 © RIBA Publishing, 2024
Published by RIBA Publishing, 66 Portland Place, London, W1B 1AD
ISBN 9781915722058
The rights of Peter Farrall and Iain Jackson to be identified as the 
Authors of this Work have been asserted in accordance with the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 sections 77 and 78.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without 
prior permission of the copyright owner.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Commissioning Editor: Alex White
Assistant Editor: Flo Armitage-Hookes
Production: Jane Rogers
Designed by CHK Design
Typeset by Fakenham Prepress Solutions, Fakenham, Norfolk
Printed and bound by Pureprint Group Ltd
Cover image: Illustration of canal running through central Manchester. 
Produced by the Authors with all rights reserved to Peter 
Farrall and Iain Jackson.
While every effort has been made to check the accuracy and quality 
of the information given in this publication, neither the Author nor the 
Publisher accept any responsibility for the subsequent use of this 
information, for any errors or omissions that it may contain, or for any 
misunderstandings arising from it.
www.ribapublishing.com
DOI: 10.4324/9781003485988TABLE OF CONTENTS
CONTENTS
Acknowledgements ix
About the authors x
Introduction xi
Chapter 1: 
Focus of the study 1
Case study 1
Chapter 2: 
Context 9
Tips 1–42
Case study 2
Chapter 3: 
Routes 100
Tips 43–52
Case study 3100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 
Chapter 4: 
Environment 124
Tips 53–78
Case study 4
Chapter 5: 
Groupings and usage 182
Tips 79–86
Case study 5
Chapter 6: 
Interface 202
Tips 87–100
Case study 6
Case study 7
Afterword 238
Appendix 240
Worked example A
Worked example BGlossary 251
Bibliography 254
Index 256
CONTENTSCONTEXT TIP Key issues to consider
Historical 1 Investigate the layers of history.
2 Consider the stylistic diversity.
3 Explore the historical development with maps.
4 Study the pace of change.
5 Create your own Nolli Map.
Social and cultural 6 Research the social and economic landscape.
7 Investigate the type of people who live and work in the area.
8 Investigate the cultural influences and assets.
9 Use census data to produce your own diagrams.
10 Use census information to understand about local residents and housing 
ownership.
11 Identify the local social hubs.
Economic 12 Consider the significance of land values.
13 Review the socio-economic demographics of an area.
14 Consider the influence of ownership and landlords.
Density and development 15 Review the density and plot size.
16 Consider the human density and household composition.
17 Consider competing future visions and other stakeholders.
18 Consider sustainability when exploring communities.
19 Explore if recent interventions can also provide opportunities.
Materiality and style 20 Consider the availability of locally sourced materials.
21 Research local styles and forms of construction.
22 Consider why the city looks the way it does.
Political 23 Who are the political influencers?
24 Review the Local Authority planning policies.
25 Is your site part of a conservation area?
Physical infrastructure 26 Explore types of places and spaces around the site.
27 Investigate why the city looks the way it does.
28 Identify monuments and nodes.
29 Review the scale of the street.
30 Review the physical infrastructure.
31 Identify neighbourhoods and districts in and around your site.
32 Identify the scale of the district.
33 Consider how historical backstory impacts on the urban grain.
34 Consider the district as part of the overall city.
35 How might the public realm influence your proposal?
36 Think vertically as well as horizontally; consider different programmes 
at different levels.
37 Explore underlying city plans and structures.
Invisible city 38 Track movement to provide data on how people interact with the city.
39 Consider the impact of any underground services.
40 Consider traffic data and restrictions.
41 Download or build your own 3D model of the site.
42 Are there any literary references relating to your site?
ROUTES
Vehicular 43 Establish the hierarchy of routes affecting your site.
44 Identify bus and cycle routes.
Pedestrian 45 Experience the city by walking.
46 Explore the alternative routes.
47 Explore pathways based on desire lines.
Transport 48 Consider the bigger picture of transport infrastructure and accessibility.
49 Explore how well your site is served by transport terminals and bus stops.
50 How well is the site connected nationally?
Timeframe 51 Consider how special events impact the city.
52 Review how intensity of use varies over time.
CONTEXT ROUTESENVIRONMENT TIP Key issues to consider
Climate 53 Assess sun paths, shading and daylight.
54 Establish the local wind paths and prevailing winds.
55 Consider how the microclimate affects the site.
56 Consider if tidal patterns or rising sea levels have an impact on your site.
Topographical 57 Survey site levels and features.
58 Determine the site boundary – it is not always clearly defined.
59 Investigate the ground conditions.
Natural features 60 Celebrate the natural features.
61 Consider the roots and crown of all trees within the site.
62 Conduct an environmental assessment of natural habitats.
63 Check flood risk data, especially in low-lying locations.
64 Explore the backstory of any formal landscapes.
Man-made features 65 Consider the existing streetscape.
66 How does street furniture impact on the site?
67 Consider the impact of telecommunications, masts and satellite dishes on 
your site.
68 Consider the impact of artificial lighting.
69 Is your site impacted by noise?
Timeframe 70 Investigate how the site use varies over 24 hours.
71 Explore how site use changes over the course of a year.
Street hierarchies 72 Consider the proportion of pavement to road.
73 Consider the street’s height to width ratio.
Sustainability 74 Explore opportunities to utilise the site’s resources.
75 Consider opportunities to deploy local materials.
Phenomenology 76 Explore opportunities to create the sense of a journey
77 Consider the potential for an architectural promenade and mystery.
78 Be aware of historical connotations.
GROUPINGS AND USAGE
Site usage 79 Map out the various functional uses around your site.
80 How has the function of your site changed over time?
Around the site 81 Be aware of activities or functions associated with your site or brief.
82 Consider the proximity of key facilities.
83 Investigate the previous uses of the site.
84 Establish current usage categories locally.
Relationship to the wider 
area 85 Investigate emerging types and planned developments.
86 Map repeating services, forms and types.
INTERFACE
Site boundary 87 Establish the extent and nature of the site boundary.
88 Assess the permeability of the site boundaries.
89 Undertake an accurate site survey to assess the site’s potential.
90 Consider thresholds where boundaries are poorly defined .
91 Research any legal restrictions impacting the site.
Views into the site 92 Make a sketch looking into the site.
93 How will your proposal impact the townscape?
94 Survey the adjacent properties.
Views out from the site 95 Make a sketch of the skyline.
96 Identify key axes and monuments.
Neighbours 97 Establish interface distances to adjacent properties.
98 How will rights of light impact your proposal?
Access 99 Consider the implications of any legal restrictions.
100 Consider legal restrictions on routes and rights of access.
ENVIRONMENT GROUPINGS INTERFACEIain Jackson: to Jo, Pippa and Dylan
Peter Farrall: to NoraACKNOWLEDGEMENTS ix
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We’d like to thank our colleagues and students at the University 
of Liverpool School of Architecture, for their help and 
encouragement, especially Alex Dusterloh, Lucretia Ray, Anna 
Gidman and Nick Wilde. We would also like to acknowledge the 
input from the architects who provided the case studies and 
gave valuable insight into their design process. Specifically, we 
would like to thank Jo Day, Alan Dunlop, Jim Eyre, Ian Ritchie, 
Hans van der Heijden, Steven Hodder and Gurmeet Sian.
The overall structure of the book: Context, Routes, 
Environment, Groupings and Interface (CREGI) was actually 
discovered left on a blackboard at the University of Bristol 
School of Architecture in the 1970s, but we have been unable to 
find out who gave the lecture! The Head of School and professor 
at that time was Ivor Smith and he invited some of the most 
talented designers of the day to teach at the school, mostly from 
London, and affectionally referred to as ‘Ivor’s flying circus’. This 
approach to site analysis has been extremely useful over 40 
years of practice and has also been developed over 20 years of 
teaching, including the later addition of phenomenology.
Thank you too to our commissioning editor, Alex White, for his 
support and encouragement.x 100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Peter Farrall is Senior Lecturer in Architecture at the 
University of Liverpool, teaching in both the MArch and BA 
programmes, as well as Professional Studies. Prior to this, 
he was partner for 25 years in a multidisciplinary practice in 
Chester, specialising in the education sector. He is a former 
president of the Liverpool Architectural Society and served on 
the National Council and Conduct Committee of the RIBA. Peter 
is a lecturer and examiner on the RIBA Part 3 course and has 
delivered lectures and webinars for RIBA CPD programmes. He 
co-authored the RIBA Good Practice Guide: Fees with Professor 
Stephen Brookhouse and is author of Feasibility Studies: An 
Architect’s Guide.
Iain Jackson is an architect and professor at University of 
Liverpool. Iain worked in practice on educational projects and 
completed his PhD on the Rock Garden of Chandigarh in India. 
He is the Research Lead for Architecture at the University of 
Liverpool and Co-director of the Architecture Heritage and 
Urbanism in Western Africa (AHUWA) research group. He is 
currently researching the architecture of the United Africa 
Company. Iain teaches architectural studio, architectural history 
and supervises PhD students. He has co-authored several 
biographies including Herbert Rowse and The Architecture of 
Edwin Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew.INTRODUCTION xi
INTRODUCTION
Conducting a site analysis is an essential part of the 
architectural design process. By carefully examining, recording, 
observing and documenting, you can cultivate a deeper 
understanding of the place you are designing for. This will result 
in a more considered and appropriate solution, crafted and 
calibrated for that spot.
Site analysis is sometimes seen as the starting point that 
leads to a design solution, but it is also an ongoing and integral 
part of the design process. Site analysis can help with initial 
feasibility studies, but it can also help refine the design intent 
and brief, contribute to the design options and justification and 
form part of a post-design review.
Architecture should respond and relate to the place where it 
is built. It is a fixture and works best when calibrated to suit local 
materials, skills, cultures and communities. Site analysis is an 
investigation into these qualities. It must also consider climatic 
data – such as sun and shadow paths, temperature and humidity 
ranges – as well as society – with its complexity, competing 
demands, contradictions and ongoing changes.
Architecture is often expected to (and should) last a long 
time. It has a public face and impacts the town, neighbourhood 
and street in much more profound ways than most other creative 
endeavours and professional activities. Architecture forms part 
of our habitat and our environment.
Architects have a duty to design buildings that serve their 
clients and communities, and that enrich the lives of future 
generations too. By considering the context of the design – 
both what has been built in the immediate vicinity as well as 
the wider cityscape – you can develop designs that respond 
with sensitivity. This should allow you to produce designs of the 
appropriate scale and materials, which both optimise the client’s 
investment and ensure societal enjoyment of the work.xii 100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 
Contextual design does not necessarily mean that everything 
‘fits in’ or is deferential to what has gone before. It may be that a 
contrast or reaction to what is already there becomes necessary 
and appropriate.
Structure of the book
This book provides a series of lenses, strategies and ideas that 
you can deploy to increase your understanding and knowledge 
of a place. There are many other approaches, but in following 
this method and producing your own ‘library’ of findings, you will 
pick up the right tools to explore, rationalise and convince others 
that your solution is valid, considered and appropriate.
At the end of each chapter is a series of case studies using 
projects undertaken by prominent architects to demonstrate 
their approach to site analysis and its impact on their design 
proposals. These are followed by two examples that show 
an incremental approach to site analysis leading to a set of 
strategic design proposals.
Site analysis can be broken down into five main headings and 
there is a chapter devoted to each of these. You can consider 
these as a checklist to work through when conducting your 
own site analysis but note that not every item will be relevant to 
every project.
Context
This is concerned with the wider area around the site in 
question. Consider the density of the neighbourhood, the size 
of the city blocks and the historical development of the site. 
This should take in a wide geographical range where possible. 
Identifying key landmarks, cultural references and other 
significant buildings in the area (such as schools, hospitals, 
transport hubs, etc.) should also be done at this stage.
Beyond the physical context, this part of the analysis should 
also consider the wider sociological and economic conditions 
of the site. This data should be represented graphically to help 
build a comprehensive picture of the site and any opportunities 
for development.INTRODUCTION xiii
Routes
How is the site connected to other places? What is the scale 
and nature of these routes? What transport infrastructure 
and facilities are available? Proximity to rail and mass-transit 
infrastructure may have a major impact on the land value, 
usage patterns and desirability of a site. Pedestrian links, the 
streetscape and a well-connected urban form can all affect your 
design solutions and the nature of the architectural proposal.
Environment
Responding to the climatic conditions of a site can enhance 
most design proposals and have a significant impact on 
the ongoing energy costs and interior comfort of a building. 
A well-sited and properly orientated design can capture 
sunlight whilst minimising solar gain, and create spaces that 
are pleasurable to be in. Temperature, humidity and seasonal 
change should also be considered. Wind, particularly around 
tall structures and in coastal settings, needs special analysis. 
Noise pollution can be problematic, but it can be mitigated with 
a sensitive design proposal. Beyond climate conditions, consider 
topography and natural features, such as animal habitats, trees, 
rivers and sea levels.
Consider how the site ‘feels’ and the responses it may 
provoke in the visitor. Perhaps the site holds a particular history, 
myth or association that resonates with the population. Places 
can become infamous or gain associations linked to a particular 
event or memory. A plot that was once a religious site will have 
a different feel and meaning to a place next to a famous sports 
stadium, for example.
Not everything important can be measured and a 
phenomenological approach can help to reconcile contradictory 
or less tangible site attributes. Consider moving beyond what 
you can see and begin to notice the noises, smells, textures 
and feelings you can detect around the site. Do they have any 
implications for your design choices?xiv 100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 
Groupings and usage
What takes place in the vicinity of and within the site? Is it 
devoted to a particular activity, for example, is it a residential site 
or mixed-use office, a restaurant or apartments? Try to find out 
how the wider district or neighbourhood is currently used and 
how your site fits in with a wider planning agenda.
Interface
This is all about the immediate context and how the site abuts 
its neighbours. As well as the physical boundaries around the 
perimeter of the site, you need to consider the views in and 
out. Consider how the site is accessed and how much of the 
site will be built on. What affect will your proposal have on the 
surrounding buildings and their occupants?2
appropriate to the task. It is therefore important to focus on the 
key issues affecting the project and ensure that the analysis is 
communicated in a clear way.
Students sometimes carry out excellent analysis, but the 
impact and findings of these studies are not evident in the 
design proposition. Alternatively, the analysis goes into too much 
detail and fails to focus on the key issues unique to the site.
Level of detail
After considering the brief it is important to decide how far to 
progress with the site analysis. For example, a brief for a new 
museum with national significance will require an understanding 
of how the proposed site relates to other similar facilities around 
the country and how accessible the site is by car and public 
transport. Being able to respond to large visitor groups will also 
be important. If the proposal is for a new village hall within a 
conservation area, then understanding the needs of the local 
community, the impact of the proposal on the local townscape 
and how the hall might relate to other community facilities 
nearby will be valuable.
You need to consider what is special or unique about the site. 
If it’s in an exposed coastal location, then details of extreme 
weather will be important, whereas a new visitor centre set in the 
grounds of a heritage site will require an in-depth understanding 
of the history, landscape and architecture of the site. The point is 
to recognise and respond to the unique and specific attributes, 
rather than attempting to cover everything in your site analysis.
Analysis and synthesis
Having gathered the data and recorded information about the 
site, it is then necessary to analyse and consider which aspects 
will impact the design. For example, you may have gathered 
information about levels of employment, but what does this say 
about an area and how does it compare with national averages? 
Setting down the key findings of your investigations, and what 
they mean to the project, provides a stepping stone towards 
your design proposal.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 4
in which case it may be necessary to revisit aspects of the site 
analysis or modify the design proposals.
Importance of on-site recording
Throughout this book, we stress the importance of visiting 
the site to gain a first-hand impression and feeling about the 
area. The act of on-site sketching tends to achieve this in a 
natural way. Whist sitting or standing to record a scene you 
are inevitably absorbed; passers-by may chat to you and you 
will take in the sounds and smells over a longer period. These 
sketches may also trigger memories in a more significant way 
than by simply taking a photograph on your phone. Often, these 
recollections can be vivid, months or even years later. Even if you 
do not consider yourself to be a great artist, the sketches you 
produce tend to communicate something very personal about 
the site and this can help when presenting proposals to a client 
or in a design review.
Key takeaway
In summary, it is important to identify what is significant about 
the site and how this complements the design brief.
Do not try to incorporate everything into your analysis. 
Be prepared to revisit the site to test your observations and 
findings. This may require you to return several times, even after 
you have begun to develop the design proposals.
Draw and map your analysis so that you can communicate 
your findings and ideas in a way that explains to others what 
is important about the site. You also need to explain how your 
site analysis informs your design proposal and ensure this is 
communicated in an effective way using appropriate media.
The ‘Quick Start Chart’ breaks down site analysis into five 
parts: context, routes, environment, groupings and usage and 
interface. These are the key things to consider when analysing 
a site and the subheadings help you to explore what might be 
relevant to your specific project. The tips that follow give some 
examples from actual sites and how they might influence design 
proposals. It is unlikely that all of these subheadings will be 
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 6
Cullen focuses on four ideas: serial vision, place, content 
and functional tradition, and these ideas are explored using 
sequential illustrations along a route.
Kevin Lynch’s The Image of the City (1960) analyses a city that 
allows the viewer to orientate themselves using five elements:
• paths, such as streets, trails, canals and railways
• edges, such as boundaries, walls and the edge of a district
• districts, medium or large, identifiable by common 
characteristics 
• nodes, which are focal points in a city, junctions, crossing 
or convergences in paths, breaks in transport routes, or key 
areas people recognise
• landmarks, such as churches, public buildings, monuments or 
unique and memorable features.
These are certainly great starting points, but also consider the 
site beyond the physical characteristics – make sure you weave 
in culture, history, politics and social conditions.
All the maps and other images in this book were hand drawn, 
requiring the authors to interpret information to communicate 
key messages. A variety of styles and techniques have been 
used. We encourage you to do the same. Experiment with 
different ways of drawing, use colours, diagrams and urban 
sketching to document and enhance your thinking. Photographs 
are wonderful, but a sketch can convey far more often with 
a lot less. Find your own style to communicate and get your 
message across.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 8
the north side with gardens to the south. Areas where noise is 
less of a problem, such as the swimming pool and activity areas, 
are also located on the south side. Apartments located on an 
adjacent site look directly onto the site from an elevated position 
and so the roof was important and becomes the fifth elevation. 
The analysis, briefing and design process took over a year, 
including extensive liaison with stakeholders.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 9
CHAPTER 2
CONTEXT
‘Context’ is the term given to the immediate area around 
and abutting your site. It is the materials, styles and physical 
infrastructure of our streets. But more than just the neighbouring 
buildings, context is also about the wider area, the historical 
background and the intangible aspects, such as the social and 
economic influences on the area.
Ideally you should first view your site in person to absorb its 
qualities. Then search for information online in the form of data, 
maps, historical photographs and policies. The ‘invisible city’ 
and virtual environments are also becoming more important and 
relevant as we enter the age of smart cities, data-driven design 
and ever-increasing digital realms.
Your site has a collective memory. Traces of the past bleed 
through to inform the future. Our buildings and places serve as 
a kind of archive, or repository, for and of the community and 
its heritage.
DOI: 10.4324/9781003485988-210
Historical
When considering a proposal, it is often the historical context 
that is the most important influence on how the site looks today. 
What is the background of the site and the surrounding area, 
and what is known about the layers of its history?
Social and cultural
The social and cultural make up of an area can determine what 
is architecturally viable and appropriate. Who lives and works 
in the surrounding area of your site? What is the social mix 
and ethnicity? Where has the population come from? Is it a 
harmonious neighbourhood?
There may be traditions, social norms or folk laws that impact 
on the cultural identity and provide clues for future propositions. 
A qualitative and quantitative review might involve interviewing 
local people. An individual’s story can offer unique insights to 
the broader perspective and offer a sounding board for future 
interventions. Be wide-ranging in your community engagement. 
Communicating effectively and sharing your ideas is essential.
Census data can also be useful in giving an objective ‘big 
data’ framework within which to work. Just as your design will 
be drawn at different scales, consider the ‘contextual scales’ 
moving from the wider district to the community and down to the 
individual level.
When exploring a particular community, it is sometimes 
helpful to establish who are the key stakeholders and primary 
users of the facilities. Landlords, politicians and community 
leaders can all bring a unique perspective too and will have 
different concerns to residents and participants. Identifying key 
community organisations and pressure groups can be important, 
and it is often wise to seek consultation when developing a 
proposal to ensure voices and concerns are heard.
Economic
Economics will often drive the viability and appropriateness of a 
design within a particular area. Although the client may be able 
to fund a project, the extent to which the proposal is appropriate 
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 11
will be affected by the demographics and the economic 
buoyancy of an area.
What are typical land values? Are they increasing? What 
rental levels can be realised and what are the council tax rates?
Levels of unemployment will affect the prosperity of an 
area, as will typical income levels and the spread from richest 
and poorest. These issues are very different from the physical 
context, but they still play a major role in what gets built 
and where.
Density and development
The existing density – that is, the dwellings/buildings per hectare 
and occupancy levels per dwelling – will provide important clues 
as to what may be appropriate with a new development and will 
also influence the ratio of open space to buildings. A high land 
value tends to drive an increased density level to capitalise on 
the value and to recoup the expense of building on that land. Of 
course, the human density may change at different times of the 
day/week/year depending on the type of population and activity 
within the area, so it’s worth thinking about how this impacts 
your design solution.
Materiality and style
As architects we are aware of the materials and styles used in 
the buildings around the site, and it is often this aspect of the 
urban grain that makes a place so distinctive. Analysing these 
characteristics and what makes the area different to other 
places will provide an important clue for your own proposal. 
The aim is not to replicate or mimic; a contrast can be more 
convincing than an attempt to fit in.
Don’t just think in terms of two dimensional plans; consider 
the impact of volumetric scale and different massing in various 
parts of the site.
Looking at street elevations, consider the scale and rhythm of 
the architecture and what this might mean for your proposal. The 
rhythm of the architecture might be expressed through window 
patterns, material changes or through decorative patterns.12
Political
Considering the political context at both a local and national 
level provides an insight into the area and may have a big impact 
on what can be achieved. Local authority planning restrictions 
and national guidelines often dictate what level of development 
is possible and what is not. When dealing with projects in a 
professional context, these can be critical considerations.
Physical infrastructure
Considering the spaces between the buildings allows the scale 
of the street to be assessed, and it is important to think vertically 
as well as horizontally. When exploring the qualities of the ‘public’ 
or outside spaces, consider how successful they are used 
along with any space left over after planning (SLOAP). When 
investigating the physical infrastructure, consider the ‘solids’ and 
‘voids’, the built-up and the spaces, the public and private. Finally, 
how does the site fit within the existing street patterns? Is there 
a rhythm or over-riding city layout, and how will this shape 
your intervention?
Invisible city
The boundaries between the virtual and the real world are 
increasingly blurred as online information becomes more 
accessible and the virtual world more immersive. Street views, 
models of entire cities and virtual reality are all changing how we 
interact with, and think about, the built environment. We can use 
these tools to test and share our ideas with a global audience.
Our built environment is becoming ‘smart’ – it can respond 
to changing conditions and events in real time. Cyber cities, 
virtual environments and Google maps can all relay retail and 
commercial data informing how we design and can test the 
impact of our ideas on the existing cityscape.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE Assessment of a site within Clifton conservation area14
TIP 1
CONTEXT
HISTORICAL
INVESTIGATE THE LAYERS OF HISTORY.
What you can see
The ‘cross’ or central crossroads at Chester is offset so that the 
church forms the end of the vista from Bridge Street leading 
south to the river.
What does this mean?
The reason for this is that the original Roman plan had a 
principia at this location and the later Christian church was built 
in the same place.
How might it affect your proposal?
Understanding the history of the city and the reasons behind 
the planning allows you to work with what is already there and 
to be sensitive to the underlying story. Unwrapping the layers of 
history can sometimes give clues as to how to move forward.
Tip links with 2, 3, 20, 21, 22, 27, 78, 83 and 90.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 15
ad 2000
ad 10016
TIP 2
CONTEXT
HISTORICAL
CONSIDER THE STYLISTIC DIVERSITY.
What you can see
This street in Chester contains buildings constructed in many 
different architectural styles and materials, built at different times 
over a span of 500 years. Even so, the overall arrangement of 
medieval ‘Rows’, or two-storey shops, is maintained.
What does this mean?
Each building says something about the period from which it 
dates. They use materials and architectural styles considered 
most appropriate at the time they were constructed.
How might it affect your proposal?
Cities are living things, not museums. In the case of Chester, 
the variety of styles and eras of building might also give a clue 
to what a modern intervention might consist of. Your design can 
also be contemporary, using materials that are appropriate for 
our times where sustainability is an important consideration. 
Cities can be an amalgamation of many different eras 
of development.
Tip links with 1, 3, 18, 19, 20, 21 22, 25 and 73.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 1718
TIP 3
CONTEXT
HISTORICAL
EXPLORE THE HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT WITH 
MAPS.
What you can see
The top map from the mid-nineteenth century shows the location 
of a new park with surrounding cottages, agricultural land and 
new brickyards in advance of the planned development that was 
to follow. The second map shows the same park 50 years later, 
now surrounded by housing development and urbanisation.
What does this mean?
The park was set out to aid the development and increase 
land value. The housing plots around the park’s perimeter were 
auctioned off for large housing development with the prices 
elevated due to the close proximity and amenity of the park.
How might it affect your proposal?
Looking at historical maps of your site can help you to 
understand how, why and when development took place. We can 
gain a better understanding of a place when we can see how it 
was made and how it has changed over time. The old roads from 
the nineteenth century, field boundaries and so on continue to 
influence and determine how the land is used today.
Tip links with 1, 24 and 29.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 1920
TIP 4
CONTEXT
HISTORICAL
STUDY THE PACE OF CHANGE.
What you can see
The older map shows a crossroads at a small settlement in 
1910. The new map from the 1990s shows the development of 
housing estates.
Note how some things remain, whilst others change. Our built 
environment may seem static, but it is in a constant state of 
flux and renewal. Equally, some older features persist and bleed 
through into the present. For example, on these plans note how 
the small triangular woodland has remained.
What does this mean?
The places in which we design are not tabula rasa (clean slate). 
There are always traces of past human activity that shape our 
design options.
How might it affect your proposal?
The built environment is not fixed; it is constantly changing, 
renewing and evolving. We may not notice these changes, 
but over time they may radically alter a place. How has your 
site changed during the last year, decade and century? What 
features (such as trees, public footpaths and boundaries) have 
been preserved or changed during this time?
Tip links with 1, 3, 24 and 29.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 2122
TIP 5
CONTEXT
HISTORICAL
CREATE YOUR OWN NOLLI MAP.
What you can see
A figure-ground plan of central Liverpool, also known as a Nolli 
Map, after Giambattista Nolli’s drawing of Rome from 1748. 
The aim here is to omit everything from the plan apart from 
the buildings.
What does this mean?
The plan reveals the spatial configurations and relationships of 
the built and unbuilt spaces. It reveals patterns, development 
formations, typology and scale. By erasing everything and 
removing data we are able to see certain aspects of the city 
more clearly. You can also ‘invert’ the drawing and show the 
buildings in white and the spaces in black.
How might it affect your proposal?
The Nolli Map reveals how your site fits into the wider city plan 
– it shows the relationships between public spaces, transport 
routes and the built environment. The density of the site can be 
examined and the connectivity and permeability of the cityscape 
explored. It is a simple technique, but surprisingly revealing, and 
often brings about clarity as a result.
Tip links with 3, 11 and 17.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 2324
TIP 6
CONTEXT
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
RESEARCH THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC 
LANDSCAPE.
What you can see
The city of Chester comprises of several distinct districts each 
with their own special character.
What does this mean?
Each district has its own character and a different social and 
economic status.
How might it affect your proposal?
The economic backdrop can have a big influence on land 
values and therefore the viability of what interventions and 
developments might be feasible. The social and cultural 
landscape can make a difference to the sorts of proposals that 
would be attractive and that are likely to thrive in the area.
Tip links with 9, 10, 12, 13, 15, 24, 33 and 79.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 2526
TIP 7
CONTEXT
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
INVESTIGATE THE TYPE OF PEOPLE WHO LIVE AND 
WORK IN THE AREA.
What you can see
This is Barry ‘The Beekeeper’ Chang. He tends over 30 beehives 
in Liverpool and collects the honey to sell. He is also a champion 
for the UK’s oldest Caribbean Centre and campaigns to keep it 
running for the good of the community.
What does this mean?
It’s a good idea to seek out people, like Barry, who can give you 
valuable insights into the community. Talk to them and listen to 
their stories.
How might it affect your proposal?
Local residents, shopkeepers and personalities can become 
advocates for your ideas and proposals, or else provide crucial 
feedback on how the proposal might be improved to resonate 
more with the community.
Tip links with 17, 23, 24 and 41.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 2728
TIP 8
CONTEXT
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
INVESTIGATE THE CULTURAL INFLUENCES AND 
ASSETS.
What you can see
This is the Cathedral Quarter of Chester, which incorporates 
a Georgian square with offices and living accommodation. 
For most of the time it provides tranquil space away from the 
main bustle of the city. Every four years the city hosts the 
medieval mystery plays and the area is transformed into a 
performance space.
What does this mean?
Many areas of the country have traditions and festivals that form 
an important part of their heritage and calendar.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of festivals and traditions may influence your design 
proposals. There can be practical issues, such as occasional 
access and legal rights, as is the case with open markets. 
Sometimes, long-standing traditions and folk law can provide a 
clue as to how to approach a design proposal, giving it additional 
depth and meaning.
Tip links with 1, 4, 19, 28, 52, 65 and 78.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 2930
TIP 9
CONTEXT
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
USE CENSUS DATA TO PRODUCE YOUR OWN 
DIAGRAMS.
What you can see
This is a map of Litchfield showing the various parts of the 
city categorised according to their features and attributes. It is 
called Classification of Multidimension Open Data Morphology 
(MODUM). Here you can see the city arranged according 
to eight broad categories: ‘Suburban’, ‘Railway’, ‘Old Town’, 
‘Victorian Terraces’, ‘Waterside’, ‘Countryside’, ‘High Street’ and 
‘Central Business District’.
What does this mean?
To understand a place, try describing its dominant features and 
categorising its different parts. This will allow for broad analysis 
and it will help you to understand the constituent parts. It can 
also help to inform the identity of particular districts.
How might it affect your proposal?
These tools can help build up a picture of how a neighbourhood 
is organised and fits into a larger settlement pattern. Using 
eight categories is a crude, but surprisingly useful, mode of 
beginning to describe a place. It will help you to communicate 
quickly with others and provide a system for comparison and 
further investigation.
Tip links with 5, 16, 17, 25 and 34.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 31
 Suburban
 Railway
 Old Town
 Victorian Terraces
 Waterside
 Countryside
 High Street
 Central Business District32
TIP 10
CONTEXT
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
USE CENSUS INFORMATION TO UNDERSTAND 
MORE ABOUT LOCAL RESIDENTS AND HOUSING 
OWNERSHIP.
What you can see
This is a map of Litchfield showing the percentage of social 
rented properties in each area. The higher percentages of social 
housing are located in the northern parts of the city and within 
the old town area. South of the railway track there is only a very 
small amount of social housing.
What does this mean?
This may impact how a place is perceived, the land valuations 
and the scale and scope of ongoing development. Affordable 
housing is a major issue for many today.
How might it affect your proposal?
Who are the stakeholders and people with an interest/concern 
with your site? How are the communities formed and arranged? 
What kinds of needs and services might they require? How 
is social provision arranged and distributed? How might 
this impact on perceptions of your site? Make use of freely 
available information and census data to form new maps and 
interpretations of your site.
Tip links with 9, 11, 13, 16, 24 and 32.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 33
 90% or more social rented housing
 60%–90% social rented housing
 20–30% social rented housing
 0–10% social rented housing34
TIP 11
CONTEXT
SOCIAL AND CULTURAL
IDENTIFY THE LOCAL SOCIAL HUBS.
What you can see
This city map shows the location of primary schools in the city 
of York.
What does this mean?
Primary schools tend to serve a very local population. They often 
form the hub of the community, not only for the families of the 
children who attend the school, but also for other people who 
use the facilities for after-school clubs and activities.
How might it affect your proposal?
Where major developments create more dwellings, it can 
sometimes mean that local schools have insufficient capacity to 
accommodate the new children coming into the area. Sometimes 
local authorities require a financial contribution to help with the 
provision of new or extended schools. Where populations are 
reducing, the opposite is the case and difficult decisions must be 
made regarding which schools might close. Understanding the 
location of the schools and their proximity to populations and 
influence is important.
Tip links with 6, 14, 23, 24, 35, 82 and 84.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 3536
TIP 12
CONTEXT
ECONOMIC
CONSIDER THE SIGNIFICANCE OF LAND VALUES.
What you can see
This map of Liverpool shows property values across the city, 
which also give a good indication of land values.
What does this mean?
Land and property prices affect what might be economically 
viable in an area. In the case of Liverpool, some previously 
predominantly industrial zones are becoming used for offices, 
entertainment and gallery spaces. This change of use pattern 
can be beneficial for investors as it increases the value. 
However, it may present a problem for established businesses 
and community users as they may no longer be able to afford 
increased rents.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of land and property values gives an indication of 
what types of proposal might be economically viable. Looking 
at future trends can sometimes provide an opportunity for 
innovation. Taking risks tends to be what developers do, but of 
course, these ventures do not always pay off. Predicting the 
future can be tricky.
Tip links with 12 and 24.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 37
 £100,000
 £150,000
 £250,000
 £400,00038
TIP 13
CONTEXT
ECONOMIC
REVIEW THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEMOGRAPHICS 
OF AN AREA.
What you can see
This map of Liverpool shows areas of deprivation using multiple 
deprivation ratings provided by the City Council in 2013.
What does this mean?
The map shows that a significant part of Liverpool’s population 
experiences multiple deprivation and social exclusion. In terms 
of social disadvantage, around 50% of Liverpool’s lower-level 
output areas are classified as being in the bottom 10% nationally 
for multiple deprivation.
How might it affect your proposal?
Depending upon your brief, these statistics can either 
demonstrate a need to add a specific type of facility to support 
the community, or they might be an indication that a particular 
type of development or outlet would be inappropriate within the 
local area because the local population might not be able to 
afford to use it.
Tip links with 6, 9, 10, 12, 16, 31 and 79.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 39
 1% most deprived
 2–5% most deprived
 6–10% most deprived40
TIP 14
CONTEXT
ECONOMIC
CONSIDER THE INFLUENCE OF OWNERSHIP AND 
LANDLORDS.
What you can see
This map shows a large portion of the city under the ownership 
of a single landlord (highlighted in blue).
What does this mean?
This major landowner will have a significant affect on how the 
shops and other types of accommodation are let and may 
restrict the types of businesses that can operate within the city.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of restrictions on ownership and control allows 
you to understand the potential viability of different uses. 
Opportunities for independent traders may be restricted, either 
because rental levels are too high, or because the landlords 
want to restrict the types of shops and businesses operating 
in the town. In some instances, whole streets may be in private 
ownership and what appears to be in the public realm is within 
the control of the landowner.
Tip links with 12 and 19.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 4142
TIP 15
CONTEXT
DENSITY AND DEVELOPMENT
REVIEW THE DENSITY AND PLOT SIZE.
What you can see
A map of Manchester showing different scales of plot size and 
street patterns. On the left is the Cathedral (in red), alongside 
large-scale museums and shopping centres, which occupy vast 
plots. On the right-hand side is the Northern Quarter containing 
a series of former smaller warehouses and showrooms.
What does this mean?
Density can be measured in many different ways (e.g. population 
per hectare; building height to street width ratio; ratio of building 
area to street area). The height of construction is often the 
greatest determinant of density, but the scale of the building’s 
footprint relative to the site area and surrounding open space is 
equally important.
How might it affect your proposal?
Consider how your site fits within the wider urban context and 
examine how the scale of the plot aligns with the surrounding 
streets, neighbouring sites and wider district. A large building 
set within a vast site and surrounded by large roads will have a 
completely different feel (and lower density) compared to a small 
plot with a narrow street.
Tip links with 9, 12, 15 and 17.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 43
 The medieval cathedral
 New large-scale shopping centres, museums and galleries
 Victorian commercial retail district
 Showrooms, warehouses and workshops44
TIP 16
CONTEXT
DENSITY AND DEVELOPMENT
CONSIDER THE HUMAN DENSITY AND HOUSEHOLD 
COMPOSITION.
What you can see
A map of Birkenhead showing the average quantities of single￾person households. More people are living alone, resulting 
in a major impact on housing provision, development and 
associated services.
What does this mean?
In which areas are people likely to be living in single￾occupancy households and why? As demographic trends move 
towards smaller household sizes there is an impact on our 
housing provision.
How might it affect your proposal?
Changing demographics might mean a different design 
approach, especially in terms of housing layouts and design. 
What kind of homes should we be making to adequately serve 
the next generation and society’s changing requirements? 
It is also useful to overlay this with other maps to look for 
correlations with healthcare, schools, social housing and access 
to transportation. There isn’t one map that can ever give a 
full picture.
Tip links with 10, 13 and 15.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 45
 Average of 60% single occupancy households
 Average of 40% single occupancy households
 Average of 20% single occupancy households46
TIP 17
CONTEXT
DENSITY AND DEVELOPMENT
CONSIDER COMPETING FUTURE VISIONS AND 
OTHER STAKEHOLDERS.
What you can see
A map of old docklands and a former industrial area. The 
site sits between major road and rail links and forms a key 
regeneration site. The entire site is owned by a single developer 
– Peel Holdings.
What does this mean?
The developer will have a strategy and vision for its future use. 
Any proposals adjacent to the site, and even in the wider region, 
will need to be mindful of what is taking place here. Often large 
projects like this will have multiple architectural and design 
teams working on distinct portions of the site, requiring careful 
communication and coordination between the various projects.
How might it affect your proposal?
The site you’re allocated to work on might be part of a much 
larger project and vision funded by a major developer over many 
years. The context in which your building sits may not exist yet. 
Effective communication and clear masterplanning objectives 
are essential for larger scale development and working on this 
urban scale.
Tip links with 9 and 14.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 47
 Parkland
 Former industrial site owned by one developer
 Sites impacted by the regeneration
 River and docklands
 Railway and stations
 Ferry48
TIP 18
CONTEXT
DENSITY AND DEVELOPMENT
CONSIDER SUSTAINABILITY WHEN EXPLORING 
COMMUNITIES.
What you can see
This map of the village of Willaston in Cheshire West shows 
potential areas of the greenbelt that could be released 
for housing.
What does this mean?
Local authorities must consider how to meet the housing need. 
Often this is done by using ‘brown field’ sites within a city. In 
some instances, land previously designated as ‘greenbelt’ is 
released for housing developments. In this way it is sometimes 
argued that an increase in population, particularly if it is for 
affordable housing, will help the sustainability of a village in terms 
of schools and shops.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of the local plan and any changes that are being 
considered is important because they might affect your 
proposals. These can provide an opportunity where previously 
development would not have been possible. However, it can 
also be a threat to the existing properties values if the houses 
previously enjoyed the amenity of the countryside with views 
across open fields.
Tip links with 6, 12, 13, 15, 18, 79 and 87.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 4950
TIP 19
CONTEXT
DENSITY AND DEVELOPMENT
EXPLORE IF RECENT INTERVENTIONS CAN ALSO 
PROVIDE OPPORTUNITIES.
What you can see
This is the Shakespeare North Playhouse in Prescot. The 
oak-framed traditional performance space is contained within a 
building of contemporary design, which provides hospitality and 
technical support facilities.
What does this mean?
The town of Prescot planned the new theatre to attract visitors 
and provide a catalyst for the regeneration of the area. The 
masterplan includes infrastructure improvements to ensure that 
visitors can have easy access and good transport links to other 
parts of the UK.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of developments may allow your proposals to 
benefit from the potential economic uplift of an area and take 
advantage of any associated environmental improvements.
Tip links with 8, 12, 14, 18 and 25.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 5152
TIP 20
CONTEXT
MATERIALITY AND STYLE
CONSIDER THE AVAILABILITY OF LOCALLY 
SOURCED MATERIALS.
What you can see
Nantwich is a small market town in Cheshire East. This street 
has a variety of houses from different eras, but there is a 
consistency in the use of materials, which gives the street a 
sense of harmony.
What does this mean?
In many areas of the country there is a predominant use of 
certain materials because they are available locally and it makes 
economic sense to use them. Sometimes this means that 
specialist skills are developed to use these materials.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of what materials are commonly used can inform 
what your building might be constructed of. Considering what 
type of brick or stone is available locally will allow you to 
create something that not only fits into its context, but is also 
sustainable, because the materials do not have to be transported 
over long distances.
Tip links with 2, 21, 22, 27 and 75.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 5354
TIP 21
CONTEXT
MATERIALITY AND STYLE
RESEARCH LOCAL STYLES AND FORMS OF 
CONSTRUCTION.
What you can see
These buildings in Chipping Campden are constructed in 
local Cotswold stone with stone slabs forming the roof finish. 
Although there are differences in the scale and form of the 
buildings, there is a constancy of traditional details to the gables, 
chimneys and around the windows.
What does this mean?
There can often be a particular style of architectural detailing 
in an area, either because there is the traditional way of doing 
things, or because the buildings forms part of a larger estate 
where the architect chose a specific style and pallet of materials.
How might it affect your proposal?
The example shown here is from a rather special Cotswold 
village. It is often the case, with less iconic examples, that there 
is a particular architectural style in an area or estate, and this 
can sometimes provide a clue as to how to approach your 
design. It is best to avoid a simple copy or pastiche, but perhaps 
reinterpret what is already there in some way as part of your 
own contemporary design.
Tip links with 2, 20, 22, 27 and 75.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 5556
TIP 22
CONTEXT
MATERIALITY AND STYLE
CONSIDER WHY THE CITY LOOKS THE WAY IT DOES.
What you can see
These buildings on Bold Street in Liverpool have a variety of 
styles, heights and materials. The street currently has many 
independent shops, as well as bars and restaurants. The lively 
nature of the architecture suits the different types of users.
What does this mean?
The buildings on the street were built in the Victorian era and all 
at roughly the same time. The development of the individual plots 
allowed the designs to reflect the aspirations of their owners. It 
is an animated ensemble, revealing that variety and contrast is 
an effective design approach.
How might it affect your proposal?
If an opportunity came up to develop one of these sites, the 
varied nature of the frontages allows considerable latitude in 
terms of architectural handling, materials and scale. Picking up 
on the lively nature of the street would also be important, as 
would perhaps instilling a sense of fun.
Tip links with 2, 20, 21, 27 and 75.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 5758
TIP 23
CONTEXT
POLITICAL
WHO ARE THE POLITICAL INFLUENCERS?
What you can see
This map shows the location of the combined and regional 
authorities across England. These are attempts to devolve 
power to the larger urban centres under the leadership of a local 
mayor representing several local authorities.
What does this mean?
The political landscape may not seem important to an individual 
project, but the administration of a region – and particularly 
that of a larger urban area – can have a significant impact on 
investment, development and ambition. Being aware of this (and 
where the boundaries of administration and responsibility lie) is 
part of our wider understanding of place, site and the context in 
which we design.
How might it affect your proposal?
Large projects and regeneration schemes benefit from political 
endorsement and support. Regional mayors and city regions 
will have a future vision for their city and its environs. How does 
this align with your project and site? What can your project 
contribute to the ambition for the city region and its future?
Tip links with 12, 13 and 19.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 59
 Devolved administrations and metro regions in England60
TIP 24
CONTEXT
POLITICAL
REVIEW THE LOCAL AUTHORITY PLANNING 
POLICIES.
What you can see
This map shows central Manchester and surrounding districts. 
The City Council wrote a planning policy document to set out 
its 10-year strategy for the city. This included specific policy 
targeting dwelling construction at certain ‘large sites and 
development opportunity areas’. Other areas were highlighted in 
the policy for smaller and medium dwelling sites.
What does this mean?
The political vision for the city shaped the planning policies and 
approaches to regeneration. The council identified strategic 
areas that it wanted to develop in particular ways. It shaped 
policy and sought out partnerships and commercial allegiances 
to deliver these goals.
How might it affect your proposal?
Planning policy and regional planning strategy documents can 
have dramatic impacts on the built environment. Whether it is 
through permitted developments, relaxations of planning rules 
or the release of land and compulsory purchases, the political 
vision for a place is always worth examining. How does your 
proposal align or country wide policy and development goals?
Tip links with 9, 15, 23, 25 and 31.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 61
Harperhey
Wythenshawe
 City Centre 
 Large sites and development opportunities 
 Range of medium sites
Areas in Manchester identified for large sites and 
development opportunities.62
TIP 25
CONTEXT
POLITICAL
IS YOUR SITE PART OF A CONSERVATION AREA?
What you can see
This is a map of Liverpool’s conservation areas. Each zone has 
been identified as having an important and unique character 
worthy of preserving. Whilst individual buildings may receive 
statutory protection through ‘listing’, conservation areas are 
concerned with wider characteristics and values that extend to 
streetscapes, landscapes and collections of structures.
What does this mean?
Proposals within conservation areas receive additional scrutiny 
and are expected to respect and respond to the unique values 
and characteristics of that area. Planners, local pressure groups, 
residents and other concerned parties will pay particular 
attention to any new proposals that might be seen to damage or 
dilute these important qualities.
How might it affect your proposal?
If your site sits within a conservation area (or even abuts one), 
then special care and design justification will be required. It is 
not necessary to ‘fit in’ or produce an historical pastiche, but it is 
important to provide clear justification for your design proposals, 
and to explain how your design will enhance and contribute to 
the conservation area.
Tip links with 33, 35, 37 and 42.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 6364
TIP 26
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
EXPLORE TYPES OF PLACES AND SPACES AROUND 
THE SITE.
What you can see
This journey through the old part of Amsterdam moves through a 
sequence of spaces, which include some narrow, dark alleyways 
and wide, open canals.
What does this mean?
Cities are experienced by moving through them, normally on 
foot. The variety of space and light, as well as the unexpected, 
creates a dynamic journey. In this example, the visitor leaves the 
wide tree-lined Geldersekade and enters the narrow alleyways 
before coming across the unexpected wide canal basin and onto 
a quiet backwater with warehouses.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of the theatrical nature of a city and how people 
move through it allows you to develop a masterplan and place 
your proposal in context. This means that you can either build on 
what is already there or grasp a new opportunity by exploiting 
the unique aspects of a particular site to create incident 
and interest.
Tip links with 1, 3, 27, 28, 29, 35, 37, 46 and 73.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 6566
TIP 27
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
INVESTIGATE WHY THE CITY LOOKS THE WAY IT 
DOES.
What you can see
These two maps of Ipswich show how the settlement has 
developed from a medieval market town to its current layout. The 
river crossing and civic square are still in the same location.
What does this mean?
Understanding the history of a city allows you to make sense of 
the urban grain, its roads and squares. At Ipswich, the original 
layout of roads is still visible, but the inner ring road for vehicular 
traffic tends to create a barrier and makes the medieval street 
pattern less obvious when moving around the town. The 
connection between the river crossing and the civic square 
is lost.
How might it affect your proposal?
Try to understand how and why a city has developed into its 
current form. Aim to be sensitive to earlier layouts whilst also 
trying to help unify the city, improve connectivity and reinforce 
the urban grain.
Tip links with 1, 3, 4, 27, 37 and 43.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 67
1780
202068
TIP 28
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
IDENTIFY MONUMENTS AND NODES.
What you can see
The city of Edinburgh has many important monuments. The 
Royal Mile has the castle at one end and the parliament 
building at the other with several other structures of cultural 
and historical significance between. Here it shows St Mary’s 
Cathedral, Usher Hall, Edinburgh Castle, the Scottish National 
Gallery, the Scott Monument, Edinburgh Waverley station, the 
National Gallery of Scotland and the Scottish Parliament building.
What does this mean?
Understanding the history of a city allows you to make sense 
of the urban grain. The roads, monuments and nodes are all 
important elements to a city and they allow you to orientate 
yourself and find your way.
How might it affect your proposal?
When working within a city, it is important to respect the existing 
infrastructure, history and culture. Views to monuments and 
other structures may become design drivers and it is likely that 
there will be rules associated with the scale of the development 
when your site is close to an important building.
Tip links with 8, 19, 26, 57, 64 and 96.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE Section through the Royal Mile 
CONTEXT 69 70
TIP 29
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
REVIEW THE SCALE OF THE STREET.
What you can see
This is a view of a narrow medieval street in York with buildings 
overhanging the narrow passageway.
What does this mean?
Streets are places of encounter, exchange and possibility. 
They are the shared spaces where the life of a town or city is 
encountered or, in a smaller settlement, where the community 
can gather.
How might it affect your proposal?
Think about how your design might contribute to the 
streetscape. Consider how wide the street is in relation to the 
height of the buildings. What is the relationship between the road 
width and the pavement? How is the pavement (or wider public 
realm) going to be used and how does the street façade interact 
with this domain?
Tip links with 21, 22 and 37.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 7172
TIP 30
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
REVIEW THE PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE.
What you can see
This map shows a historic walled city with later developments 
outside the wall.
What does this mean?
Structures such as old city walls and similar boundaries still 
feature in layouts of towns and cities today (even if the wall 
has been demolished or dramatically altered). The density and 
street pattern will have been determined by these features, and 
different districts and parts of the city will have been determined 
by their presence.
How might it affect your proposal?
Density, building plot sizes, access and heritage considerations 
need to be considered in your proposal, and these may be 
impacted by the historic layout of the town including features 
such as city walls and significant historic structures. Look for 
shifts in planning density within and outside these structures. 
Consider how your proposal might respond to its location within 
the older and more tightly arranged districts or the more formal 
grid patterns of later expansions.
Tip links with 15, 18 and 29.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 7374
TIP 31
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
IDENTIFY NEIGHBOURHOODS AND DISTRICTS IN 
AND AROUND YOUR SITE.
What you can see
This map shows central Manchester with the large university 
buildings and facilities flanking Oxford Road. On the right is the 
residential neighbourhood of Brunswick.
What does this mean?
There are often sharp divisions and distinct boundaries between 
certain districts reflected in the different scale of the buildings 
and how these places are used. Some districts become more 
prominent because of their public function and scale, whilst 
others may seem to nestle almost invisibly within the city fabric. 
As the university continues to expand, what will the impact be on 
the surrounding houses and the communities who live there?
How might it affect your proposal?
Make sure you venture beyond the site boundaries of your 
project and explore the neighbouring areas. You may begin to 
notice different communities, usage patterns and architectural 
approaches. How might your proposal impact these places and 
the current communities?
Tip links with 43, 48 and 78.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 75
 The university along Oxford Road
 Inner-city housing of Brunswick76
TIP 32
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
IDENTIFY THE SCALE OF THE DISTRICT.
What you can see
This map of the north-west of England indicates the relative 
scale of the cities of Chester, Liverpool and Manchester. It also 
shows the motorway links connecting these cities.
What does this mean?
A city the size of Chester can only support certain types of 
facilities and residents tend to go to Manchester or Liverpool for 
major sporting events, cultural activities or specialist services.
How might it affect your proposal?
Depending on your brief, some types of facility require a 
minimum critical mass of population in order to sustain them. 
Understanding the scale of the proposal relative to the local 
district allows you to understand how sustainable it might be.
Tip links with 11, 14, 24, 34, 43, 44 and 84.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 77
Manchester
Liverpool
Chester78
TIP 33
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
CONSIDER HOW HISTORICAL BACKSTORY IMPACTS 
ON THE URBAN GRAIN.
What you can see
This view of the Georgian Quarter of Bath shows The Circus and 
Royal Crescent forming the most impressive residences.
What does this mean?
The development of Bath in the eighteenth century as a spa 
town created the most exclusive and desirable residences with 
the Bath Assembly Rooms providing the focus for gatherings 
and events. The layout of the roads and squares were designed 
to impress and provide a clear hierarchy. This was a set piece 
design, imposed without any regard to the context at that time.
How might it affect your proposal?
This part of Bath is an extreme example of a legacy from one 
particular era. This area is now designated as a conservation 
area and any future development and alterations are governed 
by strict rules. You need a strong argument to support any 
changes or departure from the existing townscape. Even 
when working in more everyday settings, it is important to be 
aware of the historical grain as well as any legislation affecting 
development and to acknowledge it in your design proposals.
Tip links with 1, 2, 3, 21, 24, 27 and 33.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 7980
TIP 34
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
CONSIDER THE DISTRICT AS PART OF THE OVERALL 
CITY.
What you can see
The conurbation around Birmingham is a collection of smaller 
districts, each with its own distinct character and history.
What does this mean?
The history of each area, why it developed and how each relates 
to the other is important in understanding why they are as they 
are. The social and economic story of the Midlands is quite 
different to other parts of the UK and has strong traditions and a 
unique industrial heritage.
How might it affect your proposal?
Considering the wider context for your site allows you to see the 
big picture, how your site fits into its district and how that area 
relates to the wider geographical area. Identifying the distinct 
character of your district can provide important clues as to the 
appropriateness and direction of your own proposal.
Tip links with 1, 3, 5, 6, 12, 13, 23, 25, 27 and 85.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 81
Selly Oak Mosely
Perry Barr
Edrington
Handsworth
Ashton
Rotten Park Washwood
Market Hall
Edbaston Yardley
Harbourn
Acock’ Green
Selly Oak Mosely
Sparkhill
Northfeild
Kings Northon
 1731 1838 1863 191382
TIP 35
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
HOW MIGHT THE PUBLIC REALM INFLUENCE YOUR 
PROPOSAL?
What you can see
This is a drawing of a market space and cathedral square in 
Ghent, Belgium. The historic square is now home to a new 
market hall suitable for a variety of gatherings and events 
throughout the year.
What does this mean?
Historical and sensitive sites are capable of new and innovative 
uses that can enhance the spaces and quality of the public 
realm. The new market hall helps to reinforce the boundaries 
of the public square whilst also serving as a sheltered arcade 
for gatherings.
How might it affect your proposal?
Consider the spaces around your site: how can your proposal 
enhance the public realm? Landscaping, shade, places to 
sit, habitats for wildlife, colour from planting, protection from 
the weather and spaces for people to come together and 
meet with friends, are all part of creating a successful and 
welcoming cityscape.
Tip links with 67, 68 and 82.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 8384
TIP 36
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
THINK VERTICALLY AS WELL AS HORIZONTALLY; 
CONSIDER DIFFERENT PROGRAMMES AT DIFFERENT 
LEVELS.
What you can see
A sectional drawing through a medieval street showing how 
buildings have different functions at different levels, including 
high-level walkways as shown highlighted here.
What does this mean?
Cities and streets must be considered vertically as well as 
through the simple plan drawing. By cutting sectional drawings 
through a street you can explore a much richer set of uses and 
demands on the site and the surrounding area.
How might it affect your proposal?
Do not rely on plan drawings alone to show how a place works 
and is used. Cut a section to show how the programmes might 
change when regarded vertically. Housing, retail, offices, leisure 
and food outlets all need to be carefully mapped through the 
section drawing to understand how the streetscape is used and 
by whom.
Tip links with 59, 75 and 77.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 8586
TIP 37
CONTEXT
PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE
EXPLORE UNDERLYING CITY PLANS AND 
STRUCTURES.
What you can see
This is a plan of Glasgow showing the grid pattern of streets and 
city blocks.
What does this mean?
There is often an urban grain that can be observed in our cities. 
This relates to the size of the city block in relation to the street 
size and pattern. Certain projects may break or flex this pattern 
but most projects will align with the plots available. Be aware 
that the plan does not reveal gradients, and what may appear as 
a grid layout in plan will have a very different feel when visited in 
person – as is the case in Glasgow.
How might it affect your proposal?
How does your site align with the rhythm and structure of 
the cityscape? Is there a city pattern, grid or underlying 
planning device that is dictating the urban form? If not, can you 
discern any typical plot sizes or other arrangements that have 
determined the urban grain and plot structure of your site?
Tip links with 30, 31 and 33.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 87
 Typical city block
 Park at the city block scale88
TIP 38
CONTEXT
INVISIBLE CITY
TRACK MOVEMENT TO PROVIDE DATA ON HOW 
PEOPLE INTERACT WITH THE CITY.
What you can see
This map of part of the Liverpool University campus shows the 
movement of people using phone tracking data.
What does this mean?
This exercise was carried out by a group of architectural 
students to understand how people move around the campus, 
the natural gathering areas and pinch points. The large number 
of students crossing Brownlow Hill, the road at the top of the 
drawing, is particularly noticeable.
How might it affect your proposal?
Understanding how people move around the site can provide 
clues for the location of key interventions and the impact of 
any new developments on the masterplan. In the case of this 
exercise, the team proposed the pedestrianisation of Brownlow 
Hill, an idea that is actually viable and is now being considered 
by the local authority.
Tip links with 45, 47, 65 and 72.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 8990
TIP 39
CONTEXT
INVISIBLE CITY
CONSIDER THE IMPACT OF ANY UNDERGROUND 
SERVICES.
What you can see
This university campus in Liverpool has a strip of undeveloped 
land running diagonally through its centre.
What does this mean?
The main railway line linking Liverpool to London runs through a 
tunnel beneath the campus, making development very restrictive.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of substructure services in the vicinity of your 
site, including sewers, gas and electricity supplies, is important 
because there may be rules about how the site can be 
developed. Restrictions associated with building close to train 
lines can be particularly onerous, whether they are beneath or 
adjacent to your site.
Tip links with 1, 3, 41 and 67.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 9192
TIP 40
CONTEXT
INVISIBLE CITY
CONSIDER TRAFFIC DATA AND RESTRICTIONS.
What you can see
To control the volume of traffic entering the city, York has a 
park-and-ride scheme, with car parks around the perimeter 
located on the major routes into the city.
What does this mean?
The City Council’s strategy for managing its visitors means that 
traffic and buses are directed along designated routes with key 
set-down points within the city. This may also affect visitors’ 
shopping habits.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of the key transport nodes and routes might 
impact on your proposal, since it may provide an opportunity 
for your site to benefit from the increased volume of pedestrian 
traffic. The route between bus set-down points and other major 
attractions may also mean that those outlets and services are at 
a premium.
Tip links with 27, 38, 41, 43, 44 and 48.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 9394
TIP 41
CONTEXT
INVISIBLE CITY
DOWNLOAD OR BUILD YOUR OWN 3D MODEL OF 
THE SITE.
What you can see
A computer model of part of London.
What does this mean?
Whilst maps are useful diagrams, increasingly we have access 
to virtual models of our major towns and cities. We can use 
these to explore and view our cities. These models can 
contain information about transport, services and planning 
applications, as well as providing useful details about our site 
and its neighbourhood.
How might it affect your proposal?
You can use virtual city models to test your ideas and insert 
your own computer models. This will help you to visualise the 
proposal and to see how it fits into the wider area. The virtual 
city models can also enable you to ‘explore’ the district and to 
generate a greater understanding of how it works. The virtual 
model should not be seen as a replacement for your own 
physical models but rather as an enhancement and additional 
insight into the city.
Tip links with 42.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 9596
TIP 42
CONTEXT
INVISIBLE CITY
ARE THERE ANY LITERARY REFERENCES RELATING 
TO YOUR SITE?
What you can see
Nicholas Hawksmoor’s churches in London provided the 
inspiration for Peter Ackroyd’s novel Hawksmoor.
What does this mean?
Have you ever walked down an unfamiliar street yet felt you 
had been there before? Perhaps it was the setting for a TV 
programme or film? The imaginary and fictional can shape how 
we perceive and experience a place.
How might it affect your proposal?
Perhaps the site you are researching featured in a particular 
documentary, sit-com or film set? If so, how does that 
association shape how you, and others, view that place and how 
does it impact your design response? Does the site sit within 
our cultural memory? This might impact tourism, future filming 
schedules and even listing protection and heritage policy.
Tip links with 1 and 102.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 9798
CASE STUDY 2
NEW BODLEIAN, 
WESTON LIBRARY
WILKINSON EYRE
What you can see
The Weston Library (outlined in red) is one of Oxford’s most 
important institutions. The original Giles Gilbert Scott design was 
remodelled in 2015 by Wilkinson Eyre to create better storage 
and research facilities with an improved entrance to the south.
What does this mean?
By changing the way in which the south elevation works, the 
building relates much better to the public realm, providing an 
active frontage and welcoming visitors. The original plinth has 
been removed and replaced with steps and ramped access.
What the architect says
The project offered an opportunity to boost the library’s 
relationship with its urban setting by addressing Broad Street 
and the main Bodleian Library building opposite. The design knits 
the library more closely into its context by extending the axis 
created by the Radcliffe Camera, the ‘Old Schools Quadrangle’ 
and the Clarendon Building, a logical move to encourage the 
public inside. The design works with, rather than against, Scott’s 
robust design.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE CONTExT 99
Weston Library
Broad Street
Clarendon Building
Bodleian Library/
Old Schools Quadrangle
Radcli-e Camera
University Church of 
St Mary the Virgin100
CHAPTER 3
ROUTES
The way in which the site is connected to the surrounding area 
can have an important influence on the viability and form of 
the proposal. How the site is accessed and where visitors are 
coming from can affect how the scheme is laid out and who is 
permitted to access. The organisation of primary and secondary 
routes allows you to understand the significance of design 
decisions and can help to develop an appropriate strategy.
For many places, the main arterial routes define the city and 
its districts with the secondary routes determining the urban 
grain within these zones. In rural areas, the roads and paths 
sometimes have a history going back many centuries. Working 
within this framework is important if you are to preserve what is 
special about a place.
Vehicular
Vehicular routes include those for cars, buses, trucks and 
bicycles. Depending on the proposed function, knowing how 
accessible the site is to major roads and motorways can be 
important. At a more local level, understanding restrictions on 
vehicle access will allow you to plan accordingly.
Cycle routes are becoming increasingly important and in 
some parts of Europe it is possible for an inexperienced cyclist 
or child to access the centre of a city in complete safety, 
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S 
GUIDE 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003485988-3ROUTES 101
segregated from the main vehicular traffic routes. Understanding 
existing and proposed routes allows you to consider how 
accessible your site is.
Pedestrian
Exploring a city on foot provides a different perspective and 
pace. Looking at the routes around or through the site allows 
you to consider the human scale. Where are people coming from 
and how might your proposal benefit from what is happening 
around the site? Pedestrian access to the site can be a 
determining factor in your design strategy and feasibility. In some 
cases, there may be a public right of way across the site or an 
opportunity to create a new link.
Transport
How well the site is served by public transport and what form 
this takes can be important. Depending on the function of the 
proposal, the use of public transport may be important to allow 
stakeholders to use the facility. Bus stops and metro or train 
stations can make the site more accessible and therefore more 
sustainable. For certain projects, the proximity of airports or 
other major transport hubs can be critical. Different areas will 
have different transport services and sometimes it is important 
to pick up on the availability and frequency of these services.
Timeframe
When assessing how the existing routes work, it is important to 
consider how busy they are at different times of the day, month 
or year. Certain roads are very busy at rush hour and some 
pedestrian routes linking, say, a university campus to the city 
centre, may become very quiet during the holidays.
Movement
Exploring the intensity of use allows you to establish the 
significance of certain routes, and this may be important in some 
commercial situations where the footfall can be a major factor in 
establishing viability.102
TIP 43
ROUTES
VEHICULAR
ESTABLISH THE HIERARCHY OF ROUTES AFFECTING 
YOUR SITE.
What you can see
The city of Ipswich has a perimeter ring road. Within the town 
there are then principal routes and minor roads serving the 
local areas.
What does this mean?
Within every city there is a hierarchy of roads from busy urban 
expressways to quiet backstreets. The urban grain is often 
affected by serving the needs of vehicular traffic and this 
can sometimes be to the detriment of the city. Nevertheless, 
how an area is served is important in order to establish its 
development potential.
How might it affect your proposal?
Understanding the way in which the roads work allows you to 
put your site in context. If it is on a major route it will be well 
served and accessible. Smaller streets can be difficult for large 
vehicles to negotiate and also less easy to find if your customers 
are coming by car.
Tip links with 27, 40, 44, 45 and 51.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 103
 Primary roads
 Secondary roads
 Minor roads104
TIP 44
ROUTES
VEHICULAR
IDENTIFY BUS AND CYCLE ROUTES.
What you can see
Chester has a network of cycle routes using old railway lines 
and canal towpaths. Buses are excluded from the main four 
pedestrianised streets of the historic centre.
What does this mean?
Discouraging car use has required designated bus lanes and 
cycle ways that provide safe routes right into the centre of the 
city as well as a sustainable transport network.
How might it affect your proposal?
Pedestrianised areas can place restrictions on the operation 
and service of sites within the city. Carrying out construction 
activities can be especially difficult with deliveries only possible 
at certain times. Being aware of the transport infrastructure will 
allow you to grasp the opportunities. If cycling is a major thing, 
then providing space for bikes to be parked can be important. 
In certain circumstances, what appears to be a backwater can 
actually have great commercial potential due to the volume of 
cyclists and pedestrians.
Tip links with 27, 40, 43, 48, 49 and 51.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 105
 Cycle routes
 Shared routes
 Bus routes
 Bus terminal106
TIP 45
ROUTES
PEDESTRIAN
EXPERIENCE THE CITY BY WALKING.
What you can see
A schematic plan of Rome showing the main tourist sites, 
walking routes and metro stations.
What does this mean?
You can draw and represent cities in a variety of ways to show 
different situations or events. It is useful to know how a city is 
traversed and experienced – especially along the main roads and 
routes. You can add additional layers, such as public transport 
hubs and connections, to begin to understand how the city is 
used and experienced.
How might it affect your proposal?
Think about how you can represent your site and the 
surroundings in a diagrammatic way. You can create alternative 
maps that are not figurative or to scale. Through the diagram, 
you can depict complex ideas through simple means and remove 
all unnecessary information to stress a single idea with clarity.
Tip links with 48, 49 and 53.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 107
Vatican
Pantheon
Borghese
Gallery
Trevi Spanish Steps
Fountain
Colosseum
Campo
Di Fiori
Trastevere
Skyline108
TIP 46
ROUTES
PEDESTRIAN
EXPLORE THE ALTERNATIVE ROUTES.
What you can see
A canal and towpath that cuts through central Manchester, it is 
flanked with trees and industrial heritage buildings and leads to 
an old wharf.
What does this mean?
City maps are often produced with road and rail transportation 
in mind; it is these things that have often determined the layout 
of our cities. However, there may be other lesser-known routes 
and pathways through the city. Here are some paths from the 
city’s industrial heritage that now form a walking and cycle route 
through the city.
How might it affect your proposal?
Look out for these often hidden paths through the city, as 
they can provide rare spaces of tranquility as well as effective 
connections and spaces for walking, leisure and wildlife. How 
might you integrate such spaces within your own work and how 
can we ensure all parts of the city contribute to better urban 
realms with accessible transport options?
Tip links with 26, 67 and 74.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 109110
TIP 47
ROUTES
PEDESTRIAN
EXPLORE PATHWAYS BASED ON DESIRE LINES.
What you can see
On the left is a prescribed footpath with hard surfacing and on 
the right is a track made by people taking the shortest, or more 
desirable, route instead.
What does this mean?
Despite the best intentions of designers and planners, people 
will not always follow the paths and routes that are set out for 
them. If there is a ‘better’ or more useful route then people will 
tend to carve out a new pathway. Once that route becomes 
established and forms a new path it will always be used. The 
illustration shows that even a relatively small saving in time will 
still be preferred.
How might it affect your proposal?
When laying out a large campus, parkway or landscape, try 
to predict the most direct, shortest routes between the key 
destinations and lay a path along that route. Alternatively (and 
this is not always possible) wait for the ‘desire lines’ to become 
established and then install the hard paving and landscaping 
to suit.
Tip links with 35, 55 and 92.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 111112
TIP 48
ROUTES
TRANSPORT
CONSIDER THE BIGGER PICTURE OF TRANSPORT 
INFRASTRUCTURE AND ACCESSIBILITY.
What you can see
The city of Liverpool has canal, train, bus and ferry links, as well 
as an airport.
What does this mean?
The radial pattern of roads is particularly pronounced and 
provides good links for buses and cars across the city. The train 
lines tend to follow the estuary as well as providing links inland. 
The airport is not actually connected to the train infrastructure 
and requires a bus link.
How might it affect your proposal?
How well your site is connected to other parts of the city, and 
also to the wider geographical area, will make a difference to 
how accessible it is to different groups of people. The viability of 
your proposal may be affected by how easily it is serviced or, if 
it is a major attraction or sports venue, how many thousands of 
people can visit it within 30 minutes of their home.
Tip links with 40, 43, 44, 45, 49 and 50.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 113
 Road
 Rail
 Ferry
 Canal114
TIP 49
ROUTES
TRANSPORT
EXPLORE HOW WELL YOUR SITE IS SERVED BY 
TRANSPORT TERMINALS AND BUS STOPS.
What you can see
This map of York shows the location of bus stops, the bus 
terminal and rail stations. The location of the main hospital and 
medical centre are shown in yellow.
What does this mean?
Accessing healthcare facilities using public transport is 
important for patients, staff and visitors. In York they are well 
served with rail stations and bus stops nearby.
How might it affect your proposal?
When considering the viability of a proposal, proximity of public 
transport is important, not only from a viability point of view 
but also in terms of sustainability. Facilities, such as sports and 
leisure arenas, as well as workplaces, need to be accessible 
without requiring a car. Very occasionally a new station is 
provided to support a new development, but this is expensive 
and only a major initiative would warrant this sort of investment.
Tip links with 34, 40, 43, 44, 45, 46, 48, 51 and 52.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 115
 Healthcare facility
 Bus stop
 Bus terminal
 Rail station116
TIP 50
ROUTES
TRANSPORT
HOW WELL IS THE SITE CONNECTED NATIONALLY?
What you can see
A map showing the motorway networks and major airports 
within England.
What does this mean?
Different parts of the country are connected through a variety 
of infrastructure and transportation networks that impact 
commercial decisions, distribution systems and regional 
economic patterns.
How might it affect your proposal?
Whilst most analysis is undertaken at a local level, it can be 
useful to switch scales and consider a regional, or even national, 
position. Consider how your site is connected to a much larger 
system of infrastructure. How do these networks of rail, road, 
flight paths and docks impact the place you are designing for, 
and how might this connectivity shape your clients’ decision to 
invest and build in that area?
Tip links with 12 and 25.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 117118
TIP 51
ROUTES
TIMEFRAME
CONSIDER HOW SPECIAL EVENTS IMPACT THE CITY.
What you can see
The Chester races are a popular event and many of the 
attendees arrive at the rail station and then walk across the city. 
In the evening the reverse journey takes place, with more of a 
party atmosphere.
What does this mean?
Chester is a very different place on race days, much busier with 
all the shops, bars and restaurants full to capacity. Other cities 
may have other facilities generating large crowds, such as sports 
stadiums or event arenas.
How might it affect your proposal?
Special events, festivals and major performances can be a 
challenge for a city but also a great opportunity. If your site 
is close to the main route leading to the venue there will be 
potential to develop the design in such a way to be able to 
cope with both quiet days and busy times. Allowing flexibility of 
function can avoid facilities being underused for large parts of 
the year. In some circumstances the risks associated with large 
numbers of people has to be managed and this can impact on 
infrastructure and the design of the townscape.
Tip links with 8, 12, 40, 44, 45, 52, 71 and 82.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 119120
TIP 52
ROUTES
TIMEFRAME
REVIEW HOW INTENSITY OF USE VARIES OVER 
TIME.
What you can see
The Knowledge Quarter of Liverpool is linked to the city centre 
via two roads: Mount Pleasant and Brownlow Hill. The main rail 
station is also shown in red.
What does this mean?
During termtime these routes are busy with students and the 
shops and cafes do good business. During the summer break 
things quieten down considerably.
How might it affect your proposal?
Seasonal differences can make a big difference to the viability 
of businesses and other facilities. The Christmas period can be 
brilliant for pop-up markets and bars that are not sustainable at 
other times. Some towns rely on holiday trade but are quiet at 
other times. Considering the broader picture over a 12-month 
period can sometimes be useful.
Tip links with 6, 14, 50, 71 and 79.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 121122
CASE STUDY 3
MERCER WALK
RITCHIE STUDIO
What you can see
This mixed-use development is in the heart of London’s Covent 
Garden, a sensitive conservation area. The client was interested 
in long-term sustainability and economic viability, so quality 
was important.
What does this mean?
The scheme transformed a group of old warehouse buildings 
and cluttered service yards to create a completely new public 
realm space. A new pedestrian route links Mercer Street and 
Langley Street to form a new piazza at the heart of this formally 
inaccessible site. Mercer Walk uses a new architectural language 
that picks up on the existing, creating new spaces with similar 
proportions and human scale to that of the surrounding area.
What the architect says
You need to understand the adjoining streets and the historical 
fabric; take a snapshot from above and consider what the public 
room is like. Look at massing and how openings are articulated 
in the elevations. Consider the building’s orientation in relation 
to the rising and falling of the sun. What space can be created? 
What are the benefits of the routes created? It’s important to 
make them work and to communicate the ideas in a way that 
can be understood by both the client and the public.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ROUTES 123
Before
After124
CHAPTER 4
ENVIRONMENT
The term ‘Environment’ covers climate as well as topographical 
features and townscape. The microclimate of your site may be 
the starting point for a sustainable proposal and being aware of 
the localised effects of sun, wind and rain should allow you to 
work with the elements, rather than against them. When dealing 
with live projects, a topographical or building survey is often the 
starting point. Even when carrying out initial option appraisals, 
some sort of accurate site plan with approximate levels is 
required. Whether the site is in the city or a more rural location, 
the physical environment within which it is located will have a 
bearing on the proposals. Gathering the information, so that it is 
readily available during the design process, will allow you to be 
reminded of the key design influences.
Climate
Climate data and the ‘yellow banana diagram’, indicating the 
sun’s movement across the site, is often used. Wind rose charts 
are also popular, showing the direction and frequency of the 
wind distribution for an area. However, the data gathered is only 
useful if it provides information that is relevant to the specific 
site location and will make a difference to the design proposal.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003485988-4ENvIRONMENT 125
It is now relatively easy to set up a ‘Sketch Up’ model and show 
how shadows are cast across a site at different times of the day 
or year. Alternatively, a physical site model can be tested using a 
heliodon – or simply replicating altitude and azimuth with a torch.
Wind direction is affected by local features, so that winds tend 
to flow along valleys or estuaries rather than across them. Being 
aware of extreme weather in exposed locations is important as it 
will affect the design proposals.
Data on rainfall, temperature range and humidity are readily 
accessible, but the way these events occur at extreme times 
needs to be considered, since one of the issues associated with 
climate change is an increase in extremes.
Topographical
Having information about the size of the site, the levels and 
any important features is an essential starting point for any 
design proposal. The accuracy of the information should tally 
with the level of design detail being considered. Even relatively 
flat sites can have falls across them, and these can make a big 
difference to access and floor levels. Also take note of gradients, 
ramps or steps. Ground conditions, substructure services and 
contamination are all important considerations with a live project 
but may be less so with theoretical college projects. When 
dealing with existing buildings, an accurate and detailed survey is 
essential, especially when proposals become more detailed.
Natural features
Whether the site is located in the city or a more rural location, 
the existing landscape and natural features may influence your 
design proposals. Existing trees can have an impact on what 
might be possible in terms of siting your project and wildlife 
habitats can also be a major constraint. For a live project, 
surveys of newts, bats and other mammals can be necessary. 
A site near a river may be affected by flooding and issues 
associated with water run-off and erosion can be important 
considerations. The biodiversity of a site can sometimes be a 
major factor to be considered.126
Man-made features
The environment may be affected by man-made features and 
the townscape might include unusual ground surface materials, 
bollards, railings and other street furniture. The modern era has 
introduced less attractive equipment into towns and features 
such as power lines, telephone masts, satellite disks and solar 
panels, which can be intrusive features.
The quality of artificial light can influence the character of a 
space at night and be a barrier to ‘dark skies’ in rural areas. The 
same is true of sound pollution and an awareness of nearby 
transport routes or manufacturing facilities may be significant 
depending on the proposal. Air quality is also important, as well 
as an awareness of unpleasant odours as a result of natural or 
man-made processes.
Timeframe
When considering the climate, as well as sound, light and 
air pollution, it is necessary to note how things vary over 
the seasons or over a typical day. For example, the noise 
associated with clubs and music venues may only be evident 
later in the evening and poor air quality may coincide with 
particular climatic conditions or rush hours. Considering the 
environmental conditions over a 24-hour period can be useful 
and an awareness of the climate at different times of the year 
is essential.
Street hierarchies
The quality of the urban environment is often determined by the 
streets and the height of the buildings. This is perhaps most 
pronounced in a medieval city, with narrow alleyways and high 
buildings, but more modern cities like New York can also provide 
an extraordinary experience. The extent to which these patterns 
dictate the future proposals will depend upon the function, 
and also the current regulations on space standards and 
interface distances.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 127
Sustainability
Sustainability can be assessed from many standpoints and each 
site will have different requirements and opportunities. Social 
and economic sustainability may be a big factor in assessing 
the viability of the proposals in the context of the surrounding 
area. The availability of natural resources locally may also affect 
choices on construction materials.
phenomenology
Architecture is a spatial medium but it also has tangible 
qualities – surfaces and textures – that the architect can use, 
sculpt and curate. These qualities also change appearance in 
different lighting conditions, at different times of the day and in 
different seasons. These qualities in and around the site can be 
observed, recorded and might inform your response as part of 
the design proposal.
Buildings also have acoustic qualities. The reverberation, 
echoes and the relationship between volume and surface 
materials can have a profound impact on how the space is used 
and experienced.
As designers we can both respond to these qualities and 
seek to create them. We can also think beyond the five senses 
and attempt to invoke memories, recall associations and 
stir emotions.
This approach to design requires the inclusion of stakeholders 
who are involved with the project but perceive things in a 
different way. Inclusivity and accessibility must be at the core of 
what we produce.
Whist statistics, maps and graphs can provide objective data, 
visiting the site and reflecting upon how it makes you feel can be 
important. Consider how ‘safe’ you feel on the site or when moving 
through the surrounding areas. You might develop a creative 
response to the site through a photographic montage, or perhaps 
there is a particular photograph or artwork that encapsulates 
the site in some way. Site analysis does not have to remain a 
fact-based extraction of data; even your own maps and sketches 
of the site can be fundamental in developing design ideas.128
TIP 53
ENVIRONMENT
CLIMATE
ASSESS SUN PATHS, SHADING AND DAYLIGHT.
What you can see
A sketch of Boston, Massachusetts and the shadows cast onto 
Boston Commons.
What does this mean?
In Boston there is legislation to protect the Commons from 
being overshadowed by the tall developments at the periphery 
of the park. New construction, particularly large and tall 
developments, can have a major impact on the sunlight/shading 
on neighbouring structures and amenities.
How might it affect your proposal?
Consider the orientation of your design to benefit from direct 
sunlight or to reduce the impact of solar gain and glare. 
Shadow paths can also be plotted to analyse whether parts of 
your site are in shade at certain times of the year. These can 
equally demonstrate the impact your proposal might have on 
neighbouring plots. Work with the solar and shadow paths to 
enhance your design and to create comfortable, energy-efficient 
solutions that respond to the light and shade.
Tip links with 57 and 97.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 129130
TIP 54
ENVIRONMENT
CLIMATE
ESTABLISH THE LOCAL WIND PATHS AND 
PREVAILING WINDS.
What you can see
A dominant wind direction flowing across the site.
What does this mean?
The wind direction can impact on the use and enjoyment of a 
site – especially in cities with large buildings, coastal areas and 
exposed sites.
How might it affect your proposal?
Identify the dominant wind direction and whether there is 
potential to provide windbreaks through planting, hedges, 
trees and landscaping to improve the comfort for building 
users. An exposed site may also require different construction 
specifications to mitigate storm damage and extreme winds. In 
city contexts, tall buildings may generate strong wind tunnels 
with intense gusts of wind. Mitigate against these with your 
design, especially at the entrances and any exposed outside 
areas such as roof terraces and balconies.
Tip links with 55.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 131132
TIP 55
ENVIRONMENT
CLIMATE
CONSIDER HOW THE MICROCLIMATE AFFECTS THE 
SITE.
What you can see
Sun, wind and rain contribute to create a particular microclimate 
for a site dependent upon its location, orientation and section.
What does this mean?
All buildings must be designed for their local climate to keep 
the building occupants comfortable. Whilst broad climatic 
data is readily available, each site will have its own particular 
microclimate that must be considered.
How might it affect your proposal?
A microclimate may not conform to the broader averages 
and typical climate statistics. Mountainous and hillside sites, 
coastal peninsulas, valleys and plains all express very particular 
conditions – these are opportunities for your design to exploit 
the specific site attributes and to ensure your design is carefully 
adapted to its plot.
Tip links with 56.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 133
Wind Speeds
 1.8 m/s sitting for long periods
 3.6 m/s sitting for short periods
 5.3 m/s leisurely walking
 7.5 m/s walking fast
 7.6 m/s uncomfortable134
TIP 56
ENVIRONMENT
CLIMATE
CONSIDER IF TIDAL PATTERNS OR RISING SEA 
LEVELS HAVE AN IMPACT ON YOUR SITE.
What you can see
The island of Lindisfarne, off the Northumbrian coast, is a 
popular destination for pilgrims and tourists. There is a small 
village on the island with a public house. The island is cut off 
from the mainland by the tide twice a day.
What does this mean?
The people who live and work on the island need to consider the 
tidal patterns if they want to journey to the mainland and there 
tend to be fewer tourists on the island when the tide is in.
How might it affect your proposal?
This is a rather extreme example of the influence of the tides 
on people’s everyday lives. However, there are many coastal 
areas, including estuaries, where the tidal patterns make a 
big difference to the appearance and functionality of the site. 
Issues such as rising sea levels and coastal erosion can also be 
important considerations when assessing longer term strategies.
Tip links with 57, 62 and 63.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 135
Lindisfarne Castle
High tide
Low tide136
TIP 57
ENVIRONMENT
TOPOGRAPHICAL
SURVEY SITE LEVELS AND FEATURES.
What you can see
This area has four different interconnecting transport 
infrastructures vertically adjacent to each other just outside the 
medieval city walls but within the conservation area.
What does this mean?
These various structures place considerable constraints on the 
development potential of the adjoining sites. Any proposal would 
require not only accurate physical surveys, but also checks on 
any legal and legislative constraints placed on proposals, as 
well as an assessment of the structural implications. Careful 
coordination and phasing of construction would also be required.
How might it affect your proposal?
This site provides an exciting opportunity for the designer 
and the possibility to link the various levels in some way. 
Connections to infrastructure and circulation networks do not 
just exist at ground-floor level. Consider sectional studies to 
investigate below and above the site level in order to fully exploit 
the opportunities.
Tip links with 58, 61, 87 and 88.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 137
View across railway, canal and elevated road
25.00m
19.50m
14.00m
8.50m
Sectional elevation along the railway line138
TIP 58
ENVIRONMENT
TOPOGRAPHICAL
DETERMINE THE SITE BOUNDARY – IT IS NOT 
ALWAYS CLEARLY DEFINED.
What you can see
These fields on the outskirts of Willaston in Cheshire West 
have potential to be developed for housing. However, the actual 
boundaries are formed of shrubs and trees and are difficult 
to define.
What does this mean?
The fields are in multiple ownerships, as is the land around 
the development area. Each landowner is likely to want a 
fair remuneration for use of their land and this tends to be 
proportional to the site area.
How might it affect your proposal?
Defining the site boundary can be critical to whether a 
proposition will work or not. It may affect the number of 
dwellings that can be accommodated, for example. Moving 
forward on a false premise is likely to cause problems later 
on. Sometimes boundaries are recorded in the deeds of the 
property but often the ‘red line’ indicated on the legal document 
or land registry is difficult to determine on site and this can lead 
to disputes.
Tip links with 3, 59, 62, 63, 67, 87 and 88.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 139140
TIP 59
ENVIRONMENT
TOPOGRAPHICAL
INVESTIGATE THE GROUND CONDITIONS.
What you can see
The top site plan shows a petrol filling station. The site has 
subsequently been redeveloped as a three-storey apartment 
building as shown in the lower drawing.
What does this mean?
Sometimes it is difficult to tell how a site was previously 
used without careful research. After the filling station closed 
the buildings were demolished and the site lay dormant for 
many years, possibly due to the high cost of dealing with 
the contamination of the fuel tanks. These sites are known 
as brownfield sites and may contain a variety of polluting 
contaminants in the ground. Making a site suitable for housing 
can be prohibitively expensive due to the excavation required 
and ensuring any polluting material and gases do not enter the 
new buildings.
How might it affect your proposal?
The development potential of a site can be finely balanced 
financially. It is sometimes said that ‘all the risks are in the 
ground’; contamination, poor ground conditions or hidden 
basements can all have high associated cost. When dealing with 
a live project a ground investigation is essential.
Tip links with 1, 3, 39 and 58.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 141
2020
1990142
TIP 60
ENVIRONMENT
NATURAL FEATURES
CELEBRATE THE NATURAL FEATURES.
What you can see
A sketch of Snowdonia in Wales with a valley and small 
settlement below the mountains in the distance.
What does this mean?
The materials, climate, altitudes and features all have an impact 
on how we approach design and respond to the place in which 
we are working. Dramatic landscapes and vast terrains can 
provide wonderful settings for our designs – but proposals must 
be located with utmost care to both acknowledge the natural 
landscape and defer to its far grander scale.
How might it affect your proposal?
Architects have a duty to respect the natural landscape and, 
wherever possible, to leave it in a better state than how it was 
found. Working with the landscape and topography, rather 
than imposing a plan, is the bare minimum. By considering the 
inclines, water flow, vistas, micro-climates, trees and wildlife you 
can aim to complement the sites you work in and around.
Tip links with 49, 60 and 64.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 143144
TIP 61
ENVIRONMENT
NATURAL FEATURES
CONSIDER THE ROOTS AND CROWN OF ALL TREES 
WITHIN THE SITE.
What you can see
A sketch of a tree showing the extensive root network and 
recommendation that properties are at least the equivalent 
distance to the tree’s height away from the tree.
What does this mean?
Large trees can cause shrinkage and swelling in clay soil 
conditions, and this may damage a building’s foundations. 
Chopping through a tree’s roots will also weaken the tree and 
make it less stable in storms. Falling trees can be a danger to 
life and property. Certain trees have Tree Preservation Orders, 
which mean they must not be damaged or cut down.
How might it affect your proposal?
Trees provide shelter and shade and their environmental 
benefits are essential to human life. Their root structure must 
be protected, rather than erased or damaged. Planting trees 
and using their ability to provide shade, create vistas, block 
unsightly elements, provide fruit and encourage biodiversity and 
pollinators can enhance nearly every project.
Tip links with 4, 57 and 65.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 145146
TIP 62
ENVIRONMENT
NATURAL FEATURES
CONDUCT AN ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT OF 
NATURAL HABITATS.
What you can see
Bats, newts and badgers are just some of our wildlife with 
protected status.
What does this mean?
Certain animals and trees have legal protection and must not be 
disturbed, nor their habitats destroyed by construction projects. 
There are strict rules and severe penalties to ensure vulnerable 
and important species are protected. Certain places are also 
labelled sites of special scientific interest, and others may be 
deemed ‘green belt’ or agricultural use only to limit and control 
where development may take place. Larger projects should have 
a specialist ecological survey conducted to ensure any protected 
species can be identified and protected, as well as to examine 
the impact on the wider ecology of the site.
How might it affect your proposal?
All construction has an environmental and ecological impact, but 
particular care must be given not to disturb rare and protected 
species. Rewilding and rehabilitation of former industrial sites 
into parkland and wildlife habitats is increasingly important and 
necessary. Whilst your site and remit may be limited, there is 
scope to lobby and engage with these issues.
Tip links with 35, 62 and 68.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 147148
TIP 63
ENVIRONMENT
NATURAL FEATURES
CHECK FLOOD RISK DATA, ESPECIALLY IN LOW￾LYING LOCATIONS.
What you can see
This map of York shows zones where there is a 1 in 25 and a 1 in 
100 annual likelihood of flooding. As you can see, large areas of 
the city are affected.
What does this mean?
There are strict policies laid down for any developments in 
the flood zone and owners of existing buildings will have 
contingencies in place to deal with potential floods. National 
agencies have strategic plans to address and avert issues of 
flooding. However, in some cases it is not possible to prevent 
flooding and the impact has to be managed.
How might it affect your proposal?
Examples from around the world show many ingenious methods 
of dealing with flood risk. In some cases, a sacrificial zone will 
allow for occasional floods by putting utility accommodation on 
the ground floor. In the Netherlands, housing that ‘floats’ allows 
the accommodation to overcome the problem. In other areas, 
housing and linking walkways are placed on ‘stilts’ to lift the 
accommodation above the flood level.
Tip links with 56, 57, 61, 87 and 88.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 149
 Normal river level
 1 in 25 annual probability of flooding
 1 in 100 annual probability of flooding150
TIP 64
ENVIRONMENT
NATURAL FEATURES
EXPLORE THE BACKSTORY OF ANY FORMAL 
LANDSCAPES.
What you can see
This is the ‘Roman Garden’, a part of the Victorian Grosvenor 
Park in Chester. This section was laid out in 1949 to display 
fragments from the Roman legionary fortress.
What does this mean?
This is a rather unusual example of a formally laid out landscape, 
and one that provides a place for visitors to sit and ponder the 
antiquities. The medieval wall, which forms the eastern boundary 
of the old city, provides shelter and creates its own microclimate 
as the sun heats it up during the morning. The garden provides a 
pedestrian route to the river and is popular with tourists.
How might it affect your proposal?
Working within a site that already has a formal landscape allows 
you to explore the existing design strategy and consider how 
this might affect your proposals. You may feel you can improve 
or completely change what is there. An analysis of the site and 
its history should be the starting point and allow you to justify 
your scheme in an objective way.
Tip links with 1, 20, 26, 28, 47, 60 and 65.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 151152
TIP 65
ENVIRONMENT
MAN-MADE FEATURES
CONSIDER THE EXISTING STREETSCAPE.
What you can see
The Town Hall Square in Chester provides a civic space for 
various events throughout the year.
What does this mean?
Civic space is important and having a flexible gathering space 
in our towns and cities is essential for building community and 
providing a place for celebrations, protests, special events, 
Christmas fairs and summer festivals. The way in which the 
square is laid out also provides places for visitors to relax.
How might it affect your proposal?
Street furniture, ground materials and civic paraphernalia 
contribute to the special character of civic spaces. Sometimes, 
for example in docklands areas, the objects can be of historic 
interest and tell the story of the place. Being aware of what 
is around the site and how it works allows you to put your 
proposals in context and consider what objects and finishes are 
important and what might be changed.
Tip links with 1, 20, 26, 28, 47, 64, 66, 92 and 95.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 153154
TIP 66
ENVIRONMENT
MAN-MADE FEATURES
HOW DOES STREET FURNITURE IMPACT ON THE 
SITE?
What you can see
A sketch of fixed and temporary street furniture, including 
planting and solar shading.
What does this mean?
Our streets and public spaces need to be carefully designed 
and planned with appropriate gathering spaces and resting 
spots. The furniture enables streets and squares to be used and 
enjoyed throughout the day as gathering spaces, rather than just 
as thoroughfares.
How might it affect your proposal?
Think about how you can design the streets, public realm and 
outside spaces so that they are enjoyable and add value to the 
cityscape. Rather than using bollards, railings or other defensive 
solutions to control behaviour, consider how planting, material 
changes and furniture can be deployed instead. Providing places 
for people to gather adds value to a site, offers informal security 
and a sense of wellbeing, as well as providing opportunities to 
introduce greenery and wildlife habitats.
Tip links with 47, 64, 65, 67 and 72.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 155156
TIP 67
ENVIRONMENT
MAN-MADE FEATURES
CONSIDER THE IMPACT OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS, 
MASTS AND SATELLITE DISHES ON YOUR SITE.
What you can see
A telephone mast and street lamp with some uncoordinated 
cables and wires.
What does this mean?
All cities and buildings rely on an array of services and 
infrastructure, some of which is carried on masts or fixed to 
buildings, such as telecommunication wires and electricity. It can 
become intrusive and add a sense of ‘clutter’ to our streetscapes 
and façades.
How might it affect your proposal?
Whilst the installation of services and infrastructure may be 
beyond the scope and reach of some projects, whenever 
possible coordinate these essential services so that they are 
appropriately sited, preferably hidden from view, and easily 
accessible for future maintenance and servicing.
Tip links with 68.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 157158
TIP 68
ENVIRONMENT
MAN-MADE FEATURES
CONSIDER THE IMPACT OF ARTIFICIAL LIGHTING.
What you can see
The Wellington Arch in London lit up at night.
What does this mean?
Using artificial lighting can dramatically enhance a building at 
night. Certain objects, such as the archway shown here, are 
singled out as celebrated jewels within the cityscape. More 
discreet and subtle lighting solutions may be more appropriate in 
other contexts.
How might it affect your proposal?
Think about how your scheme will look at night-time. Can it be 
enhanced through some celebratory lighting that accentuates its 
features and draws attention to it? Other proposals might benefit 
from more subtle or utilitarian lighting. Beware of increasing light 
pollution or causing a nuisance to neighbours through insensitive 
lighting. Also consider how the light fittings look during daylight 
hours. They should be unobtrusive and mounted with care to not 
detract from the main façade.
Tip links with 67.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 159160
TIP 69
ENVIRONMENT
MAN-MADE FEATURES
IS YOUR SITE IMPACTED BY NOISE?
What you can see
The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
commissioned a study on noise pollution and air quality. 
Here you can see the noise levels at the intersection of two 
motorways, the M1 and M62 near Leeds.
What does this mean?
The noise level along the motorway exceeds 75 decibels and 
has a major impact on the surrounding areas. The noise pollution 
level in the areas within the dashed lines are unacceptably high.
How might it affect your proposal?
There are many noise and air quality studies available online 
that you can consult for your own site. Ensure you are aware of 
noise problems and any other potential issues for your site. The 
noise pollution may be seasonal or diurnal. Orientation, building 
specification and being aware of vibrations and noise transfer 
through the fabric of the building should also be considered.
Tip links with 61, 62 and 74.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 161
 75+ decibels
 70–75 decibels
 65–69 decibels
 60–65 decibels162
TIP 70
ENVIRONMENT
TIMEFRAME
INVESTIGATE HOW THE SITE USE VARIES OVER 
24 HOURS.
What you can see
This is the Ropewalks area of Liverpool and the heart of the club 
and bar area of the city (shown in blue).
What does this mean?
During the daytime these streets are relatively quiet, with the 
exception of Bold Street on the right-hand side of the map, 
which also has shops and restaurants. In the evening and early 
hours of the morning the area is buzzing with activity as people 
enjoy the nightlife, music and vibrancy of the district.
How might it affect your proposal?
Understanding how areas of the city are used over a 24-hour 
period is important. Some of these streets can be quite noisy 
late at night and although there are some flats in the area, it 
would not be the obvious choice for residential use for families.
Tip links with 38, 51, 52 and 71.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 163164
TIP 71
ENVIRONMENT
TIMEFRAME
EXPLORE HOW SITE USE CHANGES OVER THE 
COURSE OF A YEAR.
What you can see
The Edinburgh International Festival is a major cultural event that 
occurs in August each year, with this map showing the location 
of some of the performance venues.
What does this mean?
The influx of thousands of visitors makes the city into a very 
different place with all the cafes, bars and restaurants at full 
capacity and many residents moving out, renting their homes 
to visitors.
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of how a city changes throughout the year allows 
you to put into perspective the different modes of use. You may 
happen to visit on a day when it is quiet and form a particular 
impression. Looking into the festivals and events that occur, 
as well as the Christmas shopping period, can turn up a very 
different picture.
Tip links with 51, 52 and 70.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 165166
TIP 72
ENVIRONMENT
STREET HIERARCHIES
CONSIDER THE PROPORTION OF PAVEMENT TO 
ROAD.
What you can see
The Embankment, running along the north bank of the River 
Thames in central London, where there are designated zones for 
pedestrians and different types of transport.
What does this mean?
London, like many cities, has embraced cycling as a sustainable 
and convenient way of getting around the city. The Embankment 
is a major thoroughfare; segregating traffic allows safe routes 
for travel as well as creating pleasant places to sit and enjoy 
the view.
How might it affect your proposal?
Thinking about the public realm and how it works in the area 
around your site means that your proposals can be put in 
context. It may even be that you are recommending a new 
way of using existing streets, squares and parks, either by 
segregation or by using some sort of ‘shared platform’, where all 
types of traffic have to take equal care. Opportunities for street 
cafes may also be affected.
Tip links with 27, 29, 40 and 73.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 167168
TIP 73
ENVIRONMENT
STREET HIERARCHIES
CONSIDER THE STREET’S HEIGHT TO WIDTH RATIO.
What you can see
Mercer Street off Seven Dials in the Covent Garden area 
of London; a narrow street originally providing access 
to workshops.
What does this mean?
The Seven Dials area of Covent Garden has a colourful 
history. Originally laid out by Thomas Neale to maximise 
the development potential and rental, the buildings were 
subsequently used for workshops and warehouses. It also forms 
one of the boundaries of the Mercer Walk scheme (referred to in 
Case Study 3).
How might it affect your proposal?
Being aware of the proportions of streets by looking up and 
exploring the section provides an extra dimension to your site 
analysis. Whether it is a wide boulevard or narrow back street 
makes a difference to your intervention and affects how the 
scheme can be viewed.
Tip links with 2, 3, 26, 29 and 72.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 169170
TIP 74
ENVIRONMENT
SUSTAINABILITY
EXPLORE OPPORTUNITIES TO UTILISE THE SITE’S 
RESOURCES.
What you can see
At the Centre for Alternative Technology in Powys, Wales, 
there is a funicular used to transport visitors up the steep 
embankment. Both carriages are connected via a cable 
and operate using a small amount of energy by utilising the 
counterbalance of the other carriage.
What does this mean?
Every aspect of the design process – contextual analysis, 
movement of people and factors such as embodied energy – 
must be considered at all stages of the design, construction, use 
and re-use of the site.
How might it affect your proposal?
How might you utilise the site’s natural attributes to increase 
sustainability and reduce carbon dependency? Researchers 
at places like the Centre for Alternative Technology have been 
grappling with these issues for decades, but the responsibility 
now extends from the fringes of the built environment and is a 
core responsibility for all designers.
Tip links with 55, 77 and 79.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 171172
TIP 75
ENVIRONMENT
SUSTAINABILITY
CONSIDER OPPORTUNITIES TO DEPLOY LOCAL 
MATERIALS.
What you can see
A detail of St Alban’s Church in Norwich. Built in the inter-war 
period, it utilises locally available stone – unknapped flints, set 
within red-brick dressings.
What does this mean?
The materials used for this church are locally available and have 
not had to travel very far from the place they were quarried 
and burnt. Using local materials reduces the amount of energy 
required to transport the materials to the site. It can also help 
with creating a sense of place and adding local flavour.
How might it affect your proposal?
Reducing the carbon footprint of construction is essential 
and this includes reducing the amount of energy required to 
transport heavy and large building materials. Where possible, 
aim to source materials and products that are produced close 
to the site. Not only will this reduce the carbon produced during 
the construction of the project, but it will also help to create a 
regional design response. Local techniques, crafts and skills can 
also be deployed to produce designs that reflect their locality 
and community.
Tip links with 20 and 77.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 173174
TIP 76
ENVIRONMENT
PHENOMENOLOGY
EXPLORE OPPORTUNITIES TO CREATE THE SENSE 
OF A JOURNEY.
What you can see
In the grounds of Fountains Abbey, North Yorkshire, are a series 
of ‘eye-catcher’ follies. They lead the eye through the landscape 
and give various focal points. En route to one of the follies, the 
visitor encounters dramatic landscapes with trees and grottoes 
and is finally rewarded with a view back over the landscape and 
perhaps to another folly.
What does this mean?
Consider creating a series of ‘events’, ‘eye-catchers’, vistas and 
views that entice the visitor through your project landscape.
How might it affect your proposal?
What special and unique qualities does your site have that could 
be arranged into a journey or sequential experience for the 
visitor to enjoy. Create your own architectural promenade. This 
can also help with wayfinding and signposting.
Tip links with 43, 91 and 92.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 175176
TIP 77
ENVIRONMENT
PHENOMENOLOGY
CONSIDER THE POTENTIAL FOR AN 
ARCHITECTURAL PROMENADE AND MYSTERY.
What you can see
A sketch of the Oratory temple in Liverpool, perched on top of a 
small rocky outcrop. It sits above a former stone quarry, later a 
garden and burial site.
What does this mean?
Moving through this space with its hidden views, tunnels and 
almost subterranean landscapes invokes certain feelings and 
responses from visitors. Our senses – especially those of sound 
and touch – become heightened and we enjoy the shadows 
and shifts in light. There is a sense of the sublime and attractive 
decay in this space.
How might it affect your proposal?
Consider how you might use shadows, darkness and 
anticipation. The sense of exploring, touching and hearing 
can be immensely powerful. Not everything can be explained 
or understood, we need to leave some room for mystery 
and ambiguity.
Tip links with 43, 100 and 102.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 177178
TIP 78
ENVIRONMENT
PHENOMENOLOGY
BE AWARE OF HISTORICAL CONNOTATIONS.
What you can see
The Cestrian Book of the Dead provides a record of historical 
sites of drownings on the Dee Estuary dating back to the early 
1500s. The dotted line shows the line of the old ford between 
England and Wales.
What does this mean?
The map reveals that the estuarine landscape was historically 
a thriving social and cultural space for washing clothes, 
grazing, bathing and leisure. However, due to the hazardous, 
unpredictable nature of the terrain, many people died on the site.
How might it affect your proposal?
An awareness of the history and past uses of your site provide 
perspective and depth to your appreciation of it. Whilst marshes 
are a popular destination for walkers and birdwatchers who 
come to enjoy the tranquil surroundings, this macabre story 
shows that a deep and dark history may exist. What stories lie 
beneath your site?
Tip links with 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 27, 76 and 77.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 179
Route across estuary at low tide
ENGLAND
WALES
Flint
Neston
Burton
Shotwick Route across estuary at low tide
ENGLAND
WALES
Flint
Neston
Burton
Shotwick180
CASE STUDY 4
AELTC COMMUNITY 
TENNIS CENTRE
LANGSTAFF DAY ARCHITECTS
What you can see
The tennis club in Raynes Park had a problematic site. It frequently 
flooded and the sports pitches could not be used. Other factors 
and constraints had to be considered, such as orientating the 
tennis courts in the same direction as the Wimbledon courts for 
effective practice; providing suitable drop-off and parking areas; 
maximising views from the club house over the courts without 
overshadowing; providing community-use pitches that could be 
isolated from the tennis courts; providing discrete maintenance 
facilities and also respecting the residential neighbourhood.
What does this mean?
This was a project with numerous demands and sometimes 
contradictory requirements. The architects had to reconcile 
these competing agendas, and they did this by first turning a 
problem into an asset – flooding and drainage. By installing a 
Sustainable Drainage System (SuDS) they developed a new 
habitat for wildlife and worked with nature rather than against it. 
They also salvaged drainage water for irrigation purposes.
The clubhouse was relocated by the car park and drop-off 
point to provide a welcoming entrance with extensive 
views overlooking the courts rather than the neighbouring 
residential gardens.
What the architect says
Constraints and problems can become important design 
generators. By carefully studying the site along with the client 
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE ENvIRONMENT 181
requirements we were able to reconcile the array of demands 
and problems that enhanced the project.
Drainage is becoming increasingly important and as we 
become more susceptible to flooding we need to ensure this 
is carefully considered at the design stage, and that large hard 
landscaped areas are permeable. Using a SuDS allowed us to 
create new habitats for wildlife and to eliminate the waterlogging 
problems. We now have a solution that serves the community, 
enhances the site and makes a positive contribution to 
the environment.
flooding
no drainage
detention basin
permeable
car park 
surface
views from
clubhouse
maintenance
recycled 
water for 
irrigation
under court
drainage
clubhouse overlooking 
neighbours
hard landscaping 
for parking
EXISTING PROPOSED
playing surfaces182
CHAPTER 5
GROUPINGS AND 
USAGE
‘Groupings’ refer to the various functions and uses of the 
site. For example, if the site is located within a predominantly 
residential area then this is likely to affect the way it might 
be developed and what future usage would be regarded as 
appropriate. Establishing what is going on around the site 
will help inform your project. Sometimes there may be similar 
facilities close by and you will need to consider whether your 
proposal is trying to work with these facilities or is in competition 
with them. In live projects, ownership of land can also be an 
important factor affecting access and sometimes the whole 
viability of the project.
Site usage
What is the current use of the site and what is its designation 
in terms of local authority planning? Establish how the site is 
being used now. If there is a change of function, say from retail 
to residential, there will be implications in terms of planning 
approval, which must inform your design proposal.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003485988-5GROUpINGS AND USAGE 183
around the site
The functions of the areas around the site will have an influence 
on how the site might be developed. What is the predominant 
use of the surrounding buildings or land? Where are the key 
buildings or facilities located? How close is the local school or 
hospital? Exploring what parks or other recreational amenities 
are available may also be important, as well as the proximity 
of countryside and other open spaces. The story of land use 
is often a complex one and may involve accessing census or 
other data to establish what is going on. Land ownership is also 
important, and it may be that a single individual or company 
controls what goes on over a large geographical area.
Considering the ‘public’ and ‘private’ areas provides a 
perspective on access and perception. There are often 
thresholds or boundaries that exist (not always physical) that 
signal public access or private domains.
Relationship to the wider area
How the district or the area immediately around the site relates 
to the wider geographical area may be important. Is your site 
unique, or is it part of a much wider zone? How does your town 
or city relate to the country as a whole? Are the functions you 
propose replicated elsewhere? The sustainability and viability of 
the proposal may be related to what is happening elsewhere and 
the interdependency between these functions. When looking at 
a site, consider the idea of ‘animation’ – how the area or street 
becomes ‘alive’, how people use the streets and what impact 
this makes.184
TIP 79
GROUPINGS
SITE USAGE
MAP OUT THE VARIOUS FUNCTIONAL USES 
AROUND YOUR SITE.
What you can see
A plan of Liverpool city centre showing certain buildings 
highlighted according to their use. Certain parts of a city may 
become associated with a particular activity or specialist 
provision. Here the map shows the location of public houses, 
nightclubs and cinemas within a small area highlighting the 
night-time activity of the district.
What does this mean?
You need to know what kind of neighbourhood your site is 
located within. This may help with providing historical content 
and context, as well as highlighting more pragmatic needs 
especially with regards to noise, music venues, late-night 
entertainment and large crowds.
How might it affect your proposal?
It is useful to produce maps of the neighbourhood highlighting 
the main uses and activities that take place there. This can help 
to identify potential noise problems and usage patterns. Think 
about how the district surrounding your site is currently used and 
the main activities that occur. Will your proposal align with how 
the area is currently used and perceived? Will it complement or 
contrast with current usage patterns? Will you need to modify your 
proposal to mitigate against problems or perceived nuisances?
Tip links with 38, 50 and 72.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 185
 Public houses
 Nightclubs
 Cinema186
TIP 80
GROUPINGS
SITE USAGE
HOW HAS THE FUNCTION OF YOUR SITE CHANGED 
OVER TIME?
What you can see
An old church building, designed for Christian worship, and now 
with a broader community focus.
What does this mean?
Buildings might serve a specific purpose and have a single 
‘user group’, but often they have many different types of visitor/
occupancy at different times. Buildings also change uses and are 
adapted to meet new demands and purposes at different stages 
of their life.
How might it affect your proposal?
Consider the various groups, communities, businesses, 
occupants and visitors who are likely to inhabit and experience 
your proposal. How might you respond to their needs (and if 
possible, future as yet unknown uses)? It is more important 
than ever that buildings can be reused and modified to suit 
changing needs. Propose rehabilitation and adaption rather than 
demolition and starting again to save energy and reduce waste.
Tip links with 81, 82 and 84.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 187188
TIP 81
GROUPINGS
AROUND THE SITE
BE AWARE OF ACTIVITIES OR FUNCTIONS 
ASSOCIATED WITH YOUR SITE OR BRIEF.
What you can see
The area around Leeds has several large hospitals serving 
the local community. Together they provide the full range of 
diagnosis, treatment and specialist care.
What does this mean?
Depending on the project brief, some functions may work 
together with other facilities around the area; they also may be 
linked to a distribution centre or head office.
How might it affect your proposal?
Consider how your scheme relates to other sites and operational 
issues. How quickly you can move between sites may affect 
the viability and sustainability of a proposal. Proximity to rail or 
road networks could be critical to the success of a proposal. 
In the case of hospitals, staff and equipment may have to 
transit between sites. Public transport connections will also be 
important for some patients and their visitors.
Tip links with 24, 44, 48, 49, 50 and 78.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 189
Leeds Bradford
1.
4.
5. 6.
2. 3.
Halifax
Wakefield
Leeds Bradford
1.
4.
5. 6.
2. 3.
Halifax
Wakefield
 Hospitals
1. Bradford
2. Leeds General
3. St James’s
4. St Luke’s
5. Calderdale Royal
6. Pinderfields
 Motorways190
TIP 82
GROUPINGS
AROUND THE SITE
CONSIDER THE PROXIMITY OF KEY FACILITIES.
What YOU CAN see
A map of York showing the location of key facilities.
What does this mean?
The 15-minute city was a concept put forward by Professor 
Carlos Moreno to describe a sustainable community where daily 
necessities and services such as work, shopping, education, 
healthcare and leisure can be easily reached within a 15-minute 
walk or bike ride. York is a good example of this, partly as 
a result of its size. However, larger cities can still provide a 
sustainable infrastructure when they are broken down into 
self-supporting districts.
How might it affect your proposal?
Mapping the location of key facilities means that you can 
assess how close your site is to the things that form part of 
everyday life for a family. This is important because access 
using public transport, cycling and walking is more sustainable 
and also avoids long car journeys to ferry the family about. 
The requirements included within your brief, and how to these 
relate to facilities that already exist around the site, provides an 
indication of sustainability.
Tip links with 24, 44, 48, 49, 54, 79 and 85.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 191
 Hospital
 Secondary school
 Cinema/entertainment
 Sports facilities/stadium
 Parks and recreation192
TIP 83
GROUPINGS
AROUND THE SITE
INVESTIGATE THE PREVIOUS USES OF THE SITE.
What you can see
The Chester City Infirmary was the main hospital until a new 
facility was built in the 1980s. The vacant site at the top 
right-hand side of the drawing is an old Roman cemetery, 
dating from c.200 bce. The lower plan shows the site today, 
redeveloped for housing with the original buildings remodelled to 
provide apartments.
What does this mean?
Understanding the historical uses of the site allows a greater 
level of engagement. Repurposing existing buildings is 
sustainable and provides a link with the past. The site may also 
have emotional ties, while archaeological remains may determine 
how the land is used and developed.
How might it affect your proposal?
Past uses of the site can have a bearing on your current 
proposals, in the case of this example the undeveloped area is in 
recognition of the historical significance of the Roman graveyard. 
Gathering information from Digimap®, Google Earth and other 
archive sources is quick and easy to do online and can reveal 
the history of your site.
Tip links with 1, 2, 3, 8, 27, 39, 42 and 78.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 193
1940
2020194
TIP 84
GROUPINGS
AROUND THE SITE
ESTABLISH CURRENT USAGE CATEGORIES LOCALLY.
What YOU CAN see
A map of the area around the Knowledge Quarter in Liverpool 
gives an overview of the types of uses in the area.
What does this mean?
The character of an area is influenced by the types of uses 
within it. Whilst some buildings may have been repurposed, the 
functions will affect activity and how busy the area is at different 
times of the day and night.
How might it affect your proposal?
In this example, a large part of the area is given over to 
educational use for universities and schools. Interestingly, there 
is also an area of housing comprising of some older apartments 
as well as two-storey housing for families and retired people. 
Understanding the grain of the area gives important clues as to 
what sorts of interventions might be appropriate.
Tip links with 6, 17, 31, 79, 81 and 83.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 195
 Rail station
 Student accommodation
 Commercial with some living accommodation upstairs
 Ecclesiastical
 Housing
 Educational196
TIP 85
GROUPINGS
RELATIONSHIP TO THE WIDER AREA
INVESTIGATE EMERGING TYPES AND PLANNED 
DEVELOPMENTS.
What you can see
A map of Bristol showing the location of student 
accommodation, student accommodation granted planning 
permission and student accommodation currently under 
consideration for planning permission.
What does this mean?
There is a lot of information available to you in the public domain. 
Access this information and use it to produce your own maps 
to understand how your city is changing and what is likely to 
happen in the near future. In this example, there has been a 
sudden growth in student residences in the UK. This has had a 
major impact on the development of our cities and the types of 
projects seeking planning permission.
How might it affect your proposal?
Depending on what you are planning for your site, the inclusion 
of a large block of student housing could be a major advantage/
disadvantage. How is the city likely to develop and change, and 
what kind of buildings are being proposed?
Tip links with 78 and 81.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 197
 Student accommodation
 Planning permission approved for student accommodation
 Planning permission under consideration for 
student accommodation198
TIP 86
GROUPINGS
RELATIONSHIP TO THE WIDER AREA
MAP REPEATING SERVICES, FORMS AND TYPES.
What you can see
A map of Bristol showing the location of medical practices, 
dental practices, pharmacies and hospitals.
What does this mean?
It is useful to map out where similar activities are located, 
as this will show the distribution of particular services and 
amenities across the city and may help to demonstrate 
need/change/future use.
How might it affect your proposal?
Depending on the function of your site it can be desirable to 
have a concentration and dense grouping of particular facilities. 
Other functions will benefit from being spread out with sufficient 
distance to balance with demand. You may wish to demonstrate 
that certain functions could be better concentrated into a single 
form, or perhaps your study will highlight an urgent need. This 
kind of study can usefully feed into feasibility studies.
Tip links with 10, 13 and 14.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 199
 Medical practice
 Hospital
 Pharmacy
 Dental practice200
CASE STUDY 5
PHOENIX GARDEN 
COMMUNITY BUILDING
OFFICE SIAN
What you can see
Phoenix Garden Community Building is located between Soho 
and Covent Garden in central London. Phoenix Garden is the last 
remaining of seven Covent Garden community gardens built in 
the 1980s and occupies a former Second World War bomb site.
What does this mean?
The building adopts a triangular-shaped plan that traces 
the edge of the site’s boundary, invoking the classic English 
walled garden typology. The solid brick wall is softened by 
the arched entranceway and a band of limestone at roof level 
proudly displays the building’s name. The north-facing façade 
overlooking the garden’s interior is composed of oak framing 
and large windows, offering views into the oasis beyond. The 
site levels rise as one moves away from the building, revealing 
the green roof when viewed from the far end of the garden. The 
material palate of brick is again used on the floor, allowing the 
garden paths to seamlessly enter the interior space, as well as 
being a durable surface for muddy boots.
What the architect says
Context is as much about community and creating spaces for 
conversations and gatherings as it is about the physical materials 
and surrounding cityscape. Whilst the building’s concise 
materiality is subtly drawn from the immediate streetscape, it 
is the sense of moving through the solid brick wall and into the 
unknown ‘secret’ garden beyond that guides the design.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE GROUpINGS AND USAGE 201
It’s a humble building that Office Sian has successfully 
elevated into a creative piece of architecture through its 
commitment to distilling the design intent. Despite its small 
stature, the careful detailing and clarity of approach makes it 
stand out amongst its much larger neighbours.202
CHAPTER 6
INTERFACE
The boundary of your site creates an interface with its perimeter. 
Sometimes the boundary line is clear, as a fence or a river, 
but often the threshold is less well defined. Views out to the 
areas beyond can form important vistas and may act as design 
drivers. Views into the site can also be significant; consider 
how your design proposal will be seen from the surrounding 
areas. The interface between your site and its surroundings is 
important and will need constant review throughout the design 
development process.
Site boundary
The location of the site boundary and what it consists of is the 
starting point for any proposal. When dealing with live projects 
this is not always straightforward. The boundary may be poorly 
defined as part of a wide hedge or a fence may have been 
removed, or else the boundary may not be marked physically at 
all and is in the middle of a field. Establishing what the boundary 
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 
DOI: 10.4324/9781003485988-6INTERFACE 203
is, what materials it is constructed from and its permeability are 
all important and may have an impact on the design proposals. 
Ownership of the site and adjacent areas can be significant. 
In certain circumstances a land-locked site may be difficult to 
develop, or it may be that an adjacent owner controls a ‘ransom 
strip’, which potentially provides access. Sometimes a boundary 
will be created by a route or road, and considering how the site 
relates to the movement along the street will have an impact 
on the design. Finally, the permeability of the boundary is an 
important consideration, and it may be that views out from the 
site are impossible, or access to the site is restricted.
Views into the site
Exploring the views into the site from key vantage points is 
important. Having these photographs or sketches available as a 
constant reminder throughout the design process should ensure 
that the impact of the scheme has been properly considered. 
There may be reasons for taking a very positive stance so that 
your proposal closes a vista or creates a landmark. Alternatively, 
it may be the case that you want to fit in discretely. Either way, 
testing how the scheme will be viewed is important.
With a live project the Local Planning Authority will take a 
keen interest in these things and may require the architect to 
produce CGI renders from specific viewpoints. Street elevations 
are also a useful way to test a proposition, as are hand-drawn 
sketches on tracing paper over site photographs. In conservation 
areas there may be strict rules governing the height and impact 
of new developments.
Views out from the site
Considering the available views out from the site is important for 
two reasons. Firstly, the potential for views and any restriction on 
privacy and interface distances may be a major constraint on the 
design proposal. Secondly, views out from the site to other key 
landmarks or vistas may provide a key design driver. Considering 
the skyline and whether the site is elevated or not will make 
a difference to the opportunities for views out. Exploring the 204
potential and having this information to hand is essential if the 
proposals are to exploit the opportunities.
Neighbours
Privacy and interface to the adjoining sites can be a major 
constraint to the design proposals. In live projects this is 
also tied into land ownership and legislation about interface 
distances, especially if the project is concerned with housing. 
Rights of light can also be an important consideration and, in 
cities like London, a complex issue to assess. Corners need 
special attention, as they offer a lot of design opportunity and 
must respond to both streets and the wider junction.
Access
The nature of the boundary and the routes around the site 
will determine the availability of access. Identifying potential 
access points will allow you to consider what is possible in 
terms of the developing design. Issues such as adjacent land 
ownership, rights of access for you and your neighbours and 
any restrictions will all be factors. In live projects these things 
can sometimes make a project non-viable because there may be 
issues outside the control of the site owner or developer.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE A key vista from the town square in Amersfoort206
TIP 87
INTERFACE
SITE BOUNDARY
ESTABLISH THE EXTENT AND NATURE OF THE SITE 
BOUNDARY.
What you can see
A proposal to construct a new house (shown in yellow) in the 
gap between existing houses. There are big level differences on 
this steeply sloping riverside site.
What does this mean?
Developing the site involves extensive excavations close to the 
adjoining properties. Establishing the extent of the site boundary 
accurately is essential and requires a topographical survey as 
well as a ground investigation. This allows the developer to 
anticipate the impact of the scheme and then negotiate with the 
two neighbours who will be affected by the new construction.
How might it affect your proposal?
Party wall agreements are a legal requirement when building in 
close proximity to a neighbouring property. Understanding the 
implications of your proposal is important at an early design 
stage. Being a good neighbour and thinking about the impact 
of your design is also important. What will the neighbouring 
properties see? How will your design impact on shadows, views 
and enjoyment of their property?
Tip links with 59, 88, 89, 99 and 100.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 207208
TIP 88
INTERFACE
SITE BOUNDARY
ASSESS THE PERMEABILITY OF THE SITE 
BOUNDARIES.
What you can see
A site between the city walls and the main perimeter road 
in Chester.
What does this mean?
The site is prominent and highly visible to traffic moving around 
the city. Steel railings form the southern boundary to the street, 
with high medieval sandstone walls to the west. Abutting the site 
to the north is a more recent development in brick with a glazed 
timber-framed upper storey overlooking the site.
How might it affect your proposal?
What the boundary consists of and how permeable it is will 
impact your design proposal. In the case of this site, the 
prominent southern boundary provides a great opportunity, 
whereas the windows at the upper level to the north will place 
restrictions on what might be possible. Thinking about the 
constraints and opportunities provides clues on the direction 
your scheme might take.
Tip links with 60, 87, 94, 95, 97 and 98.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 209210
TIP 89
INTERFACE
SITE BOUNDARY
OBTAIN AN ACCURATE SITE SURVEY TO PROPERLY 
ASSESS THE SITE’S POTENTIAL.
What you can see
A sketch scheme for a small housing development in a rural 
location at the edge of a village in Cheshire. This was produced 
using an Ordnance Survey map from Digimap®.
What does this mean?
The number of dwellings that can be accommodated on the 
site will have a direct bearing on the viability of the scheme. 
Sometimes, at an early stage, architects rely on Ordnance 
Survey data from Digimap® and this allows a general layout to 
be produced, but more accurate plans will be required for the 
final scheme.
How might it affect your proposal?
It is essential to have a physical survey of the site. When 
preparing a sketch scheme, the architect may use Digimap® and 
will sometimes err on the side of caution when assessing the 
development potential of the site. They will also state caveats 
so that the developer understands the level of accuracy of the 
proposal until such time as a topographical survey has been 
carried out.
Tip links with 60, 87, 88, 91 and 97.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 211212
TIP 90
INTERFACE
SITE BOUNDARY
CONSIDER THRESHOLDS WHERE BOUNDARIES ARE 
POORLY DEFINED.
What you can see
This enclosure in the moorland of North Wales has tracks 
running through it with varying levels of definition.
What does this mean?
This area of the country has a long history of habitation dating 
back to 4000 bce. Many of the tracks appear to relate to 
Neolithic monuments and settlements associated with the ‘axe 
factory’ located close by. Artefacts from this location have been 
found in other parts of the country, indicating that some sort of 
trade existed with objects being transported hundreds of miles.
How might it affect your proposal?
Sometimes finding clues to determine the site layout and 
the boundaries can be difficult. Picking up on old paths and 
bridleways can provide a means of recognising the special things 
about a site and these can be used to help make decisions 
about your proposals.
Tip links with 1, 3, 87, 88 and 89.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 213214
TIP 91
INTERFACE
SITE BOUNDARY
RESEARCH ANY LEGAL RESTRICTIONS IMPACTING 
THE SITE.
What you can see
The site boundary is shown in yellow and the access road to the 
site shown in grey.
What does this mean?
This is a highly desirable site on the sloping bank of the River 
Dee. Whist a case could be made to develop the land for 
housing, the access is not an ‘adopted’ road, but a privately 
owned one. Permission to use the road would therefore be 
required if the site was to be used.
How might it affect your proposal?
Checking ownership, covenants, wayleaves or restrictions on a 
site can be important when assessing the viability of a proposal. 
This information is not always in the public realm and when 
dealing with live projects, it is best left to the client and their 
legal advisors.
Tip links with 46, 61, 97, 98 and 99.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 215216
TIP 92
INTERFACE
VIEWS INTO THE SITE
MAKE A SKETCH LOOKING INTO THE SITE.
What you can see
A sketch of Bold Street in Liverpool showing a strong linear axis 
that terminates with St Luke’s Church.
What does this mean?
Our proposals do not only offer views out, we must also 
consider how the site is viewed from the outside. Consider how 
others can view the site and how linear axes and strong visual 
connections might be impacted by new additions.
How might it affect your proposal?
Sketching a view that looks into your site can help you to 
visualise how your proposal might look and how neighbouring 
buildings will be impacted by your proposal.
Tip links with 75, 93 and 94.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 217218
TIP 93
INTERFACE
VIEWS INTO THE SITE
HOW WILL YOUR PROPOSAL IMPACT THE 
TOWNSCAPE?
What you can see
A six-storey hotel in Chester, designed in the 1980s. The building 
is higher than its neighbours and sits alongside the Guildhall, one 
of the important monuments of this city.
What does this mean?
The hotel has a dramatic impact on the skyline of the city and 
also competes with the spire of the Guildhall. The sketch shows 
the vista looking into the site from the Grosvenor Bridge, one of 
the main routes into the city from the south.
How might it affect your proposal?
When developing a proposal, it is important to consider the 
impact it may have on its surroundings. Views into the site from 
a distance may be significant and it is important to explore the 
potential impact that your scheme may have on the area as a 
whole. Producing physical or 3D models will help to test the 
impact of your proposal.
Tip links with 91, 93 and 95.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 219220
TIP 94
INTERFACE
VIEWS INTO THE SITE
SURVEY THE ADJACENT PROPERTIES.
What you can see
The Liverpool Playhouse theatre showing the historical music 
hall on the right from 1866, with the later modern addition on the 
left from 1968. The extension provides an additional foyer, bar, 
dressing rooms and workshop.
What does this mean?
The new extension did not try to blend in with the historical 
part of the building. A deliberate and provocative solution was 
produced that sought to offer something new and distinct from 
the old. By carefully abutting the older building on the side 
façade, the historical arrangement and formal symmetry of the 
old is respected.
How might it affect your proposal?
Contemporary design can sit well in historical contexts and 
provide a welcome foil to older architecture. An appropriate 
solution can recognise and respect heritage whilst still being 
contemporary and cutting edge. This does not mean that your 
design should be gimmicky or a crude attempt to ‘stand out’, but 
be brave and confident with your proposals when marrying old 
and new.
Tip links with 21, 22 and 29.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 221222
TIP 95
INTERFACE
VIEWS OUT FROM THE SITE
MAKE A SKETCH OF THE SKYLINE.
What you can see
A sketch from Birkenhead looking across the river towards 
Liverpool. The city skyline has been sketched to show the 
major landmarks.
What does this mean?
Cities are collections of thousands of unique buildings providing 
opportunities for distinctive skylines, views and roofscapes.
How might it affect your proposal?
Your project might have a major impact on the skyline of the 
cityscape. Certain places have protected vistas, for example 
around St Paul’s Cathedral in London, whereas other cities have 
become famous for particular views and the dramatic high-rise 
skyscrapers. If your work will have an impact on the skyline or 
city elevation, make sure it is tested and mocked up to on a large 
scale to reveal its impact.
Tip links with 91, 95 and 101.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 223224
TIP 96
INTERFACE
VIEWS OUT FROM THE SITE
IDENTIFY KEY AXES AND MONUMENTS.
What YOU CAN see
Liverpool One is a large retail development by Grosvenor Estates 
in the centre of Liverpool. Views of the cathedral, the Royal Liver 
Building and Royal Insurance Building can be seen from the 
shopping centre.
What does this mean?
The client amassed a high-profile team of architects as part 
of a masterplan. Locking the development into the urban grain 
was considered to be important and this included allowing local 
monuments to become the focus of key vistas. The views out 
were an important design driver for the masterplan.
How might it affect your proposal?
Views out from your site can be generators for your design 
strategy. Exploring how the city works in the area around your 
site will allow you to pick up on key axes or monuments as well 
as ensuring you are respectful of the existing urban grain.
Tip links with 3, 28, 37, 93 and 95.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 225226
TIP 97
INTERFACE
NEIGHBOURS
ESTABLISH INTERFACE DISTANCES TO ADJACENT 
PROPERTIES.
What you can see
A street in the centre of Leeds with a new development opposite 
the Old Post Office.
What does this mean?
The new building looks directly onto the older building with about 
16m between them, creating the potential for loss of privacy and 
visual intrusion.
How might it affect your proposal?
Local authority planning legislation provides guidelines for 
interface distances depending upon the type of buildings, their 
function and what the affected rooms are used for. Regardless 
of legal requirements, being respectful of neighbours’ privacy is 
an important consideration, particularly in dense city centre sites 
and where housing is concerned.
Tip links with 29, 87, 88, 95 and 98.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 227228
TIP 98
INTERFACE
NEIGHBOURS
HOW WILL RIGHTS OF LIGHT IMPACT YOUR 
PROPOSAL?
What YOU CAN see
Toronto Square in the centre of Leeds, located between the Old 
Post Office and the former Yorkshire Penny Bank (in yellow), two 
impressive buildings from the Victorian era.
What does this mean?
The new building extension (in pink) created a dispute following 
construction in 2009 because the owner of the Yorkshire Penny 
Bank building claimed that it blocked his daylight. Following legal 
action, the developer was required to remove parts of the sixth 
and seventh floors.
How might it affect your proposal?
Rights of light can be complex matters to assess and apply 
equally to large buildings and much more modest domestic 
extensions. This can be a particularly sensitive issue in central 
London where architects sometimes engage a specialist to 
assess the situation. Whatever the legal situation, it is important 
to consider the impact your proposal is having on its neighbours 
and their quality of light.
Tip links with 2, 5, 73, 87 and 97.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 229230
TIP 99
INTERFACE
ACCESS
CONSIDER THE IMPLICATIONS OF ANY LEGAL 
RESTRICTIONS.
What you can see
The proposed club house for rowing eights on the River Dee.
What does this mean?
The proposal was not allowed to go ahead despite having 
received planning approval from the local authority. Originally, 
the riverside gardens were owned by the large Victorian houses 
shown on the inset plan. A legal covenant restricted what could 
be built on the site, even though ownership had changed.
How might it affect your proposal?
Your site may have historical legal restrictions on how it may 
be used, along with tithes, rents and other restrictions. It is 
important that the client and their legal advisors confirm all legal 
restrictions on their site. Access to this information is not always 
in the public domain and detailed searches must be undertaken.
Tip links with 87, 88, 89, 91 and 100.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 231232
TIP 100
INTERFACE
ACCESS
RESEARCH AND MAP ANY LEGAL RESTRICTIONS 
AND RIGHTS OF ACCESS.
What you can see
A plan of Frodsham in Cheshire showing the M53 motorway in 
red, along with the dashed line showing the railway. The pink 
lines are bridleways and public footpaths. These are ancient 
routes and must be kept open for all to use.
What does this mean?
Developments must maintain these access rights even if it 
means building bridges across motorways and railway lines, 
and providing footpaths through developments. Even private 
land may have access rights that are protected and must 
be respected.
How might it affect your proposal?
Legal checks and searches over access rights must be made 
prior to developing a plot of land. If access rights exist on a 
site they must be respected and kept fully open. They can also 
become important design guides and constraints that inform and 
shape your decisions.
Tip links with 87, 88, 89, 91, 96 and 99.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 233234
CASE STUDY 6
ROYAL HORTICULTURAL 
SOCIETY VISITOR 
CENTRE
HODDER + PARTNERS
What you can see
This is a new visitor centre in the grounds of Worsley New 
Hall in Salford, adjacent to the Bridgewater Canal. The client 
wanted to bring the health and wellbeing benefits of gardening 
to more people and the site’s close proximity to Manchester 
was important.
What does this mean?
The siting of the new building (red outline) respects the 
geometry of the original Victorian walled kitchen garden (green), 
which is retained and now provides produce for the facility. The 
building sits alongside an original lake, which has been relined. 
The new Paradise Garden also picks up on the geometry of the 
original site. Other parts of the site have poor ground conditions 
and as such were designated for car parking.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 235
What the architect says
The remains of the walled garden were an important design 
driver in the planning of the building. We wanted all the elements 
of the complex brief to be under one roof, without the building 
itself becoming too dominant. Our intention was that the 
building should blur into the landscape. The Bridgewater Canal 
(blue dotted line) was an important vista forming the southern 
boundary to the site. The canal is elevated, and we had a rule 
that the horizon should not be bridged. The timber building 
employs a sustainable design strategy using a section that 
minimises solar gain.236
CASE STUDY 7
URBAN RENEWAL OF 
KLOOSTERBUUREN
HANS VAN DER HEIJDEN
What you can see
This case study examines an urban renewal housing project 
in Moerijk, north of The Hague in the Netherlands (shown in 
yellow). Now used primarily for housing refugees, the scheme 
retained an existing church (outlined in red), which once formed 
part of a larger monastery on the site. The square adjacent 
to the church provides a focus and also links with the existing 
pedestrian routes (dotted in red).
What does this mean?
The urban block (outlined in blue) is one of several residential 
blocks on the outskirts of Delft. The main vehicular routes create 
a grid pattern around the town within which smaller blocks sit. 
Each of these smaller blocks has a more intimate urban grain 
reflecting its uses and movement, as well as exhibiting its own 
special character.
What the architect says
Aerial photographs are useful to show the urban grain without 
abstracting information. With this project it was important not 
to restrict our analysis just to our own block. The site analysis 
accompanied the briefing process and the client was kept 
fully engaged and encouraged to take a longer-term view 
of the site. Even though the church’s future use had not yet 
been determined, retaining it meant that the site edges were 
articulated and helped the client market this unique feature of the 
site. The existing green avenues were a real asset and created 
an important link between the architecture and the landscape.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE INTERFACE 237238
AFTERWORD
A site analysis is not an end in and of itself. Rather, it is a way 
of thinking about the problem and becoming more aware of 
the external influences on the design. It is therefore a live 
and developing document. Refer to it throughout your design 
process to support your proposals and provide justification for 
some of the key design moves you make.
Use your site analysis to inform discussions with your client, 
the local community and other stakeholders to help create a 
consensus on the constraints within the project’s environment. 
Creating a proposal that fits with these constraints and supports 
the existing infrastructure should ensure that the scheme not 
only complements its environment but also provides a positive 
and sustainable contribution for many years to come.
Sometimes there can be a difference of opinion on the merits 
of a proposal and how it sits within its surroundings. You may be 
asked to justify your stance. Being able to express your views 
in an articulate and objective way without resorting to jargon is 
important, especially when communicating with your clients and 
the wider public.
From your analysis it is possible to create a diagram showing 
the key design drivers, rather than just adding more information 
to a map. This is important so that you know what to do next 
and so that you have a full understanding of how the analysis 
might influence the design approach. This ‘map’ can become the 
key diagram and contain all the information needed to describe 
and interpret the site. Your designs can be enriched, informed 
and shaped by the site, street and place you’re working in – 
there are clues and inspiration all around you. Make the most 
of this data by drawing it and turning your observations into a 
design generator. In the Appendix we’ve included two worked 
examples that show how you might undertake an analysis. 
The examples do not use everything discussed in this volume 
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE AFTERWORD 239
(such as historical studies and materiality), but instead reveal 
how you might interpret a site to develop a design strategy and 
outline proposal.
The sketches and narrative contained in this book are just a 
beginning. As architects we are always learning. Good luck with 
your journey!240
AppENDIx
WORKED EXAMPLE A
ARTS CENTRE AT REAR 
OF BEDFORD HOUSE, 
LIVERPOOL
Context – density, materiality and massing
The site (shown in red) is for a new arts centre to the south of 
Bedford House, a 1960s three-storey office building. Surrounding 
the site are three- and four-storey domestic buildings dating 
from the mid-nineteenth century, as well as student housing 
blocks from the 2000s.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE AppENDIx 241
Routes – vehicular
There is a busy road to the north and a quieter road to the 
west of the site. Access for deliveries coming from the south to 
Bedford House must be maintained.
Routes – pedestrian
The site is on the southern edge of the University of Liverpool 
with movement of students across campus and to a pub located 
just to the south of the site.242
Environment – climate and trees
This is mostly an urban environment, although there is some 
greenery in a nearby square. The site is not overshadowed 
and is quite sunny, particularly when the sun is higher in the 
summer months.
Groupings and interface – edges and boundaries
There are adjacent buildings looking onto the site to the east 
and west. The view out from the office block to the north is 
particularly significant.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE AppENDIx 243
Interface – potential active frontages
There is potential for pleasant views out from the site to the 
west, including a glimpse of the cathedral to the north-west. The 
south-west corner is particularly important as the public-facing 
site edge.
Interface – restrictions and potential views
Analysing the implications of interface, there is potential for views 
to the west and south but restrictions to the north and east.244
Opportunities – testing the constraints
A design strategy starts to show potential for interesting things 
happening to the south-west corner and the need for a buffer 
zone to the north.
Brief analysis
Begin to explore the brief and to test out the implications of the 
site constraints. How might the accommodation be arranged and 
best positioned to exploit the features of the site such as the 
climate, light and views?
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE AppENDIx 245
Exploring
Consider the scale of the site and the surrounding buildings. 
Analysis of the context can begin to suggest scale, entrance 
locations, light/shadow and building orientation.
Testing
Test the design ideas and consider how they relate to your site 
analysis. How are the views, routes, shadows, entrances, scale 
and massing starting to align? Investigate these ideas further 
in 3D with card models, photographs and montages to see the 
implications of various design options.246
Preliminary proposals
Proposals can then begin to take shape and the impact of your 
proposal tested. Note how the existing streetscape is included; 
always include the neighbouring buildings (even in sketch form) 
on your proposals. A perspective sketch need only take a few 
minutes to produce but it can very quickly reveal your design and 
how it responds to the site.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE AppENDIx 247
ORKED EXAMPLE B
HEADLE HIGH STREET 
EDEVELOPMENT
ontext and brief
 development proposal to link the existing high street (shown in 
lue) with the main road (in red) and other sites to the east.
W
C
R
C
A
b248
Groupings and nodes
The site is outlined in red with existing features shown and 
future road improvements given in purple.
Routes and assets
Look in more detail at the existing buildings and other assets 
on and around the site, as well as routes (note base map 
transparency is increased).
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE AppENDIx 249
Opportunities – strategic diagram
Create a diagram to show potential connections and key nodes 
with possible development sites (shown here in red).
Design strategy
Use the analysis to develop a strategy for the proposed 
development, showing landscape and picking up on connections 
to the high street and further developments to the east.250
Development proposals
A more formal drawing shows the proposed interventions (dark 
grey), landscape and routes. This example demonstrates how 
you might develop a massing layout and overall design strategy. 
The next stage would be to consider the historical, social and 
material properties of the site.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 252
number of dwellings per hectare; or the ratio of a building’s 
height to the street width.
Desktop study: An investigation conducted using paper and 
computer-based information.
Development: The act of proposing and delivering a building 
project. Sometimes used to imply commercial investment or 
speculative construction.
Development potential: How likely a site is to yield a profit for 
investors risking their capital.
Digimap®: An online map and data delivery service, available 
by subscription to UK higher and further education 
establishments.
Feasibility study: A systematic review of a project’s potential 
and the various options available to the clients.
Frontage: The front façade of a building or street and how it 
interacts with the streetscape.
Greenbelt land: Land that has not been built on before or is only 
used for agricultural purposes.
Historical grain: How the historical plot sizes or boundaries 
continue to inform current usage.
Intervention: A deliberate design decision that responds to the 
existing context.
Local authority: District government responsible for 
administering and enforcing certain legislation.
Local Authority Planning: A governmental department 
responsible for granting permission for future buildings and 
administering policy.
Local plan: A strategic vision for a particular district, city 
or region, usually compiled by the local authority or 
commissioned by them.
Materiality: The physical properties of a material and how it 
looks, weathers and feels.
Microclimate: A localised climate of a specific place that differs 
from the wider climate of the area.
Mixed-use: A building that is used for a variety of different 
purposes, for example, shops and cafes at ground floor with 
residential usage above.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 254
BIBLIOGRApHY
Aldallal, Ennis, Husam Al Waer and Soumyen Bandyopadhyay, 
Site and Composition: Design Strategies in Architecture and 
Urbanism (Routledge, London, 2016).
Ambrose, James and Peter Brandow, Simplified Site Design
(John Wiley and Sons, New York 1992).
Barrie, Thomas, Spiritual Path, Sacred Place – Myth, Ritual 
and Meaning in Architecture (Shambhala Publications, 
Boston, 1996).
Benjamin, Walter, The Arcades Project (Belknap/Harvard 
University, Cambridge, Mass, 2002).
Clayton, George T., The Site Plan in Architectural Working 
Drawings (Stipes Publishing Co., Champaign, Illinois, 1973).
Crowe, Norman A., Nature and the Idea of a Man-Made World: An 
Investigation into the Evolutionary Roots of Form and Order in 
the Built Environment (The MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, 1995).
Cullen, Gordon, The Concise Townscape (Routledge, 
Oxford, 1961).
Farrall, Peter, Feasibility Studies: An Architect’s Guide (RIBA 
Publishing, London, 2023).
Gehl, Jah, Life Between Buildings: Using Public Space, (Island 
Press, Washington D.C., 2011).
Jacobs, Jane, The Death and Life of Great American Cities
(Random House, New York, 1961).
Koolhaus, Rem, Delirious New York: A Retroactive Manifesto for 
Manhattan (Uitgeverij 010, Rotterdam, 1994).
La Gro, James A., Site Analysis: Linking Program and Concept 
in Land Planning and Design (John Wiley and Sons, New 
Jersey, 2001).
Lynch, Kevin and Gary Hack, Site Planning (MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass, 1984).
Lynch, Kevin, The Image of the City (MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass, 1960).
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE BIBLIOGRApHY 255
Massey, Doreen, World City (Polity, Cambridge, 2007).
Norberg-Schulz, Christian, Architecture: Presence, Language, 
Place (Skira, Lausanne, 2001).
Norberg-Schulz, Christian, Genius Loci: Towards a 
Phenomenology of Architecture (Rizzoli, New York, 1984).
Pallasmaa, Juhani, The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the 
Senses (John Wiley and Sons, New Jersey, 2005).
Rasmussen, Steen Eiler, Experiencing Architecture (MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass, 1962).
Rossi, Aldo, The Architecture of the City (Oppositions Books, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass, 1984).
Rowe, Colin and Fred Koetter, Collage City (MIT Press, 
Cambridge, Mass, 1978).
Russ, Thomas H., Site Planning and Design Handbook (McGraw 
Hill, New York, 2002).
Venturi, Robert, Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten 
Symbolism of Architectural Form (MIT Press, Cambridge, 
Mass, 1977).
White, Edward, Diagramming Information for Architectural Design
(Architectural Media, South Melbourne, 1983).256
INDEx
access rights 232–3
access to site 204, 214
accessibility
15-minute city 190
transport infrastructure 
112–13, 188
adjacent properties 204,
206–7, 220–1, 226–9
Aeltc Community Tennis 
Centre 180–1
affordable housing 32
air quality 162–5
airports 112, 116–17
alternative routes 108–9
architectural style 16, 52, 
54–7
artificial lighting 158–9
Bedford House, Liverpool, 
arts centre 240–6
Bodleian Library, Weston 
Library 98–9
boundaries 72, 74, 202–3, 
206–15
brownfield sites 140
building density 11, 42
building materials 11, 52, 
172–3
building reuse 186, 192
building style see
architectural style
bus routes 104–5, 114–15
busy times 118–21, 162, 164
carbon footprint 172
census data 10, 30, 32
change of use 36, 182, 
186 (see also historical 
evolution)
Cheadle High Street 
redevelopment 247–50
cityscape 22, 86, 154, 222 
(see also streetscape; 
townscape)
civic space 152–3
climate 124–5
coastal sites 134–5
communications 
infrastructure 156–7
communities see
neighbourhoods
community engagement 
10, 26
community garden 200–1
competing visions 46
computer models 94–5
conservation areas 62–3
contamination 140
context 9–97
economic 10–11, 24
historical 10, 14–23, 78, 
192, 212
invisible city 88–96
materiality and style 52–7
physical infrastructure 
64–87
political 58–63
routes 100–21
social and cultural 10,
24–9
covenants 230
cultural context 10, 24–9
cycle routes 104–5, 166–7
daylight 128, 228
demographics 38–9, 44
density 11, 42
deprived areas 38–9
desire lines 110–11
development potential 210
devolved administrations 59
Digimap® 210
digital models 94–5
districts 24, 30–1, 74–5, 80–1
drainage 180–1
drawings 4, 5, 6
ecological surveys 146
economic context 10–11, 24
economic sustainability 48
electricity distribution 156–7
energy conservation 170
environment 124–79
climate 128–35
man-made features 152–61
natural features 142–51
phenomenology 174–9
street hierarchies 166–8
sustainability 170–2
timeframe 162–5
topographical 136–41
environmental assessment 
146
environmental improvements 
50
equipment for site visits 5
events 28, 118, 164
façade lighting 158–9
festivals 28, 118, 164
flood risk 148
footpaths 108–11, 232 (see 
also pedestrian routes)
funicular 170–1
gardens 150–1, 200–1, 234–5
ground conditions 140–1
groupings and usage 182–99
around the site 188–95
site usage 184–6
wider area 196–9
habitats 146–7, 181
Hazelwood School 7–8
hidden paths 108–9
historical connotations 178–9
historical context 10, 14–23, 
78, 192, 212
historical evolution 20–1,
66–7, 186, 192
historical grain 22, 72–3, 78
Hodder + Partners 234–5
household composition 44
housing tenure 32
infrastructure improvements 
50–1
interface 202–33
access 230–3
distances 226–7
neighbouring properties 
226–9
site boundary 202–3,
206–15
views into the site 216–21
views out from the site 
222–5
invisible city 12, 88–96
key axes and monuments 
224–5
key facilities 190–1
Kloosterbuuren urban 
renewal 236–7
land ownership 40
land use 183 (see also site 
usage)
land values 36–7
landlords 40
landscapes 150, 174–7 (see 
also parks)
Langstaff Day Architects 
180–1
legal restrictions 214, 230
lighting 158–9
literary references 96
local materials 52, 172–3
local styles 16, 54–7
man-made features 126,
152–61
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 258
IMAGE CREDITS
All images Peter Farrall and Iain Jackson. Case Studies and 
Worked Examples redrawn by Farrall and Jackson from 
architects’ original drawings with permission.
100 SITE ANALYSIS ESSENTIALS: AN ARCHITECT’S GUIDE 
