In an era where technological advancements are not just tools but partners in 
our workspaces, Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of 
Industry 5.0 emerges as a seminal guide to understanding and navigating the com￾plexities of the Fifth Industrial Revolution. This book, a collective work of expert 
authors, delves into the heart of Industry 5.0, exploring how it synergizes human 
creativity with robotic precision to redefine industrial landscapes. From collabora￾tive robotics to sustainable development, each chapter unfolds layers of knowledge 
essential for professionals, academics, and students alike.
Features
• Covers modern technologies including artificial intelligence, robotics, and the 
Internet of Everything for modernizing Industry 5.0 and the transformative 
role of collaborative robots in the workplace and how they are changing the 
dynamics of human labour.
• Focuses on technologies mimicking human behaviour and reasoning to solve 
complex problems and explores the evolving role of human expertise in an 
increasingly automated world and the competencies needed to thrive in this 
new era.
• Showcases the impact of Industry 5.0 on the environment, and industry com￾mitment to sustainable development by laying a map to understand how 
Industry 5.0 is steering industries towards sustainable practices, focusing on 
green supply chains, reverse logistics, and the critical role of internal audits.
• Highlights future perspectives such as smart manufacturing and the Industrial 
Internet of Things (IIoT) for Industry 5.0 manufacturing processes and pro￾vides insights into the challenges and security concerns as industries prepare 
to adopt Industry 5.0, offering foresight into its long-term impacts on global 
markets and societies.
• Presents real-time case studies on tools, technologies, architecture, and prod￾uct outcomes for Industry 5.0.
Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0 is 
more than a book; it’s a roadmap for the future, guiding readers through the intri￾cacies of industrial evolution. It is primarily written for senior undergraduate and 
graduate students and academic researchers in the fields of industrial engineering, 
production engineering, mechanical engineering, and aerospace engineering.
Modern Technologies and 
Tools Supporting the 
Development of Industry 5.0Modern Technologies 
and Tools Supporting 
the Development 
of Industry 5.0
Edited by 
Justyna Ż
ywiołek
Joanna Rosak-Szyrocka
Anand Nayyar
Mohd NavedFirst edition published 2024
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2024 selection and editorial matter, Justyna Ż
ywiołek, Joanna Rosak-Szyrocka, 
Anand Nayyar and Mohd Naved; individual chapters, the contributors
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the 
author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or 
the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the 
copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copy￾right holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copy￾right material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may 
rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, 
reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other 
means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permis￾sion from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access 
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not avail￾able on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trade￾marks and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-53104-5 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-78757-2 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-48926-9 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269
Typeset in Sabon
by SPi Technologies India Pvt Ltd (Straive)v
Contents
Preface vii
Editors xi
Contributors xv
1 Industry 5.0: employee readiness for co-bot workspace 1
NARAYANA MAHARANA, GIRISH PRASAD DAS, B. UDAYA BHASKAR GANESH, 
JYOTIRMAYEE MOHANTY, P. DEEPIKA, AND DUSMANTA BEHERA
2 Automation and robotization: an aerial view of 
Industry 5.0 on employment and employees 41
VRINDA V. NAIR
3 Structural dimensions and measurement of readiness 
for Industry 5.0 implementation: a fresher insight from 
SMEs in developing country 75
PHAM QUANG HUY AND MA. VU KIEN PHUC
4 Thriving in Industry 5.0: the evolving role of employees 
in the age of automation and innovation 107
V. HARISH AND ANAND NAYYAR
5 Exploring the impact of collaborative robots on 
human–machine cooperation in the era of Industry 5.0 149
R. DAMAŠEVIČ
IUS, M. VASILJEVAS, L. NARBUTAITĖ
, AND T. BLAŽAUSKAS
6 Harmonising human and robotic workforces in 
Industry 5.0: creating a resilient, human-centric, 
and sustainable organisational ecosystem 179
KANCHAN PRANAY PATIL AND MUGDHA SHAILENDRA KULKARNIvi Contents
7 Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development with 
machine learning and the role of internal audit: 
literature review 209
ALI REHMAN, TARIQ UMAR, AND FATHYAH HASHIM
8 Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable 
development: from welfare to wellbeing 259
RENUKA SHARMA
9 Reverse logistics and green supply chain in terms 
of sustainability: an application in an enterprise 301
AYŞENUR ERDIL
10 Influence of internal audit on implementation of 
environmental, social and governance (ESG) factor: 
case of public listed companies in Oman 339
ALI REHMAN, YUVARAJ GANESAN, AND NAHAD AL-MASKARI
11 Foresight the future of Industry 5.0 in perspective 
of sustainable services in developing countries 381
PANKAJ SINGH, RUCHI KUSHWAHA, AND JYOTI KUSHWAHA
12 Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0: 
challenges and security concerns 408
NGUYEN HUU PHUOC DAI, PHAM PHI GIANG, 
AND TRUONG HONG VO TUAN KIET
Index 444vii
Preface
The factory floors of our ancestors were fortresses of sweat and steel, where 
human toil met the unyielding rhythm of machines. This was Industry 1.0, 
the era of mechanized muscle, laying the groundwork for the mass produc￾tion that defined the 20th century. But progress, like a restless river, never 
stays still. Industry 2.0 brought electricity, powering the assembly line and 
ushering in an age of standardized efficiency. Then came the digital revolu￾tion of Industry 3.0, where computers took the reins, weaving automation 
into the fabric of production. And now, on the horizon, a new dawn breaks: 
Industry 5.0.
This book, Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development 
of Industry 5.0, stands as a map for navigating this new landscape. It is 
more than just a collection of technical treatises; it is a compass guiding us 
through the intricate network of emerging technologies and transformative 
tools reshaping the very fabric of industry.
Industry 5.0 is not merely an incremental upgrade. It is a paradigm shift, 
a fundamental reimagining of the relationship between humans, machines, 
and the industrial ecosystem. It is about collaboration, not competition, 
where humans and AI work in tandem, leveraging their unique strengths to 
push the boundaries of innovation. It is about sustainability, where factories 
become closed-loop systems, minimizing environmental impact and maxi￾mizing resource efficiency. It is about personalization, where products and 
services adapt to individual needs, reflecting the diverse tapestry of our 
global society.
This journey towards Industry 5.0 is paved with a myriad of modern 
technologies and tools. Artificial intelligence, the once-mythical whisper, 
now roars with the potential to optimize every facet of production, from 
predictive maintenance to self-learning robots. Big Data, the silent observer, 
now holds the key to unlocking hidden patterns and insights, enabling data￾driven decision-making. The Internet of Things (IoT), an invisible web of 
connected devices, promises to orchestrate a symphony of real-time data, 
ensuring seamless communication and intelligent adaptation. These are just 
a glimpse of the tools at our disposal, each a brushstroke in the grand can￾vas of Industry 5.0.viii Preface
But technology, like any powerful tool, demands thoughtful stewardship. 
We must ensure that the benefits of Industry 5.0 are shared equitably, bridg￾ing the digital divide and empowering individuals with the skills and knowl￾edge to thrive in this evolving landscape. We must address ethical concerns, 
ensuring that AI serves humanity, not the other way around. And we must 
remain vigilant, protecting our data and infrastructure from the ever￾evolving threats of the digital age. The road ahead is not without its chal￾lenges. But within these challenges lie opportunities, waiting to be seized by 
those bold enough to embrace the future. This book is not just a chronicle 
of technology; it is a call to action. It is an invitation to join the vanguard of 
those who are shaping the future of industry, who are building a world 
where humans and machines dance in harmony, where innovation fuels sus￾tainability, and where progress serves the needs of all.
The book comprises 12 chapters enlisting the development of Industry 
5.0 in a strong methodological approach. Chapter 1 titled “Industry 5.0: 
Employee Readiness for Co-Bot Workspace” enlightens the current level of 
employee readiness for co-bot workspace in Industry 5.0, stresses on HR 
requirements and adaptation-related challenges faced by industries to build 
a sustainable co-bot workspace, highlights key skills of employees to work 
in a co-bot workspace, as well as HR preparedness and adaptation-related 
challenges faced by industries for building a co-bot workspace. Chapter 2
titled “Automation and Robotization: An Aerial View of Industry 5.0 on 
Employment and Employees” illustrates various technology enablers for 
Industry 5.0 like the IoT, AI, ML, and Blockchain and also determines the 
effects of technology on employee’s psychology at the workplace. Chapter 3
titled “Structural Dimensions and Measurement of Readiness for Industry 
5.0 Implementation: A Fresher Insight from SMEs in Developing Country” 
explores the readiness for Industry 5.0 implementation (RII) which is defined 
from the perspectives of SMEs and formulates a measurement scale utilizing 
mixed methods in two phases. In the first phase, following Churchill’s scale 
development process, three dimensions are determined—the Technology 
aspect, the Organizational aspect, and the Environmental aspect—with 
eight factors that have appropriate convergent validity and discriminant 
validity. In the second phase, the nomological validity of the RII scale is 
evaluated by investigating its interconnection with other theoretical con￾structs to offer managerial and operational pointers and suggests a road￾map, at the policy degree, regarding Industry 5.0 implementation to 
policymakers, at the industrial and national levels. Chapter 4 titled “Thriving 
in Industry 5.0: The Evolving Role of Employees in the Age of Automation 
and Innovation” provides a comprehensive analysis of the evolving role of 
employees in Industry 5.0, including its impact on employment, the key 
competencies required for career development, the challenges faced by 
employees, strategies to overcome these challenges, and the management of 
human–robot collaboration. The chapter sheds light on how employees can 
not only acclimatise but also thrive in Industry 5.0, and contribute to the Preface ix
ongoing dialogue about the changing role of employees in the age of auto￾mation and innovation. Chapter 5 titled “Exploring the Impact of 
Collaborative Robots on Human–Machine Cooperation in the Era of 
Industry 5.0” explores the impact of cobots on human–machine coopera￾tion and the workforce in the era of Industry 5.0. This chapter presents a 
comprehensive review of the existing literature on cobots, including their 
development, implementation, and applications in various industries and 
investigates the differences between human and machine work, including 
the defects of each, and how cobots can be used to compensate for these 
defects. Additionally, the chapter examines the social perception of Industry 
5.0 and the impact of cobots on workforce readiness and job quality. The 
chapter also presents a case study of a manufacturing company that has 
recently integrated cobots into its production process. The case study inves￾tigates the impact of cobots on the company’s workforce, including changes 
in job responsibilities and perceptions of job quality. Chapter 6 titled 
“Harmonising Human and Robotic Workforces in Industry 5.0: Creating a 
Resilient, Human-Centric, and Sustainable Organizational Ecosystem” eval￾uates each manager’s competence in an automotive organization embracing 
Industry 5.0, enlightens human-centric values managers perceive as crucial 
to involvement in Industry 5.0 and also illustrates the managers’ role in 
encouraging team members’ resilience termed as crucial to involvement in 
Industry 5.0. Chapter 7 titled “Impact of Industry 5.0 on Sustainable 
Development with Machine Learning and the Role of Internal Audit: 
Literature Review” analyses the impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable devel￾opment and examines the role of ML and IA function with the application 
of Stakeholder Theory, Resource-Based View (RBV) of the industry, and 
Ethical Decision-Making theory. Chapter 8 titled “Analysis of Industry 5.0 
Contributions to Sustainable Development: From Welfare to Wellbeing” 
illustrates the relationship between Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0, demon￾strates the Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0 transition, and stresses the signifi￾cance of sustainability in Industry 5.0. Chapter 9 titled “Reverse Logistics 
and Green Supply Chain on Terms of Sustainability: An Application in an 
Enterprise” identifies the product-recovering options and factors of RLs and 
GCSC towards attaining sustainability and sustainable development of 
companies, finds the inter-relationship among the identified potential driv￾ers, to evaluate the success of GSCM in any industry or marketplace and 
chapter analyses the obstacles to RLs and GSCM for a mathematical model 
approach to decision-making for the sustainability of a business. Chapter 10
titled “Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of Environment, 
Social and Governance (ESG) Factor: Case of Public-Listed Companies in 
Oman” examines the influence of internal audit (IA) on Environmental, 
Social, and Governance (ESG) practices and emphasizes the importance of 
integrating ESG practices into IA for effective corporate governance and 
also explores the relationship between IA, ESG, and Industry 5.0. Chapter 
11 titled “Foresight the Future Consequences of Industry 5.0 in Sustainable x Preface
Services Production and Consumption in Developing Countries” illustrates 
the future consequences of Industry 5.0 in the context of sustainable ser￾vices, analyses the role of Industry 5.0 in sustainable service production and 
consumption in developing countries, and also highlights the significance of 
Industry 5.0 in the attainment of sustainable development goals. Chapter 12
titled “Readiness of Enterprises to Implement Industry 5.0: Challenges and 
Security Concerns” enlightens a meta-analysis of the literature review to 
describe the benefits of the 5.0 Industry along with several components and 
related technologies of Industry 5.0. In addition, diverse challenges of this 
technology to enterprises, such as human–robot interaction, human factors, 
and security concerns, are discussed to raise awareness and minimize the 
gaps between Industry 4.0 and 5.0. The chapter aims to provide helpful 
information about Industry 5.0 via several aspects: main components of 
Industry 5.0, challenges of Industry 5.0 application for enterprise, outstand￾ing opportunities of Industry 5.0, human and Industry 5.0, and potential 
contribution of Industry 5.0 to future production and business.
“As we stand at the threshold of Industry 5.0,” writes Alan Kay, “the best 
way to predict the future is to invent it.” Let this book be your compass, 
your blueprint, and your spark of inspiration. Let us invent a future where 
technology amplifies human potential, where progress serves all, and where 
Industry 5.0 becomes not just a revolution, but a renaissance.
Justyna Ż
ywiołek
Joanna Rosak-Szyrocka
Anand Nayyar
Mohd Navedxi
Editors
Justyna Ż
ywiołek completed her master’s stud￾ies in the field of Metallurgy in 2010. In 2014, 
she defended her doctoral dissertation with hon￾ors in the field of management science, special￾izing in security science, entitled: The impact of 
information process management on the security 
of knowledge resources in the enterprise, at the 
Faculty of Organization and Management of the 
Lodz University of Technology. Since January 
2015, she has been an assistant professor in the 
Faculty of Management at the Technical University of Częstochowa. She is 
a respected researcher in Poland and abroad for her experience in manage￾ment issues: knowledge and information management and their security. She 
has published over 160 articles and is the author/co-author/editor of seven 
books. She presented research results at various international conferences. 
She deals with data protection, is an inspector of personal data protection 
and a leading ISO 27001:2018 auditor. Phd. Eng. Justyna Ż
ywiołek is a 
member of ICAA (Intelectual Capital Association) and EU-OSHA, as well 
as organizations operating in Poland promoting information and knowl￾edge security. She is a guest editor of Energies MdPI, International Journal 
of Environmental Research and Public Health MdPI Journal, Computer 
Modeling in Engineering & Sciences. During her early career, she served 
on the editorial board of The Journal of Strategic Information Systems 
IF 14.682 and the Editorial Advisory Board of the International Journal 
of Management and Applied Research IF 3.508. She was a participant in 
multiple Erasmus+ teacher mobility: Slovenia, Hungary, Czech Republic, 
Slovakia and France.xii Editors
Joanna Rosak-Szyrocka is an Assistant Professor, 
Erasmus+ coordinator at the Faculty of 
Management, Czestochowa University of 
Technology, Poland. She specialized in the fields 
of digitalization, industry 5.0, quality 4.0, edu￾cation, IoT, AI, and quality management. She 
was a participant in multiple Erasmus+ teacher 
mobility programs: Italy, UK, Slovenia, Hungary, 
Czech Republic, Slovakia, and France. She coop￾erates with many universities both in her country 
and abroad. She is on the editorial boards of Plos 
One Journal, PeerJ Journal and on the Advisory Board of Heliyon Journal. 
She is the Associate Editor for Cogent Business and Management, Taylor 
& Francis, Guest Editor of Entertainment Computing Journal, Elsevier 
Journal, Resources MdPI, IJERPH MdPI, Energies MdPI, Sustainability 
MdPI, Springer Discover Sustainability Journal, Frontiers and Elsevier 
Measurement Journal. She is reviewer for a number of prestigious jour￾nals such as IEEE, Elsevier, MdPI, Frontiers, Sage, Springer and Emerald, 
and a member of the research team at the Faculty of Management of the 
Częstochowa University of Technology 2022 and the interdisciplinary team 
2022. Additionally, she is a member of the team for surveying deans’ offices 
and the course of studies in the field of occupational health and safety and a 
member of the technical team for evaluation at the Faculty of Management 
of the Częstochowa University of Technology. She was awarded a diploma 
of recognition from the Dean of the Faculty of Management of the 
Częstochowa University of Technology for her publishing activities, as well 
as a medal from the Dean of the Faculty of Management of the Częstochowa 
University of Technology in gratitude for long-term cooperation with the 
Faculty of Management (2017). In 2023, she was awarded the medal of the 
President of the Republic of Poland for long-term service.
Dr. Anand Nayyar earned a Ph.D (Computer 
Science) from Desh Bhagat University in 2017 
in the area of Wireless Sensor Networks, Swarm 
Intelligence and Network Simulation. He is 
currently working in the School of Computer 
Science-Duy Tan University, Da Nang, Vietnam as 
Professor, Scientist, Vice-Chairman of Research, 
and Director- IoT and Intelligent Systems Lab. He 
is a Certified Professional with 125+ Professional 
certifications from CISCO, Microsoft, Amazon, 
EC-Council, Oracle, Google, Beingcert, EXIN, 
GAQM, Cyberoam among others. He has published more than 200+ 
Research Papers in various High-Quality ISI-SCI/SCIE/SSCI Impact Editors xiii
Factor- Q1, Q2, Q3, Q4 Journals cum Scopus/ESCI indexed Journals, 80+ 
Papers in International Conferences indexed with Springer, IEEE and ACM 
Digital Library, 50+ Book Chapters in various SCOPUS/WEB OF SCIENCE 
Indexed Books with Springer, CRC Press, Wiley, IET, Elsevier with Citations: 
(Google Scholar): 14000+, H-Index: 62 and I-Index: 225; (Scopus): 7000+; 
H-Index: 45. Member of more than 60+ Associations as Senior and Life 
Member such as, IEEE (Senior Member) and ACM (Senior Member). He 
has authored/co-authored cum Edited 65+ Books of Computer Science and 
is associated with more than 600+ International Conferences as Programme 
Committee/Chair/Advisory Board/Review Board member.
He is Associate Editor for Wireless Networks (Springer), Computer 
Communications (Elsevier), International Journal of Sensor Networks 
(IJSNET) (Inderscience), Computers Materials and Continua (CMC), Tech 
Science Press- IASC, Cogent Engineering, Human Centric Computing and 
Information Sciences (HCIS), PeerJ Computer Science, IET-Quantum 
Communications, IET Networks, IEEE Transactions on Artificial Intelligence 
(IEEE TAI), Indonesian Journal of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, IJFC, IJISP, IJDST, IJCINI, IJGC, IJSIR, IJBDCN, IJNR, IJSI. He is 
Managing Editor of IGI-Global Journal, USA titled “International Journal 
of Knowledge and Systems Science (IJKSS)” and Editor-in-Chief of IGI￾Global, USA Journal titled “International Journal of Smart Vehicles and 
Smart Transportation (IJSVST)”. He has reviewed more than 2600+ Articles 
for diverse Web of Science and Scopus Indexed Journals. He is currently 
researching in the areas of Wireless Sensor Networks, Internet of Things, 
Swarm Intelligence, Cloud Computing, Artificial Intelligence, Drones, 
Blockchain, Cyber Security, Healthcare Informatics, Big Data and Wireless 
Communications.
Dr. Mohd Naved is an Associate Professor in 
Jaipuria Institute of Management, Noida, India. 
He has an impressive career spanning over a 
decade in the fields of Business Analytics, Data 
Science, and Artificial Intelligence. As an educator, 
Dr. Naved has consistently demonstrated a com￾mitment to the highest standards of teaching and 
mentoring, ensuring that his students receive an 
education that is both cutting-edge and grounded 
in real-world experience. His dedication to helping students achieve their 
full potential extends beyond the classroom, as he has been an active par￾ticipant in the university’s Mentor-Mentee Program, providing guidance 
and support to over 150 undergraduate and postgraduate students. In addi￾tion to his teaching prowess, Dr. Naved has excelled in the areas of educa￾tion management, research, and curriculum development. He has served on 
various committees and led initiatives related to curriculum development, xiv Editors
faculty recruitment and retention, and accreditation, contributing to the 
institutions he has worked with becoming centers of academic excellence in 
their respective fields. He has also successfully led the launch of several BBA/
MBA programs, resulting in increased admissions and student satisfaction.
As a researcher, Dr. Naved has made significant contributions to the fields 
of Business Analytics, Data Science, and Artificial Intelligence, with over 80+ 
publications in reputed scholarly journals and books. His research focuses 
on the applications of these disciplines in various industries, and he has 
supervised numerous research projects and dissertations, guiding students 
to successful outcomes.xv
Contributors
Nahad Al-Maskari
Finance Department
A’Sharqiyah University
Ibra, Oman
Dusmanta Behera
Department of Commerce
Vyasanagar Autonomous College
Jajpur, India
T. Blažauskas
Department of Software 
Engineering
Kaunas University of Technology
Kaunas, Lithuania
R. Damaševičius
Department of Applied Informatics
Vytautas Magnus University
Kaunas, Lithuania
Nguyen Huu Phuoc Dai
Bánki Donát Faculty
Óbuda University, Hungary
Girish Prasad Das
Department of Humanities and 
Social Sciences
Parala Maharaja Engineering College
Berhampur, India
P. Deepika
Department of Management Studies
Gayatri Vidya Parishad College of 
Engineering (A)
Visakhapatnam, India
Ayşenur Erdil
Department of Business 
Administration
Istanbul Medeniyet University
Turkey
B. Udaya Bhaskar Ganesh
Mittal School of Management Studies
Lovely Professional University
Phagwara, India
Yuvaraj Ganesan
Graduate School of Business
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia
Pham Phi Giang
Can Tho Technical Economics 
College
Vietnam
V. Harish
PSG Institute of Management
PSG College of Technology
Coimbatore, India
Fathyah Hashim
Graduate School of Business
Universiti Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia
Pham Quang Huy
School of Accounting
University of Economics Ho Chi 
Minh City (UEH)
Vietnamxvi Contributors
Mugdha Shailendra Kulkarni
Symbiosis Centre for Information 
Technology (SCIT)
Symbiosis International (Deemed 
University)
Pune, India
Jyoti Kushwaha
Department of Home Management
KRG Post Graduate College
Jiwaji University
Gwalior, India
Ruchi Kushwaha
School of Studies in Management
Jiwaji University
Gwalior, India
Narayana Maharana
Department of Management Studies
Gayatri Vidya Parishad College of 
Engineering (A)
Visakhapatnam, India
Jyotirmayee Mohanty
Department of Economics
Kendrapada Autonomous College
Kendrapada, India
Vrinda V. Nair
RV University
Bengaluru, India
L. Narbutaitė
Department of Software 
Engineering
Kaunas University of Technology
Kaunas, Lithuania
Anand Nayyar
Graduate School
Faculty of Information Technology
Duy Tan University
Da Nang, Vietnam
Kanchan Pranay Patil
Symbiosis Centre for Information 
Technology (SCIT)
Symbiosis International (Deemed 
University)
Pune, India
MA. Vu Kien Phuc
School of Accounting
University of Economics Ho Chi 
Minh City (UEH)
Vietnam
Ali Rehman
Internal Audit Department
A’Sharqiyah University
Ibra, Oman
Renuka Sharma
Amity College of Commerce
Amity University
Gurugram, India
Pankaj Singh
Institute of Business Management
GLA University
Mathura, India
Tariq Umar
School of Architecture and 
Environment
University of the West England
Bristol, United Kingdom
M. Vasiljevas
Department of Software 
Engineering
Kaunas University of Technology
Kaunas, Lithuania
Truong Hong Vo Tuan Kiet
FPT University
VietnamDOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-1 1
1.1 INTRODUCTION
Industry 5.0, also known as the ‘human-centred industry’, is the next stage 
of the industrial revolution that emphasizes the integration of human capa￾bilities with advanced technologies such as co-bots, augmented reality, and 
artificial intelligence. Technology is certainly the backbone of the futuristic 
knowledge economy of Industry 5.0. In the coming days, robots are going to 
play an important role in almost every sector of the economy by integrating 
the physical world with the digital world (Culot et al., 2020; Ghobakhloo, 
2020). Many academicians and industrial experts are anticipating and 
discussing how robotic technology is going to change the work environ￾ment, productivity, and competition (Breque et  al., 2021; Cassioli et  al., 
2021; Demir et al., 2019; Jafari et al., 2022). In the past couple of years, 
researchers have been trying to figure out the pros and cons of the industrial 
transformation in Industry 5.0, including its impact on employees, employ￾ment, and the work environment (Briggs & Scheutz, 2014; Kwanya, 2023; 
Chapter 1
Industry 5.0
Employee readiness for co-bot workspace
Narayana Maharana
Gayatri Vidya Parishad College of Engineering (A), Visakhapatnam, India
Girish Prasad Das
Parala Maharaja Engineering College, Berhampur, India
B. Udaya Bhaskar Ganesh
Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, India
Jyotirmayee Mohanty
Kendrapada Autonomous College, Kendrapada, India
P. Deepika
Gayatri Vidya Parishad College of Engineering (A), Visakhapatnam, India
Dusmanta Behera
Vyasanagar Autonomous College, Jajpur, India2 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Lu et al., 2022; Min et al., 2019; Østergaard, 2018; Schrum et al., 2021; 
Tamers et al., 2020; Vermeulen et al., 2018). Besides, some scholars also 
highlighted the risks of unemployment in areas where the work is more 
routine and repetitive since these works can be easily replaced by robots 
(Dalenogare et al., 2018; Frey & Osborne, 2013) and most of the exist￾ing jobs are going to be automated in the coming few years (Hammershøj, 
2019). This in turn would create a new generation of employees with an 
entirely novel job profile, skill set, and abilities (Demir et al., 2019). Some 
have pointed out that the advent of technology has made salary disparity 
worse by excessively favouring jobs that are inclined towards information 
flows. Essentially, the digitalization of society has exacerbated the infor￾mation and resource gap in support of inherently strong professions that 
are strategically positioned and technologically capable of reorganizing, 
aggregating, and transferring data as well as translating, interpreting, and 
manipulating the data (Kristal, 2020). Some researchers also countered by 
arguing that machines cannot outsmart intricate knowledge systems, and, 
on the other hand, the adverse ripples of the digital revolution on employ￾ment have been overstated (Pettersen, 2019).
A study by Shirokii et al. (2018) during the era of Industry 4.0 claimed 
that automation of tasks replaced around 47% of the employees in Germany 
and over 60% of the jobs are at risk (Min et al., 2019; Vermeulen et al., 
2018). Contrarily, it is also argued by many that we should embrace new 
technology since it has the potential to drive the economy and society 
towards a better future rather than to fear it just because it can abolish some 
routine and manual jobs (Kristal, 2020; Spencer, 2018; Vermeulen et al., 
2018). Very recently, many scholars and policymakers from Europe and 
Japan also claimed that the emergence of Industry 5.0 would bring a drastic 
change in three areas: human-centricity, sustainability, and resilience (Breque 
et al., 2021; Choi et al., 2022). Hence, it is high time to contemplate the 
essential attributes that employees must possess to thrive in a technology￾driven work environment, where the learning capabilities of robots surpass 
those of humans. Simultaneously, it is imperative for industries to proac￾tively equip themselves to integrate such technologies seamlessly, fostering a 
harmonious relationship between human workers and robots within the 
workplace. The objective of this chapter is to analyse different theoretical 
perspectives and frameworks concerning key findings, with the aim of pro￾viding insight for future academic inquiry and policy interventions.
To achieve this goal, two primary research questions are posed as follows:
a. In what ways advanced AI technologies transformed industries around 
the world and what kind of skill and knowledge an employee needs to 
harvest to fit into such an economy? This research question focuses on 
the preparation of the labour market for the digital innovations that 
are going to change the job profile of next-generation employees.Industry 5.0 3
b. How do the industries need to prepare themselves while adopting 
and calibrating new-age technologies and employees in Industry 5.0? 
This research question addresses the requirements that industries need 
to cultivate to adopt the drastic change brought by the use of AI and 
robotic technology at every level of the workplace.
1.1.1 Objectives of the chapter
The following are the objectives of the chapter:
• To identify the current level of employee readiness for co-bot work￾space in Industry 5.0;
• To identify the HR requirements and adaptation-related challenges 
faced by industries to build a sustainable co-bot workspace;
• To highlight and prioritize the key skills of employees to work in a co￾bot workspace;
• To highlight and prioritize the HR preparedness and adaptation￾related challenges faced by industries for building a co-bot workspace;
• And, to suggest future research areas and initiatives to improve 
employee readiness for co-bot workspaces.
1.1.2 Organization of the chapter
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: Section 1.2 presents a 
detailed review and analysis of the existing literature to explore how the 
future of Industry 5.0 would be and what kind of changes it brings to the 
labour market and industry. This section also explores the requirements that 
an employee needs to have to perform in a co-bot workspace and highlights 
what changes and capabilities an industry needs to have to sustain such an 
AI-driven economy. Section 1.3 deals with the methodology adopted for the 
study by discussing survey design, data collection, and estimation in AHP. 
Section 1.4 enlists the analysis, followed by observations and discussions in 
Section 1.5. Section 1.6 highlights the implications and limitations of the 
study conducted. Finally, Section 1.6 concludes the chapter with the future 
scope.
1.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
Industry 5.0, also referred to as the ‘human-centred industry’, is the begin￾ning of a new era in manufacturing. It is built upon the advancements made 
in Industry 4.0, where automation and advanced technologies were inte￾grated into the manufacturing processes. However, Industry 5.0 takes it a 
step further by placing humans at the forefront. It envisions a future where 4 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
advanced technologies and human capabilities work hand-in-hand, leverag￾ing the strengths of both to create more efficient, sustainable, and personal￾ized manufacturing systems (Kumar & Nayyar, 2020; Nayyar et al., 2020). 
Industry 5.0 represents a paradigm shift that places a strong emphasis on 
human–machine collaboration, customization, sustainability, and digitaliza￾tion (Jafari et al., 2022). It heralds a new era of manufacturing that embraces 
the potential of technology while prioritizing the well-being and empower￾ment of the workforce. In this section, we will delve into the key concepts, 
potential benefits, and challenges of Industry 5.0, exploring how it is shaping 
the future of manufacturing and redefining the way we approach different 
aspects of a co-bot workspace. With advances in robotics and automation, 
co-bots are becoming increasingly prevalent in various industries, revolution￾izing the way we work. Unlike traditional robots that operate in isolation, 
co-bots are designed to work alongside humans, enhancing their capabilities 
and productivity (Sherwani et  al., 2020). Co-bots are transforming work 
environments by creating a synergy between humans and machines, where 
they collaborate and coexist seamlessly and safely.
There are a lot of uncertainties in the future where robots will be playing 
significant roles in industries. As we navigate the early days of the Industrial 
Revolution, what direction it will take remains uncertain, except for some 
hypotheses and studies providing very limited insights. Østergaard (2018)
highlighted the need for the future industrial revolution is certainly due to 
increasing consumer demand for customization. This idea was further sup￾ported by a study published in Bloomberg, which noted that a German car 
manufacturer is prioritizing people in production plants, recognizing that 
adaptability is a crucial factor for modern consumers (Mattioli et al., 2020). 
A few such studies suggested that Industry 5.0 can be characterized by 
‘intensified collaboration’ between intelligent systems and people, in con￾trast to Industry 4.0 where the focus was primarily on ‘automation’ rather 
than collaboration. The shift towards Industry 5.0 reflects the growing rec￾ognition of the importance of human–machine collaboration in shaping the 
future of manufacturing and meeting evolving consumer demands. In 2021, 
the European Commission released a report that introduced the concept of 
Industry 5.0 as a means of addressing the economic and environmental chal￾lenges facing the industry. The goal of Industry 5.0 is to achieve green pro￾duction, which refers to the creation of a carbon-neutral and energy-efficient 
industry (Solanki & Nayyar, 2019). This approach is aimed at reducing the 
environmental impact of industrial processes while also promoting sustain￾able economic growth. By adopting Industry 5.0 principles, companies can 
create innovative and sustainable solutions that benefit both the economy 
and the environment (Breque et  al., 2021). The report highlights that 
Industry 4.0, over the past decade, has focused primarily on digitization and 
AI-driven technologies to enhance production efficiency and flexibility, 
while deviating from the novel objectives of social justice and sustainability 
(Nayyar & Kumar, 2020; Sahoo et  al., 2021). In contrast, Industry 5.0 Industry 5.0 5
places a renewed emphasis on research and innovation while supporting the 
long-term objectives of service to humanity and sustainability (Breque et al., 
2021). Another study by Maddikunta et al. (2022) characterized Industry 
5.0 as more intriguing, agile, and scalable than its predecessors, owing to the 
advanced technologies at its disposal. The emergence of Industry 5.0 reflects 
a shifting paradigm in manufacturing, aiming to address pressing environ￾mental concerns while driving innovation and sustainable practices in the 
industry (Kumar & Nayyar, 2020; Paschek et al., 2022).
At present, there are two distinct visions that are being proposed for 
Industry 5.0. The first vision centred around ‘human–robot co-working’, 
where humans and robots collaborate closely, leveraging their respective 
strengths. Humans would focus on tasks that require creativity and innova￾tion, while robots would handle other routine or repetitive tasks. The sec￾ond vision for Industry 5.0 is centred around bio-economy, which involves 
the intelligent utilization of biological resources for industrial purposes. 
This approach aims to strike a balance between ecology, industry, and econ￾omy, by harnessing the potential of bio-based materials and processes in 
manufacturing and production (Aaltonen & Salmi, 2019). These two visions 
reflect different perspectives on how Industry 5.0 may unfold, with one 
emphasizing human–robot collaboration and the other focusing on sustain￾able bio-economy principles. According to the European Commission, bio￾economy is
The production of renewable biological resources and the conversion 
of these resources and waste streams into value-added products, such 
as food, feed, bio-based products, and bioenergy. It includes agriculture, 
forestry, fisheries, food, pulp and paper production, as well as parts of 
the chemical, biotechnological and energy industries. Its sectors have a 
strong innovation potential due to their use of a wide range of sciences 
(life sciences, agronomy, ecology, food science, and social sciences), 
enabling and industrial technologies (biotechnology, nanotechnology, 
information and communication technologies (ICT), and engineering, 
and local and tacit knowledge.
Demir et al. (2019)
The principle of biologization,1 which entails the intelligent use of biologi￾cal resources, has the potential to bring about a profound transformation in 
various industries (Schütte, 2018). As such, bio-economy could potentially 
serve as the overarching theme or a significant component of the next indus￾trial revolution. It’s important to note that Industry 5.0 may encompass 
both human–robot co-working and bio-economy, while also potentially 
incorporating other themes, such as space life, space industries, and space 
mining, as part of the next revolution. Scientists are already urging caution 
in the utilization of space resources (Elvis & Milligan, 2019), as space min￾ing could potentially become the next ‘gold rush’.6 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
1.2.1 Co-bots in the manufacturing industries
The use of co-bots has seen a significant increase in recent years, with the 
market size estimated to be $649 million in 2019 and projected to grow 
at a rate of 45% between 2019 and 2025 (Bi et al., 2021). Manufacturing 
companies have introduced co-bots into their production environments to 
enhance productivity, usability, and flexibility (Calitz et al., 2017). Compared 
to manual workers, co-bots can minimize the risk of errors in operations, 
and the production process requires special personnel to supervise each step 
of the process (Aaltonen & Salmi, 2019; Calitz et al., 2017). Co-bots are 
robots designed to work alongside human workers in the same workspace, 
performing different tasks (Simões et al., 2022). This allows human workers 
to focus on developing innovative solutions and taking on decision-making 
roles, while the co-bots assist with various tasks (Calitz et al., 2017; Longo 
et al., 2020). In terms of technical aspects, co-bots offer several advantages 
over traditional industrial robots, especially in terms of user-friendliness and 
flexibility. Co-bots are capable of handling repetitive, tedious, and physically 
demanding tasks, and are equipped with sensors that can detect contact 
with their surroundings, whether it is intentional or accidental. These fac￾tors are crucial for ensuring safety and ease of use, and for promoting natu￾ral interactions between co-bots and human workers. Several studies have 
highlighted the significant role of co-bots in the manufacturing industry. 
For example, Calitz et al. (2017) conducted a study on African workers to 
examine the current and future implementation of co-bots and their impact 
to suggest that co-bot solutions can provide mobility and flexibility, thereby 
creating a sustainable work environment for the future (Batth et al., 2018).
Few other studies have also examined expectations and success factors in 
adopting co-bots from both industry and academic perspectives (Aaltonen
& Salmi, 2019; Kildal et al., 2022). Like, for instance, Simões et al. (2022)
had identified 39 factors that influence the intention to adopt co-bots, 
based on a conceptual framework integrating the ‘Diffusion of Innovation 
Theory’, ‘Technology Organization-Environment Theory’, and the 
‘Institutional Theory’. According to Aaltonen and Salmi (2019), the sus￾tainable development of co-bots lies in the successful allocation of work 
among human workers and co-bots. Additionally, Bi et al. (2021) identified 
some notable co-bot developments in various applications. Most previous 
studies focused on the technical challenges of implementing co-bots in man￾ufacturing processes. However, the actual use of co-bots in collaborative 
work environments can pose different challenges that are crucial for deter￾mining the success of human-co-bot collaboration in a smart working envi￾ronment (Calitz et  al., 2017). For instance, the acceptance of co-bots by 
human workers during the initial stages of implementation can only be 
achieved if they are involved in defining the work conditions. The use of co￾bots can potentially improve the design of work systems and how work is 
organized (Simões et al., 2022). To achieve this, manufacturing companies Industry 5.0 7
must consider task requirements, safety and trust assurance, ergonomics, 
and the flexibility to adapt to changes (Bi et al., 2021; Maharana, 2020).
1.2.2 Issues in human–robot collaboration
Human–robot co-working is a concept that is becoming increasingly rel￾evant with the rise of Industry 5.0. However, several issues need to be 
addressed for the successful implementation of this co-working model. One 
major issue is the need for training and upskilling of the human workforce 
to adapt to the new technologies and work processes (Agarwal & Chauhan, 
2022). There is also a need for effective communication and collaboration 
between humans and robots to ensure safe and efficient work environments. 
Another issue is the potential loss of jobs and the need for re-skilling and 
re-employment programs for workers who may be displaced by automa￾tion. In addition, there is a need for standardization and regulation of the 
co-working model to ensure the ethical and fair treatment of both humans 
and robots. Overall, while human–robot co-working offers several benefits 
such as increased productivity and efficiency, it also presents various chal￾lenges that need to be carefully addressed for successful implementation. On 
the other hand, there are a lot of changes the organization need to undergo 
including evolution in organizational behaviour, ethics, work culture, orga￾nizational structure, workflow, and work environment. Additionally, some 
important factors to consider in a human–robot co-working environment 
include the acceptance of robots in the workplace, potential discrimina￾tion towards either robots or human workers, privacy concerns, building 
trust between human and robot workers, the redesign of workspaces to 
accommodate robots, and the need for education and training (Huang et al., 
2022; Pizoń & Gola, 2023). The study of Buchner et al. (2013) discussed 
three major factors that undergo a drastic change in Industry 5.0, including 
individuals, organizations, and the robotic agent, where, individual factors 
include the employee’s age, gender, educational level, technical experience, 
expectations, and social skills. Organizational factors include workflow, 
physical environment, social and emotional context, training, and alignment 
of employee–robot goals. Robotic agent factors encompass appearance, 
behaviour, interaction capabilities, and safety. The study of Demir et  al. 
(2019) was based on the legal and regulatory issues due to human–robot 
coworking that any organization can face. Authors suggested that a clear 
and legal definition of a robot is essential to address the issues arising from 
human–robot co-working. Without a legally binding definition of a robot, 
human–robot co-working will create numerous issues. Therefore, there is 
a need to consider various factors such as individual, organizational, and 
robotic agents while designing human–robot co-working environments. The 
necessary regulations for human–robot co-working should include a clear 
definition of what a robot is, as well as distinctions between robots, drones, 8 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
and cyborgs. The law and related regulations need to define the categories of 
robots that are appropriate for use in work environments, their designated 
functions and obligations, the scope of decisions that robots are authorized 
to make with regard to humans, the allocation of liability in cases of robot 
malfunctions, and whether the robot software operates on pre-programmed 
rules or has the ability to learn and adapt. Regulations should also cover 
robot development, manufacturing, and certifications to ensure safety and 
responsibility (Senna, 2022).
On the other hand, employee preference for working in a technology￾driven environment varies from person to person. Employees who are 
incompatible with the co-bot environment will not be able to perform better. 
Similarly, psychological issues resulting from working with robots would 
impart certain disorders and may increase the stress level. Sometimes, it may 
result in some sort of addiction or phobia like ‘robophobia’ among the 
employees with increased use of robots. It is quite possible that advanced 
technology would bring some unprecedented social and psychological 
changes that we are not ready to face. The increase in the use of robots in 
workplaces may lead to a decrease in social interactions between humans 
(EunJeong et al., 2022; Smids et al., 2020). Employees may have different 
opinions on how to interact with robots socially, especially if the robots are 
in a management position. The issue is complicated by the fact that humans 
tend to show respect to their superiors or managers, but respect means noth￾ing to a robot. Furthermore, some humans may prefer robots that exhibit 
social behaviour, while others may think it is unreal and fake. Studies have 
shown that children treat robots like living pets, indicating that social studies 
will be an essential part of researching human–robot co-working (Piçarra & 
Giger, 2018).
The human resource department has to incorporate a lot of changes in its 
functioning from work analysis to the job description, recruitment, training, 
and development. They have to fix new challenges arising out of human–
robot co-working in addition to the current issues. Eventually, in a highly 
robot-dominated workplace, the importance given to humans would be 
minimal; therefore, human resource management may also take a different 
form to cater to such human-related issues. On the other hand, the introduc￾tion of robots into the workplace raises questions about their ethical status 
and how they may affect current work ethics. Robots that are selfless, do not 
know laziness, and cannot lie will challenge human employees expected 
ethical behaviour. It is difficult to predict the development of work ethics in 
an environment where humans and robots collaborate. A set of ethical stan￾dards will probably be established to govern the interactions between 
humans and robots and to define the ethical standing of robots in the work￾place (Briggs & Scheutz, 2014). Moreover, in human–robot co-working 
environments, employees may need to learn how to behave towards robots 
and understand their different capabilities. Nonverbal communication may 
be important, but robots may or may not understand it. Employees may Industry 5.0 9
need time to get used to communicating properly with robots, and robot 
manufacturers will need to develop robots that can inform about their capa￾bilities without causing confusion.
Whether or not Industry 5.0 will focus on human–robot co-working, it 
will still represent a significant shift for organizations. In reality, having 
machines in our lives will probably cause a big shift for humanity. This will 
mimic, excite, and inspire some people. Some people will think it’s outland￾ish, annoying, or even dangerous for humanity. The media actively promotes 
this anti-robot sentiment. A few surveys on how people feel about machines 
in society will be skewed by this disapproval (Huang et al., 2022; Martynov 
et al., 2019; Paschek et al., 2022). One of the first measures designed to 
gauge attitudes towards machines takes a pessimistic stance. We are not sure 
how people will respond to robots until they truly live and interact with 
robots. As people interact with robots, their outlook towards them is likely 
to change. Children of today might respond differently from how members 
of our age did because they will develop alongside this or comparable tech￾nologies. Robotic civilization will exist for their offspring. In order to create 
a robotic society where humans can fully profit from technology while 
attempting to limit negative effects, it is important to be conscious of gen￾erational differences. A study by Matheson et al. (2019) on human–robot 
collaboration in the context of manufacturing applications analysed more 
than 40 papers discussing the control mechanism, and collaboration strate￾gies for improving production, performance, and flexibility. Authors 
observed that most of the studies were carried out in the automotive and 
electronics industries where the co-bots are easily integrated into the work￾place and also anticipated that the Small- and Medium-Scale Enterprises 
(SMEs) in  future are the early adopters of such technological changes 
whereas the upcoming challenges are not quite clear at this point and need 
more in-depth study.
1.2.3 Employee and organizational readiness for 
Industry 5.0
The readiness of employees to work alongside co-bots is influenced by vari￾ous factors, including their skills, knowledge, attitudes, and perceptions. One 
critical factor is the level of technology literacy among employees (Cheon 
et al., 2022; Kwanya, 2023; Schrum et al., 2021). Studies have shown that 
employees with higher levels of technology literacy are more comfortable 
working with co-bots than those with lower levels of technology literacy. 
Technology literacy includes the ability to use digital devices, software, and 
other technologies effectively (Davies, 2011). Employees who lack technol￾ogy literacy may struggle to understand how to operate and interact with 
co-bots, leading to reduced efficiency and productivity (Tamers et al., 2020).
Another critical factor is the perception of co-bots among employees. 
Employees’ perceptions of co-bots can be influenced by various factors, 10 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
including their previous experiences with technology, their knowledge of 
co-bots, and their attitudes toward automation (Kwanya, 2023). Studies 
have shown that employees who have positive perceptions of co-bots are 
more likely to be comfortable working with them (Kwanya, 2023; 
Lambrechts et al., 2021). On the other hand, employees who view co-bots 
negatively may be resistant to working with them, leading to reduced pro￾ductivity and efficiency (Lambrechts et al., 2021).
Training is critical to ensure that employees are ready to work with co￾bots effectively. The training should focus on providing employees with the 
knowledge and skills necessary to operate and interact with co-bots safely 
and efficiently (Calitz et al., 2017). The training should also address any 
concerns or misconceptions that employees may have about co-bots. Studies 
have shown that employees who receive comprehensive training on co-bots 
are more comfortable and confident working with them. Training should 
also be ongoing to ensure that employees remain up-to-date with the latest 
co-bot technologies and best practices (Cassioli et al., 2021).
Industry 5.0 requires a significant shift in organizational mindset and the 
adoption of new technologies, business models, and work processes. This 
literature review examines the preparedness of industries to adopt the 
changes associated with Industry 5.0. The readiness of industries to adopt 
Industry 5.0 depends largely on their technological maturity. Industry 5.0 
requires advanced automation, machine learning, and artificial intelligence 
technologies that are not yet widely available. Therefore, industries that 
have already adopted Industry 4.0 technologies and have a culture of inno￾vation are more likely to be prepared for the changes of Industry 5.0. 
Similarly, the organizational culture of industries can significantly affect 
their preparedness for Industry 5.0. Industries that have a culture of innova￾tion, adaptability, and flexibility are more likely to be prepared for the 
changes of Industry 5.0 (Lachvajderová & Kádárová, 2022; Romero & 
Stahre, 2021).
On the other hand, industries with a rigid and hierarchical organizational 
culture may struggle to adapt to the changes brought about by Industry 5.0. 
Along with this, the preparedness of the existing workforce to adopt the 
changes of Industry 5.0 is another essential factor (Dwivedi et al., 2023). 
Industries need to ensure that their workforce has the necessary skills and 
knowledge to operate and maintain Industry 5.0 technologies. They also 
need to invest in upskilling and reskilling programs to ensure that their 
employees are ready for the new work processes and business models associ￾ated with Industry 5.0 (Agarwal & Chauhan, 2022; Doyle-Kent & 
Shanahan, 2022; Leopold et al., 2017). As such, the regulatory framework 
can significantly affect the adoption of Industry 5.0. Governments need to 
create an enabling environment for the development and adoption of 
Industry 5.0 technologies (Işcan, 2021). This includes creating supportive 
policies, funding research and development, and providing incentives for 
industries to invest in Industry 5.0. Moreover, there is a sheer necessity for Industry 5.0 11
collaboration between industries, which plays a crucial role in the adoption 
of Industry 5.0. Collaboration can help to create economies of scale, pro￾mote knowledge sharing, and accelerate the development and adoption of 
Industry 5.0 technologies (Senna, 2022).
The adoption of Industry 5.0 poses several challenges for human resource 
(HR) professionals. This literature review also examines the challenges faced 
by HR while adapting to Industry 5.0. The adoption of advanced technolo￾gies requires a new set of skills and competencies, which are different from 
those required in traditional industries (Agarwal & Chauhan, 2022; Doyle￾Kent & Shanahan, 2022). HR professionals face the challenge of identifying 
and recruiting individuals with the necessary skills and knowledge to work 
in the Industry 5.0 environment (Maddikunta et al., 2022; Paschek et al., 
2022). This can be a daunting task as the demand for skilled workers is high, 
and the competition for talent is intense. In Industry 5.0, employees need to 
be equipped with new skills and knowledge to operate and manage advanced 
technologies such as AI, IoT, and robotics (Spencer, 2018). HR professionals 
are responsible for providing training and development opportunities to 
help employees acquire new competencies (Orlova, 2021). However, this 
can be a challenge as the training programs need to be designed to meet the 
specific needs of the Industry 5.0 workforce, which requires a significant 
investment of time and resources (Doyle-Kent & Shanahan, 2022). Moreover, 
there is a need for significant changes in the work environment, which can 
be unsettling for some employees. HR professionals need to develop reten￾tion strategies to ensure that employees feel valued and engaged (Cillo et al., 
2022; Orlova, 2021). This can involve creating a supportive work culture, 
providing opportunities for career development, and offering competitive 
compensation and benefits packages. At the same time, another critical chal￾lenge faced by HRM in Industry 5.0 is the shortage of skilled workers who 
can work effectively with the latest technologies. With Industry 5.0, organi￾zations require employees who possess a unique set of skills that combines 
technical expertise with social and emotional intelligence (Cillo et al., 2022; 
Martynov et  al., 2019). However, many organizations struggle to find 
employees with these skills, and the shortage of skilled workers can impede 
the adoption of Industry 5.0. On the other hand, resistance to change also 
brings a lot of complications for HR (Romero & Stahre, 2021). The imple￾mentation of Industry 5.0 requires a significant shift in the way organiza￾tions operate, and many employees may be resistant to this change. Some 
employees may fear that their jobs will be replaced by machines, while oth￾ers may feel overwhelmed by the new technologies and processes. HRM 
needs to address these concerns and provide employees with the necessary 
training and support to adapt to the changes brought by Industry 5.0.
Industry 5.0 necessitates a diverse and inclusive workforce that can col￾laborate effectively. HR professionals need to develop strategies to recruit 
and retain individuals from diverse backgrounds and create an inclusive work 
environment that values and respects individual differences. In addition to 12 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
this, it also brings a lot of compliance with new legal and regulatory require￾ments such as data privacy and security laws (Leng et al., 2022). HR profes￾sionals need to be aware of these requirements and ensure that the organization 
is compliant to avoid legal and financial risks. Where organizations are 
increasingly relying on interconnected systems and devices to automate pro￾cesses and gather data, the importance of security cannot be ignored. While 
robots can enhance productivity and efficiency, they also create new kinds of 
cybersecurity risks about which we are quite clueless (Özsungur, 2021; Venaik 
et al., 2023). HRM needs to ensure that employees are trained to identify and 
respond to cybersecurity threats to prevent data breaches and protect sensi￾tive information. More importantly, it also creates several ethical concerns 
that HRM needs to address. For example, the use of AI and automation may 
lead to job displacement and inequality, and organizations need to ensure 
that their technology and practices are ethical and inclusive. HRM needs to 
establish clear ethical guidelines and ensure that employees are trained to 
uphold these standards.
Working in a collaborative robot or ‘co-bot’ workspace requires certain 
skills, knowledge, and qualities from employees. Based on the previous 
studies and discussions with industrial experts, the following points high￾light the things that an employee may need to work in a co-bot workspace 
(Figure 1.1).
a) Adaptability: Working in a co-bot workspace may require employ￾ees to adapt to new and changing work environments. Co-bots may 
be reprogrammed or moved to different locations in the workspace, 
which may require employees to adjust their workflows and work 
methods accordingly.
Figure 1.1 Employee and industry requirements for sustainable co-bot workspace.
Training and development
Safety Policies
Performance management
Recruitment
Job design
Employee
Readiness
HR as Change 
Agent
Sustainable 
Co-bot
Workspace
Technology 
Adaptation 
Challenges
Attention to detail
Technical skills
Safetyawareness
Teamwork
Problem-solving skills
Physical fitness
Communication skills
Adaptability
Cost of implementation
Technology integration
Cybersecurity
Complex system integration
Data management
Integration of human-machine interfaces
Technological literacy
Workforce retrainingIndustry 5.0 13
b) Attention to detail: The precision and accuracy required in a co-bot 
workspace mean that employees need to be detail-oriented. They 
should be able to follow instructions carefully and ensure that their 
work is accurate and error-free.
c) Communication skills: Communication is key in a co-bot workspace, 
as employees must work closely with the co-bots and with each other. 
They should be able to communicate effectively and clearly, both ver￾bally and in writing.
d) Physical fitness: Depending on the tasks being performed in the co￾bot workspace, employees may need to be physically fit and able to 
perform tasks such as lifting, standing for extended periods of time, or 
working in awkward positions.
e) Problem-solving skills: Co-bots are designed to work alongside 
humans and assist them with tasks, but they may encounter unex￾pected situations or errors. Employees should be able to think criti￾cally and creatively to solve problems as they arise.
f) Safety awareness: Safety is of utmost importance in a co-bot work￾space. Employees should be aware of the safety protocols and proce￾dures in place, and understand the risks associated with working with 
co-bots. They should also be able to identify and respond to potential 
safety hazards.
g) Teamwork: Collaboration is a key aspect of working in a co-bot 
workspace. Employees should be able to work well with others and 
be willing to help and support their colleagues as needed.
h) Technical skills: Employees working in a co-bot workspace should 
have a good understanding of the technology behind the co-bots and 
how they operate. This may include programming skills, knowledge 
of sensors and automation systems, and the ability to troubleshoot 
technical issues.
Overall, employees working in a co-bot workspace should have a combina￾tion of technical skills, safety awareness, communication skills, adaptability, 
attention to detail, teamwork, and problem-solving skills.
To make the co-bot environment effective, the HR department in an orga￾nization may need to make the following changes.
a) Job design: The HR department may need to redesign job roles to 
incorporate co-bots into work processes. This could include identify￾ing tasks that co-bots can perform and redefining the roles of employ￾ees to focus on more complex or strategic tasks that require human 
expertise.
b) Performance management: The HR department may need to review 
and update performance management systems to account for the 
use of co-bots. This could include setting performance targets for 
both employees and co-bots, evaluating the efficiency of the co-bot 14 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
environment, and assessing the performance of employees working 
with co-bots.
c) Recruitment: The HR department may need to recruit employees with 
the necessary skills and knowledge to work in a co-bot environment. 
This could include recruiting individuals with engineering, robotics, or 
computer science backgrounds to operate and program the co-bots.
d) Safety policies: The HR department may need to review and update 
safety policies to ensure that employees can work safely with co-bots. 
This could include implementing safety protocols to prevent accidents 
and ensuring that employees are trained to operate co-bots safely.
e) Training and development: The HR department may need to provide 
employees with training and development programs to enhance their 
skills and knowledge of co-bots. This could include technical train￾ing, safety training, and collaboration skills training to ensure that 
employees can work efficiently with co-bots.
Overall, the HR department may need to provide training and development 
programs, recruit the right employees, redesign job roles, review and update 
safety policies, and adapt performance management systems to make the 
co-bot environment effective.
The technological adaptation challenges that organizations may face 
while implementing Industry 5.0 are enlisted as follows.
a) Complex system integration: Integrating various technologies such as 
co-bots, sensors, and artificial intelligence to work together seamlessly 
can be a complex process. It requires a high level of technical expertise 
to integrate these systems effectively.
b) Technology integration: Integrating advanced technologies like robot￾ics, artificial intelligence, and IoT into existing manufacturing systems 
can be a significant challenge. Organizations need to ensure that these 
technologies are compatible with existing systems and processes, and 
they may need to invest in additional infrastructure and tools to facili￾tate this integration.
c) Cost of implementation: Implementing advanced technologies 
required for Industry 5.0 can be expensive, and it may be a challenge 
for some companies to justify the cost of implementation. They need 
to ensure that the benefits, such as increased productivity and effi￾ciency, outweigh the costs of implementation.
d) Cybersecurity: As Industry 5.0 relies heavily on connected devices 
and technologies, cybersecurity is a significant challenge. There is a 
need to ensure that the systems and technologies used are secure from 
cyber-attacks and data breaches. The integration of advanced tech￾nologies into manufacturing processes creates new cybersecurity chal￾lenges. Organizations need to ensure that their systems are secure and Industry 5.0 15
protected from cyber threats, and they need to invest in cybersecurity 
tools and practices to mitigate these risks (Venaik et al., 2023).
e) Data management: With the proliferation of sensors and IoT devices, 
the amount of data generated by Industry 5.0 systems can be over￾whelming. Organizations need to develop efficient data management 
strategies to collect, store, process, and analyse this data to derive 
insights and make informed decisions.
f) Integration of human–machine interfaces: In Industry 5.0, humans 
and machines will work together seamlessly. However, integrating 
human–machine interfaces will require a significant technological 
adaptation as machines and humans have different ways of interacting 
and communicating.
g) Technological literacy: Industry 5.0 requires a highly skilled work￾force that is comfortable with advanced technologies such as artificial 
intelligence, augmented reality, and co-bots. There is a need for tech￾nological literacy among the workforce to ensure the effective integra￾tion and use of these technologies.
h) Workforce retraining: The shift to Industry 5.0 requires organizations to 
retrain their workforce to work collaboratively with machines. Employees 
need to be equipped with new skills such as data analytics, machine learn￾ing, and robotics to effectively collaborate with the machines.
Overall, organizations may face several technological adaptation challenges 
while implementing Industry 5.0. They need to ensure that they have the 
right infrastructure, tools, and skills to successfully integrate advanced tech￾nologies into their manufacturing processes.
The emergence of Industry 5.0, which involves human collaboration with 
specialized robots, has prompted inquiries into the necessary skills for suc￾cessful co-working with co-bots in manufacturing settings. This research 
chapter aims to investigate the essential employability skills required for 
such collaboration, as well as the strategies organizations can use to foster a 
collaborative environment in the era of Industry 5.0. To identify these skills, 
it is first necessary to examine the key factors influencing the co-working 
relationship between humans and robots (refer to Figure 1.2). Based on a 
review of relevant literature and expert interviews, this study identifies three 
major factors: employee readiness, HR as a change agent, and challenges in 
adapting to new technologies.
1.3 METHODOLOGY
Saaty (1980) introduced the Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP), which is a 
structured approach to organizing and analysing the elements of a problem 
in a hierarchical manner. AHP is a user-friendly method for making and 16 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
evaluating decisions (Millet & Saaty, 2000; Saaty, 1980), particularly when 
there are a limited number of choices with multiple attributes. AHP involves 
comparing objects concerning a common goal or criterion, with weight 
scores (preference scores) assigned to the factors being compared to help 
inform the decision. The primary criteria are compared in paired groups, 
while the sub-criteria are compared within those groups. The preference 
response scale (Hafeez et al., 2002; Saaty, 1980) used during the comparison 
of criteria is presented in Table 1.1.
1.3.1 Survey design
For this study, we designed a survey tool that contains three independent 
variables that lead to the goal of attaining a sustainable co-bot workplace, 
Figure 1.2 Conceptual model for building a sustainable co-bot workplace.
Employee
Readiness
Internal Support
Mechanism
Sustainable
Co-bot Workplace
Employee skill
Technology Adoption
challenges
HR Management at
Workplace
Table 1.1 Rating of preferences in pairwise comparison of sub-criteria in AHP
Preference weight Meaning Rating
Equally preferred Both elements contribute equally to the 
objective
1
Moderately preferred Weak importance of one over the other 3
Strongly preferred One element is strongly favoured over the other 5
Very strongly 
preferred
One element is very strongly preferred over the 
other
7
Extremely preferred The evidence favouring one element is the 
highest possible order of affirmation
9
Intermediate values When compromise is needed between two 
adjacent judgments
2, 4, 6, 8
Source: Bhutta and Huq (2002); Saighal et al. (2015)Industry 5.0 17
which is our dependent variable. We identified a total of 28 items for the 
survey through a literature review and consultation with key employees 
from selected organizations. The survey instrument was developed in con￾sultation with experts in the field and academic professionals. The primary 
goal of the survey tool was to assess the priority of employee readiness 
and industry preparedness for creating an effective co-bot workplace. The 
readiness of HR personnel and the challenges associated with adopting new 
technologies served as key indicators of industrial preparedness.
1.3.2 Data collection
Responses were collected from the 14 industrial experts working in the 
seven selected industries online by asking them to respond to the AHP pair￾wise comparison using the website https://bpmsg.com/ahp/ahp-calc.php. We 
contacted each selected employee to respond to the AHP comparison matrix 
for each criterion online and also ensured that the consistency ratio (CR) 
value was within the acceptable limit. Further, the validity of the instrument 
was also ensured using both expert opinion and statistical tools.
1.3.3 Estimations in AHP
The process of AHP starts with the collection of pairwise comparison data 
in a matrix form of size n × n (n = number of sub-criteria). The upper trigo￾nal comparison matrix values are represented as ‘aij’ and the lower trigonal 
comparison matrix value can be determined by getting the reciprocal of ‘aij’:
a
a
ij
ij
= 1
where i and j = 1, 2, …, 9.
In the second step, we calculate the average of all response matrices and 
then normalized using the following formula
a
a
a
ik
ij
i
n
ij

 1
Calculating the priority vector for a criterion Wik we can use the formula 
given below:
W
a
n
ik i
n
ij
  118 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
To weight the Eigenvectors based on the criteria weights, hierarchical syn￾thesis is employed, where the sum of all weighted Eigenvector entries cor￾responding to those in the next lower level of the hierarchy is calculated.
Now the Weighted Vector (Wv) can be estimated as
W a V W
i
n
 ij ik

1
where ‘i’ is the row number and ‘k’ is the column number.
Now let
AW
X
X
X
Xn























1
2
3
.
.
.
Then, we can calculate λmax
max    


 


1 1
1
2
2
3
n 3
X
W
X
W
X
W
X
W
n
n
Eigenvalues can be calculated using the formula
E W
RI v ik =
Having made all the pairwise comparisons, the consistency is determined by 
using the Eigenvalue, λmax, to calculate the consistency index (CI):
CI  

max n
n 1
where ‘n’ is the matrix size or the number of criteria.
Consistency Ratio: The consistency ratio (CR) was calculated using 
Saaty’s random index table (ref. Table 1.2). An inconsistency of 10% 
or less implies that the adjustment is small as compared to the actual 
values of the Eigenvector entries. Further, a higher value of CR is Industry 5.0 19
considered unworthy since those responses would be random and 
comparison is not reliable.
CR CI
RI =
1.4 ANALYSIS
1.4.1 Demographic profile
Table 1.3 provides the demographic profile of the participants of the survey. 
We selected 34 employees from seven manufacturing industries where they 
are using artificial intelligence, robotics, and other advanced techniques for 
their manufacturing and other operational activities. Since the introduction 
of artificial intelligence in manufacturing is in the early stage in India; there￾fore, the availability of samples is very limited. In this particular study, we 
collected data from 34 employees out of which about 56% are male and 
Table 1.2 Saaty’s random index for different numbers of elements
N 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
RI 0 0 0.52 0.89 1.11 1.25 1.35 1.40 1.45 1.49 1.51 1.54
Source: Saaty (1980)
Table 1.3 Demographic profile of the respondents (N = 34)
Demographics Number of respondents Percentage (%)
Gender
Male 19 55.88
Female 15 44.12
Age
Less than 35 years 16 47.06
36–45 years 9 26.47
Above 45 years 9 26.47
Department
Production 12 35.29
Quality control and R&D 8 23.53
Human resource 13 38.24
Position
Managerial/supervisor 18 52.94
Executive 16 47.06
Source: Interpretation of primary data20 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
44% are females. The majority (47%) of the respondents who participated 
are at a young age (less than 35 years) whereas 26% of the respondents are 
in the middle age group (35–45 years) and another 26% of respondents are 
aged above 45 years. Therefore, we maintained uniformity among custom￾ers of different age groups to get an unbiased result that may arise due to the 
respondents of similar age groups. We also selected respondents from three 
prominent departments in a manufacturing industry where AI is already 
in use; 35% of respondents are from the production department, 24% are 
from the Quality Control and R&D (Research and Development) depart￾ment, and 38% are from the HR department. Out of the total respondents, 
53% are holding managerial positions in the selected organizations whereas 
47% are in executive positions.
1.4.2 Development of a hierarchical model
To build the hierarchical structure, first, a graphical model needs to be 
planned. The graphical presentation acts as a guide map for achieving the 
overall objective of the AHP process. The factors that are identified by 
reviewing the prior studies and from expert opinion are now considered 
as the sub-criteria for the AHP model. Figure 1.3 provides the criteria and 
sub-criteria of the AHP model. Usually, all the identified elements or criteria 
under a factor can be considered in the AHP model since AHP allows pair￾wise comparisons of all the available options. However, with the increase in 
the number of criteria, the level of consistency in response would be critical 
Figure 1.3 Factors and parameters for AHP.
Prioritize Requirements of an Efficient Co-bot Workspace
Employee Readiness (ER) HR as Change Agent 
(HRCA)
Technology Adaption
Challenges (TAC)
· Adaptability to changing work
environment (ACW)
· Attention to detail (ATD)
· Communication skills (CS)
· Complex decision-making
ability (CDM)
· Continuous learning and 
development (CLD)
· Creativity and innovation in
problem-solving (CIPS)
· Education and training (ET)
· Physical fitness (FF)
· Safety awareness (SA)
· Teamwork (TW)
· Technical skills (TS)
· Stress Bearing Ability (SBA)
· Complex System
Integration (CSI)
· Cost Of Implementation
(COI)
· Cybersecurity (CYS)
· Data Management and 
Analysis (DMA)
· Integration Of Human￾Machine (IHM)
· Technological Literacy
(TL)
· Technology Integration 
(TI)
· Workforce Training (WT)
· Job Design (JD)
· Performance Management 
(PM)
· Motivation For 
Collaboration (MFC)
· Recruitment Process (RP)
· Safety Policies (SP)
· Training And Development 
(TAD)
· Trust Building (TB)
· Managing Employee
Psychological Issues 
(MESI)Industry 5.0 21
to achieve. We have 12 sub-criteria under the factor of ‘employee readi￾ness’, and eight sub-criteria under the factor of ‘HR as a Change Agent’ and 
‘technology adoption challenges’ each. Further, the assessment bias of the 
respondents needs to be looked into while collecting pairwise comparison 
data from the respondents. By using the online AHP pairwise comparisons 
tool, we collected data from the respective respondents personally after 
explaining how to respond to the AHP pairwise comparisons data sheet.
After the collection of pairwise comparison data in a matrix form for each 
factor, we used all 34 responses to find out the average response pairwise 
comparisons matrix. Then, we obtained the column total in the average 
response pairwise comparisons matrix, which is represented in the first table 
of the AHP outcome of each factor (ref. Tables 1.4, 1.7, and 1.10). In the 
next tables (ref. Tables 1.5, 1.8, and 1.11), we normalized the average 
responses by dividing each value in the column by the respective column 
total. After getting the normalized values, we estimated the average of each 
row called the prioritized vector (PV) and ranked them to get erstwhile 
information about the priorities of the sub-criteria. In the next step, we esti￾mated the weighted Vectors and Eigenvalues by using formulas stated in the 
methodology. We then estimated the Average Lambda (λmax), Consistency 
Index (CI), and Consistency Ratio (CR) for each factor to ensure the reli￾ability of the model outcome, the results of which are given in Tables 1.6, 
1.9, and 1.12.
1.5 OBSERVATION AND DISCUSSION
The final AHP ranking outcome for the factor Employee Readiness given in 
Table 1.5 indicates that the sub-criteria ‘Creativity and innovation to prob￾lem solving’ is the most important element for the employees to make them 
suitable for working in a co-bot workplace. Since the working of robots 
along with humans will be guided by artificial intelligence but needs to 
be supported by the innovativeness of the worker which would be miss￾ing in the case of robots. This quality in employees should be improved 
followed by ‘Technical Skill’ and ‘Complex Problem-solving ability’ which 
were ranked two and three, respectively. The least preferred skill that an 
employee may require for working in the co-bot workspace is ‘Physical fit￾ness’. ‘Attention to detail’ was ranked 11th and one of the least preferred 
characteristics of an employee may be due to the fact that robots can do the 
job of attention to detail more efficiently than humans. Further, Table 1.6
provides the reliability measures for the hierarchical model for the factor 
of ‘employee readiness’. The reliability of the responses and the AHP rank￾ing of the sub-criteria can be ensured by looking at the consistency index 
and consistency ratios estimated thereof. We can see that the CI of the AHP 
model is estimated to be 0.0882 (8.82%), which is below 0.10, indicating 
the consistency of the responses and reliability of the model.22 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0 Table 1.4 Average responses of pairwise comparison matrix for employee readiness ACW ATD CS CDM CLD CIPS ET FF SA TW TS SBA ACW 1.0000 6.6000 1.0000 0.1580 0.3680 0.1520 0.3980 5.4000 1.0000 2.2000 0.1640 1.0000 ATD 0.1520 1.0000 0.2820 0.1820 0.1580 0.1580 0.1820 1.6000 0.2200 1.6000 0.1520 0.2200 CS 1.0000 3.6000 1.0000 0.2200 0.2820 0.1520 0.7000 6.6000 1.0000 3.8000 0.1880 0.5000 CDM 6.4000 5.6000 4.6000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 4.0000 7.6000 6.6000 6.6000 0.7320 5.6000 CLD 3.6000 6.4000 3.6000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 7.0000 3.6000 4.0000 0.4400 3.4000 CIPS 6.6000 6.4000 6.6000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 5.0000 6.6000 8.6000 7.6000 2.6000 5.6000 ET 2.6000 5.6000 1.6000 0.2500 1.0000 0.2000 1.0000 5.6000 4.6000 4.0000 1.0000 1.8000 FF 0.1880 0.7000 0.1520 0.1280 0.1400 0.1580 0.1820 1.0000 0.3500 0.3460 0.1520 0.1880 SA 1.0000 4.6000 1.0000 0.1520 0.2820 0.1140 0.2200 3.2000 1.0000 2.2000 0.1400 0.8500 TW 0.5980 0.7000 0.2780 0.1520 0.2620 0.1280 0.2500 3.4000 0.6400 1.0000 0.1860 0.3720 TS 6.2000 6.6000 5.4000 1.8000 3.2000 0.6800 1.0000 6.8000 7.0000 5.6000 1.0000 5.0000 SBA 1.0000 4.6000 2.0000 0.1820 0.4000 0.2240 0.6660 5.4000 1.6000 3.0000 0.2000 1.0000 Sum 30.3380 52.4000 27.5120 6.2240 9.0920 4.9660 14.5980 60.2000 36.2100 41.9460 6.9540 25.5300Industry 5.0 23
Table 1.5 Normalized pairwise comparison matrix for employee readiness
ACW ATD CS CDM CLD CIPS ET FF SA TW TS SBA
Prioritized 
vector (PV) Rank
ACW 0.03296 0.12595 0.03635 0.02539 0.04048 0.03061 0.02726 0.08970 0.02762 0.05245 0.02358 0.03917 0.04596 8
ATD 0.00501 0.01908 0.01025 0.02924 0.01738 0.03182 0.01247 0.02658 0.00608 0.03814 0.02186 0.00862 0.01888 11
CS 0.03296 0.06870 0.03635 0.03535 0.03102 0.03061 0.04795 0.10963 0.02762 0.09059 0.02703 0.01958 0.04645 7
CDM 0.21096 0.10687 0.16720 0.16067 0.10999 0.20137 0.27401 0.12625 0.18227 0.15735 0.10526 0.21935 0.16846 3
CLD 0.11866 0.12214 0.13085 0.16067 0.10999 0.20137 0.06850 0.11628 0.09942 0.09536 0.06327 0.13318 0.11831 4
CIPS 0.21755 0.12214 0.23990 0.16067 0.10999 0.20137 0.34251 0.10963 0.23750 0.18119 0.37389 0.21935 0.20964 1
ET 0.08570 0.10687 0.05816 0.04017 0.10999 0.04027 0.06850 0.09302 0.12704 0.09536 0.14380 0.07051 0.08662 5
FF 0.00620 0.01336 0.00552 0.02057 0.01540 0.03182 0.01247 0.01661 0.00967 0.00825 0.02186 0.00736 0.01409 12
SA 0.03296 0.08779 0.03635 0.02442 0.03102 0.02296 0.01507 0.05316 0.02762 0.05245 0.02013 0.03329 0.03643 9
TW 0.01971 0.01336 0.01010 0.02442 0.02882 0.02578 0.01713 0.05648 0.01767 0.02384 0.02675 0.01457 0.02322 10
TS 0.20436 0.12595 0.19628 0.28920 0.35196 0.13693 0.06850 0.11296 0.19332 0.13350 0.14380 0.19585 0.17938 2
SBA 0.03296 0.08779 0.07270 0.02924 0.04399 0.04511 0.04562 0.08970 0.04419 0.07152 0.02876 0.03917 0.05256 6
1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.0000024 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0 Table 1.6 Reliability test matrix for employee readiness ACW ATD CS CDM CLD CIPS ET FF SA TW TS SBA PV Weighted vector Eigenvalue ACW 1.0000 6.6000 1.0000 0.1580 0.3680 0.1520 0.3980 5.4000 1.0000 2.2000 0.1640 1.0000 0.04596 0.599 13.035 ATD 0.1520 1.0000 0.2820 0.1820 0.1580 0.1580 0.1820 1.6000 0.2200 1.6000 0.1520 0.2200 0.01888 0.244 12.912 CS 1.0000 3.6000 1.0000 0.2200 0.2820 0.1520 0.7000 6.6000 1.0000 3.8000 0.1880 0.5000 0.04645 0.601 12.938 CDM 6.4000 5.6000 4.6000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 4.0000 7.6000 6.6000 6.6000 0.7320 5.6000 0.16846 2.383 14.145 CLD 3.6000 6.4000 3.6000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 7.0000 3.6000 4.0000 0.4400 3.4000 0.11831 1.617 13.666 CIPS 6.6000 6.4000 6.6000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 5.0000 6.6000 8.6000 7.6000 2.6000 5.6000 0.20964 3.004 14.328 ET 2.6000 5.6000 1.6000 0.2500 1.0000 0.2000 1.0000 5.6000 4.6000 4.0000 1.0000 1.8000 0.08662 1.202 13.876 FF 0.1880 0.7000 0.1520 0.1280 0.1400 0.1580 0.1820 1.0000 0.3500 0.3460 0.1520 0.1880 0.01409 0.188 13.340 SA 1.0000 4.6000 1.0000 0.1520 0.2820 0.1140 0.2200 3.2000 1.0000 2.2000 0.1400 0.8500 0.03643 0.484 13.272 TW 0.5980 0.7000 0.2780 0.1520 0.2620 0.1280 0.2500 3.4000 0.6400 1.0000 0.1860 0.3720 0.02322 0.306 13.182 TS 6.2000 6.6000 5.4000 1.8000 3.2000 0.6800 1.0000 6.8000 7.0000 5.6000 1.0000 5.0000 0.17938 2.494 13.905 SBA 1.0000 4.6000 2.0000 0.1820 0.4000 0.2240 0.6660 5.4000 1.6000 3.0000 0.2000 1.0000 0.05256 0.701 13.333 Average Lambda = 13.494 N = 12 Consistency Index = 0.136 Random Index = 1.54 Consistency Ratio = 0.088Industry 5.0 25
Again, the second AHP model for the factor ‘HR as a Change Agent’ is 
given in Table 1.8. It can be observed that ‘Managing Employee Psychological 
Issues’ and ‘Safety Policies’ are the two most important aspects that human 
resource management needs to focus on a priority basis. Out of eight differ￾ent elements recognized in the literature review, employee psychology is 
going to be affected very severely due to a fully automated robotic and AI￾driven workplace (Ljungholm, 2022). The psychological aspects may create 
unnecessary havoc and stress among the employees due to work-related 
uncertainties. The lack of clarity about future developments, particularly in 
relation to the evolving role of automation and robotics, leaves many 
employees feeling uncertain and insecure. It is imperative to promptly 
address these concerns to foster a conducive work environment that pro￾motes productivity and well-being among employees. The second most 
important aspect of the ‘safety policy’ is a matter of concern when more 
machines are working and communicating with each other in a manufactur￾ing facility. The more the number of machines, the more stringent the safety 
measures should be. Therefore, Industry 5.0 should also focus on safety 
measures to ensure harmony in the co-bot workplace. On the other hand, 
the least preferred elements that the HR needs to focus on are ‘Job Design’ 
and ‘Training and Development’ which were ranked seven and eight, respec￾tively. A few studies on Industry 5.0 stressed the importance of job design 
and training and development as they are important to select the right can￾didate and induce the required skill and expertise to perform well (Cillo 
et al., 2022; Longo et al., 2020; Lu et al., 2022). However, in Industry 5.0, 
the situation is completely different where job design and training and 
development are given the least priority because robots and AI are going to 
be doing more than 50% of the routine work of any organization. At the 
same time, these HR activities in an organization can also be managed well 
by robots with AI technology (Arslan et al., 2022; Vrontis et al., 2022). For 
this AHP result, we can see the reliability measures given in Table 1.9, where 
Table 1.7 Average responses of pairwise comparison matrix for HR as a change agent
JD PM MFC RP SP TAD TB MESI
JD 1.0000 0.8400 0.2240 0.8660 0.1760 0.7660 1.4400 0.1760
PM 1.0000 1.0000 0.1800 0.7075 0.1400 2.5000 1.2275 0.2050
MFC 5.2500 5.7500 1.0000 4.0000 2.0000 5.2500 6.2500 1.0000
RP 1.0000 1.7500 0.2575 1.0000 0.2025 1.7500 1.0000 0.1425
SP 5.7500 7.0000 0.8000 5.2500 1.0000 5.7500 6.2500 1.2575
TAD 1.2500 0.6250 0.1975 0.7075 0.1775 1.0000 0.3725 0.1775
TB 1.1650 2.5625 0.1650 1.0000 0.1625 2.7500 1.0000 0.1775
MESI 5.5000 5.0000 1.0000 7.0000 2.5625 5.7500 5.7500 1.0000
Sum 21.9150 24.5275 3.8240 20.5310 6.4210 25.5160 23.2900 4.136026 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0 Table 1.8 Normalized pairwise comparison matrix for HR as a change agent JD PM MFC RP SP TAD TB MESI Prioritized vector (PV) Rank JD 0.04563 0.03425 0.05858 0.04218 0.02741 0.03002 0.06183 0.04255 0.04281 7 PM 0.04563 0.04077 0.04707 0.03446 0.02180 0.09798 0.05271 0.04956 0.04875 6 MFC 0.23956 0.23443 0.26151 0.19483 0.31148 0.20575 0.26836 0.24178 0.24471 3 RP 0.04563 0.07135 0.06734 0.04871 0.03154 0.06858 0.04294 0.03445 0.05132 5 SP 0.26238 0.28539 0.20921 0.25571 0.15574 0.22535 0.26836 0.30404 0.24577 2 TAD 0.05704 0.02548 0.05165 0.03446 0.02764 0.03919 0.01599 0.04292 0.03680 8 TB 0.05316 0.10447 0.04315 0.04871 0.02531 0.10778 0.04294 0.04292 0.05855 4 MESI 0.25097 0.20385 0.26151 0.34095 0.39908 0.22535 0.24689 0.24178 0.27130 1 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000Industry 5.0 27
Table 1.9 Reliability test matrix for HR as a change agent
JD PM MFC RP SP TAD TB MESI PV Weighted vector Eigenvalue
JD 1.0000 0.8400 0.2240 0.8660 0.1760 0.7660 1.4400 0.1760 0.04281 0.387 9.029
PM 1.0000 1.0000 0.1800 0.7075 0.1400 2.5000 1.2275 0.2050 0.04875 0.426 8.735
MFC 5.2500 5.7500 1.0000 4.0000 2.0000 5.2500 6.2500 1.0000 0.24471 2.277 9.305
RP 1.0000 1.7500 0.2575 1.0000 0.2025 1.7500 1.0000 0.1425 0.05132 0.454 8.843
SP 5.7500 7.0000 0.8000 5.2500 1.0000 5.7500 6.2500 1.2575 0.24577 2.217 9.021
TAD 1.2500 0.6250 0.1975 0.7075 0.1775 1.0000 0.3725 0.1775 0.03680 0.319 8.669
TB 1.1650 2.5625 0.1650 1.0000 0.1625 2.7500 1.0000 0.1775 0.05855 0.514 8.784
MESI 5.5000 5.0000 1.0000 7.0000 2.5625 5.7500 5.7500 1.0000 0.27130 2.532 9.335
Average Lambda = 8.965
N = 8
Consistency Index = 0.138
Random Index = 1.400
Consistency Ratio = 0.09828 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
the consistency ratio is 0.0984 (or 9.84%), which is less than 0.10 (10%), 
indicating good consistency in the responses and results.
In Table 1.11, we can observe the ranking of the sub-criteria for the factor 
‘Technology Adaption Challenges’. ‘Integration of Human–Machine’ and 
‘Complex System Integration’ are the two major challenges that need to be 
addressed on a priority basis. In a co-bot workplace, integration of advanced 
technology with the existing operations that require complex integration of 
various systems, processes, and departments is a very critical task. Further, 
‘cybersecurity’ is the third important aspect and the proper adoption of 
which is critical for the sustainability of a co-bot workplace. With the 
increased use of technology, the risk of cyber-attacks, phishing, and many 
other unknown threats would increase. Therefore, integrating, updating, and 
protecting the technology can only ensure sustainability. Besides, the ‘integra￾tion of humans and machines’ is in fact a more important task and organiza￾tions need to make this possible on a priority basis. Better coexistence, 
communication, and collaboration are very important to building a sustain￾able co-bot work environment (Hanna et al., 2020; Jost et al., 2020). In the 
adaptability-related issues, the least preferred criteria are ‘Workforce Training’ 
and ‘Data Management and Analysis’ which are ranked seven and eight, 
respectively. These two elements are not very imperative to worry about since 
these jobs can be done easily with technology. Moreover, many companies 
are managing these two aspects very efficiently with the use of various 
advanced techniques. Some authors also highlighted that employee training 
and management of big data can easily be done with the use of cutting-edge 
database management techniques where they can use three-dimensional 
dummy models, virtual reality, and advanced database management software 
(Chiang et al., 2022; Ljungholm, 2022; Wellsandt et al., 2022). The reliability 
of AHP results for the factor ‘Technology Adaption Challenges’ is given in 
Table 1.12, where we can see the value of the consistency ratio is 0.0949 (or 
9.49%) which is within the acceptable limit of 0.10 (10%).
Table 1.10 Average responses of pairwise comparison matrix for technology 
adaption challenges
CSI COI CYS DMA IHM TL TI WT
CSI 1.0000 6.2000 1.8000 7.0000 0.3500 4.4000 2.0000 5.4000
COI 0.1640 1.0000 0.2620 4.2000 0.1360 1.0000 0.6660 2.8000
CYS 0.7320 4.0000 1.0000 5.0000 0.4320 4.8000 3.4000 6.6000
DMA 0.1400 0.2700 0.2080 1.0000 0.1520 0.2860 0.2020 2.0000
IHM 3.2000 7.2000 2.4000 6.6000 1.0000 4.6000 5.6000 9.0000
TL 0.2300 1.0000 0.2140 4.0000 0.2200 1.0000 0.4000 4.8000
TI 0.7400 1.8000 0.3500 5.2000 0.1820 2.8000 1.0000 5.8000
WT 0.1880 0.5560 0.1520 0.6320 0.1100 0.2140 0.1760 1.0000
Sum 6.3940 22.0260 6.3860 33.6320 2.5820 19.1000 13.4440 37.4000Industry 5.0 29
Table 1.11 Normalized pairwise comparison matrix of technology adaption challenges
CSI COI CYS DMA IHM TL TI WT Prioritized vector (PV) Rank
CSI 0.15640 0.28149 0.28187 0.20814 0.13555 0.23037 0.14877 0.14439 0.19837 2
COI 0.02565 0.04540 0.04103 0.12488 0.05267 0.05236 0.04954 0.07487 0.05830 6
CYS 0.11448 0.18160 0.15659 0.14867 0.16731 0.25131 0.25290 0.17647 0.18117 3
DMA 0.02190 0.01226 0.03257 0.02973 0.05887 0.01497 0.01503 0.05348 0.02985 7
IHM 0.50047 0.32689 0.37582 0.19624 0.38730 0.24084 0.41654 0.24064 0.33559 1
TL 0.03597 0.04540 0.03351 0.11893 0.08521 0.05236 0.02975 0.12834 0.06618 5
TI 0.11573 0.08172 0.05481 0.15461 0.07049 0.14660 0.07438 0.15508 0.10668 4
WT 0.02940 0.02524 0.02380 0.01879 0.04260 0.01120 0.01309 0.02674 0.02386 8
1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.00000 1.0000030 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0 Table 1.12 Reliability test matrix for technology adaption challenges CSI COI CYS DMA IHM TL TI WT PV Weighted vector Eigenvalue CSI 1.0000 6.2000 1.8000 7.0000 0.3500 4.4000 2.0000 5.4000 0.19837 1.846 9.305 COI 0.1640 1.0000 0.2620 4.2000 0.1360 1.0000 0.6660 2.8000 0.05830 0.513 8.805 CYS 0.7320 4.0000 1.0000 5.0000 0.4320 4.8000 3.4000 6.6000 0.18117 1.692 9.338 DMA 0.1400 0.2700 0.2080 1.0000 0.1520 0.2860 0.2020 2.0000 0.02985 0.250 8.384 IHM 3.2000 7.2000 2.4000 6.6000 1.0000 4.6000 5.6000 9.0000 0.33559 3.139 9.352 TL 0.2300 1.0000 0.2140 4.0000 0.2200 1.0000 0.4000 4.8000 0.06618 0.559 8.451 TI 0.7400 1.8000 0.3500 5.2000 0.1820 2.8000 1.0000 5.8000 0.10668 0.962 9.016 WT 0.1880 0.5560 0.1520 0.6320 0.1100 0.2140 0.1760 1.0000 0.02386 0.210 8.794 Average Lambda = 8.931 N = 8 Consistency Index = 0.133 Random Index = 1.4 Consistency Ratio = 0.095Industry 5.0 31
Table 1.13 The result of AHP priority ranking of individual elements under a factor and combined ranking
Factor Subfactor Local weight
Local 
rank Consistency
Combined 
weight Ranking
Employee 
Readiness
Adaptability to changing work environment (ACW) 0.04596 8 CI 0.1358 0.0153 9
Attention to detail (ATD) 0.01888 11 RI 1.54 0.0063 27
Communication skills (CS) 0.04645 7 CR 0.0882 0.0155 19
Complex decision-making ability (CDM) 0.16846 3 0.0562 9
Continuous learning and development (CLD) 0.11831 4 0.0394 10
Creativity and innovation in problem-solving (CIPS) 0.20964 1 0.0699 5
Education and training (ET) 0.08662 5 0.0289 12
Physical fitness (FF) 0.01409 12 0.0047 28
Safety awareness (SA) 0.03643 9 0.0121 23
Teamwork (TW) 0.02322 10 0.0077 26
Technical skills (TS) 0.17938 2 0.0598 8
Stress bearing ability (SBA) 0.05256 6 0.0175 16
HR as a 
Change 
Agent
Job design (JD) 0.04281 7 CI 0.1378 0.0143 21
Performance management (PM) 0.04875 6 RI 1.40 0.0162 18
Motivation for collaboration (MFC) 0.24471 3 CR 0.0984 0.0816 4
Recruitment process (RP) 0.05132 5 0.0171 17
Safety policies (SP) 0.24577 2 0.0819 3
Training and development (TAD) 0.03680 8 0.0123 22
Trust building (TB) 0.05855 4 0.0195 14
Managing Employee Psychological Issues (MESI) 0.27130 1 0.0904 2
(Continued)32 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0 Factor Subfactor Local weight Local rank Consistency Combined weight Ranking Technology Adaption Challenges Complex system integration (CSI) 0.19837 2 CI 0.1329 0.0661 6 Cost of implementation (COI) 0.05830 6 RI 1.40 0.0194 15 Cybersecurity (CYS) 0.18117 3 CR 0.0949 0.0604 7 Data management and analysis (DMA) 0.02985 7 0.0100 24 Integration of Human–Machine (IHM) 0.33559 1 0.1119 1 Technological literacy (TL) 0.06618 5 0.0221 13 Technology integration (TI) 0.10668 4 0.0356 11 Workforce training (WT) 0.02386 8 0.0080 25 Total 3 Table 1.13 (Continued ) The result of AHP priority ranking of individual elements under a factor and combined rankingIndustry 5.0 33
Table 1.13 presents a combined view of the individual ranking called the 
local ranking of the sub-criteria under each of the three variables and a uni￾versal ranking or ‘combined weight and ranking’ of all the criteria to find 
out which criteria are more important. It was observed that ‘Integration of 
Human–Machine’ under the ‘Technology Adaption Challenges’ factor is 
ranked one and supposed to be the most important element that needs pri￾mary focus followed by ‘Managing Employee Psychological Issues’ which is 
ranked second under the ‘HR as a Change Agent’ factor. The third and 
fourth important criteria ‘Safety Policies’ and ‘Motivation for Collaboration’, 
respectively, are again under the ‘HR as a Change Agent’ factor. The fifth￾ranked criteria ‘Creativity and Innovation to Problem Solving’ comes much 
after the adaptation-related challenges and HR preparedness. On the con￾trary, the least preferred criteria are ‘attention to detail’ and ‘physical fitness’ 
which are also the lowest locally ranked elements under the employee readi￾ness factor.
1.6 IMPLICATIONS AND LIMITATIONS
The study on employee readiness for co-bot workplaces has several implica￾tions for employees, organizations and HRM. By understanding the factors 
that influence employee readiness, organizations can take steps to ensure 
the successful integration of co-bots into the workplace. First of all, the 
study highlighted the importance of providing employees with what skills 
they need to develop in order to get employment and survive in a co-bot 
technology-driven economy. The study provides the employees with a list 
of qualities that need to be developed on a priority basis so that it will 
help save time and make them more apt for future-ready organizations in 
Industry 5.0. This will enable employees to gain confidence in working with 
co-bots and enhance their readiness.
Second, organizations need to communicate the potential advantages of 
co-bots, such as increased productivity, efficiency, and safety, to their 
employees. By doing so, employees are more likely to be receptive to the 
introduction of co-bots into their work environment. For HR managers, it 
is more important to understand the psychology of the employees so that 
their productivity can be ensured. Further, organizations need to address 
any concerns relating to both psychological issues and security-related 
aspects that may bother an employee while working with co-bots. Employees 
may be worried about job displacement or the loss of control over their 
work tasks. Organizations need to address these concerns and provide reas￾surance that the introduction of co-bots is not intended to replace human 
labour, but rather to augment it.
Third, the organizations which are entering into Industry 5.0 are going to 
face tremendous challenges while adopting new technology and coping with 
the changing work environment. The study also highlighted what the 34 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
adaptation-related challenges that an organization may face and be supposed 
to handle on a priority basis would help devise better strategies and save time 
in the adaptation process. Overall, the study highlights the importance of 
creating a work environment that supports employee readiness for co-bot 
workplaces. Organizations that take the necessary steps to ensure employee 
readiness will be better equipped to reap the benefits of co-bot technology 
and achieve greater efficiency and productivity. Moreover, by addressing 
these factors, organizations can maximize the benefits of co-bots while mini￾mizing potential risks and challenges associated with their introduction.
The study has also a few limitations, first, the sample size of the study is 
small, which could limit the generalizability of the observation. Second, the 
study only focussed on the manufacturing sector which limits the applicabil￾ity of the findings to the manufacturing sector only. Therefore, the selection 
of such sectors in further study may bring some novel outcomes. Third, the 
study did not take into account the contextual factors that could influence 
employee readiness for co-bot workplaces, such as the type of industry or 
the organizational culture which may impact results. Finally, Industry 5.0 is 
in the budding stage so, it is very difficult to list the factors that affect an 
employee’s preparedness and the organization’s preparedness for such a 
radical change, thus, the results may not have long-term applicability.
1.7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
In conclusion, employee readiness along with the role of human resource 
management and the adaptation-related challenges are very crucial for the 
successful integration of co-bots into the workplace. As per the findings 
of the study, in order to ensure employee collaboration with robots, orga￾nizations should invest more time and effort in understanding employee 
psychology, motivating them while ensuring safety, by promoting a posi￾tive organizational culture that values innovation and collaboration. On 
the other hand, the survival of an employee necessitates the acquisition of 
certain qualities on a priority basis including innovation and creativity in 
problem-solving, technical skill, complex decision-making ability along 
with an attitude of continuous learning and development. Further, it was 
observed that organizations may also face adaptation-related challenges 
that need to be addressed first, including proper integration of humans and 
machines, complex system integration, and good cybersecurity. By doing 
so, organizations can maximize the benefits of co-bots, including increased 
productivity, efficiency, and safety, while creating a positive and inclusive 
work environment that supports employee well-being and job satisfaction.
Future research could involve longitudinal studies that track changes in 
employee attitudes and behaviours over time, providing insights into the 
factors that influence employee readiness in the long term. Second, the study 
can be extended to different other sectors, for instance, the healthcare sector, Industry 5.0 35
research and development organizations, and services sector where many 
jobs presently performed by humans may be taken over by robots with 
Industry 5.0. Third, to gain a better understanding of the factors that influ￾ence employee readiness for co-bot workplaces, comparative studies could 
be conducted across different industries, organizations, and countries. This 
would allow researchers to identify commonalities and differences in 
employee attitudes and behaviours and to develop strategies that are tai￾lored to specific contexts. Fourth, employee readiness for co-bot workplaces 
is a complex phenomenon that involves factors related to technology, psy￾chology, and organizational behaviour. Future research could involve multi￾disciplinary studies that bring together experts from different fields to 
develop a more comprehensive understanding of the phenomenon. Finally, 
employee readiness for co-bot workplaces is a complex phenomenon that 
involves factors related to technology, psychology, and organizational 
behaviour. Future research could involve multidisciplinary studies that bring 
together experts from different fields to develop a more comprehensive 
understanding of the phenomenon.
NOTE
1 To engage in biological investigations, especially superficially or amateurishly.
REFERENCES
Aaltonen, I., & Salmi, T. (2019). Experiences and expectations of collaborative 
robots in industry and academia: Barriers and development needs. Procedia 
Manufacturing, 38, 1151–1158.
Agarwal, N., & Chauhan, S. (2022). Amplifying employability skills to create co￾working space for human and cobots in the E-Commerce industry. Procedia 
Computer Science, 214, 1040–1048.
Arslan, A., Cooper, C., Khan, Z., Golgeci, I., & Ali, I. (2022). Artificial intelligence 
and human workers interaction at team level: A conceptual assessment of the chal￾lenges and potential HRM strategies. International Journal of Manpower, 43(1), 
75–88.
Batth, R. S., Nayyar, A., & Nagpal, A. (2018). Internet of robotic things: Driving 
intelligent robotics of future-concept, architecture, applications and technologies. 
2018 4th International Conference on Computing Sciences (ICCS),
Bhutta, K. S., & Huq, F. (2002). Supplier selection problem: A comparison of the 
total cost of ownership and analytic hierarchy process approaches. Supply Chain 
Management: An International Journal, 7(3), 126–135. https://doi.org/10.1108/
13598540210436586
Bi, Z. M., Luo, C., Miao, Z., Zhang, B., Zhang, W., & Wang, L. (2021). Safety assur￾ance mechanisms of collaborative robotic systems in manufacturing. Robotics 
and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 67, 102022. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.rcim.2020.10202236 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Breque, M., De Nul, L., & Petridis, A. (2021). Industry 5.0: Towards a sustain￾able, human-centric and resilient European industry. Publications Office of the 
European Union. https://doi.org/doi/10.2777/308407
Briggs, G., & Scheutz, M. (2014). How robots can affect human behavior: 
Investigating the effects of robotic displays of protest and distress. International 
Journal of Social Robotics, 6, 343–355.
Buchner, R., Wurhofer, D., Weiss, A., & Tscheligi, M. (2013). Robots in time: How 
user experience in human-robot interaction changes over time. Social Robotics: 
5th International Conference, ICSR 2013, Bristol, UK, October 27–29, 2013, 
Proceedings 5,
Calitz, A. P., Poisat, P., & Cullen, M. (2017). The future African workplace: The 
use of collaborative robots in manufacturing. SA Journal of Human Resource 
Management, 15(1), 1–11.
Cassioli, F., Fronda, G., & Balconi, M. (2021). Human–co-bot interaction and 
neuroergonomics: Co-botic vs. robotic systems. Frontiers in Robotics and AI, 8, 
659319. https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2021.659319
Cheon, E., Schneiders, E., & Skov, M. B. (2022). Working with bounded collabo￾ration: A qualitative study on how collaboration is co-constructed around col￾laborative robots in industry. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer 
Interaction, 6(CSCW2), 1–34.
Chiang, F.-K., Shang, X., & Qiao, L. (2022). Augmented reality in vocational train￾ing: A systematic review of research and applications. Computers in Human 
Behavior, 129, 107125.
Choi, T. M., Kumar, S., Yue, X., & Chan, H. L. (2022). Disruptive technologies 
and operations management in the Industry 4.0 era and beyond. Production and 
Operations Management, 31(1), 9–31.
Cillo, V., Gregori, G. L., Daniele, L. M., Caputo, F., & Bitbol-Saba, N. (2022). 
Rethinking companies’ culture through knowledge management lens during 
Industry 5.0 transition. Journal of Knowledge Management, 26(10), 2485–2498.
Culot, G., Orzes, G., & Sartor, M. (2020). The 4.0 industrial revolution. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 226, 107617.
Dalenogare, L. S., Benitez, G. B., Ayala, N. F., & Frank, A. G. (2018). The expected 
contribution of Industry 4.0 technologies for industrial performance. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 204, 383–394.
Davies, R. S. (2011). Understanding technology literacy: A framework for evaluating 
educational technology integration. TechTrends, 55, 45–52.
Demir, K. A., Döven, G., & Sezen, B. (2019). Industry 5.0 and human-robot co￾working. Procedia Computer Science, 158, 688–695.
Doyle-Kent, M., & Shanahan, B. W. (2022). The development of a novel educational 
model to successfully upskill technical workers for Industry 5.0: Ireland a case 
study. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 55(39), 425–430.
Dwivedi, A., Agrawal, D., Jha, A., & Mathiyazhagan, K. (2023). Studying the inter￾actions among Industry 5.0 and circular supply chain: Towards attaining sustain￾able development. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 176, 108927.
Elvis, M., & Milligan, T. (2019). How much of the solar system should we leave as 
wilderness? Acta Astronautica, 162, 574–580.
EunJeong, C., Eike, S., Kristina, D., & Mikael, B. S. (2022). Robots as a Place 
for Socializing: Influences of Collaborative Robots on Social Dynamics In- and Industry 5.0 37
Outside the Production Cells. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer 
Interaction, 6(CSCW2), Article 457. https://doi.org/10.1145/3555558
Frey, C. B., & Osborne, M. A. (2013). The future of employment: How susceptible 
are jobs to computerisation. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 114, 
254–280.
Ghobakhloo, M. (2020). Industry 4.0, digitization, and opportunities for sustain￾ability. Journal of Cleaner Production, 252, 119869.
Hafeez, K., Zhang, Y., & Malak, N. (2002). Determining key capabilities of a firm 
using analytic hierarchy process. International Journal of Production Economics, 
76(1), 39–51.
Hammershøj, L. G. (2019). The new division of labor between human and machine 
and its educational implications. Technology in Society, 59, 101142.
Hanna, A., Bengtsson, K., Götvall, P.-L., & Ekström, M. (2020). Towards safe 
human robot collaboration-Risk assessment of intelligent automation. 2020 
25th IEEE International Conference on Emerging Technologies and Factory 
Automation (ETFA), Vienna, Austria, 2020, pp. 424–431. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ETFA46521.2020.9212127
Huang, S., Wang, B., Li, X., Zheng, P., Mourtzis, D., & Wang, L. (2022). Industry 
5.0 and Society 5.0—Comparison, complementation and co-evolution. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 64, 424–428.
Işcan, E. (2021). An old problem in the new era: Effects of artificial intelligence to 
unemployment on the way to Industry 5.0. Yaşar Üniversitesi E-Dergisi, 16(61), 
77–94.
Jafari, N., Azarian, M., & Yu, H. (2022). Moving from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0: 
What are the implications for smart logistics? Logistics, 6(2), 26.
Jost, C., Le Pévédic, B., Belpaeme, T., Bethel, C., Chrysostomou, D., Crook, N., 
Grandgeorge, M., & Mirnig, N. (2020). Human-robot interaction. Springer.
Kildal, J., Molina, J., & Andrés, U. (2022). User-centred human-robot collabora￾tive handling of small parts in a MIM process. In M. Shafik and K. Case (Eds.), 
Advances in manufacturing technology XXXV (pp. 113–118). IOS Press. https://
doi.org/10.3233/ATDE220576
Kristal, T. (2020). Why has computerization increased wage inequality? Information, 
occupational structural power, and wage inequality. Work and Occupations, 47(4), 
466–503.
Kumar, A., & Nayyar, A. (2020). si 3-Industry: A sustainable, intelligent, innovative, 
internet-of-things industry. In Nayyar, A., Kumar, A. (eds) A roadmap to Industry 
4.0: Smart production, sharp business and sustainable development (pp. 1–21). 
Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14544-6_1
Kwanya, T. (2023). Working with robots as colleagues: Kenyan perspectives of eth￾ical concerns on possible integration of co-bots in workplaces. In Responsible 
AI in Africa: Challenges and opportunities (pp. 65–99). Springer International 
Publishing Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-08215-3_4
Lachvajderová, L., & Kádárová, J. (2022). Industry 4.0 Implementation and Industry 
5.0 Readiness in Industrial Enterprises. Management and Production Engineering 
Review, 13(3), 102–109. https://doi.org/10.24425/mper.2022.142387
Lambrechts, W., Klaver, J. S., Koudijzer, L., & Semeijn, J. (2021). Human factors influ￾encing the implementation of Cobots in high volume distribution centres. Logistics, 
5(2), 32.38 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Leng, J., Chen, Z., Huang, Z., Zhu, X., Su, H., Lin, Z., & Zhang, D. (2022). Secure 
blockchain middleware for decentralized IIoT towards Industry 5.0: A review of 
architecture, enablers, challenges, and directions. Machines, 10(10), 858.
Leopold, T. A., Ratcheva, V., Zahidi, S., & Samans, R. (2017). The future of jobs and 
skills in Africa: Preparing the region for the fourth industrial revolution. World 
Economic Forum.
Ljungholm, D. P. (2022). Metaverse-based 3D visual modeling, virtual reality 
training experiences, and wearable biological measuring devices in immersive 
workplaces. Psychosociological Issues in Human Resource Management, 10(1), 
64–77.
Longo, F., Padovano, A., & Umbrello, S. (2020). Value-oriented and ethical technol￾ogy engineering in industry 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design of the 
factory of the future. Applied Sciences, 10(12), 4182.
Lu, Y., Zheng, H., Chand, S., Xia, W., Liu, Z., Xu, X., Wang, L., Qin, Z., & Bao, J. 
(2022). Outlook on human-centric manufacturing towards Industry 5.0. Journal 
of Manufacturing Systems, 62, 612–627.
Maddikunta, P. K. R., Pham, Q.-V., Prabadevi, B., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T. 
R., Ruby, R., & Liyanage, M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technolo￾gies and potential applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26, 
100257.
Maharana, N. (2020). Entrepreneurial Lessons from the Bhagavad Gita. 
PURUSHARTHA-A journal of …. http://journals.smsvaranasi.com/index.php/
purushartha/article/view/822
Martynov, V. V., Shavaleeva, D. N., & Zaytseva, A. A. (2019). Information technol￾ogy as the basis for transformation into a digital society and industry 5.0. 2019 
International Conference” Quality Management, Transport and Information Security, 
Information Technologies”(IT&QM&IS), Sochi, Russia, 2019, pp. 539–543. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ITQMIS.2019.8928305
Matheson, E., Minto, R., Zampieri, E. G., Faccio, M., & Rosati, G. (2019). Human–
robot collaboration in manufacturing applications: A review. Robotics, 8(4), 100.
Mattioli, G., Roberts, C., Steinberger, J. K., & Brown, A. (2020). The political econ￾omy of car dependence: A systems of provision approach. Energy Research & 
Social Science, 66, 101486.
Millet, I., & Saaty, T. L. (2000). On the relativity of relative measures–accommodat￾ing both rank preservation and rank reversals in the AHP. European Journal of 
Operational Research, 121(1), 205–212.
Min, J., Kim, Y., Lee, S., Jang, T.-W., Kim, I., & Song, J. (2019). The fourth industrial 
revolution and its impact on occupational health and safety, worker’s compensa￾tion and labor conditions. Safety and Health at Work, 10(4), 400–408.
Nayyar, A., & Kumar, A. (2020). A roadmap to industry 4.0: Smart production, 
sharp business and sustainable development. Springer.
Nayyar, A., Rameshwar, R., & Solanki, A. (2020). Internet of Things (IoT) and the 
digital business environment: A standpoint inclusive cyber space, cyber crimes, 
and cybersecurity. In The evolution of business in the cyber age (pp. 111–152). 
Apple Academic Press.
Orlova, E. V. (2021). Design of personal trajectories for employees’ professional 
development in the knowledge society under Industry 5.0. Social Sciences, 10(11), 
427.
Østergaard, E. H. (2018). Welcome to industry 5.0. Retrieved Febr, 5, 2020.Industry 5.0 39
Özsungur, F. (2021). Business management and strategy in cybersecurity for digi￾tal transformation. In K. Sandhu (Ed.), Handbook of research on advancing 
cybersecurity for digital transformation (pp. 144–162). IGI Global. https://doi.
org/10.4018/978-1-7998-6975-7.ch008
Paschek, D., Luminosu, C.-T., & Ocakci, E. (2022). Industry 5.0 challenges and 
perspectives for manufacturing systems in the Society 5.0. Sustainability and 
Innovation in Manufacturing Enterprises: Indicators, Models and Assessment for 
Industry 5.0, 17–63.
Pettersen, L. (2019). Why artificial intelligence will not outsmart complex knowl￾edge work. Work, Employment and Society, 33(6), 1058–1067.
Piçarra, N., & Giger, J.-C. (2018). Predicting intention to work with social robots 
at anticipation stage: Assessing the role of behavioral desire and anticipated emo￾tions. Computers in Human Behavior, 86, 129–146.
Pizoń, J., & Gola, A. (2023). Human–machine relationship—Perspective and future 
roadmap for Industry 5.0 solutions. Machines, 11(2), 203.
Romero, D., & Stahre, J. (2021). Towards the resilient operator 5.0: The future of 
work in smart resilient manufacturing systems. Procedia CIRP, 104, 1089–1094.
Saaty, T. (1980). The analytic hierarchy process (AHP) for decision making. Japan: 
Kobe.
Sahoo, K. S., Tiwary, M., Luhach, A. K., Nayyar, A., Choo, K.-K. R., & Bilal, M. 
(2021). Demand–Supply-based economic model for resource provisioning in 
industrial IoT traffic. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 9(13), 10529–10538.
Saighal, B., Bhat, M., & Gupta, A. (2015). Analytical study: Workplace environ￾ment in IT companies and ranking of companies using AHP–topsis method. IOSR 
Journal of Business and Management (IOSR-JBM), 17(5), 11–22. https://doi.
org/10.9790/487X-17511122
Schrum, M. L., Neville, G., Johnson, M., Moorman, N., Paleja, R., Feigh, K. M., 
& Gombolay, M. C. (2021). Effects of social factors and team dynamics on 
adoption of collaborative robot autonomy. Proceedings of the 2021 ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI ‘21). Association 
for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, pp. 149–157. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3434073.3444649
Schütte, G. (2018). What kind of innovation policy does the bioeconomy need? New 
Biotechnology, 40, 82–86.
Senna, P. P. (2022). Policies for the digital era: Digital technology adoption, 
Implementation and the Role of Governments.
Sherwani, F., Asad, M. M., & Ibrahim, B. S. K. K. (2020). Collaborative robots 
and industrial revolution 4.0 (ir 4.0). 2020 International Conference on Emerging 
Trends in Smart Technologies (ICETST).
Shirokii, V., Batusov, R., Chubarov, A., Dolenko, S., & Samsonovich, A. (2018). 
Patterns of cognitive activity in a human vs collaborative robot interactive game. 
Procedia Computer Science, 145, 495–499.
Simões, A. C., Pinto, A., Santos, J., Pinheiro, S., & Romero, D. (2022). Designing 
human-robot collaboration (HRC) workspaces in industrial settings: A system￾atic literature review. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 62, 28–43. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.11.007
Smids, J., Nyholm, S., & Berkers, H. (2020). Robots in the workplace: A threat 
to—or opportunity for—meaningful work? Philosophy & Technology, 33(3), 
503–522.40 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Solanki, A., & Nayyar, A. (2019). Green internet of things (G-IoT): ICT technol￾ogies, principles, applications, projects, and challenges. In G. Kaur & P. Tomar 
(Eds.), Handbook of research on big data and the IoT (pp. 379–405). IGI Global. 
https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-5225-7432-3.ch021
Spencer, D. A. (2018). Fear and hope in an age of mass automation: Debating the 
future of work. New Technology, Work and Employment, 33(1), 1–12. https://doi.
org/10.1111/ntwe.12105
Tamers, S. L., Streit, J., Pana-Cryan, R., Ray, T., Syron, L., Flynn, M. A., Castillo, D., 
Roth, G., Geraci, C., & Guerin, R. (2020). Envisioning the future of work to safe￾guard the safety, health, and well-being of the workforce: A perspective from the 
CDC’s National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health. American Journal 
of Industrial Medicine, 63(12), 1065–1084. https://doi.org/10.1002/ajim.23183
Venaik, A., Jain, S., & Nayyar, A. (2023). Industry 4.0—Its Advancement and Effects 
on Security of Whistle-Blowers on Dark Web. In Singh, G., Goel, R., & Garg, V. 
(eds) Industry 4.0 and the Digital Transformation of International Business (pp. 
103–121). Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-7880-7_6
Vermeulen, B., Kesselhut, J., Pyka, A., & Saviotti, P. P. (2018). The impact of automa￾tion on employment: Just the usual structural change? Sustainability, 10(5), 1661. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/su10051661
Vrontis, D., Christofi, M., Pereira, V., Tarba, S., Makrides, A., & Trichina, E. (2022). 
Artificial intelligence, robotics, advanced technologies and human resource man￾agement: A systematic review. The International Journal of Human Resource 
Management, 33(6), 1237–1266. https://doi.org/10.1080/09585192.2020.
1871398
Wellsandt, S., Klein, K., Hribernik, K., Lewandowski, M., Bousdekis, A., Mentzas, 
G., & Thoben, K.-D. (2022). Hybrid-augmented intelligence in predictive main￾tenance with digital intelligent assistants. Annual Reviews in Control, 53(2022), 
382–390. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.arcontrol.2022.04.001DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-2 41
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Industrial Revolution refers to the historical period in which there is a signif￾icant shift in the way goods are produced and services are delivered. There 
have been five distinct phases of the Industrial Revolution, each with its 
own unique characteristics and technological advancements. Industry 5.0 
sets the stage when Industry 4.0 is still at large, establishing its popularity. 
Industry 5.0 is known more for its revolution in which consumers could sat￾isfy their requirements as per their tastes and expectations. In Industry 4.0, 
mass customization is achieved with the help of robots, while Industry 5.0 
aims for personalization with the help of artificial intelligence or AI (Demir 
and Cicibas, 2017). Industry 5.0 is expected to bring in a sea change in the 
production process. It provides higher autonomy to collaborative robots. It 
brings in more creativity and innovation in the production process by allow￾ing robots to perform repetitive tasks (Demir and Cicibaş, 2018). Industry 
5.0 is futuristic in nature, bringing creativity and innovation to the produc￾tion process through the creative intellectual ability of humans in the most 
optimized manner (Demir et al., 2019b). Industry 5.0 is the trend of mov￾ing from mass production to custom manufacturing and techniques, where 
the production system is moving from digitalization to intelligentization 
(Vaidya et al., 2018).
Since the First Industrial Revolution, successive developments have led in 
manufacturing, from water and steam-driven devices to electrical and digi￾tal electronic production, making manufacturing processes more complex, 
automatic, and sustainable so that machines can be operated with simplicity, 
efficiency, and persistence (Qin et al., 2016). Technological advances in 
manufacturing processes fuel all Industrial revolutions. One of the critical 
things that can be noticed is the reduced timeline between the Second 
Industrial Revolution and the Third Industrial Revolution. Industry 4.0, is 
characterized by the integration of automation, data exchange, and other 
digital technologies into manufacturing processes (Dalenogare et al., 2018; 
Culot et al., 2020). Industry 5.0, on the other hand, is a concept that 
describes the next phase of industrial development. Industry 5.0 builds on 
Chapter 2
Automation and robotization
An aerial view of Industry 5.0 on employment 
and employees
Vrinda V. Nair
RV University, Bengaluru, India42 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
this foundation and emphasizes the importance of human collaboration and 
creativity in manufacturing. People nowadays need the human touch of 
mass personalization, so Industry 5.0 helps them change from mass manu￾facturing to mass personalization (Oks et al., 2022). Industry 5.0 is making 
mass customization a reality and, the fast advances in manufacturing tech￾niques, production system digitization, and intelligence are the needs of 
today’s sector (Vaidya et al., 2018). Industry 4.0 previously activated mass 
customization, which was not sufficient. For instance, type-1 diabetes is dif￾ficult to manage because people have distinct levels of metabolism and dis￾tinct dimensions with distinct skin thicknesses, behaviors, lifestyles, etc. 
Shift to industry 5.0 allows providing people with an application that fol￾lows their habits and routine, producing a diabetes control production 
method and eventually a lower, more discreet, and reliable device tailored to 
the person. The capacity to produce an Industry 5.0 method would there￾fore be totally life-changing in every aspect.
In Industry 4.0, CPPS (Cyber-Physical Production System) helps make 
intelligent decisions in “manufacturing things” through real-time communi￾cation and cooperation, enabling flexible production of personalized prod￾ucts at mass efficiency and augmenting high quality (Kachiche et al., 2023). 
AI uses various technological blends enabling software and machines to 
comprehend, sense, and act and also to learn operations done by human 
operations. This process enables the industrial production system to be 
more efficient and ensure more precision. “Artificial intelligence is not a sub￾stitute for human intelligence; it is a tool to amplify human creativity and 
ingenuity”, states Fei-Fei Li, Co-Director of the Stanford Institute for 
Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence.
AI can be applied in various industries, from healthcare to finance to 
manufacturing. Along with machine learning (ML), generative and discrimi￾native AI can bring massive value to technological advancement in both 
Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0. AI at this stage brings in a human-like level 
in software which raises the bar in the area of automation. This leads to a 
reduction in the need for manpower to evaluate information and helps in 
better decision-making in manufacturing and other sectors, reducing costs 
and improving productivity. Machine learning can help in guiding robotic 
operation which helps in better precision and better quality.
The Fifth Industrial Revolution (Industry 5.0) goes beyond jobs and 
growth. It aims to focus on achieving societal goals and expects to become 
a buoyant provider of prosperity. One of the agenda is to make the produc￾tion process respect the boundaries of the planet and place the well-being of 
the employees working in the organization as an essential criterion in the 
production process. Industry 4.0 focuses more on digitalization and AI￾driven technologies for increasing efficiency and allowing flexibility in the 
organization while Industry 5.0 focuses on the importance of research and 
innovation which helps and supports the industry in the long term and helps 
serve humanity and sustain planet boundaries (Dengler and Matthes, 2018). Automation and robotization 43
It is an “Age of Augmentation” where humans and machines reconcile and 
work in a symbiosis. AI can play a significant role in Industry 5.0 by helping 
to improve efficiency and productivity, but it is just one part of a larger shift 
toward more human-centered manufacturing processes. So, while they are 
related, AI and Industry 5.0 are not the same.
2.1.1 Evolution of Industry 5.0
The horse-drawn steam engine and horse wagon clamored out, moving into 
the reign of a motorized coach. To understand on which era of the industry 
we are currently in, let us understand the evolution of Industry 5.0.
Figure 2.1 highlights the evolution of Industry 5.0.
The First Industrial Revolution, also known as Industry 1.0, began in 
the late 18th century in Britain and lasted until the mid-19th cen￾tury. The period was marked by the introduction of steam power, the 
development of new textile machines, and the use of iron and coal as 
key raw materials. Factories were built and mass production methods 
were introduced, leading to significant increases in productivity and 
economic growth.
The Second Industrial Revolution, or Industry 2.0, occurred during the 
late 19th and early 20th centuries. This period was characterized by 
the widespread use of electricity and the development of new tech￾nologies such as the telephone, radio, and the internal combustion 
engine. Assembly lines and other mass production methods were fur￾ther refined, leading to even greater increases in productivity.
The Third Industrial Revolution, or Industry 3.0, took place during the 
late 20th century and was marked by the introduction of computer 
technology and automation computer/information revolution. This 
Figure 2.1 Evolution of Industry 5.0.44 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
led to the development of new manufacturing processes and the wide￾spread adoption of information technology, including the use of per￾sonal computers and the internet.
Industry 4.0 is the current phase of the industrial revolution and is char￾acterized by the integration of digital technologies such as artificial intel￾ligence, the Internet of Things (IoT), and robotics. These technologies are 
changing how we work and live, increasing efficiency, productivity, and 
innovation. Today, we use handheld devices that use large amounts of cloud 
computing, machine learning devices, and Big Data through 4G/5G to cloud 
infrastructure. These data derive analytics that the average human cannot 
produce. The machine learning models are presented to the user with mag￾ical accuracy and a shorter time. For example, the application or ability 
maps will help you to tell how long it will take to commute home if you 
leave 30–60 minutes in the future or suggest alternative routes when there is 
a traffic jam. These are specific examples of the convergence of technology 
and application of technology in Industry 5.0.
Industry 4.0 relies on various technologies like robotics/cobotics, the IoT, 
additive manufacturing, digital twinning, 3D printing, and analytics (Haleem 
and Javaid, 2019). A digital factory is a combination of intelligent instru￾mentation that watches and controls every aspect of production on one end 
and has minute data on material quality and millisecond updates on the 
machinery (Dalenogare et al., 2018). Beyond automation in manufacturing 
sectors, AI can be used for various purposes. It can aid in constructing digi￾tal twins, a mechanism for speeding up the product development cycle. It is 
widely used in Industrial IoT or IIoT infrastructure. A typical example of 
this is the filtering of event information both at the spot and predicting 
potential production problems based on sensor data. It can help identify 
unseen patterns in production and usage data which helps suggest design or 
process change.
Industry 5.0 is the next stage of the industrial revolution, and its main 
focus is on integrating human-centric approaches with advanced digital 
technologies. This includes using collaborative robots, augmented reality, 
and virtual reality to create a more seamless and interactive working envi￾ronment. The goal of Industry 5.0 is to create a more sustainable and inclu￾sive society by placing greater emphasis on human creativity and social 
responsibility Beier et al., 2020). The exponential advancement from 
Industry 4.0 to 5.0 has occurred quickly in one to two years. The differenti￾ating factor between 4.0 and 5.0 requires deliberate evaluation and is con￾fined to the given technology and capability area. An analysis done in the 
future may help in evaluating if we have moved from one industrial era to 
another especially from Industry 4.0 to 5.0. To make it concise, Industry 5.0 
is a combination of advanced 4.0 technologies that are assembled to create 
a digital assistant to support humans in various activities at the workplace.Automation and robotization 45
Unlike Industry 4.0, Industry 5.0 creates more skilled jobs as it requires 
intellectual professionals working with machines. In Industry 4.0, robots are 
actively engaged in large-scale production but Industry 5.0 focuses on mass 
customization and is designed for enhancing customer satisfaction. Humans 
will be guiding robots. Cyber-Physical System (CPS) connectivity is the main 
focus of Industry 4.0, whereas Industry 5.0 links the application of Industry 
4.0 to establish a relationship with collaborative robots (cobots). Industry 
5.0 focuses on greener and more sustainable solutions compared to existing 
industrial transformations which lack focus on protecting the natural envi￾ronment. The major aims of Industry 5.0 are to model and use predictive 
analytics and operating intelligence to create more accurate and unstable 
decisions for organizations. Industry 5.0 helps in obtaining real-time data 
through the process of production automation and collaborating with spe￾cialized and equipped human resources.
2.1.2 Objectives of the chapter
The objectives of the chapter are:
(1) To identify the various technology enablers for Industry 5.0;
(2) To explain the application of technologies (IoT, artificial intelligence, 
ML, and blockchain) at the workplace;
(3) To determine the effects of technology on the employee’s psychology 
at the workplace;
(4) And, to analyze the impact of technology on future employment and 
employees.
2.1.3 Organization of the chapter
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: Section 2.2 elaborates related 
terminologies. Section 2.3 stresses deep insights into Industry 5.0 specifying 
how technology enables Industry 4.0 and 4.0 applications and applications 
of technology in Industry 5.0. Section 2.4 signifies opportunities of Industry 
5.0. Section 2.5 highlights remonstrance under Industry 5.0. And, finally, 
Section 2.6 concludes the chapter.
2.2 RELATED TERMINOLOGIES
A theoretical framework enables to shape the contribution of the scholars. 
It provides a window to understanding relatively new issues highlighted by 
some scholars. There are many perspectives related to the future of work 
and a few of them are mentioned below (Kolade and Owoseni, 2022).46 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
2.2.1 Cyber-physical system (CPS)
CPS integrates the physical system with computer-based control and com￾munication systems. CPS adopts a close integration of advanced technolo￾gies like IoT, AI, and ML with traditional manufacturing processes to create 
a more efficient and flexible system of production. It is an engineered system 
that arrays sensing, computation, control, networking, and analysis to inter￾act with the physical world which includes humans. They enable a safe, real￾time, secure, resilient, adaptable, and reliable performance (Cropley, 2020). 
Figure 2.2 highlights CPS.
CPS processes manage and optimize physical outcomes from individual 
processes to entire eco systems. Examples include robotic arms, gas and oil 
processing technology, water purification systems, meat cutting, gain pro￾cessing, baggage handling, and building management systems.
2.2.2 Human-centric system (HCS)
The HCS model adopts a methodology of designing technologies and sys￾tems that are intuitive and user-friendly as mentioned in Figure 2.3. In the 
context of Industry 5.0, this model integrates advanced technologies that 
support and enhance human functions at the workplace rather than displac￾ing them. This model uses designing technologies that are human-friendly, 
provide timely feedback, and support decision-making in integrating a sus￾tainable model.
Figure 2.2 Cyber-physical system.Automation and robotization 47
2.2.3 Lean manufacturing perspective
Lean manufacturing is a methodology that focuses on eliminating waste 
in the production process. This perspective emphasizes the importance of 
integrating advanced technologies to streamline the manufacturing process 
and reduce waste. This includes designing flexible and agile systems, allow￾ing for quick adaptation to changing market demands. Figure 2.4 shows the 
lean manufacturing perspective.
2.2.4 Socio-technical systems
Kolade and Owoseni (2022) highlighted the gripping change at the work￾place and how technology is changing the needs of human factors (Kadir 
et al., 2019). It is defined as “the participative, multidisciplinary study and 
improvement of how jobs, single organisations, networks and ecosystem 
Figure 2.3 Human-centric system (HCS).
Figure 2.4 Lean manufacturing system.48 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
functions internally and externally in relation to their environment con￾text, with special focus on the mutual interactions of entity’s value cre￾ation process” (Davis et al., 2014). Figure 2.5 highlights the socio-technical 
system.
The assumption underlying the emergence of Industry 4.0 and Industry 
5.0 is that it will precipitate an increasing degree of automation that in turn 
would lead to less and less need for human interaction in the future of 
worker-less production (Mohr, 2016). However, the emergence of a new 
system will not reduce the need for human interaction but change how 
humans interact with computers – both at accomplishing the task or while 
using products and services in the future, as certain other scholars claim. 
Thus, socio-technical theory was proposed as a framework to analyze the 
complexity of the human and technical association and create performance 
(Sony and Naik, 2020, Beier et al., 2020).
This system is a six-dimensional structure comprising (1) People, (2) 
Infrastructure, (3) Technology, (4) Culture, (5) Process and Procedure, and 
(6) Goals. This offers an organizational-centric view of how these compo￾nents interact in a complex system. This approach is participative and multi￾disciplinary and improves how jobs function, organizations network and 
create an ecosystem that functions internally to meet the external environ￾ment with a focus on value creation. This perspective helps in analyzing tech￾nological innovation for organizations and also social innovation to optimize 
the benefits and to compact the possible side effects arising out of regulating 
growth. For example, the technological development around IoT has been 
significant in the last decade, equal importance should be given in terms of 
human components with reference to security, safety, and privacy. The 
dynamics and human–machine interaction in Industry 5.0 has led to changes 
in tasks and new profiles in skills leading to skill upgradation along with 
skills to use technology to communicate between humans, machines, and 
products. These include new communication roles to support the integration 
of customers with digital products, and more mentally resilient people 
who are doing less physical work (Fareri et al., 2020). In short, this approach 
Figure 2.5 Socio-technical system.Automation and robotization 49
provides information on employment challenges and opportunities and the 
guidelines to be made in an era of digital transformation (Cirillo et al., 2020).
2.2.5 Skill-based technology
Frey and Osborne (2017) explained how the swift adoption of computing 
technology changes the worker’s task and the demand for human skills. It 
maps the changes required in the skill profile in the current and future occu￾pation due to digital transformation. This theory is based on two related 
actualities: Computers are a substitution for workers following routine tasks 
and following certain explicit rules at work. Computers can complement 
workers involved in tasks with no explicit rules but require more flexibility 
and creativity. The framework classifies tasks into routine and non-routine 
time tasks and further classifies them into manual and non-manual, and 
cognitive and interactive tasks. The major challenge emerging in this context 
along with the productivity-enhancing mechanisms is the polarization and 
wage inequality across occupations and tasks (Dengler and Matthes (2018).
The skill-based model classifies the task into three categories: (1) percep￾tion and manipulation task, (2) creative intelligence, and (3) social intelli￾gence. While the perception and manipulation task requires manual and 
physical dexterity of fingers, in awkward positions, and in cramped work 
spaces, creative intelligence requires originality and the ability to come up 
with new or unusual ideas to solve problems at work. The examples range 
from fine arts to music, mainly composing, performing, visual arts, etc. 
Social intelligence comprises the art of negotiation, persuasion, and percep￾tiveness, among many others. In the era of automation, the perception and 
manipulation task fall under the high-risk category which can be easily sub￾stituted (Frey and Osborne, 2017). Tasks related to creative and social intel￾ligence are less likely to be substituted and replaced as they tend to be 
non-routine and less amenable to coding on computers. However, the pace 
of technological progress does indicate the risk factor and is not completely 
immune to replacement (Novakova, 2020). Sophisticated algorithms have 
emerged that use pattern recognition to do non-routine tasks and robots 
with enabled senses and adroitness. There is a proposal for routine-based 
technological change that distinguishes routines from skills which enable 
locating specific points and tasks even for low-skilled jobs where automa￾tion replacements are high (Fernández-Macías and Hurley, 2017).
Another modification of skill-based technological change (SBTC) is class￾based technological change (CBTC). In this model, computer-based technol￾ogy is used as a key driver that transforms work into an activity that is more 
knowledge-intensive (Caines et al., 2017). While SBTC focuses on produc￾tivity enhancement leading to job polarization and wage inequality across 
tasks and occupations, the CBTC model is focused on a power-enhancing 
mechanism explaining the occupations with respect to access, control, and 
information on the production process (Kristal, 2020).50 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
The SBTC framework states that occupational earning results from the 
social relationship among the occupations. It has posited a power struggle 
between occupation and education where education has failed to keep 
pace with the technology-driven skill requirement and this has resulted in 
higher wages only for selected more educated groups. According to this 
model, there are two powerful occupations that emerge (Abduljabbar et 
al., 2019). Computer programmers or information specialists who have 
expertise in technology reorganize, aggregate, and transfer knowledge to 
managers and engineers who are experts in translating, managing, and 
interpreting the data (Adel, 2022; Kristal, 2020; Tomaskovic-Devey and 
Avent-Holt, 2019).
2.2.6 The political economy of automation and 
transformation
Spencer (2017) enlightened the political and policy factors related to tech￾nology, ownership, the gig economy, and work-less future issues. Digital 
technology leads to unequal power between the capitalist and labor. The 
main objective of technological advancement is to create surplus value. In 
the process, human workers are either reduced, replaced, or pushed down in 
the ranking order in terms of wages and remuneration. On one side, there is 
a huge expansion in production and consumption, but on the other side, it 
is alienation and exploitation of the workforce. This perspective advocates 
collective ownership and looks at technology as a “Positive” force that helps 
liberate rather than enslave the workforce. Automation should be embraced 
willingly as a step toward better work and more leisure. There is a need 
for fundamental reforms, as the need for technological changes is empirical 
(Caines et al., 2017). It should move into a collectivist ownership rather 
than capital ownership. The future of work should be based on production, 
forms, and relationships based on a social context.
Hence, the possible Industrial 5.0 can be depicted as shown in Figure 2.6.
Figure 2.6 Critical factors for Industry 5.0.Automation and robotization 51
2.3 DEEP INSIGHT INTO INDUSTRY 5.0
Industry 5.0 is connected with three core values – human centricity, sustain￾ability, and resilience – as shown in Figure 2.7. The human-centric approach 
shows interest in putting humans at the center of the production process. 
The approach is to shift progress using technology for a human-centric and 
societal benefit. The new approach shifts the perception of industry work￾ers from “cost” to “investment” through new roles in the organization. 
Technology is seen as an enabler to serve people wherein there is a shift to a 
sustainable production process, which includes the diversity of the industry 
workers. The intention is to create a safe work environment with priority 
given to the physical and mental health of the employees, focusing on the 
employees’ holistic well-being. It is also essential to guard their fundamental 
rights, i.e., autonomy, human dignity, and privacy. Employees will have to 
keep reskilling and upskilling themselves to have better career opportunities 
and work–life balance (Garcia-Murillo et al., 2018).
2.3.1 Technology enablers of Industry 5.0
Various technologies that enable the implementation of Industry 5.0 are 
highlighted as follows:
1. Cloud Computing
This technology helps in the delivery of computing services that in￾clude databases, software, intelligence analytics, networks, and others. 
Cloud computing offers economies of scale and innovation efficiently. 
Figure 2.7 Industry 5.0 model.52 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Data is stored in remote servers. The internet is used to store, manage, 
and access data.
The industrial cloud is a virtual environment that provides a sup￾portive environment for industry applications, for example, IoT moni￾toring tools for mobile and web usage, and automating data normal￾ization from diverse production data sources. Autonomous robots and 
diverse robots are managed through these platforms. This helps de￾termine the machine defects or failures and mitigate them using more 
workforce (Bekey, 2005).
Scalable infrastructure to support data edge devices is provided by 
cloud computing. The IoT platforms are primarily supported by cloud 
computing. It is used in managing autonomous and diverse robots 
mainly deployed in shop floor plants of manufacturing companies.
2. Collaborative Robots
Industry 5.0 aims to provide a human touch in the production 
units for development. Collaborative robots represent a new age in 
robotics-aided production. Cobots are the technology that combines 
the innate ability of fine craftsmanship and creativity of people with 
high efficiency and consistency. Industry 5.0 focuses on highly skilled 
people along with robots to create individualized products ranging 
from smart devices to cars for consumers (Cormier et al., 2013). Ro￾bots accomplish heavy tasks while skilled humans provide the cogni￾tive skills of the craftsman (Adel, 2022). Robots help humans work 
better via IoT and thus increase automation and business efficiency. 
For example, it provides human operators the benefit of robots with 
more technical precision and heavy lifting abilities. Robots can be lev￾eraged using advanced technologies using the IoT. It uses a network 
of physical objects and things embedded with sensors, software, and 
other technologies (Bagdasarov et al., 2020). It helps in connecting 
and exchanging ideas using devices plus internet systems. IoT is an im￾portant component in a smart city. It enables IoT-incorporated home 
appliances, heating systems, and security systems for better comfort 
and reduced energy. Authentication and access control are issues in 
the IoT. It is a dynamic approach to data-centric applications using a 
cloud platform.
3. Big Data Analytics
Big Data analysis is an intricate procedure to examine Big Data to 
uncover certain trends, and hidden patterns using advanced analyti￾cal methods for decision-making processes. In Industry 5.0, Big Data 
plays a vital role. It helps in utilizing 3D symmetry in innovation 
ecosystem design. Big Data helps store massive amounts of data and 
processes through traditional methods. Technology helps in analyzing 
these data, which could be diverse, semi-structured unstructured data 
using innovative analytical methods and disseminating information Automation and robotization 53
that leverages a list of root causes and helps better decision-making. 
This lays the foundation for better customer experience and building 
strong customer relationships.
Huge data that is stored requires time and storage space. Big Data 
analytics bring value by helping disseminate the data for industries. 
This is mainly achieved through connecting with physical devices to 
the internet using novel technologies. This analyzed data helps in pro￾viding systematic guidance in manufacturing units, related to produc￾tion activities within the entire product life cycle, a process of cost￾efficient fault-free running of units, and helping in decision-making 
and solving problems related to the operation.
Big Data is running on information. For a better characterization, 
the dimension can be classified into Veracity, Vision, Volatility, Verifi￾cation, Validation, Variability, and Value. To explore data, advanced 
analytics is used, for example, machine learning and forecasting mod￾els. Knowledge is extracted, enabling manufacturers to understand 
the product life cycle allowing them to make rational, informed, and 
responsive decision-making. IoT converges with Big Data being an en￾abler for further growth.
4. Blockchain Technology
Complete information and data are stored in an immutable ledger 
which is decentralized and distributed containing a digital records 
ledger. Through blockchain, the members can access the data. This 
information includes orders, payments, and production information 
wherein the customers can track the information.
The blockchain is a digital ledger of any transaction or contract 
that must be recorded independently. This is encoded and dispersed 
across several hundred and thousands of computers which is distrust￾ed across various locations (Lage et al., 2022). The digital ledger is 
accessible across various locations and remains a critical feature of 
blockchain. This technology has disrupted the financial sector and un￾derpins the digital currency. Bitcoin is the finest example of the same.
This has become a boon to the financial sector. Using blockchain 
technology, the financial sector customers make transactions across the 
internet without any third-party interference. The transaction records 
are created and encrypted for security (Bhushan et al., 2021). This also 
reduces the possibility of data breaches. This advanced technology can 
potentially revolutionize various business sectors in the future.
2.3.2 Industry 4.0 and 5.0 applications
The usage of advanced technologies like AI, machine learning, and robotics 
is clearly visible in various retail, healthcare, finance, manufacturing, and 
other industries (Adel, 2022).54 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
2.3.2.1 AI and its applications in Industry 4.0
AI can be widely used in manufacturing in both Industry 4.0 and Industry 
5.0 environments. In the first product life phase of designing and prototyp￾ing, 3D printing, computer-controlled machining, or additive manufacturing 
is done using AI. Generative AI helps in optimizing the design and making it 
more efficient in terms of materials. For example, the cutting layout of cloth￾ing panels on the cloth’s bolts can be controlled and fabric waste minimized 
using AI (Zawacki-Richter et al., 2019).
In other manufacturing processes, the AI system helps incorporate sim￾plicity and optimize the number of parts required for a design (Muro et al., 
2019). For example, AI helps in concocting a design and speeds up produc￾tion by reducing the number of separate cuts in the making of a finished 
chair leg in an automatic lathe machine.
A few other uses of AI in factories are as follows:
• Use of generative AI by Nutella in designing packages for its products 
which run to millions
• 3D printing: In ADDMAN, hybrid modeling tools along with AI are 
used to design and prototype machine parts.
• Use of computerized numeric control machine tools by FANUC which 
learns from errors and improvises the control as they operate.
• In an oxygen-free environment or extreme temperature, where it is 
difficult for humans to be physically present, cobots are used for plant 
control in a production line.
• In 3B Fibreglass, AI monitors the performance of machinery by speed￾ing and slowing lines or operations based on real-time events.
• Finally, in BMW, to save time and energy, AI uses cameras and other 
sensors to review the product quality and material.
AI algorithms and techniques are dynamic and keep growing. Computing is 
available both on-site and in the cloud. The manufacturers are looking for effi￾ciency and responsiveness of these latest tools to compete in the business world. 
As new manufacturers emerge, old factories are retooling to cope with the 
advancement and hence AI will continue to expand from Industry 4.0 to 5.0.
2.3.3 Applications of technology in Industry 5.0
2.3.3.1 Healthcare
By 2023, AI had made considerable advances in the healthcare sectors, espe￾cially in the areas of diagnostics and personal medicine. It has helped accel￾erate the discovery of new drugs and has emerged as a new paradigm in 
telemedicine. Machine learning algorithms are used for early disease detec￾tion and accurate diagnoses. It has helped in personalized healthcare and 
treatment plans based on the unique genetic makeup of the patient.Automation and robotization 55
AI has also made a substantial impact through wearable devices and IoT￾enabled health monitoring systems. These technologies have enabled the 
collection of patient data like the heartbeat, blood pressure, and sugar levels 
to monitor and manage chronic medical conditions. Integration of AI into 
the healthcare sector is going to make a dynamic change in diagnosis and 
health management.
These advanced technologies using AI have created a significant impact in 
the area of mental improvement by creating accessible personalized support 
systems. Powered by natural language processing and machine learning, chat￾bots and virtual therapists can engage users in therapeutic conversations. 
This has become highly effective in alleviating symptoms of anxiety, depres￾sion, and other mental health issues especially during and post-COVID-19.
Big Data analytics helps healthcare providers with information related to 
patient care, treatment effectiveness, prediction of diseases, and effective 
resource allocation. Big Data is widely used in clinical trial optimizations, 
improving operational efficiencies in the hospital, drug discovery, and 
genomics research.
Blockchain technology helps to enhance the security, privacy, and interop￾erability of data related to healthcare. It enables the sharing of medical 
records, streamlining the claiming process, and managing the pharmaceuti￾cal supply chain effectively.
2.3.3.2 Smart hospital
Industry 5.0 has enabled the creation of real-time capability for smart hos￾pitals by providing remote monitoring systems using technology. Smart 
healthcare technologies enable doctors to monitor and focus on patients 
using efficient data and provide better treatment. It helps in providing cus￾tomized implants and performing surgery with more precision.
1. Early Detection of Sepsis: At Humber River Hospital in Toronto, 
Canada, the usage of AI-powered algorithms helps to identify early 
signs of sepsis, a potentially life-threatening infection. This system has 
led to a reduction in sepsis-related deaths by 25% and helped cut the 
average length of stay in the hospital by one day.
2. Image Analysis in Radiology: Mount Sinai Hospital in New York City 
uses AI systems to analyze breast cancer scans and detect malignancies 
wherein the accuracy is 94.5%. These processes are done by using AI 
to scan medical images such as X-rays, CT scans, and MRIs.
3. Predictive Analytics: By analyzing a large amount of patient data, patterns 
and predictions are made to identify patients with diabetes and heart dis￾ease. This also helps in predicting patient outcomes and readmission.
4. Personalized Treatment Plan: At Mayo Clinic, the researcher used an AI 
system to analyze the genetic data of patients, their medical history, and 
current symptoms to recommend targeted therapies for their cancer.56 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
5. Virtual Assistants for Patients: AI-powered virtual assistants such 
as chatbots help patients navigate the healthcare system and quick 
answers to their questions. The patients’ scheduled visits and remind￾ers for taking their prescriptions and keeping an eye on health-related 
activities are done through this technology. AI is specifically useful 
for old care. Virtual assistants help seniors in their daily routines. For 
instance, the virtual assistant greets an elderly person who says “Good 
Morning”, prompts them to take medicine and have breakfast, and 
reminds them of their health visits. This enables elderly users to take 
care of their activities and themselves independently. This virtual assis￾tant by having a conversation with these older users helps in alleviat￾ing loneliness to a large extent.
2.3.3.3 Manufacturing industry
Applications of AI in manufacturing range from quality control, predic￾tive maintenance, optimization, and supply chain to robotics. The usage of 
advanced algorithms helps in detecting quality issues in products while predic￾tive maintenance ensures minimizing equipment downtime. The supply chain 
can be optimized, allowing resource allocation more efficiently. Robotics 
helps increase productivity and precision in manufacturing processes.
Companies use digital twins by creating replicas of physical items, pro￾cesses, or systems virtually and these digital representations enable them to 
manage real-time through simulation, monitoring, and optimizing the per￾formance. These are specifically applicable to manufacturing industries.
Big Data helps optimize the production process, reduce downtime, minimize 
maintenance costs, and improve quality. It enables predictive maintenance, 
supply chain optimization, inventory management, and real-time monitoring.
Blockchain can enhance the security and interoperability of IoT devices. 
Provides a secure and authenticated decentralized communication and data 
exchange between devices in a network which is an essential requirement in 
an automated environment.
The manufacturing system is shifting in the era of Industry 5.0. The mun￾dane, repetitive tasks done by humans are getting automized (Autor et al., 
2003). It is a collaboration combining the accuracy of machines and human 
beings’ creative and innovative potential. Cloud-based platforms help in 
controlling manufacturing services and provide cost optimization.
A few of the industry-based applications are as follows:
1. General Electric: GE has implemented AI in its manufacturing plants 
to improve productivity and reduce costs and developed Brilliant 
Manufacturing which uses AI and machine learning to optimize pro￾duction processes, reducing waste and increasing efficiency. The system 
collects data from machines, sensors, and other resources to identify 
patterns and anomalies that could indicate problems or opportunities 
for improvement.Automation and robotization 57
2. BMW: BMW uses AI to improve its production line and streamline 
the manufacturing process and developed an AI system called BMW 
AI assistant which uses natural language processing to understand and 
respond to commands from workers. This system helps in optimiz￾ing production schedules and identifying potential bottlenecks in the 
manufacturing process.
3. Foxconn: A Taiwanese electronics manufacturer, has implemented AI 
and automation in its factories called Foxconn Intelligent Robotics 
Initiative which is mainly used to do repetitive tasks and improve 
productivity. They also use machine learning to optimize production 
schedules and to identify potential issues before they occur.
4. Intel: AI is implemented in the manufacturing process to improve 
product quality and reduce defects. The data generated from sensors 
and other sources are analyzed to identify patterns and anomalies that 
could indicate problems with a particular component or process. The 
significant benefit is to identify issues before they become substantial.
5. Siemens: AI and machine learning are used for optimizing manufac￾turing processes and improving product quality. Siemens developed a 
system “Siemens Digital Enterprise” which enables production sched￾ules, reduces waste and increases efficiency along with analyzing data 
patterns to identify potential issues in the manufacturing process.
These are a few examples of how AI and machine learning are used to trans￾form the way products are designed and delivered along with enhanced 
efficiency.
2.3.3.4 Futuristic human-centric assembly
The approach in component assembly is changing rapidly. A few of the 
repeated tasks have been automated. The last decade saw the collaboration 
of humans and robots (HRC). This has helped in retaining quality in mun￾dane tasks and improving work conditions. This model of HR combines 
qualities like agility, accuracy, and strength along with cognition, flexibility, 
and adaptability in robots to maintain the quality of the products. Industry 
5.0 aims for sustainability and resilience. The futuristic robots are facilitated 
by four qualities of humans such as augmented thinking, cognition, mixed 
reality, and co-intelligence. This quality enables the robot to co-work with 
humans by energizing, advising, supporting, and empowering in their work. 
They are modeled as super operators that help in applying knowledge to 
perform various tasks assigned (Figure 2.8).
1. Augmented Robot: Robots are made with augmented strength which 
has more sustainable muscle power than human beings. So this fac￾tor eliminates fatigue at the workplace. Hence, with the exoskeleton, 
augmented robots can be used to energize with active or passive actua￾tion. Human operators and the exoskeleton can perform tasks beyond 58 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
normal physical limits along with consistency, accuracy, and quality 
(Wang et al., 2019).
2. Cognitive System: A high level of cognitive ability is possessed by 
human beings within an allotted time at times with a restricted holis￾tic view. To enhance this ability, an intelligent multi-cognitive system 
is added that helps advise operators in making optimized decision￾making. This also leads to a collaboration of humans and robots while 
together (Monostori et al., 2006; Kemény et al., 2021).
3. Mixed Reality: Humans rely on senses to make decisions. At times 
with perception and fading memories, they cannot foresee the future. 
Mixed reality is a combination of Augmented Reality (AR) and digital 
twin, which helps humans to see what is invisible now and presumed 
to happen in the future, for making informed decisions for organiza￾tional effectiveness.
4. Co-Intelligence: Collaborative intelligence is based on assistance 
provided to robots, i.e., to train, explain, and sustain by amplify￾ing, interacting, and embodying the primitives. Humans need to 
apply competence to robots, train on what to do, and use sustainable 
decision-making. Robots must amplify humans’ self-adaptably so that 
humans are empowered to interact with work using the full potential 
of (artificial and anthropological) co-intelligence.
5. Brain Robotic: Brainwaves are used to control robots, another modal￾ity of HRC in production assembly. Here, human thought control com￾mands are sent to the robot for the desired action. This process is done 
by controlling commands through deep learning. This process aligns 
well with human centricity and complements modalities like voice, and 
gesture for effective communication between humans and robots.
Figure 2.8 Human-centric assembly in future factories (Wang, 2022).
Source: A futuristic perspective on human-centric assembly. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems.Automation and robotization 59
6. Human-Centric Assembly: This system enables the human operator 
to do this task along with the function of instructing the cobots to 
co-work with him. This is done through contact-awareness-enabled 
real-time sensing systems (Wang et al., 2019).
This is definitely the reality for tomorrow, wherein humans and robots work 
together to meet the common objective of the organization effectively maxi￾mizing the growth and development of the organization (Wang, 2022).
2.3.3.5 Customer service
In the realm of customer service, AI has taken over in a big way. AI-powered 
virtual assistants and chatbots provide service 24/7 to cater to various cus￾tomer queries. Automation in call centers has been able to capture customer 
emotions through sentiment analysis. This has enabled increased productiv￾ity by tailoring the responses of the customers.
AI is used to analyze consumer data, including buyer behavior patterns, 
preferences, and purchase history. This data is used to provide hyper￾personalized customer experiences by businesses (Morgan-Thomas et al., 
2020). Algorithms help in creating content, promotions, and personalized 
recommendations for consumers.
2.3.3.6 Finance
The usage of AI in the finance domain is becoming prominent. Professionals 
in finance are employing AI to detect fraud, use algorithms in trading and 
credit scoring, and analyze customers’ risk assessments. AI tools like machine 
learning are used to identify suspicious transactions and execute faster trad￾ing with accuracy. With AI, financial institutions can more accurately assess 
risk so they can improve loan decisions and investment strategies.
Finance is a highly regulated industry and needs to maintain compliance 
and regulations. AI helps financial institutions to simplify regulatory com￾pliance. The documents and records are automated and AI helps in monitor￾ing transactions for violations and deviations in compliance.
AI is also revolutionizing the area of financial and wealth management 
and planning by creating robo-advisors which is intelligent enough to 
cater to client requirements who range from seasoned to novice profes￾sionals. These platforms use advanced algorithms to assess the trends in 
the market and risk tolerance and provide recommendations at personal￾ized levels.
Big Data analytics enables real-time monitoring, anomaly detection, and 
fraud prevention. It helps financial institutions analyze vast amounts of data 
to detect fraudulent activities, assess credit risk, improve customer experi￾ence, optimize trading strategies, and comply with regulatory requirements.60 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
With blockchain technology in the financial sector, this facility has enabled 
cross-border payment and remittance with ease. The receiver has direct access 
to the payment with no delays, unnecessary fees, or remittances involved from 
any part of the globe and can trade finance at their fingertips. Participants can 
interact directly and make transactions across the internet without the inter￾ference of a third party. Helps in cross-border payments, remittances, and 
trade finance. Through blockchain technology, personal information and 
transaction records are encrypted to maintain safety and security. Blockchain 
technology has helped in reducing data breaches to a large extent.
2.3.3.7 Transportation
The automobile industry has introduced self-driving cars and trucks using 
advanced technology like AI. This helps in reducing human errors and 
enhances safety. Also, using technology, intelligent traffic management helps 
in reducing congestion. It also helps in route optimization and saving time 
and fuel which is in alignment with sustainable goals (Bednar and Welch, 
2020). Also, drone delivery is picking up as an alternative, which is more 
eco-friendly than the traditional drop-out method.
Predicting passenger demand and optimizing schedules is one of the key 
components for which AI is used – to enhance and improve public transpor￾tation systems (Abduljabbar et al., 2019).
Logistics companies leverage Big Data analytics to optimize routes, reduce 
delivery times, manage fleet operations, and improve supply chain visibility. 
It enables real-time tracking, demand forecasting, and efficient inventory 
management.
2.3.3.8 Agriculture
The innovation in technology is helping the agriculture world too. Farmers 
and scientists are using AI technology to monitor crops, keep pests at bay, 
and predict farm yield. The technological precision aided by AI is helping 
to improve fertilization, optimize irrigation, and aid farmers reduce waste 
through data-driven informed decision-making.
The agriculture sector has seen farmers using tractors and machinery and 
have revolutionized the traditional agriculture practices followed. Equipped 
with sensors, GPS, and control systems, self-driven tractors have started per￾forming tasks like plowing, seeding, and spraying, leading to increased out￾put due to precision and efficiency.
Equipped with AI, ML, and remote sensing features, drone technology is 
growing at a rapid pace. There is a rising demand for the usage of drones in 
the future in this field due to their immense advantage. It is increasing per￾formance and solving assorted barriers through precision farming. The mar￾ket for agriculture drones has increased to a whopping $1.3 billion. The 
Unmanned Ariel Vehicles (UAVs) are filling the gap and inefficiencies of tra￾ditional farming. The primary aim of adopting drone technology is to avoid Automation and robotization 61
guesswork or ambiguity and focus on precise accurate information before 
making decisions.
Machine learning and remote sensing help provide information related to 
weather, soil conditions, and temperature, which plays a critical role in 
farming. Agriculture drone provides input to farmers helping to decide on 
the optimum choice of farming based on the environmental conditions. The 
data obtained through drones are used for regulating crop health, treatment 
of crops, scouting, irrigation, analyzing the soil, and assessment of crop 
damage. The surveys conducted through drones provide information on 
crop yield and help in minimizing time and expenses.
2.3.3.9 Retail and supply chain management
AI application is widely used in retail for inventory management and tar￾geted marketing. They leverage artificial intelligence through chatbots and 
create personalized recommendations based on customer preferences and 
buying history.
Retailers are also integrating visual search technologies into their online 
stores, so customers can find products by uploading images instead of rely￾ing on text-based queries. These types of AI-powered visual search engines 
can analyze the features of the uploaded image and provide a list of similar 
products available for purchase.
Visual search technologies are adopted in online stores by retailers to help 
customers find products by uploading images. The earlier method mainly 
was text-based queries. AI-powered visual engines analyze the features of 
the product and provide similar products available in the store.
Big Data analytics is used to understand customer behavior, preferences, 
and buying patterns. It helps in personalized marketing, targeted advertising, 
inventory optimization, demand forecasting, and recommendation systems.
Blockchain technology also provides end-to-end visibility and traceability 
of products. It enables tracking and verification, ensuring authenticity and 
improving efficiency. It also helps reduce counterfeiting.
The digital supply chain is the next-generation supply chain solution. This 
technology integrates human intelligence with cognitive computing and 
intelligent automation provides the opportunity for hyper-personalization 
(Krzywdzinski, 2017). Machine learning, robotics, and other automated 
technologies help organizations and employees increase business proficiency 
and provide immense value to customers.
AI is widely used in supply chain management to optimize processes, 
reduce costs, and increase customer satisfaction. A few of the areas where it 
is widely used are as follows.
1. Demand Forecasting: AI algorithms analyze extensive data of cus￾tomer orders, social media trends, and weather patterns to predict 
future demand. This helps in optimizing inventory levels, production 
planning, and logistics.62 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
2. Inventory Management: Helps in analyzing the inventory levels, lead 
times, and demand to optimize inventory levels and reduce the risk of 
stockouts or overstocking.
3. Logistics Optimization: Optimization of transportation routes (Abduljabbar 
et al., 2019) and schedules based on real-time data such as traffic con￾ditions and weather forecasts, reducing delivery times and costs.
4. Supplier Selection: Identifying potential suppliers based on criteria like 
pricing, quality, and delivery times helps companies make informed 
supplier selection decisions.
5. Quality Control: Sensors’ data from production lines are used to iden￾tify potential quality issues and alert operations before they become 
more significant problems.
6. Risk Management: Systems that help in identifying potential risks in 
supply chain management, disruption in transportation, and bank￾ruptcies of suppliers allowing companies to develop contingency plans 
and mitigate risks.
A few of the industry examples are as follows:
1. Walmart: Walmart has been experimenting with AI for long. They 
use machine learning algorithms to optimize the supply chain includ￾ing forecasting demand, tracking inventory levels, and predicting the 
product demands. They use AI-powered robots to scan store shelves 
and track inventory levels in real time.
2. Amazon: Amazon is well known for its usage of AI and machine learn￾ing in recommending products based on the browsing and purchase 
history of the customers. Alexa Voice Assistant is also AI-enabled to 
help customers order through voice commands.
3. Sephora: AI-powered chatbot provides personalized beauty product 
recommendations to customers. The chatbot uses natural language to 
understand customers’ questions and preferences to recommend beauty 
products. Sephora has developed a color-matching AI tool which provides 
inputs for selecting the correct type of foundation based on skin tone.
4. H&M: AI is used to optimize the supply chain, predict demand, and 
optimize inventory levels. They also help to analyze customer reviews 
to identify trends and improve product design.
5. Starbucks: Starbucks uses AI to optimize its mobile ordering system. 
The system uses a machine learning algorithm to predict when cus￾tomers will arrive and prepare orders accordingly, reducing waiting 
time and improving customer satisfaction.
2.3.3.10 Education
AI has made an impact in the education field as well. AI-powered learn￾ing techniques are adaptive and can be tailored to meet customized student Automation and robotization 63
needs. The use of AI in academics helps in predicting the performance of the 
students and helps in early intervention to address this issue. This is specifi￾cally useful in cases of students dealing with learning challenges (Zawacki￾Richter et al., 2019).
These advanced technologies are playing a significant role as enablers in 
democratizing access to education for lesser privileged. AI tools help in lan￾guage translation and real-time transcription services. This helps in breaking 
language barriers enabling wide access to students on educational content 
sitting in any part of the globe enabling students worldwide to access edu￾cational content from anywhere in the world. One-to-one support and guid￾ance are provided by supplementing regular classroom instructions making 
quality education accessible to a broader audience. This technology helps in 
the evaluation of the performance of teachers and professional development 
(Akgunduz and Mesutoglu, 2021).
2.3.3.11 Energy
Energy management is also significantly impacted in a positive way through 
the usage of AI in various applications like smart grid management, fore￾casting demand, optimization of renewable energy, and conservation of 
energy. The usage of AI-driven systems helps in predicting customer usage 
patterns, helps in balancing supply and demand, recommends energy￾saving measures, and optimizes renewable energy resources, which is 
the main aim of Industry 5.0, sustainability and resilience (Ghobakhloo, 
2020).
Apart from energy management, it is used in improving the performance 
of energy storage systems like thermal and battery storage. By analyzing 
historical performance metrics and data from sensors, AI-powered algo￾rithms can optimize charging and discharging cycles and extend the life of 
energy storage systems.
Big Data analytics help provide inputs to companies the consumption pat￾terns, predict demand, optimize energy distribution, and predict anomalies 
in the power grid. This data helps in energy integration, equipment mainte￾nance, and initiatives for efficient energy utilization.
Blockchain technology helps in energy trading and grid management, 
especially peer-to-peer energy trading, where organizations and individuals 
can trade electricity. It helps in energy distribution and encourages renew￾able energy via transparent tracking of production of energy production and 
consumption.
2.3.3.12 Human resources
Organizations are using AI tools in Human Resource Management as well. 
The time-consuming tasks like resume screening and workforce planning 64 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
are being done using automation services. AI is helping HR professionals in 
assessing employee training needs and monitoring employee performance.
Many diversity and inclusion initiatives are supported through artificial 
intelligence tools. Algorithms are used to assess job postings and for hiring 
to attract a diverse pool of candidates. These technologies have helped 
ensure fair and smooth HR processes for candidates.
Artificial intelligence tools are increasingly acting as gatekeepers between 
the job seeker and job provider. More companies are using chatbots to 
screen candidates and video interviewing that evaluates body language to 
judge personality, skills, and aptitude.
2.3.3.13 Environment
Big Data and AI are helping address environmental challenges by provid￾ing inputs related to climate modeling, wildlife conservation, prediction of 
natural disasters, protecting endangered species, trailing pollution norms, 
and addressing various environmental challenges. Advanced technologies 
adopted help give insights into predicting climate patterns, and pollution 
norms and help in taking measures to avoid mass calamities to a large 
extent.
2.3.3.14 Security
AI is a game-changer in the security world. They are widely used in facial 
recognition, surveillance, and threat detection by law enforcement agencies. 
Cyber security firms are using these advanced technologies to combat cyber￾crime. AI helps in identifying and neutralizing potential threats in virtual 
and real-time situations.
Advanced biometric authentications like fingerprint, iris, and voice recog￾nition are developed using AI. Technological support helps a high level of 
security unlike traditional methods using passwords and access cards, and 
also relying on biological features that are difficult to forge or replicate.
Blockchain-based voting systems can provide transparent and tamper￾resistant voting processes. It ensures the integrity of the voting process, 
enhances trust, and eliminates the possibility of fraud or manipulation.
2.3.3.15 Entertainment
AI is the real “name of the game” in the entertainment industry. Game design￾ers are creating an immersive experience for the players, which includes 
virtual and augmented reality elements. Players also get AI-powered recom￾mendations that help personalize and provide customized, engaging enter￾tainment. With AI-powered recommendation systems, companies can curate 
content for users so they have more personalized and engaging entertain￾ment experiences.Automation and robotization 65
AI has also entered into the space of generative art, virtual concerts, and 
interactive installations. This has created an enhanced experience for the 
customers in art and music and changed the way we interact with the art 
forms.
2.3.3.16 Law and legal services
Big Data is emerging as a boon to law and legal services. This technology 
helps in storing and collecting data related to clients, contracts, and legal 
history and provides access anytime and anywhere, including courtrooms. 
AI-driven tools help in processing large volumes of legal documents, expe￾dite legal research from extensive data, and identify issues in legal contracts. 
AI is also used in dispute resolution and to streamline mediation and arbi￾tration. This also helps in cost reduction.
Blockchain can establish proof of existence and ownership for intellectual 
property rights. It provides a secure and timestamped record of creations, 
patents, and copyrights.
2.3.3.17 Space exploration
The advent of the application of AI is visible in space exploration as well. 
Scientists are using this technology for spacecraft navigation, imaging satel￾lites, and mission planning. This technology is immensely helpful in astron￾omy, for example, in identifying a new astronomical phenomenon.
AI plays a critical role in the detection and tracking of asteroids and com￾ets (near-Earth objects). Big Data helps in analyzing vast amounts of astro￾nomical data; machine learning is of immense use to identify and predict the 
trajectory of these objects to make decisions and provide alerts to avoid any 
disaster.
2.4 OPPORTUNITIES OF INDUSTRY 5.0
The following points enlighten diverse opportunities of Industry 5.0:
• Automation will positively impact many sectors through the deploy￾ment of next-generation technology.
• It creates opportunities for higher customization of products to the 
customers in a highly automated production system.
• Industry 5.0 provides greater opportunities for creative people enabling 
optimization of human efficiency.
• The versatility of the machines provides employees with the choice of 
creating a high level of customization for the customers. Also, it helps 
in managing repeated or follow-up assignments through digital mode, 
making work much easier (Haleem and Javaid, 2019).66 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
• Industry 5.0 demands highly competent skills leading to higher-value 
employment. This also provides people the opportunity to be creative 
and innovative (Rossi et al., 2018).
• In Industry 5.0, the operation in the production unit can engage 
themselves in the planning and execution than in a less automated 
production unit. This also has a positive impact on the well-being of 
the employees as work that leads to fatigue is mostly done by robots 
(Spencer, 2017).
• In Industry 5.0, Automation provides opportunities for designing 
tailor-made and personalized products especially related to medicine 
and prosthetics for physically challenged people.
• Automation helps in providing real-time information from various 
sectors helping for informed decision-making. This is specifically 
applicable to the manufacturing and service sectors.
• The introduction of cobots on the floor helps in taking up jobs or 
work that are more hazardous and dangerous in nature. This leads to 
better safety and quality at the workplace.
• More personalized products and services increase customer satisfac￾tion, and loyalty and attract new customers which results in increased 
profit and market share for the companies.
• AI and Big Data provide great opportunities for start-ups and entre￾preneurs to be in creative and innovative spheres and come up with 
unique products and services allied to the concept of sustainability. It 
also helps look at opportunities in a holistic manner.
• Increasing human–machine interaction is also providing opportuni￾ties in Industry 5.0 for future research and development which adds 
greater value for society and organizations (Mohr, 2016).
• Quality services can be provided at remote locations with the help 
of Industry 5.0, especially in the healthcare industry such as robots’ 
medical surgeries in rural areas.
• Technology is appealing as it is cost-effective, especially in the arena 
of HR where thousands of resumes can be screened and filtered to get 
the right candidates.
• The cobots in HR can help in emotional analysis and performance 
rating. It helps in analyzing human behavior related to burnout stress 
syndrome and lack of commitment.
• Robots can be used for working in high-risk environments which may 
be dangerous or difficult for humans to work. They can be used in 
situations involving hazardous material, nuclear facilities, deep sea, 
or space exploration. Industrial robots possess significant physical 
strength and endurance allowing them to perform heavy lifting and 
repetitive physical tasks for extended periods. This is highly beneficial 
in industries like construction, logistics, and manufacturing.
• Since communication and collaboration are key factors in Industry 
5.0, engineering education should focus on innovations in human–
technology interaction in a futuristic manner.Automation and robotization 67
2.5 REMONSTRANCE UNDER INDUSTRY 5.0
• Industry 5.0 comes up with enormous challenges. High automation 
leads to an increase in work polarization. On one end, there are highly 
trained and qualified professionals and, on the other end, there are 
low-paid, unqualified employees. This may augment the skilled and 
unskilled divide in society (Boyd and Huettinger, 2019; Kolade and 
Owoseni, 2022).
• Due to highly automated manufacturing systems, skill development 
is a humongous task such as training the workforce in advanced and 
cutting-edge technologies. Along with this, it is essential to provide 
behavioral training to interact with robots.
• Collaborative robotics has its own safety issues, as there are instances 
where robots have emerged as dangerous for human beings co-working 
with them (Rossi et al., 2018).
• Smart manufacturing systems demand higher autonomy as they have 
enabled robots’ cognitive capabilities. The shift from the present con￾text to Industry 5.0 is difficult due to the lack of autonomy in the pres￾ent systems, such as integrated decision-making (Thoben et al., 2017).
• Even through automation, accommodating diverse data repositories 
and acquiring high quality and integrity of the data is a concern, espe￾cially for manufacturing sectors.
• Increased connectivity and standard communication protocols have 
led to issues about cyber security threats in industrial and manufactur￾ing lines.
• Industry 5.0 demands a huge amount of investment to fully implement 
all its pillars which is difficult for industry, especially for the SMEs to 
adopt.
• For instance, Industry 5.0 offers great potential in the healthcare indus￾try but a high degree of precision and accuracy is needed. The research 
on this front is still in a nascent stage and demands a high number of 
investments and infrastructure.
• It is challenging for startups and entrepreneurs since Industry 5.0 
demands high investments and infrastructure with cutting-edge tech￾nology requirements.
• Challenging to draw regulatory mechanisms in Industry 5.0 due to the 
high amount of automation presence. For example, whom to be held 
accountable in case of failures and to what extent.
• Due to higher levels of automation in the industries, the existing busi￾ness strategy and business models have to be modified and customized 
to meet the requirements of Industry 5.0. Due to mass personalization, 
business strategy will be focusing more on customer-centric opera￾tions. Customer subjectivity changes over time and it is difficult to 
change business strategies and business models frequently.
• Business strategies in Industry 5.0 demand a higher level of dynamism 
to sustain competition due to differential customer preferences.68 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
2.5.1 Challenges emerging from the co-work of 
human–robots
It is not easy to overlook the challenges with respect to Industry 5.0 in the 
organizational behavior, structure, workflow, ethics, and environment.
A few of the major challenges are for Industry 5.0 developments to suc￾ceed in the business (Tomaskovic-Devey and Avent-Holt, 2019).
1. Human–robot co-working is expected to create many challenges. It is 
essential to legally define what a robot is (Demir et al., 2019a). This 
should include what are the distinctions of robots that can be used in 
the workplace, the role and responsibilities of robots, and the types of 
decisions that can be made by the robot regarding the work.
2. People need to develop competency skills; employees are required to 
upskill and reskill to collaborate and work with advanced robots and 
smart machines. Along with the soft skills required, gaining technical 
skills is a key component to remain relevant for the employees (Goos 
et al., 2010). Programming the industrial robot and managing transla￾tion in the new jobs leads to an upgrade to a high level of technical 
skills (Gorman and Sandefur, 2011).
3. Customized software-connected factories, artificial intelligence, real￾time information, and the IoT, collaborative robotics, are widely used 
for Industry 5.0. Employees need to continuously adopt advanced 
technology which requires more time and effort from the side of the 
human workers. Personal preference for not using a particular tech￾nology varies from human to human. Some people would readily 
accept or strongly oppose it. Hence, change management becomes a 
crucial factor that needs to be addressed.
4. Advanced technologies require heavy investments. Implementing 
Industry 5.0 is expensive as it requires smart machines and highly 
skilled employees to increase productivity and efficiency. Cobots are 
expensive too. Training the employees for new jobs brings extra costs. 
The companies need to upgrade the production lines for Industry 5.0.
5. Advanced technology issues may have certain psychological effects 
on employees like “robophobia” or “nonrobophobia” (Briggs and 
Scheutz, 2014). Humans are social creatures. Social interactions are 
essential for effective work performance. When the number of robots 
increases, it could lead to unprecedented effects in the workplace 
(Bartlett et al., 2004).
6. The Human Resources department may face new challenges. Nowadays, 
most organizations are advertising themselves as “Green”. They claim 
to be sensitive to the environment. Hence, an automized environment 
may contradict the green philosophy (Kovacs, 2018). Some organi￾zations may go for a “human workforce” to prove they are socially 
responsible.Automation and robotization 69
7. To establish trust in the ecosystem, it is necessary to have a fully 
proofed security. The authentication used in the industry is the scale 
to interact with various devices, to stand against the future quantum 
computing applications to deploy nodes of IoT. Artificial intelligence 
and automation in Industry 5.0 come with their own challenges due to 
security. Various strategies need to be adopted to maintain cyber secu￾rity as it may prove dangerous to organizations, including nations, as 
it contains data that could be misused.
8. Robots are selfless, have no ambition, and do not have laziness. All 
these factors have an impact on how the work is perceived. Robots 
do not require breaks, sleep, or rest, enabling them to operate con￾tinuously. In industries where constant operation is critical, such as 
customer support, surveillance, or autonomous vehicles, robots can 
provide non-stop service, ensuring uninterrupted operations (Bekey, 
2005). Humans may not be able to compete with robots. It is hard to 
predict how work ethics evolve in a human–robot co-working envi￾ronment (Demir, 2017).
9. Robots if not properly designed, can cause physical harm to the 
human. A malfunctioning industrial robot may inadvertently injure 
a worker by striking or pinning them against the surface. Accidents 
can occur when humans make errors in programming or designing. 
Human operators also make mistakes while interacting with robots 
leading to accidents. There are possible accidents from collabora￾tive robots working alongside humans due to miscommunication or 
failure in sensors. Software bugs and glitches can lead to unexpected 
behavior causing unsafe situations or accidents (Roboticsbiz, 2022; 
Winfield et al., 2021).
A few examples are as follows:
• The robot stopped because of some technical issue with the locating 
switch. The operator entered the cell and attempted to locate the part. 
The robot which got activated in the process crushed the employee.
• An electrician who entered a robot cell to reposition a part was leaving 
back passed through an envelope of an adjacent robot which had com￾pleted a task and moving back to its home position to pick another 
part. This robot pinned the electrician with its end effector against a 
parts feed conveyor.
• Four workers entered a restricted space to troubleshoot a robot with 
power on. One worker puts the part to the fixture back on the live 
robot. The command the robot took was “Go”. The worker was 
pinned to the fixture.
• An employee who was cleaning up was crushed between the “safety 
post” and the back end.70 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
• When attempting to load parts into empty parts on conveyors, the 
robot pinned an employee against one of the conveyors causing severe 
injuries to the employee.
• It was necessary to wipe the dust off two photoelectric eyes of the 
robot of a cell design to perform the next task. The robot had stopped 
and the employee entered through the opening to fix the issue. While 
dusting, it signalled the robot to move crushing the employee.
• A technician was working on a robot-conveyor arm which dips part into 
solution every 15 minutes. The operator forgot about the 15-minute 
cycle and was caught between the conveyor and the robot arm.
There are multiple reports of workers sustaining injuries while working 
alongside robotic systems in the automotive industry. These incidents often 
involve collisions between workers and robots or the unintended activation 
of robotic equipment.
To mitigate the risks associated with robot usage, safety standards and 
regulations should be in place in industries. These standards aim to ensure 
the proper design, implementation, and operation of robots, as well as the 
training of personnel involved in their use. Continued research and develop￾ment in the field of robotics are also focused on improving safety features 
and creating a more robust and reliable system.
It’s important to note that while robots may outperform humans in cer￾tain tasks, they lack the adaptability, creativity, emotional intelligence, and 
complex decision-making abilities that humans possess. The ideal scenario 
often involves a collaboration between humans and robots, where each can 
leverage their strengths to achieve optimal results.
2.6 CONCLUSION
Industry 5.0 is mainly an HCS which helps human–machine interaction 
making jobs easier and quicker. Personalization and customization top the 
agenda by providing greater effectiveness along with building virtual envi￾ronments, advanced computers, and information technologies. They inte￾grate it through technologies such as Big Data, artificial intelligence, IoT, 
cloud computing, and cobots. This is an era of high innovation and creativ￾ity. Industry 5.0 is expected to create a huge transformation in the work sys￾tems for industries. It is anticipated to create higher-value employment with 
a huge focus on design thinking and creativity. It is bound to increase the 
productivity of labor and greater opportunities for customization in various 
spheres. The technologies are not just going to revolutionize the production 
system, it is going to collaborate between humans and robots to provide 
tailor-made products to customers.
On the flip side, high automation in manufacturing and other domains 
may create the need for skill development for the workforce at a constant Automation and robotization 71
pace which can be a gargantuan task. The increased connectivity and stan￾dard communication protocols lead to increased security and cyber threats 
for industrial and manufacturing lines (Qin et al., 2016).
Even though Industry 5.0 provides greater autonomy to robots, impor￾tant and moral-based decision-making is vested with humans. Human cen￾tricity is a way of looking at the lasting existence and well-being of employees 
but challenges loom large. On one end, there exist humans with limited 
physical strength and restricted intellectual capacity in prediction, and rea￾soning for optimal decision-making in a short time, automation should be 
used as an adaptive support for enhancing and empowering their work. The 
futuristic perspective should be based on four EHAs (enhanced human abili￾ties) to EASE (energize, advise, support, empower) human TASK (human 
thoughts, robot assistance, real-time sensing, and human knowledge) in 
human-centric assembly.
Einstein had said after the Second World War “I know not with what 
weapons World War III will be fought, but World War IV will be fought with 
sticks and Stones” (Smith and Browne, 2021). The aspect that needs to be 
looked into is “Is artificial intelligence making people uneasy”? Computers 
are endowed with the ability to learn and make decisions increasingly free 
from human interventions. How would they make these decisions? Would it 
reflect best on humanity? AI technologies need to be guided by solid ethical 
principles if they are to serve society well.
REFERENCES
Abduljabbar, R., Dia, H., Liyanage, S., & Bagloee, S. A. (2019). Applications of arti￾ficial intelligence in transport: An overview. Sustainability, 11(1), 189.
Adel, A. (2022). Future of industry 5.0 in society: Human-centric solutions, chal￾lenges and prospective research areas. Journal of Cloud Computing, 11(1), 1–15.
Akgunduz, D., & Mesutoglu, C. (2021). STEM education for Industry 4.0 in techni￾cal and vocational high schools: Investigation of teacher professional development. 
Science Education International, 32(2), pp. 172–181. doi:10.33828/sei.v32.i2.11
Autor, D., Levy, F., & Murnane, RJ (2003). The skill content of recent technological 
change: An empirical exploration. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(4), 
1279–1333.
Bagdasarov, Z., Martin, A. A., & Buckley, M. R. (2020). Working with robots: 
Organizational considerations. Organizational Dynamics, 49(2), 100679.
Bartlett, B., Estivill-Castro, V., & Seymon, S. (2004, January). Dogs or robots: Why 
do children see them as robotic pets rather than canine machines? In Proceedings 
of the fifth conference on Australasian user interface-Volume 28 (pp. 7–14).
Bednar, P. M., & Welch, C. (2020). Socio-technical perspectives on smart working: 
Creating meaningful and sustainable systems. Information Systems Frontiers, 
22(2), 281–298.
Beier, G., Ullrich, A., Niehoff, S., Reißig, M., & Habich, M. (2020). Industry 4.0: 
How it is defined from a sociotechnical perspective and how much sustainability 
it includes–A literature review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 259, 120856.72 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Bekey, G. A. (2005). Autonomous robots: From biological inspiration to implemen￾tation and control. MIT Press.
Bhushan, B., Sinha, P., Sagayam, K. M., & Andrew, J. (2021). Untangling blockchain 
technology: A survey on state of the art, security threats, privacy services, applications 
and future research directions. Computers & Electrical Engineering, 90, 106897.
Boyd, J. A., & Huettinger, M. (2019). Smithian insights on automation and the 
future of work. Futures, 111, 104–115.
Briggs, G., & Scheutz, M. (2014). How robots can affect human behavior: 
Investigating the effects of robotic displays of protest and distress. International 
Journal of Social Robotics, 6, 343–355.
Caines, C., Hoffmann, F., & Kambourov, G. (2017). Complex-task biased technolog￾ical change and the labor market. Review of Economic Dynamics, 25, 298–319.
Cirillo, V., Evangelista, R., Guarascio, D., & Sostero, M. (2020). Digitalization, 
routineness and employment: An exploration on Italian task-based data. Research 
Policy, July, 104079. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.respol.2020.104079
Cormier, D., Newman, G., Nakane, M., Young, J. E., & Durocher, S. (2013, August). 
Would you do as a robot commands? An obedience study for human-robot inter￾action. In International Conference on Human-Agent Interaction (pp. 1–3).
Cropley, A. (2020). Creativity-focused technology education in the age of industry 
4.0. Creativity Research Journal, 32(2), 184–191.
Culot, G., Nassimbeni, G., Orzes, G., & Sartor, M. (2020). Behind the definition of 
Industry 4.0: Analysis and open questions International Journal of Production 
Economics. press, corrected proof, Available online, 10.
Dalenogare, L. S., Benitez, G. B., Ayala, N. F., & Frank, A. G. (2018). The expected 
contribution of Industry 4.0 technologies for industrial performance. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 204, 383–394.
Davis, M. C., Rose Challenger, D. N. Jayewardene, & Chris W. Clegg. 2014. Advancing 
socio-technical systems thinking: A call for bravery. Applied Ergonomics, 45(2), 
171–180.
Demir, K. A. (2017). Research questions in roboethics. Mugla Journal of Science and 
Technology, 3(2), 160–165.
Demir, K. A., & Cicibas, H. (2017, October). Industry 5.0 and a critique of Industry 
4.0. In Proceedings of the 4th international management information systems con￾ference, Istanbul, Turkey (pp. 17–20).
Demir, K. A., & Cicibaş, H. (2018). The next industrial revolution: Industry 5.0 
and discussions on industry 4.0, industry 4.0 from the management information 
systems perspectives.
Demir, K. A., Döven, G., & Sezen, B. (2019a). Industry 5.0 and human-robot co￾working. Procedia Computer Science, 158, 688–695.
Demir, K. A., Turan, B., Onel, T., Ekin, T., & Demir, S. (2019b). Ambient intelli￾gence in business environments and internet of things transformation guidelines. 
Guide to Ambient Intelligence in the IoT Environment: Principles, Technologies 
and Applications, 39–67.
Dengler, K., & Matthes, B. (2018). The impacts of digital transformation on the 
labour market: Substitution potentials of occupations in Germany. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 137, 304–316.
Fareri, S., Fantoni, G., Chiarello, F., Coli, E., & Binda, A. (2020). Estimating Industry 
4.0 impact on job profiles and skills using text mining. Computers in Industry, 
118, 103222.Automation and robotization 73
Fernández-Macías, E., & Hurley, J. (2017). Routine-biased technical change and job 
polarization in Europe. Socio-Economic Review, 15(3), 563–585.
Frey, C. B., & Osborne, M. A. (2017). The future of employment: How susceptible 
are jobs to computerisation Technological Forecasting & Social Change, 114, 
254–280.
Garcia-Murillo, M., MacInnes, I., & Bauer, J. M. (2018). Techno-unemployment: 
A framework for assessing the effects of information and communication tech￾nologies on work. Telematics and Informatics, 35(7), 1863–1876. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tele.2018.05.013
Ghobakhloo, M. (2020). Industry 4.0, digitization, and opportunities for sustain￾ability. Journal of Cleaner Production, 252, 119869.
Goos, M., Manning, A., & Salomons, A. (2010). Explaining job polarization in Europe: 
The roles of technology and globalization. University of Maastricht, mimeo.
Gorman, E. H., & Sandefur, R. L. (2011). “Golden age,” quiescence, and revival: 
How the sociology of professions became the study of knowledge-based work. 
Work and Occupations, 38(3), 275–302.
Haleem, A., & Javaid, M. (2019). Additive manufacturing applications in industry 
4.0: A review. Journal of Industrial Integration and Management, 4(04), 1930001. 
https://roboticsbiz.com/robot-safety-types-and-sources-of-accidents/
Kachiche, S., Gahi, Y., Gharib, J. (2023). An efficient framework for the implemen￾tation of sustainable Industry 4.0. In: Ben Ahmed, M., Boudhir, A.A., Santos, D., 
Dionisio, R., Benaya, N. (eds) Innovations in smart cities applications, Vol. 6. SCA 
2022. Lecture Notes in Networks and Systems, vol. 629. Cham: Springer. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-26852-6_74
Kadir, B. A., Broberg, O., & da Conceicao, C. S. (2019). Current research and future 
perspectives on human factors and ergonomics in Industry 4.0. Computers & 
Industrial Engineering, 137, 106004.
Kemény, Z., Váncza, J., Wang, L., & Wang, X. V. (2021). Human–robot collabo￾ration in manufacturing: A multi-agent view. In Wang, L., Wang, X. V., Váncza, 
J., & Kemény, Z. (eds.) Human–robot collaboration in manufacturing: A multi￾agent view (pp. 3–41). Cham: Springer International Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-69178-3_1
Kolade, O., & Owoseni, A. (2022). Employment 5.0: The work of the future and 
the future of work. Technology in Society, 71, 102086. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
techsoc.2022.102086
Kovacs, O. (2018). The dark corners of industry 4.0–Grounding economic gover￾nance 2.0. Technology in society, 55, 140–145.
Kristal, T. (2020). Why has computerization increased wage inequality? Information, 
occupational structural power, and wage inequality. Work and Occupations, 
47(4), 466–503. https://doi.org/10.1177/0730888420941031
Krzywdzinski, M. (2017). Automation, skill requirements and labour-use strategies: 
High-wage and low-wage approaches to high-tech manufacturing in the automo￾tive industry. New Technology, Work and Employment, 32(3), 247–267.
Lage, O., Saiz-Santos, M., & Zarzuelo, J. M. (2022). Decentralized platform 
economy: Emerging blockchain-based decentralized platform business models. 
Electronic Markets, 32(3), 1707–1723.
Mohr, B. J. (2016). Co-Creating Humane and Innovative Organizations. Creating 
high-performing organizations: The North American open socio-technical systems 
design approach. Global STS-D Network Press, pp. 16–33.74 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Monostori, L., Váncza, J., & Kumara, S. R. (2006). Agent-based systems for manu￾facturing. CIRP Annals, 55(2), 697–720.
Morgan-Thomas, A., Dessart, L., & Veloutsou, C. (2020). Digital ecosystem and con￾sumer engagement: A socio-technical perspective. Journal of Business Research, 
121, 713–723.
Muro, M., Maxim, R., & Whiton, J. (2019). Automation and artificial intelligence: 
How machines are affecting people and places. Brookings Institute, https://www.
brookings.edu/research/automation-and-artificial-intelligence-howmachines￾affect-people-and-places/
Novakova, L. (2020). The impact of technology development on the future of the 
labour market in the Slovak Republic. Technology in Society, 62, 101256.
Oks, S. J., Jalowski, M., Lechner, M. et al. (2022). Cyber-physical systems in the con￾text of Industry 4.0: A review, categorization and outlook. Information Systems 
Frontiers.
Qin, J., Liu, Y., & Grosvenor, R. (2016). A categorical framework of manufacturing 
for industry 4.0 and beyond. Procedia CIRP, 52, 173–178.
Roboticsbiz, 2022 https://roboticsbiz.com/robot-safety-types-and-sources-of-accidents/
#:~:text=Types%20of%20accidents,four%20categories%20of%20robotic%
20incidents
Rossi, S., Staffa, M. & Tamburro, A. (2018). Socially assistive robot for provid￾ing recommendations: Comparing a humanoid robot with a mobile application. 
International Journal of Social Robotics, 10, 265–278. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12369-0Fift
Smith, B., & Browne, C. A. (2021). Tools and weapons: The promise and the peril 
of the digital age. Penguin.
Sony, M., & Naik, S. (2020). Industry 4.0 integration with socio-technical sys￾tems theory: A systematic review and proposed theoretical model. Technology in 
Society, 61, 101248.
Spencer, D. (2017). Work in and beyond the Second Machine Age: The politics of pro￾duction and digital technologies. Work, Employment and Society, 31(1), 142–152. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/095001701664571
Thoben, K. D., Wiesner, S., & Wuest, T. (2017). “Industrie 4.0” and smart manufac￾turing-a review of research issues and application examples. International Journal 
of Automation Technology, 11(1), 4–16.
Tomaskovic-Devey, D., & Avent-Holt, D. (2019). Relational inequalities: An organi￾zational approach. USA: Oxford University Press.
Vaidya, S., Ambad, P., & Bhosle, S. (2018). Industry 4.0–a glimpse. Procedia 
Manufacturing, 20, 233–238.
Wang, L. (2022). A futuristic perspective on human-centric assembly. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 62, 199–201.
Wang, L., Gao, R., Váncza, J., Krüger, J., Wang, X. V., Makris, S., & Chryssolouris, 
G. (2019). Symbiotic human-robot collaborative assembly. CIRP Annals, 68(2), 
701–726.
Winfield, A. F., Winkle, K., Webb, H., Lyngs, U., Jirotka, M., & Macrae, C. (2021). 
Robot accident investigation: A case study in responsible robotics. Software 
Engineering for Robotics, 165–187.
Zawacki-Richter, O., Marín, V.I., Bond, M. (2019). Systematic review of research on 
artificial intelligence applications in higher education – where are the educators? 
International Journal of Higher Education 16(1), 1–27.DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-3 75
3.1 INTRODUCTION
3.1.1 Background and research motivation
While the world is still attempting to adjust to Industry 4.0 and realize 
its promise, numerous industrialists and academics have begun to imagine 
and explore the next Industrial Revolution, known as Industry 5.0. While 
Industry 4.0 is about digitally connecting machines to enable a seamless 
flow of data and the highest possible optimization, Industry 5.0 is thought 
to focus on sustainable manufacturing while also bringing humans back into 
the game for collaboration and adding the human touch to manufactured 
products (Nahavandi, 2019; Demir et al., 2019). Nevertheless, because a 
considerable portion of businesses are micro-, small-, and medium-sized 
firms, such transformations in Asian countries face a significant problem 
of industry structure (Madhavan et al., 2022). The majority of countries’ 
gross domestic products are contributed by small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs), which are regarded as the foundation of an economy (Robu, 2013). 
They are one of the fundamental forces behind the development of compe￾tence because they make up the bulk of all apprenticeships.
Therefore, radical changes to Industry 5.0 will not be feasible in terms of 
fundamental values without taking the SMEs into account (Madhavan et al., 
2022). In fact, manufacturing companies in developing nations are far from 
implementing Industry 5.0 (Xu et al., 2021), and many sectors of emerging 
economies have yet to embrace new technologies like them (Sharma et al., 
2022; Raj et al., 2020). The ability of industries to undergo this digital transi￾tion is also not fully understood; it is not simple to convert all processes to 
digital because it requires a lot of time, money, and labor. Indeed, SMEs’ 
transition to Industry 5.0 from Industry 4.0 faces a number of difficulties, 
including a lack of tools, motivation, and expertise; a lack of open innova￾tion and strategies; and a concern for sustainability. Even though the readi￾ness of SMEs for digital transformation is critical, firms have a limited 
Chapter 3
Structural dimensions and 
measurement of readiness for 
Industry 5.0 implementation
A fresher insight from SMEs in developing 
country
Pham Quang Huy and MA. Vu Kien Phuc
University of Economics Ho Chi Minh City (UEH), Vietnam76 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
understanding of the required future skills and experience and their readi￾ness to embark on the Industry 5.0 transformation. Thus, it is crucial to 
investigate SMEs’ readiness for Industry 5.0 implementation (RII) because 
implementation efforts regarding new technology processes or organiza￾tional change frequently fail when leaders do not establish adequate organi￾zational readiness for change. Despite the importance of SMEs’ readiness for 
the digital transformation, firms’ knowledge of the necessary future knowl￾edge and experience and their readiness for the Industry 5.0 transition is low. 
Investigating SMEs’ RII is thus essential since leaders frequently fail to build 
enough organizational readiness for change when implementing new techno￾logical processes or organizational transformation.
With this agenda in consideration, this study seeks to develop a thorough 
and useful model that can identify the RII level, allowing businesses to 
deploy and utilize the technology components of this. To that end, this work 
bridges this knowledge gap by tackling the research question as follows.
RQ1. How can the measurement model for RII be created?
RQ2. How can the measurement model for RII be standardized?
3.1.2 Research contribution
The current study provides contributions to the academic and practitio￾ner communities by filling several gaps based on the examination of the 
overall findings and key insights. The majority of the current research on 
the adoption of Industry 5.0 focuses on the many technologies needed for 
its integration (Özdemir& Hekim, 2018) and its prospective applications 
(Sachsenmeier, 2016; Ciasullo et al., 2022). The bulk of previous research 
has only conducted descriptive analyses to examine specific hurdles to the 
adoption of Industry 5.0 (Maddikunta et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). 
Given the significance and wide-ranging applications of Industry 5.0 in 
numerous organizations and industries, as well as the numerous advantages 
of this digital transformation framework, organizations need to assess their 
RII as a starting point and take action to fulfill the strategic objectives of 
Industry 5.0. From a theoretical perspective, this chapter represents likely 
the first attempt to pinpoint the RII that SMEs in emerging nations should 
achieve. In particular, this research is one of the first empirical ones to inves￾tigate structural dimensions and measures of RII. Accordingly, the obtained 
findings in this chapter will enable academicians to gain a good grasp of 
how Industry 5.0 is being adopted in emerging markets. From the stand￾point of practitioners, the in-depth analysis of the interconnection between 
RII and expected benefits from the Industry 5.0 implementation will allow 
the SMEs to sense and seize which issue should be addressed first. Besides, 
this research will assist policymakers, governmental influencers, and regula￾tory authorities in using the findings and insights to guide their decisions 
and action plans about the adoption of Industry 5.0.Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 77
3.1.2.1 Organization of chapter
The rest of the chapter is organized as: Section 3.2 tackles the existing litera￾ture on the theoretical underpinning and Industry 5.0. Section 3.3 delineates 
the data collection process and analyzed as well as outlines the main results. 
And, finally, Section 3.4 concludes the chapter with implications and future 
scope.
3.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
3.2.1 The technology–organization–environment (TOE) 
framework
The TOE which Tornatzky and Fleischer first introduced in 1990, has 
become a well-known theoretical perspective that integrates both human 
and non-human actors into the network. This approach helps manage the 
illusion of accumulated traditions and techno-centric predictions that are 
found to be the weakness of other technology adoption frameworks like 
TAM, TRA, UTAUT, and TPB (Awa et al., 2016). By describing how a firm’s 
technological, organizational, and environmental contexts determine the 
adoption, implementation, and probability of technological innovations 
(Masood & Egger, 2019; Abed, 2020), the TOE framework more specifi￾cally states the affecting factor for the acceptance of new technologies at 
the organizational level (Rajbhandari et al., 2022). Since its inception to 
the present, TOE has been one of the theories of organizational technology 
adoption that scholars and practitioners have used the most (Muhamad et 
al., 2021). Since innovation adoption decisions must be researched within 
appropriate contexts and with variables adapted to the peculiarity of the 
invention, it is appropriate to adapt the TOE framework to fit into a differ￾ent study context (Chau & Tam, 1997). The study as a whole uses the TOE 
framework as a theoretical foundation to explain the institutionalization 
of Industry 5.0 technologies among SMEs and to further build a structured 
classification of adoption drivers.
3.2.2 Industry 5.0
Although numerous academic notes have deepened analyses on Industry 
4.0 and its advancement and effect on smart production, sharp business, 
and sustainable development (i.e., Kumar and Nayyar (2020); Nayyar 
and Kumar (2020); Singh et al. (2021)), security of whistle-blowers on 
Dark Web (Venaik et al., 2023), Industry 4.0 is primarily focused on a 
shift in the industrial paradigm that is driven by technology, but society 
and human factors have received less attention (Jafari et al., 2022). The 
potential for job loss and job security with the rising use of autonomous 
systems is one worry associated with this industrial revolution (Doyle-Kent 78 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
& Kopacek, 2019). Several scholars like Nahavandi (2019) and Leng et al. 
(2022) criticized Industry 4.0’s focus on productivity. Therefore, it is cru￾cial that the technological transition be made in a sustainable manner and 
in line with the objectives of socioeconomic growth (Nahavandi, 2019). 
The concerns of people and society throughout the industrial transition 
gave rise to Industry 5.0, which was established in 2015 to advance the 
idea of “Industrial Upcycling” (Jafari et al., 2022). In the interim, Özdemir 
and Hekim (2018) identified Industry 5.0 as the incremental progression 
of Industry 4.0 that can support symmetric innovation to overcome the 
flaws of the Industry 4.0 innovation ecosystem. In order words, Industry 
5.0 expands on the principles and ideas of Industry 4.0 in a more compre￾hensive and futuristic way. Industry 5.0 has been the subject of substantial 
research since 2017 (Nahavandi, 2019; Paschek et al., 2019; Demir et al., 
2019). Due to the fact that Industry 5.0 has not yet fully evolved, a number 
of industry practitioners and scholars have offered a variety of definitions 
(Maddikunta et al., 2022; Mehdiabadi et al., 2022). Based on the perspec￾tives of Nahavandi (2019) and Leng et al. (2022), Industry 5.0 represents 
the start of human-focused industrial sector activities brought on by recent 
technological advancements that encourage joint participation between 
humans and machines.
According to Mehdiabadi et al. (2022), everything in Industry 5.0 revolves 
around the deployment of digitalization and intelligent technologies to 
boost human productivity. Industry 5.0 has been divided into distinct seg￾ments by experts, including edge computing, big data, the Internet of Things, 
autonomous robots, artificial intelligence, augmented reality, and innova￾tion system integration (Maddikunta et al., 2022). By integrating technol￾ogy and people, it seeks to serve humanity by putting artificial intelligence 
to use (Xu et al., 2021). Industry 5.0, as defined by Espina-Romero et al. 
(2023), is the most recent technological revolution that aims to transform 
industries into intelligent structures supported by cognitive computing and 
the Internet of Things.
As humans and machines work together to improve process efficiency by 
harnessing human creativity and brainpower through the integration of 
workflows with intelligent systems, Industry 5.0 brings back the human 
workforce to the factory (Nahavandi, 2019). According to the European 
Economic and Social Committee, Industry 5.0 is a new revolutionary wave 
that combines the varying powers of human intelligence and cyber-physical 
production systems to build synergistic factories (Longo et al., 2020). 
Furthermore, policymakers are searching for creative, moral, and human￾centered designs to overcome the workforce weakness brought on by Industry 
4.0. Industry 5.0 is the era of the socially intelligent industry, in which Cobots 
converse with people (Koch et al., 2017). Given that this industrial model 
encourages the economic productivity of the commercial sector while ensur￾ing environmental sustainability, the high energy consumption of this sector 
as a result of the use of novel technologies necessitates a progressive display Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 79
of rational and advantageous parameters within this medium (Ghobakhloo 
et al., 2022). Therefore, Industry 5.0 aims to create a comprehensive frame￾work by implementing disruptive technologies and creative solutions to 
address the societal and human challenges that are currently emerging (Jafari 
et al., 2022).
3.3 METHODOLOGY
3.3.1 Phase 1: qualitative scale development
3.3.1.1 Domain of construct specification and content 
analysis
This study gathered the scale items through an analysis of Industry 5.0 
and RII by examining the pertinent literature in order to acquire the initial 
item pool. Alternatively, Churchill (1979) also advocated doing qualitative 
interviews to gather knowledge from experts and create better survey items 
for the target topic. In the current study, semi-structured interviews were 
used since they allowed for the collection of open-ended data, respondent 
thought exploration, topic-specific feelings, and beliefs, as well as in-depth 
personal and sensitive issue examination (DeJonckheere & Vaughn, 2019). 
In order to find the right set of field participants, purposive sampling was 
chosen since it allowed for the collection of a variety of opinions and the 
acquisition of fresh ideas for discussion (Kummer et al., 2021). A profes￾sional team of business elites who are knowledgeable about the issue, have 
the necessary tools, appreciate the value of working, and have the ability to 
set aside enough time has been chosen. Table 3.1 lists the traits of this group 
of experts.
Table 3.1 Profile of panel of expert
Item Frequency
Valid 
(%) Item Frequency
Valid 
(%)
Gender Career
Female 18 50 Manager 8 22.22
Male 18 50 Employee 8 22.22
University Lecturer 20 55.56
Experience (Years) Education
5–10 15 41.67 Associate Professor 2 5.56
11–16 8 22.22 PhD degree 11 30.56
17–21 8 22.22 Master degree 23 63.88
22–27 1 2.78
28–33 3 8.33
Over 33 1 2.7880 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
A series of questions were left open-ended, leading to a number of follow￾up questions based on the respondents’ responses because open-ended 
responses were a useful tool for examining and comprehending participants’ 
experiences and perspectives (Feng & Behar-Horenstein, 2019). This allowed 
the respondents to simply and fully express their various perceptions of RII. 
In order for participants to fully understand what we discussed because these 
terms are theoretical, the researchers clarified the definitions of Industry 5.0 
and RII before the interview began. Every interview lasted 45–60 minutes.
3.3.1.2 Analysis strategy
The qualitative data was then analyzed using NVivo version 12.2 to extract 
all of the responses and record the most common keywords. The content 
was analyzed from the feedback of 36 respondents,1,341 words in total, 
and only words that appeared four times or more were retained (Fetscherin 
& Stephano, 2016). This standard assisted in removing unimportant data. 
For further assessment and selection, the remaining terms were ordered in 
descending order by frequency of occurrence.
3.3.1.3 Peer review
The assertions in the experimental form, which had 83 statements, were 
assessed in the following phase. These questions were given to subject mat￾ter experts for feedback on content validity, clarity, and developmental rel￾evance in accordance with DeVellis’s (2017) recommendations. The expert 
panel, made up of ten respondents including five lecturers from the informa￾tion technology field and five practitioners from SMEs, was requested to 
rate each item as “prerequisite,” “helpful and indispensable,” or “not imper￾ative” based on how well it adhered to the definition. Items that received 
more than 90% of positive votes (either “prerequisite” or “helpful and not 
indispensable”) would be retained.
The items were improved, developed, and combined based on the evalua￾tion process to create a preliminary scale with 35 candidate items for each 
sub-scale. This led to the creation of the first pilot questionnaire, which 
contained 35 items, based on the statements discovered through the concep￾tual analysis evaluations.
3.3.1.4 Pilot survey study
A five-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 1 (extensively disagree) to 5 
(extensively agree) was employed for all the measurements. In order to test 
for internal consistency and to whittle down the number of items to a toler￾able quantity, the first questionnaire was created. The small-scale pilot test 
required participation from 300 respondents in order to maintain the input 
corroboration. Information technology middle and senior managers make up Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 81
the bulk of this stage’s audience. The questionnaires were sent using the con￾venience sampling method to those who were reachable. The survey’s imple￾mentation period was from April 2022 to June 2022. The Cronbach’s α value 
was employed to examine the degree of internal consistency of each con￾struct of the pilot questionnaire (Dunn et al., 2013) and expected to be at 0.7 
or more to generate an acceptable reliability coefficient (Hair et al., 2011). In 
this regard, the measurement scales with the Cronbach’s α value reported to 
be greater than 0.7 would be retained. In contrast, the measurement scales 
with the Cronbach’s α value reported to be below 0.7 would be eliminated 
from the dataset. In addition, the questionnaire and several items were later 
updated and rewritten where necessary based on their feedback and observa￾tions. In doing so, a total of 32 items were used in the questionnaire.
3.3.1.5 Discussion
Hinged on the scale construction phase recommendations from DeVellis 
and Thorpe (2021) and Churchill (1979), Phase 1 in this research sought 
to produce a suitable item pool that accurately matched the construct of 
RII. The methods used in this study created a clear, logical, and systematic 
process that guaranteed the quality of the first item pool. In a nutshell, the 
initial item pool was improved in Phase 1 using several techniques, yielding 
32 items for additional quantitative scale validation in Study 2.
3.3.2 Phase 2: quantitative scale validation
3.3.2.1 Scale purification and refinement
This study gathered quantitative survey data from accountants in SMEs to 
further analyze the scale’s validity and reliability. The SMEs in the Southern 
regions in Vietnam made up the sample unit of analysis for this study, and 
the accountants in SMEs were selected as the study’s target participants. 
These businesses were frequently chosen in a number of earlier studies on 
the application of innovation (e.g., Nguyen & Wongsurawat, 2012; Hoang 
& Otake, 2014), as the southern regions of Vietnam have been regarded 
as the most dynamic regions (Pham & Vu, 2022). In addition, SMEs in 
Southern Vietnam tended to implement innovations more quickly and 
successfully than SMEs in other parts of Vietnam, according to Ha et al. 
(2022). Incredibly, in view of the rapidly spreading use of digital technolo￾gies, accountants would become essential to a successful outcome (Zybery 
& Rova, 2014). In this study, convenience sampling and snowball sampling 
were used in combination. The paper-and-pencil questionnaire survey was 
employed for data collection. The primary data collection lasted from mid￾May to mid-September 2022. After screening and examination of the ques￾tionnaires, a final sample size of 723 cases with a data loss rate of 12.89 
percent was left for analysis. A detailed description of demographic data 
collected from the survey is demonstrated in Table 3.2.82 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Table 3.2 Distribution of participants based on demographic characteristics
Item Contents Frequency Valid (%)
Gender
Male 452 62.52
Female 271 37.48
Age (years)
20 to Under 30 39 5.39
30 to Under 40 364 50.35
40 to Under 50 256 35.41
50 to Under 60 64 8.85
Education
Undergraduate 712 98.48
Postgraduate 11 1.52
Experience 
(years)
Under 10 39 5.39
10 to Under 20 358 49.52
20 to Under 30 262 36.24
30 to Under 40 64 8.85
Business type
Production of food items 284 39.28
Production of other machinery and 
equipment 66 9.13
Production of fabricated metal products 42 5.81
Production of electrical equipment 39 5.39
Manufacture of electronic components, 
computers, visual, sounding, and 
communication equipment 25 3.46
Production of goods made of rubber 
and plastic 71 9.82
Production of medical, precision, and 
optical instruments, watches, and 
clocks 12 1.66
Production of pharmaceuticals, 
medicinal chemicals 29 4.01
Production of coke, briquettes, and 
refined petroleum products 14 1.94
Production of goods made of fur, 
clothes, and accessories 23 3.18
Production of fundamental metals 66 9.13
Production of leather, luggage, and 
footwear 52 7.19Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 83
As the goal of exploratory factor analysis (EFA) is to identify the quantity 
and type of common factors in a group of variables in order to decrease 
their factor structure, EFA is appropriate for use in an exploratory investiga￾tion, especially when there is no prior theory regarding the interactions 
between variables (Stevens, 2002). By using the Kaiser–Meyer–Olkin (KMO) 
test and Bartlett’s test of sphericity, it is determined whether the factor anal￾ysis of the variables under study can be used and whether the model’s joint 
significance is valid. Since the KMO value was 0.812, it was clear that the 
data set was appropriate for EFA. Additionally, Bartlett’s test of sphericity 
was performed to examine the possibility of multiple co-relationships 
among variables. The result was highly significant [χ2(666) = 18.020, p = 
0.000], suggesting that the correlation matrix demonstrated appropriate lin￾earity between the variables. A structure of eight components that accounted 
for about 58.60% of the overall variation was revealed by the initial study. 
The outcomes of factor loads are displayed in Table 3.3.
3.3.2.2 Collecting information and reexamining scale 
characteristics
Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) was performed following the EFA to 
determine how measured RII factors contribute to the conceptual frame￾work (Harrington, 2009). CFA was applied using structural equation mod￾eling (SEM) using the maximum likelihood method.
Using Kaynak’s (2003) suggestion as a foundation, the indicators used to 
assess the goodness of the model included the Chi-square to degree of free￾dom (Chi-square/df), goodness of fit index (GFI), comparative fit index 
(CFI), and root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), and Tucker–
Lewis index (TLI) was also included for further model fitness assurance 
(Prasetyo et al., 2020). All of the recorded indices appeared to comply with 
the cut-off criteria suggested by earlier researchers, which supported the 
measurement models’ claim that they completely fit the acquired data based 
on the results listed in Table 3.4.
The skewness and kurtosis coefficients were investigated to determine if 
they met the CFA’s normalcy requirements. More specifically, it was sug￾gested that skewness values should range from −2 to +2 to show the char￾acteristics of a normal distribution and that kurtosis values should vary 
from −7 to +7 to be appropriate for SEM study (Watkins, 2018). The skew￾ness values for 32 items in the current study ranged from −0.918 to 2.756. 
The values of skewness for 32 items were simultaneously found to range 
between −1.351 and 3.233.
Internal consistency and item-total correlation were calculated to make 
sure the scale was reliable. The relationship between each scale item and the 
overall scale score was known as item-total correlation. The items were 
indicative of a comparable construct when there was a positive and high 84 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Table 3.3 EFA results of the readiness of Industry 5.0 implementation
Factor/item
Factor 
loading
Institutional readiness. Eigen value: 3.324; Variance explained: 9.538%
INR1 We closely adhere to industry 5.0 implementation regulations 
and standards. 0.780
INR2 We pay great attention to recommendations from professional 
associations and other government agencies on promising 
future directions.
0.770
INR3 We implement Industry 5.0 to get financial, tax, and other 
incentives from the government. 0.786
INR4 We implement Industry 5.0 for public image certifications and 
recognitions 0.898
Task readiness. Eigen value: 2.918; Variance explained: 8.451%
TAR1 Our organization implements environmental solutions 0.823
TAR3 Our organization implements sustainability-focused business 
model 0.797
TAR4 Our organization implements strategic planning participation 0.819
TAR5 Our organization tracks sustainability metrics 0.802
Management readiness. Eigen value: 2.727; Variance explained: 7.850%
MAR1 Our management has a plan to digitize the production process. 0.766
MAR2 The Industry 5.0 production process should be taken into 
consideration, according to our management. 0.864
MAR3 We have the right leadership in place to implement digitized 
production. 0.782
MAR5 Our management has commitment to upgrade the production 
process.
0.767
Human resource readiness. Eigen value: 2.699; Variance explained: 7.682%
HURR1 Our human resource acquires technical knowledge 0.808
HURR3 Our human resource acquires technology management capability. 0.730
HURR4 Our human resource acquires relational knowledge. 0.779
HURR5 Our senior managers acquire managerial skills 0.744
Ecosystem actor readiness. Eigen value: 2.303; Variance explained: 6.589%
ECAR1 The capacity of a human actor to select from a variety of actors 
and resources to collaborate with or use during the Industry 
5.0 implementation process
0.803
ECAR2 The capacity of a human actor to detect and appropriately react 
to the good and negative effects of other actors during the 
Industry 5.0 implementation process
0.724
ECAR3 The capacity of a human actor, when dealing with other actors 
during the Industry 5.0 implementation process, to adapt to 
diverging institutions (i.e., various norms, regulations, or beliefs).
0.766
ECAR4 During the Industry 5.0 implementation process, a human actor’s 
self-assurance in his or her capacity to master particular skills 
or jobs
0.729
(Continued )Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 85
correlation between them (Koc & Barut, 2016). The correlation was consid￾ered to have a cut-off value of 0.30 (Pallant, 2007). Cronbach’s alpha con￾sistency coefficient was used to calculate the scale’s internal consistency 
level. For internal consistency, an Cronbach’s alpha of 0.70 or above was 
required (DeVellis & Thorpe, 2021).
Factor/item
Factor 
loading
Financial readiness. Eigen value: 2.228; Variance explained: 6.427%
FIR1 Our organization is financially ready to switch to digital 
production. 0.697
FIR2 Industry 5.0-related financial incentives from agencies are known 
to our organization. 0.733
FIR3 Agency financing for Industry 5.0 is available to our organization. 0.725
FIR4 Our organization is aware of the agencies to whom our 
organization can apply for funding for Industry 5.0. 0.747
Technology readiness. Eigen value: 2.151; Variance explained: 6.232%
TER1 Our information technology setup might be improved for the 
Industry 5.0 manufacturing process. 0.684
TER2 For Industry 5.0 processes, our main equipment could be 
networked. 0.672
TER3 The size of our factory floor allows for digital production. 0.767
TER4 Our infrastructure’s adaptability fits Industry 5.0. 0.744
Cybersecurity readiness. Eigen value: 2.029; Variance explained: 5.831%
CYR1 Our organization implements the identification and detection 
process for cybersecurity risk management 0.623
CYR2 Our organization implements the protection process for 
cybersecurity risk management 0.749
CYR3 Our organization implements the response process for 
cybersecurity risk management 0.603
CYR4 Our organization implements the recovery process for 
cybersecurity risk management 0.759
Table 3.3 (Continued) EFA results of the readiness of Industry 5.0 implementation
Table 3.4 Results of measurement model analysis
Fit indices
Measurement 
model
Suggested 
value
Global 
model fit References
CMIN/DF 1.490 ≤3 Yes Hair et al. (2014)
GFI 0.927 ≥0.9 Yes Little (2013)
CFI 0.969 ≥0.9 Yes Tiglao et al. (2020); Dominguez 
et al. (2019)
TLI 0.966 ≥0.9 Yes Tiglao et al. (2020); Dominguez 
et al. (2019)
RMSEA 0.025 ≤0.06 Yes Xia and Yang (2018)86 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Additionally, it was decided that the composite reliabilities of all the 
structures would surpass the specified internal consistency accomplishment 
level of 0.70. (Hair et al., 2018). For the purpose of demonstrating a mea￾suring model with equivalent convergent validity, the AVE of all constructs 
had to be greater than the minimal threshold of 0.5 (Hair et al., 2018). The 
specifics of these outputs in Table 3.5 highlight the measurement model’s 
validity, internal consistency, and dependability.
3.3.2.3 Model development and testing
The goal of the current study was to create a model that would explain how 
the elements of RII interacted with the benefits that SMEs may expect from 
adopting the technology. The distinct data set using the valid and trustwor￾thy RII scale was captured to accomplish this goal. Figure 3.1 shows the 
research model with the hypotheses. Below are the hypotheses that, accord￾ing to earlier literature, explain the links. Empirical observations were pro￾vided after information about participants and the data-gathering process.
Hypothesis development procedure. The technological component of the 
TOE framework denoted the pool of internal as well as external technologies 
to the enterprises (Chittipaka et al., 2022). In the current research, techno￾logical factors were characterized by the presence of technology readiness, 
cybersecurity readiness, and task readiness for Industry 5.0 implementation.
In order to adopt advanced technologies, businesses must be technologi￾cally prepared. Technology readiness is described as an individual inclina￾tion to adopt and apply new technologies to achieve goals in their personal 
and professional lives (Parasuraman, 2000). At the organizational level, 
technology readiness can be understood as the organizational inclination to 
Table 3.5 Results summary of measurement model assessment
Construct
Item 
abbreviation AVE
Cronbach’s 
alpha
Composite 
reliability Inference
Technology factors
Technology readiness TER 0.514 0.808 0.809 Retained
Cybersecurity readiness CYR 0.500 0.774 0.778 Retained
Task readiness TAR 0.655 0.884 0.884 Retained
Organizational factors
Financial readiness FIR 0.524 0.814 0.815 Retained
Management readiness MAR 0.631 0.870 0.872 Retained
Human resource 
readiness HURR 0.585 0.849 0.849 Retained
Environmental factors
Institutional readiness INR 0.656 0.882 0.883 Retained
Ecosystem actor 
readiness ECAR 0.570 0.840 0.841 RetainedStructural dimensions and measurement of RII 87
adopt and apply new technologies to achieve the overall goals of the orga￾nization. How technologically proficient an organization is based on how 
ready it is to implement Industry 5.0 technology in its unique organization 
to meet organizational goals. This is a vital component since how well an 
organization manages these technologies will influence how successfully 
Industry 5.0 is implemented.
The harmonization between the development of advanced information 
technology and socio-economic issues has become the main concern of ade￾quate assimilation of Industry 5.0 principles. It may lead to a significant risk 
toward the successful rollout of Industry 5.0 (Deguchi & Karasawa, 2020). 
In response to this, the deployment of environmental solutions and a business 
plan incorporating sustainability, participation in strategic planning, and 
keeping track of sustainability metrics will enable SMEs to be well-prepared 
for Industry 5.0 implementation. In light of the combined impact of the four 
subdimensions, the formation of task readiness mirrors the organizational 
tendency to approach and implement Industry 5.0 from a holistic level.
Industry 5.0 is anticipated to introduce a multitude of interconnected sys￾tems, processes, machines, devices, platforms, and nodes that will help to 
close the gap between the physical and digital worlds (Porambage et al., 
2021). Although the aforementioned components constitute a close net￾work, businesses must ensure there is no security breach without sacrificing 
service and operational standards (Maddikunta et al., 2022). To ensure the 
success of Industry 5.0, businesses must address security issues relating to 
authentication, integrity, access control, and audit (Liyanage et al., 2020). 
As a result, enterprises can use cybersecurity readiness as a roadmap to 
enhance the security of their information technology infrastructure and 
online services. In light of the issues raised above, the second hypothesis is 
conjectured accordingly.
Figure 3.1 Hypothesized model.
Technological 
factors
Organizational
factors
Environmental
factors
Expected benefits 
from Industry 5.0 
implementation
H1
H2
H388 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Hypothesis 1(H1). TEF instigates a significant effect on EBI in a posi￾tive manner.
According to Gide and Sandu (2015), the internal qualities and resources 
of the company, including both tangible and intangible resources, are 
included in the TOE framework’s organizational perspective (Chittipaka et 
al., 2022). In earlier investigations, different elements that include the orga￾nizational aspect have been identified (Alsetoohy et al., 2019; Gutierrez et 
al., 2015; Senyo et al., 2016). The organizational elements are heavily influ￾enced by internal factors, management support and awareness, and employee 
involvement (Alraja et al., 2022). Additionally, the company needed to have 
access to specialists and financial resources in order to implement new tech￾nologies (Iacovou et al., 1995; Parasuraman, 2000; Chwelos et al., 2001). 
Therefore, businesses are more likely to succeed in adopting digital technol￾ogy if they invest more money in doing so (Nikopoulou et al., 2023). Similar 
to this, numerous studies discovered that the availability of skilled personnel 
has an impact on an organization’s readiness to adopt new technology 
(Ifinedo, 2011). On the other side, increasing expertise and knowledge 
enables technology users to utilize technology more effectively (Rogers, 
2003; Gao et al., 2012). Building on the perspectives of the TOE framework, 
the presence of appropriate and enabling organizational elements enhances 
Industry 5.0 adoption by organizations. In the current research, organiza￾tional factors were characterized by the presence of financial readiness, 
management readiness, and human resource readiness for Industry 5.0 
implementation. In light of the issues raised above, the second hypothesis is 
conjectured accordingly.
Hypothesis 2 (H2). ORF instigates a significant effect on EBI in a posi￾tive manner.
An organization’s operating environment includes all relevant factors, 
such as laws and regulations (Tornatzky et al., 1990). The environmental 
dimension in the TOE framework refers to the external environment of an 
organization (Alraja et al., 2022; Chittipaka et al., 2022). Concretely, the 
environmental context represents the external social and technological sup￾port influencing the implementation of advanced technology in organiza￾tions (Tornatzky et al., 1990; Pan & Jang, 2008; Lin, 2014). In the current 
research, environmental factors were characterized by the presence of insti￾tutional readiness and ecosystem actor readiness for Industry 5.0 implemen￾tation. Building a successful digital economy depends on having effective 
information technology policies and regulatory frameworks (Othman et al., 
2023). As proposed by Zhu et al. (2004), the impact of government is crucial 
within the TOE framework. Government laws are essential for the adoption 
and use of digital technology (Intan Salwani et al., 2009). Accordingly, 
government policies include incentives and prohibitions (Awa et al., 2017). Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 89
As stated by Baker (2012), when governments place restrictions on the mar￾ket, the adoption of digital technology may be forced. On the other hand, 
manufacturing and product/service delivery nowadays are growingly real￾ized among a wide range of actors outside of dyadic contacts, driven by 
technological advancements. The actor ecosystem readiness enables a cus￾tomer or an employee to navigate the Industry 5.0 implementation process 
effectively. In light of the issues raised above, the third hypothesis is posited 
accordingly.
Hypothesis 3 (H3). ENF instigates a significant effect on EBI in a posi￾tive manner.
Operationalization and purification of constructs. The indicators for each 
construct of the current hypothesized model stemmed from precedent 
literature and the scale development phase in this research.
Technology context. The measurement scale for the technology context 
covered three ingredients, namely, technology readiness, cybersecurity 
readiness, and task readiness. More concretely, the criteria employed to 
evaluate technology readiness comprised four dimensions. The criteria 
employed to evaluate cybersecurity readiness comprised four dimen￾sions. The criteria employed to evaluate task readiness comprised four 
dimensions.
Organizational context. The measurement scale for organizational con￾text covered three ingredients, namely, financial readiness, manage￾ment readiness, and human resource readiness. More concretely, 
the criteria employed to evaluate financial readiness comprised four 
dimensions. The criteria employed to evaluate management readiness 
comprised four dimensions. The criteria employed to evaluate human 
resource readiness comprised four dimensions.
Environmental context. The measurement scale for environmental con￾text covered two ingredients, namely, institutional readiness and 
ecosystem actor readiness. More concretely, the criteria employed to 
evaluate institutional readiness comprised four dimensions. The cri￾teria employed to evaluate ecosystem actor readiness comprised four 
dimensions.
Expected benefits from Industry 5.0 implementation. The criteria 
employed to evaluate EBI comprised five dimensions which were cre￾ated from those proposed by Venkatesh et al. (2003); Chung and Park 
(2021), Ragu-Nathan et al. (2004), Khan et al. (2013), and Jung et al. 
(2020) and adjusted to be appropriate with the current study setting.
Participants and data collection procedure. This study gathered quantita￾tive survey data from accountants in SMEs to further analyze the scale’s 
validity and reliability. The SMEs in Vietnam made up the sample unit 
of analysis for this study, and the accountants in SMEs were selected 
as the study’s target participants. According to Singh and Srivastava 90 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
(2019), there has not been a scholarly agreement on the precise sample 
size to use for CB-SEM deployment. In particular, a sample size that 
would yield an informant-to-informant ratio of between 1:4 and 1:10 
was advised (Hinkin, 1995). While Hair et al. (2014) maintained that 
the sample size should fall within the range of 100–400 to be adequate 
to implement SEM, Wolf et al. (2013) suggested a sample size varied 
from 30 to 460, while Urbach and Ahlemann (2010) reasoned that the 
sample size should fall within the range of 200–800 responses for CB￾SEM approach. From the begin of October 2022 to the mid of March 
2023, the survey took place. After removing all invalid responses, a 
total of 1,283 legitimate surveys were obtained, representing an 83.31 
percent response rate. Given that there were 1,283 responses, this num￾ber of samples met the prerequisites. A detailed description of demo￾graphic data collected from the survey is demonstrated in Table 3.6.
Results of the measurement model. Factor loadings of the items to their 
respective constructions were supported as convergent if they were 
higher than the criterion of 0.6 (Kline, 2015). In contrast, AVE values 
larger than 0.5 provide accepted proof of convergent validity mea￾surements for the notion. (Hanus & Wu, 2016). Based on established 
loadings and measurement errors for each item, the CR was used to 
evaluate the reliability of each concept (Corsini et al., 2019). It was 
advised that the 0.70 literature cutoffs serve as the accepted threshold 
for the values of Cronbach’s alpha and CR (Hair et al., 2017). The 
results in Table 3.7 highlight the fact that all of the model’s constructs 
met the aforementioned requirements.
In order to determine if the constructions’ components were uncorrelated 
with other constructs (Corsini et al., 2019) or obtained a low correlation 
with other constructs in the research, discriminant validity was used (Hair 
et al., 2010). For each latent variable, the square roots of the AVE correla￾tions comparison and the inter-constructs comparison were used to test the 
discriminant validity (Alzahrani et al., 2017). The square root of the AVE 
was proposed to be more than the correlation between the constructs based 
on Fornell and Larcker’s (1981) criterion. Additionally, each component 
should show a higher loading on its related factor than in the cross-loading 
(Gotz et al., 2010). When the correlations between any latent variables were 
noticeably less than 1.0, the discriminant validity of the constructs was also 
attained (Sekaran & Bougie, 2016). According to the statistical findings 
shown in Table 3.8, the hypothesized model reflected the aforementioned 
conditions, and as a result, the constructs gained discriminant validity.
Using Kaynak’s (2003) suggestion as a foundation, the indicators used to 
assess the goodness of the model included the Chi-square to the degree of 
freedom (Chi-square/df), goodness of fit index (GFI), comparative fit index 
(CFI), root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) and TLI was also 
included for further model fitness assurance (Prasetyo et al., 2020). All of Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 91
Table 3.6 Distribution of participants based on demographic characteristics
Item Contents Frequency Valid (%)
Gender
Male 790 61.57
Female 493 38.43
Age (years)
20 to Under 30 148 11.54
30 to Under 40 719 56.03
40 to Under 50 268 20.89
50 to Under 60 148 11.54
Education
Undergraduate 1,248 97.27
Postgraduate 35 2.73
Experience 
(years)
Under 10 148 11.54
10 to Under 20 723 56.35
20 to Under 30 269 20.96
30 to Under 40 143 11.15
Business type
Production of food items 313 24.40
Production of other machinery and 
equipment
53 4.13
Production of fabricated metal products 34 2.65
Production of electrical equipment 45 3.51
Manufacture of electronic components, 
computers, visual, sounding, and 
communication equipment
29 2.26
Production of goods made of rubber and 
plastic
84 6.55
Production of medical, precision, and 
optical instruments, watches, and clocks
23 1.79
Production of motor vehicles, trailers, and 
semitrailers
41 3.20
Production of chemicals and chemical 
products, except pharmaceuticals and 
medicinal chemicals
32 2.49
Production of other transport equipment 24 1.87
Production of goods made of fur, clothes, 
and accessories
33 2.57
Production of leather, luggage, and 
footwear
32 2.49
Production of other non-metallic mineral 
products
45 3.51
(Continued )92 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Item Contents Frequency Valid (%)
Production of textiles, except apparel 83 6.47
Production of pulp, paper, and paper 
products
73 5.69
Production of furniture 93 7.25
Production of wood and products of wood 
and cork
42 3.27
Production of fundamental metals 134 10.44
Production of pharmaceuticals, medicinal 
chemicals
22 1.71
Production of coke, briquettes, and refined 
petroleum products
48 3.75
Table 3.6 (Continued) Distribution of participants based on demographic characteristics
Table 3.7 Results summary of measurement model assessment
Construct
Item 
abbreviation
Convergent validity Construct reliability
Inference
Factor 
loadings 
ranges AVE
Cronbach’s 
alpha
Composite 
reliability
Technology 
factors
Technology 
readiness
TER 0.707–0.769 0.547 0.828 0.828 Retained
Cybersecurity 
readiness
CYR 0.630–0.737 0.5 0.774 0.777 Retained
Task readiness TAR 0.785–0.841 0.651 0.882 0.882 Retained
Organizational 
factors
Financial 
readiness
FIR 0.688–0.767 0.521 0.812 0.813 Retained
Management 
readiness
MAR 0.770–0.862 0.636 0.872 0.874 Retained
Human resource 
readiness
HURR 0.733–0.811 0.584 0.848 0.848 Retained
Environmental 
factors
Institutional 
readiness
INR 0.756–0.907 0.647 0.878 0.88 Retained
Ecosystem actor 
readiness
ECAR 0.726–0.782 0.557 0.834 0.834 Retained
Expected 
benefits from 
Industry 5.0
EBI 0.717–0.852 0.591 0.877 0.878 RetainedStructural dimensions and measurement of RII 93
the recorded indices appeared to comply with the cut-off criteria suggested 
by earlier researchers, which supported the measurement model and struc￾tural model in that they completely fit the acquired data based on the results 
listed in Table 3.9.
Results of the structural model. With reference to the parameter estimates 
and outcomes of the models’ hypotheses detailed in Table 3.10, the CR for 
all variables exceeded the value of 1.96, and the p-value met the threshold, 
implying that the regression coefficients for the three direct effects were sig￾nificant. Concretely, the positive and substantial path coefficients evinced 
that TEF demonstrated vigorous impacts on EFF (β = 0.232; p = 0.002) and 
ORF demonstrated vigorous impacts on EFF (β = 0.156; p = 0.008). On the 
other hand, the direct effect of ENF on EFF was positive and statistically 
significant (β = 0.346; p = 0.002). Thus, H1–H3 were accepted.
Table 3.8 Results of discriminant validity
EBI TAR INR MAR HURR ECAR TER FIR CYR
EBI 1
TAR 0.111 1
INR 0.105 0.123 1
MAR 0.03 0.145 0.148 1
HURR 0.201 0.078 0.019 0.078 1
ECAR 0.196 −0.003 0.116 0.072 0.146 1
TER 0.114 0.178 0.139 0.085 0.049 0.07 1
FIR 0.054 0.035 0.056 0.017 0.103 0.118 0.065 1
CYR 0.134 0.055 0.027 0.075 0.102 0.124 0.153 0.076 1
Table 3.9 The outcomes of measurement and structural model analysis
Model fitting 
index
Model 
fitting 
values
Standard 
values of the 
measurement 
model
Parameter 
estimates of the 
structural model
Result 
judgment Recommended by
Chi-square/
df < 3 1.838 1.996 Satisfied
Hair et al. 
(2014)
TLI ≥ 0.9 0.973 0.967 Satisfied Little (2013)
CFI ≥ 0.9 0.976 0.970 Satisfied
Tiglao et al. 
(2020); 
Dominguez 
et al. (2019)
GFI ≥ 0.9 0.955 0.950 Satisfied
Tiglao et al. 
(2020); 
Dominguez 
et al. (2019)
RMSEA < 0.06 0.026 0.028 Satisfied
Xia and Yang 
(2018)94 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
3.3.2.4 Discussion: Phase 2
Through a series of analyses, the interlinks and patterns within the codes 
were unearthed. Figure 3.2 presents the first-order codes, second-order the￾oretical sub-categories, and aggregate theoretical dimensions collectively. 
Following are three categories of themes that are revealed by the three 
aggregate dimensions.
The current research develops a scale for measuring the structural charac￾teristics of RII within SMEs in emerging countries. The structural character￾istics of RII include three core pillars: technological factors, organizational 
factors, and environmental factors. More concretely, the technological fac￾tors act as a high-order construct comprising three unidimensional con￾structs, namely, technology readiness, cybersecurity readiness, and task 
readiness. Particularly, by introducing numerous interconnected systems, 
processes, machines, devices, platforms, and nodes, Industry 5.0 is predicted 
to close the gap between the physical and digital worlds (Porambage et al., 
2021). Although the aforementioned things are interconnected in a dense 
network, businesses must ensure that there is no security breach without 
sacrificing operating and service standards (Maddikunta et al., 2022). To 
support the success of Industry 5.0, businesses must address security issues 
relating to authentication, integrity, access control, and audit (Liyanage 
et al., 2020). On the other hand, Industry 5.0 is still in its infancy, but as 
time goes on, it will include a web of millions of interconnected equipment, 
devices, systems, and people that will collectively improve sustainability, 
productivity, and resilience. To scale up and connect to and create such a 
broad network, businesses must be sensitive to the demand and growing 
workload (Mukherjee et al., 2023).
Organizational factors served as a high-order construct comprising three 
unidimensional constructs, namely, financial readiness, management readi￾ness, and human resource readiness. Building on the perspectives of 
Mukherjee et al. (2023), researchers believe that when Industry 5.0 emerges, 
robots may begin to perform routine daily tasks. The ability to handle 
unusual circumstances, inventiveness, and design are only a few of the spe￾cialized skill sets that humans may need at the same time. Given that Industry 
5.0 is still in its very early stages, the government, society, and organizations 
may not yet be prepared to provide the necessary trainers and training pro￾grams (Sheridan, 2016). Additionally, Industry 5.0 would feature excessive 
Table 3.10 Structural coefficients (β) of the hypothesized model
Hypothesis 
No. Hypothesized path Standardized SE CR p-value Inference
H1 TEF → EBI 0.232 0.017 3.131 0.002 Buttressed
H2 ORF → EBI 0.156 0.086 2.672 0.008 Buttressed
H3 ENF → EBI 0.346 0.049 3.056 0.002 ButtressedStructural dimensions and measurement of RII 95
technological exploitation, coworking between humans and robots, and 
mass customization through networked gadgets (Fukuda, 2020). These 
would necessitate large investments from governments as well as SMEs.
Environmental factors act as a high-order construct comprising two uni￾dimensional constructs, namely, institutional readiness and ecosystem actor 
readiness. As argued by Maddikunta et al. (2022), human–robot coworking, 
6G, digital twins, additive manufacturing, drone technology, networked, 
intelligent devices, and numerous systems are just a few of the newer, smarter 
Figure 3.2 Data analysis and construct evolution.
First-order codes
Second-order theoretical
sub-categories codes
Aggregate theoretical
dimensions
 Our information technology setup might be improved for the Industry 5.0 
manufacturing process.
 For Industry 5.0 processes, our main equipment could be networked.
 The size of our factory floor allows for digital production.
 Our infrastructure's adaptability fits Industry 5.0.
Technology readiness
Technological
factors
 Our organization implement the identification and detection process for cyber 
security risk management
 Our organization implement the protection process for cyber security risk
management
 Our organization implement the response process for cyber security risk
management
 Our organization implement the recovery process for cyber security risk
management
Cybersecurity readiness
Task readiness  Our organization implements environmental solutions
 Our organization implements sustainability-focused business model
 Our organization implements strategic planning participation
 Our organization tracks sustainability metrics
 Our organization is financially ready to switch to digital production.
 Industry 5.0-related financial incentives from agencies are known to our
organization.
 Agency financing for Industry 5.0 is available to our organization.
 Our organization is aware of the agencies to whom our organization can apply 
for funding for Industry 5.0.
Financial readiness
Organizational
factors
 Our management has a plan to digitize the production process.
 The Industry 5.0 production process should be taken into consideration,
according to our management.
 We have the right leadership in place to implement digitized production. 
 Our management has commitment to upgrade production process.
Management readiness
Human resource readiness
 Our human resource acquires technical knowledge
 Our human resource acquires technology management capability.
 Our human resource acquires relational knowledge.
 Our senior managers acquire managerial skills
 We closely adhere to industry 5.0 implementation regulations and standards.
 We pay great aention to recommendations from professional associations and 
other government agencies on promising future directions.
 We implement Industry 5.0 to get financial, tax, and other incentives from the 
government.
 We implement Industry 5.0 for public image certifications and recognitions
Institutional readiness
Environmental
factors
 The capacity of a human actor to select from a variety of actors and resources to
collaborate with or use during the Industry 5.0 implementation process
 The capacity of a human actor to detect and appropriately react to the good and 
negative effects of other actors during the Industry 5.0 implementation process
 The capacity of a human actor, when dealing with other actors during the 
Industry 5.0 implementation process, to adapt to diverging institutions (i.e.,
various norms, regulations, or beliefs).
 During the Industry 5.0 implementation process, a human actor's self-assurance 
in his or her capacity to master particular skills or jobs
Ecosystem actor readiness96 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
ways of working that are anticipated to come with Industry 5.0. In order to 
manage each of these, new laws and regulations for overall ecosystem orien￾tation, including laws for human–robot coworking, discriminating between 
different sorts of robots, as well as different types of machines such as 
drones and robots, need to be created (Demir et al., 2019). Additionally, it is 
necessary to develop clear regulations that include agility and flexibility in 
order to promote innovation in the ecosystem and in technology (Xu et al., 
2021).
3.4 FINAL CONSIDERATION AND FUTURE 
EXTENSIONS
3.4.1 General discussion
In the past several years, significant attention has been made to human–
robot collaboration in Industry 5.0, with a focus primarily on the role of 
the human in the technological transformation (Javaid & Haleem, 2020; 
Nahavandi, 2019; Pathak et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2021). Additionally, a num￾ber of studies examine the human role from various angles, such as techni￾cal, ethical, operational, societal, and safety, and this has emerged as one of 
the main research directions to shape this new industrial revolution (Demir 
et al., 2019; Callaghan, 2019). However, radical changes to Industry 5.0 will 
not be feasible in terms of the fundamental values without taking the SMEs 
into account (Madhavan et al., 2022). Even though the readiness of SMEs 
for digital transformation is critical, firms have a limited understanding of 
the required future skills and experience and their readiness to embark on 
the Industry 5.0 transformation. Thus, it is crucial to investigate SMEs’ RII. 
The main aim of this research is to explore RII which is defined from the 
perspectives of SMEs and formulate a measurement scale utilizing mixed 
methods in two phases. In the first phase, hinged on the scale construction 
phase recommendations from DeVellis and Thorpe (2021) and Churchill 
(1979), Phase 1 in this research sought to produce a suitable item pool that 
accurately matched the construct of RII. The methods used in this study 
created a clear, logical, and systematic process that guaranteed the quality 
of the first item pool. In a nutshell, the initial item pool was improved in 
Phase 1 using several techniques, yielding 32 items for additional quantita￾tive scale validation in Study 2. In the second phase, the current research 
develops a scale for measuring the structural characteristics of RII within 
SMEs in emerging countries. This study gathered quantitative survey data 
from a sample of 723 accountants in SMEs to further analyze the scale’s 
validity and reliability as well as scale characteristics reexamination. The 
EFA results and CFA results of RII released the structural characteristics of 
RII. Subsequently, the SEM was employed in the model development and 
testing procedure to create a model that would explain how the elements Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 97
of RII interacted with the benefits that SMEs may expect from adopting the 
technology by analyzing the statistical data from a sample of 1,283 accoun￾tants in SMEs. Consequently, the structural characteristics of RII comprised 
three core pillars: technological factors, organizational factors, and environ￾mental factors. More concretely, technological factors act as a high-order 
construct comprising three unidimensional constructs, namely, technology 
readiness, cybersecurity readiness, and task readiness. While organizational 
factors serve as a high-order construct comprising three unidimensional 
constructs, namely, financial readiness, management readiness, and human 
resource readiness, the environmental factors act as a high-order construct 
comprising two unidimensional constructs, namely, institutional readiness 
and ecosystem actor readiness.
3.4.2 Practical implications
Policy makers and practitioners will greatly benefit from the research’s empir￾ical findings. In order to implement Industry 5.0 successfully, senior manag￾ers in SMEs should focus even more on the technological aspect, according 
to the acquired findings, which will help prioritize the practices. As a result, 
senior managers in SMEs should be aware of the benefits of contemporary 
information technology and look for practical, workable solutions to speed 
up the adoption of Industry 5.0 across all internal organizational functions. 
Senior managers in SMEs are also urged to make every effort to equally 
share the necessary resources for enhancing and strengthening the organiza￾tion’s information technology infrastructure and implementing good human 
resource management practices.
The findings of this study also increase the leaders of SMEs’ understand￾ing of the importance of human resources and management productivity. In 
this regard, it has also been mandated that senior managers in SMEs focus 
on enhancing organizational staff proficiency through appropriate training 
programs to keep them up to date with the Industry 5.0 model. Intriguingly, 
the current publication sheds light on the significance of environmental fac￾tors, and this finding can lead to a deeper understanding for individuals 
looking for fresh approaches to problems relating to RII. Simply defined, the 
most important aspects of implementing Industry 5.0 will be the legal and 
regulatory framework as well as the close cooperation amongst ecosystem 
actors.
It is also envisaged that the findings of this study will assist policymakers 
and other relevant organizations in developing standards for the implemen￾tation of Industry 5.0 that will encourage their widespread acceptance 
among SMEs. Hardware and software makers as well as merchants are 
requesting that efforts focus more intently on the benefits and drawbacks of 
Industry 5.0 in order to advance cutting-edge systems in a way that is suited 
for SMEs’ unique needs. More concretely, technological initiatives and 
cybersecurity should be taken into consideration. As such, the hardware and 98 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
software makers should pay more concern to the identification and detec￾tion process, protection process, response process, and recovery process for 
cybersecurity risk management. On the other hand, merchants should place 
much more attention on the organizational tasks of potential customers to 
provide the most beneficial product/service.
3.4.3 Conclusion and future lines of study
Industry 5.0 is far from being implemented by manufacturing firms in devel￾oping countries (Xu et al., 2021), and many industries in emerging econo￾mies have not yet adopted similar new technology (Sharma et al., 2022; Raj 
et al., 2020). It is also unclear how well-equipped sectors are to make this 
digital transformation; it is difficult to make all processes digital because it 
takes a lot of time, money, and manpower. The shift of SMEs from Industry 
4.0 to Industry 5.0 is in fact fraught with challenges, such as a lack of 
resources (tools, expertise, and motivation), a lack of open innovation and 
strategy, and sustainability concerns. Despite the importance of SMEs’ read￾iness for the digital transformation, firms’ knowledge of the necessary future 
knowledge and experience and their readiness for the Industry 5.0 transition 
is low. The primary goal of this study is to investigate RII, as defined from 
the viewpoints of SMEs, and to develop a measurement scale using a com￾bination of approaches over the course of two phases. Following Churchill’s 
scale construction approach, the first phase determines three dimensions—
the technological, organizational, and environmental aspects—with eight 
components that have suitable convergent and discriminant validity.
The nomological validity of the RII scale is assessed in the second phase 
by examining how it connects to other theoretical conceptions. In spite of 
highlighting notable results, the current research effort in a new field of 
study ran into a number of unavoidable limitations. Nevertheless, the limi￾tations detailed could offer the starting points for new avenues generation 
for future works. First, the empirical sample in this study is limited to 
Vietnamese SMEs. Future research may also examine larger populations 
and various cultures. Additionally, future research examining the same char￾acteristics might take into account businesses from other nations. The fac￾tors examined in this study could have varying degrees of value in other 
contextual circumstances. Second, this study is beneficial to SMEs and poli￾cymakers, but due to time restraints during data collection, the sample size 
is restricted. Follow-up researchers may be able to get a more comprehen￾sive view of the issue regarding status and attitude toward Industry 5.0 
adoption and preparedness with a larger sample size. To get more interesting 
results, more groups with different levels of preparation (ready vs. not ready) 
should be researched. To comprehend the time-oriented behavior of Industry 
5.0 ready models, more complex research including a longitudinal study of 
the dimension prior to, during, and following the deployment of Industry 
5.0 should be conducted.Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 99
Finally, this study depends on individual-level data’s capacity to provide 
information regarding organizational-level constructs. Surveys are an effec￾tive way to gather data and offer a great place to start for additional activi￾ties, despite the fact that their explanatory power is restricted. However, it is 
crucial to recognize that survey data is gathered at the individual level and 
can be utilized to infer traits of the larger organization through equivalency 
testing. Nonetheless, the information in this research is based on an inter￾view with a single respondent and the responses to a questionnaire survey. 
Building an analysis on one individual’s perspective can be viewed as a con￾straint because one cannot be certain that this person has a comprehensive 
understanding of the subjects being studied. Future studies can thus investi￾gate these phenomena by using several responders from each organization 
to reinforce the results.
REFERENCES
Abed, S. S. (2020). Social commerce adoption using TOE framework: An empiri￾cal investigation of Saudi Arabian SMEs. International Journal of Information 
Management, 53, 102118. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102118
Alraja, M. N., Imran, R., Khashab, B. M., & Shah, M. (2022). Technological inno￾vation, sustainable green practices and SMEs sustainable performance in times 
of crisis (COVID-19 pandemic). Information Systems Frontiers, 24, 1081–1105. 
doi:10.1007/s10796-022-10250-z
Alsetoohy, O., Ayoun, B., Arous, S., Megahed, F., & Nabil, G. (2019). Intelligent agent 
technology: What affects its adoption in hotel food supply chain management? 
Journal of Hospitality and Tourism Technology, 10(3), 317–341. doi:10.1108/
JHTT-01-2018-0005
Alzahrani, A. I., Mahmud, I., Ramayah, T., Alfarraj, O., & Alalwan, N. (2017). 
Extending the theory of planned behavior (TPB) to explain online game play￾ing among Malaysian undergraduate students. Telematics and Informatics, 34(4), 
239–251. doi:10.1016/j.tele.2016.07.001
Awa, H. O., Ukoha, O., & Emecheta, B. C. (2016). Using T-O-E theoretical frame￾work to study the adoption of ERP solution. Cogent Business & Management, 
3(1), 1–23. doi:10.1080/23311975.2016.1196571
Awa, H. O., Ukoha, O., & Igwe, S. R. (2017). Revisiting technology-organization￾environment (T-O-E) theory for enriched applicability. The Bottom Line, 30(1), 
2–22. doi:10.1108/bl-12-2016-0044
Baker, J. (2012). The technology–organization–environment framework. In: 
Dwivedi, Y., Wade, M., Schneberger, S. (Eds.), Information Systems Theory. 
Integrated Series in Information Systems, vol 28. Springer, New York, NY. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-6108-2_12
Callaghan, C. W. (2019). Transcending the threshold limitation: A fifth indus￾trial revolution? Management Research Review, 43(4), 447–461. doi:10.1108/
mrr-03-2019-0102
Chau, P. Y. K., & Tam, K. Y. (1997). Factors affecting the adoption of open systems: 
An exploratory study. MIS Quarterly, 21(1), 1–24. doi:10.2307/249740100 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Chittipaka, V., Kumar, S., Sivarajah, U., Bowden, J. L.-H., & Manish Mohan Baral, M. 
M. (2022). Blockchain technology for supply chains operating in emerging markets: 
An empirical examination of technology-organization-environment (TOE) frame￾work. Annals of Operations Research, 1–28. doi:10.1007/s10479-022-04801-5
Chung, S.-I., & Park, H.-S. (2021). The influencing factors of SME’s acceptance 
intention to advance smart factory. Journal of Digital Convergence, 19(6), 199–
211. doi:10.14400/JDC.2021.19.6.199
Churchill, G. (1979). A paradigm for developing better measures of marketing con￾structs. Journal of Marketing Research, 16, 64–73. doi:10.2307/3150876
Chwelos, P., Benbasat, I., & Dexter, A.S. (2001). Empirical test of an EDI adoption 
model. Information Systems Research, 12(3), 304–321.
Ciasullo, M. V., Orciuoli, F., Douglas, A., & Palumbo, R. (2022). Putting Health 
4.0 at the service of Society 5.0: Exploratory insights from a pilot study. Socio￾Economic Planning Sciences, 80, 1–12. doi:10.1016/j.seps.2021.101163
Corsini, F., Appio, F. P., & Frey, M. (2019). Exploring the antecedents and con￾sequences of environmental performance in micro-enterprises: The case of the 
Italian craft beer industry. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 138, 
340–350. doi:10.1016/j.techfore.2018.10.018
Deguchi, A., & Karasawa, K. (2020). Issues and Outlook, vol. 155. Hitachi-UTokyo 
Laboratory (H-UTokyo Lab.).
DeJonckheere, M., & Vaughn, L. M. (2019). Semi-structured interviewing in pri￾mary care research: A balance of relationship and rigour. Family Medicine and 
Community Health, 7(2), 1–8. doi:10.1136/fmch-2018-000057
Demir, K. A., Döven, G., & Sezen, B. (2019). Industry 5.0 and human-robot co-working. 
Procedia Computer Science, 158, 688–695. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2019.09.104
DeVellis, R. F. (2017). Scale Development: Theory and Applications (4th ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
DeVellis, R. F., & Thorpe, C. T. (2021). Scale Development: Theory and Applications. 
London: Sage Publications.
Dominguez, L. C., Silkens, M.E.W.M., & Sanabria, A. (2019). The Dutch residency 
educational climate test: Construct and concurrent validation in Spanish lan￾guage. International Journal of Medical Education, 10, 138–148. doi:10.5116/
ijme.5d0c.bff7
Doyle-Kent, M., & Kopacek, P. (2019). Industry 5.0: Is the manufacturing industry 
on the cusp of a new revolution? In Proceedings of the International Symposium 
for Production Research. Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany.
Dunn, T. J., Baguley, T., & Brunsden, V. (2013). From alpha to omega: A practi￾cal solution to the pervasive problem of internal consistency estimation. British 
Journal of Psychology, 105(3), 399–412. doi:10.1111/bjop.12046
Espina-Romero, L., Guerrero-Alcedo, J., Avila, N. G., Sánchez, J. G. N., Hurtado, 
H. G., & Li, A. Q. (2023). Industry 5.0: Tracking scientific activity on the most 
influential industries, associated topics, and future research agenda. Sustainability, 
15(6), 1–20. doi:10.3390/su15065554
Feng, X., & Behar-Horenstein, L. (2019). Maximizing NVivo utilities to analyze open￾ended responses. The Qualitative Report, 24(3), 563–571. doi:10.46743/2160-
3715/2019.3692
Fetscherin, M., & Stephano, R.-M. (2016). The medical tourism index: Scale devel￾opment and validation. Tourism Management, 52, 539–556. doi:10.1016/j.
tourman.2015.08.010Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 101
Fornell, C., & Larcker, D. F. (1981). Evaluating structural equation models with 
unobservable variables and measurement error. Journal of Marketing Research, 
18(1), 39–50. doi:10.1177/002224378101800104
Fukuda, K. (2020). Science, technology and innovation ecosystem transformation 
toward Society 5.0. International Journal of Production Economics, 220, 1–14. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.07.033
Gao, T. (Tony), Leichter, G., & Wei, Y. (Susan). (2012). Countervailing effects of 
value and risk perceptions in manufacturers’ adoption of expensive, discontinuous 
innovations. Industrial Marketing Management, 41(4), 659–668. doi:10.1016/j.
indmarman.2011.09
Ghobakhloo, M., Iranmanesh, M., Mubarak, M.F., Mubarik, M., Rejeb, A., Nilashi, 
M. (2022). Identifying Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development: A 
strategy roadmap for delivering sustainability values. Sustainable Production and 
Consumption, 33, 716–737. doi:10.1016/j.spc.2022.08.003
Gide, E., & Sandu, R. (2015). A Study to Explore the Key Factors Impacting on Cloud 
Based Service Adoption in Indian SMEs. Proceedings – 12th IEEE International 
Conference on E-Business Engineering, ICEBE 2015, 387–392. doi:10.1109/
ICEBE.2015.72
Gotz, O., Liehr-Gobbers, K., Krafft, M. (2010). Evaluation of structural equation 
models using the partial least squares (PLS) approach. In: Vinzi, V.E., Chin, W.W., 
Henseler, J., Wang, H. (Eds.), Handbook of Partial Least Squares (pp. 691–711). 
Heidelberg: Springer.
Gutierrez, A., Boukrami, E., & Lumsden, R. (2015). Technological, organisational 
and environmental factors influencing managers’ decision to adopt cloud comput￾ing in the UK. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 28(6), 788–807. 
doi:10.1108/jeim-01-2015-0001
Ha, D. T., Le, T., Fisher, G., & Nguyen, T. T. (2022). Factors affecting the adop￾tion extent of the balanced scorecard by Vietnamese small- and medium-sized 
enterprises. Accounting Research Journal, 35(4), 543–560. doi:10.1108/ARJ-08-
2020-0221
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. (2010). Multivariate Data 
Analysis (7th ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. (2014). Multivariate Data 
Analysis (7th ed.). Essex, UK: Pearson Education.
Hair, J. F., Black, W. C., Babin, B. J., & Anderson, R. E. (2018). Multivariate Data 
Analysis (8th ed.). United Kingdom: Cengage Learning.
Hair, J., Ringle, C. and Sarstedt, M. (2011). PLS-SEM: Indeed a silver bullet. 
Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, 19, 139–151. doi:10.2753/MTP1069-
6679190202
Hair, J.F., Hult, G.T.M., Ringle, C.M., & Sarstedt, M. (2017). A Primer on Partial 
Least Squares Structural Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM) (2nd ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications Inc.
Hanus, B., & Wu, Y. “Andy.” (2016). Impact of users’ security awareness on desk￾top security behavior: A protection motivation theory perspective. Information 
Systems Management, 33(1), 2–16. doi:10.1080/10580530.2015.1117842
Harrington, D. (2009). Confirmatory Factor Analysis. New York, NY: Oxford 
University Press.
Hinkin, T. R. (1995). A review of scale development practices in the study of organiza￾tions. Journal of Management, 21(5), 967–988. doi:10.1177/014920639502100509102 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Hoang, N.A., & Otake, T. (2014). Credit participation and credit source selec￾tion of Vietnam small and medium enterprises. The South East Asian Journal of 
Management, 8(2), 104–128. doi:10.21002/seam.v8i2.3929
Huang, S., Wang, B., Li, X., Zheng, P., Mourtzis, D., & Wang, L. (2022). Industry 
5.0 and Society 5.0—Comparison, complementation and co-evolution. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 64, 424–428. doi:10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.07.010
Iacovou, C. L., Benbasat, I., & Dexter, A. S. (1995). Electronic data interchange and 
small organizations: Adoption and impact of technology. MIS Quarterly, 19(4), 
465–485.
Ifinedo, P. (2011). An empirical analysis of factors influencing internet/e-business 
technologies adoption by SMEs in Canada. International Journal of Information 
Technology & Decision Making, 10(04), 731–766. doi:10.1142/s0219622011
004543
Intan Salwani, M., Marthandan, G., Daud Norzaidi, M., & Choy Chong, S. (2009). 
E-commerce usage and business performance in the Malaysian tourism sector: 
Empirical analysis. Information Management & Computer Security, 17(2), 166–
185. doi:10.1108/09685220910964027
Jafari, N., Azarian, M., & Yu, H. (2022). Moving from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0: 
What are the implications for smart logistics? Logistics, 6(26), 1–7. doi:10.3390/
logistics6020026
Javaid, M., & Haleem, A. (2020). Critical components of Industry 5.0 towards a 
successful adoption in the field of manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Integration 
and Management, 5, 327–348. doi:10.1142/s2424862220500141
Jung, W.-K., Kim, D.-R., Lee, H., Lee, T.-H., Yang, I., Youn, B. D., Zontar, D., 
Brockmann, M., Brecher, C., & Ahn, S.-H. (2020). Appropriate smart fac￾tory for SMEs: Concept, application and perspective. International Journal of 
Precision Engineering and Manufacturing, 22(1), 201–215. doi:10.1007/s12541-
020-00445-2
Kaynak, H. (2003). The relationship between total quality management practices 
and their effects on firm performance. Journal of Operations Management, 21(4), 
405–435. doi:10.1016/s0272-6963(03)00004-4
Khan, S. A., Lederer, A. L., & Mirchandani, D. A. (2013). Top management sup￾port, collective mindfulness, and information systems performance. Journal of 
International Technology and Information Management, 22(1), 95–122.
Kline, R. B. (2015). Principles and Practice of Structural Equation Modeling. New 
York, NY: Guilford publications.
Koc, M., & Barut, E. (2016). Development and validation of New Media Literacy 
Scale (NMLS) for university students. Computers in Human Behavior, 63, 834–843. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2016.06.035
Koch, P. J., van Amstel, M. K., Dębska, P., Thormann, M. A., Tetzlaff, A. J., Bøgh, 
S., & Chrysostomou, D. (2017). A skill-based robot co-worker for industrial 
maintenance tasks. Procedia Manufacturing, 11, 83–90. doi:10.1016/j.promfg.
2017.07.141
Kumar, A., & Nayyar, A. (2020). si 3-Industry: A sustainable, intelligent, innovative, 
internet-of-things industry. A roadmap to Industry 4.0: Smart production, sharp 
business and sustainable development, 1–21.
Kummer, T.-F., Pelzl, S., & Bick, M. (2021). A conceptualisation of privacy risk and its 
influence on the disclosure of check-in services information. International Journal 
of Information Management, 57, 1–11. doi:10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2020.102266Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 103
Leng, J., Sha, W., Wang, B., Zheng, P., Zhuang, C., Liu, Q., Wuest, T., Mourtzis, D., & 
Wang, L. (2022). Industry 5.0: Prospect and retrospect. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 65, 279–295. doi:10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.09.017
Lin, H.-F. (2014). Understanding the determinants of electronic supply chain manage￾ment system adoption: Using the technology–organization–environment frame￾work. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 86, 80–92. doi:10.1016/
j.techfore.2013.09.001
Little, T. D. (2013). Longitudinal Structural Equation Modeling. New York, NY: The 
Guilford Press.
Liyanage, M., Braeken, A., Kumar, P., & Ylianttila, M. (Eds.). (2020). IoT Security: 
Advances in Authentication New Jersey, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.
Longo, F., Padovano, A., & Umbrello, S. (2020). Value-oriented and ethical technol￾ogy engineering in Industry 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design of the 
factory of the future. Applied Sciences, 10(12), 1–25. doi:10.3390/app10124182
Maddikunta, P. K. R., Pham, Q.-V., Prabadevi B., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T. 
R., Ruby, R., Liyanage, M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technolo￾gies and potential applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26, 
1–19. doi:10.1016/j.jii.2021.100257
Madhavan, M.; Wangtueai, S.; Sharafuddin, M.A.; Chaichana, T. (2022). The pre￾cipitative effects of pandemic on open innovation of SMEs: A scientometrics and 
systematic review of Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0. Journal of Open Innovation: 
Technology, Market, and Complexity, 8, 1–16. doi:10.3390/joitmc8030152
Masood, T., & Egger, J. (2019). Augmented reality in support of Industry 4.0—
Implementation challenges and success factors. Robotics and Computer-Integrated 
Manufacturing, 58, 181–195. doi:10.1016/j.rcim.2019.02.003
Mehdiabadi, A., Shahabi, V., Shamsinejad, S., Amiri, M., Spulbar, C., & Birau, R.
(2022). Investigating Industry 5.0 and its impact on the banking industry: 
Requirements, approaches and communications. Applied Science, 12, 1–25. doi:
10.3390/app12105126
Muhamad, M. Q. B., Mohamad, S. J. A. N. S., & Nor, N. M. (2021). Technological￾Organisational-Environmental (TOE) framework in Industry 4.0 adoption among 
SMEs in Malaysia: An early outlook. ASEAN Entrepreneurship Journal, 6(3), 
13–19.
Mukherjee, A. A., Raj, A., & Aggarwal, S. (2023). Identification of barriers and 
their mitigation strategies for industry 5.0 implementation in emerging econo￾mies. International Journal of Production Economics, 257, 1–15. doi:10.1016/j.
ijpe.2023.108770
Nahavandi, S. (2019). Industry 5.0—A human-centric solution. Sustainability, 
11(16), 1–13. doi:10.3390/su11164371
Nayyar, A., & Kumar, A. (Eds.). (2020). A Roadmap to Industry 4.0: Smart Production, 
Sharp Business and Sustainable Development (pp. 1–21). Berlin: Springer.
Nguyen, T., & Wongsurawat, W. (2012). The impact of government policies on the 
development of small- and medium-sized enterprises: The case of Vietnam. Journal 
for International Business and Entrepreneurship Development, 6(2), 188–200. 
doi:10.1504/jibed.2012.048567
Nikopoulou, M., Kourouthanassis, P., Chasapi, G., Pateli, A., & Mylonas, N. (2023). 
Determinants of digital transformation in the hospitality industry: Technological, 
organizational, and environmental drivers. Sustainability, 15, 1–20. doi:10.3390/
su15032736104 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Othman, A., Al Mutawaa, A., Al Tamimi, A., & Al Mansouri, M. (2023). Assessing the 
readiness of government and semi-government institutions in Qatar for inclusive 
and sustainable ICT accessibility: Introducing the MARSAD tool. Sustainability, 
15, 1–25. doi:10.3390/su15043853
Özdemir, V., & Hekim, N. (2018). Birth of Industry 5.0: Making sense of big data 
with artificial intelligence, “The Internet of Things” and next-generation technol￾ogy policy. OMICS: A Journal of Integrative Biology, 22(1), 65–76. doi:10.1089/
omi.2017.0194
Pallant J. (2007). SPSS Survivalmanual: A Step By Step Guide to data analysis using 
SPSS. Sydney: Allen & Unwin, Sabon by Bookhouse.
Pan, M.-J., & Jang, W.-Y. (2008). Determinants of the adoption of enterprise resource 
planning within the technology-organization-environment framework: Taiwan’s 
communications industry. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 48, 94–102. 
doi:10.1080/08874417.2008.11646025
Parasuraman, A. (2000). Technology Readiness Index (TRI): A multiple-item scale to 
measure readiness to embrace new technologies. Journal of Service Research, 2(4), 
307–320. doi:10.1177/109467050024001
Paschek, D., Mocan, A., & Draghici, A. (2019). Industry 5.0-The expected impact of 
next Industrial Revolution. In Proceedings of the Thriving on Future Education, 
Industry, Business, and Society, Proceedings of the Make Learn and TIIM 
International Conference, Piran, Slovenia, 15–17 May 2019; pp. 15–17.
Pathak, P., Pal, P. R., Shrivastava, M., & Ora, M. S. (2019). Fifth revolution: Applied 
AI and human intelligence with cyber physical systems. International Journal of 
Engineering and Advanced Technology, 8(3), 23–27.
Pham, Q. H., & Vu, K. P. (2022). Digitalization in small and medium enterprise: A 
parsimonious model of digitalization of accounting information for sustainable 
innovation ecosystem value generation. Asia Pacific Journal of Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship, 16(1), 2–37. doi:10.1108/APJIE-02-2022-0013
Porambage, P., Gür, G., Osorio, D. P. M., Liyanage, M., Gurtov, A., & Ylianttila, 
M. (2021). The roadmap to 6G security and privacy. IEEE Open Journal of the 
Communications Society, 2, 1094–1122.
Prasetyo, Y. T., Castillo, A. M., Salonga, L. J., Sia, J. A., & Seneta, J. A. (2020). 
Factors affecting perceived effectiveness of COVID-19 prevention measures 
among Filipino during enhanced community quarantine in Luzon, Philippines: 
Integrating protection motivation theory and extended theory of planned behav￾ior. International Journal of Infectious Diseases, 99, 312–323. doi:10.1016/j.
ijid.2020.07.074
Ragu-Nathan, B. S., Apigian, C. H., Ragu-Nathan, T. S., & Tu, Q. (2004). A path 
analytic study of the effect of top management support for information systems 
performance. Omega, 32(6), 459–471. doi:10.1016/j.omega.2004.03.001
Raj, A., Dwivedi, G., Sharma, A., Lopes de Sousa Jabbour, A. B., & Rajak, S. (2020). 
Barriers to the adoption of industry 4.0 technologies in the manufacturing sector: 
An inter-country comparative perspective. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 224, 1–50. doi:10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.107546
Rajbhandari, S., Devkota, N., Khanal, G., Mahato, S., & Paudel, U. R. (2022). 
Assessing the industrial readiness for adoption of industry 4.0 in Nepal: A structural 
equation model analysis. Heliyon, 8(2), 1–11. doi:10.1016/j.heliyon.2022.e08919
Robu, M. (2013). The dynamic and importance of SMEs in economy. The USV 
Annals of Economics and Public Administration, 13, 84–89.Structural dimensions and measurement of RII 105
Rogers, E.M. (2003). Diffusion of Innovations (15th ed.). Tampa, FL: Free Press, Sch.
Sachsenmeier, P. (2016). Industry 5.0—The relevance and implications of bionics and 
synthetic biology. Engineering, 2(2), 225–229. doi:10.1016/j.eng.2016.02.015
Sekaran, U., & Bougie, R. (2016). Research Methods for Business: A Skill Building 
Approach. New Jersey, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Senyo, P. K., Effah, J., & Addae, E. (2016). Preliminary insight into cloud computing 
adoption in a developing country. Journal of Enterprise Information Management, 
29(4), 505–524. doi:10.1108/jeim-09-2014-0094
Sharma, M., Joshi, S., Luthra, S., & Kumar, A. (2022). Managing disruptions and 
risks amidst COVID-19 outbreaks: Role of blockchain technology in develop￾ing resilient food supply chains. Operations Management Research, 15, 268–281. 
doi:10.1007/s12063-021-00198-9
Sheridan, T. B. (2016). Human–Robot interaction. Human Factors: The Journal of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, 58(4), 525–532. doi:10.1177/0018720
816644364
Singh, K. K., Nayyar, A., Tanwar, S., & Abouhawwash, M. (Eds.). (2021). 
Emergence of Cyber Physical System and IoT in Smart Automation and 
Robotics. Advances in Science, Technology & Innovation. Switzerland: Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-030-66222-6
Singh, S., & Srivastava, S. (2019). Engaging consumers in multichannel online retail 
environment: A moderation study of platform type on interaction of e-commerce 
and m-commerce. Journal of Modelling in Management, 14(1), 49–76. doi:10.1108/
JM2-09-2017-0098
Stevens, J. (2002). Applied Multivariate Statistics of the Social Sciences (4th ed.). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tiglao, N. C. C., De Veyra, J. M., Tolentino, N. J. Y., & Tacderas, M. A. Y. (2020). 
The perception of service quality among paratransit users in Metro Manila using 
structural equations modelling (SEM) approach. Research in Transportation 
Economics, 83, 1–13. doi:10.1016/j.retrec.2020.100955
Tornatzky, L.G., Fleischer, M., & Chakrabarti, A.K. (1990). Processes of 
Technological Innovation. Washington, DC: Lexington Books.
Urbach, N., & Ahlemann, F. (2010). Structural equation modeling in information 
systems research using partial least squares. Journal of Information Technology 
Theory and Application, 11(2), 5–40.
Venaik, A., Jain, S., & Nayyar, A. (2023). Industry 4.0—Its Advancement and Effects 
on Security of Whistle-Blowers on Dark Web. In: Singh, G., Goel, R., Garg, V. 
(Eds.), Industry 4.0 and the Digital Transformation of International Business. 
Singapore: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-981-19-7880-7_6
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Gordon, B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of 
information technology: Toward a unified view. MIS Quarterly, 27(3), 425–478. 
doi:10.2307/30036540
Watkins, M. W. (2018). Exploratory factor analysis: A guide to best practice. Journal 
of Black Psychology, 44(3), 219–246. doi:10.1177/0095798418771807
Wolf, E. J., Harrington, K. M., Clark, S. L., & Miller, M. W. (2013). Sample size 
requirements for structural equation models. Educational and Psychological 
Measurement, 73(6), 913–934. doi:10.1177/0013164413495237
Xia, Y., & Yang, Y. (2018). RMSEA, CFI, and TLI in structural equation modeling 
with ordered categorical data: The story they tell depends on the estimation meth￾ods. Behavior Research Methods, 51, 409–428. doi:10.3758/s13428-018-1055-2106 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., & Wang, L. (2021). Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0—
Inception, conception and perception. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 61, 
530–535. doi:10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.10.006
Zhu, K., Kraemer, K. L., & Dedrick, J. (2004). Information technology payoff in 
E-Business environments: An international perspective on value creation of 
E-Business in the Financial Services Industry. Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 21(1), 17–54. doi:10.1080/07421222.2004.1104579
Zybery, I., & Rova, L. (2014). The role of the accountants in the framework of 
the modern technological developments and digital accounting systems. European 
Scientific Journal, 24, 30–48. doi:10.19044/esj.2011.v24n0p%25pDOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-4 107
4.1 INTRODUCTION
In the last few decades, technology has made significant advancements and 
expansions, particularly with the advent of the Internet. People are witness￾ing a new era of rapid development of technologies such as the Internet of 
Things (IoT), Artificial Intelligence (AI), Big Data (BD), robotics, 3D print￾ing, Cloud Computing (CC), and Mobile Devices (MD), are driving signifi￾cant developments in business and society.
The evolution of new-age technologies has paved the transition to Industry 
4.0 (I 4.0); as a result, technology has evolved as a vital part of daily life, 
impacting every aspect of people and society (Van Dijk, 2020). As a result, 
the use of ICT in industry distinguishes I 4.0 from previous industrial trans￾formations, driving the development of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) 
(Nikolakis et al., 2019).
The emergence of I 4.0 has transformed the manufacturing sector as well 
as other sectors and has presented employees with new challenges and 
opportunities (Koh et al., 2019). However, technological and automation 
advancements have continued to revolutionise the industry, and we are now 
witnessing the beginning of Industry 5.0 (I 5.0). This era of production will 
necessitate a unique set of skills, competencies, and mentalities from the 
employees (Xu et al., 2021). Therefore, it is essential to investigate the 
impact of I 5.0 on employees and the strategies that can be implemented to 
successfully navigate these changes.
I 4.0 signifies the assimilation of new technologies such as artificial intel￾ligence (AI), Internet of Things (IoT), and machine learning (ML) into the 
manufacturing sector (Sony & Naik, 2020). This integration has trans￾formed the manufacturing of goods, resulting in augmented productivity 
and profitability.
However, the key focus of I 4.0 was on automation and the role of 
machines in manufacturing, which led to concerns about employment losses 
Chapter 4
Thriving in Industry 5.0
 The evolving role of employees in the age 
of automation and innovation
V. Harish
PSG Institute of Management, India
Anand Nayyar
Duy Tan University, Vietnam108 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
and human obsolescence (Culot et al., 2020). I 5.0, with its emphasis on 
“human–machine collaboration” and the use of technology to augment 
human capabilities, emerged in response to these concerns (Kaasinen et al., 
2022). I 5.0 seeks to balance the roles of technology and human expertise, 
emphasising the significance of machine-human collaboration (Xu et al., 
2021). I 5.0, which emphasises collaboration between humans and machines 
and sustainable manufacturing, represents the evolution of I 4.0 and it aims 
to create a future in which people and technology work together to accom￾plish productivity and innovation while preserving the environment and 
promoting a socially responsible approach to manufacturing (Adel, 2022).
I 5.0 is characterised by decentralised production and service offerings, 
product and service customisation, and sustainable manufacturing (Yao et al., 
2022) and decentralised production allows for the making of customised 
products and services closer to the consumer, thereby decreasing lead times 
and transportation costs. I 5.0 places an emphasis on reducing waste and 
carbon emissions by the adoption of renewable energy and ecological manu￾facturing practices (ElFar et al., 2021). I 5.0 will also result in a more decen￾tralised approach to manufacturing, with an emphasis on customisation and 
smaller-batch production. This will necessitate a workforce that is more agile 
and adaptable to changing customer requirements and demands (Tiwari et al., 
2022). By establishing new occupations and requiring new skills and capabili￾ties, I 5.0 will radically alter employment options (Battini et al., 2022).
I 5.0 will open up new job roles such as robot coordinators, experts in 
digital clones, and augmented reality technicians (Mashelkar, 2018). 
Coordinators of robots will supervise the incorporation of robots into the 
production process and ensure their proper operation. Experts in digital 
twins will utilise digital representations of products, equipment, and pro￾cesses to optimise production and reduce costs. Technicians specialising in 
augmented reality will use AR technology to enhance the user experience, 
facilitate remote maintenance and training, and enhance quality control 
(Nagaraj, 2020).
Employees will be required to adapt to new-age skills and abilities such as 
digital literacy, data analytics, and problem-solving as a result of I 5.0. 
Because the incorporation of advanced technologies will require employees 
to utilise software applications, operate machinery, and analyse data, digital 
literacy is crucial (Mitchell & Guile, 2022). As companies collect and anal￾yse enormous quantities of data to optimise production and identify oppor￾tunities for improvement, data analytics will become indispensable. As the 
complexity of the production process increases, employees will be required 
to make fast decisions and troubleshoot issues, which will necessitate 
problem-solving skills.
I 5.0 will generate new employment opportunities requiring new skills 
and competencies. It will also change the nature of current job responsibili￾ties, requiring employees to adapt to new technology and collaborate with 
machines (Nahavandi, 2019). For firms to stay competitive in this new age Thriving in Industry 5.0 109
of manufacturing, individuals and organisations must accept the changes 
and invest in training programmes.
Apart from the new job roles and talents required, I 5.0 would alter the 
nature and environment of the workspace. Employees will work alongside 
robots and other machines with a focus on maximising efficiency (Kaasinen 
et al., 2022), allowing for increased productivity, efficiency, and safety. This 
will result in a shift in employment roles, with an increased emphasis on 
problem-solving, decision-making, and creative thinking.
In addition, I 5.0 will have a substantial effect on the education and train￾ing industry. Individuals may not be adequately prepared for the new job 
roles and skills demanded by I 5.0 through the use of traditional education 
models. Consequently, education and training programmes will need to be 
planned to integrate novel technologies and skills, such as “Big data and 
machine learning” (Broo et al., 2022).
I 5.0 will alter the employment landscape by generating innovative job 
categories and necessitating varied skills and competencies (Jerman et al., 
2020) and it will also result in a workforce that is more flexible and adapt￾able to altering market demands. The focus of this chapter is to delve into 
the topic of “An Employee in the Era of I 5.0” and offer perspectives into the 
encounters that employees will face in this new era. I 5.0 will be defined and 
its distinguishing characteristics relative to I 4.0 will be highlighted, and the 
chapter will then explore the influence of I 5.0 on employees and the skills 
and competencies required to flourish in this new era. In addition, the chap￾ter will discuss the training and development programmes required to pre￾pare employees for I 5.0 and the challenges organisations might face when 
facing them, and finally, it will provide organisations and employees with 
strategies to surmount the challenges and capitalise on the chances offered 
by I 5.0.
4.1.1 Objectives of the chapter
The objectives of the chapter are
• To understand the evolution of Industry 1.0 to I 5.0;
• To understand the effect of I 5.0 on employees;
• To identify the key competencies for career development for people in 
I 5.0;
• To analyse the challenges faced by employees in I 5.0;
• And, to understand the strategies that stakeholders can take to over￾come the challenges faced by employees in I 5.0.
4.1.2 Organisation of the chapter
The chapter is organised as follows: Section 4.2 proceeds with a detailed 
literature study that investigates the development of industry 1.0 to 5.0, 110 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
focusing on the distinctive qualities of each generation and specifically com￾paring I 4.0 and I 5.0. Section 4.3 looks into the characteristics of I 5.0 as 
well as the impact that it has on personnel. Section 4.4 discusses the abilities 
that workers in I 5.0 must possess as well as the difficulties that workers in 
I 5.0 must overcome. Section 4.5 discusses the impact of I 5.0 on employ￾ment across various industries. Section 4.6 discusses the competencies for 
career development and growth for people in I 5.0. Section 4.7 highlights 
the skills required for employees in I 5.0. Section 4.8 enlightens the chal￾lenges faced by employees in I 5.0. Section 4.9 extends the discussion on 
strategies to overcome challenges in I 5.0. Section 4.10 elaborates on the 
human–robot collaboration (HRC) in I 5.0. And, finally, Section 4.11 con￾cludes the chapter.
4.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
I 5.0 will drastically alter employment opportunities by creating new posi￾tions and requiring new skills and capabilities (Doyle-Kent & Kopacek, 
2020). I 5.0 emphasises human–machine collaboration, which will create 
new job responsibilities that require specialised skills and knowledge.
4.2.1 Definitions of Industry 5.0
I 5.0 refers to the amalgamation of advanced digital technologies, such as 
the IoT, AI, and robotics, with human intelligence to create a new level of 
manufacturing productivity and efficiency. The chapter provides a compre￾hensive analysis of I 5.0, discussing its historical context, defining character￾istics, potential benefits, and obstacles. It provides researchers, practitioners, 
and policymakers with vital insight into the future prospects of this emerg￾ing paradigm (Leng et al., 2022).
I 5.0 signifies the integration of advanced digital technologies with human 
expertise and creativity to advance flexible smart factories that are autono￾mous and self-optimising. The chapter presents a paradigm for transitioning 
from I 4.0 to I 5.0, emphasising the need to move from “digital manufactur￾ing to digital society”.
The I 5.0 evolution strategy is innovative. The report concludes that I 5.0 
will require a holistic and collaborative strategy for technological and social 
digital change (Skobelev & Borovik, 2017).
“I 5.0 is characterized by the seamless integration of digital and physical 
technologies, enabling machines and humans to work together in a flexible 
and adaptive way”. The chapter discusses a macro-perspective on I 5.0, 
highlighting the necessity for a holistic and collaborative framework that 
reflects social, environmental, and economic factors. The I 5.0 transition 
framework is innovative and the chapter concludes that I 5.0’s full potential 
requires a human-centric strategy (Tiwari et al., 2022). “I 5.0 is the next Thriving in Industry 5.0 111
generation of manufacturing that brings together humans, machines, and 
data in a way that maximises the strengths of each” (Nahavandi, 2019).
I 5.0 is the fusion of smart technologies with conventional processes, 
resulting in the conception of intelligent factories that are proficient in accli￾matising to changes in the environment and production requirements. The 
chapter discusses EU companies’ I 4.0 to 5.0 transformation. Analysing 
indicators and models to assess companies’ I 5.0 readiness is a novelty factor 
of the chapter. To move to I 5.0, organisations must invest in people, tech￾nology, and sustainability (Alexa et al., 2022).
I 5.0 based on the various definitions can be defined as follows:
I 5.0 is a paradigm for manufacturing that integrates sophisticated digital 
technologies, such as the Internet of Things, artificial intelligence, and 
robotics, with human expertise and creativity to create smart factories. 
It is characterised by the seamless integration of digital and physical 
technologies, which enables humans and machines to work together 
in a flexible and adaptable manner to maximise manufacturing pro￾ductivity and efficiency. I 5.0 also combines humans, machinery, and 
data to create intelligent factories that can adapt to environmental and 
production demands.
I 5.0 will generate new occupations such as robot coordinators, experts 
in digital clones, and augmented reality technicians. Coordinators of 
robots will supervise the incorporation of robots into the produc￾tion process and ensure their proper operation (Elangovan, 2021). 
Experts in digital twins will utilise digital representations of products, 
equipment, and processes to optimise production and reduce costs 
(Nahavandi, 2019). Technicians specialising in augmented reality will 
use AR technology to enhance the user experience, facilitate remote 
maintenance and training, and enhance quality control.
I 5.0 will also necessitate new skills and competencies, such as digital liter￾acy, data analytics, and problem-solving, from employees. Because the 
incorporation of advanced technologies will require employees to uti￾lise software applications, operate machinery, and analyse data, digital 
literacy is crucial (Maddikunta et al., 2022). As companies collect and 
analyse enormous quantities of data to optimise production and identify 
opportunities for improvement, data analytics will become indispens￾able. As the complexity of the production process increases, employees 
will be required to make fast decisions and troubleshoot issues, which 
will necessitate problem-solving skills (Mitchell & Guile, 2022).
I 5.0 will generate new employment opportunities requiring new skills 
and competencies. It will also change the nature of current job respon￾sibilities, requiring employees to adapt to new technology and col￾laborate with machines (Kolade & Owoseni, 2022). In addition to 
the new job roles and talents required, I 5.0 would alter the nature 
and environment of work. Employees will work alongside robots and 112 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
other machines with a concentration on “human–machine collabo￾ration”, allowing for augmented productivity, efficiency, and safety 
(Demir et al., 2019).
The increasing complexity of manufacturing processes, which necessitates 
more advanced technologies and greater association between humans and 
machinery, is one of the primary drivers of I 5.0 (Özdemir & Hekim, 2018) 
and this complexity is driven by the need for increased customisation and 
manufacturing flexibility, as well as the expanding demand for sustainability 
and energy efficiency. I 5.0 is viewed as a remedy to these issues, offering a 
new framework for collaboration and innovation in industry and manufac￾turing (Rodríguez-Garcia et al., 2023).
I 5.0 research has focused on a variety of topics, such as the influence of 
emerging technologies on the manufacturing process, the role of human fac￾tors, and the potential to generate innovation and economic growth; and the 
potential for I 5.0 to improve the competence and sustainability of manufac￾turing methods has been the subject of some research. Skobelev and Borovik 
(2017), in their work, examined the usage of AI and IoT in smart produc￾tion, highlighting the potential for these technologies to improve manufac￾turing processes’ productivity, waste reduction, and sustainability.
Alves et al. (2023) examined the influence of I 5.0 on the workplace, high￾lighting the potential for new technologies to improve job satisfaction and 
the authors emphasised the significance of devising user-friendly technolo￾gies and work environments that promote employee well-being.
The potential for I 5.0 to spur innovation and economic growth has also 
been investigated. Sharma et al. (2022), for instance, investigated the effect 
of I 5.0 on the German engineering sector, emphasising the potential for new 
technologies to drive productivity gains and enhance competitiveness. 
Authors highlighted the significance of establishing a policy environment 
that encourages investment in new technologies and skill development. 
Concerns exist regarding the influence of automation on jobs and the posi￾tion of humans in the traditional process, despite the potential advantages 
of I 5.0. For instance, Ghobakhloo et al. (2022) examined the impact of 
automation on job displacement and emphasised the significance of reskill￾ing and upskilling programmes to facilitate the changeover to I 5.0.
4.2.2 Evolution from Industry 1.0 to 5.0
Figure 4.1 illustrates the transition/evolution of Industry 1.0 to 5.0.
I 1.0, which was characterised by manual labour, employed unskilled 
labour with poor working conditions and minimal job security. The major￾ity of the workforce was engaged in physically demanding and repetitive 
duties, with minimal training and development opportunities. The compen￾sation structure was founded on hourly wages and lacked benefits and job 
security (Vinitha et al., 2020).Thriving in Industry 5.0 113
The onset of mechanisation in production processes characterised 
Industry 1.0, started in the 18th century and sustained till the middle of the 
19th century. The invention of steam-powered machinery, which increased 
productivity leading to the progress of factory systems, was the most sig￾nificant technological advancement of this time period. Among the earliest 
examples of this type of apparatus were the cotton gin and the spinning 
jenny. During this era, the production of iron and coal also advanced 
significantly.
The start of Industry 2.0 (I 2.0) led to the employment of skilled workers 
with enhanced working conditions and job security (Yavari & Pilevari, 
2020). The introduction of machines increased output and decreased labour 
hours. The wage structure shifted to incorporate hourly wages with benefits 
such as health insurance and retirement plans.
Industry 2.0 commenced in the late 19th century and endured until the 
beginning of the 20th century. The start of industrial manufacturing 
through the use of electrical power, assembly lines, and conveyor belts 
marked this phase. This caused an increase in output and efficiency, allow￾ing manufacturers to produce more goods at a reduced price and the auto￾mobile sector was one of the most significant sectors to emerge during this 
time.
I 3.0 introduced automation, which led to the employment of highly 
skilled employees with improved working conditions, job security, and flex￾ible hours (Thangaraj & Narayanan, 2018). The workplace has become 
increasingly automated, necessitating both technical and soft skills in order 
to operate and maintain the machinery. The wage structure shifted from 
hourly pay to salaried compensation with benefits such as paid leave and 
overtime (Zakoldaev et al., 2020).
Figure 4.1 Transition from Industry 1.0 to 5.0.
Source: Authors’ own source.114 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
I 3.0 commenced in the second half of the 20th century and endured 
until the beginning of the 21st century. This era was characterised by the 
launch of computers and the manufacturing process. Manufacturers were 
able to produce products with greater precision and accuracy thanks to 
computer-controlled machines, resulting in quality improvements, and, in 
addition, this time period witnessed the emergence of international supply 
chains and the implementation of lean management techniques to boost 
productivity.
I 4.0, which is characterised by digitalisation, has resulted in the hiring of 
multiskilled employees with flexible compensation and on-demand work 
hours (Lasi et al., 2014) and in order to function in a fast-paced, digital 
space, the workforce must possess technical, social, and digital skills, and 
the workplace has evolved to include remote work, and the wage structure 
is more flexible, with the possibility of individualised compensation 
arrangements.
I 4.0 began and is ongoing at the start of the 21st century and this era is 
distinguished by the incorporation of cutting-edge technologies such as 
the Internet of Things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI), and big data ana￾lytics into production processes and this has led to the progress of intelli￾gent factories that can promote autonomous communication and 
decision-making. I 4.0 has the potential to revolutionise the manufactur￾ing industry by increasing efficiency, decreasing costs, and facilitating 
mass customisation.
Recent years have seen the advent of the notion of I 5.0, which builds on 
the achievements of I 4.0 and it is characterised by the incorporation of 
cutting-edge technologies with human skills in order to produce person￾alised goods and services that meet societal requirements. Adopting tech￾nologies such as AI, robotics, and augmented reality can augment the 
capabilities of human employees in I 5.0. Human-centred manufacturing, 
which emphasises the value of human input and the creation of meaningful 
work, is the focus of I 5.0. I 5.0 has the potential to stimulate economic 
expansion while addressing social and environmental issues.
With each industrial revolution, workplace safety has increased (Agarwal 
et al., 2023). In Industry 1.0, production was prioritised at the expense of 
worker safety. Industry 2.0 was characterised by the introduction of machin￾ery and an emphasis on enhancing workplace safety. With the implementation 
of safety protocols and training programmes, Industry 3.0 further enhanced 
workplace safety.
The interface between people and gadgets has also evolved with each 
industrial revolution. In the First Industrial Revolution, manual labour was 
the norm. Industry 2.0 introduced assistance from machines, with humans 
operating machines to execute tasks. Industry 3.0 introduced automated 
processes that are controlled by humans (Papcun et al., 2018) Human￾augmented intelligence is the norm in I 4.0, with workers using sophisti￾cated technologies to enhance their productivity and decision-making.Thriving in Industry 5.0 115
In conclusion, the evolution from I 1.0 to I 4.0 has resulted in substantial 
enhancements to working conditions, job security, and workplace safety. 
The workforce has shifted from unskilled labour in Industry 1.0 to workers 
with multiple technical, soft, and digital abilities in I 4.0. Continuous train￾ing and development are now required for workers to remain pertinent in a 
rapidly evolving technological landscape.
4.2.3 Comparison of Industry 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0
Table 4.1 highlights an exhaustive comparison of Industry 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 
and 5.0 across various aspects (Yin et al., 2018, Koh et al., 2019, Xu et al., 
2021, Konstantinidis et al., 2022, Mathur et al., 2022, Joseph, 2023).
Table 4.1 outlines the major characteristics of industrial development 
during various time periods. The first period, Industry 1.0, was character￾ised by the mechanisation of manual labour predominantly through the 
steam engine. The personnel consisted of artisans and craftsmen with spe￾cialised training. With a semi-skilled labour force, Industry 3.0 witnessed 
the automation of routine duties via electronics and automated production. 
“cyber-physical systems” and automation, driven by data and connectivity, 
automated production, and the amalgamation of progressive technologies 
into the employees increased productivity and efficiency in I 4.0, and 
knowledgeable workers and qualified technicians became the standard. 
The emphasis on personalisation, customisation, and innovative products 
and services has led to exceptionally high levels of efficiency, adaptability, 
and customisation. I 5.0 is characterised by advanced and real-time data 
collection and ubiquitous connectivity, with minimal environmental 
impact. The change from Industry 1.0 to I 5.0 has been accompanied by 
significant workforce challenges, including long work hours, employment 
displacement, a skills gap, rapid technological change, and mental health 
issues.
4.2.4 Comparison between Industry 4.0 and 5.0
While the progression from I 1.0 to 5.0 has been significant, researchers 
have focussed more on I 4.0 to I 5.0 as it is from the present to the future. 
Some of the significant differences between I 4.0 and 5.0 are presented in 
Table 4.2.
Table 4.2 indicates that I 4.0 and I 5.0 are two distinct phases of the 
manufacturing industry’s evolution, each characterised by distinct techno￾logical advancements and focuses. “Cyber-physical systems, the IoT, AI, big 
data, and cloud computing” are the primary technologies that drive I 4.0 
(Ammar et al., 2021). These technologies facilitate real-time “machine-to￾machine and machine-to-human communication”, allowing for greater con￾trol and optimisation of production processes. I 4.0 aims to construct a 116 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0 Table 4.1 Comparison of Industry 1.0 to 5.0 Aspect Industry 1.0 Industry 2.0 Industry 3.0 Industry 4.0 I 5.0 Time Period Late 18th century to mid-19th century Late 19th century to mid-20th century Mid-20th century to late 20th century Late 20th century to present Present and future Main technology Mechanical power Mass production and assembly line Electronics and automated production Cyber-physical systems and automation Integration of advanced technologies with workforce Main driver Steam engine Electricity Computers and automation Data and connectivity Artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things Workforce Skilled artisans and craftsmen Unskilled labour force Semi-skilled labour force Knowledgeable workers and skilled technicians Highly skilled and adaptive workforce Focus Mechanisation of manual tasks Efficiency and mass production Automation of routine tasks Personalisation and customisation Integration of humans and machines Products Textiles, iron, coal, steam engines Cars, appliances, consumer goods Electronics, computers, aerospace Software, e-commerce, online services Advanced products and services Efficiency Low Medium High Very high Extremely high Flexibility Low Low to medium High Very high Extremely high Customisation Low Low Medium High Very high Data Collection Minimal Minimal Basic Extensive Advanced and real-time Connectivity Minimal Minimal Basic Advanced Advanced and pervasive Environmental impact High Medium Medium Low to medium Low Workforce challenges Long working hours, dangerous working conditions Repetitive tasks, low job satisfaction Job displacement, need for retraining Skills gap, need for lifelong learning Rapid technological change, job insecurity, privacy concerns, mental health issuesThriving in Industry 5.0 117
production system that is highly automated, interconnected, and able to 
respond rapidly to shifting market demands.
I 4.0 is characterised by human–machinery collaboration where employ￾ees monitor and control machines to ensure their correct and efficient opera￾tion. Apprehensions have been high about the possible effect of the 
technologies on the workforce due to the introduction of automation, which 
results in the replacement of some positions by machines (Battini et al., 
2022). The drive of I 5.0 is to progress a more personalised and human￾centred production system capable of producing goods that are tailored to 
the requirements and choices (Ozkeser, 2018). In I 5.0, humans and algo￾rithms collaborate to develop innovative solutions to complex problems 
such as sustainability and social responsibility. I 5.0 is characterised in terms 
of human–technology interaction by machines and humans cooperating to 
accomplish a common goal. This collaboration necessitates a workforce 
with both technical and emotional skills, including creativity, problem￾solving, and adaptability.
4.2.5 Employment in I 5.0
Table 4.3 enlightens 5Ws and 1 H regarding employment in Industry 5.0.
Table 4.2 Comparison between I 4.0 and I 5.0
Aspect Industry 4.0 Industry 5.0 Citation
Focus Automation and 
electronic data 
interchange
Inclusion of AI, IoT, 
and robotics
Massaro (2021), Tiwari 
et al. (2022), Akundi 
et al. (2022)
Technology “Cyber-physical 
systems, IoT, 
AI, cloud 
computing and 
big data”
AI, IoT, robotics, 
additive 
manufacturing, 
and advanced 
materials
Ammar et al. (2021), 
Khorasani et al. 
(2022)
Goal Efficiency and 
productivity 
gains through 
automation
Humans and 
machines 
Collaboration
Ozkeser (2018), Leng 
et al. (2022)
Human–
Technology 
Interaction
Workers monitor 
and control 
machines
Machines and 
humans work 
collaboratively
Huang et al. (2022), 
Maddikunta et al. 
(2022)
Impact on 
Workforce
A few jobs are 
substituted by 
automation
Emerging new jobs 
and roles
Nahavandi (2019), 
Battini et al. (2022)
Education and 
Skills
Emphasis 
on STEM 
education and 
digital skills
Greater emphasis 
on creativity, 
problem-solving, 
and adaptability 
skills
Saniuk and Grabowska 
(2022), Rathod and 
Agrawal (2023), 
Shukla and Singh 
(2023)118 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Table 4.3 5W and H analysis table for employment in I 5.0
Aspect Question Answer Citation
When When will I 
5.0 impact 
employment?
I 5.0 is already having an effect 
on employment, with the 
integration of “cutting-edge 
technologies” such as IoT, AI 
and automation robots creating 
new job positions and requiring 
new skills from employees. 
In the coming years, the full 
impact on employment is 
anticipated to persist.
• Huang et al. 
(2022)
• Maddikunta 
et al. (2022)
• Leng et al. 
(2022)
What What is I 5.0? I 5.0 is the incorporation of 
advanced technologies such 
that there is a sense of 
human–machine collaboration 
in various processes. This 
integration is generating new 
employment opportunities and 
altering the nature of labour.
• Østergaard 
(2018)
• Xu et al. (2021)
• Nahavandi 
(2019)
Why Why is I 5.0 
important 
for 
employment?
I 5.0 is significant for employment 
because it generates new job 
openings in fields like data 
analysis, robotics maintenance, 
and AI. It is also varying the 
work, requiring the expansion 
of new jobs in the market.
• Aheleroff et al. 
(2022)
• Konstantinidis 
et al. (2022)
• Raja Santhi and 
Muthuswamy 
(2023)
Whom Whom does I 
5.0 impact?
I 5.0 has consequences for both 
employers and employees. To 
remain competitive, employers 
must acclimatise to new 
technologies and think about 
emerging business models, 
while employees must acquire 
new skills to remain employable 
in a changing job market.
• Jafari et al. 
(2022)
• Paschek et al. 
(2019)
• Tiwari et al. 
(2022)
Where Where is I 5.0 
impacting 
employment?
I 5.0 has an effect on employment 
in almost all industries. 
Countries and regions 
invest in the adoption of I 
5.0 technologies, to reap 
the benefits of the various 
technologies.
• Maddikunta 
et al. (2022)
• Javaid et al. 
(2020)
• Huang et al. 
(2022)
How How is I 5.0 
changing 
employment?
I 5.0 is transforming employment 
by automating routine and 
repetitive tasks, creating new 
job roles in areas such as 
data analysis and automation 
maintenance, and requiring 
workers to acquire new skills 
such as creativity, problem￾solving, and adaptability.
• Mitchell and 
Guile (2022)
• Hussain et al. 
(2023)
• Broo et al. 
(2022)Thriving in Industry 5.0 119
4.3 CHARACTERISTICS OF I 5.0
As I 5.0 is a comparatively new notion, its characteristics are still being 
defined and refined. However, based on current discussions and research, 
the following are some of the most prominent characteristics are as follows 
(Figure 4.2).
• Human–machine collaboration: The alliance between humans and 
machinery is one of the defining characteristics of I 5.0. Instead of 
viewing machines as a replacement for human labour, to accomplish 
shared goals (Pizoń & Gola, 2023), this strategy acknowledges the 
assets of both humans and machines and aims to create a synergis￾tic effect that improves performance and outcomes. Humans and 
machines collaborate to attain higher productivity and innovation in I 
5.0. “The vision of I 5.0 is to achieve symbiosis between humans and 
machines” (Leng et al., 2022).
• Customisation and flexibility: I 5.0 emphasises customisation and 
flexibility. Instead of relying on mass production techniques, I 5.0 
aims to produce smaller batches of customised products that are cus￾tomised to the requirements and preferences of specific customers 
(Destouet et al., 2023). This strategy necessitates a workforce that is 
more adaptable, agile and able to rapidly adapt to shifting customer 
demands and production requirements. I 5.0 emphasises the objec￾tive of satisfying the varying requirements of customers. “I 5.0 aims 
to deliver individualised products and services to customers” (Adel, 
2022).
• Sustainability: Sustainability is an additional important characteris￾tic of I 5.0 wherein it aims to accomplish sustainable production by 
optimising the use of resources, minimising waste, and minimising the 
manufacturing process’ carbon footprint. This strategy emphasises 
Figure 4.2 Characteristics of I 5.0.120 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
social and environmental responsibility and drives to generate a 
more impartial distribution of wealth by ensuring that the potential 
benefits of technological adoption are shared among all stakehold￾ers (Ghobakhloo et al., 2022). “I 5.0 represents the convergence of 
advanced technologies with the physical world”. “I 5.0 puts a strong 
emphasis on sustainability and green production” (Zeb et al., 2022). 
To achieve sustainability in I 5.0, however, all stakeholders, includ￾ing manufacturers, policymakers, and consumers must collaborate 
(Kasinathan et al., 2022).
• Advanced technologies: I 5.0 relies on sophisticated technologies 
to accomplish its objectives which facilitate increased automation, 
enhanced efficiency, and enhanced human–machine interaction and 
collaboration. In the literature, the significance of advanced tech￾nologies in I 5.0 has been extensively discussed. According to Adel 
(2022), the goals of I 5.0 significantly rely on “AI and machine learn￾ing”. Utilising these technologies permits manufacturers to acquire 
and analyse vast quantities of data in real time, thereby improving the 
processes and enhancing quality control. Similarly, Tiwari et al. (2022)
assert that I 5.0 necessitates the integration of robotics and IoT in 
order to create highly connected and automatic manufacturing.
• Upskilling and reskilling: I 5.0 necessitates a highly competent staff that 
can work with advanced technologies, analyse the data obtained, and 
make quick decisions. Consequently, one of the key aspects of I 5.0 
is the emphasis on upskilling workers to acclimatise to the evolving 
nature of work (Gagnidze, 2022). This approach acknowledges that the 
skills required for I 5.0 may differ from those required for previous 
industrial revolutions and aims to prepare workers for future employ￾ment. Upskilling and reskilling programmes will play a dynamic role in 
facilitating the transition of workers into the new occupations and roles 
created by I 5.0. These programmes must emphasise the development of 
skills in areas such as data analytics, digital literacy, and programming.
• Focus on social responsibility: I 5.0 emphasises the social responsi￾bility of businesses and the necessity of generating a positive social 
impact (Ivanov, 2023). “I 5.0 requires businesses to prioritise their 
social responsibilities and have a positive impact on society”. I 5.0 
places a heavy emphasis on corporate social responsibility (CSR) envi￾ronmental concerns (Akundi et al., 2022). Companies implementing 
I 5.0 are expected to consider the impact of their operations on their 
stakeholders, and the community at large. The emphasis on social 
responsibility in I 5.0 is also expected to improve companies’ repu￾tations, attract customers, and increase their competitive advantage 
(Cillo et al., 2022).
• Agility and flexibility: I 5.0 requires businesses to be agile to acclima￾tise to rapid technological change and fluctuating market conditions. 
“I 5.0 requires companies to be agile and flexible in order to remain 
competitive in a rapidly changing market” (Akkaya & Ahmed, 2022). Thriving in Industry 5.0 121
I 5.0 emphasises the significance of agility and flexibility in organ￾isations through the incorporation of cutting-edge technologies and 
systems. These systems enable real-time data analysis, which expedites 
decision-making and improves process efficiency. I 5.0’s increased flex￾ibility and agility can reduce lead times, lessen expenses, and enhance 
customer satisfaction (Huang et al., 2022). In addition, the ability to 
quickly and effectively adapt to varying market factors is becoming an 
increasingly important success factor for businesses.
• Knowledge-intensive work: I 5.0 places greater emphasis on knowledge￾intensive work and requires highly trained and adaptable employees. 
“I 5.0 requires a workforce that is highly skilled and capable of adapt￾ing to new technologies and processes” (Mitchell & Guile, 2022). I 
5.0 emphasises knowledge-intensive work, which necessitates highly 
competent employees who can manage complex systems and pro￾cesses, and knowledge-intensive work requires technical proficiency 
and problem-solving skills as emerging technologies and processes are 
implemented in the workplace; I 5.0 also emphasises the significance 
of continuous learning and upskilling (Rodríguez-Garcia et al., 2023). 
This emphasis on knowledge-intensive work provides new opportu￾nities for highly skilled workers while increasing manufacturing sec￾tor productivity and efficiency; nonetheless, it poses a challenge for 
businesses to attract and retain skilled employees and may necessitate 
investments in training and development programmes.
• Customer-centric approach: I 5.0 involves a customer-first approach 
to production and operations, with an emphasis on delivering cus￾tomer value and “I 5.0 requires companies to adopt a customer-centric 
approach and deliver products and services that provide value for cus￾tomers” (Barata & Kayser, 2023). I 5.0 emphasises a customer-centric 
approach in which products are designed and manufactured based 
on customer requirements and preferences and this is accomplished 
by employing cutting-edge technologies such as artificial intelligence 
and the IoT, which enable real-time data collection and analysis to 
better comprehend consumer behaviour and preferences. I 5.0 also 
enables greater product customisation and personalisation, allowing 
businesses to meet the specific needs and preferences of each consumer 
(Alexa et al., 2022), and by emphasising a customer-centric approach, 
I 5.0 can assist businesses in enhancing customer satisfaction, fostering 
brand loyalty, and gaining a competitive advantage in the market.
The available literature on the I 5.0 characteristics is expanding. A study by 
Pizoń and Gola (2023), for instance, highlights the significance of “human–
machine” collaboration and customisation in I 5.0 and the study emphasises 
that I 5.0 aims to create a manufacturing process that is more adaptable to 
fluctuating consumer demands and production requirements. I 5.0 aims to 
accomplish sustainable production by minimising waste and reducing the 
environmental impact of firms.122 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Carayannis and Morawska-Jancelewicz (2022) highlighted the signifi￾cance of sustainability and social responsibility in I 5.0. I 5.0 seeks to estab￾lish a more equitable distribution of wealth by ensuring that the goodness of 
technological adoption is distributed to all stakeholders; additionally, the 
study emphasises the significance of upskilling and reskilling workers in 
order to change the nature of work in I 5.0.
Moreover, a study by Ma et al. (2022) emphasised the significance of 
innovative technologies and these technologies facilitate increased automa￾tion, enhanced efficiency, and enhanced human–machine collaboration. 
Additionally, the study emphasises the need for a highly competent labour 
force capable of operating and maintaining these technologies.
Literature suggests that I 5.0 emphasises collaboration, customisation, 
sustainability, advanced technologies, and upskilling and reskilling. These 
characteristics represent a shift from viewing manufacturing as a solely tech￾nological process to one that emphasises the importance of human labour in 
achieving maximum productivity, efficiency, and sustainability.
4.4 INDUSTRY 5.0’S EFFECT ON EMPLOYEES
The rise of I 5.0 is likely to have a substantial influence on manufacturing 
employees. Some of the prospective employee impacts of I 5.0 are discussed 
along with supporting literature.
• Upskilling and reskilling: As previously stated, I 5.0 requires a highly 
skilled staff capable of working with advanced technologies. This 
necessitates skill upgrades and retraining for many workers to remain 
employable. According to a study by Zizic et al. (2022), employees in 
I 5.0 will need an assortment of skills, including technical knowledge, 
data analysis, problem-solving abilities, and life-long learning.
• Changes in job roles: I 5.0 will likely result in changes to job duties, 
with some tasks being automated and others requiring new skills. 
According to a study by Pacher et al. (2023), employees will need to 
be more flexible and adaptable in I 5.0. The research indicates that 
employees will need to be able to switch between duties and collabo￾rate with machines.
• Improved working conditions: The potential exists for I 5.0 to enhance 
the workplace atmosphere for employees. For instance, advanced 
technologies can lessen the risk of workplace stress and injuries and 
allow employees to complete tasks more effectively. According to Zizic 
et al. (2022), I 5.0 can also generate new employment opportunities in 
maintenance, programming, and data analysis as well as provide bet￾ter working conditions for employees.
• Job displacement: Despite the possible benefits of I 5.0, there is a dan￾ger that some employees will be replaced by automation. I 5.0 could 
contribute to the displacement of low-skilled workers who perform Thriving in Industry 5.0 123
repetitive tasks (Ghobakhloo et al., 2022). The research focuses on the 
need for policies and programmes to assist displaced workers in find￾ing new employment.
I 5.0 is likely to have complex and varied effects on employees. It has the 
scope to improve working conditions and establish innovative employment 
opportunities, but it also poses a threat of job displacement for some work￾ers. Therefore, employees impacted by I 5.0 require policies and programmes 
to support upskilling and reskilling, job transition, and social protection.
Table 4.4 specifies Industry 5.0’s effect on employees.
Table 4.4 I 5.0’s effect on employees
Point Description References
1 Upskilling and reskilling become essential to 
remain employable in I 5.0.
Zizic et al. (2022), 
Mukherjee et al. (2023)
2 The implementation of novel technologies leads 
to the displacement of low-skill jobs, which 
may negatively impact certain segments of the 
workforce.
Ghobakhloo et al. (2022), 
Battini et al. (2022)
3 I 5.0 enables the creation of new job roles that 
require skills in AI, robotics, and data analytics.
Kasinathan et al. (2022), 
Huang et al. (2022)
4 Association between humans and machines 
becomes more prevalent, which may require 
new ways of working and interacting with 
technology.
Tiwari et al. (2022), 
Maddikunta et al. (2022)
5 The use of smart technologies may improve 
working conditions, such as reducing physical 
strain and minimising exposure to hazardous 
materials.
Battini et al. (2022), 
De Giovanni (2023)
6 I 5.0 emphasises a customer-centric approach, 
which may require employees to develop 
new skills in various domains such as design 
thinking and customer service.
Mansurali et al. (2023), 
Joglekar et al. (2023)
7 Flexibility and adaptability become critical 
skills for employees in I 5.0, as companies 
are expected to be responsive to changes in 
market demand.
Modgil et al. (2023), Raja 
Santhi and Muthuswamy 
(2023)
8 The usage of data analytics and AI may lead to 
increased surveillance of employees in the 
workplace.
Rožanec et al. (2022), Zizic 
et al. (2022)
9 The development of a sustainable process is 
a key dimension of I 5.0, which may require 
employees to work with a greater emphasis 
on sustainability and environmental impact.
Ghobakhloo et al. (2022), 
Saniuk and Grabowska 
(2022)
10 The implementation of I 5.0 may need significant 
modifications in organisational culture and 
management practices, which may impact 
employee engagement and job satisfaction.
Maddikunta et al. (2022), 
Panday and Kaur (2023)
Source: Authors’ own work.124 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
4.5 IMPACT OF INDUSTRY 5.0 ON EMPLOYMENT 
ACROSS VARIOUS INDUSTRIES
Table 4.5 summarises the impact of I 5.0 on employment in ten prominent 
industries, along with citations for the supporting literature.
It is anticipated that the introduction of novel technologies will automate 
repetitive and monotonous activities, allowing workers to concentrate on 
more creative and complex tasks. It is also anticipated that the technology 
Table 4.5 Impact of I 5.0 on employment in prominent industries
Industry Impact on employment Authors
Automotive Higher demand for skilled workers to operate 
and maintain advanced machinery, but lower 
demand for assembly-line workers due to 
automation
Patel et al. 
(2023), Rastogi
et al. (2022)
Aerospace Increased need for engineers and technicians 
to design and maintain advanced aircraft 
and space vehicles, but lower demand 
for manual labour in manufacturing and 
assembly
Massaro (2021), 
Sharma and 
Arya (2022)
Electronics Higher demand for engineers and technicians 
to develop and maintain advanced 
electronics, but lower demand for 
assembly-line workers due to automation
Qahtan et al. 
(2022)
Pharmaceuticals Increased need for researchers and 
engineers to develop advanced medicines 
and therapies, but lower demand for 
manual labour in manufacturing and 
packaging
Sharma et al. 
(2022)
Food and 
Beverage
Higher demand for engineers and technicians 
to develop and maintain advanced 
production and packaging equipment, 
but lower demand for manual labour in 
processing and assembly
Saptaningtyas and 
Rahayu (2020)
Construction Increased use of automation and robotics to 
streamline building processes and increase 
efficiency, leading to lower demand for 
manual labour
Kasinathan et al. 
(2022)
Healthcare Higher demand for skilled workers to 
operate and maintain advanced medical 
equipment and robots, but lower demand 
for manual labour in certain aspects of 
patient care
Javaid et al. 
(2020)
Energy Increased need for engineers and technicians 
to develop and maintain advanced 
renewable energy technologies, but lower 
demand for manual labour in traditional 
energy production
Carayannis et al. 
(2021)Thriving in Industry 5.0 125
integration will create new employment roles, such as data analysts, robot 
technicians, and AI engineers.
4.6 KEY COMPETENCIES FOR CAREER DEVELOPMENT 
AND GROWTH FOR PEOPLE IN INDUSTRY 5.0
As previously discussed, I 5.0 necessitates a highly trained labour force 
capable of operating and maintaining progressive technologies and some 
of the skills required for personnel in I 5.0, supported by relevant literature 
(Figure 4.3):
1. Technical expertise: Employees must have technical expertise in areas 
such as automation, AI and the IoT to work in I 5.0. According to a 
study by Mitchell and Guile (2022), employees in I 5.0 will need to be 
able to program and operate advanced machines, as well as analyse 
and interpret the data produced by these machines.
2. Problem-solving skills: I 5.0 requires employees to be able to solve 
complex manufacturing process-related problems. According to a 
study by Neubert et al. (2015), I 5.0 necessitates a manufacturing pro￾cess that is more adaptable to altering customer demands and pro￾duction requirements, and in order to maximise production efficiency, 
staff should analyse data and make well-informed choices.
3. Collaborative skills: I 5.0 necessitates that employees collaborate 
with machinery and other workers and Leng et al. (2022) report that 
I 5.0 seeks to establish a more equitable distribution of wealth by 
ensuring that the benefits of technological advancements are shared 
with all stakeholders and this necessitates that employees be able to 
effectively work in teams and communicate with machinery and other 
employees.
Figure 4.3 Key competencies for career development and growth for people in 
I 5.0.
Source: Authors’ own source.126 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
4. Soft skills: Employees in I 5.0 must possess a variety of soft skills, 
including communication, creativity, and adaptability. I 5.0, accord￾ing to a study by Chin (2021), requires workers to be more flexible 
and adaptable in their job responsibilities and this necessitates that 
employees be able to switch between duties and collaborate with 
machines and other employees.
5. Leadership skills: I 5.0 requires employees to have leadership skills in 
order to manage teams, drive innovation, and effectively implement 
changes, and a study by Bakir and Dahlan (2022) indicated that I 5.0 
necessitates an innovative culture in which employees are empow￾ered to make decisions and take risks and this implies that employees 
must be capable of inspiring and motivating others, communicating a 
vision, and setting an example.
6. Project management abilities: In order to manage complex initiatives 
involving multiple stakeholders and technologies, I 5.0 employees must 
have solid project management abilities, and a study by Cakmakci 
(2019) indicated that I 5.0 necessitates a more collaborative approach 
to project management, in which employees must collaborate closely 
with machinery and other workers to complete projects on time and 
within budget.
7. Continuous learning: I 5.0 requires employees to be committed to 
continuous learning in order to keep up with swiftly evolving technol￾ogies and processes, and, according to a study by (Carayannis et al., 
2021), I 5.0 necessitates a culture of learning and development in 
which employees are encouraged to acquire new skills and knowledge 
and this implies that employees must be proactive in their pursuit of 
learning opportunities and skill upgrades.
8. Customer service: I 5.0 requires employees to have a customer-centric 
mindset to satisfy the changing needs and demands of customers, 
and, according to a study by Al Faruqi (2019), I 5.0 necessitates a 
customer-centric approach in which employees must be able to antici￾pate customer requirements and provide customised solutions, there￾fore, employees must possess strong communication and interpersonal 
skills in order to establish and maintain relationships with consumers.
9. Critical thinking: I 5.0 requires employees to possess critical thinking 
skills in order to analyse data, identify problems, and create solutions 
and a study by Javaid and Haleem (2020) indicates that I 5.0 requires 
employees to make decisions in a more analytical and data-driven 
manner and this necessitates that employees be able to analyse data, 
recognise patterns and trends, and devise strategies to maximise pro￾duction efficiency.
10. Ethics and social responsibility: Employees in I 5.0 must have an 
inclination towards ethics and social responsibility and according to 
a study by Zhang et al. (2021), I 5.0 necessitates a more responsible Thriving in Industry 5.0 127
and sustainable approach to manufacturing, in which workers must 
consider the social and environmental impact of their work and this 
implies that employees must have a strong ethical conscience and be 
able to make decisions that are consistent with the company’s values 
and mission.
4.7 SKILLS REQUIRED FOR EMPLOYEES IN INDUSTRY 5.0
Employees in I 5.0 require a range of technical, problem-solving, collab￾orative, and soft skills and as all sectors continue to progress continuously, 
it becomes imperative for employees to continuously upskill and reskill to 
remain employable.
To flourish, employees must possess a wide variety of skills and these 
abilities consist of critical thinking, problem-solving, communication, lead￾ership, adaptability, creativity, time management, collaboration, emotional 
intelligence, and decision-making.
Critical thinking is a fundamental skill that enables employees to objec￾tively analyse information and make sensible decisions based on this analy￾sis and this skill is essential for identifying problems, creating solutions, and 
evaluating results and complex technological systems in I 5.0 require con￾tinuous attention and problem-solving to optimise performance and prevent 
breakdowns, making problem-solving an important skill.
Collaboration between humans and machinery, as well as managing 
teams with disparate skill sets and backgrounds, requires effective 
communication, and effective communication skills are crucial in I 5.0, 
where the emphasis is on developing and implementing new and emerg￾ing technologies.
In I 5.0, leadership is also an essential talent and it is necessary to moti￾vate and manage teams towards a common objective, to manage diverse 
skill sets and backgrounds, to drive innovation, and to respond to industry￾specific changes.
In I 5.0, where technology is perpetually evolving, adaptability is a cru￾cial talent. Employees must be able to rapidly adopt new tools and proce￾dures in order to maintain competitiveness. Another essential talent for 
driving innovation and developing new technologies and products is 
creativity.
Emotional intelligence is essential for team management and conflict reso￾lution in the workplace. It allows employees to recognise and control their 
own emotions as well as those of others. In I 5.0, decision-making skills are 
essential for evaluating new technologies and processes and identifying 
areas for enhancement in existing systems.
The skills can be classified into three basic skills, namely, personal, inter￾personal, and business skills as shown in Figure 4.4.128 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
4.7.1 Personal skills
Personal skills refer to an individual’s capacity to effectively manage them￾selves. Adaptability, time management, self-awareness, problem-solving, 
and resiliency are among these skills. Adaptability refers to the character￾istics of being receptive to change, learning rapidly, and being resourceful 
and time management involves establishing objectives, establishing priori￾ties, and meeting deadlines. Self-awareness is the ability to recognise one’s 
own strengths and weaknesses, to seek feedback, and to use that feedback 
to develop while problem-solving requires data analysis, critical reasoning, 
and the development of inventive solutions and resilience involves manag￾ing stress, recovering from setbacks, and maintaining optimism (McKinsey 
Global Institute, 2017, Mitchell & Guile, 2022, Neubert et al., 2015, Saniuk 
& Grabowska, 2022).
• Adaptability: I 5.0 requires individuals to be open to change and fast 
learners, so adaptability is a crucial personal skill, and success requires 
the ability to adapt to new technologies and processes, as well as 
diverse work environments, and also essential are resourcefulness and 
the ability to devise original solutions to issues (Ivanov, 2023).
• Time management: Time management is another essential skill for 
the I 5.0 era and setting objectives, prioritising duties, and meeting 
deadlines are essential for productive and efficient work, and time 
Figure 4.4 Skills required for employees in I 5.0.
Source: Authors’ own source.Thriving in Industry 5.0 129
management also requires the ability to juggle numerous duties and 
responsibilities (Tabuenca et al., 2022).
• Self-awareness: Self-awareness is the capacity to recognise one’s own 
assets and weaknesses, as well as to solicit feedback from others, and 
this competency is essential for both personal and professional devel￾opment, and individuals are also able to identify areas for improve￾ment and take measures to enhance their skills (London et al., 2023).
• Problem-solving: Problem-solving is an essential skill for I 5.0, as it 
requires data analysis, critical reasoning, and innovative solutions, and 
this ability is essential for identifying and resolving complex problems 
in the workplace, as well as creating innovative solutions to meet busi￾ness requirements (Hollenstein et al., 2022).
• Resilience: Resilience is the capacity to manage stress, recover from 
setbacks, and maintain optimism in the face of adversity, and manag￾ing the high-pressure demands of I 5.0 work environments, as well as 
adapting to change and overcoming obstacles, requires this skill while 
developing resilience also requires self-care practises, such as exercise, 
mindfulness, and reaching out to colleagues and mentors for assis￾tance (Mangalaraj et al., 2023).
4.7.2 Interpersonal skills
Interpersonal skills refer to a person’s capacity to interact effectively 
with others and these competencies consist of communication, collabo￾ration, leadership, conflict resolution, empathy, and cultural competence. 
Communication requires precise expression and attentive listening, and the 
provision and reception of feedback and collaboration requires effective 
teamwork, respect for diversity, and relationship building while leadership 
requires inspiring and motivating others, making decisions, and delegat￾ing responsibilities. Resolving a conflict entails addressing differences of 
opinion, locating common ground, and negotiating, and compassionate 
empathy involves comprehending and responding to the perspectives of oth￾ers. Understanding diverse cultures and customs, working across borders, 
and valuing diversity are all components of cultural competence (McKinsey 
Global Institute, 2017, Mitchell & Guile, 2022, Neubert et al., 2015, Saniuk 
& Grabowska, 2022).
• Communication: This skill requires the ability to communicate ideas 
plainly and effectively, to actively listen to others, and to provide con￾structive feedback; individuals must develop effective communication 
skills to avoid misunderstandings and ensure that ideas are conveyed 
accurately (Cho & Lee, 2022).
• Collaboration: Collaboration entails working effectively with others 
to achieve a common objective and this requires valuing diversity, 130 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
fostering relationships, and recognising the various perspectives and 
experiences of team members (Olson & Johnson, 2023).
• Leadership: Leadership entails inspiring and motivating others, mak￾ing intelligent decisions, and delegating tasks efficiently. Leaders must 
possess effective communication skills, the capacity to influence oth￾ers, and a strategic perspective (Akundi et al., 2022).
• Conflict resolution: Conflict resolution requires the ability to address 
disagreements constructively, identify common ground, and negotiate 
a solution that works for all parties and this skill is essential in busi￾ness for maintaining positive relationships and preventing conflicts 
from escalating (Rathod & Agrawal, 2023).
• Empathy: The capacity to comprehend and respond to the perspectives 
and emotions of others and it is essential for establishing relationships 
and collaborating effectively with diverse groups (Mehdiabadi et al., 
2022).
• Cultural competence: Cultural competence refers to the ability to work 
effectively with people of various cultures and backgrounds and this 
includes comprehending diverse customs and norms, valuing diversity, 
and communicating effectively across cultural barriers (Whewell et al., 
2022).
4.7.3 Business skills
Business skills refer to an individual’s capacity to manage and function 
effectively in a business setting and these abilities include data analysis, 
digital literacy, entrepreneurship, strategic management, and a focus on the 
consumer while data analysis entails accumulating and interpreting informa￾tion and making decisions based on that analysis the components of digital 
literacy are data analysis, computing, and cybersecurity. Entrepreneurship 
involves recognising opportunities, taking risks, and being innovative, and 
the components of strategic management are planning, budgeting, and 
project management. User experience, customer service, and relationship 
management are all components of customer-centricity (McKinsey Global 
Institute, 2017, Mitchell & Guile, 2022, Neubert et al., 2015, Saniuk & 
Grabowska, 2022).
• Data analysis: The ability to collect, analyse, and interpret data is cru￾cial for making sound business decisions and utilising statistical and 
computational tools to identify trends, patterns, and insights that can 
guide strategic decision-making (Hollenstein et al., 2022).
• Digital literacy: Employees must have a fundamental understanding 
of technology, such as computing and cybersecurity, as businesses 
become increasingly digital and digital literacy entails the ability to use 
and comprehend digital tools and technologies, as well as to recognise 
and mitigate cybersecurity risks (Mitchell & Guile, 2022).Thriving in Industry 5.0 131
• Entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurship entails recognising opportunities, 
taking calculated risks, and innovating to develop new products, ser￾vices, or enterprises and it requires creativity, strategic thought, busi￾ness acumen, and risk management skills (Paschek et al., 2019).
• Strategic management: Strategic management entails the capacity to 
effectively plan, budget, and manage projects to attain business objec￾tives and it requires a comprehensive comprehension of the business 
environment and the ability to identify and prioritise key objectives, 
allocate resources, and manage risks (Kasinathan et al., 2022).
• Customer-centricity: Consumer-centricity entails placing the con￾sumer at the centre of all business decisions and it requires an in-depth 
knowledge of customer requirements and preferences, as well as the 
ability to design and deliver products and services that satisfy those 
needs and this ability also entails managing customer relationships to 
increase customer loyalty and improve the overall customer experi￾ence (Wulf et al., 2017).
• Innovation: Innovation is the process of identifying new concepts, 
products, or services that have the potential to add value to a business 
and it requires a combination of originality, market savvy, and strate￾gic thought, as well as the ability to manage risk and uncertainty while 
skills in innovation can be used to create new products and services, 
enhance business processes, and generate new revenue streams (Aslam 
et al., 2020).
In conclusion, I 5.0 requires its employees to possess a wide variety of skills. 
For success in the industry, it is essential to be able to think critically, solve 
problems creatively, communicate effectively, lead teams, adapt to change, 
manage time, collaborate with others, possess emotional intelligence, and 
make informed decisions.
4.8 CHALLENGES FACED BY EMPLOYEES IN 
INDUSTRY 5.0
I 5.0 is characterised by the incorporation of advanced technologies to coex￾ist with the workforce posing some challenges to the employees. Here are 
ten challenges encountered by I 5.0 employees:
1. Rapid technological changes: Keeping up with the continuous changes 
and advancements in technology is one of the greatest tests faced by 
employees in I 5.0 and a significant majority of the core skills required 
for current employment will change in the future, indicating the need 
for continuous upskilling and reskilling (Leng et al., 2022).
2. Upgrading skills: With the increasing use of advanced and new/
updated technologies in I 5.0, employees are required to perpetually 132 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
upgrade their skills and according to a report by Deloitte, the work￾force must acquire cognitive abilities, social and affective skills, and 
advanced technological skills to support technological advancements 
(Deloitte, 2017).
3. Job insecurity: Automation and robotics are progressively replacing 
human labourers, resulting in job losses and creating job insecurity 
for workers and a McKinsey Global Institute report states that auto￾mation in the manufacturing and service sector could displace up to 
800 million positions worldwide by 2030 (McKinsey Global Institute, 
2017).
4. Privacy and security concerns: With the expanding use of technology, 
employees run the risk of their personal information being compro￾mised or misappropriated and cybersecurity threats are on the rise, 
and organisations must take precautions to protect sensitive data 
(Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2023).
5. Mental health concerns: The integration of technology in the work￾place can increase employee stress, anxiety, and exhaustion and 
according to the National Institute for Occupational Safety and 
Health, excessive technology use in the workplace was associated with 
greater psychological distress (Padma et al., 2015).
6. Resistance to change: Staff and employees may be resistant to the 
changes introduced by new technologies or work processes, resulting 
in decreased productivity and efficiency and organisations must take 
steps to effectively manage change, including providing employees 
with training and support (Moraru and Popa, 2021).
7. Intergenerational divide: The use of advanced technologies may create 
a chasm between older and younger employees with varying degrees of 
technological proficiency (Elangovan, 2021) and organisations must 
take steps to close the digital divide and guarantee that all employees 
have access to training and support.
8. Collaboration and communication: The increased use of technology 
may reduce face-to-face communication, resulting in communication 
gaps and the possibility of misinterpretation and organisations must 
promote effective communication and collaboration among employ￾ees, utilising technology as necessary (Ivanov, 2023).
9. Ethical concerns: The use of advanced technologies may raise ethical 
issues regarding their impact on society, employment, and the environ￾ment and organisations must be cognisant of these issues and ensure 
that technology is utilised ethically and responsibly (Longo et al., 
2020).
10. Skills gap: The fast-evolving technological advancements may create a 
skills gap between the workforce and the requirements of I 5.0, mak￾ing it challenging to locate qualified workers, and organisations must 
take steps to close this divide, including providing employees with 
training and support (Doyle-Kent & Kopacek, 2020).Thriving in Industry 5.0 133
4.9 STRATEGIES TO OVERCOME CHALLENGES IN 
INDUSTRY 5.0
While research indicates that I 5.0 is likely to pose many challenges to 
employees, there are certain things that can be done by organisations, gov￾ernments, and individuals (employees) to overcome these challenges which 
are presented below.
Strategies that can be taken by companies to negate the challenges faced 
by employees in I 5.0 include the following.
1. Rapid technological changes: Companies can invest in regular training 
and development programs to help employees stay up-to-date with 
the latest technologies and industry trends and one of the most effec￾tive strategies is to constantly relook into the needs of the employees 
and have a continuous learning program in the organisation to help 
employees stay up to date with the latest technologies and industry 
trends and this ensures that employees have the necessary skills to 
adapt to the evolving technological landscape.
2. Upgrading skills: Companies can provide incentives to encourage 
employees to acquire new skills and offer opportunities for them to 
attend workshops, conferences, and other training programs, and 
firms can come out with innovative incentive mechanisms and create a 
robust eco system in order to facilitate skill upgradation by employees 
and this encourages continuous learning and development, enabling 
employees to remain relevant in a rapidly changing technological 
environment.
3. Job insecurity: Companies can focus on retraining employees whose 
jobs are at risk of being automated, and invest in the development of 
new roles that complement technology rather than replacing it and 
companies by doing this can improve the morale of the employees 
by eliminating the employees job insecurity by upskilling them, and 
this ensures that employees are equipped with skills that are in high 
demand and have a promising future.
4. Privacy and security concerns: Companies can ensure that they have 
adequate measures in place to protect employee data, such as imple￾menting strong data encryption, access controls, and regular security 
audits, and this helps to safeguard employee data and minimise the 
risk of data breaches and cyber-attacks.
5. Mental health issues: Companies can prioritise employee well-being 
by providing flexible work arrangements, offering mental health sup￾port programs, and encouraging a healthy work–life balance, and this 
helps to reduce stress and improve employee morale and productivity.
6. Resistance to change: Companies can involve employees in the 
decision-making process when implementing new technologies, pro￾vide adequate training and support, and communicate the benefits of 134 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
change, and this helps to overcome resistance to change and facilitate 
a smooth transition to new technologies.
7. Intergenerational divide: Companies can provide training programs 
that cater to different levels of technological proficiency, encourage 
cross-generational mentorship and collaboration, and create a cul￾ture that values diversity and companies can involve employees in the 
decision-making process, provide adequate training and support, and 
communicate the benefits of change and this helps to overcome resis￾tance to change and facilitate a smooth transition to new technologies.
8. Collaboration and communication: Companies can provide employees 
with tools and platforms that facilitate communication and collabora￾tion, encourage regular face-to-face interactions, and prioritise open and 
transparent communication, and the openness in communication can cer￾tainly assist in reducing conflicts and minimise communication gaps and 
this helps to foster a collaborative culture and improve team dynamics.
9. Ethical concerns: Companies can establish ethical frameworks and 
guidelines for the use of new technologies and engage in open and trans￾parent dialogues with employees, customers, and other stakeholders 
about the impact of technology on society, and this helps to ensure that 
technology is used responsibly and for the benefit of society as a whole.
10. Skills gap: Companies can work with educational institutions to 
bridge the skills gap by providing internships, apprenticeships, and 
other forms of experiential learning, and invest in developing talent 
pipelines to attract and retain skilled workers.
4.9.1 Strategies that governments can take to overcome 
the challenges faced by employees in Industry 5.0
1. Governments can
• invest in education and training programmes that empower em￾ployees with the necessary skills to keep up with the fast advance￾ments in various technologies.
• provide funding and support for vocational training programmes 
and encourage initiatives that promote lifelong learning.
• implement policies and programmes that assist displaced employ￾ees, such as unemployment insurance, retraining programmes, 
and job placement services.
• create regulations and standards to ensure the preservation of 
employee data and privacy, as well as penalties for noncompliance.
• implement policies that inspire a healthy work–life balance, flexibility 
in the work arrangements, and mental health support programmes.
• collaborate with businesses to create change management pro￾grammes that involve employees and promote innovation across 
the various segments.Thriving in Industry 5.0 135
• promote diversity and inclusion in the workforce by encourag￾ing the development of education and training programmes that 
appeal to various levels of technological proficiency.
• promote the development of communication and collaboration 
platforms that facilitate dialogue between employers and employ￾ees, as well as the use of digital tools for remote work.
• establish ethical guidelines and frameworks that govern the use of 
new technologies and promote public awareness and engagement 
on the social and environmental effects of technology.
• collaborate with industry stakeholders to identify skills deficits, 
develop policies and programmes that support the development 
of talent pipelines, and invest in various research initiatives.
4.9.2 Individual strategies for overcoming the 
challenges encountered by employees in I 5.0
1. Individuals should embrace change, be receptive to acquiring new 
skills, and view obstacles as opportunities to develop and improve.
2. Employees must continually develop their skills and update their 
knowledge in order to remain pertinent in the industry, given the rapid 
pace of technological advancement.
3. Embrace technology: Employees must learn to utilise technology to 
enhance their productivity and work processes.
4. As I 5.0 requires a human touch, employees must concentrate on 
enhancing their creativity and problem-solving abilities.
5. Collaboration and cross-functional collaboration will become increas￾ingly crucial in I 5.0. Employees in co-existence with machines must 
be able to work effectively in diverse organisations and possess strong 
communication and interpersonal skills.
6. Prioritise mental and physical health, as the adoption of technology 
and automation may increase stress and exhaustion. It is crucial to 
prioritise mental and physical well-being by taking breaks, engaging 
in physical activity, and seeking support when necessary.
7. Employees should cultivate an entrepreneurial mindset and search 
for opportunities to innovate and create new value within their 
organisations.
8. Seek out mentors: Learning from seasoned colleagues and mentors 
can help individuals navigate the challenges of I 5.0 by providing valu￾able insights.
9. Establish a professional network: Establishing and maintaining a net￾work of industry contacts can provide opportunities for professional 
advancement and development.
10. Keeping abreast of the latest industry trends, best practices, and tech￾nological developments can help employees remain competitive in the 
employment market.136 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Individuals can overcome the challenges of I 5.0 and position themselves for 
success in the new era of employment by employing these strategies.
Strategies to be undertaken by different stakeholders to overcome the 
challenges of I 5.0 towards employment are illustrated in Table 4.6.
4.10 MANAGING HUMAN–ROBOT COLLABORATION 
IN INDUSTRY 5.0
In the era of I 5.0, robots and AI play an increasingly crucial role in reshap￾ing our lives and workplaces. Workers are now expected to collaborate with 
robots and other autonomous systems due to the rise of intelligent automa￾tion. This co-existence between humans and machines is a key driver of I 
5.0, and it has the possibility to change the workplace by enhancing human 
Table 4.6 Strategies to be adopted by different stakeholders to overcome the 
challenges of I 5.0 towards employment
Organisations Government Individuals
Invest in regular training 
programs
Invest in education Develop skills and knowledge
Provide incentives for 
employees to acquire new 
skills
Support vocational 
training
Embrace technology
Retrain employees whose 
jobs are at risk of being 
automated
Assist displaced 
employees
Enhance creativity and 
problem-solving abilities
Ensure adequate measures 
are in place to protect 
employee data
Ensure privacy & 
security
Work effectively in diverse 
organisations
Prioritise employee well-being Promote mental 
health
Prioritise mental and physical 
health
Involve employees in 
decision-making
Create change 
management
Cultivate an entrepreneurial 
mindset
Provide training programs for 
technological proficiency
Encourage diversity & 
inclusion
Seek out mentors
Provide tools that facilitate 
communication and 
collaboration
Promote collaboration 
& communication
Establish a professional 
network
Establish ethical frameworks 
and guidelines
Establish ethical 
guidelines & 
frameworks
Keep abreast of the latest 
industry trends and 
developments
Work with educational 
institutions to bridge the 
skills gap
Identify skills deficits Foster awareness of industry 
trendsThriving in Industry 5.0 137
capabilities, boosting productivity, and increasing efficiency (Adel, 2022). 
However, there are obstacles to the effective collaboration between humans 
and automata. Humans and robots, for example, have distinct assets and 
weaknesses. Humans are superior at decision-making, problem-solving, 
and creative thinking, whereas robots excel at repetitive and routine duties. 
Therefore, the challenge is to design collaboration systems that capitalise 
on the strengths of both humans and robots while compensating for their 
deficiencies. Figure 4.5 highlights managing HRC in Industry 5.0.
A multidisciplinary approach encompassing robotics, artificial intelli￾gence, human factors engineering, and organisational psychology is neces￾sary for the fruitful integration of HRC (Lu et al., 2022). Researchers have 
witnessed the transformative effects of HRC on industries such as manufac￾turing, service industry, healthcare, logistics, and agriculture. Humans are 
still required to perform tasks that require manual dexterity, creativity, and 
decision-making because robots cannot perform all duties (Skobelev & 
Borovik, 2017).
4.10.1 Designing effective human–robot teams
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in designing effective 
human–robot teams for applications as diverse as manufacturing, health￾care, and search-and-rescue missions. A comprehensive comprehension of 
the cognitive, social, and emotional factors that influence human–robot 
interaction and collaboration is necessary for the development of such 
teams.
Assuring effective communication and coordination between team mem￾bers is one of the primary challenges of designing human–robot teams 
(Kaasinen et al., 2022) and this requires the development of algorithms and 
interfaces that allow robots to interpret and respond to human gestures, 
facial expressions, and verbal cues and, for instance, scientists have devel￾oped algorithms that enable robots to recognise and respond to hand 
Figure 4.5 Managing human–robot collaboration in I 5.0.138 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
gestures and facial expressions, allowing them to communicate with humans 
in a more natural and intuitive manner and similarly, researchers have cre￾ated interfaces that allow humans to control robots using voice commands 
or hand gestures, facilitating team coordination (Green et al., 2008).
Ensuring that robots can adapt to shifting environments and tasks is a 
significant challenge in the design of effective human–robot teams and this 
requires the development of algorithms and control systems that enable 
robots to modify their behaviour based on their interactions with humans 
and their surroundings (Oliff et al., 2020) and, for instance, researchers have 
created algorithms that enable robots to learn from human demonstrations, 
allowing them to execute complex tasks such as assembly or manipulation 
with greater precision and efficiency.
Designing effective human–robot teams requires addressing social and 
affective factors that influence human–robot interaction and collaboration, 
in addition to technical obstacles, and, for instance, researchers have discov￾ered that humans are more likely to trust and collaborate with robots that 
demonstrate human-like social behaviours such as empathy, humour, and 
civility (Demir et al., 2019) and therefore, designing robots capable of 
exhibiting such behaviours can improve their ability to collaborate with 
humans.
Finally, it is essential to consider the ethical and legal implications of 
designing human–robot partnerships, especially in terms of privacy, security, 
and responsibility, and designing robots that can collect and retain sensitive 
information about humans, for instance, may raise privacy and security con￾cerns and similarly, the development of automata capable of autonomous 
decision-making may raise concerns regarding accountability and 
responsibility.
4.10.2 Strategies for overcoming communication and 
coordination challenges
Communication and coordination are indispensable to the success of any 
team, including human–robot partnerships; however, there are a number 
of obstacles that can hinder effective communication and coordination in 
human–robot teams, such as language, cultural, and technical differences, 
and developing lucid communication protocols and interfaces is one of the 
primary strategies for overcoming communication and coordination chal￾lenges (Akhilesh, 2020). This requires the development of algorithms and 
interfaces that enable humans and robots to exchange information and 
instructions in a plain and concise manner, and, for instance, researchers 
have created interfaces that allow humans to control robots using voice com￾mands or hand gestures, facilitating seamless interaction between humans 
and robots, and researchers have also developed algorithms that enable 
robots to interpret and respond to human gestures, facial expressions, and Thriving in Industry 5.0 139
verbal signals, allowing them to communicate with humans in a more natu￾ral and intuitive manner.
Establishing a common language and culture is an additional method for 
fostering effective communication and coordination in human–robot part￾nerships and this involves establishing a shared understanding of the team’s 
guiding objectives, values, and norms, for instance, researchers have created 
frameworks for establishing a shared culture between humans and robots, 
such as the concept of “joint attention”, in which humans and robots focus 
their attention on the same object or task (Siposova & Carpenter, 2019).
Establishing distinct roles and responsibilities for each team member is 
another technique for fostering effective communication and coordination 
in human–robot teams (Dahiya et al., 2023) and this involves identifying the 
tasks and responsibilities assigned to each team member and establishing 
explicit communication channels and decision-making authority, For 
instance, researchers have created algorithms that enable robots to learn 
from human demonstrations, allowing them to execute complex tasks such 
as assembly or manipulation with greater precision and efficiency.
In order to promote effective communication and coordination in human–
robot partnerships, ongoing training and evaluation is necessary and this 
includes providing team members with regular feedback and training, as 
well as monitoring and evaluating the team’s performance as a whole, for 
instance, researchers have created instruments for monitoring and assessing 
the performance of human–robot teams, such as the Robot Activity Support 
Scale, which measures the level of assistance provided by robots during 
daily activities (Prati et al., 2021).
In conclusion, a combination of technical, social, and affective strategies 
is necessary to promote effective communication and coordination in 
human–robot teams and this requires the development of clear communica￾tion protocols and interfaces, the establishment of a common language and 
culture, the consideration of social and emotional factors, the establishment 
of clear roles and responsibilities, and the provision of ongoing training and 
evaluation; by implementing these strategies, we can surmount communica￾tion and coordination obstacles and create effective, efficient, and socially 
responsible human–robot teams.
4.10.3 Mitigating risks and ensuring safety in 
human–robot collaboration
HRC has emerged as a result of the increasing use of robots in various 
industries and in HRC, robots work alongside humans to complete various 
duties. HRC has a number of potential advantages but it also poses some 
hazards and safety concerns (Parra et al., 2020) and in order to assure the 
safety of humans and robots working together, it is essential to identify and 
mitigate these risks and this chapter will discuss strategies for mitigating 140 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
risks and guaranteeing safety in HRC.Before deploying robots in the work￾place, conducting a risk assessment is one of the most important methods 
for ensuring safety in HRC and this involves identifying potential risks 
and hazards associated with robot use, such as collisions, entrapment, and 
electrical hazards (Huck et al., 2021). Once the risks have been identified, 
appropriate countermeasures, such as implementing safety sensors, protec￾tive barriers, and emergency stop buttons, can be implemented.
Designing robots with safety features is another technique for mitigating 
hazards in HRC and this involves the design of robots endowed with sensors 
and software to detect and respond to potential safety hazards, for instance, 
robots can be programmed to automatically halt or slow down when they 
sense an obstacle in their path or a human in their workspace (Zacharaki et 
al., 2020) and in addition to technical measures, promoting safety in HRC 
necessitates the consideration of social and cultural factors.
Establishing defined roles and responsibilities for every team member is 
another method for promoting safety within HRC and this involves identi￾fying the tasks and responsibilities assigned to each team member and estab￾lishing explicit communication channels and decision-making authority 
(Caruana & Francalanza, 2023) and this can aid in preventing confusion 
and conflicts that could result in safety incidents.
Finally, promoting HRC safety requires ongoing training and evaluation 
and this includes training team members on how to work safely with autom￾ata and evaluating the team’s performance as a whole and this can aid in 
identifying areas for development and addressing safety concerns prior to 
the occurrence of incidents.
4.11 CONCLUSION
I 5.0 is a paradigm shift that emphasises the need for businesses to embrace 
automation and innovation while empowering their employees and this 
chapter examines the changing position of employees in the age of automa￾tion and innovation, highlighting the challenges they face and the skills they 
must possess to thrive in this new era of business.
The first section of the chapter introduces the concept of I 5.0 and its 
essential characteristics and the section then examines the relevant litera￾ture, tracing the development of the industry from its earliest origins to the 
present day and the comparison with I 4.0 emphasises the significant differ￾ences between the two paradigms, especially I 5.0’s increased emphasis on 
collaboration and human–robot interaction.
The chapter then discusses the impact of I 5.0 on employees, outlining the 
essential skills they must acquire to flourish in this new industrial era and 
the challenges they encounter, such as the need to continuously acquire new 
skills and adapt to new technologies, are also examined.Thriving in Industry 5.0 141
Strategies to surmount these obstacles, including those that companies, 
governments, and individuals, can be implemented to support employees in 
I 5.0, are then discussed and emphasis is also placed on the significance of 
managing HRC, as this will be crucial to the success of I 5.0.
Finally, the chapter emphasises the potential for future research in this 
discipline and there will be new challenges and opportunities for employees, 
businesses, and governments as I 5.0 continues to evolve and understanding 
how to navigate these changes will call for ongoing research and creativity.
REFERENCES
Adel, A. (2022). Future of Industry 5.0 in society: Human-centric solutions, chal￾lenges and prospective research areas. Journal of Cloud Computing, 11(1), 1–15.
Agarwal, A., Mathur, P., & Walia, S. (2023). Journey of HR From Industry 1.0 to 
5.0 and the Road Ahead. In Opportunities and Challenges of Business 5.0 in 
Emerging Markets (pp. 172–184). IGI Global.
Aheleroff, S., Huang, H. Y., Xu, X., & Zhong, R. R. (2022). Toward sustainability 
and resilience with Industry 4.0 and INDUSTRY 5.0. Frontiers in Manufacturing 
Technology, 2, 951643. https://doi.org/10.3389/fmtec.2022.951643
Akhilesh, K. B. (2020). Smart Technologies—Scope and Applications (pp. 1–16). 
Springer Singapore.
Akkaya, B., & Ahmed, J. (2022). VUCA-RR Toward INDUSTRY 5.0. In Agile 
Management and VUCA-RR: Opportunities and Threats in Industry 4.0 towards 
Society 5.0 (pp. 1–11). Emerald Publishing Limited.
Akundi, A., Euresti, D., Luna, S., Ankobiah, W., Lopes, A., & Edinbarough, I. (2022). 
State of INDUSTRY 5.0—Analysis and identification of current research trends. 
Applied System Innovation, 5(1), 27.
Al Faruqi, U. (2019). Future service in INDUSTRY 5.0. Jurnal Sistem Cerdas, 2(1), 
67–79.
Alexa, L., Pîslaru, M., & Avasilcăi, S. (2022). From Industry 4.0 to INDUSTRY 
5.0—an overview of European Union enterprises. Sustainability and Innovation 
in Manufacturing Enterprises: Indicators, Models and Assessment for INDUSTRY
5.0, 221–231.
Alves, J., Lima, T. M., & Gaspar, P. D. (2023). Is INDUSTRY 5.0 a Human-Centred 
Approach? A Systematic Review. Processes, 11(1), 193.
Ammar, M., Haleem, A., Javaid, M., Walia, R., & Bahl, S. (2021). Improving material 
quality management and manufacturing organizations system through Industry 
4.0 technologies. Materials Today: Proceedings, 45, 5089–5096.
Aslam, F., Aimin, W., Li, M., & Ur Rehman, K. (2020). Innovation in the era of 
IoT and INDUSTRY 5.0: Absolute innovation management (AIM) framework. 
Information, 11(2), 124.
Bakir, A., & Dahlan, M. (2022). Higher education leadership and curricular design 
in INDUSTRY 5.0 environment: A cursory glance. Development and Learning in 
Organizations: An International Journal, (ahead-of-print).
Barata, J., & Kayser, I. (2023). INDUSTRY 5.0–Past, present, and near future. 
Procedia Computer Science, 219, 778–788.142 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Battini, D., Berti, N., Finco, S., Zennaro, I., & Das, A. (2022). Towards INDUSTRY 
5.0: A multi-objective job rotation model for an inclusive workforce. International 
Journal of Production Economics, 250, 108619.
Broo, D. G., Kaynak, O., & Sait, S. M. (2022). Rethinking engineering education 
at the age of INDUSTRY 5.0. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 25, 
100311.
Cakmakci, M. (2019). Interaction in project management approach within industry 
4.0. In: Trojanowska, J., Ciszak, O., Machado, J., Pavlenko, I. (eds) Advances in 
Manufacturing II: Volume 1-Solutions for Industry 4.0 (pp. 176–189). Springer 
International Publishing, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-18715-6_15
Carayannis, E. G., Draper, J., & Bhaneja, B. (2021). Towards fusion energy in the 
INDUSTRY 5.0 and Society 5.0 context: Call for a global commission for urgent 
action on fusion energy. Journal of the Knowledge Economy, 12(4), 1891–1904.
Carayannis, E. G., & Morawska-Jancelewicz, J. (2022). The futures of Europe: 
Society 5.0 and INDUSTRY 5.0 as driving forces of future universities. Journal of 
the Knowledge Economy, 1–27.
Caruana, L., & Francalanza, E. (2023). A Safety 4.0 Approach for Collaborative 
Robotics in the Factories of the Future. Procedia Computer Science, 217, 1784–1793.
Chin, S. T. S. (2021). Influence of emotional intelligence on the workforce for 
INDUSTRY 5.0. Journal of Human Resources Management Research, 2021(2021), 
882278.
Cho, H. Y., & Lee, H. J. (2022). Digital transformation for efficient communication 
in the workplace: Analyzing the flow coworking tool. Business Communication 
Research and Practice, 5(1), 20–28.
Cillo, V., Gregori, G. L., Daniele, L. M., Caputo, F., & Bitbol-Saba, N. (2022). Rethinking 
companies’ culture through knowledge management lens during INDUSTRY 5.0 
transition. Journal of Knowledge Management, 26(10), 2485–2498.
Culot, G., Nassimbeni, G., Orzes, G., & Sartor, M. (2020). Behind the definition of 
Industry 4.0: Analysis and open questions. International Journal of Production 
Economics, 226, 107617.
Dahiya, A., Aroyo, A. M., Dautenhahn, K., & Smith, S. L. (2023). A survey of multi￾agent Human–Robot Interaction systems. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 
161, 104335.
De Giovanni, P. (2023). Sustainability of the Metaverse: A Transition to INDUSTRY 
5.0. Sustainability, 15(7), 6079.
Deloitte. (2017). Future-ready workforce: Adapting to the new world of work. 
Retrieved from https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/ca/Documents/
consulting/ca-future-ready-workforce-en-aoda.pdf
Demir, K. A., Döven, G., & Sezen, B. (2019). INDUSTRY 5.0 and human-robot co￾working. Procedia Computer Science, 158, 688–695.
Destouet, C., Tlahig, H., Bettayeb, B., & Mazari, B. (2023). Flexible job shop sched￾uling problem under INDUSTRY 5.0: A survey on human reintegration, envi￾ronmental consideration and resilience improvement. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 67, 155–173.
Doyle-Kent, M., & Kopacek, P. (2020). INDUSTRY 5.0: Is the manufacturing 
industry on the cusp of a new revolution?. In Proceedings of the International 
Symposium for Production Research 2019 (pp. 432–441). Springer International 
Publishing.Thriving in Industry 5.0 143
Elangovan, U. (2021). INDUSTRY 5.0: The Future of the Industrial Economy. CRC 
Press.
ElFar, O. A., Chang, C. K., Leong, H. Y., Peter, A. P., Chew, K. W., & Show, P. L. 
(2021). Prospects of INDUSTRY 5.0 in algae: Customization of production and 
new advance technology for clean bioenergy generation. Energy Conversion and 
Management: X, 10, 100048.
Gagnidze, I. (2022). Industry 4.0 and INDUSTRY 5.0: Can clusters deal with the 
challenges? (A systemic approach). Kybernetes.
Ghobakhloo, M., Iranmanesh, M., Mubarak, M. F., Mubarik, M., Rejeb, A., & 
Nilashi, M. (2022). Identifying INDUSTRY 5.0 contributions to sustainable 
development: A strategy roadmap for delivering sustainability values. Sustainable 
Production and Consumption, 33, 716–737.
Green, S. A., Billinghurst, M., Chen, X., & Chase, J. G. (2008). Human-robot 
collaboration: A literature review and augmented reality approach in design. 
International Journal of Advanced Robotic Systems, 5(1), 1.
Hollenstein, L., Thurnheer, S., & Vogt, F. (2022). Problem solving and digital trans￾formation: Acquiring skills through pretend play in kindergarten. Education 
Sciences, 12(2), 92.
Huang, Sihan, Baicun Wang, Xingyu Li, Pai Zheng, Dimitris Mourtzis, and Lihui 
Wang. (2022) “INDUSTRY 5.0 and Society 5.0—Comparison, complementation 
and co-evolution.” Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 64(2022), 424–428.
Huck, T. P., Münch, N., Hornung, L., Ledermann, C., & Wurll, C. (2021). Risk 
assessment tools for industrial human-robot collaboration: Novel approaches and 
practical needs. Safety Science, 141, 105288.
Hussain, S., Singh, A. M., Mohanty, P., & Gavinolla, M. R. (2023). Next genera￾tion employability and career sustainability in the hospitality INDUSTRY 5.0. 
Worldwide Hospitality and Tourism Themes, 15(3), 308–321.
Ivanov, D. (2023). The INDUSTRY 5.0 framework: Viability-based integration of 
the resilience, sustainability, and human-centricity perspectives. International 
Journal of Production Research, 61(5), 1683–1695.
Jafari, N., Azarian, M., & Yu, H. (2022). Moving from Industry 4.0 to INDUSTRY 
5.0: What are the implications for smart logistics? Logistics, 6(2), 26.
Javaid, M., & Haleem, A. (2020). Critical components of INDUSTRY 5.0 towards a 
successful adoption in the field of manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Integration 
and Management, 5(3), 327–348.
Javaid, M., Haleem, A., Singh, R. P., Haq, M. I. U., Raina, A., & Suman, R. (2020). 
INDUSTRY 5.0: Potential applications in COVID-19. Journal of Industrial 
Integration and Management, 5(4), 507–530.
Jerman, A., Pejić Bach, M., & Aleksić, A. (2020). Transformation towards smart fac￾tory system: Examining new job profiles and competencies. Systems Research and 
Behavioral Science, 37(2), 388–402.
Joglekar, S., Kadam, S., Director, I. C. T., & Dharmadhikari, S. (2023). INDUSTRY 
5.0: Analysis, applications and prognosis. The Online Journal of Distance 
Education and e-Learning, 11(1), 1.
Joseph, J. (2023). Work-Life Balance and Its Socio-cultural Inclination from Industry 
1.0 to Industry 4.0. In Singh, G., Goel, R., Garg, V. (eds) Industry 4.0 and the 
Digital Transformation of International Business (pp. 287–304). Springer Nature, 
Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-7880-7_17144 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Kaasinen, E., Anttila, A. H., Heikkilä, P., Laarni, J., Koskinen, H., & Väätänen, A. 
(2022). Smooth and resilient human–machine teamwork as an INDUSTRY 5.0 
design challenge. Sustainability, 14(5), 2773.
Kasinathan, P., Pugazhendhi, R., Elavarasan, R. M., Ramachandaramurthy, V. K., 
Ramanathan, V., Subramanian, S., … Alsharif, M. H. (2022). Realization of sus￾tainable development goals with disruptive technologies by integrating INDUSTRY 
5.0, Society 5.0, smart cities and villages. Sustainability, 14(22), 15258.
Khorasani, M., Loy, J., Ghasemi, A. H., Sharabian, E., Leary, M., Mirafzal, H., … 
Gibson, I. (2022). A review of Industry 4.0 and additive manufacturing synergy. 
Rapid Prototyping Journal, (ahead-of-print).
Koh, L., Orzes, G., & Jia, F. J. (2019). The fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0): 
Technologies disruption on operations and supply chain management. International 
Journal of Operations & Production Management, 39(6/7/8), 817–828.
Kolade, O., & Owoseni, A. (2022). Employment 5.0: The work of the future and the 
future of work. Technology in Society, 71, 102086.
Konstantinidis, F. K., Myrillas, N., Mouroutsos, S. G., Koulouriotis, D., & Gasteratos, 
A. (2022). Assessment of industry 4.0 for modern manufacturing ecosystem: A 
systematic survey of surveys. Machines, 10(9), 746.
Lasi, H., Fettke, P., Kemper, H. G., Feld, T., & Hoffmann, M. (2014). Industry 4.0. 
Business & Information Systems Engineering, 6, 239–242.
Leng, J., Sha, W., Wang, B., Zheng, P., Zhuang, C., Liu, Q., … Wang, L. (2022). 
INDUSTRY 5.0: Prospect and retrospect. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 65, 
279–295.
London, M., Sessa, V. I., & Shelley, L. A. (2023). Developing self-awareness: Learning 
processes for self-and interpersonal growth. Annual Review of Organizational 
Psychology and Organizational Behavior, 10, 261–288.
Longo, F., Padovano, A., & Umbrello, S. (2020). Value-oriented and ethical technol￾ogy engineering in INDUSTRY 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design of 
the factory of the future. Applied Sciences, 10(12), 4182.
Lu, Y., Zheng, H., Chand, S., Xia, W., Liu, Z., Xu, X., … Bao, J. (2022). Outlook on 
human-centric manufacturing towards INDUSTRY 5.0. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 62, 612–627.
Ma, X., Mao, C., & Liu, G. (2022). Can robots replace human beings?—assess￾ment on the developmental potential of construction robot. Journal of Building 
Engineering, 56, 104727.
Maddikunta, P. K. R., Pham, Q. V., Prabadevi, B., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, 
T. R., … Liyanage, M. (2022). INDUSTRY 5.0: A survey on enabling technolo￾gies and potential applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26, 
100257.
Mangalaraj, G., Nerur, S., & Dwivedi, R. (2023). Digital transformation for agility 
and resilience: An exploratory study. Journal of Computer Information Systems, 
63(1), 11–23.
Mansurali, A., Harish, V., & Ramakrishnan, S. (2023). INDUSTRY 5.0–The 
Co-creator in Marketing. In Saini, A. and Garg, V. (ed.) Transformation for 
Sustainable Business and Management Practices: Exploring the Spectrum of 
INDUSTRY 5.0 (pp. 5–15). Emerald Publishing Limited. https://doi.org/10.1108/
978-1-80262-277-520231002
Mashelkar, R. A. (2018). Exponential technology, industry 4.0 and future of jobs in 
India. Review of Market Integration, 10(2), 138–157.Thriving in Industry 5.0 145
Massaro, A. (2021). Electronics in Advanced Research Industries: Industry 4.0 to 
INDUSTRY 5.0 Advances. John Wiley & Sons.
Mathur, A., Dabas, A., & Sharma, N. (2022, December). Evolution From Industry 1.0 to 
INDUSTRY 5.0. In 2022 4th International Conference on Advances in Computing, 
Communication Control and Networking (ICAC3N) (pp. 1390–1394). IEEE.
McKinsey Global Institute. (2017). Jobs lost, jobs gained: What the future of work 
will mean for jobs, skills, and wages. Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/
featured-insights/future-of-work/jobs-lost-jobs-gained-what-the-future-of-work￾will-mean-for-jobs-skills-and-wages
Mehdiabadi, A., Shahabi, V., Shamsinejad, S., Amiri, M., Spulbar, C., & Birau, R. 
(2022). Investigating INDUSTRY 5.0 and its impact on the banking industry: 
Requirements, approaches and communications. Applied Sciences, 12(10), 5126.
Mitchell, J., & Guile, D. (2022). Fusion skills and INDUSTRY 5.0: Conceptions 
and challenges. Insights Into Global Engineering Education After the Birth of 
INDUSTRY 5.0, 53.
Modgil, S., Singh, R. K., & Agrawal, S. (2023). Developing human capabilities for 
supply chains: An INDUSTRY 5.0 perspective. Annals of Operations Research, 
2023, 1–31. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10479-023-05245-1
Moraru, G. M., & Popa, D. (2021). Potential Resistance of Employees to Change 
in the Transition to INDUSTRY 5.0. In MATEC Web of Conferences (Vol. 343, 
p. 07005). EDP Sciences.
Mukherjee, A. A., Raj, A., & Aggarwal, S. (2023). Identification of barriers and their 
mitigation strategies for INDUSTRY 5.0 implementation in emerging economies. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 108770.
Nagaraj, S. V. (2020). Disruptive technologies that are likely to shape future jobs. 
Procedia Computer Science, 172, 502–504.
Nahavandi, S. (2019) INDUSTRY 5.0—A human-centric solution. Sustainability, 
11(16), 4371.
Neubert, J. C., Mainert, J., Kretzschmar, A., & Greiff, S. (2015). The assessment 
of 21st century skills in industrial and organizational psychology: Complex and 
collaborative problem solving. Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 8(2), 
238–268.
Nikolakis, N., Maratos, V., & Makris, S. (2019). A cyber physical system (CPS) 
approach for safe human-robot collaboration in a shared workplace. Robotics 
and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 56, 233–243.
Oliff, H., Liu, Y., Kumar, M., Williams, M., & Ryan, M. (2020). Reinforcement 
learning for facilitating human-robot-interaction in manufacturing. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 56, 326–340.
Olson, T., & Johnson, P. (2023). Case study in digital transformation collaboration. 
In INTED2023 Proceedings (pp. 533–536). IATED.
Østergaard, E. H. (2018). Welcome to INDUSTRY 5.0. Retrieved Febr, 5, 2020.
Özdemir, V., & Hekim, N. (2018). Birth of INDUSTRY 5.0: Making sense of big 
data with artificial intelligence, “the internet of things” and next-generation tech￾nology policy. Omics: A Journal of Integrative Biology, 22(1), 65–76.
Ozkeser, B. (2018). Lean innovation approach in INDUSTRY 5.0. The Eurasia 
Proceedings of Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics, 2, 422–428.
Padma, V., Anand, N. N., Gurukul, S. S., Javid, S. S. M., Prasad, A., & Arun, S. (2015). 
Health problems and stress in Information Technology and Business Process 
Outsourcing employees. Journal of Pharmacy & Bioallied Sciences, 7(Suppl 1), S9.146 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Pacher, C., Woschank, M., & Zunk, B. M. (2023). The role of competence profiles 
in INDUSTRY 5.0-related vocational education and training: Exemplary devel￾opment of a competence Profile for industrial logistics engineering education. 
Applied Sciences, 13(5), 3280.
Panday, P., & Kaur, G. (2023). Talent management and employee outlook on 
INDUSTRY 5.0. In Handbook of Research on Education Institutions, Skills, and 
Jobs in the Digital Era (pp. 299–306). IGI Global.
Papcun, P., Kajáti, E., & Koziorek, J. (2018, August). Human machine interface in 
concept of industry 4.0. In 2018 World Symposium on Digital Intelligence for 
Systems and Machines (DISA) (pp. 289–296). IEEE.
Parra, P. S., Calleros, O. L., & Ramirez-Serrano, A. (2020). Human-robot collab￾oration systems: Components and applications. In International Conference of 
Control, Dynamic Systems, and Robotics.
Paschek, D., Mocan, A., & Draghici, A. (2019, May). INDUSTRY 5.0—The expected 
impact of next industrial revolution. In Thriving on future education, industry, 
business, and Society, Proceedings of the MakeLearn and TIIM International 
Conference, Piran, Slovenia (pp. 15–17).
Patel, P. H., Angrish, A. K., & Nadda, V. (2023). A Cross-Sector Comparison of 
INDUSTRY 5.0: Digital Technologies in Supply Chain Management of FMCG 
and the Automotive Sector. In Opportunities and Challenges of Business 5.0 in 
Emerging Markets (pp. 99–123). IGI Global.
Pizoń, J., & Gola, A. (2023). Human–Machine relationship—perspective and future 
roadmap for INDUSTRY 5.0 solutions. Machines, 11(2), 203.
Prati, E., Peruzzini, M., Pellicciari, M., & Raffaeli, R. (2021). How to include User 
eXperience in the design of Human-Robot Interaction. Robotics and Computer￾Integrated Manufacturing, 68, 102072.
Qahtan, S., Alsattar, H. A., Zaidan, A. A., Pamucar, D., & Deveci, M. (2022). 
Integrated sustainable transportation modelling approaches for electronic passen￾ger vehicle in the context of INDUSTRY 5.0. Journal of Innovation & Knowledge, 
7(4), 100277.
Raja Santhi, A., & Muthuswamy, P. (2023). INDUSTRY 5.0 or industry 4.0 S? 
Introduction to industry 4.0 and a peek into the prospective INDUSTRY 5.0 tech￾nologies. International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing (IJIDeM), 
1–33.
Rastogi, R., Sharma, B. P., & Gupta, M. (2022). Registration of vehicles with valida￾tion and obvious manner through Blockchain: Smart City approach in INDUSTRY 
5.0. Smart City Infrastructure: The Blockchain Perspective, 127–161.
Rathod, S., & Agrawal, P. (2023). Emerging challenges and opportunities for leaders 
in INDUSTRY 5.0: A roadmap through literature review. Managing Technology 
Integration for Human Resources in INDUSTRY 5.0, 2, 20–30.
Rodríguez-Garcia, C., León-Mateos, F., López-Manuel, L., & Sartal, A. (2023). 
Assessing the drivers behind innovative and creative companies. The importance 
of knowledge transfer in the field of INDUSTRY 5.0. In INDUSTRY 5.0: Creative 
and Innovative Organizations (pp. 91–114). Cham: Springer International 
Publishing.
Rožanec, J. M., Novalija, I., Zajec, P., Kenda, K., Tavakoli Ghinani, H., Suh, S., 
… Soldatos, J. (2022). Human-centric artificial intelligence architecture for 
INDUSTRY 5.0 applications. International Journal of Production Research, 
61(20), 6847–6872.Thriving in Industry 5.0 147
Saniuk, S., & Grabowska, S. (2022). Development of knowledge and skills of engi￾neers and managers in the era of INDUSTRY 5.0 in the light of expert research. 
Zeszyty Naukowe. Organizacja i Zarządzanie/Politechnika Ś
ląska.
Saptaningtyas, W. W. E., & Rahayu, D. K. (2020). A proposed model for food man￾ufacturing in SMEs: Facing INDUSTRY 5.0. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Industrial Engineering and Operations Management (pp. 1653–1661).
Sharma, R., & Arya, R. (2022). UAV based long range environment monitoring sys￾tem with INDUSTRY 5.0 perspectives for smart city infrastructure. Computers & 
Industrial Engineering, 168, 108066.
Sharma, M., Sehrawat, R., Luthra, S., Daim, T., & Bakry, D. (2022). Moving towards 
INDUSTRY 5.0 in the pharmaceutical manufacturing sector: Challenges and solu￾tions for Germany. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, 1–18. https://
doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2022.3143466
Shukla, P., & Singh, S. (2023). INDUSTRY 5.0 and Digital Innovations: Antecedents 
to Sustainable Business Model. In Transformation for Sustainable Business and 
Management Practices: Exploring the Spectrum of INDUSTRY 5.0 (pp. 17–29). 
Emerald Publishing Limited.
Siposova, B., & Carpenter, M. (2019). A new look at joint attention and common 
knowledge. Cognition, 189, 260–274.
Skobelev, P. O., & Borovik, S. Y. (2017). On the way from Industry 4.0 to INDUSTRY 
5.0: From digital manufacturing to digital society. Industry 4.0, 2(6), 307–311.
Sony, M., & Naik, S. (2020). Key ingredients for evaluating Industry 4.0 readiness 
for organizations: A literature review. Benchmarking: An International Journal, 
27(7), 2213–2232.
Tabuenca, B., Greller, W., & Verpoorten, D. (2022). Mind the gap: Smoothing the 
transition to higher education fostering time management skills. Universal Access 
in the Information Society, 21(2), 367–379.
Thangaraj, J., & Narayanan, R. L. (2018). Industry 1.0 to 4.0: The Evolution of 
Smart Factories. Chicago, IL: APICS.
Tiwari, S., Bahuguna, P. C., & Walker, J. (2022). INDUSTRY 5.0: A macroperspec￾tive approach. In Handbook of Research on Innovative Management Using AI in 
INDUSTRY 5.0 (pp. 59–73). IGI Global.
Van Dijk, J. (2020). The Digital Divide. John Wiley & Sons.
Vinitha, K., Prabhu, R. A., Bhaskar, R., & Hariharan, R. (2020). Review on indus￾trial mathematics and materials at Industry 1.0 to Industry 4.0. Materials Today: 
Proceedings, 33, 3956–3960.
Whewell, E., Caldwell, H., Frydenberg, M., & Andone, D. (2022). Changemakers 
as digital makers: Connecting and co-creating. Education and Information 
Technologies, 27(5), 6691–6713.
Wulf, J., Mettler, T., & Brenner, W. (2017). Using a digital services capability model 
to assess readiness for the digital consumer. MIS Quarterly Executive, 16(3), 
171–195.
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., & Wang, L. (2021). Industry 4.0 and INDUSTRY 
5.0—Inception, conception and perception. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 
61, 530–535.
Yao, X., Ma, N., Zhang, J., Wang, K., Yang, E., & Faccio, M. (2022). Enhancing 
wisdom manufacturing as industrial metaverse for industry and society 5.0. 
Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 35, 235–255. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10845-022-02027-7148 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Yavari, F., & Pilevari, N. (2020). Industry revolutions development from Industry 1.0 
to INDUSTRY 5.0 in manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Strategic Management, 
5(2), 44–63.
Yin, Y., Stecke, K. E., & Li, D. (2018). The evolution of production systems from 
Industry 2.0 through Industry 4.0. International Journal of Production Research, 
56(1–2), 848–861.
Zacharaki, A., Kostavelis, I., Gasteratos, A., & Dokas, I. (2020). Safety bounds in 
human robot interaction: A survey. Safety Science, 127, 104667.
Zakoldaev, D. A., Korobeynikov, A. G., Shukalov, A. V., Zharinov, I. O., & Zharinov, 
O. O. (2020). Industry 4.0 vs Industry 3.0: The role of personnel in production. 
In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering (Vol. 734, No. 1, 
p. 012048). IOP Publishing.
Zeb, S., Mahmood, A., Khowaja, S. A., Dev, K., Hassan, S. A., Qureshi, N. M. F., 
… Bellavista, P. (2022). INDUSTRY 5.0 is coming: A survey on intelligent nextG 
wireless networks as technological enablers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09084.
Zhang, Q., Chen, Y., Lin, W., & Chen, Y. (2021). Optimizing Medical Enterprise’s 
Operations Management considering Corporate Social Responsibility under 
INDUSTRY 5.0. Discrete Dynamics in Nature and Society, 2021, 1–13.
Zizic, M. C., Mladineo, M., Gjeldum, N., & Celent, L. (2022). From industry 4.0 
towards INDUSTRY 5.0: A review and analysis of paradigm shift for the people, 
organization and technology. Energies, 15(14), 5221.DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-5 149
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Industry 5.0 is a new paradigm in the field of industrial automation that 
emphasizes the integration of human skills and expertise with advanced 
technologies (Maddikunta et al., 2022). It represents a significant shift from 
the previous industrial revolutions where the focus was on replacing human 
labor with machines to improve efficiency and productivity. Industry 5.0 
seeks to leverage the strengths of both humans and machines in order to 
create a more flexible, adaptable, and sustainable industrial ecosystem.
Cobots are a key technology that supports the vision of Industry 5.0 as an 
evolution of the concept of Industry 4.0 (Nayyar & Kumar, 2020; Weiss et 
al., 2021). Cobots are designed to work alongside human workers in a col￾laborative manner, performing repetitive, dangerous, or physically demand￾ing tasks while freeing up human workers to focus on more complex or 
creative tasks that require human intelligence and problem-solving skills 
(Liu et al., 2022). Unlike traditional industrial robots that are designed to 
work independently in a cage or a fixed workspace, cobots are designed to 
be flexible and adaptable, capable of interacting with human workers in a 
safe and intuitive manner (Faccio et al., 2023).
The development of cobots has been driven by a number of factors, 
including advances in artificial intelligence, sensors, and other enabling tech￾nologies (Batth et al., 2018) such as the Internet of Things (Kumar & 
Nayyar, 2019), as well as a growing recognition of the importance of 
human-centric design (Rožanec et al., 2022) and the need for more flexible 
and adaptable production systems. Cobots are being used in a wide range of 
industries, from automotive and aerospace manufacturing (Javaid et al., 
2022) to healthcare (Pauliková et al., 2021) and logistics.
Chapter 5
Exploring the impact of 
collaborative robots on 
human–machine cooperation 
in the era of Industry 5.0
R. Damaševicius ̌
Vytautas Magnus University, Kaunas, Lithuania
M. Vasiljevas, L. Narbutaite, and T. Blažauskas ̇
Kaunas University of Technology, Kaunas, Lithuania150 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Despite the potential benefits of cobots, there are also challenges to their 
adoption and integration into existing production systems (Dobra & Dhir, 
2020). These challenges include issues related to safety (Boschetti et al., 
2023), training, and job displacement, as well as questions about the ethical 
and legal implications of using robots in the workplace. Addressing these 
challenges will require a collaborative effort between industry, academia, 
and government, as well as a better understanding of the social and cultural 
factors that influence the adoption and acceptance of new technologies 
(Leesakul et al., 2022).
The aim of this chapter is to provide an overview of the background of 
Industry 5.0 and cobots and their potential impact on the industrial ecosys￾tem. The chapter also aims to identify the challenges and opportunities asso￾ciated with the adoption of cobots and to highlight the need for collaborative 
efforts to address these challenges.
The novelty of this chapter lies in its focus on the integration of cobots 
within the context of Industry 5.0, and its exploration of the challenges and 
opportunities associated with this integration. The chapter also provides a 
comprehensive overview of the background and development of Industry 
5.0 and cobots and identifies key trends and drivers in the field.
This chapter contributes to the understanding of the potential impact of 
cobots on the industrial ecosystem and identifies key challenges and oppor￾tunities associated with their adoption. The chapter also highlights the need 
for a collaborative approach to addressing these challenges and provides 
insights into the social and cultural factors that influence the adoption and 
acceptance of new technologies. The chapter is intended to be a useful 
resource for researchers, practitioners, and policymakers interested in the 
integration of cobots within the context of Industry 5.0.
5.1.1 Organization of chapter
The remaining parts of this chapter are organized as follows. Section 5.2 dis￾cusses the development and implementation of cobots. Section 5.3 discusses 
the integration of cobots into industrial manufacturing. Section 5.4 presents 
a case study of integrating cobots in a manufacturing company. Section 5.5
summarizes the role of cobots in Industry 5.0 and future research directions. 
And, finally, Section 5.6 concludes the chapter.
5.2 DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF COBOTS
5.2.1 Evolution of collaborative robots
Cobots are a type of industrial robot designed to work alongside human 
operators in a collaborative and safe manner (Vicentini, 2021). The evolu￾tion of cobots can be traced through three generations (Figure 5.1).Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 151 Figure 5.1 Timeline of cobot generations.152 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
The first generation of cobots emerged in the early 1990s and were 
designed to operate in a shared workspace with humans. These cobots were 
characterized by their low payload capacity, limited range of motion, and 
low speed. They were primarily used for tasks such as assembly, packaging, 
and inspection.
The second generation of cobots emerged in the late 2000s and were 
designed to be more flexible and adaptable to a wider range of tasks. These 
cobots had improved safety features, such as sensors and software that 
allowed them to detect and avoid collisions with humans. They also had 
improved payloads and range of motion, which made them suitable for 
tasks such as welding, painting, and material handling.
The third generation of cobots is currently emerging and is characterized 
by advanced sensing and artificial intelligence capabilities. These cobots are 
designed to be more autonomous and are capable of learning from their 
environment and adapting to new tasks. They also have improved safety 
features, such as advanced vision systems and force sensors, which allow 
them to work safely and efficiently alongside humans. These cobots are 
being used for a wide range of tasks, including logistics, healthcare, and 
education.
The evolution of cobots is driven by advances in technology, including 
improvements in sensors, software, and artificial intelligence (Borboni et al., 
2023). As cobots continue to evolve, they are expected to become more 
capable, adaptable, and autonomous, which will enable them to play an 
increasingly important role in the industrial ecosystem (Rodriguez-Guerra 
et al., 2021).
5.2.2 Different types of cobots and their applications 
in various industries
There are several types of cobots, each designed for specific applications in 
different industries. Some of the most common types of cobots and their 
applications are summarized in Table 5.1. Assembly cobots are designed 
to perform assembly tasks alongside human operators in industries such as 
automotive, electronics, and consumer goods. They are typically equipped 
with grippers, vision systems, and force sensors to detect and manipulate 
parts. Inspection cobots are designed to perform quality control tasks, such 
as inspecting products for defects or identifying discrepancies in manufac￾turing processes. They are used in industries such as aerospace, pharmaceu￾ticals, and food and beverage. Packaging cobots are designed to package 
products in industries such as food and beverage, pharmaceuticals, and 
consumer goods. They are typically equipped with end-of-arm tooling, con￾veyors, and vision systems to package products efficiently and accurately. 
Material-handling cobots are designed to move materials and products 
from one location to another in industries such as logistics, warehousing, Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 153
Table 5.1 Table of different types of cobots, their application areas, tasks, and parts
Cobot type Area Tasks Parts
Assembly cobots (Andersson 
et al., 2021; Calvo & Gil, 
2022; Navas-Reascos et al., 
2022; Rossi et al., 2020; Yin & 
Li, 2023)
Automotive, 
electronics, 
consumer goods
Perform assembly 
tasks alongside 
human operators
Grippers, vision systems, and force sensors to detect and 
manipulate parts
Inspection cobots (Hameed 
et al., 2023)
Aerospace, 
pharmaceuticals, 
food and beverage
Perform quality 
control tasks 
such as inspecting 
products for defects 
or identifying 
discrepancies in 
manufacturing 
processes
2D and 3D cameras for detecting defects or inconsistencies 
in products; laser scanners for measuring dimensions 
and checking for deviations; force sensors for detecting 
variations in pressure or weight; thermal cameras for 
detecting heat or temperature variations; X-ray or 
ultrasound systems for inspecting internal structures 
of products; spectrometers for analyzing chemical 
composition of products
Packaging cobots (Romanov 
et al., 2022)
Food and beverage, 
pharmaceuticals, 
consumer goods
Package products End-of-arm tooling, conveyors, and vision systems to package 
products efficiently and accurately
Material-handling cobots 
(Fager et al., , 2020; Javaid 
et al., 2022)
Logistics, 
warehousing, 
e-commerce
Move materials and 
products from one 
location to another
Conveyors, sensors, and vision systems to navigate their 
environment and pick up and move objects
Welding cobots (Jones et al., 
2015)
Automotive, 
aerospace, 
construction
Perform welding tasks Equipped with welding torches, vision systems, and sensors to 
perform precise and accurate welding
(Continued)154 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0 Cobot type Area Tasks Parts Healthcare cobots (Chiriatti et al., 2021) Hospitals, clinics, long-term care facilities Assist healthcare professionals with tasks such as patient monitoring, medication delivery, and sterilization Sensors such as cameras, microphones, and infrared sensors to detect and respond to changes in their environment and monitor patient health; end effectors such as grippers, syringe injectors, and sterilization equipment Education cobots (Damaševicius et al., 2017 ̌ ; Plauska & Damaševicius, ̌ 2014; Ponsa & Tornil-Sin, 2022) Classrooms, research labs Teach and assist students in educational settings Grippers to pick up and manipulate objects during the learning process; sensors to detect the environment and interact with objects and humans safely; cameras for vision-based tasks such as object recognition, tracking, and detection; an interactive display screen is used to display information and engage with students; speakers for audio interaction. Table 5.1 (Continued) Table of different types of cobots, their application areas, tasks, and partsImpact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 155
and e-commerce. They are typically equipped with conveyors, sensors, and 
vision systems to navigate their environment and pick up and move objects. 
Welding cobots are designed to perform welding tasks in industries such 
as automotive, aerospace, and construction. They are typically equipped 
with welding torches, vision systems, and sensors to perform precise and 
accurate welding. Healthcare cobots are designed to assist healthcare pro￾fessionals with tasks such as patient monitoring, medication delivery, and 
sterilization. They are used in hospitals, clinics, and long-term care facili￾ties. Education cobots are designed to teach and assist students in edu￾cational settings, such as classrooms and research labs. They are used to 
teach coding, robotics, and other STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, 
Mathematics) subjects.
Cobots have several advantages over traditional industrial robots, includ￾ing lower costs, greater flexibility, and improved safety features. As a result, 
they are becoming increasingly popular in industries such as manufacturing, 
logistics, and healthcare. As technology continues to advance, cobots are 
expected to become even more capable and adaptable, enabling them to 
perform a wider range of tasks in a variety of industries.
5.2.3 Characteristics of cobots
Cobots are designed to work safely alongside human workers and have sev￾eral characteristics that differentiate them from traditional industrial robots, 
which are summarized in Table 5.2.
Overall, cobots are designed to be more flexible, user-friendly, and col￾laborative than traditional industrial robots, with a focus on working safely 
and effectively alongside human workers.
5.3 INTEGRATION OF COBOTS INTO INDUSTRIAL 
MANUFACTURING
5.3.1 Defects of human work and machine work
Complementarity is the concept that cobots can work alongside humans 
to complement and enhance their skills, rather than replacing them (Sowa 
et  al., 2021). Cobots can address the defects of both human work and 
machine work by combining the strengths of both.
Humans have the ability to learn and adapt quickly, make decisions based 
on context and intuition, and perform delicate or complex tasks that require 
dexterity and creativity. However, humans are prone to fatigue, error, and 
injury when performing repetitive, monotonous, or physically demanding 
tasks. In contrast, machines excel at performing repetitive, precise, and con￾sistent tasks without tiring, but lack the ability to learn, adapt, or make 
context-based decisions.156 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Cobots can address these defects of human work and machine work by 
working collaboratively with humans to perform tasks that require both 
cognitive and physical abilities. For example, a cobot can work alongside a 
human operator in an assembly line, handling heavy or repetitive tasks 
while the human performs more delicate or complex tasks. This can help to 
reduce worker fatigue and injury, while also increasing efficiency and 
productivity.
Furthermore, cobots can help to improve the quality of work by reducing 
errors and variability. For example, an inspection cobot can detect defects in 
a product that a human operator may miss, while a welding cobot can per￾form precise and consistent welds that are difficult for a human to achieve 
consistently.
Table 5.2 Features of cobots
Features Description
Safety (Adriaensen et al., 2022; Bi 
et al., 2022; Boschetti et al., 2023; 
Villani et al., 2018)
Cobots are equipped with sensors and other 
safety features that prevent collisions 
and other accidents. They can detect the 
presence of humans and automatically slow 
down or stop when a human enters their 
workspace.
Flexibility (Buerkle et al., 2023) Cobots are designed to be easily reprogrammed 
or reconfigured to perform different tasks 
or to adapt to changes in the manufacturing 
process, making them more flexible than 
traditional industrial robots.
Ease of use (Buerkle et al., 2023; 
Fournier et al., 2022)
Cobots are designed to be easy to program 
and operate, with user-friendly interfaces that 
allow workers to quickly teach them new 
tasks.
Compact size Cobots are typically smaller and lighter than 
traditional industrial robots, making them 
easier to integrate into existing workspaces 
and to move around as needed.
Lower cost Cobots are generally less expensive to purchase 
and maintain than traditional industrial robots, 
making them more accessible to small- and 
medium-sized enterprises.
Human-like movement 
(Papanagiotou et al., 2021; Sauer 
et al., 2021)
Cobots are designed to mimic human movement 
and behavior, making them well-suited 
for tasks that require delicate or precise 
movements.
Collaboration with human workers 
(Amin et al., 2020; Liang et al., 
2021; Villani et al., 2018)
Cobots are designed to work collaboratively 
with human workers, performing tasks that 
are too repetitive, dangerous, or physically 
demanding for humans to do alone.Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 157
5.3.2 Challenges in integrating cobots with human 
workers
Integrating cobots with human workers is a challenging task that requires 
careful planning, design, and implementation (Calvo & Gil, 2022; Rossi 
et al., 2020). The following are some of the challenges involved in integrat￾ing cobots with human workers:
• Safety: Safety is the primary concern when integrating cobots with 
human workers. Cobots need to be designed and programmed to 
avoid collisions, reduce the risk of injury, and ensure safe operations 
in the presence of human workers.
• Training: Human workers need to be trained to work with cobots 
effectively (Qiu et al., 2021). This includes training in operating the 
cobot, understanding its capabilities and limitations, and learning how 
to collaborate with it safely.
• Communication: Effective communication between human work￾ers and cobots is critical for successful collaboration. Cobots need 
to be designed to communicate their actions and status effectively, 
and human workers need to be able to communicate their intentions, 
needs, and feedback to the cobot (Salehzadeh et al., 2022).
• Compatibility: Cobots need to be compatible with existing workflows 
and processes in the industry. This requires careful planning and design 
to ensure that cobots can integrate seamlessly with existing systems 
and processes.
• Cost: The cost of integrating cobots with human workers can be sig￾nificant, including the cost of purchasing, programming, and training. 
This can be a barrier to adoption, particularly for small- and medium￾sized enterprises.
• Resistance to change: Resistance to change is a common challenge when 
introducing new technologies, including cobots, into the workplace. 
Human workers may be resistant to the idea of working with cobots, 
particularly if they perceive them as a threat to their jobs or livelihoods.
Addressing these challenges requires a collaborative effort between design￾ers, engineers, human factors experts, and industry stakeholders. Effective 
integration of cobots with human workers can improve productivity, reduce 
errors, and enhance worker safety and satisfaction. However, to achieve 
these benefits, it is essential to address the challenges involved in integrating 
cobots with human workers effectively.
5.3.3 Human-centered design of cobots
Human-centered design is a design approach that emphasizes the needs, 
preferences, and limitations of users throughout the design process 
(Nguyen Ngoc et al., 2022). The human-centered design of cobots requires 158 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
a deep understanding of human needs and limitations and a willingness to 
adapt the design of the robot to meet those needs (Boschetti et al., 2023; 
Chiriatti et al., 2022). When applied to the development of cobots, human￾centered design principles (Table 5.3) ensure that the robots are designed 
with the goal of improving human performance and well-being in mind.
One principle of the human-centered design of cobots is to ensure that 
they are intuitive to use (Villani et al., 2018). The robots should be designed 
with a simple and clear interface that can be easily understood and operated 
by humans. This will allow workers to use the robots effectively without 
requiring extensive training or specialized knowledge.
Table 5.3 Human-centered design of cobots
Principle Human requirements Cobot requirements
Safety Ensuring human safety 
and well-being in cobot 
workspaces by using safety 
sensors, providing safety 
training, and designing 
cobots that minimize the 
risk of physical harm
Equipping cobots with safety 
sensors and features, minimizing 
sharp edges or dangerous 
moving parts, and ensuring that 
cobots can safely collaborate 
with humans
Intuitiveness Designing cobots that are 
intuitive and easy to use for 
human operators, with clear 
instructions and minimal 
training required
Providing cobots with clear and 
simple user interfaces, easily 
understood instructions, and 
clear indicators of cobot status 
and performance
Adaptability Cobots that can adapt to 
different human work styles, 
preferences, and needs, and 
that can work with a range 
of human abilities
Cobots that can easily be 
reprogrammed or reconfigured 
to adapt to different tasks or 
work environments, and that 
can adjust their movements or 
behavior to suit different human 
needs
Collaboration Cobots that can collaborate 
with human operators 
in a way that maximizes 
productivity, efficiency, and 
well-being for both humans 
and cobots
Cobots that can communicate 
and collaborate effectively with 
human operators, that can 
perform tasks that complement 
human abilities, and that can 
adapt their behavior to suit the 
needs and preferences of human 
operators
Usability Designing cobots that are 
usable and accessible for 
a wide range of human 
operators, including those 
with physical or cognitive 
disabilities, and that can be 
integrated easily into existing 
work environments
Providing cobots with features 
such as adjustable height, 
easy-to-reach controls, and 
voice-activated commands, and 
ensuring that cobots can be 
easily integrated with existing 
equipment and workspacesImpact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 159
Another principle is to ensure that cobots are designed to support col￾laboration between humans and robots (Li et al., 2023). This requires 
designing the robot to be aware of human movements and intentions and to 
be able to adapt its behavior to support the human (Jahanmahin et al., 
2022). For example, the robot should be able to anticipate when the human 
needs assistance and provide that assistance in a timely and appropriate 
manner.
The human-centered design of cobots should also consider the physi￾cal and cognitive limitations of the human user (Fournier et al., 2022). 
The robot should be designed to minimize physical strain and fatigue on 
the human user and to support their cognitive abilities. This may involve 
designing the robot to take over repetitive or physically demanding 
tasks, leaving the worker free to focus on more complex and creative 
tasks.
Finally, the human-centered design of cobots should consider the social 
and emotional aspects of human–robot interaction (Cusano, 2022; Eyam 
et al., 2021). The robot should be designed to foster a sense of trust and col￾laboration with the human user and to provide feedback and recognition 
that supports the worker’s motivation and well-being (Kumar et al., 2021).
5.3.4 User interface (UI) design of cobots
The user experience (UX) of cobot interfaces is an essential aspect of design￾ing effective and efficient human–robot collaboration in industrial environ￾ments (Duarte et al., 2022; Frijns & Schmidbauer, 2021). A well-designed 
UX can increase worker satisfaction, productivity, and safety while reducing 
errors and the need for extensive training.
Effective UX design of cobot interfaces can significantly improve human–
robot collaboration, increase productivity and safety, and enhance worker 
satisfaction. By considering the principles of simplicity, clarity, flexibility, 
feedback, compatibility, and usability testing, designers can create effective 
and efficient interfaces that optimize the UX and support human perfor￾mance. The key considerations for designing cobot interfaces that optimize 
the UX are summarized in Table 5.4.
5.3.5 Cobot as a digital twin
Digital twin technology is a virtual representation of a physical system, 
product, or process that can be used for simulation, monitoring, and 
optimization purposes (Mazumder et al., 2023). It can be implemented 
using virtual reality technology (Bermúdez I Badia et al., 2022). In the 
context of cobots, digital twin technology can play a critical role in 
improving the performance and safety of these collaborative systems 
(Park et al., 2022).160 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
One of the key benefits of digital twin technology is that it allows for the 
creation of a virtual environment where the behavior of the cobot can be 
tested and optimized before it is deployed in the real world (Wang et al., 
2021). This can help to identify and address any potential issues or safety 
concerns before they arise, reducing the risk of accidents and improving the 
overall efficiency of the cobot. Another important aspect of digital twin 
technology is its ability to enable real-time monitoring and control of the 
cobot.
By collecting and analyzing data from sensors and other sources, the digi￾tal twin can provide insights into the performance of the cobot, identifying 
areas for improvement and enabling operators to make more informed deci￾sions about how to optimize its operation.
In addition, digital twin technology can also facilitate collaboration between 
humans and cobots. By creating a virtual environment that accurately reflects 
the real-world conditions in which the cobot will operate, it is possible to 
train human workers on how to interact safely and effectively with the cobot, 
reducing the risk of accidents and improving overall productivity.
To summarize, the role of digital twin technology in cobots is to enhance 
their performance, safety, and overall efficiency. As cobots become increas￾ingly common in industrial settings, digital twin technology is likely to play 
an increasingly important role in ensuring that these collaborative systems 
operate safely and effectively.
Table 5.4 UX considerations of cobot design
Consideration Explanation
Simplicity The interface of the cobot should be easy to use, intuitive, and 
require minimal training. Users should be able to quickly 
understand the functions of the robot and operate it efficiently.
Clarity The interface should provide clear and concise information about 
the cobot’s status, actions, and feedback. This information should 
be presented in a way that is easy to understand and visually 
appealing.
Flexibility The interface should allow for customization and flexibility to 
adapt to different tasks and user preferences. This can include the 
ability to change the robot’s movements, speed, and actions.
Feedback The interface should provide real-time feedback to the user, such 
as visual and auditory signals, to ensure that the user is aware of 
the robot’s actions and status. This can help to prevent errors 
and increase safety.
Compatibility The interface should be compatible with different types of devices 
and platforms, such as smartphones, tablets, and PCs. This can 
increase the flexibility and accessibility of the cobot system.
Usability testing The interface should be tested with real users in a simulated 
environment to identify usability issues and improve the UX. This 
can involve user testing, observation, and feedback.Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 161
5.3.6 The use of AI methods
Artificial Intelligence (AI) methods are increasingly being used in cobot 
technology to enhance human–robot collaboration and ensure safety in the 
workplace (Borboni et al., 2023). Some of the AI methods used by cobots 
include the following.
• Machine learning: This involves training a cobot to recognize pat￾terns in data and make predictions based on that data. Machine learn￾ing algorithms can be used to improve cobots’ ability to detect and 
respond to objects in their environment, to learn from human behav￾ior and adjust their movements accordingly, and to predict and pre￾vent errors or accidents (Semeraro et al., 2022).
• Computer vision: Cobots use computer vision algorithms to detect, rec￾ognize, and classify objects in their environment, which allows them to 
interact with objects and people more accurately and safely. Computer 
vision algorithms can also be used to identify defects or quality issues 
in manufacturing processes and to monitor workers’ activities for safety 
and productivity (Mart´ınez-Franco & Alvarez Mart´ınez, 2021).
• Natural language processing: This involves teaching cobots to under￾stand and respond to natural language commands and queries. Cobots 
with natural language processing capabilities can communicate more 
effectively with human workers, enabling more collaborative and effi￾cient workflows (Angleraud et al., 2021; Tirmizi et al., 2019).
• Reinforcement learning: This involves training a cobot to learn from its 
own experiences and adjust its behavior accordingly. Reinforcement 
learning algorithms can be used to optimize cobots’ movements and 
actions and to learn from the feedback provided by human work￾ers (Alessio et al., 2022; Gomes et al., 2021; Li, 2021; Winter et al., 
2019).
• Deep learning: This involves training cobots to recognize complex pat￾terns in data using deep neural networks. Deep learning algorithms 
can be used to improve cobots’ accuracy and efficiency in tasks such 
as object recognition and motion planning (Luneckas et al., 2021).
The AI methods play a critical role in enabling cobots to operate intelli￾gently, autonomously, and collaboratively with human workers, improving 
efficiency, safety, and productivity in manufacturing and other industries. 
One of the key applications of AI in cobot technology is in human behavior 
prediction, safe zone detection, task planning and optimization, and quality 
control.
• Human behavior prediction involves using machine learning algorithms 
to analyze human behavior and predict future actions. By analyzing the 
patterns and movements of human workers, cobots can anticipate their 162 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
behavior and adjust their movements accordingly (Male & Martinez￾Hernandez, 2021). For example, if a human worker is about to walk 
into the cobot’s work area, the cobot can slow down or stop its move￾ments to avoid any potential collisions.
• Safe zone detection involves using sensors and AI algorithms to detect 
the presence of humans in the cobot’s work area (Hammer & Jung, 
2020). The cobot can then adjust its movements to ensure that it stays 
within its designated work area and avoids any potential collisions 
with humans. For example, if a human worker enters the cobot’s work 
area, the cobot can stop its movements until the worker has left the 
area.
• Task planning and optimization involves using algorithms to plan and 
optimize the cobot’s movements and actions based on the specific task 
it is performing (El Zaatari et al., 2019). By analyzing factors such as 
the location and orientation of objects, the cobot can determine the 
most efficient path to complete the task. This can lead to increased 
productivity and efficiency in manufacturing and other industries that 
use cobots.
• Quality control in manufacturing processes involves using machine 
vision and AI algorithms that can detect defects in products as they are 
being manufactured. By analyzing images of the products, the cobot 
can identify defects and either remove the defective products from the 
assembly line or alert human workers to make necessary adjustments.
Therefore, the AI methods enable cobots to perform tasks more efficiently 
and effectively, while also enhancing safety and reducing the risk of errors 
and accidents.
5.4 CASE STUDY: INTEGRATING COBOTS INTO A 
MANUFACTURING COMPANY
5.4.1 Generic architecture of cobots
The generic architecture of cobots can be divided into the mechanical struc￾ture, control system, sensor and perception system, and human–machine 
interface (HMI) (Segura et al., 2021).
The mechanical structure of a cobot includes the robot arm, grippers, and 
end-effectors (Devaraja et al., 2021). The robot arm is the core of the 
mechanical structure, which provides the cobot with the capability of move￾ment and flexibility (Devaraja et al., 2020). The gripper and end-effectors 
are used to manipulate and interact with the objects in the environment.
The control system of a cobot is responsible for controlling the movement 
and operation of the robot. It includes the motion control system, power 
supply system, and communication system. The motion control system is Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 163
used to control the speed and direction of the robot. The power supply sys￾tem provides the necessary power to the robot, and the communication sys￾tem allows the robot to communicate with other machines or humans.
The sensor and perception system of a cobot includes various sensors 
such as cameras, LiDAR, and tactile sensors. These sensors are used to cap￾ture the environmental data and provide the robot with the necessary infor￾mation to perform the task. The perception system uses the data from the 
sensors to recognize and understand the objects and environment.
The HMI is used to enable communication and interaction between the 
cobot and human workers (Coronado et al., 2022). This interface can take 
various forms, including buttons, touchscreens, voice recognition, and ges￾tures. The interface is designed to be intuitive and easy to use, allowing the 
human worker to interact with the robot effectively.
The generic architecture of cobot (Figure 5.2) is designed to enable effec￾tive human–machine cooperation and support human workers in various 
industries. There are five main components: the Human, the Robot, the 
Sensor, the Actuator, and the Controller. The Human interacts with the 
Controller by sending commands, while the Robot receives commands from 
the Controller. The Sensor sends data to the Controller, which collects data 
from multiple sensors. The Actuator receives data from the Controller and 
sends commands to the physical system. Finally, the Controller interacts 
with the Human by receiving feedback and sends commands to the Robot. 
The architecture is flexible and can be customized based on the specific 
requirements of the application.
5.4.2 Integration of cobots in the production process
The integration of cobots in the production process requires careful consid￾eration and planning to ensure that they can work effectively with human 
Figure 5.2 Generic architecture of cobots.164 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
workers and other machines in the production line. This integration involves 
several steps (Figure 5.3):
• Analyzing the production process: The first step is to analyze the pro￾duction process and identify areas where cobots can be integrated. 
This analysis should consider factors such as the type of task, the level 
of complexity, the skill required, and the potential benefits of using 
cobots.
• Designing the cobot system: Once the potential areas for cobot inte￾gration are identified, the next step is to design the cobot system. This 
includes selecting the appropriate cobot type, defining the tasks it will 
perform, and designing the interface for human–machine interaction 
(Hentout et al., 2019).
Figure 5.3 Integration of cobots in the production process.Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 165
• Installation and testing: After designing the cobot system, it needs to 
be installed and tested to ensure that it operates smoothly and effi￾ciently. This involves installing the hardware and software, configuring 
the system, and conducting tests to verify its performance.
• Integration with other machines and systems: Cobots must be inte￾grated with other machines and systems in the production line to 
ensure that they can operate in coordination with them. This integra￾tion may involve modifying existing systems or designing new ones 
that can work with the cobot system.
• Training and support: Human workers must be trained to work with 
cobots and to understand their capabilities and limitations. They 
should also be provided with support and assistance to ensure that 
they can use the cobot effectively.
The integration of cobots in the production process can improve productiv￾ity, reduce costs, and enhance the quality of products (Cohen et al., 2022). 
However, it requires careful planning, design, and implementation to ensure 
that cobots can work effectively with human workers and other machines 
in the production line.
5.4.3 Real-life scenarios of human and cobot 
operation
5.4.3.1 Generic scenario of cobot operation
Here is a typical operation scenario of a cobot in industrial manufacturing.
(1) Initialization: The cobot is initialized by the operator, who inputs the 
necessary parameters and task details, such as the type of product to 
be manufactured, the required quality specifications, and the quantity.
(2) Material handling: The cobot is programmed to pick up the raw mate￾rials required for the production process and transport them to the 
production line.
(3) Assembly and machining: Once the raw materials are transported 
to the production line, the cobot is programmed to assemble and 
machine the parts according to the product specifications. This may 
include cutting, drilling, welding, and other operations.
(4) Quality control: As the product is being assembled, the cobot is pro￾grammed to perform quality control checks to ensure that the product 
meets the required specifications.
(5) Packaging and shipping: Once the product is assembled and inspected, the 
cobot is programmed to package the product and prepare it for shipping.
(6) Maintenance: The cobot is programmed to perform routine main￾tenance tasks such as cleaning, oiling, and changing worn parts to 
ensure the smooth operation of the cobot and the production process.166 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Throughout the process, the cobot communicates with the operator to 
receive instructions, provide feedback, and alert the operator if there are 
any issues that need to be addressed. The cobot is also equipped with sen￾sors and safety mechanisms to ensure that it operates safely and efficiently.
5.4.3.2 Collaboration scenario for the assembly task
Further, we discuss the example scenario in which a cobot and a human worker 
collaborate to assemble a product as follows (Figure 5.4). This sequence dia￾gram represents the collaboration between a human worker and a cobot in 
an assembly process. The human worker initiates the process by requesting 
the cobot to start the assembly process. The cobot then sends a signal to the 
manufacturing system to start the process and the conveyor belt is started. As 
objects are detected on the conveyor belt, the manufacturing system sends a 
signal to the cobot to pick up the object. The cobot then requests confirma￾tion of the object from the human worker, who confirms it. The cobot then 
sends a signal to the manufacturing system to continue the process and move 
to the next station. The conveyor belt is stopped and the cobot moves to the 
next station to continue the assembly process.
Figure 5.4 Example of a real-life scenario of assembly.Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 167
5.4.3.3 Collaboration scenario for the painting–coating task
In another example, we examine the industrial painting–coating task. The 
sequence diagram (Figure 5.5) illustrates a real-life scenario of painting and 
coating by a cobot, with the participation of a human worker and the paint 
application process. The first step is performed by the human worker, who 
prepares the paint and the object to be painted. Then, the human worker 
positions the object, and the cobot starts scanning it to generate a 3D model. 
The cobot adjusts the position and orientation of the object based on the 
model and then applies the base coat. The human worker assists the cobot 
with masking and positioning during the application process. After applying 
the base coat, the cobot waits for it to dry before proceeding to apply the 
second coat. The human worker inspects and touches up the paint as needed. 
Figure 5.5 Example of a real-life scenario of painting and coating.168 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Then, the cobot applies the final clear coat, and the human worker removes 
the masking. Finally, the human worker transfers the object to the drying area, 
while the cobot moves to its home position and waits for the next task.
5.5 THE ROLE OF COBOTS IN INDUSTRY 5.0 AND 
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
5.5.1 Benefits and drawbacks of cobots in Industry
Cobots offer several benefits to industries, including increased productivity, 
improved quality of work, greater flexibility, lower costs, and improved safety 
(Giberti et al., 2022). Cobots can work alongside humans and perform repeti￾tive or dangerous tasks, resulting in higher productivity. They can also reduce 
errors and defects in the manufacturing process by performing tasks with con￾sistent accuracy and precision. Cobots can be reprogrammed or reconfigured 
easily, making them more flexible than traditional robots. They are also less 
expensive to purchase and maintain, making them more accessible to small￾and medium-sized businesses. Cobots are designed with sensors and other 
safety features to work safely alongside human workers, preventing accidents 
and collisions.
The drawbacks of cobots in industry include limited capabilities, integra￾tion challenges, maintenance and repair, lack of human touch, and the need 
for specialized skills. Cobots may not be suitable for tasks that require a 
high degree of force or speed and may require significant changes to the 
manufacturing process to integrate with existing equipment and systems. 
They also require regular maintenance and specialized skills to program and 
operate and may lack the human touch necessary for some tasks.
The advantages and drawbacks of cobots in industry are summarized in 
Table 5.5. The benefits of cobots in industry outweigh the drawbacks, mak￾ing them a promising technology for improving productivity, quality, and 
safety in manufacturing and other industries. However, careful consider￾ation and planning are necessary to ensure successful integration and effec￾tive use of cobots in the manufacturing process.
5.5.2 The potential of cobots in improving work 
support and productivity
Cobots have the potential to greatly improve work support and productiv￾ity in a variety of industries. Some potential benefits of cobots in this regard 
include the following.
• Reducing physical strain on workers: Cobots can be used to perform 
physically demanding tasks, such as lifting heavy objects, that can 
cause strain or injury to human workers. This can help reduce the risk 
of workplace injuries and improve worker safety.Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 169
• Improving efficiency and productivity: Cobots can work alongside 
human workers to complete tasks more quickly and efficiently, reduc￾ing production times and increasing output.
• Improving quality and accuracy: Cobots are able to perform tasks with 
a high level of precision and accuracy, helping to improve the overall 
quality of products and reducing the number of errors or defects.
• Enabling more flexible production processes: Cobots can be quickly 
reprogrammed or reconfigured to perform different tasks or to adapt 
to changes in the manufacturing process, making production processes 
more flexible and adaptable.
• Providing real-time data and insights: Cobots can collect and analyze 
data in real-time, providing valuable insights into production pro￾cesses and helping to identify areas for improvement.
• Enhancing worker skills and training: Cobots can be used to train 
workers on new skills and tasks, providing opportunities for skill 
development and career growth.
Table 5.5 Advantages and drawbacks of cobots
Advantages of cobots Drawbacks of cobots
Increased productivity: Cobots 
can work alongside human workers, 
performing repetitive or dangerous 
tasks, freeing up human workers to 
focus on more complex tasks, and 
increasing overall productivity.
Limited capabilities: Cobots are generally 
less powerful than traditional industrial 
robots and may not be able to perform 
tasks that require a high degree of force 
or speed.
Improved quality: Cobots can 
perform tasks with consistent 
accuracy and precision, reducing 
errors and defects in the 
manufacturing process.
Integration challenges: Cobots may 
require significant changes to the 
manufacturing process and may be difficult 
to integrate with existing equipment and 
systems.
Greater flexibility: Cobots can 
be easily reprogrammed or 
reconfigured to perform different 
tasks or to adapt to changes in 
the manufacturing process, making 
them more flexible than traditional 
industrial robots.
Maintenance and repair: Cobots 
require regular maintenance and may be 
more difficult to repair than traditional 
industrial robots due to their complex and 
interconnected systems.
Lower costs: Cobots are typically less 
expensive to purchase and maintain 
than traditional industrial robots, 
making them more accessible to 
small- and medium-sized enterprises.
Lack of human touch: Cobots may lack 
the human touch in some tasks where 
human intuition is necessary to make 
decisions.
Improved safety: Cobots are designed 
to work safely alongside human 
workers, with sensors and other 
safety features that prevent collisions 
and other accidents.
Need for specialized skills: Cobots 
require specialized skills to program and 
operate, which may require additional 
training or hiring of specialized personnel.170 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
The potential of cobots to improve work support and productivity is sig￾nificant. By working alongside human workers to perform tasks more 
quickly, accurately, and safely, cobots have the potential to revolutionize 
production processes and improve outcomes for workers and companies 
alike.
5.5.3 Real-time operation of cobots
Real-time operation is critical for cobots in the discussed case study and in 
most robot operation scenarios. The cobots are designed to work alongside 
human workers, and their movements need to be precise and coordinated 
with the movements of the human workers. Any delays or lags in the cobot’s 
operation can lead to accidents and injuries. For example, in the painting 
and coating scenario discussed earlier, the cobot needs to apply the paint or 
coating to the object precisely and in a timely manner to avoid drips and 
ensure a smooth finish. If there is a delay in the cobot’s operation, the paint 
or coating may dry out or be applied unevenly, leading to defects in the 
finished product.
Real-time operation is also important for cobots’ safety features, such as 
sensors that detect the presence of humans in their work area. If the cobot’s 
sensors have a delay in detecting the presence of a human worker, it may not 
be able to adjust its movements in time to avoid a collision. Therefore, real￾time operation is critical for cobots to perform their tasks efficiently and 
safely. This requires advanced control systems and algorithms that can 
ensure that the cobot’s movements are coordinated with the movements of 
human workers and other machines in the production line and that any 
safety risks are quickly detected and addressed.
5.5.4 Ethical and legal issues of cobots in industry
The use of cobots in industry raises ethical and legal issues that must be 
addressed (Chromjakova et al., 2021). Some of the key issues include the 
following.
• Job displacement: The use of cobots has the potential to displace 
human workers, raising questions about the impact on employment 
and the potential for social and economic disruption.
• Safety and liability: Cobots must be designed and programmed to 
operate safely in close proximity to human workers. Any failure to 
ensure safety could lead to injuries or other accidents, raising ques￾tions of liability and legal responsibility.
• Privacy and data security: Cobots collect and transmit data, raising con￾cerns about data privacy and security. Companies must take steps to 
protect sensitive data and ensure that cobots are not used to violate the 
privacy rights of workers or customers (Venaik et al., 2023).Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 171
• Autonomy and control: As cobots become more advanced, they may 
have the ability to make decisions and act autonomously. This raises 
questions about who is responsible for decisions made by cobots and 
how their actions can be controlled or regulated.
• Fairness and bias: Cobots are programmed to make decisions based on 
data and algorithms, but these algorithms may contain biases or perpet￾uate unfair practices. This raises questions about the potential for dis￾crimination and the need to ensure fairness in cobot decision-making.
• Intellectual property: Cobots may be used to automate processes or 
tasks that were previously performed by human workers (Damaševičius 
et al., 2020; Lefranc et al., 2022). This raises questions about the own￾ership of intellectual property and the rights of workers who may have 
contributed to the development of these processes.
To address these ethical and legal issues, companies must take a proac￾tive approach to designing and implementing cobot systems. This includes 
engaging with workers and other stakeholders to address concerns about 
job displacement and safety, implementing strong data privacy and security 
measures, and ensuring that cobot decision-making is transparent and fair. 
Policymakers and regulators must work to develop guidelines and regula￾tions that promote the responsible use of cobots in industry, balancing the 
potential benefits with the need to protect workers and other stakeholders.
5.5.5 Future research directions in human–machine 
cooperation and cobots
The field of human–machine cooperation and cobots is rapidly evolving, 
with new technologies and applications emerging at a rapid pace. Future 
research in this area is likely to focus on a number of key areas, including 
the following.
(1) Human–robot interaction: Researchers will continue to explore ways 
to improve the interaction between humans and cobots, focusing on 
areas such as natural language processing, speech recognition, and 
object recognition.
(2) Artificial intelligence: As cobots become more advanced, researchers 
will explore new ways to integrate artificial intelligence into cobot 
systems, enabling them to make more complex decisions and operate 
autonomously.
(3) Ethics and social impact: The use of cobots raises a number of ethical 
and social impact questions, such as job displacement, privacy, and 
data security. Future research will focus on developing frameworks 
and guidelines for the responsible use of cobots and exploring the 
potential social and economic impact of these technologies.172 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
(4) Industry-specific applications: Cobots have the potential to revolu￾tionize a wide range of industries, from manufacturing and logistics to 
healthcare and retail. Future research will focus on developing cobot 
applications tailored to the specific needs and challenges of different 
industries.
(5) Training and education: As cobots become more prevalent in the 
workforce, there will be a growing need for workers to be trained 
in their use and operation. Future research will focus on developing 
training and education programs to ensure that workers have the nec￾essary skills to work effectively with cobots.
(6) Human-centered design: As cobots become more integrated into the 
workforce, there will be a growing need for human-centered design 
approaches that take into account the needs and preferences of human 
workers. Future research will focus on developing cobot systems that 
are designed to work seamlessly with human workers, improving pro￾ductivity and safety in the workplace.
To summarize, the future of cobots and human–machine cooperation is 
bright, with significant potential to transform a wide range of industries 
and improve the lives of workers and consumers alike. By focusing on these 
key research areas, researchers and practitioners can ensure that cobot tech￾nology is developed and implemented in a responsible and effective manner.
5.6 CONCLUSION
Cobots have the potential to significantly increase productivity and flexibil￾ity in industrial manufacturing by providing human–machine collaboration 
and support. Different types of cobots have unique applications and ben￾efits in various industries and manufacturing processes. Cobots can improve 
workplace safety by taking over dangerous or repetitive tasks, reducing the 
risk of injuries for human workers. Human-centered design principles and 
well-designed user interfaces are crucial for the successful integration and 
adoption of cobots in the production process.
The research article provides important implications for the adoption of 
cobots in Industry 5.0. The findings suggest that cobots have significant 
potential to improve work support, productivity, and safety in various 
industries. Therefore, companies should consider integrating cobots into 
their production processes to improve efficiency and quality while reducing 
costs. However, there are also challenges associated with cobot adoption 
that need to be addressed. These include ethical and legal issues, integration 
with human workers, and the need for human-centered design principles 
to ensure the usability and effectiveness of cobot interfaces. To fully realize 
the potential of cobots, companies need to prioritize employee training and Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 173
education to ensure that workers are comfortable and knowledgeable about 
working alongside these machines. Additionally, companies need to estab￾lish clear ethical and legal guidelines for the use of cobots and implement 
appropriate safeguards to prevent potential harm or misuse.
Future research should aim to address these limitations by conducting 
more comprehensive studies that explore the adoption and use of cobots 
across a range of industries and contexts. This could involve longitudinal 
studies that track the evolution of cobot use over time, as well as studies that 
incorporate user feedback and perspectives. Another important area for 
future research is the development of more advanced cobots that are capa￾ble of more complex tasks and interactions with human workers. This could 
involve the integration of advanced technologies such as AI, machine learn￾ing, and computer vision, as well as the development of more sophisticated 
interfaces and control systems. Currently, most cobots use simple machine 
learning algorithms to analyze human behavior and predict their move￾ments. However, with more advanced AI algorithms, cobots could become 
even more efficient and effective in working alongside human workers. 
Another area of future research could be the development of more advanced 
sensors and safety features for cobots. While current cobots are designed to 
work safely alongside human workers, there is always room for improve￾ment. By developing more advanced sensors and safety features, cobots 
could become even safer and more reliable. In addition, there is a need for 
more research into the social and ethical implications of cobots in the work￾place. As cobots become more prevalent in industrial production, there may 
be concerns about the impact on employment, worker safety, and privacy. 
More research is needed to address these concerns and develop strategies for 
mitigating any negative effects. There is a lot of potential for future research 
and development in the field of cobots in industrial production. By continu￾ing to improve and refine cobot technology, we can create a safer, more 
efficient, and more productive workplace for human workers.
REFERENCES
Adriaensen, A., Costantino, F., Di Gravio, G., & Patriarca, R. (2022). Teaming with 
industrial cobots: A socio-technical perspective on safety analysis. Human Factors 
and Ergonomics in Manufacturing, 32 (2), 173–198.
Alessio, A., Aliev, K., & Antonelli, D. (2022). Robust adversarial reinforcement 
learning for optimal assembly sequence definition in a cobot workcell.
Amin, F. M., Rezayati, M., van de Venn, H. W., & Karimpour, H. (2020). A mixed￾perception approach for safe human–robot collaboration in industrial automa￾tion. Sensors, 20 (21), 1–20.
Andersson, S. K. L., Granlund, A., Bruch, J., & Hedelind, M. (2021). Experienced 
challenges when implementing collaborative robot applications in assembly oper￾ations. International Journal of Automation Technology, 15 (5), 678–688.174 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Angleraud, A., Mehman Sefat, A., Netzev, M., & Pieters, R. (2021). Coordinating 
shared tasks in human-robot collaboration by commands. Frontiers in Robotics 
and AI, 8.
Batth, R. S., Nayyar, A., & Nagpal, A. (2018). Internet of robotic things: Driving intel￾ligent robotics of future - concept, architecture, applications and technologies. In 
2018 4th International Conference on Computing Sciences (ICCS) (pp. 151–160).
Bermúdez I Badia, S., Silva, P. A., Branco, D., Pinto, A., Carvalho, C., Menezes, P., 
…Pilacinski, A. (2022). Virtual reality for safe testing and development in collab￾orative robotics: Challenges and perspectives. Electronics, 11 (11).
Bi, Z. M., Chen, B., Xu, L., Wu, C., Malott, C., Chamberlin, M., & Enterline, T. 
(2022). Security and safety assurance of collaborative manufacturing in industry 
4.0. Enterprise Information Systems, 16 (12).
Borboni, A., Reddy, K. V. V., Elamvazuthi, I., Al-Quraishi, M. S., Natarajan, E., & 
Azhar Ali, S. S. (2023). The expanding role of artificial intelligence in collaborative 
robots for industrial applications: A systematic review of recent works. Machines, 
11 (1).
Boschetti, G., Faccio, M., & Granata, I. (2023). Human-centered design for produc￾tivity and safety in collaborative robots cells: A new methodological approach. 
Electronics, 12 (1).
Buerkle, A., Eaton, W., Al-Yacoub, A., Zimmer, M., Kinnell, P., Henshaw, M., …Lohse, 
(2023). Towards industrial robots as a service (IRaaS): Flexibility, usability, safety 
and business models. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 81.
Calvo, R., & Gil, P. (2022). Evaluation of collaborative robot sustainable integration 
in manufacturing assembly by using process time savings. Materials, 15 (2).
Chiriatti, G., Ciccarelli, M., Forlini, M., Franchini, M., Palmieri, G., Papetti, A., & 
Germani, (2022). Human-centered design of a collaborative robotic system for the 
shoe-polishing process. Machines, 10 (11).
Chiriatti, G., Palmieri, G., & Palpacelli, M. C. (2021). Collaborative robotics for 
rehabilitation: A multibody model for kinematic and dynamic analysis (Vol. 91).
Chromjakova, F., Trentesaux, D., & Kwarteng, M. A. (2021). Human and cobot 
cooperation ethics: The process management concept of the production work￾place. Journal of Competitiveness, 13 (3), 21–38.
Cohen, Y., Shoval, S., Faccio, M., & Minto, R. (2022). Deploying cobots in col￾laborative systems: major considerations and productivity analysis. International 
Journal of Production Research, 60 (6), 1815–1831.
Coronado, E., Kiyokawa, T., Ricardez, G. A. G., Ramirez-Alpizar, I. G., Venture, 
G., & Yamanobe, N. (2022). Evaluating quality in human-robot interaction: A 
systematic search and classification of performance and human-centered factors, 
measures and metrics towards an industry 5.0. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 
63, 392–410.
Cusano, N. (2022). Cobot and sobot: For a new ontology of collaborative and social 
robots. Foundations of Science.
Damaševičius, R., Maskeliūnas, R., Narvydas, G., Narbutaite, R., Polap, D., & ̇
Wo´zniak, M. (2020). Intelligent automation of dental material analysis using 
robotic arm with jerk optimized trajectory. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and 
Humanized Computing, 11 (12), 6223–6234.
Damaševičius, R., Narbutaite, L., Plauska, I., & Blažauskas, T. (2017). Advances 
in the use of educational robots in project-based teaching. TEM Journal, 6 (2), 
342–348.Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 175
Devaraja, R. R., Maskeliūnas, R., & Damaševičius, R. (2020). Aisra: Anthropomorphic 
robotic hand for small-scale industrial applications (Vol. 12249 LNCS).
Devaraja, R. R., Maskeliūnas, R., & Damaševičius, R. (2021). Design and evalua￾tion of anthropomorphic robotic hand for object grasping and shape recognition. 
Computers, 10 (1), 1–14.
Dobra, Z., & Dhir, K. S. (2020). Technology jump in the industry: human–robot 
cooperation in production. Industrial Robot, 47 (5), 757–775.
Duarte, I. M., Pinto, A., Carvalho, C., Zornoza, A., & Santos, J. (2022). The con￾tribution of the user experiences goals for designing better cobots: A systematic 
literature review. Applied System Innovation, 5 (6).
El Zaatari, S., Marei, M., Li, W., & Usman, Z. (2019). Cobot programming for col￾laborative industrial tasks: An overview. Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 116, 
162–180.
Eyam, A. T., Mohammed, W. M., & Martinez Lastra, J. L. (2021). Emotion-driven 
analysis and control of human-robot interactions in collaborative applications. 
Sensors, 21 (14).
Faccio, M., Granata, I., Menini, A., Milanese, M., Rossato, C., Bottin, M., … Rosati, 
G. (2023).Human factors in cobot era: a review of modern production systems 
features. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 34 (1), 85–106.
Fager, P., Sgarbossa, F., & Calzavara, M. (2020, December). Cost modelling of 
onboard cobot-supported item sorting in a picking system. International Journal 
of Production Research, 59 (11), 3269–3284.
Fournier, E., Kilgus, D., Landry, A., Hmedan, B., Pellier, D., Fiorino, H., & Jeoffrion, C. 
(2022). The impacts of human-cobot collaboration on perceived cognitive load and 
usability during an industrial task: An exploratory experiment. IISE Transactions 
on Occupational Ergonomics and Human Factors, 10 (2), 83–90.
Frijns, H. A., & Schmidbauer, C. (2021). Design guidelines for collaborative indus￾trial robot user interfaces (Vol. 12934 LNCS).
Giberti, H., Abbattista, T., Carnevale, M., Giagu, L., & Cristini, F. (2022). A method￾ology for flexible implementation of collaborative robots in smart manufacturing 
systems. Robotics, (1).
Gomes, N. M., Martins, F. N., Lima, J., & Wörtche, H. (2021). Deep reinforcement 
learning applied to a robotic pick-and-place application (Vol. 1488 CCIS).
Hameed, A., Ordys, A., Możaryn, J., & Sibilska-Mroziewicz, A. (2023). Control sys￾tem design and methods for collaborative robots: Review. Applied Sciences, 13 
(1).
Hammer, C., & Jung, N. (2020). Research project beyondSPAI – the safe and reliable 
monitoring of adaptive safety zones in the proximity of collaborating industrial 
robots using an intelligent InGaAs camera system (Vol. 12198 LNCS).
Hentout, A., Aouache, M., Maoudj, A., & Akli, I. (2019). Human–robot interaction 
in industrial collaborative robotics: a literature review of the decade 2008–2017. 
Advanced Robotics, 33 (15–16), 764–799.
Jahanmahin, R., Masoud, S., Rickli, J., & Djuric, A. (2022). Human-robot inter￾actions in manufacturing: A survey of human behavior modeling. Robotics and 
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 78.
Javaid, M., Haleem, A., Singh, R. P., Rab, S., & Suman, R. (2022). Significant appli￾cations of cobots in the field of manufacturing. Cognitive Robotics, 2, 222–233.
Jones, J. E., Dydo, J. R., Rhoades, V. L., Fast, K., Beard, J., Bryant, A., …Gaffney, 
J. H. (2015). Development of a collaborative robot (COBOT) for increased 176 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
welding productivity and quality in the shipyard. In SNAME 5th World Maritime 
Technology Conference, WMTC 2015.
Kumar, A., & Nayyar, A. (2019, November). si3-industry: A sustainable, intelli￾gent, innovative, internet-of-things industry. In A roadmap to industry 4.0: Smart 
production, sharp business and sustainable development (pp. 1–21). Springer 
International Publishing.
Kumar, S., Savur, C., & Sahin, F. (2021). Survey of human-robot collaboration in 
industrial settings: Awareness, intelligence, and compliance. IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, 51 (1), 280–297.
Leesakul, N., Oostveen, A., Eimontaite, I., Wilson, M. L., & Hyde, R. (2022). 
Workplace 4.0: Exploring the implications of technology adoption in digital man￾ufacturing on a sustainable workforce. Sustainability, 14 (6), 3311.
Lefranc, G., Lopez-Juarez, I., Osorio-Comparán, R., & Peña-Cabrera, M. (2022). 
Impact of cobots on automation. Procedia Computer Science, 214, 71–78.
Li, S., Zheng, P., Liu, S., Wang, Z., Wang, X. V., Zheng, L., & Wang, L. (2023). 
Proactive human–robot collaboration: Mutual-cognitive, predictable, and self￾organising perspectives. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 81.
Li, W. D. (2021). Reinforcement learning-based learning from demonstrations for 
collaborative robots. In IEEE international conference on automation science and 
engineering (Vol. 2021, August, pp. 1642–1647).
Liang, C., Wang, X., Kamat, V. R., & Menassa, C. C. (2021). Human-robot collabo￾ration in construction: Classification and research trends. Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management, 147 (10).
Liu, L., Guo, F., Zou, Z., & Duffy, V. G. (2022). Application, development and future 
opportunities of collaborative robots (cobots) in manufacturing: A literature 
review. International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction.
Luneckas, M., Luneckas, T., Kriauciǔ nas, J., Udris, D., Plonis, D., Damaševic ̄ ius, R., ̌
& Maskeliunas, R. (2021). Hexapod robot gait switching for energy consumption ̄
and cost of transport management using heuristic algorithms. Applied Sciences, 11 
(3), 1–13.
Maddikunta, P. K. R., Pham, Q., Prabadevi, P., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T. 
R., … Liyanage, M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and 
potential applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26.
Male, J., & Martinez-Hernandez, U. (2021). Collaborative architecture for human￾robot assembly tasks using multimodal sensors. In 2021 20th International 
Conference on Advanced Robotics, ICAR 2021 (pp. 1024–1029).
Martínez-Franco, J. C., & Alvarez Martínez, D. (2021). Machine vision for collab￾orative robotics using synthetic data-driven learning (Vol. 987).
Mazumder, A., Sahed, M. F., Tasneem, Z., Das, P., Badal, F. R., Ali, M. F., …Islam, 
M. R. (2023). Towards next generation digital twin in robotics: Trends, scopes, 
challenges, and future. Heliyon, 9 (2).
Navas-Reascos, G. E., Romero, D., Rodriguez, C. A., Guedea, F., & Stahre, J. (2022). 
Wire harness assembly process supported by a collaborative robot: A case study 
focus on ergonomics. Robotics, 11 (6).
Nayyar, A., & Kumar, A. (Eds.). (2020). A roadmap to industry 4.0: Smart production, 
sharp business and sustainable development. Springer International Publishing.
Nguyen Ngoc, H., Lasa, G., & Iriarte, I. (2022). Human-centred design in industry 
4.0: case study review and opportunities for future research. Journal of Intelligent 
Manufacturing, 33 (1), 35–76.Impact of robots on human–machine cooperation in Industry 5.0 177
Papanagiotou, D., Senteri, G., & Manitsaris, S. (2021). Egocentric gesture recogni￾tion using 3d convolutional neural networks for the spatiotemporal adaptation of 
collaborative robots. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 15.
Park, J., Caroe Sorensen, L., Faarvang Mathiesen, S., & Schlette, C. (2022). A digital 
twin-based workspace monitoring system for safe human-robot collaboration. In 
2022 10th International Conference on Control, Mechatronics and Automation, 
ICCMA 2022 (p. 24–30).
Pauliková, A., Babeľ
ová, Z. G., & Ubárová, M. (2021). Analysis of the impact 
of human–cobot collaborative manufacturing implementation on the occupa￾tional health and safety and the quality requirements. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 18 (4), 1–15.
Plauska, I., & Damaševičius, R. (2014). Educational robots for internet-of-things 
supported collaborative learning (Vol. 465).
Ponsa, P., & Tornil-Sin, S. (2022). Exploring the practical use of a collaborative robot 
for academic purposes. In Sefi 2022 - 50th Annual Conference of the European 
Society for Engineering Education, Proceedings (p. 1445–1453).
Qiu, S., Natarajarathinam, M., Johnson, M. D., & Roumell, E. A. (2021). The 
future of work: Identifying future-ready capabilities for the industrial distri￾bution workforce. In ASEE Annual Conference and Exposition, Conference 
Proceedings.
Rodriguez-Guerra, D., Sorrosal, G., Cabanes, I., & Calleja, C. (2021). Human-robot 
interaction review: Challenges and solutions for modern industrial environments. 
IEEE Access, 9, 108557–108578.
Romanov, D., Korostynska, O., Lekang, O. I., & Mason, A. (2022). Towards human￾robot collaboration in meat processing: Challenges and possibilities. Journal of 
Food Engineering, 331, 111117.
Rossi, F., Pini, F., Carlesimo, A., Dalpadulo, E., Blumetti, F., Gherardini, F., & Leali, 
F. (2020). Effective integration of cobots and additive manufacturing for recon￾figurable assembly solutions of biomedical products. International Journal on 
Interactive Design and Manufacturing, 14 (3), 1085–1089.
Rožanec, J. M., Novalija, I., Zajec, P., Kenda, K., Tavakoli Ghinani, H., Suh, S., 
… Soldatos, (2022). Human-centric artificial intelligence architecture for industry 
5.0 applications. International Journal of Production Research. https://doi.org/
10.1080/00207543.2022.2138611
Salehzadeh, R., Gong, J., & Jalili, N. (2022). Purposeful communication in human￾robot collaboration: A review of modern approaches in manufacturing. IEEE 
Access, 10, 129344–129361.
Sauer, V., Sauer, A., & Mertens, A. (2021). Zoomorphic gestures for communicating 
cobot states. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 6 (2), 2179–2185.
Segura, P., Lobato-Calleros, O., Ramírez-Serrano, A., & Soria, I. (2021). Human￾robot collaborative systems: Structural components for current manufacturing 
applications. Advances in Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, 3.
Semeraro, F., Griffiths, A., & Cangelosi, A. (2022). Human–robot collaboration and 
machine learning: A systematic review of recent research. Robotics and Computer￾Integrated Manufacturing, 79.
Sowa, K., Przegalinska, A., & Ciechanowski, L. (2021, March). Cobots in knowl￾edge work. Journal of Business Research, 125, 135–142.
Tirmizi, A., Cat, B. D., Janssen, K., Pane, Y., Leconte, P., & Witters, M. (2019). 
User-friendly programming of flexible assembly applications with collaborative 178 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
robots. In Proceedings of the 2019 20th International Conference on Research 
and Education in Mechatronics, REM 2019.
Venaik, A., Jain, S., & Nayyar, A. (2023). Industry 4.0—its advancement and effects 
on security of whistle-blowers on dark web. In Industry 4.0 and the digital trans￾formation of international business (pp. 103–121). Springer Nature Singapore.
Vicentini, F. (2021). Collaborative robotics: A survey. Journal of Mechanical Design, 
Transactions of the ASME, 143 (4).
Villani, V., Pini, F., Leali, F., & Secchi, C. (2018). Survey on human–robot col￾laboration in industrial settings: Safety, intuitive interfaces and applications. 
Mechatronics, 55, 248–266.
Wang, X., Liang, C., Menassa, C. C., & Kamat, V. R. (2021). Interactive and immer￾sive process-level digital twin for collaborative human-robot construction work. 
Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 35 (6). https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)
CP.1943-5487.0000988
Weiss, A., Wortmeier, A., & Kubicek, B. (2021). Cobots in Industry 4.0: A roadmap 
for future practice studies on human-robot collaboration. IEEE Transactions on 
Human-Machine Systems, 51 (4), 335–345.
Winter, J. D., Beir, A. D., Makrini, I. E., de Perre, G. V., Nowé, A., & Vanderborght, 
B. (2019). Accelerating interactive reinforcement learning by human advice for an 
assembly task by a cobot. Robotics, 8 (4).
Yin, M., & Li, J. (2023). A systematic review on digital human models in assembly 
process planning. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology.DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-6 179
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Extending the concepts of “Industry 4.0,” which prioritises automation, 
connectivity, and digitalisation, “Industry 5.0” refers to the next phase of 
industrialisation (Skobelev & Borovik, 2017). While Industry 4.0 placed 
a strong emphasis on the application of cutting-edge technologies to boost 
output and efficiency, Industry 5.0 goes a step further by integrating resil￾ience, sustainability, and human-centricity into the industrial processes, 
especially for micro-, small-, and medium-sized businesses (Organisations) 
(Mourtzis et al., 2022; Leng et al., 2022). The EU defines Industry 4.0 as 
“a vision of an industry that aims beyond efficiency and productivity as 
the sole goals and reinforces the role and the contribution of industry to 
society.” It is the new 4.0 Industrial Revolution which focused on human￾ism and ethics (Berrah et al., 2021) and is more phased towards advanced 
technology. Artificial intelligence (AI)-based robots, the Internet of Things 
(IoT), blockchain, smart contracts, etc., add to the efficiency as well as pro￾ductivity of the organisation. The human-centric motivation, as well as 
augmented resilience, emphasises sustainability. Even though CSR activi￾ties were always prevailing, there was a need to put the idea of prioritising 
people and the environment over profits to shift the industry’s emphasis 
(Spence & Rutherford, 2001). The idea of Industry 5.0 widens the organisa￾tion, becoming more human-centric, resilient, and sustainable as the main 
foundations of Industry 5.0 to develop a more comprehensive vision than 
Industry 4.0 (Saniuk et al., 2022).
The combination of man and machinery progresses the means and effi￾ciency of production is known as the “Industry 5.0” revolution (Nahavandi, 
2019). The automotive industry is witnessing a paradigm shift with the inte￾gration of human brains and mechanical muscles. This interaction has stim￾ulated the need for a new set of managerial competencies. Certain managers’ 
competencies must be identified and examined in this study for human 
brains and mechanical muscles to work together successfully in the automo￾tive industry. While interpersonal skills like leadership, teamwork, and 
Chapter 6
Harmonising human and robotic 
workforces in Industry 5.0
Creating a resilient, human-centric, and 
sustainable organisational ecosystem
Kanchan Pranay Patil and Mugdha Shailendra Kulkarni
Symbiosis International (Deemed University), Pune, India180 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
communication are crucial for efficient team management, technical skills 
like knowledge of technology, engineering, and mechanics are critical for 
making informed decisions (Ngwenyama & Lee, 1997). Several definitions 
of a manager from the time of Fayol (2016) said that a manager’s duties 
should include planning, directing, and controlling. Management tasks are 
gradually performed with bigger stakeholder groups and intelligent agents. 
To develop and implement management activities in the future, a more con￾temporary idea that refers to managers as “architects of context” 
(Wrzesniewski & Dutton, 2001, pp. 179–201) may be beneficial and more 
flexible.
To encourage innovation throughout the lifespan of the organisation, 
Industry 5.0 is required. According to Hung et al. (2010), managers play a 
crucial role in providing resources and empowering employees to experi￾ment and work together to develop innovative ideas. Creativity involves a 
certain amount of risk, and managers can give those who might otherwise 
feel susceptible to criticism the justification they need to take risks. Many 
concepts can be developed, but not all will result in valuable advancements. 
To recognise individuals who show promise and require further examina￾tion, leaders and managers may have a role to play. The Industrial Revolution, 
which brought about significant changes in technology and society, has 
resulted in many industries becoming mechanised, factories expanding, and 
replacing labour incentives with machine incentives. These adjustments sig￾nificantly impacted family life and helped create a new working class 
(Mokyr, 2001). In contrast to Industry 4.0, which concentrated on digitising 
and automating production processes, Industry 5.0 is based on prior indus￾trial revolutions and strives to combine cutting-edge technology with a 
human-centric approach. This strategy particularly emphasises the impor￾tance of social responsibility, adaptability, and sustainability.
Implementing Industry 5.0 requires a socio-technical viewpoint that care￾fully takes into account inter-human, inter-system, and contextual relation￾ships. Industry 5.0 identifies the industry’s capability to contribute to societal 
goals beyond employment and economic expansion and to develop into a 
dependable wealth source by ensuring organisation production. This study 
will look at how managers might notice Industry 5.0’s potential to advance 
social objectives beyond profit in the context of the car sector.
From being technology-driven in the Fourth Industrial Revolution to 
becoming value-driven in the Fifth Industrial Revolution, managerial com￾petencies must be transformed. Instead of being fearful about losing tradi￾tional employment prospects, managers in the automobile industry can 
concentrate on utilising cutting-edge technical breakthroughs, facilitating 
communication, business intelligence, and production/service delivery 
(Schröder, 2016). However, it is crucial to look into how, in an Industry 5.0 
environment, human agents will get the competencies needed to act autono￾mously and advance the techno-social revolution (Bednar & Welch, 2020).Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 181
To reflect new thinking and provide performance, changes are expected to 
follow technological changes in relationships among organisational stake￾holders. Bednar and Welch (2020) defined “smart” working as the “changes 
in approaches to work, work cultures, business architectures, premises, deci￾sion making, communications, and collaboration.” Organisational chal￾lenges, like a lack of agility and cultural complacency, were revealed as even 
more of a significant issue of worry than technical or security difficulties in 
a poll of managers’ views towards the use of technology (Li, 2015). The base 
of industrial conditions is determined to be equipment, and embedded intel￾ligent equipment enhancement is a crucial prerequisite for digital twins. 
Fault identification and rectification can be accelerated simultaneously by 
the automatic real-time process analysis that digital twins can provide 
between connected machines and data sources. Digital twins can also dra￾matically reduce expenses and boost productivity in industrial operations. 
Digital twins indicate its prospective application value and ensuing potential 
value in Industry 5.0 through the prospect. This methodical review will 
work as a technical road map for the intelligent development of industrial 
manufacture and the improvement of the efficacy of the complete business 
process in the Industrial 5.0 era.
Therefore, the growth of Industry 5.0 is examined in this study from the 
viewpoint of how each management perceives their job roles and skills to be 
human-centric, resilient, and sustainable (European Commission, 2021). 
The study concludes that for the automotive industry to prosper in the 
future, it is essential to have specific managerial competencies. Software for 
manufacturing cost estimation can be used to estimate the price of a new 
product. It automates the costing processes and shortens the time to market 
new products (Hammarlund & Trakanavicius, 2023). Combining humans 
and machines can boost production and efficiency across several industries, 
including the auto sector (Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2023). Hence, 
organisations must possess a distinct set of skills than traditional managerial 
abilities to integrate humans and robots successfully (Agolla, 2018).
6.1.1 Objectives of the chapter
The objectives of the chapter are as follows:
• To evaluate each manager’s competence in an automotive organisation 
embracing Industry 5.0;
• To understand human-centric values managers perceive crucial to 
involvement in Industry 5.0;
• Understanding managers’ role in encouraging team members’ resil￾ience is crucial to involvement in Industry 5.0;
• And, to understand how sustainability principles in the workplace are 
perceived as crucial to involvement in Industry 5.0.182 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
6.1.2 Organisation of chapter
The rest of the chapter is organised as follows: Section 6.2 elaborates a 
review of the literature on Industry 5.0, emphasising its evolution and rel￾evance. Section 6.3 focuses on research methodology. Section 6.4 elucidates 
data analysis and findings with regard to manager competencies to promote 
human-centricity, resilience, and sustainability. Section 6.5 highlights discus￾sion and recommendations with regard to the factors playing a dominant 
role in Industry 5.0 and human-centricity, resilience, and sustainability. And, 
finally, Section 6.6 concludes the chapter with implications.
6.2 REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Engineers, roboticists, and management researchers have all shown an inter￾est in the interaction of human-sectored mechanical muscles. According to 
the literature on this subject, combining humans and machines can boost 
production and efficiency across several industries, including the auto sec￾tor. However, managers must possess a distinct set of skills than traditional 
managerial abilities to integrate humans and robots successfully. According 
to the literature, managers in the automotive sector must be thoroughly 
aware of both the capabilities of humans and machines and how they may 
work together to produce the necessary results. The review is categorised 
into three parts: first, explaining the evolution of Industry 5.0, second, men￾tioning the impact on the automotive sector, and, further, understanding of 
manager competencies to promote human-centricity values, strategic resil￾ience, and sustainability.
6.2.1 Evolution of the Industrial Revolution
The First Industrial Revolution took place between the 1760s and around 
1840. In this region, the Second Industrial Revolution began. This was 
known as “the technological revolution,” primarily in Germany and America, 
according to historians (Verhave & van Hoorn, 2014). It began in the early 
days of computing, where initially computers were hefty and disproportion￾ately bulky, the time taken to compute was long, and the power they could 
produce was less. These challenges set a stage for a modern society that is 
only feasible thanks to computer technology (Krippendorff, 2018).
As part of the Third Industrial Revolution, factory automation increased 
around 1970, using electronics and IT (information technology). 
Manufacturing and automation have substantially advanced, thanks to 
Internet availability, connectivity, and renewable energy (Bloem et al., 2014).
Industry 3.0 replaced humans with automated systems on the production 
line using Programmable Logic Controllers (PLCs). Even if mechanical sys￾tems existed, they could not operate without human input. The Industrial Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 183
IoT (IIoT), as it is currently known, enables this information exchange. The 
following are some of the significant elements of Industry 4.0: A “cyber￾physical system” (CPS) is a mechanical apparatus managed by computer￾based algorithms (Sharma & Singh, n.d.). The IoT is a system of 
interconnected devices, vehicles, and other items that enables computers to 
sense, detect, and keep an eye on them from a distance. Visionaries are 
already forecasting the arrival of Industry 5.0 less than ten years after the 
initial discussions on Industry 4.0 in the manufacturing sector (Wójcicki et 
al., 2022). Industry 5.0 is expected to place a greater emphasis on the rein￾tegration of human hands and brains into the industrial framework than the 
current revolution, which is focused on transforming factories into IoT￾enabled innovative facilities that use cognitive computing and link via cloud 
servers (George & George, 2020; Maddikunta et al., 2022). The “Industry 
5.0” revolution combines man and machine to increase production methods 
and efficiency (Nahavandi, 2019, p. 4371), even when firms begin utilising 
cutting-edge technologies. The automotive industry is witnessing a para￾digm shift with the integration of human brains and mechanical muscles 
(Kolarevic & Parlac, 2015).
As the Industrial Revolution continued, the expansion of Industry 4.0 
continued through digital transformation and beyond and can be traced 
back to the Industrial Revolution. Each stage emphasises how the Industrial 
Revolution has increased output, which has changed how we view and do 
our work in the industry (Morrar et al., 2017; Vinitha et al., 2020).
The most recent business and manufacturing buzzword is “Industry 
5.0.” Industry 5.0 drives further to Industry 4.0 by fusing digital & phys￾ical technology to improve human–machine collaboration (Carayannis 
& Morawska-Jancelewicz, 2022). Industry 4.0 was all about the integra￾tion of digital technologies. Industry 5.0 seeks to develop a more human￾centric manufacturing and industrial approach to enhance productivity 
and efficiency. Each following stage emphasises how the Industrial 
Revolution has increased production and changed how we view and 
work in the industry (Longo et al., 2020). Industry 5.0 seeks to develop 
a more human-centric manufacturing and industrial approach to enhance 
productivity and efficiency (Zizic et al., 2022). The textile industry and 
transportation underwent a tremendous transformation due to industri￾alisation. Fuel sources like steam and coal made machine use more prac￾ticable, and the idea of producing with machines quickly gained traction 
(Wrigley, 1962)—machines allowed for the quick and straightforward 
production of items and the development of several innovations and 
technology.
As a result of this interaction, an entirely new set of managerial skills is 
now necessary. A literature review on practical organisational skills com￾bines personal, relational and technical skills. While technical skills like 
information technology, manufacturing, and mechanics are vital for making 
methodological conclusions, relational skills like leadership, cooperation, 184 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
and communication are vital for actual team management (Giunipero et al., 
2006). The literature suggests that managers in the organisation need to 
deeply consider both the capabilities of humans and machines and how they 
could collaborate to generate the desired results. It combines the method￾ological and interpersonal skills which are required for management. While 
interpersonal skills like leadership, teamwork, and communication are cru￾cial for efficient team management, technical skills like knowledge of tech￾nology, engineering, and mechanics are essential, critical, and informed 
judgements (Robles, 2012). Specific managerial skills need to be recognised 
and researched for mechanical muscles and human brains to function effec￾tively in the automotive industry. Human skills like leadership, cooperation, 
and communication are essential for effective team management, but techni￾cal abilities like computer literacy and making informed decisions require an 
understanding of engineering and mechanics. Human characteristics like 
cooperation, leadership, and communication are crucial for efficient team 
management, but technical skills like computer literacy and the ability to 
make sound decisions also come into play.
6.2.2 Impact on the automotive sector and 
technologies used in Industry 5.0
Due to the fusion of mechanical muscles and human minds, the automo￾tive sector has undergone a considerable revolution. The sector industry 
automates its processes to improve productivity and efficiency, resulting in 
collaboration between humans and robots (George & George, 2020). A new 
set of managerial skills is now required to successfully integrate humans and 
machines as a result of this interaction. Managers in the automotive busi￾ness require a specific skill set to manage interactions between people and 
machines (Carver & Turoff, 2007). To ensure everyone is on the same page 
with the goals and objectives, managers must effectively communicate with 
their teams. Successful team management depends on collaboration, and 
managers must promote a collaborative environment to ensure everyone is 
working towards the same objective (Bedwell et al., 2012). The emphasis of 
Industry 5.0 is on both technology and people. It blends cutting-edge tech￾nologies, such as robotics, the IoT, and AI, with a human-centred viewpoint. 
Managers and staff members can manage complex problems requiring 
judgement and expertise. According to Industry 5.0, the production process 
values human abilities and innovation. It also emphasises how important it 
is to use it morally and sensibly.
IIoT and Industry 5.0 technologies can improve the resilience of systems 
in their physical, digital and social dimensions. A dynamic and self-adapting 
system supported by AI/ML and real-time intelligence for predictive cyber 
risk analytics. This knowledge was applied to design a step-by-step approach 
for the SME’s automotive supply chain integration with IIoT technologies in 
Industry 5.0.Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 185
6.2.3 Manager competencies to promote 
human-centricity values
The breadth and depth of automation made possible by Industry 4.0 should 
not make us lose sight of the value of excellent organisational analysis, espe￾cially given the political and social implications.
It will be necessary to look into the organisational analysis that forms the 
framework of Industry 5.0. The need for rapid technology exploitation will 
increase the strain on corporate and business planning procedures. Building 
a platform using tools to facilitate reciprocal exploration of divergent 
employees and group viewpoints should help all stakeholder groups com￾municate more effectively (Bednar, 2000). Strategic planning, decision￾making, and knowledge management will all receive a new boost from 
managing stakeholder connections and interactions.
Employees must be ethically aligned to experience positive outcomes 
regarding job satisfaction, meaningfulness of work, organisational commit￾ment, and lower intentions to quit. To be ethically aligned, employees must 
perceive that their manager acts ethically and feel that their values align 
with their organisations (Longo et al., 2020).
Organisations can acquire specialised capabilities that prioritise the wel￾fare and empowerment of individuals to adopt human-centric values in 
Industry 5.0. The human-centric approach “promotes talents, diversity, and 
empowerment” (Carayannis & Morawska-Jancelewicz, 2022). Humans, as 
a resource, need to focus. Focusing on human resource talent will help to 
transition into the digital era across many industries, including education, 
by placing the interpersonal and human components at the centre of our 
activities (Swanson, 2022; Roepke et al., 2000). However, the modern digi￾tal world emphasises “human-centricity” as a crucial element of the future 
workplace (Kolade & Owoseni, 2022; Jafari et al., 2022). Integrating CPS 
into industrial processes, Industry 5.0 and Industry 4.0 aims to merge the 
physical and digital worlds and establish a self-managing network linking 
people, machines, products, and other connected items. The emphasis on 
human-centricity, which enables a paradigm change from independent auto￾mated and human operations towards a human–automation symbiosis, is a 
crucial component of the present evolution to Industry 4.0 (Zarte et al., 
2020).
Industrial and commercial uses of virtual reality, artificial intelligence, and 
highly integrated manufacturing systems are now available, thanks to tech￾nological advancements. As work activities and markets have used informa￾tion and communication technologies to operate remotely, it has also 
liberated corporate training from a focus on location. There are discussions 
on developing Industry 5.0, combining social and technological systems to 
provide mass-customized goods and services.
The phrase “smart working” has been used to refer to an evolutionary transi￾tion occurring across a variety of work-related characteristics. According to 186 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Iannotta et al., (2020), “changes in approaches to work, work cultures, busi￾ness architectures, premises, decision making, communications, and collab￾oration” have occurred in recent years. The significance of location in 
professional activities has decreased, and there is no more room for collabo￾ration, employee autonomy, talent management, and an emphasis on inno￾vation). Flexibility is a crucial component of modern, innovative working 
practices. Flexibility and spatial displacement are only one aspect of intelli￾gent work, however.
While Industry 4.0 has increased production, it has also raised issues 
among stakeholders and the general public. Many businesses are still hesi￾tant to take advantage of the possibilities of the cyber-physical output 
because they worry that doing so will make them overly dependent on sys￾tems susceptible to embedded errors, cyberattacks, and power failures. 
Smaller organisations may need more skills to change to Industry 4.0, or 
current managers may fear losing control over systems they have a limited 
understanding of. Concerns from workers include but are not limited to, the 
possibility that they would lose their jobs due to the use of robotics in manu￾facturing or providing services.
Smart working demands the right mix of abilities, engagement, and 
enabling technologies, as well as professional training and dedication from 
workers. However, whether or not they do so critically depends on the per￾ceptions and perspectives of the involved players and the extent to which 
they can explore and express them. Social networks can be seen as inter￾twined elements of cultural behaviour. Systemically desirable and culturally 
viable possibilities must be sought when thinking about purposeful change 
in a system. It will be challenging to undertake change that is not culturally 
feasible within specific socio-technical ecosystems.
Innovative ideas and analytical thinking are essential for success in busi￾ness and life. When we look at the history of technological advancement, it 
becomes clear that scientific breakthroughs were formerly, and frequently 
now are, made by lone researchers or small teams working with meagre 
resources. In this context, innovation refers to a way of thought that 
improves processes, systems, goods, and services rather than producing new 
items.
Professionals who must make judgements based on information must be 
able to think critically and analyse instead of just pulling things apart; it is a 
process of separating the facts that matter, their implications (both positive 
and negative), and choosing the best course of action.
For professionals, emotional intelligence is becoming more and more cru￾cial. It takes self-control to manage situations for the most outstanding 
results to communicate effectively with individuals at work, on task teams, 
and with peers. Empathetic recognition and understanding of emotions and 
their effects are also necessary. Employees must develop their emotional 
intelligence to succeed as a team; leaders and supervisors are not responsible 
for coaching staff in this area.Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 187
6.2.4 Manager competencies to promote strategic 
resilience
While making sense of complex experiences has always been a part of 
human life, the speed of technological advancement has increased in the 
twenty-first century to the point where people can now avoid encountering 
uncertainty and unfamiliar obstacles regularly. Managers are the designers 
of context and can shape internal behaviour by fostering dialogue and offer￾ing the right resources (Bednar, 2000).
Their capacity to gather contextual knowledge from experts performing 
their duties, interacting with clients, and engaging in cooperative experi￾mentation and innovation may play a crucial role. The ability to recognise 
subtle changes as they happen is a trait of the most resilient organisations, 
according to (Weick & Sutcliffe, 2015), Industry 5.0 also emphasises the 
importance of resilience in disruptions such as natural disasters and pan￾demics. This involves developing flexible and adaptable manufacturing pro￾cesses that quickly respond to changing conditions. It also consists of 
implementing risk-management strategies that can mitigate the impact of 
disruptions (Leng et al., 2022; Grzybowska & Stachowiak, 2022).
According to the European Commission, a resilient approach is where 
companies are agile and flexible and change by adapting to new technology. 
However, organisations high on flexibility and agility are only sometimes 
resilient (Carvalho et al., 2011). Effectiveness and profit enlargement are 
significant factors of the business. The addition of flexibility and adaptabil￾ity with respect to the “lean” version is specifically motivated by the impor￾tance of competence (Kochan et al., 2018). Some organisations are 
anti-fragile organisations that learn to foresee, respond, and earn systemati￾cally from the crisis to guarantee stable and long-lasting performance. A 
robust industry that can quickly adjust to the approaching flood of new 
technology is required by the ever-changing times; nonetheless, a solid social 
environment composed of organic social values is necessary for a function￾ing human civilisation. Due to the speed with which its technologies are 
being adopted and their sound effects across all industries, Industry 4.0 has 
recently become the standard for applications. These advancements have 
neglected the environment by giving machines precedence over people, but 
they still need to produce the intended results. As a result, Industry 5.0 (I5.0) 
revolution is a call to action for putting sustainability concepts into practice, 
fusing technology and human values, and is seen as a step towards achieving 
sustainable development goals. In light of this, the current study suggests a 
paradigm for examining I5.0 enablers for reaching.
6.2.5 Manager competencies to promote sustainability
An organisation focused on sustainability fully understands its respon￾sibilities to various stakeholder groups (Perrini & Tencati, 2006). Such a 188 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
company deliberately enhances its social and ecological performance while 
considering socio-technical concerns. Any creative development carried out 
in business will provide the organisation with advantages. However, these 
benefits will have varying values for various stakeholder groups. Within an 
evolution towards more sustainable business practices, it might take time to 
reconcile divergent and competing requirements (Bednar & Welch, 2020). 
Industry 5.0 technology enables manufacturing industries to be sustain￾able through circular processes. Organisations must prioritise the reuse, 
repurposing, and recycling of natural resources and reduce waste and envi￾ronmental impact to eventually create a circular economy with improved 
resource efficiency and effectiveness (Xu et al., 2021). Industry 5.0 places a 
strong emphasis on sustainability. Using sustainable production techniques 
and renewable energy sources, the industry seeks to minimise waste and 
lower its carbon footprint. This includes applying circular economy ideas 
and using eco-friendly materials (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021). All 17 of the 
Sustainable Development Goals, as well as the Triple Bottom Line’s three 
Ps, should be prioritised by organisations. Instead of minimising negative 
impact, a sustainable company strategy emphasises positive impact. People 
and companies with these abilities can successfully lead their organisations.
6.3 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
6.3.1 Qualitative study
This research has used the grounded theory technique (Glaser & Strauss, 
1967) better to understand managerial competencies in the context of 
Industry 5.0; the research also examines the ideas and insights of managers 
directly involved in providing goods and services related to the automotive 
sectors in emerging economies.
The following steps enlist the qualitative study conducted.
To find the responses’ themes, patterns, and trends, content analysis 
(Krippendorff, 2018) is used to examine and evaluate qualitative data, such 
as interview transcripts. Researchers might acquire important insights into 
particular themes or research objectives by thoroughly examining the inter￾viewees’ responses while employing the semi-structured interview method. 
After all interviews have been coded, group the codes into more general 
themes or groups. To develop a complete and cogent representation of the 
data, look for repeating patterns and connections between codes.
a) Examine the categorised data to find recurring themes, significant rev￾elations, and new trends. To comprehend the relevance of each theme, 
pay attention to the topic’s frequency and depth.
b) Considering the research objectives while interpreting the content 
analysis’s findings. Discuss and connect the results’ implications to the 
main study issues.Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 189
c) Starting with the semi-structured interviews, transcribe the data. In 
order to have a thorough record of the participant’s responses, ensure 
that every interview is wholly and accurately transcribed.
d) Clearly describe the study goals or subjects you wish to investigate 
through the content analysis. This will direct your investigation and 
assist in keeping your attention on pertinent themes and patterns.
e) Create some code by creating a coding framework depending on the 
study’s goals. In coding, labels or codes are given to text passages that 
connect to particular topics, concepts, or ideas. Ensuring the codes are 
unambiguous, mutually exclusive, and all-inclusive is essential.
f) To begin coding, read the transcripts line by line and assign the appro￾priate codes to the text passages corresponding to the predetermined 
themes. If a segment covers more than one theme, it could get more 
than one code.
g) Creating a coding framework before writing any code depends on the 
research objectives. Labs or codes are assigned to text sections that 
relate to specific subjects, ideas, or concepts. Making sure the codes 
are clear, mutually exclusive, and inclusive is crucial.
h) To start coding, read the transcripts line by line and give the text pas￾sages that relate to the present topics the relevant codes. A segment 
may receive more than one code if it covers more than one theme.
i) Consider the content analysis findings in light of the study’s goals. 
Discuss and connect the results’ implications to the main study issues.
j) Consider using several coders for intercoder reliability checks to guar￾antee the accuracy of the content analysis. In order to do this, a por￾tion of the data must be independently coded by several researchers, 
and their level of agreement must then be evaluated.
k) Finally, present the results clearly and cogently. To illustrate the themes 
and patterns that emerged from the investigation, utilise tables, charts, 
and narratives. To thoroughly explain the research process, be open 
and honest about your approach and limits.
These steps can be used to combine content analysis with the semi-structured 
interview method.
6.3.2 Data collection
After contacting 25 companies, we conducted semi-structured interviews 
with ten managers from ten automotive industries with headquarters in Pune 
and the Pimpri-Chinchwad automotive industry belt. For three months, nine 
in-person interviews and one telephone interview were done. On average, 
the managers we spoke with had over five years of experience in a leader￾ship position within the automotive organisation and were knowledgeable 
about standard business procedures. The Mahratta Chamber of Commerce, 
Industries and Agriculture (MCCIA) database, a network and advocacy 190 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
organisation for Indian businesses in Pune, contained information on the 
sample of managers. The following selection criteria is used to decide which 
managers are qualified for this study’s interviews: (1) deliver products and 
services in their respective organisations; (2) have the power to reallocate 
company resources as necessary; and (3) be in charge of boosting organisa￾tional performance.
Following the recording of each interview, the transcripts were read to 
draw conclusions and do content analysis. With the available data, drawing 
reproducible and reliable implications from text or other related materials 
in the contexts of their use is the goal of the research technique known as 
content analysis. When used as a research technique, content analysis pres￾ents new viewpoints, increases the researcher’s understanding of certain 
occurrences, or directs helpful action. Due to the sensitive material presented 
in these interviews, organisations and individuals had to maintain their ano￾nymity. Identifier codes were given to each organisation and its members to 
achieve this anonymity. Table 6.1 displays these identifiers and the accompa￾nying case information.
In total, ten individuals across ten organisations were interviewed – Table 
6.1 presents the summary.
6.3.3 Interview guide
We conducted interviews with managers from several firms in the automotive 
sector during the research phase to get valuable insights into their thoughts 
on Industry 5.0. These interviews were done in two stages lasting 60–75 min￾utes on average. We asked participants to provide an overview of their vari￾ous businesses, including their major line of business, production processes, 
product offers, target markets, and key competitors, during the first stage of 
the interviews. This first stage set the groundwork for comprehending the 
Table 6.1 Anonymised organisations and participant breakdown summary
Manufacturing 
industry code
Individual code Position Industry
O1 I1 Managers Electronics/electrical
O2 I2 Assistant Manager Engineering
O3 I3 Managing Director Aerospace
O4 I4 CEO Chemical
O5 I5 Technology Consultant Automotive
O6 I6 Managing Director Engineering
O7 I7 Assistant Manager Automotive
O8 I8 Management Consultant Electronics/electrical
O9 I9 Managing Director Automotive
O10 I10 Assistant Manager AutomotiveHarmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 191
framework in which these managers worked and the specific difficulties and 
opportunities they encountered in the Industry 5.0 era.
Moving on to the second level, we explored further the expected roles and 
skills of managers in the fast-expanding Industry 5.0 environment. We 
developed open discussions, allowing managers to freely communicate their 
opinions and experience the issues they thought were significant in the con￾text of Industry 5.0, which provided us with excellent insight into the real￾world challenges automotive industry leaders face.
We used an iterative data collection and analysis approach, adjusting our 
coding approach as new insights emerged from the interviews. This iterative 
procedure confirmed that we thoroughly collected and comprehended the 
workings of the managers’ comments. We wanted to discover how to 
embrace human-centricity, devise resilient strategies, and promote sustain￾ability efforts within their firms. These three essential categories piqued our 
interest since they represented critical criteria for success and flexibility in 
Industry 5.0.
6.4 DATA ANALYSIS AND FINDINGS
All of the interviews were recorded and then transcribed verbatim. The 
coding strategy recommended by Strauss & Corbin (1997) was used inde￾pendently by the two researchers who participated in this study to analyse 
the data. The independent assessments’ results helped build the human￾centricity, resilience, and sustainability factors. Thematic analysis by NVivo 
12 Pro software was used to analyse the transcribed interviews; significant 
themes related to sustainable development functions like human-centricity, 
socio-environment sustainability, and resilience and their association with 
Industry 5.0 competencies were identified for further pattern analysis. It is 
for this reason that thematic analysis became the preferred method to anal￾yse qualitative data (Skovdal & Cornish, 2015). Tables 6.2a, b, 6.3a, b, and 
6.4a, b provide semi-structured interview questions, respective themes, and 
further interview coding.
6.4.1 Manager competencies to promote 
human-centricity
Industry 5.0 facilitates the human-centric approach, which places fun￾damental human wants and interests at the centre of the manufacturing 
process. Management must consider industry workers not as “cost” but 
as “investment.” Industry 5.0 technology used in manufacturing is adap￾tive to the needs and diversity of industry workers (Xu et al., 2021). 
Management has to safeguard workers’ physical and mental well-being, 
making the working environment safe, maintaining the work–life bal￾ance, and being conducive to growth (Xu et al., 2021). Managers have 192 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Table 6.2a Semi-structured questions for manager competencies to promote 
human-centricity
Sr. No. Semi-structured questions Theme from 
the questions
How do managers comprehend the significance of values that put employees first in 
Industry 5.0?
1 How do you articulate a clear vision of Industry 5.0 and 
how it aligns with human-centric values while inspiring 
and motivating employees to work towards that vision?
Employee 
empowerment
2 Does empowering employees by providing autonomy, 
trust, and opportunities for growth allow them to 
contribute their unique skills to Industry 5.0 initiatives?
Diversity and 
inclusion
3 Can Industry 5.0 initiatives show empathy for workers’ 
work–life balance needs and implement policies that 
promote mental health and well-being in place?
Work–life balance
4 Do you provide resources and opportunities for 
employees to enhance their skills and knowledge?
Skill development 
and lifelong 
learning
5 They understand the importance of diverse perspectives 
and experiences in driving Industry 5.0 innovation and 
fostering an inclusive environment.
Ethical and 
transparent 
practices
6 How do you ensure prioritising of customer needs and 
expectations when designing Industry 5.0 projects and 
solutions?
Customer-centric
7 Do you think upholding a robust ethical code and 
promoting transparent practices within the organisation 
is required while implementing Industry 5.0?
Social 
responsibility
Table 6.2b Human-centricity factors in Industry 5.0 context
Manager 
competencies 
to promote 
human-centricity
I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 I10 Total
Employee 
empowerment √ √ √ √ √ √ 6
Diversity and 
inclusion √ √ √ √ 4
Work–life balance √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 8
Skill development 
and lifelong 
learning
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 8
Ethical and 
transparent 
practices
√ √ √ √ 4
Customer-centric √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 7
Social responsibility √ √ √ √ √ 5Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 193
to safeguard the autonomy, human dignity, and privacy of the employees 
(Huang et al., 2022). The following are semi-structured interview questions 
and respective themes in Table 6.2a.
According to Table 6.2b, out of ten respondents, six agree that employee 
empowerment is a significant aspect of human-centricity. Industry 5.0 is all 
about enhancing the digital transformation of enterprises through the effec￾tive fusion of people and technology so that they may work more produc￾tively together in a secure setting. It fosters mechanised efficiency while 
promoting human creativity through emerging technologies such as 3D 
printing, collaborative robots (cobots), AI/ML, digital twins, and block￾chain. Human-centricity includes diversity in terms of varied resources and 
inclusive cultural outcome results, which boosts productivity and a sense of 
belonging at work. Even though less than 50% of the respondents agree 
with diversity and inclusion, a company like Accenture asserts that organ￾isations use a human-centric approach. The strategy may grow adaptable 
Table 6.3a Semi-structured questions for manager competencies to promote resilience
Sr. 
No.
Semi-structured questions Theme from 
the questions
What role does resilience play for managers in their teams and organisations?
1 How do you define Industry 5.0, and what are the critical 
strategic implications for businesses in this era of 
technological advancement?
Strategic 
thinking
2 Describe a situation where you had to adapt your 
management style or approach to address unexpected 
challenges or changes in the industry or market.
Adaptability 
and flexibility
3 How do you identify and assess potential risks associated 
with Industry 5.0 initiatives and technological 
advancements?
Management of 
risk
4 Describe a complex situation where you had to make a 
critical decision with limited information and in the face 
of uncertainty. How did you approach it?
Decision￾making in an 
unpredictable 
environment
5 How do you demonstrate emotional intelligence as a leader, 
especially when guiding your team through challenging 
projects or periods of change in Industry 5.0?
Leadership and 
emotional 
intelligence
6 How do you approach building and maintaining solid 
relationships with stakeholders, both internal and 
external, in the context of Industry 5.0 projects?
Building strong 
relationships 
with 
stakeholders
7 How do you promote a culture of continuous learning and 
personal development within your team to keep up with 
Industry 5.0 advancements?
Continuous 
learning and 
personal 
development
8 Describe a critical crisis or unexpected event that you had 
to manage in your previous role, and how you handled 
the situation to minimise its impact on the organisation.
Crisis 
management194 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
and resilient in challenging and unpredictable social and economic settings 
(Cillo et al., 2021); 80% of survey participants acknowledge the challenges 
in work–life balance, highlighting Industry 5.0 as a solution with its grow￾ing prevalence of flexible working arrangements, particularly in industrial￾ized nations. However, it is unclear how they will affect their health and 
happiness. Lifelong learning is an important aspect where companies have 
been obliged to evolve, embracing continuous learning (lifelong learning) to 
provide their employees with the training and skills necessary for the new 
professional responsibilities to reduce this training gap. As shown in Table 
6.2b, 70% of the respondents agree on the ethics and transparent factors. 
Industry 5.0 asserts that it will move away from technical productivity 
methods and towards a more human-centred strategy. Socio-technical 
interoperability between people and AI systems is a necessary first step. The 
globe has undergone extensive digitisation, and the new modern workplace 
is now primarily virtual. If we want people to focus on innovation while 
being more creative, we must develop and use AI systems and technologies 
deemed trustworthy and ethical. This is only possible if humans use the 
proper technological governance while considering productivity and a sus￾tainable economy and environment.
Thus, Industry 5.0 emphasises the value of human workers, including 
their talents, creativity, and capacity for problem-solving. Industry 5.0 
intends to empower employees by integrating technology to improve their 
Table 6.3b Resilience factors in Industry 5.0 context
Manager 
competencies 
for resiliency
I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 I10 Total
Strategic thinking √ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 8
Adaptability and 
flexibility
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ 7
Management of risk √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 7
Decision-making in 
an unpredictable 
environment
√ √ √ √ √ √ 6
Leadership and 
emotional 
intelligence
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ 7
Building strong 
relationships with 
stakeholders
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 8
Continuous 
learning and 
personal 
development
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 8
Crisis management √ √ √ √ √ √ 6Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 195
Table 6.4a Semi-structured questions for manager competencies to promote resilience
Sr. No. Semi-structured questions Theme from 
the questions
How do managers perceive the influence of integrating sustainability principles in the 
workplace?
1 How do you perceive the role of Industry 5.0 in 
addressing environmental challenges and promoting 
sustainability?
Environmental 
awareness
2 Describe how you integrate sustainability goals 
into strategic planning to ensure the long-term 
environmental viability of projects and initiatives.
Strategic planning 
for sustainability
3 How do you encourage and support a sustainable 
innovation culture within your team or organisation?
Sustainable 
innovation
4 a) How do you measure and track the environmental 
performance of projects or initiatives related to 
Industry 5.0?b) Can you provide examples of key 
performance indicators (KPIs) that you have used to 
evaluate the success of sustainability efforts within 
your team or organisation?
Performance 
measurement 
and reporting
5 Describe how you build collaborative relationships with 
external stakeholders, such as suppliers, partners, or 
industry peers, to advance environmental sustainability 
goals in Industry 5.0 projects.
Collaboration and 
partnerships
6 How do you integrate circular economy principles into 
designing and implementing Industry 5.0 processes 
and products?
Circular process
7 How do you instil a culture of sustainability within your 
team or organisation, making it an integral part of the 
company’s values and identity?
Sustainability values
Table 6.4b Sustainability factors in Industry 5.0 context
Manager 
competencies for 
sustainability
I1 I2 I3 I4 I5 I6 I7 I8 I9 I10 Total
Environmental 
awareness
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ 7
Strategic planning 
for sustainability
√ √ √ √ √ 5
Sustainable 
innovation:
√ √ √ √ √ √ 6
Performance 
measurement 
and reporting
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ 7
Collaboration and 
partnerships
√ √ √ √ √ √ √ 7
Circular process √ √ √ √ √ √ √ 7
Sustainability values √ √ √ √ √ 5196 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
productivity and well-being instead of automating and replacing human 
jobs with machines. For instance, collaborative robots (cobots) can support 
people in physically taxing or repetitive jobs, resulting in safer and more 
effective workplaces. Industry 5.0 promotes a productive workplace culture 
that embraces human potential by giving human needs and talents priority.
6.4.2 Manager competencies to promote resilience
Industry 5.0 also emphasises the importance of resilience in disruptions such 
as natural disasters and pandemics. This involves developing flexible and 
adaptable manufacturing processes that quickly respond to changing condi￾tions. It also consists of implementing risk-management strategies that can 
mitigate the impact of disruptions. Table 6.3a illustrates the semi-structured 
interview questions and respective themes.
According to Table 6.3b, resilient organisations can maintain their enthu￾siasm under stress, handle disruptive changes, and adapt. They recover 
quickly after failures. They also conquer significant obstacles without acting 
dysfunctional or hurting other people. Hence, more than 70% of the respon￾dents agree that strategic thinking, adaptability and flexibility are significant 
factors in Industry 5.0. Resilient leaders can maintain enthusiasm under 
stress, handle disruptive changes, and adapt. They recover quickly after fail￾ures. They also conquer significant obstacles without acting dysfunctional 
or hurting other people. Also, 60% more than half of the respondents agree 
that decision-making in an unpredictable environment faces challenging 
decisions that must be made quickly and effectively. However, risk and 
uncertainty can significantly affect how decisions bother and worry organ￾isations. This examines the challenges of choosing wisely in risky and 
ambiguous circumstances and provides insightful guidance, including sce￾nario planning and prototyping, communication, and risk management. 
According to psychological research, organisations with emotional intelli￾gence may also be crucial in high-stress battle circumstances where cognitive 
performance is limited. This lack of cognitive function frequently occurs in 
stressful and high-pressure professional contexts. This is noticed as 80% of 
the organisations agree that EI is important; 60% agree that crisis manage￾ment and the capacity to thrive despite disaster risk. Also, managers can 
prepare for, deal with, withstand, and recover from disasters, for example, 
COVID crisis management with work from home, especially regarding the 
sector.
6.4.3 Manager competencies to promote 
sustainability
Sustainability is a critical element of Industry 5.0. The industry aims to 
reduce its carbon footprint and minimise waste through renewable energy 
sources and sustainable manufacturing practices. This includes the use of Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 197
eco-friendly materials and the implementation of circular economy prin￾ciples. The survey questionnaire and theme are given in Table 6.4a.
According to Table 6.4b, seven out of ten respondents agree that organ￾isations must emphasise environmentally friendly practices using cutting￾edge technology. This covers the application of renewable energy 
sources—like solar or wind energy—in manufacturing operations. In addi￾tion, Industry 5.0 encourages the efficient use of resources and waste reduc￾tion by applying cutting-edge sensors, data analytics, and intelligent systems. 
Such strategic planning for sustainability is agreed upon by five out of ten. 
Six respondents emphasized the idea of sustainable innovation in Industry 
5.0, emphasizing its dedication to environmental sustainability and resil￾ience, focusing on human-centred design. Given the increasing regulatory 
and financial attention on lowering carbon emissions and environmental 
impact, businesses must assess the resource footprint that supports their 
manufacturing process. Analysing the source of raw materials, the amount 
of waste produced, the environmental impact, the energy efficiency of oper￾ations, and the energy sources may all be part of this. Performance measure￾ment and reporting, where seven out of the ten respondents agreed, mentions 
that organisations can assure compliance with environmental laws, industry 
standards, and sustainability frameworks by measuring and reporting on 
their sustainability performance. Organisations can identify gaps or areas of 
non-compliance and take corrective measures to align with applicable legis￾lation and standards by routinely monitoring and reporting their sustain￾ability performance. A circular process where Industry 5.0 technology can 
make manufacturing processes more resource-efficient by increasing prod￾uct lifespan, decreasing waste, and optimising output. For instance, IoT sen￾sors and data analytics can optimise energy and material to ensure that 
resources are used effectively throughout the production cycle. Sustainable 
values out of ten, seven respondents agreed. Organisations should actively 
seek collaborations and partnerships with external organisations, including 
NGOs, research institutions, and industry associations, to share information 
and best practices values in sustainability. Organisations can learn about 
new sustainable values, exchange experiences, and use group efforts to 
address sustainability concerns by joining sustainability networks and 
projects.
Organisations should uphold the highest ethical standards and encourage 
openness throughout their business operations. This entails acting honestly 
and responsibly, ensuring workers are treated fairly, and engaging in ethical 
business practices. Organisations gain the trust of their staff, clients, and 
stakeholders by acting with integrity and ethics. Organisations should focus 
on their consumers’ demands and preferences when designing products and 
services so that they meet their expectations. This entails undertaking mar￾ket research, actively listening to customer feedback, and constantly updat￾ing products based on feedback. Organisations may establish lasting bonds 
and client loyalty by strongly emphasising customer satisfaction.198 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
6.5 DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Industry 5.0, which emphasises human-centricity, strives to establish a har￾monious partnership between people and machines in which technology 
enhances rather than replaces human talents. This method produces supe￾rior results in innovation and problem-solving and improves job satisfaction, 
engagement, and productivity. The following sub-sections discuss diverse 
factors that play a dominant role in Industry 5.0 and human-centricity, resil￾ience, and sustainability.
6.5.1 Factors playing a dominant role in Industry 5.0 
and human-centricity
The following points highlight diverse factors that play a dominant role in 
Industry 5.0 and human-centricity.
• Employee empowerment: Organisations in Industry 5.0 understand the 
importance of including workers in decision-making. Organisations 
may tap into their collective intelligence and make better decisions by 
allowing employees to share their views and knowledge. Employee 
ownership, accountability, and dedication are all fostered by this 
involvement. Organisations should promote an atmosphere that 
gives employees agency and promotes active engagement (Murillo 
& Lozano, 2006). This entails encouraging open communication, 
involving workers in decision-making processes, and offering chances 
for career advancement (Bednar et al., 2016). Employees who feel 
empowered are more driven, engaged, and willing to contribute to the 
organisation’s success (Taneja et al., 2015; Yukl & Becker, 2006).
• Diversity and inclusion: Harnessing the potential of diversity and fos￾tering an inclusive culture become even more critical for small- and 
medium-sized enterprises to grow and remain competitive in Industry 
5.0, where cooperation between people and cutting-edge technolo￾gies is required. Small- and medium-sized businesses (organisations) 
should appreciate diversity and foster inclusive workplaces that value 
and respect individual differences (Boehm et al., 2014). This entails 
encouraging diversity in hiring procedures, ensuring every employee 
has an equal opportunity to succeed, and building an inclusive and 
respectful workplace atmosphere (Pless & Maak, 2004). Organisations 
may stimulate innovation and creativity by utilising a diverse work￾force’s distinctive perspectives and skills (Jayne, 2004).
• Work–life balance: Organisations in Industry 5.0 prioritise maintaining 
workers’ physical and emotional health. This fosters a culture that val￾ues self-care, opposes excessive working hours, and supports work–life 
balance. Organisations may put rules restricting communication after 
hours, promoting vacation use, or providing staff members time off Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 199
to unwind. Organisations should prioritise their employees’ well-being 
and understand the value of work–life balance. This entails providing 
flexible work schedules, encouraging healthy work habits, supplying 
tools for stress management and preserving one’s mental and physical 
well-being. Supporting work–life balance increases productivity, job 
satisfaction, and employee satisfaction (Shipman et al., 2023).
• Skill development and lifelong learning: Organisations should sup￾port lifelong learning and invest in their personnel’s ongoing skill 
development (Schuetze, 2006; Nevis et al., 2009). This can be done 
by encouraging staff members to learn new skills and information 
through mentorship programmes, workshops, and training sessions. 
Organisations can help their employees adapt to shifting market con￾ditions and technological demands by building a learning culture 
which promotes personal development and career advancement.
6.5.2 Factors playing a dominant role in Industry 5.0 
& resilience
Industry 5.0 competencies for resilience are adept at organising and leading 
teams in stressful situations while remaining composed and making wise 
choices (Morgan et al., 1998). They know the significance of effective com￾munication, resource allocation, and quick problem-solving in crises.
The following points highlight diverse factors that play a dominant role 
in Industry 5.0 and resilience.
• Strategic thinking: Resilient organisations can strategies and foresee 
upcoming difficulties and disruptions. They know the broader mar￾ket dynamics, technical developments, and new trends that could 
impact the sector. They can direct the organisation towards resilience 
by considering various circumstances and creating proactive measures 
(Jarvenpaa & Ives, 1994).
• Adaptability and flexibility: Resilient organisations are adaptive and 
flexible in the face of change. To respond to unforeseen occurrences 
and changes in the market, they can swiftly modify their plans, proce￾dures, and business practices. They welcome innovation and are con￾stantly looking for new chances to advance (Seville et al., 2015; He 
et al., 2023).
• Management of risk: Resilient organisations are adept at recognising, 
evaluating, and controlling risks (Waters, 2011). They are thoroughly 
aware of the business’s possible hazards and take proactive steps to 
reduce them (Luo & Tung, 2007). This entails putting in place risk￾management frameworks, creating backup plans, and ensuring opera￾tions continue during an interruption.
• Making decisions in an uncertain world: Resilient organisations 
are skilled at making defensible choices in complex and challenging 200 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
circumstances (Gregory et al., 2012). Before making strategic deci￾sions, they acquire and analyse pertinent data, communicate with 
stakeholders, and consider various viewpoints. They can make prompt 
judgements to guide the organisation towards resilience because they 
can easily take calculated risks (Chang et al., 2014).
• Leadership and emotional intelligence: Resilient organisations have 
excellent leadership and emotional intelligence. Especially in trying 
circumstances, they can motivate their colleagues and effectively com￾municate. They are sympathetic to the worries of their employees since 
they are aware of how emotions affect people. Resilient organisations 
build a supportive workplace environment that encourages teamwork, 
trust, and resilience (Goleman, 2001).
• Building solid relationships with stakeholders: Collaborating effec￾tively are skills that resilient organisations possess. They actively inter￾act with vendors, clients, business partners, and other relevant entities 
to promote cooperation and learning from one another. They use these 
connections to strengthen their resilience and adjust to shifting market 
conditions (Zack, 2003).
• Continuous learning and personal development: Resilient organisa￾tions are dedicated to their personal growth. They stay current on busi￾ness trends, technological developments, and resilient best practices. 
They actively support their team members’ progress as professionals 
by looking for possibilities for professional development (Bande et al., 
2015).
6.5.3 Factors playing a dominant role in Industry 5.0 
& sustainability
Organisations should take ownership of their social duty by actively sup￾porting the communities in which they operate. This includes participating 
in CSR programmes, lending a hand to neighbourhood projects, and con￾sidering their activities’ social and environmental effects. Organisations can 
contribute to community development, participate in sustainability projects, 
and behave ethically as businesses (Jenkins, 2009). By fostering these com￾petencies, organisations can establish a workplace emphasising individu￾als’ well-being, well-being, development and empowerment. As a result, the 
organisation experiences an uptick in employee happiness, productivity, and 
overall performance (Markos & Sridevi, 2010).
The following points highlight diverse factors that play a dominant role 
in Industry 5.0 and sustainability.
• Environmental awareness: Organisations must be well-versed in 
sustainability concepts and environmental challenges. They should 
be current on ecological laws, new fashions, and sustainable living 
guidelines. Because of this awareness, they can include environmental Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 201
factors in decision-making processes, encouraging sustainable prac￾tices (Rani & Mishra, 2014).
• Strategic planning for sustainability: Organisations must be able to 
create and practice sustainability strategies consistent with the organ￾isation’s objectives and core values. They should consider sustain￾ability’s environmental, social, and economic facets when creating a 
long-term strategy. Organisations can direct the organisation towards 
sustainable practises by establishing precise sustainability objectives 
and incorporating them into the overall company plan (Burke & 
Gaughran, 2007; Clarke and Roome, 1999).
• Environmental awareness: Organisations must understand sustain￾ability concepts and environmental challenges. They should be current 
on ecological laws, new fashions, and sustainable living guidelines. 
Because of this awareness, they can include environmental factors in 
decision-making processes, encouraging sustainable practices. Effective 
organisations know the significance of engaging with stakeholders to 
promote sustainability. They should foster partnerships with suppliers, 
consumers, employees, communities, and regulatory agencies to iden￾tify sustainability goals and work together on sustainability projects 
(Eckersley, 2003). To foster trust and a sense of shared commitment to 
sustainability, organisations should engage stakeholders in meaningful 
discussions and publicly convey the organisation’s sustainability activ￾ities. Energy, water, materials, and waste management are all areas in 
which organisations should be well-versed. They should locate areas 
where the organisation can improve resource efficiency and waste 
reduction operations. The organisation can reduce their influence on 
the environment and improve resource efficiency by implementing sus￾tainable procurement procedures, making the most of its energy use, 
and embracing circular economy ideas (Milios, 2018; Tukker, 2015).
• Sustainable innovation: Organisations should encourage a culture of 
innovation that fosters the development of sustainable products and 
the improvement of processes. Employee idea generation and imple￾mentation that minimises adverse environmental effects and develops 
sustainable solutions should be encouraged. Organisations may pro￾mote innovation for sustainability by creating a culture of creativity 
and supporting the investigation of sustainable technology and prac￾tices (Milios, 2018; Jones & Wynn, 2019).
• Performance measurement and reporting: Organisations should set up 
systems to track and evaluate the company’s sustainability performance 
(Epstein & Buhovac, 2010). They should monitor important indicators 
like carbon emissions, water usage, waste generation, and social effects 
to gauge progress towards sustainability objectives. The organisation’s 
dedication to accountability and openness is demonstrated by effective 
reporting of sustainability performance, both internally and interna￾tionally (Krajnc & Glavic, 2003 ̌ ; McDonald & Young, 2012).202 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
• Change management and employee engagement: To successfully lead 
sustainability programmes, organisations must have excellent change 
management abilities (Cameron & Green, 2019). Employees should 
be informed of the value of sustainability, given the opportunity to 
participate in decision-making, and given training and information 
on sustainable practices (Renwick et al., 2013). Organisations may 
help the organisation adopt sustainable behaviours by encouraging 
employee involvement and developing a sense of purpose.
6.6 CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS OF INDUSTRY 5.0
Industry 5.0 technology synergy promotes human-centricity, sustainability, 
and resilience by fusing human and technological strengths. It recognises the 
value of humans in the production process, develops their abilities through 
interaction with robots, and encourages a positive work atmosphere. It 
promotes sustainable practices by minimising resource usage and relying 
on renewable energy sources. Finally, it improves resilience by enabling 
agile and adaptable production systems and utilising data-driven decision￾making. Industry 5.0 provides the way for a more inclusive, sustainable, and 
resilient future by upholding these ideals.
Resolution is achieved by a paradigm shift brought about by Industry 5.0, 
which will place less emphasis on technology and assume that cooperation 
between humans and robots is the foundation for progress. The Industrial 
Revolution is increasing customer satisfaction by deploying personalised 
products. Industry 5.0 is required for contemporary enterprises to obtain 
competitive advantages and foster economic growth for production (Alves 
et al., 2023; Pang et al., 2023).
With the viewpoint of keeping the human being at the focal point of indus￾trial production processes, Industry 5.0 trails Industry 4.0. As a result, there 
will be a shift from production systems centred on human beings and high 
customisation to production systems centred on technology advancement 
and high productivity. As a result, technology no longer controls human 
beings; instead, they control technology and use it for their benefit. 
Researchers are advancing the idea of Industry 5.0 even though enterprises 
and industries have yet to embrace it fully. This is because the industrial real￾ity of today still faces issues related to Industry 4.0 and the digitalisation era. 
So far, the concentration of humans in industrial systems has been the objec￾tive behind Industry 5.0 (Yitmen et al., 2023; Ghobakhloo et al., 2022).
Industry 5.0 helps generate a more ecologically friendly and sustainable 
industrial ecosystem by exploiting energy and material utilisation. Industry 
5.0 identifies resilient systems needing to regulate and bounce back from set￾backs. Industry 5.0 makes available real-time data collection, analysis, and 
further decision-making based on fusing technologies like the IoT and AI. This 
makes preventive maintenance, predictive analytics, and quick response to Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 203
unplanned events possible, reducing downtime and enhancing industrial pro￾cesses’ overall resilience. Additionally, Industry 5.0 promotes flexible manu￾facturing and decentralised production, allowing businesses to respond 
quickly to shifting consumer needs and automotive supply chain disruptions.
Thus, concluding that automation and AI are combined to enhance rather 
than completely replace human abilities. This strategy ensures that the pro￾duction process relies heavily on human creativity, problem-solving abilities, 
and emotional intelligence. This finding suggests that Industry 5.0 not only 
assists employees in adjusting to new tasks but also helps acquire the skills 
required to run and maintain sophisticated machinery and systems; busi￾nesses and governments may concentrate on upskilling and reskilling pro￾grammes. Another significant finding is that a circular economy model, 
which encourages the reuse, renovation, and recycling of materials and 
goods, may be supported by Industry 5.0. The sector may lessen its environ￾mental and waste production impact by designing products with recyclabil￾ity in mind and streamlining supply networks.
REFERENCES
Agolla, J. E. (2018). Human capital in the intelligent manufacturing and Industry 4.0 
revolution. Digital transformation in Smart Manufacturing, 2, 41–58.
Alves, J., Lima, T. M., & Gaspar, P. D. (2023). Is Industry 5.0 a human-centred 
approach? A Systematic Review. Processes, 11(1), 193.
Bande, B., Fernández-Ferrín, P., Varela, J. A., & Jaramillo, F. (2015). Emotions and 
salesperson propensity to leave: The effects of emotional intelligence and resil￾ience. Industrial Marketing Management, 44, 142–153.
Bednar, P. M. (2000). A contextual integration of individual and organisational 
learning perspectives as part of IS analysis. Informing Science: The International 
Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline, 3, 145–156.
Bednar, P. M., & Welch, C. (2020). Socio-technical perspectives on smart working: 
Creating meaningful and sustainable systems. Information Systems Frontiers, 
22(2), 281–298.
Bednar, P. M., Welch, C., & Milner, C. (2016). Excellence in practice through a socio￾technical, open systems approach to process analysis and design. International 
Journal of Systems and Society (IJSS), 3(1), 110–118.
Bedwell, W. L., Wildman, J. L., DiazGranados, D., Salazar, M., Kramer, W. S., & 
Salas, E. (2012). Collaboration at work: An integrative multilevel conceptualisa￾tion. Human Resource Management Review, 22(2), 128–145.
Berrah, L., Cliville, V., Trentesaux, D., & Chapel, C. (2021). Industrial performance: 
An evolution incorporating ethics in the context of Industry 4.0. Sustainability, 
13(16), 9209.
Bloem, J., Van Doorn, M., Duivestein, S., Excoffier, D., Maas, R., & Van Ommeren, 
E. (2014). The fourth industrial revolution. Things Tighten, 8(1), 11–15.
Boehm, S. A., Kunze, F., & Bruch, H. (2014). Spotlight on age-diversity climate: The 
impact of age-inclusive HR practices on firm-level outcomes. Personnel Psychology, 
67(3), 667–704.204 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Burke, S., & Gaughran, W. F. (2007). Developing a framework for sustainability man￾agement in engineering SMEs. Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 
23(6), 696–703.
Cameron, E., & Green, M. (2019). Making sense of change management: A complete 
guide to the models, tools and techniques of organisational change. Kogan Page 
Publishers.
Carayannis, E. G., & Morawska-Jancelewicz, J. (2022). The futures of Europe: 
Society 5.0 and Industry 5.0 as driving forces of future universities. Journal of the 
Knowledge Economy, 13(4), 3445–3471.
Carvalho, H., Duarte, S., & Machado, V. C. (2011). Lean, agile, resilient and green: 
divergencies and synergies. International Journal of Lean Six Sigma, 2(2), 151–179.
Carver, L., & Turoff, M. (2007). Human-computer interaction: The human and com￾puter teams in emergency management information systems. Communications of 
the ACM, 50(3), 33–38.
Chang, S. E., McDaniels, T., Fox, J., Dhariwal, R., & Longstaff, H. (2014). Toward 
disaster-resilient cities: Characterising resilience of infrastructure systems with 
expert judgments. Risk Analysis, 34(3), 416–434.
Cillo, V., Gregori, G. L., Daniele, L. M., Caputo, F., & Bitbol-Saba, N. (2021). 
Rethinking companies’ culture through knowledge management lens during 
Industry 5.0 transition. Journal of Knowledge Management, 26(10), 2485–2498.
Clarke, S., & Roome, N. (1999). Sustainable business: Learning–action networks 
as organisational assets. Business Strategy and the Environment, 8(5), 296–310.
Eckersley, R. (2003). Deliberative democracy, ecological representation and risk: 
Towards a democracy of the affected. In Democratic Innovation. Routledge.
Epstein, M. J., & Buhovac, A. R. (2010). Solving the sustainability implementation 
challenge. Organizational Dynamics, 39(4), 306.
European Commission. (2021). Industry 5.0: Towards a more sustainable, resil￾ient and human-centric industry. Retrieved from https://ec.europa.eu/info/news/
industry-50-towards-more-sustainable-resilient-and-human-centric-industry
Fayol, H. (2016). General and industrial management. Ravenio Books.
Fraga-Lamas, P., Lopes, S. I., & Fernández-Caramés, T. M. (2021). Green IoT and 
edge AI as key technological enablers for a sustainable digital transition towards a 
smart circular economy: An Industry 5.0 use case. Sensors, 21(17), 5745.
George, A. S., & George, A. H. (2020). Industrial Revolution 5.0: The transforma￾tion of the modern manufacturing process to enable man and machine to work 
hand in hand. Journal of Seybold Report, Report ISSN NO, 1533, 9211.
Ghobakhloo, M., Iranmanesh, M., Mubarak, M. F., Mubarik, M., Rejeb, A., & 
Nilashi, M. (2022). Identifying Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable devel￾opment: A strategy roadmap for delivering sustainability values. Sustainable 
Production and Consumption, 33, 716–737.
Giunipero, L., Handfield, R. B., & Eltantawy, R. (2006). Supply management’s evo￾lution: Key skill sets for the supply manager of the future. International Journal of 
Operations & Production Management, 26(7) 822–844.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies 
for qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine Publishers.
Goleman, D. (2001). The emotionally intelligent workplace: How to select for, mea￾sure, and improve emotional intelligence in individuals, groups, and organisations. 
In E. B. Cherniss, & Daniel, The emotionally intelligent workplace (Vol. 1, pp. 
27–44).Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 205
Gregory, R., Failing, L., Harstone, M., Long, G., McDaniels, T., & Ohlson, D. 
(2012). Structured decision making: A practical guide to environmental manage￾ment choices. John Wiley & Sons.
Grzybowska, K., & Stachowiak, A. (2022). Global changes and disruptions in supply 
chains—Preliminary research to sustainable resilience of supply chains. Energies, 
15(13), 4579.
Hammarlund, C., & Trakanavicius, M. (2023). Digital transformation and new 
product development at incumbent manufacturing firms a case study on the effects 
of digital transformation on new product development.
He, Z., Huang, H., Choi, H., & Bilgihan, A. (2023). Building organisational resilience 
with digital transformation. Journal of Service Management, 34(1), 147–171.
Huang, Y., Zhou, Y., Wong, T. K., Luo, D., Zhang, G., Chen, J., & Smith, G. D. 
(2022). Inpatient Dignity Scale: Mandarin translation and psychometric charac￾teristics evaluation. Nursing Open, 9(1), 500–512.
Hung, R. Y.Y., Lien, B. Y., Fang, S. C., & McLean, G. N. (2010). Knowledge as a 
facilitator for enhancing innovation performance through total quality manage￾ment. Total Quality Management, 21(4), 425–438.
Iannotta, M., Meret, C., & Marchetti, G. (2020). Defining leadership in smart work￾ing contexts: A concept synthesis. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 556933.
Jafari, N., Azarian, M., & Yu, H. (2022). Moving from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0: 
What are the implications for smart logistics? Logistics, 6(2), 26.
Jarvenpaa, S. L., & Ives. (1994). The global network organisation of the future: 
Information management opportunities and challenges. Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 10(4), 25–57.
Jayne, M. E. (2004). Leveraging diversity to improve business performance: Research 
findings and recommendations for organisations. Human Resource Management: 
Published in Cooperation with the School of Business Administration, The 
University of Michigan and in alliance with the Society of Human Resources 
Management, pp. 409–424.
Jenkins, H. (2009). A ‘business opportunity model of corporate social responsibil￾ity for small and medium-sized enterprises. Business Ethics: A European Review, 
18(1), 21–36.
Jones, P., & Wynn, M. G. (2019). The circular economy, natural capital and resilience 
in tourism and hospitality. International Journal of Contemporary Hospitality 
Management, 31(6), 2544–2563.
Kochan, T. A., Lansbury, R. D., & MacDuffie, J. P. (2018). After lean production: 
Evolving employment practices in the world auto industry. Cornell University 
Press.
Kolade, O., & Owoseni, A. (2022). Employment 5.0: The work of the future and the 
future of work. Technology in Society, 102086.
Kolarevic, B., & Parlac, V. (2015). Building dynamics: Exploring the architecture of 
change. Routledge.
Krajnc, D., & Glavič, P. (2003). Indicators of sustainable production. Clean 
Technologies and Environmental Policy, 5, 279–288.
Krippendorff, K. (2018). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology. Sage 
Publications. ISBN: 9781506395661
Leng, J., Sha, W., Wang, B., Zheng, P., Zhuang, C., Liu, Q., & Wang, L. (2022). 
Industry 5.0: Prospect and retrospect. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 65, 
279–295.206 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Li, S. X. (2015). The internet of things: A survey. Information Systems Frontiers, 
17(2), 243–259.
Longo, F., Padovano, A., & Umbrello, S. (2020). Value-oriented and ethical technol￾ogy engineering in Industry 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design of the 
factory of the future. Applied Sciences, 10(12), 4182.
Luo, Y., & Tung, R. L. (2007). International expansion of emerging market enter￾prises: A springboard perspective. Journal of International Business Studies, pp. 
38, 481–498.
Maddikunta, P. K., Pham, Q. V., Prabadevi, B., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T. 
R., & Liyanage, M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and 
potential applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26, 100257.
Markos, S., & Sridevi, M. S. (2010). Employee engagement: The key to improving 
performance. International Journal of Business and Management, 5(12), 89.
McDonald, S., & Young, S. (2012). Cross-sector collaboration shaping corporate 
social responsibility best practice within the mining industry. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, pp. 37, 54–67.
Milios, L. (2018). Advancing to a Circular Economy: three essential ingredients for a 
comprehensive policy mix. Sustainability Science, 13(3), 861–878.
Mokyr, J. (2001). The rise and fall of the factory system: technology, firms, and 
households since the industrial revolution. In Carnegie-Rochester Conference 
Series on Public Policy, 55, pp. 1–45. North-Holland.
Morgan, D. L., Krueger, R. A., & King, J. A. (1998). Planning focus groups. Sage.
Morrar, R., Arman, H., & Mousa, S. (2017). The fourth industrial revolu￾tion (Industry 4.0): A social innovation perspective. Technology Innovation 
Management Review, 7(11), 12–20.
Mourtzis, D., Angelopoulos, J., & Panopoulos, N. (2022). A literature review of the 
challenges and opportunities of the transition from Industry 4.0 to Society 5.0. 
Energies, 15(17), 6276.
Murillo, D., & Lozano, J. M. (2006). SMEs and CSR: An approach to CSR in their 
own words. Journal of Business Ethics, 67, 227–240.
Nahavandi, S. (2019). Industry 5.0—A human-centric solution. Sustainability, 11(16), 
4371.
Nevis, E. C., DiBella, A. J., & Gould, J. M. (2009). Understanding organisations as 
learning systems. In knowledge, Groupware and the Internet, pp. 43–63.
Ngwenyama, O. K., & Lee, A. S. (1997). Communication richness in electronic mail: 
Critical social theory and the contextuality of meaning. MIS Q, 21(2), 145–167.
Pang, T. Y., Lee, T. K., & Murshed, M. (2023). Towards a new paradigm for digital 
health training and education in Australia: Exploring the implication of the fifth 
industrial revolution. Applied Sciences, 13(11), 6854.
Perrini, F., & Tencati, A. (2006). Sustainability and stakeholder management: The 
need for new corporate performance evaluation and reporting systems. Business 
Strategy and the Environment, 15(5), 296–308.
Pless, N., & Maak, T. (2004). Building an inclusive diversity culture: Principles, pro￾cesses and practice. Journal of Business Ethics, 54, 129–147.
Raja Santhi, A., & Muthuswamy, P. (2023). Industry 5.0 or Industry 4.0 S? 
Introduction to Industry 4.0 and a peek into the prospective Industry 5.0 technol￾ogies. International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing (IJIDeM), 
17(2), 947–979.Harmonising human and robotic workforces in Industry 5.0 207
Rani, S., & Mishra, K. (2014). Green HRM: Practices and strategic implementation 
in the organisations. International Journal on Recent and Innovation Trends in 
Computing and Communication, 2(11), pp. 3633–3639.
Renwick, D. W., Redman, T., & Maguire, S. (2013). Green human resource man￾agement: A review and research agenda.International Journal of Management 
Reviews, 15(1), 1–14.
Robles, M. M. (2012). Executive perceptions of the top 10 soft skills needed in 
today’s workplace. Business Communication Quarterly, 75(4), 453–465.
Roepke, R., Agarwal, R., & Ferratt, T. W. (2000). Aligning the IT human resource 
with business vision: The leadership initiative at 3M. Mis Quarterly, 327–353.
Saniuk, S., Grabowska, S., & Straka, M. (2022). Identification of social and economic 
expectations: Contextual reasons for the transformation process of Industry 4.0 
into the Industry 5.0 concept. Sustainability 4, 14(3), 1391.
Schröder, C. (2016). The challenges of Industry 4.0 for small and medium-sized 
enterprises. Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung: Bonn, Germany, 1–28.
Schuetze, H. G. (2006). International concepts and agendas of lifelong learning. 
Compare, 36(3), 289–306.
Seville, E., Van Opstal, D., & Vargo, J. (2015). A primer in resiliency: seven principles 
for managing the unexpected. Global Business and Organizational Excellence, 
34(3), 6–18.
Sharma, A., & Singh, B. J. (n.d.). Evolution of industrial revolutions: A review. 
International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engineering, 9(11), 
66–73.
Shipman, K., Burrell, D. N., & Huff Mac Pherson, A. (2023). An organisational 
analysis of how managers must understand the mental health impact of telework￾ing during COVID-19 on employees. International Journal of Organizational 
Analysis, 31(4), 1081–1104.
Skobelev, P. O., & Borovik, S. Y. (2017). On the way from Industry 4.0 to Industry 
5.0: From digital manufacturing to digital society. (2nd ed.). 6, 307–311.
Skovdal, M., & Cornish, F. (2015). Qualitative research for development: A guide 
for practitioners. Practical Action (Organization). ISBN 9781853398544
Spence, L. J., & Rutherford, R. (2001). Social responsibility, profit maximisation 
and the small firm owner-manager. Journal of Small Business and Enterprise 
Development, 8(2), 126–139.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. M. (1997). Grounded theory in practice. Sage.
Swanson, R. A. (2022). Foundations of human resource development. Berrett.
Taneja, S., Sewell, S. S., & Odom, R. Y. (2015). A culture of employee engagement: 
A strategic perspective for global managers. Journal of Business Strategy, 36(3), 
46–56.
Tukker, A. (2015). Product services for a resource-efficient and circular economy–a 
review. Journal of Cleaner Production, pp. 97, 76–91.
Verhave, T., & van Hoorn, W. (2014). The temporalisation of the self. Historical 
Social Psychology (Psychology Revivals), 325.
Vinitha, K., Prabhu, R. A., Bhaskar, R., & Hariharan, R. (2020). Review on indus￾trial mathematics and materials at Industry 1.0 to Industry 4.0. Materials Today: 
Proceedings, 33, pp. 3956–3960.
Waters, D. (2011). Supply chain risk management: vulnerability and resilience in 
logistics. Kogan Page Publishers.208 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Weick, K. E., & Sutcliffe, K. M. (2015). Managing the unexpected: Sustained perfor￾mance in a complex world. John Wiley & Sons.
Wójcicki, K., Biegańska, M., Paliwoda, B., & Górna, J. (2022). Internet of Things in 
industry: Research profiling, application, challenges and opportunities. A Review. 
Energies, 15(5), 1806.
Wrigley, E. A. (1962). The supply of raw materials in the industrial revolution. The 
Economic History Review, 15(1), 1–16.
Wrzesniewski, A., & Dutton, J. E. (2001). Crafting a job: Revisioning employees as 
active crafters of their work. Academy of Management Review, 26(2), 179–201.
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., & Wang, L. (2021). Industry 4.0 and Industry 
5.0—Inception, conception and perception. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 
61, 530–535.
Yitmen, I., Almusaed, A., & Alizadehsalehi, S. (2023). Investigating the causal 
relationships among enablers of the construction 5.0 Paradigm: Integration of 
Operator 5.0 and society 5.0 with human-centricity, sustainability, and resilience. 
Sustainability, 15(11), 9105.
Yukl, G. A., & Becker, W. S. (2006). Effective empowerment in organisations. 
Organization Management Journal, 3(3), 210–231.
Zack, M. H. (2003). Rethinking the knowledge-based organisation. MIT Sloan 
Management Review.
Zarte, M., Pechmann, A., & Nunes, I. L. (2020). Principles for human-centred 
system design in Industry 4.0–a systematic literature review. In Advances in 
Human Factors and Systems Interaction: Proceedings of the AHFE 2020 Virtual 
Conference on Human Facts.
Zizic, M. C., Mladineo, M., Gjeldum, N., & Celent, L. (2022). From Industry 4.0 
towards Industry 5.0: A review and analysis of paradigm shift for the people, 
organisation and technology. Energies, 15(14), 5221.DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-7 209
7.1 INTRODUCTION
A nation’s economy cannot survive without the existence of industries 
(Milberg & Winkler, 2013). The economy is composed of various industries 
that can be further categorized into interrelated goods and services (Morrar 
et al., 2017). Dividing businesses into distinct industrial segments can pro￾vide investors and economists with insight into the diverse levels of eco￾nomic activity (Rodrik, 2018; Audretsch et al., 2015). Familiarity with this 
organizational framework can enhance one’s comprehension of the econo￾my’s overall structure. Industries refer to a group of businesses engaged in 
commercial activities (Müller et al., 2021) and can be divided into different 
sectors such as financial, services, and manufacturing. While many people 
associate industries with large-scale manufacturing, it can also include other 
commercial activities such as agriculture, transportation, and hospitality.
The different levels of industries include primary, secondary, tertiary, 
quaternary, and quinary industries (Dinu & Nosca, 2020). Primary indus￾tries extract or produce raw materials, such as mining, forestry, and fishing, 
while secondary industries transform raw materials into usable products 
through processing and manufacturing (Larchenko et al., 2020). Tertiary 
industries provide essential services and support to allow other levels of 
industry to function (Ge et al., 2022). Quaternary industries focus on the 
creation and transfer of information (Aithal, 2019), and quinary industries 
Chapter 7
Impact of Industry 5.0 on 
sustainable development 
with machine learning and 
the role of internal audit
Literature review
Ali Rehman
A’Sharqiyah University, Ibra, Oman
Tariq Umar
University of the West England, Bristol, UK
Fathyah Hashim
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia210 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
are responsible for controlling the industrial and government decision-making 
processes (Dinu et al., 2022). Understanding these levels can provide insight 
into the different activities that contribute to the economy and how they work 
together to create value.
Industries play a crucial role in the economy of a nation (Milberg & 
Winkler, 2013). They provide employment opportunities, generate income, 
and contribute to economic growth and development. Industries provide 
jobs to people, both skilled and unskilled, which contributes to reducing 
unemployment rates. Employment opportunities provided by industries 
also enable individuals to earn income and contribute to the economy 
(Manzoor et al., 2019). Industries generate income for individuals, busi￾nesses, and governments through taxes, fees, and other revenues. This 
income is then used to finance government expenditures, pay salaries, and 
support social welfare programs, which contribute to economic growth and 
development.
Industries often produce goods and services that can be exported, which 
helps to earn foreign exchange and improve the balance of payments 
(Manzoor et al., 2019). This can lead to increased economic growth and 
development. Industries are often at the forefront of innovation and techno￾logical advancement, which can lead to the transfer of knowledge and tech￾nology to other sectors of the economy, leading to the creation of new 
products and services, and increased productivity. Industries usually require 
extensive infrastructure such as transportation networks, power plants, and 
communication systems, which can lead to the development of the necessary 
infrastructure and create opportunities for other businesses to grow and 
develop, thus these industries are the cornerstone for the sustainable develop￾ment of any nation (Liu et al., 2018).
Industry 5.0 is a term that is currently being used to describe the future of 
manufacturing and production. It is a concept that builds upon the previous 
industrial revolutions, namely, the mechanization of production (Industry 
1.0), mass production (Industry 2.0), automation (Industry 3.0), and digitali￾zation (Industry 4.0). Industry 5.0 envisions a new era of manufacturing that 
combines advanced technology with the creativity and ingenuity of human 
beings. In Industry 5.0, machines and humans will work together in a more 
collaborative and integrated way than ever before (Xu et al., 2021). Rather 
than simply automating repetitive tasks, Industry 5.0 seeks to empower 
workers with new tools and technologies that allow them to take on more 
complex and creative tasks (Nayyar & Kumar, 2020). This could include 
things like using virtual reality to design products or working alongside 
robots to assemble them. Industry 5.0 emphasizes sustainability and social 
responsibility and encourages manufacturing processes to be designed with 
the goal of minimizing environmental impact, reducing waste, and promot￾ing ethical practices throughout the supply chain. While Industry 5.0 is still 
in the early stages of development, it has the potential to transform the way 
we think about manufacturing and production, creating new opportunities Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 211
for innovation, collaboration, and social responsibility (Breque et al., 2021; 
Committee, 2021; Longo et al., 2020; Bednar & Welch, 2020).
Industry 5.0 envisions a future where humans and machines work together 
(Leng et al., 2022) in harmony to enhance their collaboration, leading to the 
creation of more successful and efficient businesses enabling to achieve sus￾tainable development (Dwivedi et al., 2023). Such an interaction possesses 
many risk factors including fraud risk and can raise many red flags. Given 
that Industry 5.0 is a relatively new concept, it is possible that numerous 
risks associated with it have not yet been identified. According to the 
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE), the median duration of 
fraud – which refers to the average time between when fraud occurs and 
when it is discovered – is 12 months (ACFE, 2022). Moreover, Figure 7.1
illustrates that the financial loss resulting from fraud increases with the 
duration of its detection.
Machine learning (ML) with the assistance of internal audit (IA) can iden￾tify such red flags and can ensure the path of sustainability. It is worth not￾ing that fraud is one of the major barriers to the achievement of sustainable 
development (Rehman, 2022a). Industry 5.0 can be utilized to prevent fraud 
(Nurafia, 2023). Table 7.1 demonstrates how Industry 5.0 can be utilized to 
prevent fraud in some industries.
Sustainable development is required due to the urgent need to address 
climate change and its impact on the environment, society, and gover￾nance (Sinha et al., 2020). Sustainable development refers to a develop￾ment model that meets the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. The United 
Nations has identified 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to be 
Figure 7.1 Increase in financial loss due to increase in time of its detection.
Source: ACFE (2022).212 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
achieved by 2030, covering areas such as poverty reduction, climate action, 
and responsible consumption and production (Assembly, 2015; Sinha et al., 
2020).
Given that technological advancements have the power to transform the 
way value is created, exchanged, and distributed, it is imperative that these 
technologies are designed to support societal values of the future. As these 
changes continue to unfold, questions surrounding technological innovation 
have arisen, necessitating that the industry re-examine its position and role 
in society (Breque et al., 2021). The political priorities of the world have played 
a significant role in shaping this discourse. “Go Green” initiatives require a 
transition to a more circular economy and greater reliance on sustainable 
resources. Moreover, the COVID-19 crisis has underscored the importance 
of rethinking existing working methods and approaches (Rehman et al., 
2023), particularly regarding the vulnerability of global supply chains, with 
a focus on building industries that are more resilient, sustainable, and 
human-centric in the future.
Industries contribute toward the sustainability of the nations (Morrar 
et al., 2017). Industries focus on creating reliable, sustainable, and resilient 
infrastructure, including cross-border and regional infrastructure, to sup￾port economic growth and enhance human well-being (Breque et al., 2021). 
Industries 5.0 can assure equitable and affordable access for all, promote 
inclusive and sustainable industrialization, increasing industry’s contribu￾tion to employment and gross domestic product, particularly in developing 
countries (Kynčlová et al., 2020). Industries 5.0 can ensure and facilitate 
access to financial services, such as affordable credit, for small-scale indus￾tries and integrate them into markets and value chains. Industry 5.0 will 
utilize upgraded infrastructure and upgrade industries to adopt clean and 
environmentally sound technologies and processes, while also improving 
resource-use efficiency. It is expected that Industry 5.0 encourages scientific 
Table 7.1 Utilization of Industry 5.0 to prevent frauds
Industry Technology How it prevents fraud
Financial 
Services
Machine Learning Analyzes transactional data to detect anomalies 
indicative of fraudulent activity.
Manufacturing Machine Learning, 
IoT and 
Blockchain
Increases supply chain transparency and 
traceability to identify fraudulent activities 
such as counterfeit goods, theft, and tampering.
Retail Machine Learning Analyzes customer data to detect suspicious 
patterns of behavior that may indicate 
fraudulent activity.
Healthcare Big Data Analytics 
and Machine 
Learning
Analyzes claims data to identify patterns and 
anomalies that may indicate fraudulent activity, 
such as duplicate claims or claims for services 
that were never provided.Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 213
research and innovation, particularly in developing countries, and increases 
research and development (Gera et al., 2023).
There are several risks associated with Industry 5.0 and sustainable devel￾opment which require mitigation. These risks create hindrances in the 
achievement of sustainability. Such risks are identified by the United Nations 
(UN) and include (UN, 2022) the following:
1. Lack of access to financial support for small manufacturers. Only 
33% are benefiting from loans or lines of credit.
2. Industries of least developed countries are still suffering from post￾pandemic impact. The gap between the recoverability of manufactur￾ing growth between developed nations and least developed nations is 
approximately three times.
3. One-third of jobs in industries are experiencing negative impacts.
4. Lower tech-oriented countries are suffering lower production as com￾pared to higher technology industries.
It is evident that technology plays a crucial role in achieving sustainability 
(Sarkodie, 2022; Waqas et al., 2022); however, it is important to acknowl￾edge that not everyone may have access to it due to limited and expensive 
availability. Moreover, the mere availability of technology does not guaran￾tee its proper implementation and desired outcomes (Mergel et al., 2019). 
To address these risks, machine learning can offer several promising solu￾tions (Wang et al., 2022b). Machine learning is a rapidly evolving field of 
artificial intelligence (AI) that enables computers to learn from data and 
improve their performance over time without being explicitly programmed 
(Soori et al., 2023). The use of machine learning has the potential to con￾tribute to sustainable development by enabling more efficient and effective 
decision-making, reducing waste and emissions, and improving resource 
management.
The adoption of machine learning also brings new challenges and risks, 
such as data privacy and biased decision-making due to limited information 
(Rahman et al., 2022). The successful implementation of machine learning 
technology in organizations is often hindered by various factors (Dwivedi, 
et al., 2019). In addition to potential algorithmic issues arising from 
improper training sets, other challenges may include a lack of strategic plan￾ning and limited experience with the technology, which can result in wasted 
time and resources. Security vulnerabilities may also arise from the use of 
outdated data sources, and regulatory challenges can arise from a lack of 
understanding of how the algorithm makes decisions (Shaw et al., 2019). 
Furthermore, third-party risks can pose a significant threat to organizations, 
as a provider may fail to properly govern the machine learning solution, 
leading to a data breach. Thus, it is important to identify and address these 
challenges to ensure the successful adoption and use of machine learning 214 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
technology in organizations (Koptelov, 2022; Cohen, 2020; Myradov, 2022; 
Rahman et al., 2022).
According to a recent survey administered to over 2,000 individuals 
across diverse industries, the most significant barriers to the adoption of 
machine learning technology were identified as a lack of clear strategy and 
a shortage of talent with appropriate skill sets. Specifically, 43% of respon￾dents cited a lack of a clear strategy as a primary obstacle, while 42% identi￾fied a dearth of skilled personnel as a challenge. These results underscore the 
importance of addressing these issues in order to effectively integrate 
machine learning technology into organizational operations (Diligent, 
2021). The identified risks can be effectively addressed through the utiliza￾tion of the internal audit function, which is an integral component of orga￾nizational governance management. By leveraging their expertise, internal 
auditors can identify and propose meaningful recommendations to mitigate 
the identified risks (Rehman, 2022a).
The role of internal audit is to ensure that the effective and ethical use of 
technologies mitigates risks associated with machine learning and imple￾mentation of Industry 5.0 (Verma et al., 2022). Internal audits can play a 
critical role in ensuring the alignment of machine learning initiatives with 
the organization’s sustainability objectives, identifying, and mitigating risks, 
and promoting transparency and accountability (Rehman, 2022a). Internal 
audits play a crucial role in ensuring that the organization’s sustainability 
goals are being met (Amoako et al., 2023) and that the adoption of Industry 
5.0 technologies is aligned with these goals.
Internal audits can conduct audits to assess the effectiveness of the orga￾nization’s sustainability initiatives, including the adoption of machine learn￾ing and Industry 5.0 (Verma, et al., 2022). These audits can help identify 
areas of improvement and ensure that the organization is effectively utiliz￾ing these technologies to meet its sustainability objectives (Assiri & 
Humayun, 2023). Internal audits can also help identify potential risks asso￾ciated with the adoption of Industry 5.0 technologies, including data pri￾vacy and security risks. As machine learning requires the use of large 
amounts of data, it is essential that the organization has effective controls in 
place to protect this data from misuse or unauthorized access. Internal 
audits can conduct assessments of the organization’s data privacy and secu￾rity controls (Slapni et al., 2022) to ensure that they are effective and meet 
industry best practices.
The advent of digitization and digital transformation has brought signifi￾cant changes to various industries. It is important for the internal audit to 
stay abreast of these changes, as it plays a critical role in collecting primary 
data from various information systems within a company (Kristensen, 
2022), processing it, and transforming it into new information (Iliev, 2022). 
As the industry moves toward Industry 5.0, controls such as financial con￾trol, tax control, and evaluation control are all facing challenges due to digi￾tization (Adel, 2022; Espina-Romero, et al., 2023).Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 215
It is crucial for internal audit functions to digitize and embrace the use of 
technology to remain effective (Adel, 2022). In some cases, the digitization 
of control or audit may even need to precede the digitization of processes in 
society and the economy. To this end, control processes have been digitized 
in recent years through the use of accounting programs, electronic invoicing, 
remote accounting, electronic signature, and submission of various declara￾tions electronically to regulatory agencies (Coman, et al., 2022). Overall, the 
digitization of control functions is essential to keep pace with Industry 5.0 
and to ensure the continued effectiveness of control processes.
Internal audits can also benefit from machine learning. Integrating 
machine learning into internal audit processes can offer several benefits 
(Shinde, 2021). The use of machine learning can automate audit procedures, 
making them more efficient and faster. This automation can also enable 
internal auditors to tackle more complex tasks and improve their skill set, 
particularly in the identification of business processes, associated risks, and 
fraud detection. Additionally, real-time anomaly detection and monitoring 
can help internal auditors address potential issues before they become major 
problems (Bruno & Pedrosa Isabel, 2020).
Stakeholder Theory suggests that organizations and/or industries have 
a responsibility to consider the interests of all stakeholders, including the 
environment and society, in addition to their shareholders (Freeman & 
Dmytriyev, 2017; Bridoux & Stoelhorst, 2022). The application of 
machine learning for sustainable development in Industry 5.0 can be seen 
as a way for industries to fulfill this responsibility, by reducing their envi￾ronmental impact and promoting social responsibility (Freeman et al., 
2021). Internal audits can play a critical role in ensuring that the organi￾zation is considering the interests of all stakeholders in its machine learn￾ing initiatives, including potential environmental and social impacts. 
This can help the organization build stronger relationships with its stake￾holders and enhance its reputation as a responsible and sustainable busi￾ness (Guo et al., 2023).
Resource-Based View (RBV) Theory of the industry suggests that the stra￾tegic resources and capabilities of an industry can be a source of sustainable 
competitive advantage (Freeman et al., 2021). The application of machine 
learning for sustainable development can be seen as a strategic resource that 
can enable industries to achieve their sustainability objectives and gain a 
competitive advantage in the market. Internal audits can help ensure that 
the industry is effectively utilizing its machine learning capabilities to achieve 
its sustainability objectives and gain a competitive advantage (Chen et al., 
2022).
Ethical Decision-Making (EDM) Theory can be applied to the topic of 
machine learning for sustainable development, as the adoption of these 
technologies presents new ethical challenges and risks (Meier et al., 2022). 
This theory suggests that EDM involves considering the potential conse￾quences of actions and ensuring that they align with ethical principles and 216 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
values (Abel et al., 2016). Internal audits can help ensure that the orga￾nization’s machine learning initiatives are aligned with its ethical prin￾ciples and values and that potential ethical risks are identified and 
addressed.
To summarize, for the above-mentioned three theories, the Stakeholder 
Theory suggests that the adoption of machine learning for Industry 5.0 and 
sustainable development can help organizations fulfill their responsibility 
toward their stakeholders, while the RBV suggests that these initiatives can 
provide a strategic resource that enables the industries to achieve its sustain￾ability objectives and gain a competitive advantage. The EDM Theory 
emphasizes the importance of considering the potential consequences and 
ethical implications of machine learning for sustainable development and 
ensuring that these initiatives are aligned with ethical principles and values 
for Industry 5.0. Internal audits can play a critical role in each of these theo￾ries by ensuring that the industry’s machine learning initiatives are effec￾tively aligned with its sustainability objectives, promote transparency and 
accountability, and are implemented in an ethical and responsible manner.
The purpose of this chapter is to analyze the effects of Industry 5.0 on 
sustainable development by using machine learning, and the role of inter￾nal audit in facilitating this transformation. This chapter aims to provide a 
comprehensive analysis and literature review by applying three theoretical 
perspectives: Stakeholder Theory, RBV, and EDM. To achieve this purpose, 
a literature review of relevant scholarly articles, reports, and case studies 
that explore the adoption of Industry 5.0 technologies and their implica￾tions for sustainability, machine learning, and the role of internal audit is 
conducted.
The success of Industry 5.0 adoption is dependent on industries adopting 
a holistic approach that considers the interests of all stakeholders, invests in 
critical resources such as data infrastructure and skilled personnel, and 
ensures ethical principles are upheld. By adopting these practices, organiza￾tions can effectively leverage Industry 5.0 technologies to promote sustain￾able development while mitigating risks and ensuring compliance with 
ethical standards. This chapter may encourage regulators and policymakers 
to revise their rules and policies and incorporate Industry 5.0 for sustainable 
development, while including internal audit and machine learning as com￾pulsory resources. To the best of the researchers’ knowledge, there is no 
study available that identifies the impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainability 
and the use of internal audit and machine learning.
7.1.1 Objectives of the chapter
The objectives of the chapter are:
• To identify that industries are vital to a nation’s economy, contributing 
to employment, income generation, and economic growth;Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 217
• To identify Industry 5.0 contribution to sustainability and social 
responsibility;
• To analyze that ML can help with sustainable development and 
resource management;
• And, to analyze the role of IA in identifying and mitigating risks asso￾ciated with Industry 5.0 and ML, and how IA must embrace technol￾ogy to remain effective.
7.1.2 Organization of the chapter
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: Section 7.2 illustrates the 
literature review and Section 7.3 enlightens associated theories. And, finally, 
Section 7.4 concludes the chapter with future scope.
7.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
This section aims to provide an in-depth analysis of Industry 5.0, which 
is the latest stage of industrial evolution, and explore how Industry 5.0 is 
set to impact SDGs and the potential risks associated with its implementa￾tion. Moreover, this section will also delve into two crucial aspects that 
can promote sustainability in Industry 5.0 – internal audit and machine 
learning. These activities have the potential to make a positive impact on 
the implementation of Industry 5.0 by ensuring proper control mechanisms 
are in place to enhance sustainability. Internal audit is a process of assess￾ing the effectiveness of an organization’s internal control systems, includ￾ing its governance, risk management, and internal operations. It can help 
companies identify weaknesses and vulnerabilities that may hinder their 
efforts to achieve sustainability goals. Additionally, it can enable businesses 
to establish accountability and transparency in their operations, which is 
crucial for sustainable development. Similarly, machine learning is another 
critical tool for achieving sustainability in Industry 5.0. By analyzing large 
datasets, machine learning can help companies identify patterns and trends, 
making it easier to anticipate future challenges and risks. This knowledge 
can empower businesses to make informed decisions that positively impact 
sustainability. This section will also discuss in detail the associated theories, 
namely, the Stakeholder Theory, RBV of the industry, and EDM Theory.
7.2.1 Industry 5.0
7.2.1.1 Background of sustainable development
There has been a continuous effort since humans started their lives on the 
earth to make the earth a better place to live. History indicates that humans 
went through several stages, including the Stone Age, Bronze Age, and Iron 218 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Age, before reaching the current modern lifestyle where life is more facili￾tated and comfortable (Jørgensen, 1989).
This development has, however, changed and affected the natural system 
of the earth, resulting in the issues of global warming and climate change 
(Weart, 2003). Humans have witnessed some greater natural disasters that 
are viewed as a result of human activities (Guo, 2010). The main reason for 
these disasters in many instances was the rise of the earth’s temperature. 
There have been many studies and analyses that demonstrate the rise in 
earth’s temperature, which has been very sharp since 1980 – the era also 
known as the Third Industrial Revolution (Figure 7.2) is defined by The New 
York Times (NYT) and informed the rise in temperature for a whole century 
(NYT, 2023; NASA, 2022; Cohen, 2018). These consequences of human 
activities on earth have forced us to think about the negative implications of 
these developments and how to avoid or reduce these consequences.
Figure 7.2 Rise in the earth’s temperature from 1880 to 2022.Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 219
The whole idea is this is quite simple. We have only one earth to live on, 
and it is not only us but also the upcoming generation who will have only 
this earth to live; therefore, we need to protect and use the earth’s resources 
wisely so that it can remain a better place for the future generation to live. 
Currently, there are scientific investigations for the settlement on other 
planets, but this appears to take a significant time; thus, the only available 
option so far is the earth (Arnhof, 2016). While there has been concern 
about the sustainability of the earth for a long time, the concept of sustain￾ability first truly appeared in the Brundtland Commission Report, published 
in 1987. This report was submitted to the United Nations’ 42nd General 
Assembly session. This report truly aimed to warn the countries about the 
negative environmental impact caused by economic development and glo￾balization. The report further aimed to provide solutions to the problems 
arising from industrialization, urbanization, and population growth 
(Brundtland Commission, 1987).
The idea of sustainability developed in the early 1980s, as reported in the 
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, can be defined as “meeting 
fundamental human needs while preserving the earth natural environment” 
(IGBP, 1999). Since the earth’s population is increasing, it is putting pressure 
on the earth’s resources. According to the World Economic Forum, it is esti￾mated that food production will need to double by 2050 to feed 10 billion 
people on the earth (WEF, 2018). Today, sustainability has three essential 
pillars – environmental protection, social development, and economic 
growth – and sustainable development can be defined as a development that 
meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future 
generations to meet their own needs (Sachs, 2015). This is something that 
cannot be achieved alone; therefore, collective commitment and efforts are 
needed, which has been evidenced at the global level in the form of the Paris 
Agreement and the United Nations’ 17 SDGs (Paris Agreement, 2015; UN 
SDGs, 2015).
In the past, there were eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) – 
which range from halving extreme poverty to halting the spread of HIV/
AIDS and providing universal primary education (MDGs, 2000). These 
MDGs are now replaced by the 17 SDGs. The principle of SDGs is very 
simple. The overall aim is to reduce the negative impacts of human activities 
on the environment without compromising socio-economic development. If 
we look at the list of the main pillars of sustainability, then environmental 
sustainability includes biodiversity conversation, efficient land use, and 
physical planning.
Social sustainability focuses on decent work, quality education, good 
health, and ensuring the rule of law and human rights. Finally, economic 
sustainability involves the reduction of the negative impact of human activi￾ties on the environment (Opoku, 2022; Mensah, 2019). Hopwood et al. 
(2005), viewed sustainable development as human-centered where sustain￾able development allows for balancing environmental and social dimensions 220 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
provided that there is a strong commitment to social issues, for instance, 
ensuring good health for all. In other words, society depends on the environ￾ment, while the economy depends on society.
On one side, there is a great realization of sustainability and sustainable 
development, but on the other side, there is evidence that demonstrates the 
world is not meeting its commitment and promises. The earth has more 
challenges than before, therefore, to transfer the earth to the coming genera￾tion in a good liveable condition, all efforts at individual, societal, organiza￾tional, governmental, and international levels should be undertaken to 
realize the key elements of sustainability and sustainable development. If the 
world is not progressing the way it should progress toward sustainable 
development, this means that the efforts for that are derailed at one or 
another level. Keeping the importance of sustainable development and the 
world’s commitment to make the earth a better place to live, there has been 
a great contribution of technology and industries. On the one hand, it has 
made our lives comfortable but on the other, side, there have been some 
consequences of these. The next section sheds light on the United Nations’ 
SDGs which are set to be achieved by 2030.
7.2.1.2 Sustainable development goals
The United Nations’ current SDGs were prepared in the United Nations 
Sustainable Development Conference that was organized in the city of Rio 
de Janeiro, Brazil, in 2012. The purpose of this conference was to arrive at a 
set of universal goals, connecting the environmental, political, and economic 
challenges that are faced by the world. Later in 2015, the United Nations 
officially adopted the 17 SDGs, replacing the eight MDGs and setting 2030 
as a target of achievement for them (UN SDGs, 2015). Most of the countries 
around the world have adopted these goals as their national development 
goals and trying to achieve them through a collaborative way of working. 
These goals are guided by the principle of universality, which means that 
all countries and citizens have a role to play in their achievement (Fei et al., 
2021). Each goal is further supported with several number of target and 
indicators as noted in Table 7.2.
Statistics indicate that on overage there has been good progress toward 
sustainability, as shown in Figure 7.3, but clearly, the line goes flat, meaning 
there has been no improvement since 2019 (Sachs et al., 2022). The current 
(2022) SDGs report provides a global overview of progress on the imple￾mentation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, using the latest 
available data and estimates. The report clearly indicates that many coun￾tries are not on track toward the achievement of these goals by 2030. While 
there are many factors that are affecting the progress of SDGs, COVID-19 
is the leading factor that has wiped out more than four years of progress 
(SDGR, 2022). The situation over the progress is not satisfactory which is 
well observed by the United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres in Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 221
Table 7.2 The United Nations’ SDGs, its descriptions targets, and indicators
Goal 
number
Goal name Goal description Goal 
targets
Goal 
indicator
1 No Poverty No Poverty: End poverty in all its 
forms everywhere
7 13
2 Zero Hunger Zero Hunger: End hunger, achieve 
food security and improved 
nutrition, and promote sustainable 
agriculture
8 14
3 Good 
Health and 
Well-Being
Good Health and Well-Being: Ensure 
healthy lives and promote well￾being for all at all ages
13 28
4 Quality 
Education
Quality Education: Ensure inclusive 
and equitable quality education 
and promote life-long learning 
opportunities for all
10 12
5 Gender Equality Gender Equality: Achieve gender 
equality and empower all women 
and girls
9 14
6 Clean Water 
and Sanitation
Clean Water and Sanitation: Ensure 
availability and sustainable 
management of water and 
sanitation for all
8 11
7 Affordable and 
Clean Energy
Affordable and Clean Energy: Ensure 
access to affordable, reliable, 
sustainable, and modern energy 
for all
5 6
8 Decent Work 
and Economic 
Growth
Decent Work and Economic Growth: 
Promote sustained, inclusive, and 
sustainable economic growth, full 
and productive employment and 
decent work for all
12 16
9 Industry 
Innovation 
and 
Infrastructure
Industry, Innovation, and 
Infrastructure: Build resilient 
infrastructure, promote inclusive 
and sustainable industrialization, 
and foster innovation
08 12
10 Reduced 
Inequalities
Reduced Inequalities: Reduce 
inequality within and among 
countries
10 14
11 Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities
Sustainable Cities and Communities: 
Make cities and human settlements 
inclusive, safe, resilient and 
sustainable
10 14
12 Responsible 
Consumption 
and 
Production
Responsible Consumption and 
Production: Ensure sustainable 
consumption and production 
patterns
11 13
(Continued)222 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
his remarks stating, “We must rise higher to rescue the SDGs – and stay true 
to our promise of a world of peace, dignity and prosperity on a healthy 
planet”.
It is a fact that there was a major interruption in the progress of SDGs for 
the last three years, starting from 2019, due to COVID, but statistics prior 
to COVID indicate that most of the countries were not on track to achieve 
these goals (Umar & Umeokafor, 2022). The successful achievement of all 
the goals is only possible when all the elements of society and all govern￾ment organizations embed these goals in their relevant regional, national, 
and local policies and make an effective system of monitoring and coopera￾tion among the organizations because, in some instances, it is possible that 
the effort of one organization can derail on efforts of the other, affecting one 
or many goals. This is also because the SDGs and targets are interlinked to 
each other where one can affect the other in a positive or negative way 
(Nilsson et al., 2016; Griggs et al., 2013; Fei et al., 2021; UNSC, 2019; Roy 
& Pramanick, 2019) – Figure 7.4.
The collaborative way of working to achieve these goals is well appreci￾ated by many researchers. For instance, Adams (2017) that the fulfillment of 
Goal 
number
Goal name Goal description Goal 
targets
Goal 
indicator
13 Climate Action Climate Action: Take urgent action 
to combat climate change and its 
impacts
5 8
14 Life below 
Water
Life below Water (Oceans): 
Conserve and sustainably use the 
oceans, seas, and marine resources 
for sustainable development
10 10
15 Life on land Life on Land (Biodiversity): Protect, 
restore, and promote sustainable 
use of terrestrial ecosystems, 
sustainably manage forests, combat 
desertification, and halt and 
reverse land degradation and halt 
biodiversity loss
12 14
16 Peace, Justice, 
and Strong 
Institutions
Peace, Justice, and Strong Institution: 
Promote peaceful and inclusive 
societies for sustainable 
development, provide access to 
justice for all, and build effective, 
accountable, and inclusive 
institutions at all levels
12 24
17 Partnerships of 
Goals
Partnership for the Goals: Strengthen 
the means of implementation and 
revitalize the global partnership for 
sustainable development
19 24
Table 7.2 (Continued) The United Nations’ SDGs, its descriptions targets, and indicatorsImpact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 223
the SDGs can be difficult without collaboration between governments, pri￾vate and public sectors, and civil society organizations. Fei et al. 2021) 
argued that the 17 SDGs can be divided into five “P”s – People, Planet, 
Prosperity, Peace, and Partnership – as shown in Table 7.3. All these five 
“P”s of the SDGs need the effective involvement of all the stakeholders, 
such as governments, institutions, and businesses. The built environment is 
also an important stakeholder; therefore, it needs to develop approaches 
and align its activities to SDGs. Likewise, SDGs require the transformations 
of different societal elements, including education and skills; health and 
well-being; clean energy and industry; sustainable land use; sustainable 
Figure 7.3 SDGs’ index score over time.
Source: Sachs et al. (2022).224 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
cities; and digital technologies (Sachs et al., 2019). The next section covers 
the industrial revolutions and their implications on the delivery of SDGs.
7.2.1.3 Industry 5.0 and other industrial revolutions
There have been several industrial revolutions throughout history, each 
marked by significant changes in the way goods are produced and services 
are delivered (Xu et al., 2018). The First Industrial Revolution started in 
the 18th century in Britain and was characterized by the mechanization 
of production using steam power (Deane, 1979). It led to the develop￾ment of factories and the mass production of goods. The Second Industrial 
Revolution took place in the late 19th and early 20th centuries and was 
characterized by the widespread use of electricity, the assembly line, and 
mass production (Mokyr and Strotz, 1998). It also saw the emergence of 
the automobile and the development of new materials like steel. The Third 
Industrial Revolution started in the 1960s and is also known as the Digital 
Revolution (Janicke and Jacob, 2013). It was characterized by the use of 
electronics and computers in production, and the emergence of the internet, 
Figure 7.4 Interlinking of SDGs.
Source: Nilsson et al. (2016); Griggs et al. (2013); Fei et al. (2021); UNSC 
(2019); Roy and Pramanick (2019).Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 225
which led to the widespread use of e-commerce and digital communications. 
The Fourth Industrial Revolution is currently underway and is character￾ized by the integration of physical, digital, and biological systems (Philbeck 
and Davis, 2018). It includes the use of technologies such as artificial intel￾ligence, the Internet of Things (IoT), and 3D printing (Bloem et al., 2014). 
Each of these industrial revolutions has had a profound impact on society 
and the economy, leading to significant changes in the way we work, com￾municate, and live our lives.
The concept of a “Fifth Industrial Revolution” is still emerging and not 
yet fully defined. However, it is generally believed that the Fifth Industrial 
Revolution will build upon the technologies and trends of the Fourth 
Industrial Revolution, particularly in the areas of automation, connectivity, 
and artificial intelligence (Mourtzis, 2021). Some researchers predict that 
the Fifth Industrial Revolution will be marked by the widespread use of 
autonomous machines and robots, which will have the ability to work 
alongside humans and even replace them in certain tasks (Paschek et al., 
2019). This could lead to significant changes in the way we work, as well as 
the way products and services are produced and delivered. Other potential 
trends that could define the Fifth Industrial Revolution include the use of 
blockchain technology for secure transactions and data sharing, the devel￾opment of advanced materials and nanotechnology, and the expansion of 
renewable energy sources to meet the growing demand for sustainable 
Table 7.3 Five “P”s of SDGs
P1 P2 P3 P4 P5
People Planet Prosperity Peace Partnership
SDG 1: No 
Poverty
SDG 6: Clean 
Water and 
Sanitation
SDG 7: 
Clean and 
Affordable 
Energy
SDG 16: 
Peace 
Justice and 
Strong 
Institutions
SDG 17: 
Partnership 
for Goals
SDG 2: No 
Hunger
SDG 12: 
Responsible 
Consumption 
and Production
SDG 8: Decent 
Work and 
Economic 
Growth
SDG 3: 
Good 
Health and 
Well-being
SDG 13: Climate 
Action
SDG 9: Industry, 
Innovation, 
and 
Infrastructure
SDG 4: 
Quality 
Education
SDG 14: Life 
below Water
SDG 10: 
Reduced 
Inequalities
SDG 5: 
Gender 
Equality
SDG 15: Life on 
land
SDG 11: 
Sustainable 
Cities and 
Communities226 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
solutions (Pathak et al., 2019). While the exact contours of the Fifth 
Industrial Revolution are still uncertain, however, it is clear that it will con￾tinue to transform the economy and society in profound ways, creating new 
opportunities and challenges for individuals and businesses alike (Coelho 
et  al., 2023; Mourtzis, 2021). Some potential key elements of the Fifth 
Industrial Revolution will include the following.
7.2.1.3.1 Artificial Intelligence
AI is considered one of the main key elements of the Fifth Industrial 
Revolution and is already transforming many aspects of our lives, and it 
is likely to play an even greater role in the Fifth Industrial Revolution. AI 
technologies such as machine learning and natural language processing will 
enable machines to perform more complex tasks, make decisions, and inter￾act with humans in more natural ways (Syam and Sharma, 2018).
7.2.1.3.2 Robotics and automation
Robotics and automation are expected to become even more advanced and 
sophisticated in the Fifth Industrial Revolution. Autonomous machines and 
robots will be able to work alongside humans and perform tasks that are 
too dangerous, repetitive, or difficult for humans (Noble et al., 2022).
The Fifth Industrial Revolution, or Industry 5.0, envisions a manufactur￾ing process that is more collaborative and integrated, combining advanced 
technologies like machine learning, artificial intelligence, and robotics with 
human creativity and ingenuity. Robotics and automation play a critical 
role in this vision by making it possible for autonomous machines and 
robots to work alongside humans in a range of industrial and manufactur￾ing settings.
One of the primary advantages of robotics and automation is their ability 
to perform tasks that are too dangerous, repetitive, or difficult for humans. 
This includes tasks like welding, assembly, and material handling, which can 
be done with greater precision and efficiency by robots. This, in turn, can lead 
to improved safety, reduced errors and waste, and increased productivity.
Robotic systems are also becoming increasingly sophisticated, with 
advancements in machine learning and artificial intelligence enabling them 
to perform more complex tasks. For example, robots can now learn from 
experience and adapt to changing environments, making them suitable for 
a wider range of applications. Additionally, robots can work collabora￾tively with humans, allowing for more flexible and efficient production 
processes.
However, as with any new technology, there are potential risks associated 
with the adoption of robotics and automation. These risks include job dis￾placement, as robots and automation systems take over tasks traditionally Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 227
performed by humans. Additionally, there may be concerns about the ethical 
and societal implications of increased reliance on automation, such as the 
potential for bias in decision-making processes.
7.2.1.3.3 The Internet of Things
The IoT will continue to connect more devices and objects, enabling greater 
communication and collaboration between machines, as well as between 
machines and humans. This will lead to new opportunities for data analysis 
and optimization, as well as the development of new products and services 
(Greengard, 2021).
IoT refers to the interconnection of various smart devices and objects, 
such as sensors, appliances, and vehicles, with the internet. This intercon￾nectivity allows for the exchange of data between these devices, enabling 
them to communicate and interact with each other. As technology continues 
to advance, the IoT is expected to become even more prevalent in the Fifth 
Industrial Revolution.
With the increasing use of the IoT, there will be a significant increase in 
the amount of data generated. This data can be used for data analysis and 
optimization, providing valuable insights for businesses to improve their 
operations and decision-making processes. For example, in manufacturing, 
sensors on machines can provide real-time data on their performance, 
enabling businesses to identify and address any issues before they lead to 
downtime or equipment failure.
In addition to data analysis, the IoT also creates new opportunities for 
product and service development. For example, smart homes with inter￾connected devices can provide greater convenience and automation for 
homeowners, such as automatically adjusting temperature settings or turn￾ing on lights when someone enters a room. In the healthcare industry, IoT 
devices can be used to monitor patients remotely, providing doctors with 
real-time information on their health and enabling quicker response times 
to emergencies.
7.2.1.3.4 Blockchain technology
Blockchain technology has the potential to transform many industries, from 
finance to healthcare to supply chain management. The decentralized nature 
of blockchain makes it more secure, transparent, and efficient, and it could 
be a key element of the Fifth Industrial Revolution (Kimani et al., 2020).
Blockchain technology is a distributed ledger technology that allows for 
secure and transparent transactions and data storage. In the Fifth Industrial 
Revolution, blockchain technology could have a significant impact on vari￾ous industries by enabling secure and efficient data exchange and collabora￾tion between parties. For example, in the finance industry, blockchain 228 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
technology could be used to streamline and secure financial transactions, 
reducing the need for intermediaries and decreasing transaction costs. In 
healthcare, blockchain technology could be used to secure and streamline 
medical records, improving patient care and reducing costs.
Moreover, blockchain technology could also have a significant impact on 
supply chain management by enabling greater transparency and account￾ability throughout the supply chain. By using blockchain technology, com￾panies can track and verify the authenticity and integrity of goods and 
products, from raw materials to finished products, ensuring that they meet 
certain standards and regulations.
Additionally, blockchain technology could promote greater social respon￾sibility by enabling greater transparency and accountability in the supply 
chain, which could help companies reduce their environmental footprint 
and improve labor conditions. Blockchain technology could also promote 
greater sustainability by enabling the tracking and monitoring of carbon 
emissions, waste, and resource usage.
7.2.1.3.5 Advanced materials and nanotechnology
The development of new materials and nanotechnology could enable the cre￾ation of new products and applications with unprecedented properties and 
capabilities (Ghosal and Chakraborty, 2021). This could include everything 
from stronger and lighter materials to more efficient batteries and sensors.
Advanced materials and nanotechnology have the potential to revolution￾ize the way we produce and use materials in the Fifth Industrial Revolution. 
The development of new materials with advanced properties, such as 
increased strength, durability, and flexibility, could lead to the creation of 
new products and applications in various industries such as aerospace, auto￾motive, and construction. For example, the use of lightweight and strong 
materials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes could revolutionize the 
construction industry by enabling the development of more resilient and 
earthquake-resistant buildings.
In addition, nanotechnology could lead to the creation of new materials 
with unique properties that could have a significant impact on various appli￾cations. For instance, the development of nanoscale materials and devices 
could enable the creation of more efficient batteries and energy storage sys￾tems. Nanoscale sensors could also provide highly sensitive and selective 
detection of various chemicals, biomolecules, and other substances, leading 
to new applications in healthcare and environmental monitoring.
Moreover, the use of advanced materials and nanotechnology could also 
lead to significant improvements in manufacturing processes, such as 
enhanced precision and control, reduced waste and energy consumption, 
and increased automation. This could result in higher production efficiency, 
lower costs, and reduced environmental impact. Overall, the development of 
advanced materials and nanotechnology has the potential to transform Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 229
various industries, enabling new products and applications with unprece￾dented properties and capabilities.
7.2.1.3.6 Machine learning
Machine learning is a subfield of AI that involves developing algorithms 
and statistical models that enable computers to learn from data and make 
predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed (Mitchell, 
2007). In other words, machine learning is a way of teaching computers 
to recognize patterns and relationships in data and use this information 
to make informed decisions or predictions about new data (Zhou, 2021). 
This is accomplished through the use of algorithms that are trained on large 
amounts of data, and which are then able to automatically identify patterns 
and make predictions based on new data inputs. There are many differ￾ent types of machine learning, including supervised learning, unsupervised 
learning, and reinforcement learning (Ayodele, 2010).
In supervised learning, the algorithm is trained on labeled data, meaning 
that the input data is accompanied by the correct output, allowing the algo￾rithm to learn from these examples (Burkart and Huber, 2021). In unsuper￾vised learning, the algorithm is trained on unlabeled data, meaning that 
there is no correct output, and the algorithm must identify patterns and 
relationships on its own (Usama et al., 2019). In reinforcement learning, the 
algorithm learns through trial and error, receiving rewards or penalties for 
certain actions, and adjusting its behavior accordingly (Kaelbling et al., 
1996).
7.2.2 The role of industrial revolutions and machine 
learning in SGDs
The industrial revolutions have had a significant impact on the achievement 
of the SDGs, which are a universal call to action to end poverty, protect 
the planet, and ensure that all people enjoy peace and prosperity (Popovic, ́
2020). The First Industrial Revolution played a major role in driving eco￾nomic growth and lifting millions of people out of poverty, but it also had 
negative impacts on the environment and public health (Prisecaru, 2016). 
The SDGs related to poverty reduction and economic growth are closely tied 
to the impacts of the First Industrial Revolution. However, the negative envi￾ronmental impacts, such as air and water pollution, continue to be a major 
challenge today (Jacobson, 2009). The Second Industrial Revolution had a 
significant impact on industrialization and economic development, but it 
also contributed to environmental degradation and the depletion of natural 
resources (Ali, 2021). The SDGs related to sustainable cities and communi￾ties, responsible consumption and production, and climate action are closely 
tied to the impacts of the Second Industrial Revolution. The Third Industrial 230 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Revolution, or Digital Revolution, has enabled greater connectivity and 
access to information, but it has also raised concerns about data privacy 
and security (Solangi et al., 2018). The SDGs related to quality education, 
innovation and infrastructure, and sustainable cities and communities are 
closely tied to the impacts of the Third Industrial Revolution. The Fourth 
Industrial Revolution has the potential to drive economic growth and inno￾vation, but it also raises concerns about job displacement, income inequal￾ity, and environmental sustainability (Xu et al., 2018). The SDGs related to 
decent work and economic growth, industry, innovation, and infrastructure, 
and sustainable cities and communities are closely tied to the impacts of the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution. Overall, each industrial revolution has had a 
significant impact on sustainable development, both positive and negative. 
It is important to ensure that future industrial revolutions are designed and 
implemented in a way that supports the achievement of the SDGs and con￾tributes to a more sustainable and equitable world.
Machine learning can also play an important role in supporting the 
achievement of the SDGs by enabling more efficient and effective data anal￾ysis, decision-making, and resource allocation (Asadikia et al., 2021). 
Machine learning can be used in environmental monitoring to analyze data 
from sensors and other monitoring devices to detect patterns and trends in 
environmental conditions (Kvamsdal et al., 2021). This can help to identify 
areas of concern and inform decision-making on issues such as air and water 
quality, deforestation, and climate change. It can also be used in precision 
agriculture to help farmers optimize crop yields, reduce water use, and mini￾mize the use of fertilizers and pesticides.
By analyzing data from sensors and other sources, machine learning algo￾rithms can provide insights into soil conditions, weather patterns, and plant 
health, enabling farmers to make more informed decisions about planting, 
harvesting, and resource management. Koolen et al. (2017) suggested that 
machine learning can be useful in energy management to optimize energy 
use and reduce waste in buildings, factories, and other facilities. By analyz￾ing data from sensors, machine learning algorithms can identify opportuni￾ties for energy efficiency improvements, such as adjusting temperature 
settings or lighting levels, and provide recommendations for reducing energy 
consumption. Likewise, machine learning can be used in disaster response to 
analyze data from social media, satellite imagery, and other sources to iden￾tify areas of need and allocate resources more effectively in the event of a 
natural disaster (Ofli et al., 2016). This can help to improve response times 
and minimize the impact of disasters on communities. Similarly, Tizghadam 
et al. (2019) argued that machine learning can help optimize transportation 
routes and reduce emissions by analyzing data on traffic patterns, weather 
conditions, and other factors. By providing real-time insights and recom￾mendations, machine learning algorithms can help reduce congestion, 
improve safety, and minimize the environmental impact of transportation. 
By enabling more efficient and effective data analysis and decision-making, Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 231
machine learning can help accelerate progress toward the SDGs and create 
a more sustainable and equitable future.
7.2.2.1 Potential risks of machine learning to sustainable 
development
Machine learning has the potential to significantly impact sustainable 
development by enabling more efficient and effective use of resources, bet￾ter decision-making, and improved monitoring and evaluation. However, 
there are also potential risks associated with the use of machine learning 
that could undermine SDGs (Ray, 2019). Machine learning algorithms are 
only as good as the data they are trained on. If the data used to train an 
algorithm is biased, the algorithm will also be biased, potentially leading to 
discrimination, and perpetuating existing inequalities (Mahesh, 2020). To 
reduce bias and discrimination, it is important to ensure that the data used 
to train machine learning models is diverse and inclusive (Mehrabi et al., 
2021). This can be achieved by collecting data from a wide range of sources, 
including underrepresented communities, and by using tools to detect and 
correct bias in the data.
Likewise, overreliance on machine learning and other technological solu￾tions may divert attention and resources away from addressing underlying 
social and economic issues that contribute to sustainable development chal￾lenges (Froomkin et al., 2019). To reduce overreliance on technology, it is 
important to encourage critical thinking and skepticism when it comes to 
machine learning algorithms (Chiang and Yin, 2021). This can be achieved 
by educating individuals on the limitations of machine learning, and by pro￾moting the use of multiple sources of information and expertise. It is also 
important to implement human oversight and decision-making in critical 
areas. This can be achieved by using machine learning models to support 
human decision-making, rather than replacing it entirely (Campbell et al., 
2007). Using multiple approaches to problem-solving involves employing 
both machine learning algorithms and traditional analytical methods, as 
well as integrating machine learning with human judgment when necessary.
Similarly, machine learning algorithms require significant computing 
power and energy, which could contribute to increased energy consumption 
and greenhouse gas emissions if not properly managed (Ghoddusi et al., 
2019). To reduce the energy consumption of machine learning algorithms, it 
is important to optimize their efficiency (García-Martín et al., 2019). This 
can be achieved by using hardware that is specifically designed for machine 
learning, such as graphics processing units, and by implementing algorithms 
that are designed to minimize energy consumption. The use of machine 
learning for monitoring and surveillance raises concerns about privacy and 
security, particularly in the context of vulnerable populations. To protect 
data privacy and security, it is important to implement strong security pro￾tocols, including encryption and access controls. It is also important to 232 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
ensure that individuals have control over their data and are able to give 
informed consent for its use in machine learning models (Zhu et al., 2020).
It is established that machine learning algorithms can be difficult to under￾stand and interpret, making it challenging to hold organizations account￾able for their decisions and actions (Van der Sommen et al., 2020). To 
increase transparency and explainability, it is important to use machine 
learning models that are designed to be interpretable. This can be achieved 
by using models that are based on decision trees, rule-based systems, or lin￾ear regression, which are easier to understand than more complex models 
like neural networks (Ahmad et al., 2018). Since machine learning algo￾rithms become more sophisticated, there is a risk that they will replace 
human labor in certain industries (Wang et al., 2022a). This could lead to 
job losses and economic instability, particularly in low-skilled sectors. To 
mitigate the risk of job displacement, it is important to invest in reskilling 
and upskilling programs to help workers adapt to the changing job market. 
This can include programs that focus on developing skills in areas such as 
data analysis, machine learning, and other emerging technologies (Stearns, 
2020).
Overall, machine learning needs to be used in a way that supports SDGs, 
it is important to prioritize the responsible and ethical use of these technolo￾gies. This includes ensuring that data used to train machine learning algo￾rithms is diverse and representative, developing transparent and explainable 
algorithms, and establishing clear guidelines and regulations for the use of 
machine learning in sensitive contexts.
7.2.3 Internal audit
IA can be defined as an activity or function available within an organiza￾tion that assists in the achievement of vision, mission, and goals (Rehman, 
2022a). IA enhances the governance, risk, and control of industries which 
are required to safeguard the assets and protect stakeholders’ rights (Dat 
et al., 2020). IA is an independent activity, and its independence is ensured 
through its reporting lines. In accordance with the International Professional 
Practicing Framework (IPPF) issued by the Institute of Internal Auditors 
(IIA) (Eulerich & Eulerich, 2020), IA functionally reports to the audit and 
risk committee of the board and administratively reports to the CEO of the 
industry. As IPPF is principal-based and not rule-based; therefore, several 
regulators in many countries made an amendment to the reporting line of 
IA. Based on this amendment, IA functionally and administratively reports 
to the audit and risk committee, eliminating the reporting to the CEO. Such 
practice provides the true meaning of independence to the IA enabling it to 
achieve sustainable goals for the organizations.
Fraud can be defined as an intentional act that is conducted to deceive 
people or organizations with the intention of obtaining personal benefits 
(Sithic & Balasubramanian, 2013). Fraud is the prime obstacle in the path Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 233
of sustainability (Rehman, 2022b). With the inclusion of technologies, frauds 
and fraudsters are also evolving (Dorminey et al., 2012). Table 7.4 defines 
the few fraud cases that occurred in the last five years in which technology 
was utilized to the best extent possible.
It is worth noting that the role of external auditors for fraud prevention 
and detection is not visible. Opinions provided by external auditors are 
more prone to saving their reputation than to safeguard the company’s 
assets or to inform the true and fair view (Rehman, 2022b). Table 7.5 identi￾fies the few recent cases where external auditors were fined by the regulators 
for not preventing and/or detecting fraud or were part of the fraud.
IA has emerged from just being a compliance function to a trusted advi￾sor. Failure of external auditors to provide the required satisfaction to share￾holders and stakeholders highlighted the importance of IA.
IA performs that task and tries to provide overall control opinion for the 
entire organization (Eulerich & Eulerich, 2020); moreover, the constant 
presence of IA within the organization along with the major role in risk 
Table 7.4 Fraud cases in which organizations utilized technology
Name of 
company
Fraud amount 
(USD)
Reason Source
Wirecard 2.1 billion Fraud was carried out through a complex 
network of shell companies and 
involved the use of technology such as 
fake payment processing systems and 
doctored financial statements.
Taub 
(2023)
Theranos 121 million The fraud was carried out by manipulating 
the results of blood tests using 
technology that did not work as 
advertised.
Williams 
(2022)
Volkswagen 19.1 billion Volkswagen was exposed for cheating 
emissions tests by installing software 
in its diesel vehicles that could detect 
when they were being tested and 
adjust the performance of the engines 
to produce lower emissions. The fraud 
affected millions of vehicles and resulted 
in billions of dollars in fines and legal 
settlements.
Barth et 
al., 2022
Table 7.5 Fines on external auditors by regulators
Name of company Year Penalty (USD) Source
EY 2020 11 million Jones and Hobson (2020)
KPMG 2023 231 million Louch et al., (2023)
PWC 2022 2.1 million Bloomberg (2022)234 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
assessment, makes IA the paramount source of fraud prevention, fraud 
detection who augmentations the governance, risk, and control. At this 
point, it would be necessary to briefly define the association of governance, 
risk, and control with the roles of IA.
• Governance and role of internal audit: Governance refers to the pol￾icies and procedures developed for the achievement of organizational 
value, mission, vision, and objectives. Governance can be classified 
as corporate governance and organizational governance (Hakimah 
et al., 2019). Corporate governance deals with the policies, objectives, 
and strategies of an organization that are approved by the board of 
directors (Singh et al., 2018). The board of directors is nominated and 
appointed by the shareholders (Ntim, 2018) and in some countries by 
the stakeholders as well (such as banks and major creditors), whereas 
organizational governance refers to the procedures, implementation 
guidelines, and organizational hierarchy which are developed by the 
executive/senior management to run day-to-day business (Klein et al., 
2019).
IA plays a crucial role in the effectiveness of corporate governance. Due 
to IA’s independence, objectivity, and knowledge, IA audits the entire 
organization and provides assurance and consulting activities. IA’s 
opinions are based on the completed task and professional judgment. 
IA provides and safeguards the interest of shareholders and at the 
same time enhances organizational function through its meaningful 
recommendations (Vadasi et al., 2020).
• Risk and role of internal audit: Risk can be defined as any event that 
can prevent an organization from achieving its mission and vision 
(Rasborg, 2021). Although IA is not directly responsible for the identi￾fication of risk and development of a risk register (Slapni et al., 2022); 
however, IA develops its audit plan and conducts its work based on 
the risk of the organization (Esmail & Haque, 2022). With risk-based 
audits, IA ensures that the identified risks are properly mitigated and 
action plans are properly implemented.
In a few of the organizations, risk function also comes under the jurisdic￾tion of IA. In such scenarios, it becomes very argumentative how IA 
can mitigate the conflict of interest, ensure segregation of duties, and 
audit the risks identified by the IA itself. For the best performance, the 
risk function should be under the organizational governance which 
can be audited by IA.
• Controls and role of internal audit: Controls are the policies and pro￾cedures designed to achieve organizational objectives (Kamaruddin 
& Ramli, 2018). In the current business environment, many controls 
are automated, making it obligatory for IA to update its function and 
adopt the automation in the process. Control is developed to ensure Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 235
consistency and equality in operation (Mohamad Nasri et al., 2020). 
Controls are designed and updated to ensure that the current market 
trends and regulatory environment are catered for. The role of IA is to 
ensure that the developed controls are achieving the desired results or not 
(Bubilek, 2017). IA during the course of audit can identify many redun￾dant and overlapping controls. Moreover, IA with robotic process auto￾mation (RPA) and machine learning, can conduct continuous control 
monitoring on a daily basis and identify control deficiencies immediately.
7.2.3.1 Three lines model
The Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) defines a “three lines” model in 
which it is identified which authority in an organization is responsible for 
what (IIA, 2020). Previously, this model was identified as a “three lines of 
defense” model; however, it is updated as a three lines model where all the 
lines are responsible for defense, prevention, and act. Figure 7.5 defines the 
three lines model: arrows define accountability, reporting, delegation, direc￾tion sources, oversight, alignment, communication, and coordination.
These three lines can be defined and summarized in Table 7.6.
7.2.3.2 Internal audit and Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0, also known as the “human-centered industry”, represents 
the latest stage in the evolution of industry and manufacturing (Longo, & 
Padovano, 2020). With a focus on the human experience and technology 
playing a supportive role, organizations can benefit from IA in supporting 
their transition to Industry 5.0. In accordance with the recent report by the 
Figure 7.5 Three lines model.
Source: IIA (2020).236 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Society of Corporate Compliance and Ethics & Health Care Compliance 
Association (SCCE & HCCA), IA can help organizations identify and 
mitigate risks, ensure compliance with regulations and standards, estab￾lish effective governance structures, measure performance, and manage the 
change (SCCE & HCCA, 2020) this can also be associated with Industry 5.0 
initiatives. By leveraging IA’s expertise and guidance in these areas, organi￾zations can successfully transition to Industry 5.0, optimize their operations, 
and achieve their goals while meeting their ethical and social responsibili￾ties. It is worth noting that Industry 5.0 can play a major role in achieving 
sustainability.
IA can play a crucial role in supporting Industry 5.0 initiatives (Verma, et 
al., 2022). IA can help organizations identify and manage risks associated 
with the adoption of new technologies and processes. By providing guidance 
on risk management, compliance, governance, performance measurement, 
and change management best practices, IA can help ensure that Industry 5.0 
Table 7.6 Summary of the roles as per the three lines model
Authority Role
Governing 
body
Governance bodies are the board of directors which are appointed 
by the shareholders. Governance bodies ensure that stakeholder’s 
interests are safe and communicated with them in a transparent 
manner. Governance bodies set the tone at the top to develop an 
ethical and accountability culture. Governance roles delegate the 
responsibilities among its members in the shape of committees 
such as the audit and risk committee and the nomination and 
remuneration committee. Often, responsibilities are also assigned 
to the executive/ senior management. This assignment usually 
occurs when the organization has a strong ethical and accountability 
culture. The governance function also establishes the organizational 
risk appetite and maintains oversight over governance, risk, 
regulation, and controls. The governance body also establishes IA.
Management – 
first line
Responsible for the implementation of policies and procedures 
and leads the risk management functionalities, reports directly 
to the governance body on the planned and actual performance, 
and ensures that compliance is made with all the regulations and 
maintains appropriate structure for its operations.
Management – 
second line
Involve in the reporting, analyzing, and informing of risks, operations, 
and internal controls. This function is involved in the control self￾assessment and informs the executive management about potential 
improvements.
Internal audit Reports directly to the governance body and ensures that satisfaction 
is provided to the shareholders and the organization’s vision and 
mission are achieved.
External 
assurance 
provider
These are providing reporting to satisfy regulatory and legislative 
requirements. This is necessary as many other external stakeholders 
such as bankers and financial institutions require the opinion of this 
authority.Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 237
initiatives are aligned with organizational goals and objectives (Assiri & 
Humayun, 2023). IA can also help organizations improve sustainability by 
identifying and assessing risks, optimizing energy consumption, monitoring 
and improving the sustainability of the supply chain, reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, and improving sustainability reporting (Herz, et al., 2023). IA 
can play a crucial role in helping organizations achieve sustainability goals 
(Rehman, 2022a). Some of the ways in which IA can be used to support 
sustainability initiatives are as follows.
• Risk assessment: IA and ML can be used to identify and assess risks 
associated with sustainability. By analyzing data from various sources, 
such as environmental impact reports and supply chain data, IA can 
help organizations identify areas where sustainability risks are most 
significant. ML can also be used to predict future risks and help orga￾nizations take proactive measures to mitigate them.
• Energy management: IA and ML can be used to optimize energy con￾sumption in buildings and manufacturing facilities. By analyzing data 
from sensors and other sources, ML algorithms can identify energy 
usage patterns and help organizations optimize their operations to 
reduce energy consumption. IA can also help ensure that energy man￾agement systems are functioning effectively and efficiently.
• Sustainable supply chain: IA and ML can be used to monitor and 
improve the sustainability of the supply chain. By analyzing data from 
suppliers and other sources, IA can help identify risks and opportuni￾ties for improvement in areas such as carbon emissions, waste reduc￾tion, and ethical sourcing. ML can also be used to identify potential 
issues before they arise, such as supply chain disruptions or breaches 
of ethical sourcing standards.
• Emissions management: IA and ML can be used to monitor and 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. By analyzing data from emissions 
monitoring systems, energy usage data, and other sources, ML algo￾rithms can identify areas where emissions can be reduced and help 
organizations implement solutions such as renewable energy sources 
and energy efficiency measures.
• Industry: IA and ML can be used to improve sustainability reporting. 
By analyzing data from various sources, IA can help ensure that sus￾tainability reports are accurate and complete. ML can also be used to 
automate the reporting process, reducing the time and effort required 
to prepare reports.
7.2.3.3 Machine learning and Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0 contains a human-focal attitude, which emphasizes the integra￾tion of advanced technologies with human skills and capabilities (Longo 
& Padovano, 2020). Unlike previous industrial revolutions, which were 238 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
primarily focused on automating and optimizing manufacturing processes, 
Industry 5.0 aims to create a more collaborative and flexible environment 
(Leng et al., 2022), where humans and machines work together to achieve 
common goals – in this context, efficient and effective decision-making 
(Jarrahi, 2018). Machine learning algorithms can analyze vast amounts of 
data from sensors, equipment, and other sources to identify patterns and 
optimize manufacturing processes. However, humans are still needed to 
interpret and act on this data, make critical decisions, and perform tasks 
that require creativity, empathy, and other uniquely human skills.
ML is a subfield of artificial intelligence that involves training computer 
algorithms to identify patterns and make predictions based on data (Myers 
et al., 2020). In the context of Industry 5.0, ML can be used to analyze vast 
amounts of manufacturing data, identify patterns, and optimize manufac￾turing processes (Maddikunta et al., 2022). Some specific ways that ML can 
help Industry 5.0 are defined in Table 7.7.
As mentioned in Section 7.1.2, the United Nations’ SDGs are a set of 17 
global goals that were adopted by all United Nations Member States in 2015 
as a universal call to action to end poverty, protect the planet, and ensure that 
all people enjoy peace and prosperity. While the SDGs do not explicitly men￾tion “Industry 5.0”, they do address many of the key issues and challenges that 
are driving the development of this new approach to manufacturing 
(Kasinathan et al., 2022). SDG 9 – Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure – 
recognizes the critical role that technology and innovation play in driving sus￾tainable economic growth and development. This goal specifically calls for the 
promotion of sustainable industrialization and the adoption of new and inno￾vative technologies that can help address global challenges such as climate 
change, resource depletion, and economic inequality. Similarly, SDG 8 – Decent 
Table 7.7 Machine learning assistance toward Industry 5.0
Machine learning assistance Details
Predictive maintenance By analyzing data from sensors and other sources, machine 
learning algorithms can predict when equipment is likely 
to fail, allowing for preventative maintenance to be 
performed before a breakdown occurs.
Quality control Machine learning can be used to detect defects and 
anomalies in products, helping to ensure that only high￾quality products make it to market.
Supply chain optimization By analyzing data from the entire supply chain, including 
suppliers, manufacturers, and distributors, machine 
learning algorithms can optimize inventory levels, reduce 
waste, and improve logistics.
Process optimization Machine learning can be used to optimize manufacturing 
processes by identifying inefficiencies and bottlenecks 
and recommending changes to improve efficiency.
Source: Maddikunta et al., (2022)Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 239
Work and Economic Growth –highlights the importance of creating sustain￾able and inclusive economic growth that benefits all members of society. This 
goal specifically calls for the promotion of full and productive employment 
and decent work for all, which is closely linked to the development of new 
technologies and manufacturing processes that can create new job opportuni￾ties and improve working conditions.
Both SDG 9 (Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure) and SDG 8 (Decent 
Work and Economic Growth) can benefit greatly from the application of 
ML. ML is a subset of AI that involves using algorithms to learn from data 
and make predictions or decisions without being explicitly programmed. In 
the context of SDG 9, ML can be applied to various areas to improve effi￾ciency and sustainability. Smart manufacturing is one area where ML can 
make a significant impact. By analyzing data from sensors and other sources, 
ML algorithms can identify patterns and insights that help optimize produc￾tion processes, reduce waste, and improve product quality (Maddikunta, 
et al., 2022). This can lead to cost savings and increased productivity, while 
also minimizing the environmental impact of manufacturing. Predictive 
maintenance is another area where ML can be highly beneficial (Kasinathan, 
et al., 2022).
By analyzing data from sensors and other sources, ML algorithms can 
predict when equipment is likely to fail, allowing for preventative mainte￾nance to be performed before a breakdown occurs. This can save costs, 
reduce downtime, and increase safety by preventing accidents caused by 
equipment failures. In the supply chain, ML can help identify inefficiencies 
and optimize logistics to reduce waste and improve delivery times. By ana￾lyzing data on demand, inventory levels, and shipping times, ML algorithms 
can help optimize routes and delivery schedules, leading to cost savings and 
reduced emissions from transportation. ML can be applied to sustainable 
energy management by predicting energy consumption patterns and opti￾mizing energy storage and distribution. This can help reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and improve the efficiency of energy systems, contributing to the 
transition to a more sustainable energy future.
SDG 8 aims to promote sustained, inclusive, and sustainable economic 
growth, full and productive employment, and decent work for all. ML tech￾nology can play a significant role in achieving this goal by improving pro￾ductivity, optimizing processes, and promoting innovation. ML can be 
applied to human resources management. ML algorithms can help identify 
the best candidates for a given job by analyzing resumes, skills, and past 
performance, leading to better matches between employees and job require￾ments (Zhao, et al., 2022).
ML can also help in identifying training needs and provide personalized 
learning opportunities to help employees develop the skills they need for 
their jobs. ML can also be used to optimize business processes, leading to 
increased productivity and efficiency. By analyzing data on production pro￾cesses, supply chain management, and customer interactions, ML algorithms 240 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
can identify inefficiencies and opportunities for improvement (Zhao, et al., 
2022). This can lead to cost savings and increased profitability, while also 
improving customer satisfaction. In the context of entrepreneurship and 
innovation, ML can help identify promising startups and innovative ideas 
by analyzing data on market trends and consumer preferences. This can help 
investors and entrepreneurs make better decisions about where to invest 
their time and resources.
The fact cannot be denied that Industry 5.0 is human-centric; however, 
ML is capable of replacing many human-related jobs. ML and other 
advanced technologies in Industry 5.0 may lead to some displacement of 
human workers (Alves et al., 2023). However, it is important to note that 
ML is not designed to replace human workers entirely, but rather to aug￾ment their capabilities and improve the efficiency of manufacturing pro￾cesses. In many cases, ML algorithms are used to automate repetitive or 
dangerous tasks that are not well-suited for human workers (Adel, 2022). 
For example, robots can be used to perform tasks such as welding, painting, 
or assembly line work that may be hazardous or physically taxing for 
humans. At the same time, ML can also create new job opportunities for 
workers with skills in data analysis, programming, and other related areas. 
As manufacturing processes become more automated and data-driven, there 
will be an increased demand for workers who can develop and maintain 
these systems (Uzialko, 2023).
Ethics is a critical challenge that needs to be addressed as these technolo￾gies, including ML, are becoming more widespread (Vollmer, et al., 2020). 
One of the key issues in this regard is how to ensure that ML models are 
transparent, accountable, and fair so that they can be trusted to make deci￾sions that are consistent with ethical and legal norms. Making ML respon￾sible requires a multi-faceted approach that involves ethical design, rigorous 
data governance, human oversight, monitoring and accountability, and con￾tinuous improvement (Burr & Leslie, 2022).
Implementation of the above-mentioned measures can be regularly moni￾tored by IA. By implementing these measures, IA can ensure that ML is used 
in a way that is ethical, transparent, and accountable and that it promotes 
fairness and justice. As ML technologies become more widespread and influ￾ential in our society, it is crucial that organizations address the ethical chal￾lenges they pose and take proactive steps to ensure that they are used in a 
responsible and beneficial way. By doing so, organizations – with the assis￾tance of IA – can harness the power of ML to improve lives and address 
some of the most pressing issues facing the world today.
7.2.3.4 Internal audit, machine learning, and Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0 was formally established in 2021 by the European Commission 
(Xu et al., 2021). This establishment was made after conducting critical 
analysis among scientists and industry experts in different branches of Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 241
research, academia, and technology (Breque et al., 2021). Therefore, digital 
transformation is slowly taking shape in the Industry 5.0. The emergence 
of Industry 5.0 is spurring research and innovation focused on human￾centric, sustainable industrial practices. The core values of Industry 5.0 
can be summarized into three main elements: human-centric, sustainable, 
and resilient. These three core values have been established to promote 
the diversity and talents of people, to consider the planet’s boundaries 
and environmental space, and to adopt new technologies with flexibilities 
(Longo et al., 2020).
It is clear that Industry 5.0 is value-driven not technology-driven (Longo 
et al., 2020), which leads to a number of changes and responses that could 
affect the IA readiness in organizations in the future. As one of the main 
focuses of Industry 5.0 is human-centric, this means that IA audits have to 
be adjusted to comply with the new changes to create effective and inclu￾sive IA policies, considering this dimension in a way that allows for IA to 
conduct comprehensive analysis and acquire credible evidence when 
needed. There is an excessive need for organizations to digitize their opera￾tions in a bid to become viable in the long run (Mihardjo et al., 2019). To 
help curb the issues emerging from the legal and regulatory compliance of 
digitization, there is a need to conduct audits using IA (Rehman, 2022b). 
The diversity in computing platforms and the organizational rate of digi￾tization have been proven to be challenging for collection and investiga￾tion using internal audits. Overcoming the challenges in the IA process is 
required so that organizations can be “internally audit ready”. This 
involves the collective capability to process, review, and store digital 
information.
IA is a rapidly evolving area, and ML is playing an increasingly impor￾tant role in enabling auditors (Slapni et al., 2022) to gain insights and make 
more informed decisions. IA and ML include the use of predictive analytics 
for fraud detection, risk assessment, and financial forecasting. Text analyt￾ics is another area where machine learning is being applied to analyze 
unstructured data and gain insights into employee behavior and customer 
feedback (Pejić Bach et al., 2019). RPA is being used to automate routine 
tasks, allowing auditors to focus on more strategic activities (Huang & 
Vasarhelyi, 2019). Cognitive computing is also being used to gain insights 
into complex data sets and make more informed decisions. Finally, machine 
learning is being used in the area of cybersecurity to identify potential 
threats and vulnerabilities in the organization’s IT infrastructure (Pejić Bach 
et al., 2019).
IA is an important function in organizations, providing independent 
assurance and consulting services that help organizations achieve their 
objectives (Okodo et al., 2019). With the advent of Industry 5.0, IA has 
taken on a new level of importance, as organizations seek to leverage the 
power of technology to improve their operations and enhance the customer 
experience.242 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
ML is a type of artificial intelligence that involves the use of algorithms to 
learn from data and make predictions or decisions (Diligent, 2021). IA and 
ML can be used for a variety of purposes, including fraud detection, risk 
assessment, and performance measurement. There are several benefits and 
challenges of using ML in IA and has highlighted the importance of ensuring 
that the algorithms are transparent, explainable, and ethical.
IA plays a major role in supporting organizations as they transition to 
Industry 5.0. This involves not only providing assurance and consulting ser￾vices but also helping to identify and manage the risks associated with new 
technologies and processes. IA can contribute to risk management, compli￾ance, governance, performance measurement, and change management in 
the context of Industry 5.0.
IA plays an important role in data analytics and visualization. With the 
increasing amount of data being generated by organizations, IA needs to be 
able to analyze and interpret this data in order to identify patterns (Almasria, 
2022) and trends that can help improve operations and enhance the cus￾tomer experience. Data analytics and visualization tools can be used in IA 
and they have highlighted the importance of developing the skills and capa￾bilities necessary to use these tools effectively (İ
dil & Ozoner, 2018).
The environment for Industry 5.0 can be divided into micro- and macro￾environments as it creates crucial aspects of sustainable economies, involv￾ing the processes of supply and demand and modern industry approaches. 
Monitoring the industry environment is strategic and necessary. The con￾cepts of IA and internal control are applicable to this monitoring. The appli￾cation of audit concepts is for audit purposes, and control concepts for 
control purposes (Kupec et al., 2021).
7.3 ASSOCIATE THEORIES
This section will discuss Stakeholder Theory, RBV of the industry, and EDM 
Theory as these are related to Industry 5.0, internal audit, and machine 
learning.
7.3.1 Stakeholder theory
Stakeholder Theory can guide organizations in their implementation of 
machine learning initiatives to promote sustainable development and build 
stronger relationships with their stakeholders (Freeman & Dmytriyev, 2017). 
Internal audits can play a crucial role in ensuring that these initiatives align 
with Stakeholder Theory and address potential risks and challenges. By doing 
so, organizations can enhance their reputation as responsible and sustainable 
businesses and contribute to the betterment of society and the environment.
Stakeholder Theory proposes that organizations and industries have a 
responsibility to take into account the interests of all stakeholders, including Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 243
customers, employees, shareholders, regulators, the wider community, and 
the environment, in addition to their own financial interests (Bridoux & 
Stoelhorst, 2022). With the emergence of Industry 5.0, the application of 
machine learning for sustainable development can be viewed as a means 
for industries to fulfill this responsibility. By leveraging machine learning 
technology, organizations can reduce their environmental footprint, pro￾mote social responsibility, and provide better products and services to 
their customers (Freeman et al., 2021). However, the implementation of 
machine learning initiatives also presents potential risks and challenges, 
including concerns around data privacy, bias in algorithms, and job 
displacement.
To ensure that machine learning initiatives align with Stakeholder Theory 
and address potential risks and challenges, internal audits can play a crucial 
role in overseeing the process. They can ensure that the organization is consid￾ering the interests of all stakeholders, including potential environmental and 
social impacts, in its machine learning initiatives. Internal auditors can use 
specific audit procedures to assess the impact of machine learning initiatives 
on different stakeholder groups, such as conducting risk assessments, analyz￾ing data quality, and monitoring compliance with relevant regulations.
Stakeholder Theory provides a framework for understanding the ethical, 
effective, and practical management of uncertainties related to stakeholder 
interests and organizational management (Guo et al., 2023). Industry 5.0, 
with its various technologies such as machine learning, edge computing, 
big data, IoT, autonomous robots, artificial intelligence, augmented reality, 
and innovation system integration, presents an opportunity for industries 
to develop sustainable performance and build long-term and sustainable 
relationships with their stakeholders, such as suppliers, buyers, and soci￾ety. Sustainability can be achieved by providing justice and caring for all 
stakeholders, which includes addressing potential risks and challenges 
associated with machine learning initiatives (Freudenreich & Schaltegger, 
2020).
7.3.2 Resource-based view theory
The RBV of the firm has its roots in the 1970s when scholars began to focus 
on the internal resources and capabilities of firms as a source of sustainable 
competitive advantage. The RBV gained significant attention in the 1980s 
and 1990s, and today it remains one of the most influential theories in stra￾tegic management (Brahma & Chakraborty, 2011).
Today, the RBV remains an important theoretical framework in strategic 
management and has been applied to a wide range of industries and con￾texts. The framework continues to evolve, with scholars incorporating new 
insights from fields such as evolutionary biology, psychology, and neurosci￾ence to refine our understanding of the sources of sustained competitive 
advantage (Freeman et al., 2021).244 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
RBV is related to Industry 5.0, machine learning, and internal audit, as it 
provides a framework for organizations to identify and leverage their 
resources and capabilities to achieve sustainable competitive advantages 
through the implementation of machine learning initiatives. Internal audits 
can play a crucial role in assessing the organization’s resources and capabili￾ties and ensuring that the machine learning initiatives align with the RBV 
framework (Chen et al., 2022).
The RBV of the industry is a strategic management framework that 
emphasizes the importance of an organization’s internal resources and capa￾bilities in achieving sustainable competitive advantage. According to RBV, 
resources are valuable, rare, inimitable, and non-substitutable, and there￾fore, firms must possess and develop these resources to achieve a competi￾tive edge (Rengkung et al., 2018). In the context of Industry 5.0 and machine 
learning, RBV can help organizations identify and leverage their resources 
and capabilities to create and implement machine learning initiatives that 
align with their stakeholders’ interests.
Machine learning is a resource that organizations can leverage to 
develop sustainable competitive advantages, such as improved customer 
satisfaction, increased efficiency, and reduced costs. Internal audits can 
play a role in assessing the organization’s machine learning capabilities 
and identifying areas for improvement to ensure that the machine learning 
initiatives align with the organization’s resources and capabilities (Barnes 
et al., 2021).
RBV can also be used to evaluate the impact of Industry 5.0 on the orga￾nization’s resources and capabilities. The technologies associated with 
Industry 5.0, such as machine learning, big data, and IoT, can provide valu￾able resources and capabilities that organizations can leverage to achieve 
sustainable competitive advantages. Internal audits can help the organiza￾tion identify the resources and capabilities needed to implement these tech￾nologies successfully and assess the risks associated with these initiatives 
(Cillo et al., 2022).
7.3.3 Ethical decision-making theory
EDM Theory is highly relevant to the topics of Industry 5.0, internal audit, 
and machine learning, as it provides a framework for promoting ethical 
behavior and decision-making within organizations (Dhirani et al., 2023; 
Yuhertiana et al., 2019; Rodgers et al., 2023).
As organizations increasingly adopt Industry 5.0 technologies such as 
machine learning, it becomes essential to consider the ethical implications of 
these technologies on stakeholders. EDM Theory provides a framework for 
understanding how individuals and organizations can make ethical deci￾sions in the face of competing interests and values. In the context of Industry 
5.0, EDM Theory can guide organizations in developing ethical guidelines Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 245
and decision-making processes that take into account the interests of all 
stakeholders.
Internal audits also play a critical role in promoting EDM within organi￾zations. By monitoring the organization’s operations and ensuring compli￾ance with ethical standards, internal audits can help prevent unethical 
behavior and promote a culture of EDM (Rehman, 2022b).
Machine learning also presents unique ethical challenges, such as algorith￾mic bias, privacy concerns, and the potential for misuse. EDM Theory can 
guide organizations in developing ethical guidelines and policies for the use 
of machine learning technologies. Internal audits can also help ensure compli￾ance with these guidelines and identify potential ethical issues (Rhim, 2021).
7.4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
Industries play a crucial role in the economy of any nation. They provide 
employment opportunities, generate income, contribute to economic growth 
and development, and promote innovation and technological advancement. 
The different levels of industries, from primary to quinary, provide insight 
into the diverse activities that contribute to the economy and how they work 
together to create value. Industry 5.0, the future of manufacturing and pro￾duction, envisions a more collaborative and integrated approach to manu￾facturing that combines advanced technology with human creativity and 
ingenuity while promoting sustainability and social responsibility. However, 
this new concept poses many risks, including fraud, that have yet to be fully 
identified. Understanding the importance of industries and their potential 
risks is crucial for the sustainable development of any nation.
This chapter utilized Stakeholder Theory, RBV Theory, and EDM Theory. 
Stakeholder Theory suggests that organizations and industries have a 
responsibility to consider the interests of all stakeholders, including the 
environment and society, in addition to their shareholders. RBV Theory sug￾gests that the strategic resources and capabilities of an industry can be a 
source of sustainable competitive advantage. EDM theory refers to the pro￾cess of making decisions that are morally and ethically sound. These theo￾ries are relevant to the discussion of internal audit and machine learning 
technology in the text because they provide a framework for understanding 
the role of internal audit in promoting sustainability, addressing risks, and 
ensuring EDM in the context of Industry 5.0.
The implementation of machine learning technology in organizations 
faces several challenges, including a lack of clear strategy and a shortage of 
skilled personnel. The internal audit function can play a vital role in mitigat￾ing the risks associated with the adoption of these technologies. The internal 
audit can ensure the alignment of machine learning initiatives with the orga￾nization’s sustainability objectives, identify and mitigate risks, and promote 246 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
transparency and accountability. Additionally, the internal audit can help 
identify potential data privacy and security risks and ensure that the organi￾zation has effective controls in place to protect data. The digitization of 
control functions is essential to keep pace with Industry 5.0, and the internal 
audit can benefit from integrating machine learning into its processes to 
automate audit procedures, improve skill sets, and address potential issues 
before they become major problems. Furthermore, considering stakeholder 
interests and RBV Theory can help industries achieve their sustainability 
objectives and gain a competitive advantage.
It is argued that the success of Industry 5.0 adoption depends on adopting 
a holistic approach that considers the interests of all stakeholders, invests in 
critical resources such as data infrastructure and skilled personnel, and 
upholds ethical principles. By implementing these practices, organizations 
can effectively leverage Industry 5.0 technologies to promote sustainable 
development while minimizing risks and ensuring compliance with ethical 
standards. This chapter could potentially inspire regulators and policymak￾ers to revise their rules and policies to promote the use of Industry 5.0 for 
sustainable development while making internal audits and machine learning 
mandatory resources.
The future scope of industries lies in the adoption of Industry 5.0, a col￾laborative and integrated approach to manufacturing that combines 
advanced technology with human creativity and ingenuity while promoting 
sustainability and social responsibility. However, the successful implementa￾tion of Industry 5.0 depends on a holistic approach that considers the inter￾ests of all stakeholders, invests in critical resources such as data infrastructure 
and skilled personnel, and upholds ethical principles. Internal audits can 
play a vital role in mitigating the risks associated with the adoption of 
machine learning technology, ensuring alignment with sustainability objec￾tives, identifying and mitigating risks, and promoting transparency and 
accountability. The integration of machine learning into audit processes can 
automate procedures, improve skill sets, and address potential issues before 
they become major problems. The adoption of these practices can inspire 
regulators and policymakers to promote the use of Industry 5.0 for sustain￾able development, while making internal audit and machine learning man￾datory resources.
REFERENCES
Abel, D., MacGlashan, J., & Littman, M. L. (2016). Reinforcement Learning as a 
Framework for Ethical Decision Making. AAAI workshop: AI, ethics, and society 
(Vol. 16, p. 02), 16, (02).
ACFE. (2022). Occupational Fraud 2022: A Report to the nations. LA: Association 
of Certified Fraud Examiners.
Adams, A. C. (2017). The Sustainable Development Goals, Integrated Thinking and 
the Integrated Report. International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC), London.Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 247
Adel, A. (2022). Future of Industry 5.0 in society: Human-centric solutions, chal￾lenges and prospective research areas. J Cloud Comput (Heidelb), 11(1): 40. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13677-022-00314-5
Ahmad, M. A., Eckert, C. and Teredesai, A., 2018, August. Interpretable machine 
learning in healthcare. In Proceedings of the 2018 ACM international conference 
on bioinformatics, computational biology, and health informatics (pp. 559–560).
Aithal, P. S. (2019). Information communication & computation technology 
(ICCT) as a strategic tool for industry sectors. International Journal of Applied 
Engineering and Management Letters (IJAEML), 3(2), 65–80.
Ali, A. (2021). Natural resources depletion, renewable energy consumption and 
environmental degradation: A comparative analysis of developed and develop￾ing world. International Journal of Energy Economics and Policy. https://doi.
org/10.32479/ijeep.11008
Almasria, N. A. (2022). Corporate Governance and the Quality of Audit Process: An 
Exploratory Analysis Considering Internal Audit, Audit Committee and Board of 
Directors. European Journal of Business and Management Research, 7(1), 78–99.
Alves, J., Lima, T. M., & Gaspar, P. D. (2023). Is Industry 5.0 a Human-Centred 
Approach? A Systematic Review. Process, 11(1), 193. https://doi.org/10.3390/
pr11010193
Amoako, G. K., Bawuah, J., Asafo-Adjei, E., & Ayimbire, C. (2023). Internal audit 
functions and sustainability audits: Insights from manufacturing firms. Cogent 
Business & Management, https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2023.2192313
Arnhof, M., 2016, July. Design of a human settlement on Mars using in-situ resources. 
46th International Conference on Environmental Systems.
Asadikia, A., Rajabifard, A., & Kalantari, M., 2021. Systematic prioritisation of 
SDGs: Machine learning approach. World Development, 140, p. 105269.
Assembly, G. (2015). Sustainable Development Goals. SDGs. Transforming our world: 
The, 2030. Global Change.
Assiri, M., & Humayun, M. (2023). A blockchain-enabled framework for improving 
the software audit process. Applied Sciences, 13(6), 3437; https://doi.org/10.3390/
app13063437
Audretsch, D., Heger, D., & Veith, T. (2015). Infrastructure and entrepreneur￾ship. Small Business Economics, 44, 219–230. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11187-
014-9600-6
Ayodele, T. O. (2010). Types of machine learning algorithms. New Advances in 
Machine Learning, 3, pp.19–48.
Barnes, S., Rutter, R. N., La Paz, A. I., & Scornavacca, E. (2021). Empirical iden￾tification of skills gaps between chief information officer supply and demand: 
A resource-based view using machine learning. Industrial Management & Data 
Systems, 121(8), 1749–1766.
Barth, F., Eckert, C., Gatzert, N., & Scholz, H. (2022). Spillover effects from the 
Volkswagen emissions scandal: An analysis of stock and corporate bond markets. 
Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research, 74, 37–76. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s41471-021-00121-9
Bednar, P., & Welch, C. (2020). Socio-technical perspectives on smart working: 
Creating meaningful and sustainable systems. Information Systems Frontiers, 22, 
281–298, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-019-09921-1
Bloem, J., Van Doorn, M., Duivestein, S., Excoffier, D., Maas, R., & Van Ommeren, 
E. (2014). The fourth industrial revolution. Things Tighten, 8(1), pp. 11–15.248 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Bloomberg. (2022, August 8). PwC hit with $2.1 million fine over BT audit. Retrieved 
from https://english.alarabiya.net/: https://english.alarabiya.net/business/2022/08/
08/PwC-hit-with-2-1-million-fine-over-BT-audit
Brahma, S. S., & Chakraborty, H. (2011). From industry to firm resources: Resource￾based view of competitive advantage. The IUP Journal of Business Strategy, 8(2), 
7–21.
Breque, M., De Nul, L., & Petridis, A. (2021). Industry 5.0: Towards a Sustainable, 
Human-Centric and Resilient European Industry. Luxembourg: European 
Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
Bridoux, F., & Stoelhorst, J. (2022). Stakeholder theory, strategy, and organization: 
Past, present, and future. Strategic Organization, 20(4), 797–809. https://doi.
org/10.1177/14761270221127628
Brundtland Commission, (1987). Our Common Future. Oxford University Press: 
Oxford, London, United Kingdom. See: https://sswm.info/sites/default/files/reference_
attachments/UN%20WCED%201987%20Brundtland%20Report.pdf (accessed 
18/04/2023).
Bruno, C., & Pedrosa Isabel, M. A. (2020). State of the Art of Artificial Intelligence 
in Internal Audit Context. 15th Iberian Conference on Information Systems 
and Technologies (CISTI). Sevilla: AISTI. https://doi.org/10.23919/CISTI49556.
2020.9140863
Bubilek, O. (2017). Importance of Internal Audit and Internal Control in an organi￾zation – Case Study. NY: Arcada.
Burkart, N., & Huber, M. F. (2021). A survey on the explainability of supervised 
machine learning. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 70, pp.245–317.
Burr, C., & Leslie, D. (2022). Ethical assurance: A practical approach to the respon￾sible design, development, and deployment of data-driven technologies. AI and 
Ethics, 1–26.
Campbell, E. M., Sittig, D. F., Guappone, K. P., Dykstra, R. H. and Ash, J. S., (2007). 
Overdependence on technology: An unintended adverse consequence of comput￾erized provider order entry. In AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings (Vol. 2007, 
p. 94). American Medical Informatics Association.
Chen, D., Esperança, J. P., & Wang, S. (2022). The Impact of Artificial Intelligence 
on Firm Performance: An Application of the Resource-Based View to e-Commerce 
Firms. Frontiers in Psychology, 13, https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.884830
Chiang, C. W. and Yin, M., 2021, June. You’d better stop! Understanding human 
reliance on machine learning models under covariate shift. In 13th ACM web sci￾ence conference 2021 (pp. 120–129).
Cillo, V., Gregori, G. L., Daniele, L. M., Caputo, F., & Bitbol-Saba, N. (2022). Rethinking 
companies’ culture through knowledge management lens during Industry 5.0 transi￾tion. Journal of Knowledge Management, 26(10), 2485–2498.
Coelho, P., Bessa, C., Landeck, J., & Silva, C. (2023). Industry 5.0: The Arising of a 
Concept. Procedia Computer Science, 217, pp.1137–1144.
Cohen, B. (2020, May 18). Three Risks in Building Machine Learning Systems. 
Retrieved from https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/: https://insights.sei.cmu.edu/blog/
three-risks-in-building-machine-learning-systems/
Cohen, C. B. (2018). Industry 4.0: Are You Ready for the Fourth Industrial Revolution? 
See: https://medium.com/@carmitberdugocohen/industry-4-0-are-you-ready-for￾the-fourth-industrial-revolution-464de2dea3b1 (accessed 24/09/2022).Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 249
Coman, D. M., Ionescu, C. A., Duică, A., Coman, M. D., Uzlau, M. C., Stanescu, S. 
G., & State, V. (2022). Digitization of accounting: The premise of the paradigm 
shift of role of the professional accountant. Applied Sciences, 12(7), 3359. https://
doi.org/10.3390/app12073359
Committee, E. E. (2021). Industry 5.0. Retrieved from Research and innovation: 
https://ec.europa.eu/info/research-and-innovation/research-area/industrial￾research-and-innovation/industry-50_en (Accessed 28 September 2021)
Dat, P. M., Mau, N. D., Loan, B. T., & Huy, D. T. (2020). Comparative china corpo￾rate governance standards after financial crisis, corporate scandals and manipula￾tion. Journal of Security & Sustainability Issues, 9(3).
Deane, P. M. (1979). The first industrial revolution. Cambridge University Press.
Dhirani, L. L., Mukhtiar, N., Chowdhry, B. S., & Newe, T. (2023). Ethical dilemmas 
and privacy issues. Emerging Technologies: A Review. Sensors, 23(3), 1151.
Diligent. (2021, April 8). Understanding the Risks of Machine Learning. Retrieved 
from https://www.wegalvanize.com/: https://www.wegalvanize.com/risk/
understanding-the-risks-of-machine-learning/
Dinu, D.-G., & Nosca, G. (2020). The influence of digital technologies in global busi￾ness future: The quaternary and quinary economic sectors. Conference of EuroMed 
Academy of Business (pp. 465–467). Bihar: Somaiya Vidyavihar University.
Dinu, D. G., Stoian-Karadeli, A., Mihoreanu, L., Ilić, M., & Păduraru, M. (2022). 
Competitive intelligence and neuro-technologies: The new strategic tools to boost 
the digital economy. International Journal of Business and Management Invention, 
11(7): 39–45, https://doi.org/10.35629/8028-1107013945
Dorminey, J. F., Kranacher, M. J., & Riley Jr, R. A. (2012). The evolution of fraud 
theory. Issues in Accounting Education, 27(2), 555–579.
Dwivedi, A., Agrawal, D., Jha, A., & Mathiyazhagan, K. (2023). Studying the inter￾actions among Industry 5.0 and circular supply chain: Towards attaining sustain￾able development. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 176, 108927, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cie.2022.108927
Dwivedi, Y. K., Hughes, L., Ismagilova, E., Aarts, G., Coombs, C., Crick, … Janssen. 
(2019). Artificial Intelligence (AI): Multidisciplinary perspectives on emerging chal￾lenges, opportunities, and agenda for research, practice and policy. International 
Journal of Information Management. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.08.002
Esmail, Z. M., & Haque, S. I. (2022). The influence of the business risk-based 
auditing application on the audit process: An empirical investigation in the 
Yemeni Context. Journal of Business Strategy Finance and Management, 4(2), 
214.
Espina-Romero, L., Guerrero-Alcedo, J., Avila, N. G., Sánchez, J. G., Hurtado, H. G., 
& Li, A. Q. (2023). Industry 5.0: Tracking scientific activity on the most influen￾tial industries, associated topics, and future research agenda. Sustainability, 15(6), 
5554. https://doi.org/10.3390/su15065554
Eulerich, A., & Eulerich, M. (2020). What is the value of internal auditing? – A literature 
review on qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Maandblad voor Accountancy 
en Bedrijfseconomie, 94(3/4): 83–92. https://doi.org/10.5117/mab.94.50375
Fei, W., Opoku, A., Agyekum, K., Oppon, J. A., Ahmed, V., Chen, C., & Lok, K. 
L. (2021). The critical role of the construction industry in achieving the sus￾tainable development goals (SDGs): Delivering projects for the common good. 
Sustainability, 13(16), 9112. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13169112250 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Freeman, R. E., & Dmytriyev, S. (2017). Corporate social responsibility and 
stakeholder theory: Learning from each other. Symphonya Emerging Issues in 
Management. https://doi.org/10.4468/2017.1.02freeman.dmytriyev
Freeman, R. E., Dmytriyev, S. D., & Phillips, R. A. (2021). Stakeholder theory and 
the resource-based view of the firm. Journal of Management, 47(7), 1757–1770. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0149206321993576
Freudenreich, B. L.-F., & Schaltegger, S. (2020). A stakeholder theory perspective 
on business models: Value creation for sustainability. Journal of Business Ethics, 
166, 3–18.
Froomkin, A. M., Kerr, I., & Pineau, J. (2019). When AIs outperform doctors: 
Confronting the challenges of a tort-induced over-reliance on machine learning. 
Arizona State Law Journal, 61, 33.
García-Martín, E., Lavesson, N., Grahn, H., Casalicchio, E., & Boeva, V. (2019). 
How to measure energy consumption in machine learning algorithms. In ECML 
PKDD 2018 Workshops: Nemesis 2018, UrbReas 2018, SoGood 2018, IWAISe 
2018, and Green Data Mining 2018, Dublin, Ireland, September 10–14, 2018, 
Proceedings 18 (pp. 243–255). Springer International Publishing.
Ge, H. L., Tang, D., & Boamah, V. (2022). Research on digital inclusive finance 
promoting the integration of rural three-industry. International Journal of 
Environmental Research and Public Health, 19(6), 3363.
Gera, R., Chadha, P., Khera, G. S., & Yadav, R. (2023). A Comprehensive and 
Narrative Review of Industry 5.0 Technologies: 2018–2022. In A. A. Khosla, 
Renewable Energy Optimization, Planning and Control. Studies in Infrastructure 
and Control (pp. 237–259). Singapore: Springer.
Ghoddusi, H., Creamer, G. G. and Rafizadeh, N. (2019). Machine learning in energy 
economics and finance: A review. Energy Economics, 81, 709–727.
Ghosal, M. and Chakraborty, A., 2021, August. The growing use of nanotechnology 
in the built environment: A review. In IOP Conference Series: Materials Science 
and Engineering (Vol. 1170, No. 1, p. 012007). IOP Publishing.
Greengard, S. (2021). The internet of things. MIT Press.
Griggs, D., Stafford-Smith, M., Gaffney, O., Rockström, J., Öhman, M. C., 
Shyamsundar, P., Steffen, W., Glaser, G., Kanie, N. and Noble, I. (2013). Sustainable 
development goals for people and planet. Nature, 495(7441), 305–307.
Guo, H. (2010). Understanding global natural disasters and the role of earth obser￾vation. International Journal of Digital Earth, 3(3), 221–230.
Guo, L., Sun, D., Warraich, M. A., & Waheed, A. (2023). Does Industry 5.0 model 
optimize sustainable performance of Agri-enterprises? Real-time investigation 
from the realm of stakeholder theory and domain. Sustainable Development. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/sd.2527
Hakimah, Y., Pratama, I., Fitri, H., Ganatri, M., & Sulbahrie, R. A. (2019). Impact 
of Intrinsic Corporate Governance on Financial Performance of Indonesian SMEs. 
International Journal of Innovation, Creativity and Change, 7(1), 32–51.
Herz, R. H., Jr, Hileman, D., Littan, S. H., Monterio, B. J., & Thomson, J. C. (2023). 
Achieving effective internal control over sustainability reporting (icsr): Building 
trust and confidence through the coso internal control—integrated framework. 
NY: COSO.
Hopwood, B., Mellor, M., & O’Brien, G. (2005). Sustainable development: Mapping 
different approaches. Sustainable Development, 13(1), 38–52.Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 251
Huang, F., & Vasarhelyi, M. A. (2019). Applying robotic process automation (RPA) 
in auditing: A framework. International Journal of Accounting Information 
Systems, 35, 100433.
İ
dil, K. A., & Ozoner, K. (2018). Big data analytics in internal audit. Press Academia 
Procedia, 7(1), 260–262.
IGBP (International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme), 1999. “Global Analysis, 
Integration and Modelling, “(IGBP, International Council of Scientific Unions, 
(ICSU), Durham, NH, 2000) http://gaim.unh.edu/; H. J. Schellnhuber, Nature 
402, C19 (1999); National Research Council, Committee on Global Change 
Research, Global Environmental Change: Research Pathways for the Next Decade 
(National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1999), p. 531, http://www.nap.edu/
catalog/5992.html. (accessed 21/04/2023).
IIA. (2020, February 15). The IIA’s Three Lines Model: An update of the Three 
Lines of Defense. Retrieved from https://www.theiia.org/en: https://www.theiia.
org/en/content/position-papers/2020/the-iias-three-lines-model-an-update-of￾the-three-lines-of-defense/
Iliev, P. (2022). Accounting, Digitalization, Control. Knowledge: International Journal, 
53(1), 125–129.
Jacobson, M. Z. (2009). Review of solutions to global warming, air pollution, and 
energy security. Energy & Environmental Science, 2(2), 148–173.
Janicke, M., & Jacob, K. (2013). A third industrial revolution. Long-term Governance 
for Social-ecological Change, 47–71.
Jarrahi, M. H. (2018). Artificial intelligence and the future of work: Human-AI sym￾biosis in organizational decision making. Business Horizons, 61(4), 577–586.
Jones, H., & Hobson, P. (2020, April 17). EY whistleblower awarded $11 million 
after suppression of gold audit. Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com/: https://
www.reuters.com/article/gold-whistleblower-ey-idAFL8N2C54EL
Jørgensen, R. (1989). Criteria for dating prehistoric graves: Stone Age, Bronze Age 
or Iron Age? Acta Borealia, 6(2), 28–41.
Kaelbling, L. P., Littman, M. L. and Moore, A. W., 1996. Reinforcement learning: A 
survey. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 4, 237–285.
Kamaruddin, M. I., & Ramli, N. M. (2018). The impacts of internal control prac￾tices on financial accountability in Islamic non-profit organizations in Malaysia. 
International Journal of Economics, Management and Accounting, 26(2), 365–391.
Kasinathan, P., Pugazhendhi, R., Elavarasan, R. M., Ramachandaramurthy, V. K., 
Ramanathan, V., Subramanian, S., … Rangasamy, S. (2022). Realization of sus￾tainable development goals with disruptive technologies by Integrating Industry 
5.0, Society 5.0, smart cities and villages. Sustainability, 14(22), 15258. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su142215258
Kimani, D., Adams, K., Attah-Boakye, R., Ullah, S., Frecknall-Hughes, J., & Kim, J. 
(2020). Blockchain, business and the fourth industrial revolution: Whence, whither, 
wherefore and how? Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 161, 120254.
Klein, P. G., Mahoney, J. T., McGahan, A. M., & Pitelis, C. N. (2019). Organizational 
governance adaptation: Who is in, who is out, and who gets what. Academy of 
Management Review, 44(1), 6–27.
Koolen, D., Sadat-Razavi, N., & Ketter, W. (2017). Machine learning for identifying 
demand patterns of home energy management systems with dynamic electricity 
pricing. Applied Sciences, 7(11), 1160.252 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Koptelov, A. (2022, July 15). How to Overcome Machine Learning Risks. 
Retrieved from https://www.spiceworks.com/: https://www.spiceworks.com/tech/
artificial-intelligence/guest-article/how-to-overcome-machine-learning-risks/
Kristensen, I. (2022, February 18). Building the internal-audit function of the 
future. Retrieved from https://www.mckinsey.com/: https://www.mckinsey.com/
capabilities/risk-and-resilience/our-insights/building-the-internal-audit-function￾of-the-future
Kupec, V., Písař, P., Lukáč, M., & Bartáková, G. P. (2021). Conceptual comparison of 
internal audit and internal control in the marketing environment. Sustainability, 
13(12) 6691. https://doi.org/10.3390/su13126691
Kvamsdal, S. F., Belik, I., Hopland, A. O., & Li, Y. (2021). A machine learning analy￾sis of the recent environmental and resource economics literature. Environmental 
and Resource Economics, 79, 93–115.
Kynčlová, P., Upadhyaya, S., & Nice, T. (2020). Composite index as a measure on 
achieving Sustainable Development Goal 9 (SDG-9) industry-related targets: The 
SDG-9 index. Applied Energy, 265, 114755. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.
2020.114755
Larchenko, L. V., Kolyshkin, A. V., & Yakovleva, T. V. (2020). The Reproduction 
of the Mineral Resource Base as the Basis for the Sustainable Development of 
the Resource-Producing Regions of the North and urce-Producing Regions of the 
North and. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, Boston: 
International Science and Technology Conference. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-
899X/753/6/062016
Leng, J., Sha, W., Wang, B., Zheng, P., Zhuang, C., Liu, Q., … Wang, L. (2022). 
Industry 5.0: Prospect and retrospect. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 65, 279–
295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.09.017
Liu, Z., Adams, M., Cote, R. P., Geng, Y., & Li, Y. (2018). Comparative study on 
the pathways of industrial parks towards sustainable development between China 
and Canada. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 128, 417–425, https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2016.06.012
Longo, F., Padovano, A., & Umbrello, S. (2020). Value-oriented and ethical tech￾nology engineering in Industry 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design 
of the factory of the future. Applied Science, 10, 4182. https://doi.org/10.3390/
app10124182
Longo, F., & Padovano, A. (2020). Voice-enabled Assistants of the Operator 4.0 in 
the Social Smart Factory: Prospective role and challenges for an advanced human–
machine interaction. Manufacturing Letters, 26, 12–16, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
mfglet.2020.09.001
Louch, W., O’Dwyer, M., & Kerr, S. (2023, April 15). Dubai court orders KPMG to 
pay $231mn for Abraaj fund audit failure. Retrieved from https://www.ft.com/:
https://www.ft.com/content/0843cd97-ca9b-4f8e-b54e-0a7c779d0e8d
Maddikunta, P. K., Pham, Q.-V., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T. R., … Liyanage, 
M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A Survey on Enabling Technologies and Potential 
Applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26, 100257, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2021.100257
Mahesh, B. (2020). Machine learning algorithms-a review. International Journal of 
Science and Research (IJSR). [Internet], 9, 381–386.
Manzoor, F., Wei, L., Asif, M., Haq, M. Z., & Rehman, H. U. (2019). The contri￾bution of sustainable tourism to economic growth and employment in Pakistan. Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 253
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 16(19), 
3785. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16193785
MDGs (Millennium Development Goals), 2000. The eight Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs). United Nations, New York, United States. See: https://www.
un.org/millenniumgoals/bkgd.shtml (accessed 20/04/2023).
Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K. and Galstyan, A. (2021). A sur￾vey on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 
54(6), 1–35.
Meier, L. J., Hein, A., Diepold, K., & Buyx, A. (2022). Algorithms for ethical decision￾making in the clinic: A proof of concept. The American Journal of Bioethics, 22(7), 
4–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/15265161.2022.2040647
Mensah, J. (2019). Sustainable development: Meaning, history, principles, pillars, 
and implications for human action: Literature review. Cogent Social Sciences, 
5(1), 1653531. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311886.2019.1653531
Mergel, I., Edelmann, N., & Haug, N. (2019). Defining digital transformation: 
Results from expert interviews. Government Information Quarterly, 36(4), 
101385. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.giq.2019.06.002
Mihardjo, L., Sasmoko, S., Alamsjah, F., & Elidjen, E. (2019). Digital leadership role 
in developing business model innovation and customer experience orientation in 
Industry 4.0. Management Science Letters, 9, 1749–1762.
Milberg, W., & Winkler, D. (2013). Outsourcing Economies; global value chains in 
captalist development. NY: Cambrige University Press.
Mitchell, T. M., 2007. Machine learning (Vol. 1). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Mohamad Nasri, N., Husnin, H., Mahmud, S. N., & Halim, L. (2020). Mitigating 
the COVID-19 pandemic: A snapshot from Malaysia into the coping strategies for 
pre-service teachers’ education. Journal of Education for Teaching, 46(4), 546–553.
Mokyr, J. and Strotz, R. H. (1998). The second industrial revolution, 1870-1914. 
Storia dell’economia Mondiale, 21945(1), 22–48.
Morrar, R., Arman, H., & Mousa, S. (2017). The Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 
4.0): A social innovation perspective. Technology Innovation Management Review, 
7(11), 12–24.
Mourtzis, D. (2021). Towards the 5th industrial revolution: A literature review and 
a framework for process optimization based on big data analytics and semantics. 
Journal of Machine Engineering, 21(3), 5–39. https://doi.org/10.36897/jme/141834
Müller, J. M., Buliga, O., & Voigt, K. I. (2021). The role of absorptive capacity and inno￾vation strategy in the design of Industry 4.0 business Models-A comparison between 
SMEs and large enterprises. European Management Journal, 39(3), 333–343.
Myers, T. G., Ramkumar, P. N., Ricciardi, B. F., Urish, K. L., Kipper, J., & Ketonis, 
C. (2020). Artificial intelligence and orthopaedics: An introduction for clinicians. 
The Journal of bone and joint surgery. American, 102(9), 830.
Myradov, B. (2022). Challenges of Machine Learning for Covid-19 Diagnosis 
based on Blood Tests. International Conference on Innovation and Intelligence 
for Informatics, Computing, and Technologies (3ICT) (pp. 721–727, Sakheer, 
Bahrain: IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/3ICT56508.2022.9990818
NASA (National Aeronautics and Space Administration) (2022). Global Temperature, 
NASA, Washington, DC. United States. See: https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/
global-temperature/ (accessed 19/04/2023).
Nayyar, A., & Kumar, A. (Eds.) (2020). A Roadmap to Industry 4.0: Smart Production, 
Sharp Business and Sustainable Development (pp. 1–21). Berlin: Springer.254 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Nilsson, M., Griggs, D., & Visbeck, M. (2016). Policy: Map the interactions between 
sustainable development goals. Nature, 534(7607), 320–322.
Noble, S. M., Mende, M., Grewal, D., & Parasuraman, A., (2022). The Fifth 
Industrial Revolution: How harmonious human–machine collaboration is trig￾gering a retail and service [r] evolution. Journal of Retailing, 98(2), pp. 199–208.
Ntim, C. G. (2018). Defining corporate governance: Shareholder versus stakeholder 
models. In A. Farazmand, Global Encyclopedia of Public Administration, Public 
Policy, and Governance. Singapore: Springer International Publishing.
Nurafia, A. (2023). Fraud Prevention In The Manufacturing Company Sector 
(Study On Manufacturing Companies Registered In The Association Of Bonded 
Zone Companies In Central Java - DIY). Conference on Economics and Business 
Innovation (pp. 3(1), 223–231). PN: CEBI.
NYT. (2023, January 26). What’s Going On in This Graph?|Global Temperature 
Change. Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/: https://www.nytimes.com/
2023/01/26/learning/whats-going-on-in-this-graph-feb-1-2023.html
Ofli, F., Meier, P., Imran, M., Castillo, C., Tuia, D., Rey, N., Briant, J., Millet, P., 
Reinhard, F., Parkan, M. and Joost, S., 2016. Combining human computing and 
machine learning to make sense of big (aerial) data for disaster response. Big Data, 
4(1), pp. 47–59.
Okodo, D., Momoh, M. A., & Yahaya, A. O. (2019). Assessing the Reliability 
of Internal Audit Functions: The Issues. Journal of Contemporary Research in 
Business, Economics and Finance, 1(1), 46–55.
Opoku, A. (2022). Construction industry and the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). 
In Research Companion to Construction Economics. Edward Elgar Publishing.
Paris Agreement, 2015. Paris Agreement. United Nations, New York, United States. See: 
http://unfccc.int/files/essential_background/convention/application/pdf/english_
paris_agreement.pdf (accessed 21/04/2023).
Paschek, D., Mocan, A. and Draghici, A., 2019, May. Industry 5.0—The expected 
impact of next industrial revolution. In Thriving on future education, industry, 
business, and Society, Proceedings of the MakeLearn and TIIM International 
Conference, Piran, Slovenia (pp. 15–17).
Pathak, P., Pal, P. R., Shrivastava, M. and Ora, P. (2019). Fifth revolution: Applied 
AI & human intelligence with cyber physical systems. International Journal of 
Engineering and Advanced Technology, 8(3), 23–27.
Pejić Bach, M., Krstić, Ž., Seljan, S., & Turulja, L. (2019). Text mining for big data 
analysis in financial sector: A literature review. Sustainability, 11(5), 1277.
Philbeck, T. and Davis, N., 2018. The fourth industrial revolution. Journal of 
International Affairs, 72(1), 17–22.
Popović, A. (2020). Implications of the Fourth Industrial Revolution on sustainable 
development. Economics of Sustainable Development, 4(1), 45–60.
Prisecaru, P. (2016). Challenges of the fourth industrial revolution. Knowledge 
Horizons. Economics, 8(1), 57.
Rahman, M. S., Khomh, F., Rivera, E., Guéhéneuc, Y. -G., & Lehnert, B. (2022). 
Challenges in Machine Learning Application Development: An Industrial Experience 
Report. IEEE/ACM 1st International Workshop on Software Engineering for 
Responsible Artificial Intelligence (SE4RAI) (pp. 21–28, PA: IEEE. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3526073.3527593Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 255
Rasborg, K. (2021). What is risk. In Ulrich Beck: theorising world risk society and 
cos, opolitansim. Singapore: Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-89201-2_2
Ray, S. (2019, February). A quick review of machine learning algorithms. In 2019 
International conference on machine learning, big data, cloud and parallel com￾puting (COMITCon) (pp. 35–39). IEEE.
Rehman, A. (2022b). Organizational Corruption Prevention, Internal Audit, 
and Sustainable Corporate Governance: Evidence from Omani Public Listed 
Companies. International Journal of Social Sciences and Economic Review, 4 
(12), 10–20, https://doi.org/10.36923/ijsser.v4i.2.159
Rehman, A., Khan, S., & Hashim, F. (2023). Covid 19 impact on educational institu￾tions: A detailed analysis. In J. R. Szyrocka, J. Ż
ywiołek, A. Nayyar, & M. Naved. 
(eds), Advances in Distance Learning in Times of Pandemic SG: CRC Press- Taylor 
& Francis. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003322252-1
Rehman, A. A. (2022a). With Application of Agency Theory, Can Artificial 
Intelligence Eliminate Fraud Risk? A Conceptual Overview. In B. H. Alareeni, 
Artificial Intelligence and COVID Effect on Accounting. Accounting, Finance, 
Sustainability, Governance & Fraud: Theory and Application (pp. 115–127,). 
Singapore: Springer.
Rengkung, L. R., Pangemanan, L. R., & Sondak, L. W. (2018). Competitiveness 
of Small and Medium Firms (SMEs) in facing ASEAN economic community. 
International Research Journal of Business Studies, 10(2), 123–133.
Rhim, J. L. (2021). A deeper look at autonomous vehicle ethics: An integrative ethi￾cal decision-making framework to explain moral pluralism. Frontiers in Robotics 
and AI, 8, 632394.
Rodgers, W. M., Stefanidis, A., Degbey, W. Y., & Tarba, S. Y. (2023). An artificial 
intelligence algorithmic approach to ethical decision-making in human resource 
management processes. Human Resource Management Review, 33(1), 100925.
Rodrik, D. (2018). Populism and the economics of globalization. Journal of International 
Business Policy, 1, 12–33.
Roy, A., & Pramanick, K. (2019). Analysing progress of sustainable development 
goal 6 in India: Past, present, and future. Journal of Environmental Management, 
232, pp. 1049–1065.
Sachs, J., Lafortune, G., Kroll, C., Fuller, G., & Woelm, F. (2022). From Crisis to 
Sustainable Development: The SDGs as Roadmap to 2030 and Beyond. Sustainable 
Development Report 2022. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. See: https://
dashboards.sdgindex.org/ (accessed 20/04/2023).
Sachs, J., Schmidt-Traub, G., Mazzucato, M., Messner, D., Nakicenovic, N., & Rockström, 
J. (2019). Six transformations to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Nature 
Sustainability, 2(9), 805–814. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-019-0352
Sachs, J. D. (2015). The age of sustainable development. New York, United States: 
Columbia University Press.
Sarkodie, S. A. (2022). Winners and losers of energy sustainability—Global assess￾ment of the Sustainable Development Goals. Science of the Total Environment, 
831, 154945. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2022.154945
SCCE, & HCCA. (2020). Compliance risk management: Applying the COSO ERM 
framework. NY: COSO.256 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
SDGR (Sustainable Development Goals Report) (2022). Sustainable Development 
Goals Report, 2022, United Nations, New York, United States. See: https://unstats.
un.org/sdgs/report/2022/ (accessed 21/04/2023).
Shaw, J., Rudzicz, F., Jamieson, T., & Goldfarb, A. (2019). Artificial intelligence 
and the implementation challenge. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 21(7), 
e13659. https://doi.org/10.2196/13659
Shinde, B. (2021). Artificial Intelligence Adoption in Internal Audit Processes. NY: 
ISACA.
Singh, S., Tabassum, N., Darwish, T. K., & Batsakis, G. (2018). Corporate gover￾nance and Tobin’s Q as a measure of organizational performance. British Journal 
of Management, 29(1), 171–190.
Sinha, A., Sengupta, T., & Alvarado, R. (2020). Interplay between technological 
innovation and environmental quality: Formulating the SDG policies for next 11 
economies. Journal of Cleaner Production, 242, 118549.
Sithic, H., & T. Balasubramanian. (2013). Survey of insurance fraud detection using 
data mining techniques. International Journal of Innovative Technology and 
Exploring Engineering, 2(3), 62–65.
Slapni, S., Vuko, T., Cular, M., & Drascek, M. (2022). Effectiveness of cybersecu￾rity audit. International Journal of Accounting Information Systems, 44, 100548, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.accinf.2021.100548
Solangi, Z. A., Solangi, Y. A., Chandio, S., bin Hamzah, M. S., & Shah, A. (2018, 
May). The future of data privacy and security concerns in Internet of Things. In 
2018 IEEE International Conference on Innovative Research and Development 
(ICIRD) (pp. 1–4). IEEE.
Soori, M., Arezoo, B., & Dastres, R. (2023). Machine learning and artificial intel￾ligence in CNC machine tools, A review. Sustainable Manufacturing and Service 
Economics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smse.2023.100009
Stearns, P. N. (2020). The industrial revolution in world history. Routledge.
Syam, N., & Sharma, A. (2018). Waiting for a sales renaissance in the fourth indus￾trial revolution: Machine learning and artificial intelligence in sales research and 
practice. Industrial Marketing Management, 69, 135–146.
Taub, B. (2023, February 27). How the Biggest Fraud in German History 
Unravelled. Retrieved from https://www.newyorker.com: https://www.newyorker.
com/magazine/2023/03/06/how-the-biggest-fraud-in-german-history-unravelled
#:~:text=Then%2C%20on%20June%2018%2C%202020,or%20it%20had
%20never%20existed
Tizghadam, A., Khazaei, H., Moghaddam, M. H., & Hassan, Y. (2019). Machine 
learning in transportation. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 2019.
Umar, T., & Umeokafor, N. (2022). Exploring the GCC progress towards United 
Nations sustainable development goals. International Journal of Social Ecology 
and Sustainable Development (IJSESD), 13(1), 1–32. https://doi.org/10.4018/
IJSESD.2022010105
UN. (2022). The Sustainable Development Goals Report. United Nations.
UN SDGs (United Nations Sustainable Development Goals), 2015. About the 
Sustainable Development Goals. United Nations, New York, United States. See: 
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainable-development-goals/
(accessed 20/04/2023).
UNSC (United Nations Statistical Commission), 2019. Interlinkages of the 2030 
Agenda for Sustainable Development, prepared by the Interlinkages Working Group Impact of Industry 5.0 on sustainable development 257
of the Inter-Agency and Expert Group on Sustainable Development Goal Indicators 
(IAEG-SDGs) United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC). 2019. See: https://
unstats.un.org/unsd/statcom/50th-ession/documents/BG-Item3a-Interlinkages￾2030-Agenda-for-Sustainable-Development-E.pdf (accessed 20/03/2023).
Usama, M., Qadir, J., Raza, A., Arif, H., Yau, K. L. A., Elkhatib, Y., Hussain, A., & 
Al-Fuqaha, A., 2019. Unsupervised machine learning for networking: Techniques, 
applications and research challenges. IEEE Access, 7, 65579–65615.
Uzialko, A. (2023, February 21). How Artificial Intelligence Will Transform 
Businesses. Retrieved from https://www.businessnewsdaily.com/: https://www.
businessnewsdaily.com/9402-artificial-intelligence-business-trends.html
Vadasi, C., Bekiaris, M., & Andrikopoulos, A. (2020). Corporate governance and 
internal audit: An institutional theory perspective. Corporate Governance: The 
International Journal of Business in Society, 20(1), 175–190.
Van der Sommen, F., de Groof, J., Struyvenberg, M., van der Putten, J., Boers, T., 
Fockens, K., Schoon, E. J., Curvers, W., Mori, Y., Byrne, M., & Bergman, J. J., 
2020. Machine learning in GI endoscopy: Practical guidance in how to interpret a 
novel field. Gut, 69(11), 2035–2045.
Verma, A., Bhattacharya, P., Madhan, N., Trivedi, C., Bhushan, B., Tanwar, … 
Sharma, R. (2022). Blockchain for Industry 5.0: Vision, Opportunities, Key 
Enablers, and Future Directions. IEEE, 69160–69199, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ACCESS.2022.3186892
Vollmer, S., Mateen, B. A., Bohner, G., Király, F. J., Ghani, R., Jonsson, P., & … 
Hemingway, H. (2020). Machine learning and artificial intelligence research for 
patient benefit: 20 critical questions on transparency, replicability, ethics, and 
effectiveness. Research Methods and Reporting. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.
l6927
Wang, F., Elbadawi, M., Tsilova, S. L., Gaisford, S., Basit, A. W., & Parhizkar, 
M. (2022a). Machine learning to empower electrohydrodynamic processing. 
Materials Science & Engineering C. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2021.112553
Wang, Y., Tian, J., Ones, D. S., & Landers, R. N. (2022b). Using natural language 
processing and machine learning to replace human content coders. Psychological 
Methods, 7(4), 1–17.
Waqas, A., Halim, H., & Ahmad, N. (2022). Design leadership and SMEs Sustainability; 
Role of Frugal Innovation and Technology Turbulence. International Journal of 
Systematic Innovation, 7(4), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.6977/IJoSI.202212_7(4).0001
Weart, S. R. (2003). The discovery of global warming. Harvard University Press.
WEF (World Economic Forum), 2018. This is how to sustainably feed 10 billion 
people by 2050. World Economic Forum, Colony, Switzerland. See: https://www.
weforum.org/agenda/2018/12/how-to-sustainably-feed-10-billion-people-by￾2050-in-21-charts/ (accessed 21/04/2023).
Williams, M. (2022). Elizabeth Holmes and Theranos: A play on more than 
just ethical failures. Business Information Review, 39(1), 23–31, https://doi.
org/10.1177/026638212210888
Xu, M., David, J. M., & Kim, S. H., 2018. The fourth industrial revolution: 
Opportunities and challenges. International Journal of Financial Research, 9(2), 
90–95.x
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., & Wang, L. (2021). Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0—
Inception, conception and perception. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 61, 
530–535. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2021.10.006258 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Yuhertiana, I., Patrioty, C. N., & Mohamed, N. (2019). The moderating effect of 
organizational changes on the influence of ethical decision making on public sec￾tor internal auditor performance. Contemporary Economics, 13(4), 480–494.
Zhao, C. S., Chen, X., Liu, J., Zheng, C., Qu, S., Zou, J.-P., & Xu, M. (2022). 
Quantifying the impacts of COVID-19 on sustainable development goals using 
machine learning models. Fundamental Research, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fmre.
2022.06.016
Zhou, Z. H. (2021). Machine learning. Springer Nature.
Zhu, T., Ye, D., Wang, W., Zhou, W., & Philip, S. Y. (2020). More than privacy: 
Applying differential privacy in key areas of artificial intelligence. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 34(6), 2824–2843.DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-8 259
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Since the First Industrial Revolution, humanity has understood the possibil￾ity of employing technology as a tool for growth (Industry 1.0). Around 
the year 1780, mechanical power was developed using necessary resources 
viz. water, steam, and fossil fuels. This was the start of the First Industrial 
Revolution. Industrialists who employed mass manufacturing and assem￾bly lines during the second such revolution in the 1870s welcomed elec￾trical energy (Industry 2.0). Automation was incorporated into industrial 
enterprises utilising electronics and information technology during the Third 
Industrial Revolution (Industry 3.0) in the 1970s (IT). With the help of the 
Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing, and artificial intelligence (AI), the 
Fourth Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) is making Smart Cyber-Physical 
Systems (CPS), which act as a real-time interface between the virtual and 
physical worlds, conceivable (Mourtzis, 2016, 2022 ElMaraghy et al., 2021).
The previous decade has seen a fast transition in technology, industries, 
and social patterns and processes, conceptualised by the term “Industry 4.0” 
(I4.0). I4.0 is designed to boost production efficiency and higher service and 
product quality. Pillar technologies, including Big Data Analytics (BDA), AI, 
and digital twins, are emerging and developing in this regard (Rüßmann et 
al., 2015). Because engineers have mostly concentrated on the development 
of technology, manufacturing and systems of production and networks, 
there are certain limitations even with the breakthroughs and opportunities 
provided by the I4.0 framework (digitalisation), favouring industrial sus￾tainability and worker wellbeing over industrial flexibility and efficiency 
(Xu et al., 2021).
In light of this, a new age of industrial revolution is about to begin. 
Engineers can completely exploit the existing technology to progress man￾kind and democratise manufacturing in this new century. Many nations, 
including the European Union, Japan, and the USA, are now working to 
construct the human-centric period, also known as Industry 5.0, which also 
refers to Society 5.0. Industry 4.0 is continuing technical development, and 
Chapter 8
Analysis of Industry 5.0 
contributions to sustainable 
development
From Welfare to Wellbeing
Renuka Sharma
Amity University, Gurugram, India260 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Society 5.0 (including Industry 5.0) is currently being prepared. It is impor￾tant to emphasise this to dispel misconceptions about Industry 5.0’s status 
as a standalone revolution in industry.
According to the European Commission’s 2021 report, the Fifth Industrial 
Revolution, also known as Industry 5.0 (I5.0), would comprise autonomous 
manufacturing that uses AI and human intelligence as its core technologies, 
both in and out of the production process. As a result, many business own￾ers and technical trailblazers are already anticipating Industry 4.0, even 
though it has not yet received widespread adoption. Furthermore, it is antic￾ipated that the 4.59 billion social media users in 2022 will have significantly 
increased to 5.85 billion users by 2027 because of the Internet’s and its 
related technologies’ rapid expansion.
Small- and medium-sized businesses have yet to benefit from Industry 4.0 
technology fully, but business executives have already begun to imagine what 
Industry 5.0 may look like. To provide individualised products, their aggre￾gate perspective underscores the necessity to reintroduce the human touch to 
digital technologies. Industry 5.0 aims to create a relationship between the 
digital world and human potential for critical and creative thought, while 
Industry 4.0 is about digitalisation, being adaptable to dynamic market sce￾narios, and emphasising sustainability (Venaik et al., 2023). The history of 
previous industrial revolutions has also shown that disruptive technologies 
take decades or even centuries to emerge and that industries must gradually 
adapt before moving from one “revolution” to another.
It is appropriately called a “revolution” since the degree of technology of 
the invention can completely transform all industrial processes rather than 
just bringing about little changes. The next great thing, however, would be a 
human collaboration with digital technology with an added importance to 
sustaining the economy, society, and the environment. Hence, “Industry 4.0” 
or “Sustainable Industry 4.0” would be preferable to “Industry 5.0” when 
referring to the approaching revolution. However, given that Industry 4.0 
technologies have just recently begun to penetrate small- and medium-sized 
businesses and developing countries, rather than the giant multinational 
enterprises of industrialised countries, it is still too soon to predict the forth￾coming wave.
Industry 5.0 recognises that by mandating that production consider the 
limitations of our planet and making employee wellbeing a priority, the 
manufacturing sector may serve societal purposes beyond employment and 
growth and become a sustainable source of development. Industry 5.0 adds 
to the technological update needed by businesses to be a reliable system for 
people looking for a fulfilling and healthy profession. It prioritises the wel￾fare of its workers and employs cutting-edge technology to produce income 
that goes beyond employment and development while respecting the limits 
of the world. It empowers employees and satisfies their evolving training 
and skill needs. It recruits elite talent and intensifies industrial competitive￾ness. Therefore, Industry 5.0 is based on ideas like human-centricity, Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 261
ecological consciousness, and benefits for society rather than being heavily 
focused on technology. This shift in viewpoint is supported by the notion 
that technology may be created to promote moral ideals and that ethical 
objectives may guide technical innovation rather than the other way 
around.
8.1.1 Industry 4.0
The adoption of cutting-edge technical solutions is the foundation of 
Industry 4.0. In this case, it is especially important that the production 
processes have been improved and that advanced hardware and software 
have been incorporated. Implementing the Industry 4.0 idea aims to bring 
about changes in working practices, the sector’s employer role, and not only 
technology. Regarding industrial management, Industry 4.0 is character￾ised as an intelligent, real-time, digital network focused primarily on people 
(Dombrowski et al., 2017). Through real-time data interchange, it promotes 
greater digitisation of the whole value chain and the exchange of informa￾tion between systems, things, and people (Hecklau et al., 2016).
The following are the three used to characterise Industry 4.0 (Mrugalska 
& Wyrwicka, 2017):
• Intelligent devices enable this since they have a memory to record 
operational data and standards independently, coordinating manufac￾turing processes and soliciting the necessary resources.
• Decentralised self-organisation takes the role of the conventional 
production hierarchy in Intelligent Machines, enabling a flexible and 
adaptable production line.
• An enhanced operator with knowledge automation encourages a flex￾ible and adaptable component in the production system.
The CPS, Internet of Services (IoS), and IoT, which will be crucial instru￾ments in its deployment, are the main components of Industry 4.0 (Wan 
et al., 2016). The Industry 4.0 framework is built on the CPS system, which 
integrates hardware and software into an electrical or mechanical system 
with a specific function.
The idea of an industry that emphasises preserving the environment and 
society has lately gained traction under the name Industry 5.0. The propo￾nents of Industry 5.0 think that the Industry 4.0 framework needs to be 
revised to attain sustainable growth. According to the literature, Industry 
4.0 paid emphasis on productivity driven by technology (Ghobakhloo et al., 
2021b). Industry 4.0’s internal productivity mechanism, which unintention￾ally enhances a few indicators of microenvironmental sustainability, such as 
production effectiveness or emission reduction (Ng et al., 2022) is unable to 
get around the fact that modern production and consumption economic 
models are profit-driven (Sindhwani et al., 2022). Critics contend that 262 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Industry 4.0 is consistent with established neoliberal capitalism models that 
prioritise shareholder interests and profitability, amplifying some of the 
socio-environmental issues already present, such as regional disparities, 
environmental degradation, robot collaboration for an intelligent business 
ecosystem that promotes resource efficiency and the bioeconomy, broaden￾ing the scope of Industry 5.0 to include economic sectors other than manu￾facturing (Breque et al., 2021).
Sustainable manufacturing must be made possible with the introduction 
of Industry 5.0. All these goals may be fulfilled when certain firms embrace 
Industry 4.0 ideas associated with digitalising production processes. Global 
rivalry and the necessity to swiftly respond to constantly shifting market 
demands drive industrial production today (Wolniak et al., 2019, Olkiewicz 
et al., 2019, Zhong et al., 2017). The First Industrial Revolution simplified 
the activities in manufacturing facilities, laying the groundwork for mod￾ern production; the second revolution. In the Second Revolution, electric￾ity was introduced to industry; in the third, industrial employees’ uniform 
jobs were automated (Pilloni, 2018, Zunino et al., 2020). In contrast to its 
predecessors, the Fourth Industrial Revolution—also known as Industry 
4.0—encompasses many aspects of society (Herceg et al., 2020), among 
them is the risky trend of ageing populations and the resulting decline in 
the labour force (Nanterme & Daugherty, 2017, Zhou et al., 2015, Saniuk 
et al., 2020, Baden-Filler & Haefliger, 2013). This revolution is also related 
to the fact that, despite the use of outsourcing and the “lean” manufactur￾ing approach, there are no longer any prospects to increase the profit of 
industrial production (Lee et al., 2014, Longo et al., 2017, Beier et al., 
2020, Fareri et al., 2020). Industry 4.0 refers to product developments, 
such as the switch from mass manufacturing to customised production, 
which increases the production processes’ flexibility and makes it possible 
to meet the specific requirements of varied clients more effectively (Wolniak 
et al., 2019).
8.1.2 Industry 5.0
With Industry 5.0, there are several alternative perspectives. Some futur￾ists contend that whereas Industry 4.0 primarily focuses on connecting 
gadgets, Industry 5.0 emphasises human and machine cooperation on pro￾duction floors (Johansson, 2017). Gotfredsen (2016) listed the advantages 
of teamwork between machines and humans. Instead of typical robotic 
manufacturing, there will be a creative human touch. There will be entirely 
novel job vacancies. On the manufacturing floor, the roles that humans 
play will be better. Rendall (2017) asserted that where Germany is leading 
the Fourth Industrial Revolution, North America is best positioned to lead 
Industry 5.0.
Rendall (2017) shared man–machine cooperation for Industry 5.0 is a 
notion. On the Internet, there are several conversations and blogs about Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 263
Industry 5.0. (Johansson, 2017) contends the proximity of the two indus￾trial revolutions so close in time may be seen as a single phenomenon. As a 
result, connectivity and machine–human cooperation may be part of 
Industry 4.0. Robotics and AI are one of the foundations of Industry 4.0. 
The interaction of humans and machines is a logical extension of robotics 
and AI. The mere advent of human–machine collaboration on manufactur￾ing floors cannot justify a new industrial revolution.
Collaborative industries, often referred to as “Industry 5.0,” reflect manu￾facturers’ rising belief that they must meet consumers’ growing desire for 
greater personalisation. Eighty-five per cent of firms believe that by 2020, 
coexisting robots and humans will be commonplace in production. Also, 
most firms say it is now a crucial component of their company strategy.
8.1.3 Advantages of a collaborative workforce with 
machines
The following points demonstrate the diverse advantages of a Collaborative 
Workforce with machines.
• The ability to personalise, bringing in the imaginative human aspect
Robots are adept at producing conventional goods using standardised 
methods in high production volumes but may need assistance when cus￾tomising or personalising each product. Keeping a human touch in the 
production processes is, therefore, essential. Only when human inven￾tiveness is impacting the industrial processes can automation be used to 
its fullest potential. Conventional industrial robots used in automated 
manufacturing will frequently only obey commands after considerable 
and time-consuming programming effort. However, collaborative ro￾bots, or “cobots,” operate alongside people. Because while the robot 
produces the product or prepares it for human touch, people may han￾dle modifications, man and machine can coexist in this situation. This 
gives the worker control over the cobot, allowing them to utilise it as a 
multifunctional tool, much like a screwdriver, packing tool, or palletiser.
• Job creation
According to a recent Deloitte analysis on skills gaps, there will be 
3.4 million open positions over the next ten years but only 1.4 mil￾lion competent candidates to fill them. Several of these roles are ideal 
for robots; cobots may collaborate with human workers. Cobots are 
helpful because they may replace risky, boring, and menial professions 
while allowing human workers to move into higher-paying ones. A 
company’s inability to remain competitive is the most significant dan￾ger to job security. Automation gives businesses a competitive edge by 
increasing productivity, lowering costs, and delivering more consistent 
product quality. Robots are predicted to provide 70,000–90,000 new 
employment globally in the food business between 2017 and 2020.264 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Unlike other industrial robots, cobots can improve productivity and 
foster the development of new talents, leading to more job possibili￾ties inside firms. These machines assist humans in manufacturing and 
processing jobs and do not take their place.
• Better roles for human workers
The cobot is intended to take over laborious or even hazardous ac￾tivities rather than replace the human worker. Consequently, hu￾man workers can use their imagination to take on more challenging 
tasks. For instance, when robots take over simple assembly activities, 
staff may switch to more complex duties that call for creativity from 
humans. For instance, at the Australian plastic injection moulding 
business Prysm Industries, employees used to name items every 6–7 
seconds while standing still for hours. The firm may automate this 
monotonous task using a robotic arm from Universal Robots, freeing 
workers to handle other responsibilities. Employees may now concen￾trate on operating numerous more pieces of equipment and can do 
more diversified activities around the production floor because the la￾belling chores are handled. The flexibility to work on other tasks has 
enhanced employee happiness, and they feel proud of themselves for 
learning how to operate the robot. Also, Prysm saves $550 on labelling 
costs each day the robot is in use.
There are many chances to increase industrial productivity and Innovation 
with the help of a connected and collaborative workforce. Additionally, it 
provides the potential to increase workplace safety and satisfaction while 
giving human employees more fascinating job duties and fostering employ￾ment growth. Finally, less adaptable rivals that are too sluggish to change 
will stay caught up as industrial processes progress to become more innova￾tive and networked. Manufacturers need to understand that collaborative 
factories have the potential to lower labour costs in more competitive mar￾kets, in addition to improving operational efficiency and the other advan￾tages already outlined.
The three pillars of human centricity, environmental sustainability, and 
economic resilience are among Industry 5.0’s basic ideals. On these ideas, 
there is broad agreement (Akundi et al., 2022). Nevertheless, academic and 
industry professionals cover the definition, nature, and constraints of this 
phenomenon from numerous perspectives. Industry 5.0 is centred on 
human-centric production, and technology advancements in social smart 
factories should promote human wellness. (Longo et al., 2020, Lu et al., 
2022). When seen from the standpoint of environmental sustainability, 
Industry 5.0 is a metaphor for the idea of human–robot collaboration for an 
intelligent corporate environment that fosters resource efficiency and eco￾nomics (Sindhwani et al., 2022).
Industry 5.0 includes additional economic areas outside manufacturing, 
such as agriculture and healthcare. As an alternative, the European Commission Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 265
views Industry 5.0 as a socioeconomic structural transformation towards a 
sustainable future industry. According to the European Commission, there 
has never been a historical shift from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0. Industry 
5.0 develops and, in many ways, improves the Industry 4.0 paradigm rather 
than displaces it by including socio-environmental components (Breque 
et al., 2021).
Industry 5.0’s definition, aim, and restrictions are not apparent, and the 
literature also falls short of clearly describing how this phenomenon may suc￾ceed in promoting sustainable development. In contrast, a lot of studies have 
been done on Industry 4.0. Increasing industrial productivity (Hughes et al., 
2022), supply chain innovation (Hahn, 2020), sustainable manufacturing 
(Ng et al., 2022), and sustainable energy are some of the objectives of Industry 
4.0 (Ghobakhloo & Fathi, 2021) that may be accomplished using the tech￾niques outlined in the literature. Although academia has recently made great 
strides in understanding Industry 5.0’s guiding principles, these first break￾throughs have concentrated on the microeffects of this phenomenon.
Fatima et al. (2022) showed how Industry 5.0 may lead to production and 
warehouse automation, while (Sharma & Arya 2022) addressed how it might 
improve cutting-edge city monitoring systems. According to the academic 
community, Industry 5.0 will help with a variety of sustainable development 
initiatives (Grabowska et al., 2022; Renda et al., 2022). Understanding how 
a paradigm-shifting event like Industry 5.0 and its underlying sustainability 
functions relate to micro- and macroeconomic, environmental, and social 
sustainability goals is crucial.
8.1.4 Evolution from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0 seeks to redefine and expand the purpose of digital and intel￾ligent technologies besides creating goods and services to make money. 
Instead, it places a focus on attaining actual prosperity, which calls for 
improving the social and physical environment. “Industry 5.0,” a concept 
that recognises “the power of industry to achieve social goals beyond jobs 
and growth to become a resilient provider of prosperity,” places an empha￾sis on the wellbeing of industrial employees while mandating that output 
respect the constraints of our earth. The Operator 4.0 concept already com￾plies with Industry 5.0’s requirements for social sustainability and human￾centricity (Romero et al., 2016, 2020, Longo et al., 2020).
“Industry 5.0” is said to have been coined by Rada. One of the corner￾stones of Industry 5.0 is the use of collaborative robotics to lower risk. Since 
the activities are being carried out by a human operator, these robots can 
recognise and understand the objectives and expectations of the jobs. The 
idea is that these robots will watch people perform tasks, learn how they do 
them, and then help human operators finish the job. Additionally, Industry 
5.0 recommends using AI in daily activities to maximise human potential. 
Industry 5.0 is aggressively deploying robotics, artificial intelligence, the IoT, 266 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
and augmented reality for the convenience and profit of human labour 
(Skobelev & Borovik, 2017).
Industry 5.0 recognises that by mandating that manufacturing takes our 
planet’s constraints into consideration and emphasising employee wellbeing, 
the sector may serve societal purposes beyond providing jobs and economic 
progress, and evolve into a sustainable source of development. Industry 5.0 
adds to the technology upgrade businesses need to be a reliable system for 
people looking for a fulfilling and healthy profession. To generate income 
above and beyond employment and growth while respecting the limits of 
the world, it prioritises employee wellbeing and uses new technologies. It 
increases worker control and satisfies their evolving training and skill needs.
It enhances industry rivalry and draws top talent. The three goals of the 
Commission in putting Industry 5.0 into practice are “an economy that 
works for people,” “European Green Deal,” and “Europe fit for the digital 
era.” As a result, the emphasis should be more on the values of human￾centricity, environmental responsibility, and social benefit. The idea that 
technology may be used to advance moral principles and that ethical goals 
may lead to technological innovation rather than the other way around sup￾ports this change in perspective (Müller, 2020).
Rada offers a different vision for Industry 5.0 (Rada, 2015, 2017). Rada 
argued that the objective of Industry 5.0 is “to effectively utilise a workforce 
made up of both machines and people while working with the environment. 
It switches back and forth between a real and a virtual world. He added an 
explanation of Industry 5.0 (Rada, 2017). This vision’s central idea is indus￾trial upcycling. Waste reduction is the primary goal of this vision. Rada also 
emphasises how important it is to incorporate people into the manufactur￾ing process. He condemns the attempt to incorporate 1s and 0s into any 
living thing, which is the present digitisation movement (Rada, 2015).
Rada claimed that the six R methodology and L.E.D. principles are part 
of Industry 5.0. They are as follows.
Recognise: We must first recognise the benefits that industrial upcycling 
provides. The first essential step is being aware.
Reconsider: Our operating and production practices need to be reviewed 
and updated. Redesigning processes is a crucial initial step in the 
industrial upcycling process.
Realise: After considering the potential and business processes, we must 
realise business process innovation or improvement.
Reduce: The methodology’s core goal is to employ fewer resources to 
produce effective results.
Reuse: The system also places reusing resources at its core that were 
thought to be usable before process optimisation.
Recycle: Recycling as much as possible is a crucial objective of the 
Industrial Upcycling effort. The best scenario is, of course, zero waste.Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 267
The technology of Industry 5.0 that enables an industry that is competi￾tive, inventive, resilient, focused on society, and respectful of the planet’s 
boundaries is referred to as “Industry 5.0.” This industry also strives to have 
as little negative environmental impact as possible. In the domains of tech￾nology, socioeconomics, regulations, and governance, it offers several new 
issues. Considering this, two virtual workshops were organised on July 2 
and July 9, 2020. The idea of Industry 5.0 was investigated by financing for 
participants, organisations, and Research and Technology Organisations 
(RTOs) across Europe. The goal was to talk about the supporting technol￾ogy, and potential challenges and to get input on the overall concept. 
Participants also agreed that rather than depending exclusively on individ￾ual technologies, a comprehensive approach was required to handle the 
challenges’ complexity (European Commission, 2021). The following are 
some of the Key Enabling Technologies (KET) that are facilitating the shift 
from Industry 4.0 to the idea of Industry 5.0:
• Human-centered technologies and solutions that link and combine the 
skills of humans and robots.
• Intelligent materials and bio-inspired technologies that allow recycla￾ble materials with greater features and incorporated sensors.
• Modelling entire systems using real-time digital twins and simulation.
• Methods for managing the compatibility of systems and information 
that are cybersecure in their data analysis, transfer, and storage.
• Artificial intelligence can identify causal connections in complex, 
dynamic systems and generate insightful data.
• The KET will consume a lot of energy, necessitating energy-efficient 
and dependable autonomy technologies.
When combined with cognitive abilities and innovation, a number of 
enabling technological trends, such as Edge Computing (EC), Digital Twin 
(DT), Internet of Everything (IoE), BDA, Cobots, 5G, and blockchain, can 
help industries increase production and deliver customised products more 
quickly. With the use of these enabling technologies, the 5.0 Industry produc￾tion model accentuates the relationship between people and machines. The 
primary technologies that will enable Industry 5.0 are shown in Figure 8.1.
8.1.5 The cornerstone of Industry 5.0
The following points illustrate the cornerstone of Industry 5.0.
• Enterprise agility: Businesses have used agile extensively as a method￾ology, structure, set of procedures, and technology for their gain. What 
is truly meant is to promote agile as a culture throughout the organisa￾tion rather than only focusing on one function or division. Enterprise 268 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
agility aids in handling such urgent situations that any firm cannot 
afford to delay while dealing with today’s continuously evolving client 
expectations.
• Mass customisation: Develop technology platforms that can extend to 
any size and scale to give every consumer the most customised options 
for products and services while respecting their needs in terms of price 
and comfort.
• Cultural collaboration: Acknowledging that not every struggle can 
be won at home. So, working together across many geographies and 
finding common ground by thinking beyond commercial and political 
benefits is essential. More cooperation would result in better ideas and 
more expertly crafted top goods/services.
• Cyber-physical cognitive systems: Integrating cognitive (human) and 
cyber-physical (artificial) intelligence skills would make it easier to get 
the most out of machines regarding performance and function.
• Transparency: Cheap company strategies for generating margins have 
no place in the world we live in today, which is quickly interconnected. 
Increasing openness would assist the company in attracting depend￾able staff members and clients.
• Customer obsession: The company’s top priority should be easing con￾sumer pain rather than concentrating on business limits. Every day 
should be started and finished with the customer in mind. Designing 
and redesigning organisational structures and procedures with a 
focus on customer goals would be the key to success. To guarantee 
that goods and services live up to expectations, customers should be 
included at every step of creation.
Figure 8.1 Key enabling technologies in the transition from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0.Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 269
• People-centric: Any company’s first supporters and prospective con￾sumers outside the corporate walls are its employees. Giving employ￾ees a fair environment for advancement in all areas will aid employee 
retention and overall business success.
• Green manufacturing: Implementing environmentally friendly, low￾polluting manufacturing techniques will help preserve the environ￾ment and ensure that future generations have a healthy environment.
It is past due for companies to begin thinking about incorporating cognitive 
sense into their CPS, which by fusing the capabilities of artificial and human 
intelligence, would live the purpose of industrial digital transformation and 
deliver some promising solutions to the masses all over the world. Because 
Industry 5.0 is constructed on the basis of human–machine collaboration, 
the fear of job loss due to rapid automation would be somewhat reduced. It 
would aid in encouraging upskilling of the labour force to fill specific new 
roles that have never been. Also, since they would be focused on providing 
real value to their consumers, it would help firms recoup their return on 
investments more quickly by reducing overhead expenditures for sales, mar￾keting, and other unnecessary operations.
8.1.6 Industry 5.0 and sustainable development goals
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are made up of 17 articles, 169 
objectives, and 232 charts that cover economic and environmental topics, 
including climate change, sources of water, marine and terrestrial life, as 
well as societal aspects, including gender equality, equality for all people, 
and human rights (Biggeri et al., 2019). These objectives are expected to be 
gradually attained until 2030.
The listed 17 objectives are as follows
1. No Poverty (SDG1): The goal is to eradicate severe poverty, make essen￾tial resources and services accessible to people, and shield them from 
unforeseen economic and environmental calamities (Campagnolo & 
Davide, 2019).
2. Zero Hunger (SDG2): The goal is to end global poverty and ensure 
that everyone has access to healthy, sufficient food throughout the 
year (Byerlee & Fanzo, 2019).
3. Good Health and Wellbeing (SDG3): It strives to provide individuals 
with the basic healthcare they need, including therapy, medical care, 
and affordable drugs (Wakunuma et al., 2020).
4. Quality Education (SDG4): The goal is to promote universal, life￾long, and open access to education for people of all ages (McKay, 
2020).
5. Gender Equality (SDG5): The mission of the United Nations is to 
advance gender equality in local communities and raise the position 
of women and girls in society (Yount et al., 2018).270 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
6. Clean Water and Sanitation (SDG6): Water is one of the essential ele￾ments on the planet for sustaining life and all living things. Hence, it is 
intended to implement new policies to properly utilise technology and 
provide people with fresh drinking water (Fehri et al., 2019).
7. Affordable and Clean Energy (SDG7): Its objective is to promote 
the production of energy from non-CO2-emitting sources, such as 
geothermal, hydro, solar, wind, and sea waves (Nam-Chol & Kim, 
2019).
8. Decent Work and Economic Growth (SDG8): The primary goals are 
to encourage economic expansion and provide people with adequate 
employment; the ideal work and development model is dependable, 
promotes gender equality, entails little to no risk, and properly rewards 
employees for their efforts (Rai et al., 2019).
9. Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure (SDG9): It strives to improve 
human wellbeing by producing innovations, leveraging those break￾throughs in the industrial sector to make eligible items that meet 
human requirements, and building infrastructure that is consider￾ably safer, of higher quality and more robust (Cervelló-Royo et al., 
2020).
10. Reduced Inequalities (SDG10): It aims to lessen disparities between 
and within nations and shield individuals from prejudice based on 
age, gender, ethnicity, religion, political views, and disability (Horn & 
Grugel, 2018).
11. Sustainable Cities and Communities (SDG11): Most people on Earth 
reside in urban areas. It aims to improve transportation options, set 
up sewage systems and other facilities that affect human health, and 
implement policies and practices that lead to the creation of decent, 
sustainable cities (Rozhenkova et al., 2019).
12. Responsible Consumption and Production (SDG12): To respect the 
future and the environmental implications of the things we use now, it 
is essential to utilise food, water, household goods, technology, power, 
and all fossil fuels responsibly (Sala & Castellani, 2019).
13. Climate Action (SDG13): To lessen climate change, it strives to mini￾mise energy consumption and the usage of fossil fuels reliant on 
them, build carbon-free cities, prepare for natural disasters brought 
on by climate change, and come up with countermeasures (Ma et al., 
2021).
14. Life under Water (SDG14): Its objectives are to guarantee the efficient 
utilisation of oceans and seas as well as those resources in order to 
make up for losses, build a solid foundation, and utilise resources sus￾tainably (Okafor-Yarwood, 2019).
15. Life on Land (SDG15): It emphasises the preservation of Earth’s 
ecosystems and species and their sustainable exploitation (Opoku, 
2019).Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 271
16. Peace, Justice, and Strong Institutions (SDG16): Many people lose 
their lives yearly due to international or splinter group gunfights. 
Conflicts like this prohibit offering assistance to the populace and cre￾ating a more sensible and calmer atmosphere (Calvo et al., 2019).
17. Partnerships for the Goals (SDG17): By promoting efficient interna￾tional collaboration and communication, it aims to aid global devel￾opment (Lamichhane et al., 2021).
8.1.6.1 Objectives of the chapter
The objectives of the chapter are as follows:
• To articulate the relationship between Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0;
• To demonstrate Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0 transition;
• And, to emphasise the significance of sustainability in Industry 5.0.
8.1.6.2 Organisation of the chapter
The rest of the chapter is structured as follows: Section 8.2 enlightens on 
the Literature Review. Section 8.3 emphasis on Industry 4.0 and Industry 
5.0 relationship. Section 8.4 stresses organisational agility. Section 8.5
enlightens the core values of Industry 5.0. Section 8.6 stresses Industry 
5.0 potential technologies and applications. Section 8.7 shows the link￾age between Sustainability and Industry 5.0. The Roadmap to Industry 
5.0-driven Sustainability is discussed in Section 8.8. Section 8.9 highlights 
the challenges of Industry 5.0. Sections 8.10 and 8.11 overlay discussion 
and Implications. And, finally, Section 8.12 concludes the chapter with 
future scope and limitations.
8.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
8.2.1 Industry 4.0
Beier et al. (2020), Saniuk et al. (2020), Longo et al. (2017), Biel and Glock 
(2016), Zhou et al. (2015), Lee et al. (2014), Baden-Filler and Haefliger 
(2013) witnessed Industry 4.0, the linking of machines and gadgets through 
the Internet and the digitisation across all production techniques is critical. 
Enabling factories to be sufficiently intelligent to forecast, recognise, and 
address issues is crucial to implementing innovative industries.
Müller and Voigt (2018), Lu (2017), Posada et al. (2015) discussed technol￾ogy developments are simply one aspect of Industry 4.0. It is now also linked 
to the challenge of obtaining traceability and trackability when combining 
various devices. There are ways to separate the idea of Industry 4.0 in the 272 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
following ways. The data may be easily accessed from any location and 
transferred across devices. Many components of the supply chain exchange 
information in real-time.
• Common digitalisation is the process of making all individuals and 
all gadgets digitalised and constantly connected to one another and to 
one another’s equipment.
• Autonomous manufacturing systems: Building smart manufacturing 
facilities that can autonomously manage production processes and 
adapt quickly to changes in the demands of industrial processes. There 
is practically no need for human intervention in the manufacturing 
processes of intelligent factories.
• Customisation of the product: Supplying the consumer with a product 
that is specifically tailored to their requests.
• Robotisation: Putting in place flexible production systems based on 
industrial robots and using robots designed to work in conjunction 
with people.
• Implementation of a CPS-based architecture.
• Proliferating the use of disruptive innovations may significantly boost 
a business’s socioeconomic and operational system efficacy.
Schwab (2020), Kagermann (2015) and Lasi et al. (2014) elucidated that the 
concept of Industry 4.0 was created in the second decade of the 21st century 
in Germany. Industry 4.0 aims to transform existing factories into autono￾mous, self-adaptive, social, and technical systems (smart factories), which 
will enable the development of intelligent value chains. This has already 
received several scientific investigations and implementations in many 
countries, creating a worldwide megatrend. These difficulties influence the 
current business and production model. Oesterreich and Teuteberg (2016)
highlighted the development of a digital value chain has made it feasible for 
this new industrial paradigm to be conceptualised technically as an increase 
in the production environment’s digitisation and automation as well as an 
increase in communication. Kagermann et al. (2013) stated the three char￾acteristics of integration describe the essential elements of the Industry 4.0 
concept: (1) Horizontal integration via value networks, (2) vertical integra￾tion and networked production systems, and (3) end-to-end digital integra￾tion of engineering across the whole value chain.
Hermann et al. (2016) said that “Industry 4.0” is a phrase that describes 
a group of technologies and ideas that cover the whole value chain of enter￾prises. According to the author, the first four components of Industry 4.0 are 
CPS, IoT, IoS, and Smart Factory. These components highlight the idea of 
intelligent manufacturing and the integration of its parts along the value 
chain using essential technological enablers. The modular structure of smart 
factories under the Industry 4.0 framework allows for decentralised 
decision-making while controlling and monitoring operations. While Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 273
Internet-based internal and inter-organisational services are provided by IoS 
technology, IoT technology enables real-time interaction between each CPS 
and operators in the smart factory.
Weyer et al. (2015) conceptualised that this new industrial paradigm sup￾ports the creation of intelligent settings that can unite the actual and virtual 
worlds through using CPS, integrating devices, and other technologies. 
Machines, production units, and products activate operations and regulate 
one another independently. Author highlighted that there are three para￾digms that encompasses the core elements of Industry 4.0: smart machine, 
smart product, and enhanced operator. Two crucial elements of Industry 4.0 
are the human–machine interface and the emergence of new employment 
kinds, in addition to the relevance of smart products and smart machines/
factories.
Posada et al. (2015) took it to a step further by listing and synthesising the 
main issues that Industry 4.0 addresses: (1) wide-spread adoption of mass 
customisation enabled by IT; (2) automatic and flexible production system 
adaptation to changing requirements; (3) tracking and self-awareness of 
parts and products, and their capacity to communicate within their environ￾ment; (4) increased human–machine interface, coexistence with robots, and 
the emergence of new modes of interaction and operation. Production opti￾misation facilitated by the IoT; and (5) the communication within smart 
factories, as well as the introduction of new services and business models 
that have an impact on the entire value chain, round out the list of five. In 
summary, Industry 4.0 has enormous potential and can affect every aspect 
of the value chain, including the production process, product quality, stake￾holder relationships, and the introduction of new business models and oper￾ational methods.
8.2.2 Industry 5.0
Grybauskas et al. (2022), Maddikunta et al. (2022), and Xu et al. (2021)
described in detail how Industry 4.0 would harm sustainability. While many 
academics concur that Industry 5.0 depends on Industry 4.0’s technology 
components, it also involves dramatic advances in energy transition tech￾nologies, smart materials, and cognitive artificial intelligence (CAI), to men￾tion a few.
Kumar et al., (2021), Nahavandi (2019), and Özdemir and Hekim (2018)
described Industry 5.0 as an incremental development of Industry 4.0 that 
is symmetrical and evolutionary in character and could offer a method to 
overcome the constraints of the Industry 4.0 innovation ecosystem. They 
counter that a new generation of disruptive technologies that encourage 
synergistic human–machine integration while improving working condi￾tions, employment, and production are to blame. Industry 5.0 heralds the 
rise of industrial operations that are centred on people. The focus on pro￾ductivity in Industry 4.0 has drawn criticism from academics. In contrast to 274 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
past industrial revolutions, the socio-technical phenomenon known as 
“Industry 5.0” is driven by stakeholders and increasingly replaces conven￾tional profit- and consumption-driven economic models with circular, 
regenerative, sustainable, and robust value-creating economic models.
Longo et al. (2020), Javaid and Haleem (2020), Aslam et al. (2020), Di 
Nardo et al. (2020), Demir et al. (2019), Welfare et al. (2019), and Nelles 
et al. (2016) elaborated that humans and machines cohabit in the contem￾porary world, and intelligent technologies connect humans to smart 
industries. Technology, mass customisation, and sophisticated manufac￾turing are all undergoing rapid development. Due to advancements in arti￾ficial intelligence and the ability to connect robots to the human mind, 
robots are becoming ever more crucial. Using artificial intelligence (AI) 
algorithms, human–machine interactions will probably get more advanced 
as we approach the Fifth Industrial Revolution. This will lead to greater 
automation, better automation, and the strength of human minds com￾bined. That suggests that, in contrast to predictions made during the 
Industry 4.0 period, robots won’t soon take over manufacturing opera￾tions. Productivity will undoubtedly increase as a result of Industry 5.0’s 
merger of the best aspects of the human and machine worlds. A brand￾new paradigm called “Industry 5.0” emphasises collaboration and human–
machine interaction.
Onday (2019), Wang et al., (2018a), and Zhang et al. (2015) intro￾duced a new paradigm for how businesses should operate. The IoT facili￾tates the transition from inter-personal to inter-societal cooperation 
through the interconnection of growing, interoperable information and 
communication technologies (ICT). This interconnectedness and interop￾erability have helped to alleviate any restrictions brought on by the nature 
of the Internet and digital technologies, accelerating the growth of the 
“smart society.” As the knowledge society is being recognised and incor￾porated into the online society enabled by technology, Industry 5.0 also 
has a beneficial influence by resolving social difficulties and fostering 
abundance for society.
Bansal (2018) and Chandola (2015) stated that Customers’ experiences 
had changed in Industry 5.0 based on social growth, from mass customisa￾tion to personalisation of customisation. This has happened due to the 
development of technological platforms that allow for scale expansion and 
maximum product customisation while still providing customers with flex￾ibility. Using technology to gather accurate information and provide feed￾back to the business is essential for decision-making. As a result, the creation 
of commercial and social value is significantly impacted by the use of Big 
Data to support the evolution of the customer journey in Society 5.0 
(Chandola, 2015). The point out of experiences might supply different busi￾ness capacities using technology.
Johansson (2017), Rendall (2017) and Gotfredsen (2016) emphasised 
Industry 5.0 cooperation on production floors between people and machines. Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 275
The advantages of a collaborative workforce between humans and machines 
are listed by (Gotfredsen, 2016). Instead of typical robotic manufacturing, 
there will be a creative human touch. There will be new employment open￾ings. On the manufacturing floor, the roles that humans play will be better. 
The return of human interaction to factory floors is Industry 5.0. The Fifth 
Industrial Revolution, Industry 5.0, will be best led by North America, while 
Germany is leading the fourth. The concept of man–machine collaboration 
for Industry 5.0 is shared by many other authors. The mere advent of 
human–machine collaboration on manufacturing floors cannot justify a 
new industrial revolution.
The following are some ways in which Industry 5.0 varies from Industry 4.0:
• Sustainable development and productivity-driven competitiveness are 
both valued in Industry 5.0.
• By promoting human-centric approaches to technical progress, 
Industry 5.0 empowers the human workforce.
• Industry 5.0 promotes technical Innovation in environmental sustain￾ability (such as smart renewable systems).
• Industry 5.0 encourages the prioritisation of stakeholders in the man￾agement of sustainable performance, innovation growth, and technol￾ogy governance.
• Industry 5.0 expands the reach of corporate responsibility to include 
the entire value chain by utilising specific technology and operational 
concepts.
8.2.3 Transition from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0
The integration of smart devices and systems as well as the modification of 
industrial processes to boost productivity are referred to as “Industry 4.0” 
concepts. Resilient technology, innovative working methods, and the impor￾tance of people in the workplace are all included in Industry 4.0 (Luthra & 
Mangla, 2018). The improvements brought about by Industry 4.0 cover a 
broad spectrum of developments at the level of plants and factories belong￾ing to various industries and services, as well as the running of entire com￾munities. Industry 4.0 includes technologies like the IoT, cloud computing, 
cognitive computing, and artificial intelligence, a project to automate and 
exchange data in industrial technologies and processes (Lee et al., 2015; 
Solanki and Nayyar, 2019; Sahoo et al., 2021).
Industry 4.0 advocates that the generation of industrial value is concen￾trated on sustainability to evolve towards more sustainably producing 
industrial value. Sustainability concerns in Industry 4.0 are highly valued by 
consumers, business models, and the economy (Romerao et al., 2020). By 
providing information about each manufacturing location, it may be possi￾ble to enhance processes, resource utilisation, and energy consumption 
throughout the value network (Davies et al., 2017). It is projected that the 
cutting-edge technological techniques of Industry 4.0 will enhance the 276 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
environmental performance of products over the course of their lifetimes. 
Additionally, this suggests an increase in demand for intelligent products 
and industrial methods (Stock & Seliger, 2016).
The increasing use of Industry 4.0 technology and the commercial focus 
on the dehumanisation of manufacturing processes are causing many con￾cerns for workers, society, and even governments. Industry 4.0 places an 
emphasis on integrated, complex, and robust manufacturing technologies 
that are equipped with sensors to track machine activity and communica￾tion networks to make it easier to submit data and run sophisticated simula￾tions. Numerous scientific studies (Romero et al., 2016) emphasise the need 
to take into account how people will play a key role in future industrial 
progress. Resilience should be present across the whole value chain, com￾pany processes, and even business conceptions. Thus, a conversation on the 
idea of Industry 5.0 started in 2019. This idea suggests bringing back human 
interaction in the industrial sector, i.e., encouraging collaboration between 
workers and intelligent production systems and fusing automation’s speed 
and precision with workers’ cognitive abilities and critical thinking (Longo 
et al., 2020).
The focus of Industry 5.0 is the relationship between humans and robots. 
In the current world, people live alongside machines and are connected to 
intelligent factories through smart devices (Demir et al., 2019). Rapid 
change is taking place in the fields of technology, mass customisation, and 
sophisticated manufacturing. Due to advancements in artificial intelligence 
and the ability to connect robots to the human mind, robots are becoming 
ever more crucial (Welfare et al., 2019). In the modern world, robots col￾laborate with humans rather than as competitors (Nahavandi, 2019).
The Fifth Industrial Revolution will probably promote using artificial 
intelligence (AI) algorithms to create more sophisticated human–machine 
interactions. This will result from more integration, quicker and better auto￾mation, and the strength of human minds (Aslam et al., 2020). That also 
indicates that contrary to what was anticipated in the Industry 4.0 era, 
robots will not soon take over production facilities (Javaid & Haleem, 
2020). I5.0’s integration of the best elements of the human and machine 
worlds should increase productivity (Di Nardo et al., 2020; Nelles et al., 
2016). To coordinate business and supply chain activities, digitalisation in 
Industry 5.0 should be complete. From the megatrend known as Industry 
4.0, Industry 5.0 was born. Artificial intelligence infiltration into everyday 
life is the growing vision of the Industry 5.0 paradigm. Researchers sug￾gested that “Society 5.0” (Super Smart Society) would likely be a more accu￾rate word than “Industry 5.0” (Elim & Zhai, 2020). Unlike Industry 4.0, 
which only applies to the industrial industry, Society 5.0 addresses societal 
issues by integrating the real and virtual worlds. In a society known as 
“Society 5.0,” cutting-edge technologies are actively employed in daily life, 
business, the medical field, and other areas, not just for advancement but 
also for everyone’s benefit and convenience (John et al., 2020).Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 277
The primary focus of Industry 5.0 is human–robot interaction. Individuals 
and machines coexist in the modern world, and smart devices connect indi￾viduals to intelligent industries (Romero et al., 2016, Felsberger & Reiner, 
2020). EC has used the word “resilient” in its work. The term “resilient” is 
being used increasingly often. Particularly considering the COVID-19 pan￾demic’s effects on communities, economies, and businesses, the “Industry 
5.0” idea is thought to be helpful. In a globalised and technology society 
that is unstable (unpredictable), the relevance of sustainability for firms 
concentrating just on profit is increasingly harder to sustain. For an indus￾try to fully develop, social, environmental, and societal concerns must be 
taken into account. Industry 5.0’s core is composed of the interplay of the 
three sectors: technical, ecological and social. Technology was at the van￾guard of Industry 4.0, but the next iteration will centre on factory employ￾ees who perceive rising automation as a danger to their employment. The 
focus of Industry 5.0 is on the significance of technology for industrial 
(commercial) growth while fusing business objectives with social objectives 
at work (emphasising the use of cutting-edge technology or human–
machine interactions to increase worker safety both inside and outside, for 
instance).
The central nervous system of an industrial process is a CPS. Social and 
ecological frameworks are intertwined, and the upkeep of these frameworks 
(respect, appreciation, and compliance) by Industry 4.0 technology pro￾motes economic growth. Cooperation is centred on the human individual. 
Industry 4.0 combines automation and technology, exchanges data, devel￾ops CPS, and introduces new manufacturing techniques. Products also 
address the possibility of personalisation and changes in value chains. The 
megatrend known as “digital transformation” includes all of these. Industry 
4.0 development has been recognised to have its origins in digitalisation 
(Kagermann, 2015).
ICT and operational technologies (OT) were to work closely as part of 
Industry 4.0. The interdependence between IC and OT in Industry 4.0 was 
supposed to accomplish these technologies. The need for a digital society, 
economies, and industries is acknowledged by Industry 5.0 (Kent & 
Kopacek, 2020). To coordinate operations in Industry 5.0, digitalisation 
must be through enterprise and supply chains.
8.3 INDUSTRY 4.0 AND 5.0 RELATIONSHIP
Industry 4.0 has brought several benefits to corporate life, including cost 
reduction, zero error using equipment relying on artificial intelligence, and 
providing timely customised items to consumers (Mi’skiewicz & Wolniak, 
2020). One central question is how and by whom those items made by smart 
factories will be purchased to make money (Kaygin et al., 2019). Japan has 
adopted the United Nations SDGs and the Society 5.0 initiative, which will 278 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
be the top priority in solving this issue. According to Society 5.0, artificial 
intelligence will resolve several issues, including air pollution, unemploy￾ment, and poverty (De Pascale et al., 2021).
It is widely recognised that the social structure of society has undergone 
major change as a result of the industrial revolution, which started in 1784 
(Chang et al., 2020). The word “Society 5.0” first appears in the Fifth 
Science and Technology Basic Plan, dated December 18, 2015, which is 
where we first come across it. Research, technology, and innovation were to 
be employed to promote Society 5.0. It becomes clear that technologies such 
as cloud computing, robots, augmented reality, Big Data, CPS, and artificial 
intelligence are utilised by both Society 5.0 and Industry 4.0 (Pereira et al., 
2020). Modelling and planning tasks are completed in the management of a 
similar system, under the guidance and supervision of the government, busi￾nesses, and academic organisations. Unlike Society 5.0, which takes the 
entire society, including the industry, as its practising area, Industry 4.0 sim￾ply chooses a specific sector of the industry to focus on (Kansha & Ishizuka, 
2019). In contrast, Industry 4.0 is primarily concerned with deploying more 
cost-effective production techniques (Deguchi et al., 2020).
Industry 4.0 and SDGs 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, and 13 are directly related as a 
result of factors like Economic expansion, the invention of new working 
paradigms, highly effective manufacturing, safe and shrewd waste manage￾ment, and judicious and sustainable usage of infrastructural systems are all 
examples of sustainable energy policy (Dantas et al., 2021). The SDGs are 
nonetheless completely realised in Society 5.0.
It is paradoxical that Japan, a developed nation with cutting-edge tech￾nology and a high standard of living, felt the need to design a growth strat￾egy like Society 5.0.
Several countries, including the USA, France, China, South Korea, and Italy, 
formed their application plans like Industry 4.0 to purchase inexpensively 
and market using smart technologies (Wang et al., 2020). The planned plans 
are variables that lessen Japanese firms’ ability to compete in global markets 
and make it challenging for them to do so (Cabinet Office Government of 
Japan, 2020).
8.4 ORGANISATIONAL AGILITY
Since Industry 5.0 emphasises human–machine collaboration, the latter is 
the source of all creative inspiration. As a result, the centre of agility in ver￾sion 5.0 was the human. The capacity of the company to modify its strategic 
direction to better align with its core business and produce value is referred 
to as organisational agility (Doz & Kosonen, 2010).
Agility may also be characterised as a component of decision-making 
flexibility regarding simplicity and speed (Hugos, 2009). According to Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 279
Vokurka and Fliedner (1998), agility is the capacity to adjust to changes in 
the market while providing high-quality services at a cheap cost and in a 
shorter amount of time with fluctuating product volumes. The ability of the 
company to respond to changes by offering an effective and efficient capac￾ity to produce value is what we refer to in this study as organisational 
agility.
Moreover, organisational agility concentrates on resource deployment to 
be more effective and efficient in dealing with Society 5.0. Building the 
organisation around people, culture, and process could be the best course of 
action (Carvalho et al., 2017). People are the foundation of a company’s 
capacity to seize opportunities and take risks to grow the business. As part 
of the organisation’s culture and lean process, procedures may be stream￾lined and made more efficient, which might boost the company’s profitabil￾ity (Ozkeser, 2018).
Making better judgements and assisting academics in understanding 
Society 5.0 involves a thorough understanding of organisational agility 
focused on humans at the heart of the enterprise.
8.5 CORE VALUES OF INDUSTRY 5.0
Industry 5.0’s three core principles are Human Centricity, Sustainability, and 
Resilience and are considered interdependent with one another.
The human-centric strategy allows for the shift from technology-driven 
development to a totally human-centric and society-centric approach that 
centres manufacturing on the basic needs and interests of people.
Industrial staff will take on new tasks as a result of the shift in value from 
seeing employees as “cost” to “investment.” The technology employed in 
production is adaptable to the demands and diversity of industrial employ￾ees because technology serves people and societies. Employees’ should pri￾oritize physical, mental, and emotional wellbeing and safeguard their 
fundamental rights. The career possibilities and work–life balance of indus￾trial workers must be improved by constant retraining and upskilling 
(Breque et al., 2021).
Industry must be sustainable in order to adhere to environmental restric￾tions. To create a circular economy that is more effective and efficient with 
resources, it is required to create circular processes that reuse, repurpose, 
and recycle natural resources while minimising waste and impact on the 
environment (Breque et al., 2021).
The notion of resilience holds that industrial production must become 
more resilient in order to be better equipped to resist interruptions and pre￾serve crucial infrastructure in times of disaster. The sector’s future depends 
on its ability to adapt quickly to (geo) political developments and natural 
disasters (Breque et al., 2021).280 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
8.6 INDUSTRY 5.0’S POTENTIAL TECHNOLOGIES AND 
APPLICATIONS
The previous sections make it abundantly clear that the main goal of 
Industry 4.0 has been to increase profitability via the use of various digital 
technologies, with an emphasis on the quality of goods and process effi￾ciency (Kumar & Nayyar, 2020; Kumar et al., 2020a; Kumar et al., 2020b). 
Unfortunately, it has disregarded chiefly and failed to recognise the necessity 
of the human intellect. The effects of digital technology on society and the 
environment. It is anticipated that Industry 5.0 will integrate the two crucial 
components currently lacking: human inclusion and sustainable develop￾ment. Moreover, it is anticipated to offer the adaptability and agility differ￾ent businesses need to swiftly adapt to shifting consumer preferences and 
market situations. Even though most business leaders and academics have 
identified exploiting human creativity as Industry 5.0’s main differentiator, 
few other scholars contend this is the case. Figure 8.2 illustrates the main 
distinctions between the various industrial revolutions.
1. Collaborative robots (Cobots): Robots of the fifth industrial generation 
are anticipated to work together with him and with other humans. Due 
to the development of digital technologies like artificial intelligence, 
machine learning, and traditional robotics, next-generation collabora￾tive robots, or “cobots,” are now a reality. These cobots can perceive 
their environment, adjust to it, and learn on the go. Their adaptability to 
various task needs might lessen reliance on traditional industrial robots, 
which substantially impact ownership costs in the manufacturing indus￾try (Lu et al., 2021; Elena, 2020). Cobots can now make efficient judge￾ments in real-time because of recent developments in technologies like 
Figure 8.2 The prospective technologies of Industry 5.0.
Collaborative Robots
Internet of 
Everything (IoE) abd 
Articial Intelligence 
of Things (AIoT)
Cognitive Computing 6G and beyond
Blockchain
Smart Sensors Digital Twins
Edge and Fog 
Computing
Augmented 
Reality (AR), Mixed
Reality (MR) and 
HolographyAnalysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 281
distributed artificial intelligence, edge computing, parallel processing, 
and linked data.
2. Smart sensors: It is a piece of technology that monitors any changes to 
physical properties and transmits those changes via required adjust￾ments to electrical output. In response to a change in temperature, a 
thermocouple sensor, for example, generates a proper output voltage. 
Future smart factories will need smart sensor systems that can autono￾mously execute data gathering, data conversion, data processing, and 
data connection with an external system like a cloud server. A tradi￾tional sensor, in comparison, just includes the fundamental compo￾nents for sensing. Such improved capabilities are made possible by 
a base sensing device, CPU, communication, and memory modules 
integrated into a single system.
3. Digital twins: Digital twins are exact digital copies of physical sys￾tems that function as their virtual counterparts. The fundamental idea 
behind twinning is to emulate and comprehend real-time behaviour 
by taking data collected from the original model and reflecting it on 
its duplicate model (Padmakumar & Shunmugesh, 2022) Mirroring, 
shadowing, and threading are the three key features of digital twins 
(Jiang Yuchen et al., 2021). Digital twins can be used in conjunction 
with other digital technologies like IoT, Big Data, Artificial Intelligence, 
and Machine Learning to collect data in real-time, monitor system 
health, predict remaining useful life, and carry out preventive main￾tenance because they are an extremely accurate replica of a physical 
system.
4. Internet of Everything and Artificial Intelligence of Things: Artificial 
Intelligence of Things (AIoT), a new technical subject in industrial 
automation, results from the deadly amalgamation of artificial intel￾ligence with the IoT. A typical IoT system is made up of sensors that 
can produce a considerable volume of unstructured data. A linked 
physical device with AIoT can solve issues and make previously unat￾tainable decisions for IoT-capable instruments.
5. Blockchain: The integration of blockchain technology with cutting￾edge information technologies like the IoT, cloud computing, and Big 
Data may change how data is handled in almost all industrial areas. 
The centralised nature of the present IoT architecture makes it vulner￾able to security risks. Using blockchain architecture will thereby pro￾vide safe, private, and encrypted data transport to ensure data security 
(Li & Zhang, 2017; Raja Santhi and Muthuswamy, 2022).
6. Edge and fog computing: When it comes to exploiting the comput￾ing resources accessible inside a local network, edge computing and 
fog computing are fundamentally equivalent. The primary contrast 
between cloud, edge, and fog computing is the location of data pro￾cessing In contrast, edge computing places data processing near to the 
IoT sensors on the hardware that houses the sensors or at a gateway 282 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
device. On the other side, fog computing uses processors that are 
remote from the LAN equipment’s sensors to do operations.
7. Cognitive computing: Intelligent computing is the name given to a 
group of technological platforms that handle complicated issues by 
simulating human brain processes using digital models. The purpose 
of cognitive computing is to support humans in decision-making by 
digesting data, not to replace them. A system with cognitive comput￾ing skills can communicate with people, understand context-sensitive 
language, evaluate data using prior knowledge, and draw conclusions 
based on communication (Gupta et al., 2018).
8. 6G and beyond: There needs to be more than innovations in digital 
and computational technologies to meet the demands of a fully linked 
digital world; a significant improvement in communication technolo￾gies is also essential. The telecom companies have already begun their 
research operations towards the next technical advance needed to 
reach the 6G targets, which are scheduled for a commercial debut by 
2030, even if the next generation of 5G technologies is only around 
the horizon. The market for intelligent devices and services is always 
expanding, and 6G and beyond can help with those needs.
The use of augmented reality (AR) technology to overlay digital data on 
top of real-world applications gives consumers a composite perspective. It 
is a 3D interactive environment that merges the physical and digital worlds 
(Carmigniani & Furht, 2011). Although they are not considered to be Industry 
4.0 or Industry 5.0 technology enablers, AR, MR, and holography—collectively 
referred to as “Extended reality technologies” (Gerencer, 2021)—are one of 
the technologies that will likely gain from the adoption of digital and have a 
big impact on the development of future smart factories.
8.7 LINKAGE BETWEEN SUSTAINABILITY AND 
INDUSTRY 5.0
8.7.1 Industry commitment to sustainable development
Resources will be used by Industry 5.0, which promises to adapt them to 
the industrial sector’s current demands. Human–machine collaboration 
leads to adaptable business models (Ciccarelli et al., 2022). Overproduction 
also has to be under control if waste is to be eliminated. Local production 
and fresh ideas (Javaid & Haleem, 2020; Saraswa et al., 2021) made the 
economy viable. With Industry 5.0, corporate technologies are reversing the 
trend. It results in the adoption of sustainable measures, such as reduced 
waste creation and management, which can improve corporate performance 
(Muthuswamy, 2022). Industry 5.0 places a conscious emphasis on cutting￾edge research and places knowledge at the fore of progress in order to be Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 283
practical. It may be identified by a commitment that goes beyond merely 
creating goods for profit. The three pillars of Industry 5.0 are resilience, 
human-centricity, and sustainability.
8.7.1.1 Human productivity
As a result of new technology, humans are once again at the centre of industry. 
Collaborative robots do risky and repetitive jobs when people concentrate 
on innovation and workable business solutions (Yu et al., 2018). Developing 
skills boosts workplace productivity when workers are motivated to put in the 
effort and see benefits to individuals. The technique places a higher priority on 
meeting human needs than on using production procedures. Producers need to 
be aware of what technology is capable of for individuals and how it may be 
changed to match worker demands rather than the other way around.
For sustainable growth, intelligent business is transforming from Industry 
4.0 to Industry 5.0. As a creative example of Smart Industry 4.0, a novel, 
ground-breaking model of cooperation between people, machines, robots, 
and the environment, as well as synergies from such cooperation, additions 
to or significant expansions of Industry 4.0 by the environmental and social 
dimension, and foundations for human rights could be used to describe the 
upcoming Fifth Industrial Revolution (Nayyar & Kumar, 2020; Nayyar et 
al., 2020; Müller et al., 2018; Müller, 2019). The following advantages are 
anticipated from implementing the technical and economic growth plan cre￾ated in this way: radical advances based on digitisation, artificial intelli￾gence, and robotics-inclusive workplaces, and the welfare of industrial 
employees. Production and consumption habits that are more flexible and 
sophisticated in their supply networks.
With a focus on sustainability, Industry 5.0 must be all about using it 
wisely. It also entails finding ways to do so quickly and with the least amount 
of information possible. Furthermore, these technologies’ effects must focus 
on safeguarding society and the environment in addition to production and 
industrial facilities. Hence, the three pillars of sustainability—economic, 
social, and environmental—can be used to classify sustainability. Yet, a few 
authors have included other pillars like institutional, cultural, and technical 
in addition to the three already mentioned (Purvis et al., 2019).
This is in line with data from the World Economic Forum, which esti￾mates that small to medium-sized IoT efforts make up 75% of the market 
and frequently neglect sustainability in favour of more profitable goals like 
energy efficiency, productivity, competitiveness, and cost reduction by sub￾stituting low- and medium-skilled human employees on the production 
floor with industrial robots and automation, which have an impact on social 
sustainability, technologies have the potential to generate social upheaval. 
The current difficulties that businesses must overcome in order to concur￾rently attain the three sustainability pillars of economic, social, and environ￾mental sustainability are referred to as the “sustainability trilemma.” For 284 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
example, businesses that emphasise increasing profits (economic sustain￾ability) through excessive automation risk compromising social sustainabil￾ity by eliminating jobs.
Social sustainability is yet another crucial but much-disregarded element. 
Research has also demonstrated that the workplace substantially affects 
employees’ welfare, affecting social wellbeing. It can increase productivity, 
product quality, and efficiency by emphasising human factors such as employee 
wellbeing and work–life balance, creating a healthy work environment, and 
offering appropriate employee help. So, balancing economic development, 
environmental deterioration, and social wellbeing is necessary. However, by 
utilising next-generation. This may lead to huge reductions in the amount of 
processing power and energy needed (Arias et al., 2018).
Eco-friendly products that are an alternative to plastics can be developed 
with the aid of AI and related technologies. However, as these technologies 
advance and develop over time, meeting all three significant sustainability 
pillars at once may be feasible. A few authors have also made the case that 
adopting lean manufacturing techniques like Just-in-Time (JIT), Total Quality 
Management (TQM), Total Preventative Maintenance (TPM), and Human 
Resource Management (HRM) might assist businesses in addressing a variety 
of sustainability-related problems (Resta et al., 2016).
Even though a few businesses are already utilising some of these next￾generation technologies, the benefits can only be realised when all the tech￾nologies are used simultaneously. Big Data, for instance, is a digital waste 
without AI or ML. Hence, companies aiming to increase economic sustain￾ability must plan to deal with the loss of jobs to low- and medium-skilled 
workers. Prior to using this new technology, industries must consider person￾nel training. The development of transdisciplinary competences, reskilling 
and upskilling programmes, university collaborations to support new learn￾ing, and creative training methodologies (such as online and flexible learning 
modules) are a few examples. Because green energy is far more expensive 
than non-renewable resources, firms attempting to fulfil environmental sus￾tainability goals using renewable energy sources may need help. Hence, 
industries must adopt a culture of sustainable awareness that emphasises all 
three sustainability components, and future research must be directed in that 
direction. In other words, businesses must place more emphasis on “how the 
business is done” than “how much is made” in order to preserve sustainable 
practices and a circular economy.
8.8 THE ROADMAP TO INDUSTRY 5.0-DRIVEN 
SUSTAINABILITY
The main objective of the research was to provide a roadmap that out￾lined how Industry 5.0 would promote sustainable growth, particularly 
in terms of resilience, human centricity, and environmental sustainability. Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 285
By performing a content-focused literature analysis, we could pinpoint the 
sustainability features of Industry 5.0. The functionality of Industry 5.0 for 
sustainability is shown by these findings, as well as the necessary functional 
development steps. However, it cannot be considered a sustainability blue￾print since it lacks the knowledge of the contextual links between each pair 
of activities or the significance of each function in advancing Industry 5.0’s 
SDGs.
Participants in Industry 5.0 who are interested in changing industries 
towards SDGs may utilise the path depicted in the following image as a 
model. This road map places a focus on using Industry 5.0 characteristics to 
advance sustainable goals (Majerník et al., 2022). As a result, this pathway 
aids in bridging the gap between Industry 5.0’s stated sustainability goals 
and the underlying interactions and behaviours that make them possible. 
This roadmap outlines Industry 5.0’s future ambitions for the industry, 
including its projects, partnerships, and goals. It provides leaders, Industry 
5.0 participants, and decision-makers with the whole picture. Illustrations 
of the sequence in which the various Industry 5.0 functions ought to be 
developed or financed in order to maximise the system’s sustainability 
advantages. With regard to societal and environmental boundaries, the cur￾rent research intends to execute the Industry 5.0 industrial transformation 
framework to achieve sustainable development. The 16 sustainability 
responsibilities of Industry 5.0, which were created after conducting a litera￾ture analysis, serve as the active component of the strategy roadmap. In 
order to achieve the targeted goal, activities (or functions) should be devel￾oped progressively, as shown by the roadmap.
• Value network integration, intelligent automation, sustainable think￾ing, renewable integration, circular intelligent goods, and operational 
and resource efficiency are the main factors advancing the environ￾mental sustainability goals;
• System interoperability and integration, data openness and sharing, 
service orientation, open, sustainable innovation, skill upskilling and 
reskilling, employee technical help, and customisation are the main 
forces behind Industry 5.0’s human-centricity ambitions.
8.9 CHALLENGES OF INDUSTRY 5.0
It is easier to ignore any potential issues with Industry 5.0. The problems 
that need to be fixed in order for Industry 5.0 improvements to prosper for 
the company are currently being discovered.
1. In order to cooperate with makers of advanced robots and intelli￾gent machines, humans must have competent abilities (Narvaez Rojas 
et al., 2021). Human employees frequently struggle to gain technical 286 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
capabilities in addition to the soft skills required (Liu et al., 2020). 
Among the challenging duties in the new professions that demand a 
high level of technological competence are managing translation and 
programming industrial robots.
2. Making use of advanced technology requires more time and effort 
from human workers. Collaborative robots, artificial intelligence, 
software-connected factories, real-time data, and the IoT are all nec￾essary components of Industry 5.0. (Sun et al., 2020, Tripathy & 
Pattanaik, 2020, Wang et al., 2018b, Abdelmageed & Zayed, 2020).
3. It’s essential to make investments in cutting-edge technology. The UR 
Cobot is pricey. Training people for new occupations has become 
more expensive. Companies are finding it challenging to upgrade 
their manufacturing lines for Industry 5.0 (Yin et al., 2020). Adopting 
Industry 5.0 is expensive since it necessitates sophisticated machinery 
and highly trained personnel in order to increase output and efficiency.
4. While the development of Industry 5.0 depends on ecosystem trust, 
security poses a challenge. Authentication is employed on a large scale 
in the business to communicate with various devices and defend against 
potential quantum computing applications while deploying IoT nodes 
(Ghobakhloo et al., 2021a; Kent & Kopacek, 2020; Rashidi et al., 
2020). The use of automation and artificial intelligence in Industry 5.0 
presents difficulties for businesses and calls for trustworthy security (Li 
et al., 2019, Tanveer, 2022, Tönnissen & Teuteberg, 2020, Tijan et al., 
2019). Since ICT systems are at the heart of Industry 5.0 applications, 
strict security requirements are required to avoid security risks.
5. Humans are anticipated to contribute high-value activities to manu￾facturing regulations throughout the upcoming industrial revolution. 
Legalisation and standardisation will prevent significant problems 
between enterprises, society, and technology (Mourtzis, 2016).
8.10 DISCUSSION
The development strategy known as “Industry 4.0” confronts us as a way 
to attract a talented workforce to a country like Germany that feels inept 
and to bring back the production that went to far-off Eastern nations. When 
Industry 4.0 was first implemented, the goal was to reduce the amount of 
human labour and replace it with alternative technologies like sensors, 
robots, and artificial intelligence. Nevertheless, it was planned that through 
Society 5.0, the technology utilised in Industry 4.0 could be used by all of 
society by the SDGs, and objectives would be established in that manner. 
Even though they employ and build technology similarly, Industry 4.0 is 
focused on industrial output, whereas Society 5.0 is focused on the entire 
society. Industry 4.0 argues for using new technology to produce goods more 
cheaply, accurately, and quickly (Birkel & Müller, 2021). In order to keep Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 287
their competitive edge and adapt to changing market conditions, organisa￾tions must implement Industry 4.0 by changing their organisational struc￾tures (Cirillo et al., 2021). Organisational structure modifications benefit 
enterprises and nations from an economic, ecological, and social standpoint 
(Rahman et al., 2020).
Reduced carbon emissions, improved recycling procedures, the produc￾tion of more environmentally friendly goods, and more opportunities for 
workers to participate in management roles as opposed to physically 
demanding and contaminating jobs are just a few benefits provided by 
Industry 4.0 (Birkel & Müller, 2021; Rahman et al., 2020; Müller & Voigt, 
2018; Chen et al., 2021). These changes are intended to benefit everyone, 
but Japan and Germany in particular. This will decrease the cost of goods 
made in Japan and Germany, increasing competitiveness and consumer 
pleasure. On the other hand, the impoverished nations would be most 
affected negatively by Industry 4.0 and Society 5.0.
8.11 IMPLICATIONS
The research tried to illustrate how Industry 5.0 may achieve its desired ide￾als for sustainable development. The study initially examined the ambigui￾ties around this idea and created a model to use as a guide to comprehend 
this occurrence comprehensively. The reference model demonstrated how 
Industry 5.0 is a socio-technical phenomenon that depends on stakeholder 
cooperation and technology innovation to move beyond economic devel￾opment and address contemporary environmental and social challenges. 
Disruptive and enabling technologies, both of which have evolved since the 
Third Industrial Revolution and have seen significant commercialisation, 
are primarily responsible for the creation of Industry 5.0’s new technologies, 
which include the revolutionary technological advancements like CAI or 
adaptable robots. The research made an effort to demonstrate how Industry 
5.0 may fulfil its principles for sustainable development. The research first 
looked at the ambiguity around this notion and developed the technological 
component of Industry 5.0, which also requires developing the fundamental 
principles of techno-functional design, such as decentralisation or real-time 
capabilities. These regulations enable the appropriate operation and use￾fulness of Industry 5.0’s technology components. The effects of Industry 
5.0 go well beyond the industrial sector and the deterioration of produc￾tion facilities, in contrast to Industry 4.0, which usually emerges in smart 
factories. When deciding on the elements and scope of Industry 5.0, the 
sociocultural aspect of this phenomenon serves as an example of the change 
towards the stakeholder viewpoint. The hyperconnected value ecosystem of 
intelligent clients, stakeholders (including governments or labour unions), 
suppliers, adaptable industrial facilities, and technology providers must all 
be digitalised and integrated. Depending on the commercial and industrial 288 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
environment, the particularity of Industry 5.0 components may change. For 
instance, intelligent patients, pharmaceutical companies, healthcare provid￾ers, hospitals, and insurance companies are some of the elements of Health 
5.0, also known as the Healthcare Industry 5.0.
This chapter aimed to construct a thorough literature assessment and 
offer an incomplete picture of the more valuable components and technolo￾gies for the transition from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0 by developing a 
conceptual model in an area that has not yet been fully examined in the lit￾erature. In order to create circular intelligent goods that can self-map their 
whole lifespan and integrate into the circular economy, firms need to use 
Industry 5.0 technologies, concepts, and functionalities. In the long run, 
these features enable organisations to improve resource and operational effi￾ciency, boosting economic development and lowering waste, energy use, and 
emissions. Finally, by doing these tasks, industrial value chains can acquire 
the required adaptability, resources, competencies, expertise, and innovative 
capacities to respond to market structural adjustments brought on by dis￾ruptions and build the resilience they need.
8.12 CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS, AND FUTURE 
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
With an emphasis on the future of Industry 5.0 and Society 5.0, a thorough 
review of the literature was conducted as part of this study project. This 
chapter sought to build a comprehensive literature assessment and provide a 
partial picture of the more valuable elements and technologies for the transi￾tion from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0 by developing a conceptual model in 
a field that has not yet been fully explored in the literature.
The current move to a digital industrial foundation, according to experts, 
has resulted in social and environmental problems. Industry 5.0 has evolved 
to support Industry 4.0 and address these issues. Sustainable development 
has been promoted by Industry 5.0. However, it must be made clear how 
Industry 5.0 will include concepts from sustainable development. The ideals 
of sustainable development, notably human centricity, environmental sus￾tainability, and resilience, have the potential to be advanced by Industry 5.0. 
It’s important to remember that several of the traits, like the ability to com￾municate in real-time and the ability to keep track of corporate activities, 
have been connected to technical developments since the Third Industrial 
Revolution and are not unique to Industry 5.0. However, the societal and 
technological advances enabled by Industry 5.0 have redefined the breadth 
(quality) and depth (scope) of these commitments.
Since Industry 4.0 is about digitisation, Industry 5.0 will concentrate on 
creating the partnership between the digital world, critical and creative 
thinking skills in people, being adaptable to changing market scenarios, and 
emphasising sustainability. In this chapter, Industry 5.0 has first been Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 289
explored from an academic and industrial perspective, and then the ele￾ments of sustainability in Industry 5.0 have been discussed. It has also been 
discussed additional crucial Industry 5.0 enabling technologies. Additional 
research should be done on the notion of Industry 5.0, the human role in 
industrial digitalisation processes, and the development of economy 4.0 and 
society 5.0 for sustainable development, according to the study. Some peo￾ple can object to the lack of study on the social, ecological, and economic 
impacts of the Industry 4.0 idea. Regarding Society 5.0’s potential future 
behaviours, there are none.
Despite our best efforts, much still needs to be determined about how this 
phenomenon will develop. In order to further our work in the following 
ways, further research is encouraged. Owing to methodological limitations, 
we could only establish the contextual links between the functions by using 
the opinions of European experts. Although Industry 5.0 is primarily a 
European effort, it will have the same worldwide impact as Industry 4.0. 
Reconciling the perspectives of a broader range of specialists from diverse 
socioeconomic settings and resynthesising the connections between Industry 
5.0’s sustainable development functions might be a significant direction for 
future study. Despite the fact that Industry 5.0 is seen to have the ability to 
enable sustainable growth, this is not an autonomous occurrence. Our 
model described a hypothetical ideal situation in which all necessary com￾ponents for creating Industry 5.0 were present.
To develop impartial and fair technical progress of value networks, this 
situation demands inclusive technology diffusion activities across a variety 
of disciplines and sectors. Industry 5.0 is only now beginning. Therefore, 
there is no plan in place for the creation of assistive technology. Future study 
is encouraged to examine the best ways to create a roadmap for Industry 5.0 
technology implementation to support projects including collaborative tech￾nology diffusion across regions, open innovation, and shared research. 
Industry 5.0, a mostly technological phenomenon, further relies on value￾adding network-wide connection, data-driven processes, and integration. 
Cybersecurity is a significant facilitator of this phenomenon because of 
Industry 5.0’s rapid digital transition. Given the magnitude and complexity 
of cyber risks under Industry 5.0, further research on strong passwords is 
required.
According to the reference model, encouraging policies should be imple￾mented in a variety of fields, such as taxation, government operations, 
energy, society, culture, innovation, and education are necessary to make the 
transition to this phenomenon. Individual parties (such as governments or 
labour unions) are unable to develop these policies collectively and synergis￾tically; therefore, Industry 5.0 stakeholders must frequently coordinate on a 
bilateral basis.
It must be made clear how stakeholders may collaborate to create rele￾vant laws and regulations that promote Industry 5.0. Future research must 
thus focus on how public–private stakeholder involvement may be used to 290 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
develop Industry 5.0 supporting policies, initiatives, and regulatory frame￾works. This encourages companies to align their operations with Industry 
5.0’s SDGs, which might be done by applying a revolutionary corporate 
governance paradigm. Even though the need for Corporate Governance 5.0 
is widely acknowledged, additional knowledge about the development of 
such sustainable corporate governance frameworks is still required. By 
doing in-depth evaluations of how companies may incorporate Industry 
5.0’s principles for sustainable growth into their corporate strategies and 
using quantitative indicators to track their progress towards those objec￾tives, future research might fill this knowledge vacuum.
The technologies covered in the section on Industry 5.0 enablers can 
appear to be modest upgrades or newer versions of Industry 4.0 technolo￾gies. Although somewhat accurate, a thorough examination of each technol￾ogy would show that they place a major emphasis on considering people, 
the environment, and social responsibility. The two additional buzzwords of 
the decade that industries are attempting to adopt are ESG (Environmental, 
Social, and Governance) and sustainability (Padmakumar & Shunmugesh, 
2022). Although they are distinct, according to the dictionary, ESG is a pro￾gression of sustainability. Both may be referred to as “doing good to the 
environment and society” in basic words, and there is no better way to do 
good to society than by incorporating humans. A survey of several industrial 
sectors (Brozzi et al., 2020) has shown that social and environmental sus￾tainability are frequently neglected while economic sustainability is given 
greater attention, which stresses the necessity for enterprises to implement 
Industry 5.0 technology.
The development of sustainability is ESG. Simply put, both may be referred 
to as “doing good to the environment and society,” and when it comes to 
society, nothing is more critical than the involvement of humans. Also, 
research reveals that no studies have evaluated how these technologies would 
affect social sustainability. Thus, that area has to be the focus of further study.
Instead of using Industry 5.0, use Sustainable Industry 4.0. It is premature 
to refer to the upcoming transformation as Industry 5.0, however, without 
fully understanding what is in store for us over the next few decades, given 
that Industry 4.0 technologies are just now beginning to penetrate small￾and medium-sized businesses and developing countries in developed coun￾tries. It highlights once more that “Industry 4.0S” is the appropriate 
designation for emerging technologies.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abdelmageed, S., & Zayed, T. (2020). A study of literature in modular integrated 
construction-critical review and future directions. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
277, 124044.Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 291
Akundi, A., Euresti, D., Luna, S., Ankobiah, W., Lopes, A., & Edinbarough, I. (2022). 
State of industry 5.0-analysis and identification of current research trends. Applied 
System Innovation, 5(1), 27.
Arias, R., Lueth, K. L. Rastogi, A. (2018). The effect of the Internet of Things on 
sustainability. World Economic Forum.
Aslam, F., Aimin, W., Li, M., & Rehman, K. (2020). Innovation in the era of IoT and 
industry 5.0: Absolute Innovation Management (AIM) Framework. Information, 
11(2), 124.
Baden-Filler, C., & Haefliger, S. (2013). Business models and technological innova￾tion. Long Range Planning, 46(6), 419–426.
Bansal, S. (2018). Industry 5.0 – Next Generation Customer Experience Redefined? 
Retrieved from https://www.thedigitaltransformationpeople.com/channels/customer
engagement/industry-5-0-next-generation-customer-experience-redefined/
Beier, G., Ullrich, A., Niehoff, S, Reißig, M., & Habich, M. (2020). Industry 4.0: 
How it is defined from a sociotechnical perspective and how much sustainability 
it includes–A literature review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 259, 120856.
Biel, K., & Glock, C. H. (2016). Systematic literature review of decision support 
models for energy-efficient production planning. Computers and Industrial 
Engineering, 101(C), 243–259.
Biggeri, M., Clark, D. A., Ferrannini, A., & Mauro, V. (2019). Tracking the SDGs in 
an ‘integrated’ manner: A proposal for a new index to capture synergies and trade￾offs between and within goals. World Development, 122, 628–647.
Birkel, H., & Müller, J. M. (2021). Potentials of industry 4.0 for supply chain man￾agement within the triple bottom line of sustainability—A systematic literature 
review. Journal of Cleaner Production, 289, 125612.
Breque, M., De Nul, L., & Petridis, A. (2021). Industry 5.0: towards a sustainable, 
human-centric and resilient European industry. Luxembourg, LU: European 
Commission, Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
Brozzi, R., Forti, D., Rauch, E., & Matt, D. T. (2020). The advantages of indus￾try 4.0 applications for sustainability: Results from a sample of Manufacturing 
Companies. Sustainability, 12(9), 3647.
Byerlee, D., & Fanzo, J. (2019). The SDG of zero hunger 75 years on: Turning full 
circle on agriculture and nutrition. Global Food Security, 21, 52–59.
Cabinet Office Government of Japan. Report on the 5th Science and Technology Basic 
Plan. Available online: https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/kihonkeikaku/5basicplan_
en.pdf (accessed on 22 December 2020).
Calvo, T., Razafindrakoto, M., & Roubaud, F. (2019). Fear of the state in gover￾nance surveys? Empirical evidence from African countries. World Development, 
123, 104609.
Campagnolo, L., & Davide, M. (2019). Can the Paris deal boost SDGs achievement? 
An assessment of climate mitigation co-benefits or side-effects on poverty and 
inequality. World Development, 122, 96–109.
Carmigniani, J., & Furht, B. (2011). Augmented reality: An overview. In: Furht, B. 
(ed.) Handbook of Augmented Reality. Springer, New York, NY.
Carvalho, A. M., Sampaio, P., Rebentisch, E., Carvalho, J. Á., & Saraiva, P. (2017). 
Operational excellence, organisational culture and agility: the missing link? Total 
Quality Management and Business Excellence, 30, 1495–1514.292 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Cervelló-Royo, R., Moya-Clemente, I., Perelló-Marín, M., & Ribes-Giner, G. (2020). 
Sustainable development, economic and financial factors that influence the 
opportunity-driven entrepreneurship. An fsQCA approach. Journal of Business 
Research, 115, 393–402.
Chandola, V. (2015). Digital Transformation and Sustainability Study and Analysis. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Chang, V., Xu, Y. K., Zhang, J., & Xu, Q. (2020). Research on intelligent manufactur￾ing development approach for China’s local valve industry. Smart and Sustainable 
Built Environment, 10(2), 293–321.
Chen, M., Sinha, A., Hu, K., & Shah, M. I. (2021). Impact of technological innovation 
on energy efficiency in industry 4.0 era: Moderation of shadow economy in sus￾tainable development. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 164, 120521.
Ciccarelli, M., Papetti, A., Germani, M., Leone, A., Rescio, G. (2022).Human work 
sustainability tool. Journal of Manufacturing System, 62, 76–86.
Cirillo, V., Rinaldini, M., Staccioli, J., & Virgillito, M. E. (2021). Technology vs. work￾ers: The case of Italy’s Industry 4.0 factories. Structural Change and Economic 
Dynamics, 56, 166–183.
Dantas, T., De-Souza, E., Destro, I., Hammes, G., Rodriguez, C., & Soares, S. (2021). 
How the combination of Circular Economy and Industry 4.0 can contribute 
towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. Sustainable Production 
and Consumption, 26(4), 213–227.
Davies, R., Coole, T., & Smith, A. (2017). Review of socio-technical considerations 
to ensure successful implementation of Industry 4.0. Procedia Manufacturing, 11, 
1288–1295.
De Pascale, A. Arbolino, R., Szopik-Depczyńska, K., Limosani, M., & Ioppolo, G. 
(2021). A systematic review for measuring circular economy: The 61 indicators. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 281, 124942.
Deguchi, A., Hirai, C., Matsuoka, H., Nakano, T., Oshima, K., Tai, M., & Tani, S. 
(2020). What Is Society 5.0? In Society 5.0: A People-Centric Super-Smart Society; 
Springer, 1–23. ISBN 9789811529894.
Demir, K. A., Döven, G., & Sezen, B. (2019). Industry 5.0 and human-robot co￾working. Procedia Computer Science, 158, 688–695.
Di Nardo, M., Forino, D., & Murino, T. (2020). The evolution of man-machine inter￾action: the role of human in industry 4.0 paradigm. Production and Manufacturing 
Research, 8(1), 20–34.
Dombrowski, U., Richter, T., & Krenkel, P. (2017). Interdependencies of Industrie 
4.0 & Lean Production Systems – A use cases analysis. Procedia Manufacturing, 
11, 1061–1068.
Doz, Y. L., & Kosonen, M. (2010). Embedding strategic agility A leadership agenda 
for accelerating business model renewal. Long Range Planning, 43(2 and 3), 
370–382.
Elena, F. (2020). What are cobots and how will they impact the future of manufacturing? 
Ericsson blog, https://www.ericsson.com/en/blog/2020/5/what-are-cobots-and-the￾future-of-manufacturing
Elim, H. I., & Zhai, G. (2020). Control system of multitasking interactions between 
society 5.0 and industry 5.0: A conceptual introduction & its applications. Journal 
of Physics: Conference Series, 1463(1), 012035.
ElMaraghy, H., Monostori, L., Schuh, G., & El Maraghy, W. (2021). Evolution and 
future of manufacturing systems. CIRP Annals, 70(2), 635–658.Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 293
European Commission. Industry 5.0. (2021). Towards a Sustainable, Human Centric and 
Resilient European Industry. https://ec.europa.eu/info/publications/industry-50_en
Fareri, S., Fantoni, G., Chiarello, F., Coli, E., & Binda, A. (2020). Estimating Industry 
4.0 impact on job profiles and skills using text mining. Computers in Industry, 
118, 103222.
Fatima, Z., Tanveer, M. H., Waseemullah, Z. S., Naz, L. F., Khadim, H., & Tahir, M. 
(2022). Production plant and warehouse automation with IoT and industry 5.0. 
Applied Sciences, 12(4), 2053.
Fehri, R., Khlifi, S., & Vanclooster, M. (2019). Disaggregating SDG-6 water stress 
indicator at different spatial and temporal scales in Tunisia. Science of the Total 
Environment, 694, 133766.
Felsberger, A., & Reiner, G. (2020). Sustainable Industry 40 in production and oper￾ations management: A systematic literature review. Sustainability, 12, 7982.
Gerencer, T. (2021).What Is Extended Reality (XR) and How Is it Changing the Future? 
3 April 2021, https://www.hp.com/us-en/shop/tech-takes/what-is-xr-changing-world
Ghobakhloo, M., & Fathi, M. (2021). Industry 4.0 and opportunities for energy 
sustainability. Journal of Cleaner Production, 295, 126427.
Ghobakhloo, M., Fathi, M., Iranmanesh, M., Maroufkhani, P., & Morales, M. E. 
(2021a). Industry 4.0 ten years on: A bibliometric and systematic review of con￾cepts, sustainability value drivers, and success determinants. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 302, 127052.
Ghobakhloo, M., Iranmanesh, M., Grybauskas, A., Vilkas, M., & Petraitė, M. 
(2021b). Industry 4.0, innovation, and sustainable development: A system￾atic review and a roadmap to sustainable innovation. Business Strategy and the 
Environment, 30(8), 4237–4257.
Gotfredsen, S. (2016). Bringing back the human touch: Industry 5.0 concept creating 
factories of the future. Retrieved from http://www.manmonthly.com.au/features/
bringing-back-the-human-touchindustry-5-0-concept-creating-factories-of-the￾future/
Grabowska, S., Saniuk, S., & Gajdzik, B. (2022). Industry 5.0: improving humaniza￾tion and sustainability of industry 4.0. Scientometrics, 127, 3117–3144.
Grybauskas, A., Stefanini, A., & Ghobakhloo, M. (2022). Social sustainability in the 
age of digitalization: a systematic literature review on the social implications of 
industry 4.0. Technology in Society, 70(8), 101997.
Gupta, S., Kar, A. K., Baabdullah, A., & Al Khowaiter, W. A. (2018). Big data with 
cognitive computing: A review for the future. International Journal of Information 
Management, 42, 78–89.
Hahn, G. J. (2020). Industry 4.0: A supply chain innovation perspective. International 
Journal of Production Research, 58(5), 1425–1441.
Hecklau, F., Galeitzke, M., Flachs, S., & Kohl, H. (2016). Holistic approach for 
human resource management in Industry 4.0. Procedia CIRP, 54, 1–6.
Herceg, I. V., Ku, V., Mijuškovi, V. M., & Herceg, T. (2020). Challenges and driving 
forces for Industry 4.0 implementation. Sustainability, 12(10), 4208.
Hermann, M., Pentek, T., & Otto, B. (2016). “Design Principles for Industrie 4.0 
Scenarios: A Literature Review” 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS).
Horn, P., & Grugel, J. (2018). The SDGs in middle-income countries: Setting or serv￾ing domestic development agendas? Evidence from Ecuador. World Development, 
109, 73–84.294 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Hughes, L., Dwivedi, Y. K., Rana, N. P., Williams, M. D., & Raghavan, V. (2022). 
Perspectives on the future of manufacturing within the industry 4.0 era. Production 
Planning Control, 33(2–3), 138–158.
Hugos, M. H. (2009). Business Agility: sustainable prosperity in relentlessly com￾petitive world (1st ed.). New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons, IncIn IFIP international 
conference on advances in production management systems (pp. 677–686). Cham: 
Springer.
Javaid, M., & Haleem, A. (2020). Critical components of Industry 5.0 towards a 
successful adoption in the field of manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Integration 
and Management, 5(3), 327–348.
Jiang Yuchen, Y., Shen, L., Kuan, L. H., & Okyay, K. (2021). Industrial applications 
of digital twins, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A Mathematical 
Physical and engineering Sciences, 379(2207), 20200360.
Johansson, H. (2017) Profinet Industrial Internet of Things Gateway for the Smart 
Factory. Master’s Thesis in Embedded Electronic System Design, Department 
of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University Of Technology, 
University Of Gothenburg Gothenburg, Sweden.
John, K. K., Adarsh, S. N., & Pattali, V. (2020). Workers to super workers: A brief 
discussion on important technologies for industry 5.0 manufacturing systems. In
AIP conference proceedings, 2311(1), 070025.
Kagermann, H. (2015). Change through Digitization—Value creation in the age of 
Industry 4.0. Management of Permanent Change, 2015, 23–45.
Kagermann, H., Wahlster, W., & Helbig, J. (2013). Recommendations for 
Implementing the Strategic Initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0, München.
Kansha, Y., & Ishizuka, M. (2019). Design of energy harvesting wireless sensors 
using magnetic phase transition. Energy, 180, 1001–1007.
Kaygin, E., Zengin, Y., & Topçuoglu, E. (2019). Endüstri 4.0′ akademik bakı¸s. 
Atatürk Univ. Iktis. ˙Idari Bilim. Derg., 33, 1065–1081.
Kent, M. D., & Kopacek, P. (2020). Do we need synchronization of the human and 
robotics to make industry 5.0 a success story? In: The International Symposium 
for Production Research. Springer, 302–311.
Kumar, A., & Nayyar, A. (2020). Si 3-Industry: A sustainable, intelligent, innovative, 
internet-of-things industry. A roadmap to Industry 4.0: Smart production, sharp 
business and sustainable development, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-
14544-6
Kumar, A., Srikanth, P., Nayyar, A., Sharma, G., Krishnamurthi, R., & Alazab, M. 
(2020a). A novel simulated-annealing based electric bus system design, simulation, 
and analysis for Dehradun Smart City. IEEE Access, 8, 89395–89424.
Kumar, A., Rajalakshmi, K., Jain, S., Nayyar, A., & Abouhawwash, M. (2020b). A novel 
heuristic simulation-optimization method for critical infrastructure in smart trans￾portation systems. International Journal of Communication Systems, 33(11), e4397.
Kumar, R., Gupta, P., Singh, S., & Jain, D. (2021). Human Empowerment by Industry 
5.0 in Digital Era: Analysis of Enablers. 2nd International Conference on Future 
Learning Aspects of Mechanical Engineering, FLAME 2020. Springer Science and 
Business Media Deutschland GmbH, 401–410.
Lamichhane, S., Egilmez, G., Gedik, R., Bhutta, M. K. S., & Erenay, B. (2021). 
Benchmarking OECD countries’ sustainable development performance: A goal￾specific principal component analysis approach. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
287, 125040.Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 295
Lasi, H., Fettke, P., Kemper, H.-G.; Feld, T., & Hoffmann, M. (2014). Industrie 4.0. 
Business and Information Systems Engineering, 56(4), 239–242.
Lee, J., Bagheri, B., & Kao, H. (2015). Research letters: A cyber-physical systems 
architecture for Industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems. Manufacturing 
Letters, 3, 18–23.
Lee, J., Kao, H.-A., & Yang, S. (2014). Service innovation and smart analytics for 
industry 4.0 and big data environment. Procedia Cirp, 16, 3–8.
Li, B., Boiarkina, II, Yu, W., Huang H. M., Munir, T., Wang, G. Q., & Young, B. R. 
(2019) Phosphorous recovery through struvite crystallization: Challenges for future 
design. Science of the Total Environment, 648, 1244–1256.
Li, C., & Zhang, L. J. (2017). A blockchain based new secure multilayer network 
model for Internet of Things, Proceedings of the IEEE International Congress on 
Internet of Things (ICIOT), IEEE, 33–41.
Liu, Y., Yuan, X., Xiong, Z., Kang, J., Wang, X., & Niyato, D. (2020). Federated 
learning for 6G communications: Challenges, methods, and future directions. 
China Communications, 17(9), 105–118.
Longo, F., Nicoletti, L., & Padovano, A. (2017). Smart operators in industry 4.0: A 
human-centered approach to enhance operators’ capabilities and competencies 
within the new smart factory context. Computer and Industrial Engineering, 113, 
144–159.
Longo, F., Padovano, A., & Umbrello S. (2020). Value-oriented and ethical technol￾ogy engineering in Industry 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design of the 
factory of the future. Applied Sciences, 10(12), 4182.
Lu, Y. (2017). Industry 4.0: A survey on technologies, applications and open research 
issues. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 6, 232–248.
Lu, Y., Adrados, J. S., Chand, S. S., & Wang, L. (2021). Humans are not machines—
anthropocentric human–machine symbiosis for ultra-flexible smart manufactur￾ing. Engineering, 7(6), 734–737.
Lu, Y., Zheng, H., Chand, S., Xia, W., Liu, Z., Xu, X., & Bao, J. (2022). Outlook 
on human-centric manufacturing towards industry 5.0. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 62, 612–627.
Luthra, S., & Mangla, S. K. (2018). Evaluating challenges to Industry 4.0 initia￾tives for supply chain sustainability in emerging economies. Process Safety and 
Environment Protection, 117, 168–179.
Ma, W., De Jong, M., De Bruijne, M., & Mu, R. (2021). Mix and match: Configuring 
different types of policy instruments to develop successful low carbon cities in 
China. Journal of Cleaner Production, 282, 125399.
Maddikunta, P. K. R., Pham, Q. V., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T. R., & Liyanage, 
M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and potential applica￾tions. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26, 100257.
Majerník, M., Daneshjo, N., Malega, P., Drábik, P., & Barilová, B. (2022).Sustainable 
Development of the Intelligent Industry from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0, 
Advances in Science and Technology Research Journal, 16(2), 12–18.
McKay, V. I. (2020). Learning for development: Learners’ perceptions of the impact 
of the Kha Ri Gude Literacy Campaign. World Development, 125, 104684.
Mi’skiewicz, R., & Wolniak, R. (2020).Practical application of the Industry 4.0 con￾cept in a steel company. Sustainability, 12(14), 5776.
Mourtzis, D. (2016). Challenges and future perspectives for the life cycle of manu￾facturing networks in the mass customisation era. Logistics Research, 9, 2.296 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Mourtzis, D. (2022). Design and Operation of Production Networks for Mass 
Personalization in the Era of Cloud Technology, 1st ed.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
Mrugalska, B., & Wyrwicka, M. K. (2017). Towards lean production in Industry 4.0, 
Procedia Engineering, 182, 466–473.
Müller, J. (2020). Enabling Technologies for Industry 5.0: Results of a Workshop 
with Europe’s Technology Leaders; Publications Office: Luxembourg, European 
Commission; Directorate-General for Research and Innovation, 8–10.
Müller, J. M. (2019). Assessing the barriers to Industry 4.0 implementation from a 
workers’ perspective. IFAC PapersOnline, 52, 2189–2194.
Müller, J. M., & Voigt, K.-I. (2018). Sustainable industrial value creation in SMEs: A 
comparison between Industry 4.0 and Made in China 2025. International Journal 
of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing-Green Technology, 5, 659–670.
Müller, J. M., Buliga, O., & Voigt, K. I. (2018). Fortune favors the prepared: How 
SMEs approach business model innovations in Industry 4.0. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, 132, 2–17.
Muthuswamy, P. (2022). Investigation on sustainable machining characteristics 
of tools with serrated cutting edges in face milling of AISI 304 Stainless Steel. 
Procedia CIRP, 105, 865–871.
Nahavandi, S. (2019). Industry 5.0-a human-centric solution. Sustainability, 11(16), 
4371.
Nayyar, A., Rameshwar, R., & Solanki, A. (2020). Internet of Things (IoT) and the 
digital business environment: a standpoint inclusive cyber space, cybercrimes, and 
cybersecurity. The Evolution of Business in the Cyber Age, 10, 9780429276484-6.
Nam-Chol, O., & Kim, H. (2019). Towards the 2 °C goal: Achieving Sustainable 
Development Goal (SDG) 7 in DPR Korea. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 
150, 104412.
Nanterme, P., & Daugherty, P. (2017). Technology for People: The Era of the 
Intelligent Enterprise. Accenture: Dublin, Ireland.
Narvaez Rojas, C., Alomia Peñafel, G. A., Loaiza Buitrago, D. F., & Tavera Romero, 
C. A. (2021). Society 5.0: A Japanese concept for a superintelligent society. 
Sustainability, 13(12), 6567.
Nayyar, A., & Kumar, A. (Eds.). (2020). A roadmap to industry 4.0: smart produc￾tion, sharp business and sustainable development, 1–21, Berlin: Springer.
Nelles, J., Kuz, S., & Mertens, A. (2016). Human-centered design of assistance sys￾tems for production planning and control. In Conference: IEEE International 
Conference on Industrial Technology (ICET) Location: Taipei, Taiwan, 21–
2099.
Ng, T. C., Ghobakhloo, M., Iranmanesh, M., Maroufkhani, P., & Asadi, S. (2022). 
Industry 4.0 applications for sustainable manufacturing: A systematic literature 
review and a roadmap to sustainable development. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
334, 130–133.
Oesterreich, T. D., & Teuteberg, F., (2016). Understanding the implications of digi￾tisation and automation in the context of Industry 4.0: A triangulation approach 
and elements of a research agenda for the construction industry, Computers in 
Industry, 83, 121–139.
Okafor-Yarwood, I. (2019). Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, and the 
complexities of the sustainable development goals (SDGs) for countries in the 
Gulf of Guinea. Marine Policy, 99, 414–422.Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 297
Olkiewicz, M., Wolniak, R., Grebski, E. M., & Olkiewicz, A. (2019). Comparative 
analysis of the impact of the business incubator center on the economic sustain￾able development of regions in USA and Poland. Sustainability, 11(1), 173.
Onday, O. (2019). Japan’s Society 5.0: Going Beyond Industry 4.0. Business and 
Economics Journal, 10(2), 1–6.
Opoku, A. (2019). Biodiversity and the built environment: Implications for the 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 
141, 1–7.
Özdemir, V., & Hekim, N. (2018). Birth of industry 5.0: Making sense of big data 
with artifcial intelligence, “the internet of things” and next-generation technology 
policy. Omics: A Journal of Integrative Biology, 22(1), 65–76.
Ozkeser, B. (2018). Lean Innovation Approach in Industry 5.0. In the Eurasia 
Proceedings of Science, Engineering & Mathematics, 2, 422–428.
Padmakumar, M., & Shunmugesh, K. (2022). Artificial intelligence based tool condi￾tion monitoring digital twins and industry 4.0 applications. International Journal 
on Interactive Design and Manufacturing.
Pereira, A. G., Lima, T. M., & Charrua-Santos, F. (2020). Industry 4.0 and Society 
5.0: Opportunities and threats. International Journal of Recent Technology and 
Engineering, 8(5), 3305–3308.
Pilloni, V. (2018). How data will transform industrial processes: Crowdsensing, 
crowdsourcing and big data as pillars of Industry 4.0. Future Internet, 10(3), 24.
Posada, J., Toro, C., Barandiaran, I., Oyarzun, D., Stricker, D., de Amicis, R., Pinto, 
E. B., Eisert, P., Döllner, J., & Vallarino, I. Jr. (2015). Visual computing as a key 
enabling technology for Industrie 4.0 and Industrial Internet. IEEE Computer 
Graphics and Applications, 35(2), 26–40. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCG.2015.45
Purvis, B., Mao, Y., & Robinson, D. (2019). Three pillars of sustainability: In search 
of conceptual origins. Sustainability Science, 14, 681–695.
Rada, M. (2017). Industry 5.0 definition, 3 February 2017. Retrieved from https://
www.linkedin.com/pulse/industrial-upcycling-definition-michael-rada
Rada, M. (2015). Industry 5.0 - from virtual to physical, 1 December 2015, https://
www.linkedin.com/pulse/industry-50-from-virtual-physical-michael-rada, 
Accessed on 1 June 2017.
Rahman, S. M., Perry, N., Müller, J. M., Kim, J., & Laratte, B. (2020). End-of-Life 
in industry 4.0: Ignored as before? Resources Conservation and Recycling, 154, 
104539.
Rai, S. M., Brown, B. D., & Ruwanpura, K. N. (2019). SDG 8: Decent work and 
economic growth—A gendered analysis. World Development, 113, 368–380.
Raja Santhi, A., & Muthuswamy, P. (2022). Influence of Blockchain technology in 
manufacturing supply chain and logistics. Logistics, 6(1), 15.
Rashidi, M., Mohammadi, M., Sadeghlou Kivi, S., Abdolvan, M. M., Truong Hong, 
L., & Samali, B. (2020). A decade of modern bridge monitoring using terrestrial 
laser scanning: Review and future directions. Remote Sensing, 12(22), 3796.
Renda, A., Schwaag Serger, S., Tataj, D., Morlet, A., Isaksson, D., Martins, F., & 
Giovannini, E. (2022). Industry 5.0, a transformative vision for Europe: governing 
systemic transformations towards a sustainable industry. European Commission, 
Directorate-General for Research and Innovation.
Rendall, M. (2017). The New Terminology: CRO and Industry 5.0. Retrieved from 
ttps://www.automation.com/automation-news/article/the-new-terminology-cro￾and-industry-50298 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Resta, B., Dotti, S., Gaiardelli, P., & Boffelli, A. (2016). Lean Manufacturing and sus￾tainability: an Integrated View. In: et al. In: Advances in Production Management 
Systems. Initiatives for a Sustainable World. APMS 2016. IFIP Advances in 
Information and Communication Technology, vol. 488. Springer, Cham.
Romero, D., Bernus, P., Noran, O., Stahre, J., & Fast-Berglund, Å. (2016). The opera￾tor 4.0: Human cyberphysical systems & adaptive automation towards human￾automation symbiosis work systems. In IFIP international conference on advances 
in production management systems (pp. 677–686). Cham: Springer.
Romero, D., Stahre, J., & Taisch, M. (2020). The Operator 4.0: Towards socially sus￾tainable factories of the future. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 139, 2–5.
Rozhenkova, V., Allmang, S., Ly, S., Franken, D., & Heymann, J. (2019). The role of 
comparative city policy data in assessing progress toward the urban SDG targets. 
Cities, 95, 102357.
Rüßmann, M., Lorenz, M., Gerbert, P., Waldner, M., Justus, J., Engel, P., & Harnisch, 
M. (2015). Industry 4.0: The Future of Productivity and Growth in Manufacturing 
Industries. Boston Consultant Group, 9, 54–89.
Sahoo, K. S., Tiwary, M., Luhach, A. K., Nayyar, A., Choo, K. K. R., & Bilal, M. 
(2021). Demand–supply-based economic model for resource provisioning in 
Industrial IoT Traffic. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 9(13), 10529–10538.
Sala, S., & Castellani, V. (2019). The consumer footprint: Monitoring sustainable 
development goal 12 with process-based life cycle assessment. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 240, 118050.
Saniuk, S., Grabowska, S., & Gajdzik, B. (2020). Social expectations and market 
changes in the context of developing the Industry 4.0 concept. Sustainability, 
12(4), 1362.
Saraswa, V., Jacobberger, R. M., & Arnold, M. S. (2021). Materials science chal￾lenges to graphene nanoribbon electronics. ACS Nano, 15(3), 3674–3708.
Schwab, K. The Fourth Industrial Revolution: What It Means, How to Respond. 
Available online: https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial￾revolution-what-it-means-andhow-to-respond/ (accessed on 10 January 2020).
Sharma, R., & Arya, R. (2022). UAV based long range environment monitoring sys￾tem with industry 5.0 perspectives for smart city infrastructure. Computers and 
Industrial Engineering, 168, 108066.
Sindhwani, R., Afridi, S., Kumar, A., Banaitis, A., Luthra, S., & Singh, P. L. (2022). Can 
industry 5.0 revolutionize the wave of resilience and social value creation? A multi￾criteria framework to analyze enablers. Technology in Society, 68 (C), 101887.
Skobelev, P. O., & Borovik, S. Y. (2017). On the way from Industry 4.0 to Industry 
5.0: From digital manufacturing to digital society. Industry 4.0, 2, 307–311.
Stock, T., & Seliger, G. (2016). Opportunities of sustainable manufacturing in 
Industry 4.0. Procedia CIRP, 40, 536–541.
Solanki, A., & Nayyar, A. (2019). Green internet of things (G-IoT): ICT technolo￾gies, principles, applications, projects, and challenges. In Handbook of research on 
big data and the IoT (pp. 379–405). IGI Global.
Sun, W., Wang, Q., Zhou, Y., & Wu, J. (2020). Material and energy flows of the iron 
and steel industry: Status quo, challenges and perspectives, Applied Energy, 268, 
114946.
Tanveer, M. (2022). Supply chain and logistics operations management under the era 
of advanced technology. In: Integrating Blockchain technology into the circular 
economy. IGI Global, 126–136.Analysis of Industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable development 299
Tijan, E., Aksentijević, S., Ivanić, K., & Jardas, M. (2019). Blockchain technology 
implementation in logistics. Sustainability, 11(4), 1185.
Tönnissen, S., & Teuteberg F. (2020). Analysing the impact of blockchain technology 
for operations and supply chain management: An explanatory model drawn from 
multiple case studies. International Journal of Information Management, 52(C), 
101953.
Tripathy, H. P., & Pattanaik, P. (2020). Birth of industry 5.0: “the internet of 
things” and next-generation technology policy. International Journal of Advanced 
Research Engineering Technology, 11(11), 1904–1910.
Venaik, A., Jain, S., & Nayyar, A. (2023). Industry 4.0—Its Advancement and Effects 
on Security of Whistle-Blowers on Dark Web. In Industry 4.0 and the Digital 
Transformation of International Business, 103–121, Singapore: Springer Nature 
Singapore.
Vokurka, R. J., & Fliedner, G. (1998). The journey toward agility. Industrial 
Management and Data Systems, 98(4), 165–171.
Wakunuma, K., Jiya, T., Aliyu, S. (2020). Socio-ethical implications of using AI 
in accelerating SDG3 in Least Developed Countries. Journal of Responsible 
Technology, 4, 100006.
Wan, J., Tang, S., Shu, Z., Li, D., Wang, S., Imran, M., & Vasilakos, A. V. (2016). 
Software-defined industrial Internet of Things in the context of Industry 4.0, IEEE 
Sensors Journal, 16, 7373–7380.
Wang, F. Y., Yuan, Y., Wang, X., & Qin, R. (2018a). Societies 5.0: A New Paradigm 
for Computational Social Systems Research. IEEE Transactions on Computational 
Social Systems, 5(1), 2–8.
Wang, Q., Liu, X., Liu, Z., & Xiang, Q. (2020). Option-based supply contracts with 
dynamic information sharing mechanism under the background of smart factory. 
International Journal of Production Economics, 220, 107458.
Wang, Y., Han, J. H., & Beynon-Davies P. (2018b). Understanding blockchain 
technology for future supply chains: a systematic literature review and research 
agenda. Supply Chain Management, 24(1), 62–84.
Welfare, K. S., Hallowell, M. R., Shah, J. A., & Riek, L. D. (2019). Consider the 
human work experience when integrating robotics in the workplace. In 2019 14th 
ACM/IEEE international conference on human-robot interaction (HRI), 75–84, 
IEEE.
Weyer, S. Schmitt, M. O., & Gorecky, D. (2015). Towards Industry 4.0 - 
Standardization as the crucial challenge for highly modular, multi-vendor produc￾tion systems. IFAC-PapersOnLine, 48(3), 576–584.
Wolniak, R., Grebski, M. E., & Skotnicka-Zasadzien, B. (2019). Comparative analy￾sis of the level of satisfaction with the services received at the business incubators 
(Hazleton, PA, USA and Gliwice, Poland). Sustainability, 11(10), 2889.
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., Wang, L. (2021). Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0—
Inception, conception and perception. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 61, 
530–535.
Yin, Z., Zhu, L., Li, S., Hu, T., Chu, R., Mo, F., Hu, D., Liu, C., & Li, B. (2020). A 
comprehensive review on cultivation and harvesting of microalgae for biodiesel 
production: Environmental pollution control and future directions. Bioresource 
Technology, 301, 122804.
Yount, K. M., Crandall, A., & Cheong, Y. F. (2018).Women’s age at first marriage and 
long-term economic empowerment in Egypt. World Development, 102, 124–134.300 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Yu, M., Lou, S., & Gonzalez-Bobes, F. (2018). Ring-closing metathesis in pharma￾ceutical development: Fundamentals, applications, and future directions. Organic 
Process Research and Development, 22(8), 918–946.
Zhang, Y., Wen, J., Qiuli, Q. I. N., Hao, Y. U., Leminen, S., Rajahonka, M., & Chan, 
H. C. Y. (2015). How smart, connected products are transforming companies. 
Blog.Prossess.Com, 4(4), 5–14.
Zhong, R. Y., Xu, X., Klotz, E., & Newman, S. T. (2017). Intelligent manufacturing 
in the context of Industry 4.0: A review. Engineering, 3(5), 613–630.
Zhou, K., Liu, T., & Zhou, L. (2015). Industry 4.0: Towards future industrial oppor￾tunities and challenges. In Proceedings of the IEEE 2015 12th International 
Conference on Fuzzy Systems and Knowledge Discovery (FSKD), Zhangjiajie, 
China, 15–17, 2147–2152.
Zunino, C., Valenzano, A., Obermaisser, R., & Petersen, S. (2020). Factory com￾munications at the dawn of the fourth industrial revolution. Computer Standards 
and Interfaces, 71, 103433.DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-9 301
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Over several periods, businesses have been exposed to Supply Chain 
Management (SCM). It has gotten more emphasis, and new ideas have 
emerged to adapt to an evolving world. Supply chain studies have been 
researched from a variety of viewpoints, including operation studies, 
optimization, modeling, and management. As a result of technological 
developments, related supply chain concepts like Material Requirements 
Planning (MRP), Manufacturing Resource Planning (MRP II), Just-in-Time, 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), Lean Manufacturing, Customization, 
Six Sigma, and Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) have undergone 
continuous transformations. The term “green supply chain management” 
(GSCM) refers to one of the most current trends in recent years. The atten￾tion to protecting the environment is growing in importance over time, 
owing mostly to climate change and humans’ ongoing damage to the envi￾ronment. Currently, as the effects of global warming begin to influence 
everyday life, citizens, and consequently businesses, are attempting to do 
their share to ensure the rescue of the environment. Designers are discussing 
the incentives and motivations that cause entities to distinguish themselves, 
regardless of whether human beings are dealing with an individual or a firm. 
Although people might well be driven by emotional rewards to begin assist￾ing in the slowing of climate change, corporations require more compli￾cated and interest-based motives, such as money benefits, reputation, brand 
recognition, or compliance with applicable laws. Such ecological activities, 
nevertheless, are not confined to groups. Application at the organizational 
level is inadequate to accomplish environmental objectives. Cooperation 
among a network of companies or between governing agencies and groups 
is prevalent. Cooperation is an essential element of SCM that may occur 
both inside and between enterprises. Since SCM encompasses all product￾related business tasks, implementing environmental initiatives at the supply 
chain layer may be more useful than at the organizational level. The supply 
chain takes into account the complete product chain from manufacturers, 
suppliers, distributors, transporters, retailers, and shops to consumers. As a 
Chapter 9
Reverse logistics and green supply 
chain in terms of sustainability
An application in an enterprise
Aysenur Erdil ̧
Istanbul Medeniyet University, Türkiye302 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
result, incorporating environmental ideas into SCM is more effective and 
gives greater advantages to the entire supply chain while also helping indi￾viduals (Azevedo et al., 2011; Srivastava, 2007; Sarkis, 2003).
The concept of reverse logistics is general; it is defined as processes of 
efficient and effective planning, implementation, and control of secondary 
material warehouses, material flow, and related information in order to 
recover or destroy the material in the opposite direction of the traditional 
supply chain. However, this concept is also known as environmentally 
friendly logistics in terms of recycling and re-producing unwanted materials 
(waste materials, boxes, bottles, paper, etc.) (Koban and Keser, 2013; 
Fleischmann et al., 1997).
Green logistics is concerned with environmental protection. Preserving 
natural sources and discovering renewable sources involves decreasing car￾bon emissions and waste, as well as lowering a corporation’s total carbon 
footprint. The reasons companies choose to go green are that there is now a 
market in this area and green strategies give the company a competitive 
advantage. Customers today want businesses to be green. In his study, 
Srivastava (2007) concluded that customers demand greener products and 
packaging for the environment. Author stated that some consumers arte 
willing to pay higher prices for environmentally friendly products and want 
to know more about content, usage waste, and recyclability.
Reverse Logistics (RLs) is one of the important processes in the supply 
chain in the current period. Reverse logistics studies are important for busi￾nesses due to ecological and economic reasons, corporate and social respon￾sibilities, laws, sustainable development for industry, protection of natural 
resources, and less material and resource consumption. In this case, system￾atic handling of reverse logistics has become an ecological, saving, and legal 
obligation. The process of collecting returned, expired, or unused products 
due to the purchase of a new product has a strategic importance as it can 
create a serious cost for the manufacturer. It is important to focus on how 
the products will be collected, then grouping, sorting, and maintenance of 
the collected products, and through which channels the grouped and sepa￾rated products, raw material sources, or wastes will be transported to the 
target point. Reverse logistics is involved in many industries such as automo￾tive, electronics, computer, chemical, pharmaceutical, and medical. RL is the 
control activities by planning and applying an effective method to ensure 
that the raw material, semi-processed, final product, and its information are 
disposed of properly, from the point of consumption to the point of produc￾tion. The most well-known idea about reverse activities is that the used 
product is returned from the end consumer to the manufacturer. RLs are 
also known as environmentally friendly logistics by recycling and reusing 
(waste material, cans, bottles, paper, etc.) that is not intended to be used, and 
its evaluation (Kaçtıoglu and S ̆ engü, 2010 ̧ ; Kaymak, 2010; Dinç et al., 2008).
If the concept of reverse logistics is evaluated as a process, it is a process in 
which a flow, in which each stage is planned, is applied and controlled in Reverse logistics and green supply chain 303
order to reconvert and reproduce any product, information, or material from 
the consumption area where it reaches the end consumer to the starting area. 
For a more comprehensive explanation, it is necessary to exemplify the term 
in question and if we need to specify the purposes of reverse logistics, we can 
say that the primary purpose of the companies is to provide the management 
of all goods and services in all their lives and all life cycles in their lives. It is 
obvious that the concept of forward logistics, that is, familiar logistics, is 
actually quite different from the concept of reverse logistics. The important 
difference that should be mentioned at this point is recycling. The mentioned 
recovery may be the company that produces the product itself or the recy￾cling facility located in the supplier. RLs have been defined as a concept that 
organizes the processes that include recycling, remanufacturing, resale, reuse, 
and destruction processes to provide gains to businesses. Carrying out the 
necessary purchasing activities in order to organize the waste materials, and 
outdated products and make them reusable before and after production; the 
management of the processes related to the return or return of the products 
is organized with the reverse logistics system (Çetik and Batuk, 2013; 
Kocabasoglu et al., 2007; James et al., 2000; see Figure 9.1).
Universal Collection Center Operations: These include collecting used 
products from product owners, assessing the situation of the returns through 
investigation and/or separation, remanufacturing the rates of return to 
acquire their residual balance, disposing of returns that are found to be 
impossible to recover due to financial and/or technological purposes, and 
redistributing the recoverable products. Product Recovering Options are 
listed below (Pokharel and Mutha, 2009; Aras et al., 2008).
(i) Repairing: When a product is maintained and ready for sale refurbish￾ing: when an item is sanitized and fixed to bring it to a “like new” 
condition with more labor required in the restoration
(ii) Remanufacturing: Remanufacturing is comparable to refurbishment 
but involves more substantial effort; it sometimes necessitates totally 
dismantling the product.
(iii) Cannibalization: Cannibalization occurs when pieces or components 
from one product are removed and utilized to restore or construct 
another piece of the same product.
(iv) Recycling: Recycling is the process of reducing a product to its funda￾mental ingredients, which are then reused.
There are similarities and distinctions between Green Supply Chain (GSC), 
Green Transportation, and Reverse Logistics. Reverse logistics focus on 
product re-evaluation and reuse. Green logistics and GSC are concerned 
with issues such as selecting a more ecologically friendly mode of transpor￾tation and decreasing packaging. With green logistics, the company consid￾ers more than just profit. More crucial for the corporation is the company’s 
image (Rogers and Tibben-Lembke, 2001).304 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
9.1.1 Objectives of the chapter
The current study’s goal is to demonstrate GSCM as a significant research 
field for construction management. Primarily and foremost, the differ￾ences between SCM and GSCM are presented and the literature research 
on GSCM and its subsystems are integrated, which includes waste man￾agement, reverse supply, and remanufacturing. Furthermore, determinants 
of GSCM have been described, which are used to evaluate the success of 
GSCM in any industry or marketplace. In this study, a mathematical model 
approach to decision-making for the issue is provided and the obstacles to 
GSCM are discussed. The present study helps in identifying the initial phase 
drivers of its adoption, especially for attaining objectives and sustainability 
of GSCM and RLs. The study discusses the following research issues: (i) 
To identify the product recovering options and factors of RLs and GCSC 
toward attaining sustainability and sustainable development of companies, 
Figure 9.1 Scope of reverse logistics in terms of waste management.
Source: Figure is modified from literature of Kaçtıoğlu and Şengül (2010)
and Pokharel and Mutha (2009).Reverse logistics and green supply chain 305
(ii) to find the inter-relationship among the identified potential drivers, to 
evaluate the success of GSCM in any industry or marketplace, and (iii) to 
analyze the obstacles to RLs and GSCM for a mathematical model approach 
to decision-making for the sustainability of a business.
9.1.2 Organization of chapter
The chapter is organized as follows: Section 9.2 presents information about 
research methodology, the importance of GSCM for the development of the 
industry, and the company as a significant scientific scope for future research 
in development organization and process for prioritization of the identified 
product recovering option, drivers, and factors of GSCM and RLs. In addi￾tion, the section elaborates and comprises the subjects to make a distinction 
between SCM, RLs and its subsystems, and GSCM, the research on the 
management of waste, reverse supplying, green logistics, and remanufactur￾ing in GSCM and its subsystems. Section 9.3 presents GSCM criteria, which 
could potentially be included to evaluate the efficacy of GSCM in almost 
any industry and environment. This section also covers and highlights the 
GSCM’s difficulties and obstacles, determining the right amount, cost reduc￾tion–optimization strategies, and ideal locations for central return centers 
are crucial considerations in RLs and GSCs. Section 9.4 suggests and dis￾cusses a mathematical model approach to decision-making (multi-criteria 
decision-making) for the problem of GSCM to increase the productivity of 
the business and the sector. Finally, Section 9.5 concludes the findings of this 
study along with limitations and future scope.
9.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
Due to rising environmental management concerns, several writers have 
alluded to the GSC throughout the last decade. The introduction of corpo￾ration environmental management, ecologically minded industrial strategy, 
and SCM research in the early 1990s fueled the emergence of GSC research 
(Zhu and Sarkis, 2006).
9.2.1 Supply Chain Management
SCM is the control of product and service transport facilities, and it encom￾passes all procedures that convert raw resources into finished goods. It entails 
purposefully simplifying a company’s supply-side activities in order to increase 
customer involvement and obtain a competitive edge in the market place.
The inside of Sustainable Supply Chain Management (SSCM) comes in 
second, with the downstream SSCM making the most contribution to the 
company’s performance. The upstream SSCM makes the smallest contribu￾tion. Additionally, the link between SSCM firm performance and publication 306 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
reputation may evolve. They first integrate SSCM with the innovation com￾ponent in addition to expanding the foundation for SSCM and company 
performance. These results also assist managers in better understanding how 
to compromise while using SSCM techniques (Wang et al., 2023).
The mediated channel via which the circular economy capabilities of tech￾nological advances are used can support the beneficial impacts of supply 
chain risk management and cooperation while reducing the negative conse￾quences of combining supply chains. These mediating pathways distinguish 
enterprises with uneven development and are more prominent in popula￾tions with slow growth. It offers a chance to employ digital technology to 
lessen the detrimental effects of the integration of supply chains on circular 
economy capabilities while enhancing the good effects of supply chain risk 
management and cooperation (Yuan and Pan, 2023).
Researchers and decision-makers have focused a lot of emphasis on GSCM 
in the commercial and manufacturing sectors. It comprises both conceptual 
and practical techniques, ranging from lean manufacturing, integrated quality 
management, and relationship with suppliers’ leadership at the level of the 
micro to institutional pressure at the organizational scale. As a consequence 
of social pressure or to meet their ethical and ecological commitments, an 
increasing number of firms are embracing sustainable growth strategies. The 
purpose of this research is to examine existing research and provide a theo￾retical structure that incorporates an efficient developing theories methodol￾ogy between the three essential features of advantages in competitiveness, 
business performance, and worldwide SCM methodologies. The investigation 
used bibliometric analyses to conduct a full review of GSCM works and 
examine its scientific structure, published trends, and topics (Saini et al., 
2023).
More expansive sustainability concerns, including climate change, have 
been overlooked and even worsened by concentrating on decreasing inter￾ruptions in supply chains, enhancing the resilience of supply chains, and 
increasing supply chain sustainability outcomes. In order to improve sus￾tainability leadership by recognizing the interests of supply chains and asso￾ciated issues related to sustainability, the present chapter first discusses the 
complementary relationships among the theory of stakeholders and the 
practice of oversight of SSCM from the point of view of systems. Next, it 
cultivates a novel supply chain concept. By connecting stakeholder theory 
with SSCM, it is feasible to gain a comprehensive awareness of sustainabil￾ity concerns and spot possibilities to enhance one’s choices, deeds, and pres￾ent consumption and production behaviors. The supply chain perspective 
centers on the procedure of identifying stakeholders around the good or 
service being offered rather than maintaining a firm- or client-centered view￾point. It clearly states participants in the Supply Chain (SC), whether they 
are located forward, downward, inside, or outside the focus company. All 
businesses and individuals are urged to use systems approach techniques in 
order to develop a sustainable mentality and increase their capacity to Reverse logistics and green supply chain 307
address ethical and environmental problems. The suggested SC perspective 
aids in efficiently recognizing stakeholders and comprehending sustainabil￾ity concerns associated with manufacturing and eating for managers, politi￾cians, trainers, consultants, shoppers, and individuals. Specifically, for the 
ethical decision-making and behavioral sciences, this expands the present 
understanding of sustainable management through a supply chain viewpoint 
and offers up new study topics (Fritz, 2022).
A multi-level organizational framework is created using an incorporated, 
two-stage technique that combines interpretative structural modeling and 
modeling of structural equations in order to determine the connection 
between Industry 4.0 technology, GSC procedures, and GSC effectiveness. 
The research showed that Industry 4.0 technology had an indirect impact on 
GSC performance using GSC practices and that this relationship was stron￾ger than the direct impact of Industry 4.0 and GSC procedures in the auto￾mobile supply networks. Regarding the efficient adoption of GSC procedures, 
future supply chains ought to concentrate on advancing and connecting 
technologies like the Internet of Things (IoT), Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), 
and Blockchain. Technological disruptions have a significant impact on GSC 
procedures, particularly reverse logistics and green buying, which are essen￾tial for driving improvements in GSC performance. Organizations can profit 
from making decisions for greater environmental efficiency by recognizing 
and connecting important Industry 4.0 technologies with GSC standards 
(Ghadge et al., 2022).
Hugos (2010) defined Supply Chain Management as “the coordination of 
manufacturing, storage, placement, and transportation among supply chain 
actors to achieve the greatest mix of speed and flexibility for the market￾place being serviced.” The SCM idea arose in the 1980s. Previously, the 
method was classed as part of the foundation’s operating and logistics divi￾sion. Porter (1985) stands out amongst the foundational philosophers who 
created the principles integrated into what is recognized as SCM, having 
laid the basis through which all others have developed. With the develop￾ment of the value chain concept for industry, Porter launched a three-decade￾long movement that transformed the approach of exploiting the supply 
chain to improve profits (Hugos, 2010; Porter, 1985; see Figure 9.2). Green 
SCM identifies the disproportionate influence on the environment of a foun￾dation’s supply chain procedures as Figure 9.2.
SCM may be divided into five important regions which the administrator 
should comprehend and steer. These are presented below (Hugos, 2010; 
Porter, 1985).
Production: Production is divided into two categories in SCM – pro￾duction planning, which needs a grasp of the product technique and 
desired usage, and production scheduling, which includes the SCM 
group to possess a good comprehension of supply and demand and 
demand satisfaction (Hugos, 2010).308 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Inventory: Inventory is used in SCM to provide a pillow of material 
expected to perform each phase of the manufacturing operation. 
Inventory’s significance could contribute to a prolonged commitment 
to raw resources, necessitating a tracking mechanism that maintains 
appropriate stock volumes. Current SCM advancements have concen￾trated on developing lean thinking in the profession (Hugos, 2010; 
Vollmann et al., 2005).
Location: Executives should concentrate on where production and sup￾plies must be put, utilizing accurate methods that result in a high￾performing SCM. The technology sector pioneered the “just-in-time” 
or “build-to-order” supply chain approach. Supplies are purchased as 
required from firms with warehousing near the production site in a 
particular model (Hugos, 2010; Christensen et al., 2005).
Transportation: According to Hugos (2010), transportation is the pro￾cedure whereby the product is transferred from one manufacturing 
warehouse to another or is supplied to a customer, and it plays a 
Figure 9.2 Green supply chain management.
Source: This figure is adapted from literature of Hugos (2010).Reverse logistics and green supply chain 309
significant part in SCM. To be competitive in this field, it is necessary 
to give the most convenient methods of accessing while maintaining 
cost management and productivity improvement.
Information: A leader may successfully organize product choices focused 
on supply demands with excellent, accurate information (Vollmann et 
al., 2005). Each of these major roles has contributed to the advance￾ment of SCM. Considering each phase of the supply chain enables 
executives to make production design decisions. Executives who 
implement Porter’s attitudes reform may ensure that the corporation’s 
profitability expands. These stages also assist executives in properly 
directing the traditional SCM methodology toward green supply￾chain planning.
Today’s business community and other sectors of society have made sustain￾ability a very popular term. It is hard, for instance, to pass by a supermarket 
without spotting at least one magazine front depicting renewable energy 
resources, global warming concerns, or the recognizable polar bear resting 
on a thin layer of ice. A range of variables, including the supply and demand 
dynamics affecting energy consumption, a better understanding of the sci￾ence behind climate change, and improved organization-wide transparency 
with respect to their environmental and social policy initiatives, are fueling 
the growing importance of sustainability. The majority of the research on 
supply chains that many might well take into account to be a component of 
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and sustainability has taken place in 
isolation, with little or no acknowledgment of the interconnections between 
subjects such as the surroundings, diversity, human rights, charitable work, 
and safety, and the reality that these are truly elements of the greater, more 
holistic notions of CSR and sustainability just like they pertain to supply 
chain (Carter and Jennings, 2002).
The rapidly expanding research on technologies associated with Industry 
4.0 and their consequences for supply networks contain both excellent 
insights and significant complexity. While previous Systematic Literature 
Reviews (SLRs) started consolidating the research, an SLR that concurrently 
(a) encompasses several core technologies associated with Industry 4.0, (b) 
composes their beneficial and detrimental effects on the performance of sup￾ply chains in a broad notion, and (c) profiles for the important variables that 
promote or inhibit these potential ramifications has still been lacking. By 
performing such an SLR, researchers participate in the establishment of an 
accumulating body of understanding (Rada et al., 2022). Predictive analysis 
and operational intelligence are used in Industry 5.0 to construct frame￾works that strive to make more accurate and less volatile judgments. The 
bulk of the manufacturing procedure would be computerized in Industry 
5.0 since real-time data from devices would be gathered in partnership using 
highly trained people. In comparison to Industry 4.0, Industry 5.0 is viewed 
as the next industrial revolution. Its goal is to employ the inventiveness of 310 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
human specialists in conjunction with efficiency, intelligent, and precise 
devices in order to get wealth and user-preferred producing processes 
(Maddikuntaa et al., 2022).
The research of Xu et al. (2021) seeks to establish the terrain co-occupied 
by Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0, as well as to offer some light on potential 
responses to these problems and maybe others. To keep things simple, this 
platform offers no endeavor to describe or explain what an Industrial 
Revolution, or Industry 4.0 or Industry 5.0, is. Industry 5.0 is the product of 
foresight research, a method of defining how industry and rising society 
trends and requirements would cooperate. As a result, Industry 5.0 supple￾ments and expands on the key characteristics of Industry 4.0. This could 
assist in distinguishing Industry 5.0 from the others, recognizing that the 
earlier industrial breakthroughs are the historical progression of their coun￾terparts. Along with Industry 5.0, a more immature word, the key linked 
ideas are regarded as widely recognized. The discussion over Revolution 
versus Evolution remains currently underway and falls outside the topic of 
this chapter (Xu et al., 2021).
The study of Tayal et al. (2021) combined information systems, Blockchain 
(BC), and SCM. The suggested approach addresses the limitations of the Food 
Supply Chain (FSC) and would inspire academics and businesses to embrace 
and accomplish efficient and successful FSC objectives. BC connections have 
spread across a wide range of industries. Authors received a lot of interest 
because of their ability to create secured individual and commercial networks 
in a distributed fashion. The traditional FSC does not fulfill consumer 
demands for quality, safety, dependability, transparency, and traceability. This 
study describes a novel three-stage method for constructing an interconnect￾ing BC using the FSC that incorporates principal component analysis (PCA), 
Total Interpretive Structural Model (m-TISM), and Matrice d’Impacts Croisés 
Multiplication Appliquée à un Classement analysis (MICMAC). The com￾petitive profile matrix is utilized to generate the MICMAC analysis, which 
can be utilized to determine the driving and reliance power on the inter-related 
drivers (Dwivedi et al., 2023; Tayal et al., 2021).
In order to deliver the initial conversation on Industry 5.0, researchers 
want to present a survey-based instructional on possible applications and 
infrastructure networks of Industry 5.0 in this study. Researchers outline 
various research problems and outstanding concerns which need to be 
addressed further in order to achieve Industry 5.0. SCM is the regulation of 
the transportation of products and services, and it includes all processes that 
transform raw materials into completed commodities. It comprises deliber￾ately streamlining a corporation’s supply-side procedures in order to improve 
customer engagement and gain a competitive advantage in the market sys￾tem (Nahavandi, 2019). Individuals would cooperate and work alongside 
robotic systems without concern of employment instability, culminating in 
value-added services. Nahavandi (2019) explained the principles, character￾istics, and current technology of Industry 5.0.Reverse logistics and green supply chain 311
Within the study of Sahoo et al. (2021), researchers offered a demand￾supply-based economic model for capturing interactions in Enterprise 
Resource Planning – Internet of Things (ERP-IoT) systems that operate like 
cloud micro services. The goal was to boost the usefulness of service provid￾ers. This costing model was built on demand and supply fundamentals, with 
prices given to ERP-IoT flows based on actual bandwidth requirements and 
resource availability. From the perspective of link utilization, flow queuing 
utilization, service providers, and customer satisfaction, as well as service 
providers’ efficiency, the suggested technique surpasses the relevant compo￾nents. The suggested queue scheduler optimizes the assignment of queues to 
ERP-IoT traffic patterns by taking service-level agreement (SLA) criteria 
into account (Sahoo et al., 2021).
Technologies such as 5G, Machine Learning (ML), the IoT, and Edge 
Computing (EC) that are linked with human intelligence and development 
could assist companies in fulfilling demand and offering individualized and 
customized goods at a quicker rate (Li, 2020). This helps SCM incorporate 
mass customization, a key concept in Industry 5.0, into their production 
operations. Finally, Industry 5.0 is a concept that aims to continually align 
the work environment and efficiency of humans and robots. Industry 5.0, 
enabled by a range of developing applications and supporting technology, is 
predicted to boost industrial output and consumer satisfaction. Researchers 
actually discussed a variety of obstacles and unresolved topics, such as secu￾rity, confidentiality, and human–robot collaboration in manufacturing. 
Scalability and skilled labor should be addressed in order to better implement 
the notion of Industry 5.0 in coming decades (Maddikuntaa et al., 2022).
To secure business resilience in the post-COVID-19 future, decision￾makers should rearrange their existing SC infrastructures, with the help of 
cutting-edge technology development and deployment. Lately, Industry 5.0 
(I5.0) has acquired prominence as a framework that provides distinguishing 
elements for the development of robust and inclusive processes while main￾taining long-term SC sustainability. This investigation seeks to investigate 
the problems of applying I5.0 when controlling the impact of SC disruptions 
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic in a developing economy. This study 
used both qualitative and quantitative methods. This research is intended to 
assist managers and decision-makers in effectively overcoming the problems 
of adopting I5.0 in SCs, hence improving SC sustainability (Karmaker et al., 
2023).
Blockchain, the IoT, and Artificial Intelligence (AI) Technology for SCM 
highlights the challenges that supply chain operators face, as well as possible 
alternatives to such issues and challenges. This would then be the first manu￾script that attempts to identify the impact of COVID-19 on supply chain 
structures comprising diverse decision-makers such as manufacturers, dis￾tributors, and producers, and it would then lay the groundwork for future 
studies’ chances that would permit unregulated corporate investment and 
wealth. This would provide the basis for researchers, scientists, and 312 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
educators concerned with applying current SCM innovations such as the 
IoT, AI, and Blockchain. Apart from researchers, undergraduates and pro￾fessional college pupils may utilize this chapter as a reference guide. This 
chapter also offers the public audience a broad viewpoint on themes such as 
computer science, the food industry, hotel administration, design, health￾care, inventory control, and agricultural areas (Chawla et al., 2023).
9.2.2 Green supply chain management
GSCM is the concept of combining sustainable ecological activities￾processes within the traditional supply chain. These processes include prod￾uct design, material sourcing and selection, production and manufacture, 
operation, and end-of-life management. In order to boost revenues in an 
already competitive market, enterprises have increasingly focused on mea￾sures to manage expenses. One approach to achieve this aim is to transition 
from a traditional supply chain to a green one.
The research of Das and Nayyar (2020) examined the conduct of found￾ing fathers contributing to the advancement of green steadfastness in the 
Indian retail market, utilizing similar research of these measurement meth￾ods in four general merchandise layouts: nourishment, do-it-yourself (DIY), 
electronic and family unit apparatuses, and shape and running shoes. The 
results show that in this expanding business industry, social predecessors 
differ throughout the analyzed retail arrangements in generating green fidel￾ity, which refers to a challenge for shopkeepers in their quest to recruit, sat￾isfy, and attach customers to their retail arrangements and establishments.
Previous research on GSCM was collated and categorized by Srivastava 
(2007). GSCM is defined as incorporating an environmental cognition pro￾cedure into supply chain planning, which contains product design, material 
procurement and classification, manufacturing processes, final product 
transporting to customers, and product end-of-life strategic planning after 
its forecasted lifetime. According to this description, GSCM refers to a 
broad spectrum of manufacturing processes, from product design through 
recycling or destruction (Srivastava, 2007).
Being green thereby influences ecologically conscious customers’ percep￾tions of the firm (H’Mida, 2009), which benefits the businesses and, as a 
result, their supplier chains. Ecologically concerned customers can choose 
green businesses, boosting the business’s (and its supply chain’s) competi￾tiveness and business success (Kumar and Malegeant, 2006; Rao and Holt, 
2005). Consequently, in order for the GSC to be relevant and lucrative, the 
initiatives must be properly identified and compensated by customers and 
investors.
Pati et al. (2008), while trying to minimize the amount of waste paper of 
unsuitable quality as well as the total system cost, maximize the amount of 
other scanned recycled waste paper. Authors established a multi-objective 
programming model to do it.Reverse logistics and green supply chain 313
Louwers et al. (1999) and Matthew et al. (2004) worked on carpet recy￾cling; for example, in their study, authors developed a facility location and 
assignment problem for the collection, reprocessing, and redistribution of 
carpet materials and applied the model in Europe and the USA.
Extreme climate change that has affected all of mankind in recent years is 
mostly linked to human activities. The ongoing climate warming, which 
offers huge challenges and threats to the whole human race in the form of 
global warming, earthquakes, hurricanes, storm surges, and floods, is mostly 
caused by harmful pollutants. The purpose of this study is to propose a 
foundational framework for GSCM/SSCM which adds to the Systems 
Theory (ST) and Knowledge-Based Theory (KBT), as well as a thorough 
outline of future research opportunities. The researchers have put up a fun￾damental paradigm for a sustainable supply chain network and have pro￾vided future research suggestions in the conclusion. The present study is an 
endeavor to construct a conceptual framework centered on KBT. The 
research contributes to the expansion of previous efforts that require a 
theory-focused perspective (Dubey et al., 2017).
9.2.2.1 Importance of green supply-chain management
As GSCM expanded in popularity and drew more emphasis from scholars, the 
initial research in the field concentrated on the approach’s major influence on 
the well-being of the surroundings in which organizations operate. Most of the 
original research concentrated primarily on the green paradigm as an economic 
preservation strategy. Porter and van der Linde (1995a, 1995b) addressed the 
fundamentals of the green revolution, which included (a) boosting supply 
economies, (b) lowering waste, and (c) enhancing productivity. According to 
Srivastava (2007), three methods for GSCM have appeared: reactive, proac￾tive, and importance. The reactive method takes the least amount of supply 
development for the industry and often entails revising product marking and 
investigating strategies to reduce the environmental effect of production. The 
comprehensive approach is a mid-level activity in which businesses spend min￾imal money in an attempt to be environmentally conscious and focus research 
and design on producing green and sustainable goods while building a recy￾cling program. The last tactic is value-seeking, in which firms emphasize the 
use of ISO regulations and a green purchasing strategy.
The 4R1D (reduce, reuse, recycle, reclaim, and degradable) idea must be 
followed when incorporating sustainable ecological operations into conven￾tional supply chains from manufacturing to operations to end-of-life man￾agement. Reducing the environmental impact of factors including pollutants, 
deforestation, ozone layer loss, and global warming is the goal of supply 
chain sustainability. Effective packaging solutions can include utilizing 
proper-sized boxes for shipments, avoiding using big containers for smaller 
shipments, and using reusable sheets for plastic wrap (What Is Green Supply 
Chain Management?, 2023).314 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
According to these three methods and paradigms, a conceptual approach 
for understanding the impact of green initiatives on supply chain operation 
is presented in Figure 9.3.
Stevels (2002) highlighted the advantages of GSCM to many supply chain 
responsibilities, encompassing the environment and society, in perspective of 
three subgroups: tangible, immaterial, and emotional. Additionally, a GSCM 
benefits matrix was created for each classification and position (Table 9.1).
9.2.2.2 Green supply approaches to manufacturing and 
remanufacturing
Businesses must place an emphasis on a green supply strategy, particularly 
when considering the current manufacturing methods, which include finding 
strategies to reduce the amount of energy and materials consumed during 
manufacturing. With the aim of integrating recyclable substances into the 
production process, that procedure would enable businesses to monitor the 
entire usage of fresh raw materials connected with the manufacturing pro￾cedure. The procedure opens up additional avenues for analysis and break￾down utilizing three methods: economic assessment, energy, and life cycle 
assessment (Tan and Khoo, 2005; Singhvi et al., 2004; Türkay et al., 2004).
Figure 9.3 A conceptual approach for understanding the impact of green initia￾tives on supply chain operation.
Source: Modified by author from Azevedo et al. (2011).Reverse logistics and green supply chain 315
As rules are implemented, GSCM is required to safeguard the environ￾ment; recycling material is a crucial element of the strategy. According to 
Srivastava (2007), recycling is primarily motivated by economic and legisla￾tive concerns and is accomplished in order to reclaim the material composi￾tion of old and nonfunctional products. The overwhelming costs connected 
with recycling are related to the acquisition of recyclables as well as trans￾portation and processing (Sheu et al., 2005). Consumer devices and autos 
are two businesses that have conquered the cost obstacles connected with 
recycling.
Remanufacturing was described by Chung et al., (2008) as the method of 
using recycled components in the manufacturing technique. The recycling of 
technology and automobiles enables businesses to restore goods to like-new 
condition for continued consumer usage. Even though the quality of the 
refurbished product is equivalent to that of the new product, since these 
items are not new, the method enables a person to purchase an item that 
might otherwise stand out of his or her price range. Sundin and Bras (2005)
examined the procedures required to remanufacture a product and came to 
the conclusion that the product must be cleaned and updated.
9.2.2.3 Green design – eco-design
Starting with the product design, it follows the idea of the product’s lifetime. 
Srivastava (2007) asserts that life cycle evaluation and analysis are both 
heavily emphasized in the research on green design. The design group could 
alter the production process’ basic components to become less hazardous 
and more ecologically beneficial while creating a product. Design for the 
ecology, often known as Eco-design, is another term for green design. The 
hybrid automobile is one of these eco-friendly goods. Automotive producers 
Table 9.1 Benefits of participating in a green supply chain
Within 
classification
Advantage
Manufacturer Societies Provider Environmental Consumer
Component Decreased 
pricing
Minimal 
resource 
usage
Decreased 
pricing 
expense
Lessening 
ecological 
impact
Reducing 
operation 
costs
Completely 
irrelevant
More 
convenient 
to produce
Improved 
conformity
Fewer 
rejections
Trying to 
overcome 
skepticism 
and 
intolerance
Delightful 
cuisine
Feelings Clearer view Business 
on the 
appropriate 
transport
Clearer 
view
Stakeholders’ 
incentive
Mood and 
standards 
of living
Source: Modified by author from Stevels (2002).316 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
have been developing new engines that use less or no gasoline as a result 
of rising demand and dwindling petroleum availability. The hybrid auto￾mobile has developed over time. McAuley (2003) explored the usage of 
lighter and fewer components in automotive design. The manufacturing 
firm requires close collaboration with its suppliers while creating a product. 
Stevels (2002) conducted an investigation on the supplier–manufacturer col￾laboration in eco-designs and additionally demonstrated two effective green 
supply agendas between manufacturers and suppliers.
9.2.2.4 Green drivers
In research, a variety of motivators have indeed been proposed to explain 
what makes businesses want to engage in green operations, including eco￾nomic considerations, legal requirements, social duty, ethical considerations, 
and shareholder engagement (Walker et al., 2008).
Depending on scientific research and the recommendations of a decision￾making committee that comprised industry leaders, the many factors crucial 
to the adoption of GSCM methods have been determined. The key factors 
that this research uncovered (Diabat and Govindan, 2011; Walker et al., 
2008) are as follows: suppliers’ ecological cooperation, manufacturers and 
suppliers collaborating to decrease and remove products, incorporating 
environmental quality management into the planning and operating pro￾cesses, accrediting sustainable environmental strategies of suppliers, lower￾ing energy usage, resource and package reuse and recycling, and ecological 
partnership with consumers.
9.2.2.5 Challenges and barriers to green supply chain 
application
The GSC has been increasingly implemented by businesses in recent years as a 
result of heightened awareness of environmental problems. Some businesses 
began it earlier. For both small and large businesses, GSCM implementation 
faces challenges and barriers. Numerous investigations have discovered these 
challenges. These are obstacles to GSCM are listed below (Mathiyazhagan et 
al., 2013; Diabat and Govindan, 2011; Walker et al., 2008).
The manufacturer’s design is complex enough – it cannot be reused or recy￾cled, expensive expenditures with a low return on investing, a lack of under￾standing concerning reverse logistics development, a scarcity of innovative 
technologies, materials, and processes, the inability to get borrowed funds to 
promote eco-friendly items and methods, absence of senior management 
engagement in implementing GSCM, financial limitations, consumer apathy 
and pressure about GSCM, absence of CSR, absence of environmental aware￾ness, difficulty in measuring and overseeing manufacturers’ environmental 
policies, inadequate government backing for environmentally beneficial Reverse logistics and green supply chain 317
measures, inadequate technological knowledge, deteriorating manufacturers’ 
ecological consciousness, reduced participation in sustainability initiatives 
and gatherings, absence of belief in the ecological advantages, impression of 
being out of accountability, specialists with little experience to green systems, 
corporate practices that limit product/process sustainability, expensive dis￾posal of toxic materials, a shortage of training courses/consultancy/institu￾tions to teach, monitor, and coach industry-specific development, 
disappointment anxiety, absence of collaboration between organizations, lack 
of supplier engagement and unwillingness to share information, and inade￾quate protection of the environment procedures.
The GSCM method is by which the product is transferred from one man￾ufacturing storage to another or transferred to a purchaser. To be competi￾tive in this field, it is necessary to give the most effective methods of admission 
while maintaining cost management and productivity improvement 
(Mathiyazhagan et al., 2013; Walker et al., 2008).
Description of GSCM barriers are highlighted as follows (Mathiyazhagan 
et al., 2013; Walker et al., 2008; Zhu et al., 2008; Srivastava, 2007; Stevels, 
2002).
Manufacturers struggle to keep up with environmentally sensitive suppli￾ers, and distributors worry about upholding environmental principles in 
their own fields. The main cause of inefficiencies and disruption in supply 
chain relationships is believed to be measurement mismatch. The tools that 
are absolutely important for the appropriate governance of commercial 
operations, including the environment in which they function, are regula￾tion and legislation. Environmental rules and regulations are a critical 
underpinning that businesses must perform. It encompasses the sense of 
rejection in implementing a GSC, which might result in lost earnings for the 
business or the concern of defective products, resulting in the loss of com￾mercial advantage. Environmental assessment is required for the implemen￾tation and maintenance of the green paradigm in enterprises. The 
foundation’s work force is understaffed, and/or the staff are of poor quality. 
Fundamentally, a major hindrance to the Small- and Medium-sized 
Enterprise (SME) industry’s improvement in ecological efficiency is a short￾age of human resources, shortage of environmental knowledge inside the 
company (human resources), failure to develop a pollution-free product 
alternatively to meet environmental standards, lack of funding for improve￾ments in technology and other things (especially long term), and industry￾wide technical assistance not maintained (Mathiyazhagan et al., 2013; 
Walker et al., 2008; Srivastava, 2007; Stevels, 2002).
A foundation’s belief is that taking action toward environmental aware￾ness is not their obligation. Lack of adequate organizational systems and 
broad ignorance of supply chain concepts have also been noted as impedi￾ments to GSCM adoption. Lack of awareness regarding environmental con￾sequences or underestimation of environmental repercussions is typical 318 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
among SMEs; one reason for this is that the legal gateway is frequently 
larger. SMEs are widely recognized for having insufficient human resources, 
both in terms of quantity and technical expertise, to undertake environmen￾tal management. Green idea implementation requires significant expendi￾ture, yet the Return on Investment (ROI) is modest. Industries are having 
difficulty obtaining bank funds for environmental efforts. The absence of 
money for environmental initiatives or the realization that the ROI term fol￾lowing the implementation of GSC is quite long. Carrying over GSCM 
activities necessitates greater efforts as well as a higher cost, with fewer 
evident economic returns from these programs (Mathiyazhagan et al., 2013; 
Walker et al., 2008; Srivastava, 2007; Stevels, 2002).
9.2.3 Reverse logistics
Reverse logistics is the movement of resources from the site of consump￾tion to the place of production in order to reuse diverse items that have 
reached the end of their useful lives, reduce environmental harm, and safe￾guard natural resources. Regarding the connection and differences between 
forward logistics and reverse logistics, first of all, the difference in direction 
as product provider and user is mentioned. Then, it is clear that the demand 
forecasting of the reverse logistics concept, which is different from the famil￾iar concept of logistics, is quite difficult. Of course, it is unnecessary to look 
for the quality at which the product was first produced. In the normal pro￾cess, the last stage of the product, that is, the consumers, is not clear, but on 
the contrary, the person who returns the product is clear. Finally, the reverse 
process includes a guarantee process. The main purpose here is to divide the 
product into parts and to find the part that can create the remaining value. 
It is also possible that many alternatives at this point are declared as follows 
(Çetik and Batuk, 2013; Pokharel and Mutha, 2009; Rogers and Tibben￾Lembke, 2001; Rogers et al., 1998).
• In case the product does not work at all, necessary repairs are made 
and delivered to the user.
• The product can be corrected, cleaned, and delivered to the consumer 
under warranty.
• The product can be disassembled and rebuilt, and in this way, it is sent 
to transportation networks.
• As a last alternative, the product is completely disassembled and the 
parts that can be useful are determined, cleaned, and sent to the neces￾sary places to be used again in the production phase.
• It is necessary to mention two different products that can be explained 
in this concept; the first are idle parts that are now deemed to be com￾pletely useless and must be properly disposed of. The second is the 
parts to be used in the production phase of the new products to be 
produced during the remanufacturing phase.Reverse logistics and green supply chain 319
9.2.3.1 Reverse logistics activities
Products that come back to manufacturers for reuse go through various pro￾cesses. These vary depending on what the returned product will be used for. 
There are different methods of repairing the product, destroying it, regain￾ing some or all of it, or selling it without processing. These activities are 
briefly described below (Çetik and Batuk, 2013; Coşkun, 2011; Rogers and 
Tibben-Lembke, 2001; see Figure 9.4).
Product renewal: This is to bring the used product to a certain quality 
and to prolong the product usage period, for example, due to the low 
performance of the car’s engine, the replacement of the part and, as 
a result, the prolongation of the service life with the increase in the 
engine quality of the car.
Reproduction: It is the process of checking the condition of the collected 
used products or components and replacing the old, broken, or non￾functioning parts with new ones (Paksoy, 2012). Salvage objects are 
overused or destroyed and cannot be offered as new. Salvage objects 
decrease value in proportion to their usage or damage. The most chal￾lenging aspect of salvage management is assessing its worth.
Repair: It is the process to make the product work or use again.
Defectives: These have been determined to be actually faulty by the store 
or the client. In many circumstances, a company may notify the manu￾facturer of a fault, and the manufacturer would refund the merchant 
with a replacement product or payback in the type of a check or credit 
(Çetik and Batuk, 2013; Coşkun, 2011; Rogers and Tibben-Lembke, 
2001).
Figure 9.4 Flow diagram of reverse logistics operations.
Source: Krumwiede and Sheu (2002).320 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Surplus Surplus refers to high-quality products that the firm has a sur￾plus of. The reason for this is that the company may have exaggerated 
demand or order volume. It’s also conceivable that this is the outcome 
of a hyperactive producer (Çetik and Batuk, 2013; Coşkun, 2011; 
Rogers and Tibben-Lembke, 2001).
Partial use of the product: It is the use of only a certain part of the prod￾uct in the improvement process. The aim here is to ensure that the 
part of the product that can be reused is reused. A product with this 
feature is carefully examined and disassembled. Its parts, which can be 
reused later, are used in the repair, refurbishment, or remanufacturing 
of other materials (Coşkun, 2011).
Buy out: This arises when one manufacturer purchases an existing inven￾tory of a counterpart’s product from a store; this purchase relieves 
storage space so that the producer may place its product where the 
vendor’s product was formerly, and thus decreases the retailer’s vul￾nerability producer (Çetik and Batuk, 2013; Coşkun, 2011; Rogers 
and Tibben-Lembke, 2001).
Recycle: One of the important issues in reverse logistics activities is trans￾formation. In other reverse logistics activities, the aim is to preserve 
the properties of the used products as much as possible. In recycling, 
the returned products are first disassembled and disassembled. The 
separated parts are classified according to their properties, and in the 
next step, the base material is created and used in the production of 
new units’ producer (Çetik and Batuk, 2013; Coşkun, 2011; Rogers 
and Tibben-Lembke, 2001).
Returns: Returns are items that the client has purchased and utilized. 
Consumer exchanges are often processed in the same way as salvage 
or excess merchandise. Even if a returned item is not damaged, it could 
not indeed typically be distributed as the most reliable supplier and 
producer (Çetik and Batuk, 2013; Coşkun, 2011; Rogers and Tibben￾Lembke, 2001).
Incineration and burial: This process is not preferred much, but it is among 
the alternatives in reverse logistics activities. These are the activities 
carried out to destroy the product itself or the hazardous wastes gener￾ated during its production with appropriate technology without harm￾ing the environment. In this section, it is checked whether the product 
contains harmful substances. (Paksoy, 2012). This process is generally 
preferred for products that will not bring economic benefits (Coşkun, 
2011).
In order to examine the viability of adopting reverse logistics in third-party 
vendors, including shipping firms, a framework for making decisions for 
reverse logistics is created. The fundamental process diagram for the opera￾tions of reverse logistics is shown in Figure 9.4. From the bottom-left to 
the top-right in the representation, the level of complexity of activities and Reverse logistics and green supply chain 321
the amount of information retrieved rise. The typical sequence of return 
in terms of quantity, quality, and expected arrival is of utmost significance 
(Krumwiede and Sheu, 2002).
Unsustainable economic operations cause environmental deterioration, 
which could jeopardize a developing country’s long-term development and 
economic competitiveness. Sustainable business practices could assist busi￾nesses to succeed and increase the condition of life in emerging markets 
(Schmidheiny, 1992).
The conceptual foundation for the strategic positioning precursors and 
reverse logistics results of sustainable supply chain activities was offered by 
the researchers. The study hypotheses take into account information from a 
variety of sources. In the study of Hsu et al. (2016), the investigation tech￾nique and the findings of the data analysis were explained. The present 
study is an endeavor to construct a conceptual paradigm centered on 
knowledge-based thought. The research contributes to the expansion of pre￾vious efforts that require a theory-focused perspective (Hsu et al., 2016).
9.2.3.2 Closed-loop supply chains and reverse logistics
Closed loops, as defined by Wells and Seitz (2005), typically consist of two 
supply chains: a forward chain and a reverse chain, in which a recovered 
product re-enters the typical front chain (see Figure 9.5). In a closed-loop 
supply chain (CLSC), reverse logistics is utilized to feed things that have 
served their purpose back into the forward logistics process. A producer 
develops a product, distributes it to clients, and then enables them to return 
it when they no longer require it. Via repairing, reselling, or constituent 
reusing, these old items eventually constitute half of the product’s inven￾tory. These processes are a critical component of the circular economy, 
Figure 9.5 Closed-loop supply chains. This figure is modified from literature of 
Defee et al. (2009), Kocabasoglu et al. (2007), and Wells and Seitz (2005).322 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
which aims to remove waste. CLSCs, which employ garbage as producing 
supplies, are the starting point for reducing waste. CLSCs concentrate on 
gathering customer goods returns, recovering remaining value, and resell￾ing them. According to the existing research on core recruitment manage￾ment, academics have not studied the behavioral aspects of customers 
(What Is a Closed-Loop Supply Chain and How Can it Help?, 2022; Defee 
et al., 2009). The CLSC is the same as Circular Supply Chain Management 
(CSCM).
The term “circular supply chain management” describes cooperative 
forward and reverse supply chains that are accomplished through planned 
business ecosystem integration for value creation from goods and ser￾vices, contaminants, and usable end-of-life tends to flow over extended 
life loops that improve associations’ economic, social, and environmental 
sustainability (Batista et al., 2018). The Circular Supply Chain (CSC) idea 
advises a change in business operations from linear to circular systems in 
order to guarantee the sustainability of the world. CSC comprises recov￾ery techniques that boost value and lower supply chain carbon footprints. 
A network of connected devices and procedures throughout the supply 
chain is required for the I5.0 transformation to enable intelligent manu￾facturing depending on the unique requirements of each customer. It has 
the potential to be a useful instrument for attaining sustainability through 
a circular economy (Dwivedi et al., 2023). Based on a survey of the 
research and contact with industry specialists and operators, the current 
study outlines 16 possible drivers in the context of establishing I5.0 and 
CSC convergence. To evaluate the criticality intensity of components, a 
mixed model is constructed using the improved m-TISM and the Cross￾Impact Matrix Multiplication Applied to Classification (MICMAC). 
Whereas MICMAC organizes precise evaluations of the drivers’ depen￾dence and driving strength, m-TISM organizes the binary exchanges 
between the drivers. A framework for addressing the factors of I5.0 and 
CSC in order to achieve sustainable growth is produced by the research 
(Dwivedi et al., 2023).
Defee et al. (2009) provided justification for this procedure by stating that 
strategic and operational choices throughout a corporation’s forward and 
backward supply chains must be integrated. This explanation makes clear 
that the goal of a CLSC is to encourage recirculating so that waste may be 
reduced.
In terms of the environment and environmentally responsible business 
operations, the CLSC is the desired configuration, since it fulfills the purpose 
of conserving the environment by reducing waste created. As a result, if a 
CLSC is desired, reverse logistics, a kind of GSCM, is the best strategic 
approach for accomplishing this objective, because in order to reduce waste, 
a reverse circulation must be presented into the supply chain and intended to 
produce the most beneficial usage materials/products obtained, whether with 
the maintenance and reuse, remodeling, remanufacturing, cannibalization, or Reverse logistics and green supply chain 323
recycling (Kumar and Malegeant, 2006; Beamon, 1999). Due to this new 
intimate link, this research examines the research on CLSCs and reverse 
logistics concurrently.
Closed-loop supply networks complicate the existing supply chain since 
they generally necessitate investment, and the newly added supply chain 
functions are fraught with uncertainty (Kocabasoglu et al., 2007).
9.2.4 Waste management
Waste management entails the control of items that have been recycled in 
order to reduce the quantity of materials that are really destroyed and dis￾posed of. Due to the general rising awareness of businesses in the European 
Union, including in the EU nations and in the nations that produce to the 
EU, waste management is a prominent theme in literature (Zhu et al., 2007).
The waste hierarchy prioritizes waste avoidance. To achieve the govern￾ment’s goal of a zero-waste economy, waste prevention should be supported 
and enhanced. Waste prevention, according to the Waste Framework 
Directive of 2008 (WFD), encompasses waste avoidance, reducing waste at 
the source or in the operation, and product recycling at the end of life (Waste 
Framework Directive of 2008 [WFD], 2023).
According to Andiç et al. (2012), some research findings in the previous 
research emphasized on comprehending the essence of the waste (Kahhat 
et al., 2008; Mazzanti and Zoboli, 2008; Pongrácz and Pohjola, 2004; Pitt 
and Smith, 2003; Burnley, 2001; Cardinali, 2001), whereas others attempt 
to recommend alternatives to the waste issue (Chakrabarti et al., 2009; 
Bovea and Powell, 2006; Joseph, 2006; Mohan et al., 2006; Wright et al., 
2005; Boyle, 2000; Haastrup et al., 1998).
9.3 APPLICATION AREAS IN THE INDUSTRY – EXAMPLES
Corporations develop their strategy and long-term reverse logistics plan 
after realizing the advantages of reverse logistics. Reverse logistics is used 
in a variety of sectors and marketplaces, besides electronics, computers, 
pesticides, medicines, internet commerce, construction machines, and medi￾cal vehicles. There are several significant businesses, such as BMW, Delphi, 
DuPont, General Motors, HP, Dell, Caterpillar, Xerox, Canon, IBM, Ford, 
and Phillips, that use reverse logistics (Nakıboğlu, 2007; McAuley, 2003).
Dell: If any order is canceled or returned, almost 90% of the returns, 
which makes eight hundred units, are quickly made usable by refur￾bishing and reselling if necessary. All repurposed products are put up 
for sale through the Global Dell Outlet and Dell guarantee all of them 
just like new. The remaining 10%, which cannot be renewed or resold, 
is recycled responsibly (Application Areas in the Industry, www.dell.324 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
com, 2022a). The success of Dell, one of the leading computer manu￾facturers, in recycling is another example that can be given to the con￾cept of reverse logistics.
Considering that a significant amount of waste will occur at the end of the 
life of automobiles, it causes environmental pollution. The selection of 
parts in the production of the car is a serious step in minimizing the 
harmful effect on the environment at the end of the car’s life. The fact 
that these materials are composed of recyclable materials is of great 
importance in terms of the environment. If it is not possible, differ￾ent material types should be sought instead of plastic material. Tires, 
which are part of automobiles, are a serious cause of environmental 
pollution when they are not recycled. According to the information of 
the Tire Industrialists’ Association (LASDER), around 200,000 tons of 
worn tires are produced in Türkiye every year. New areas of use can 
be created for tires that have completed their time. Truck and bus tires 
can be coated to be reused. Tires with high calorific value are used in 
cement plants, etc. When they are burned in furnaces at high tempera￾tures, energy is produced and waste generation is prevented. Rubber 
is also used in the construction of asphalt, in making sound-proofing 
materials/walls, and in making the tartan floor in sports and parking 
areas (Dinç and Erol Genevois, 2023).
Caterpillar: Remanufacturing is a form of production where the entire 
life cycle of any product is ended, the product is somehow returned to 
the place of purchase or to any dealer, and the product is returned to 
the production facility with reverse logistics systems. In the recycling 
system, which is very sustainable and useful, the mentioned metals go 
to a foundry, melt, and can be recycled by converting the returned part 
into another component. If all these stages are carried out, the product 
does not have to use that energy in the first production stage. This 
is because it already uses metals or materials in their original form 
(Application Areas in the Industry, www.caterpillar.com, 2022b). If we 
need to think of Caterpillar from the machinery industry branch and 
make an analysis in this area, we can think of the metals used by the 
company in the first stage of the product or the materials that make 
up its skeleton as a mold.
Migros: It has become one of the major corporations in the nation that 
has been successfully conducting GSCM operations for many years. 
The corporation strives to lessen its environmental impact on both 
the manufacturing and the supply chain sectors. In terms of energy 
savings and minimizing greenhouse gas emissions, the organization 
also aims to improve logistics and transportation performance. It 
attempts to establish the optimal pathways for distributing trucks by 
evaluating the distances among distribution facilities and retailers and, 
as a result, defines the placement of prospective distribution facilities 
(Sustainability, 2023).Reverse logistics and green supply chain 325
A milk producer strives to decrease the range traveled as well as green￾house gas emissions by developing optimal pathways for transport￾ing milk from suppliers situated in various places. Furthermore, it 
attempts to cut carbon energy consumption and emissions by guaran￾teeing that vehicles transferring items from manufacturers to distribut￾ing hubs equally bring goods back to manufacturers. The corporation 
focuses on measures to minimize greenhouse gas emissions through its 
manufacturing processes, create sustainable energy using refuse, and 
improve resource performance (Sustainability Reports, 2021).
FedEx: The leader in international package shipment, FedEx, has pro￾posed a number of efforts to lessen its effect on the environment 
(Green Supply Chain - Examples of Companies, 2023).
Ford Motor Company: The utilization of recycled components in the 
manufacture of vehicles has expanded because of Ford’s relationship 
to its value chain. The corporation also provides recycling standards to 
global providers and designers, enabling the dismantling of the busi￾ness’s vehicles. According to research, 4 billion pounds of recycled 
content are used in the manufacture of vehicles (Green Supply Chain - 
Examples of Companies, 2023).
Kodak: Kodak used Design for Environment to enable the photographic 
equipment and packing to be reused, recycled, and disassembled to 
make it easier to use the reversed supply chain for extracting resources. 
It collaborated with significant groups to establish recycling initiatives, 
combine logistical resources, and split the monetary benefit in order 
to keep improving the reverse supply chain (Green Supply Chain - 
Examples of Companies, 2023).
Walmart: Walmart uses the Packaging Sustainability scorecard for pro￾viders, which determines the “green quotient” for each item of packag￾ing according to a variety of factors such as emissions of greenhouse 
gases, production-related material utilized, product-to-packaging pro￾portion, cube expenditure (i.e., efficient use of space within the stor￾age area), use of recycled chemicals creative thinking, the quantity of 
renewable energy utilized in producing the wrapping, greenhouse gas 
emission levels associated with mode of transport and packaging sup￾plies, and so on (Green Supply Chain - Examples of Companies, 2023).
Many companies strategically apply the concept of reverse logistics in 
which a flow where each stage is planned is implemented and controlled for 
the purpose of recycling and repetitive production. To explain the general 
approaches of these companies, which come to mind when reverse logistics 
is mentioned, and the measures and policies they have taken, with examples; 
by making environmentally compatible plans, designs that will minimize air 
and noise pollution of the product, and that will provide the highest gain 
in recycling when the product’s useful life expires should be applied. Now, 
corporate companies are very meticulous about the use of environmentally 326 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
harmful products by creating recycling programs (Azevedo et al., 2011; 
Nakıboğlu, 2007).
9.4 MATERIALS AND METHOD
The data utilized for the present research came from the computerized 
databases of important corporate and public organizations, as well as their 
reports on operations. Relevant data that was not obtainable in records 
was acquired through interviews of individuals and customers. While being 
used, the information gathered was standardized. Data normalization is a 
method of scaling that seeks to improve the precision of the values in the 
data collection when doing numerical computations. This constitutes a key 
part of the research. The structure consists of amenities, gathering locations, 
and reversal sites. The model’s goal is to lower total costs associated with 
renting, inventory utilizing, handling materials, choosing orders, and ship￾ment. In accordance with the model, three distinct decisions are considered.
The first and most fundamental decision is to find which collection sta￾tions and centralized returning hubs ought to be established. In the context 
of this preliminary judgment, the other two possibilities are considered. The 
second choice is that the places of collection which have been established are 
open; the total amount of periods remains to be determined; and the third 
decision is connected to the allocation of consumers to the collection centers 
and collection facilities to central return facilities.
A firm, a white goods producer based in the Marmara area, distributes 
and collects the products it manufactures using the prevailing supply chain 
infrastructure. The firm is seeking responses; a commitment has been under￾taken to develop a framework for calculating the entire cost of transporta￾tion if the containers of white products are returned to the plant manufacturer 
to which they correspond. What ought to be the quantity of goods in the 
storage facilities, as well as the supply and demand, and what ought to be 
the total cost of transportation in order to decrease the expense if the prod￾ucts generated are gathered in a storage facility and are to be bought to an 
appropriate location and provided to the manufacturing facilities in full 
trucks?
9.4.1 Methodology
The utilization of mathematical models, especially optimizing configura￾tions, to aid in decision-making is known as mathematical programming 
(MP). There are different kinds of mathematical programming: Ng (2008)
created a weighted linear programming model for the supplier selection issue, 
with the goal of increasing the provider score. It is similar to AHP in that 
decision-makers are involved in setting the relative important weightings of Reverse logistics and green supply chain 327
criteria. For the supplier selection problem, Hong et al. (2005) introduced a 
mixed-integer linear programming model. The model was designed to iden￾tify the ideal number of suppliers and the appropriate order amount in order 
to maximize revenue. The evolution of providers’ supply capabilities and 
customer requirements through time was studied.
To assess and choose suppliers, Karpak et al. (2001) developed a goal 
programming (GP) approach. The model took into account three objectives: 
cost, quality, and delivery dependability. The model was designed to find the 
ideal number of items to order while taking into account customer demand 
and supplier capacity restrictions.
9.4.2 Case study
In the study by Min et al. (2006), a model prepared was used. The main lay￾out of the reverse logistics network concept is depicted in this model. This 
network is made up of facilities, collecting points, and turnaround points. 
The model’s purpose is to reduce overall expenses, which involve renting, 
inventory handling, handling of materials, order picking, and shipping. 
Three different decisions are attempted, based on the model. The first and 
most basic choice is to decide which collecting stations and central return 
centers will be opened. The other two options are investigated in light of this 
initial decision. The second decision is that the collection centers are open, 
the number of days is determined, and the final decision is related to the 
assignment of customers to collection centers and collection centers to the 
central return center. If there is no capacity limitation, each client is distrib￾uted to the nearest collection location, and each collecting point is allocated 
to the nearest centralized return location.
The company, which is a white goods manufacturer operating in the 
Marmara region, distributes and collects the products it produces in the 
existing transportation supply system. The business is looking for answers.
An attempt has been made to establish a model for what the total trans￾portation cost will be in case the pallets of white goods are sent back to the 
factory manufacturer they belong to (it is important to balance supply and 
demand).
If the products produced are collected in a warehouse to be installed in a 
suitable place and sent to the factories in full trucks, what should be the 
product quantity in the warehouses and the supply and demand quantities, 
and what will be the total transportation cost in a way that will minimize 
the cost?
Depending on the given constraints, a mathematical model was estab￾lished and solved in the GAMS software program, and using this developed 
model, the situations containing the above-mentioned constraints were ana￾lyzed and the transportation model that minimized the total transportation 
costs and its results were obtained as shown in Tables 9.2–9.4.328 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Constrains:
i) Production Capacity Factory 1 200
ii) Production Capacity Factory 2 300
iii) Production Capacity Factory 3 100
iv) Shipping Capacity 200
v) Demand Customer 6 400
vi) Demand Customer 7 180
vii) No waste (Production = Demand)
viii) Disabling Transitions
ix) No Inventory in Transposition 4
x) No Inventory in Transposition 5
xi) No negative variables
Table 9.2 Shipping cost per unit
Cij: shipping cost 
from i to j
From (İ
) i \ j 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Plant 1 0,0 5,0 3,0 5,0 5,0 20,0 20,0
Plant 2 9,0 0,0 9,0 1,0 1,0 8,0 15,0
Plant 3 0,4 8,0 0,0 1,0 0,5 10,0 12,0
Warehouse 1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 1,2 2,0 12,0
Warehouse 2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,8 0,0 2,0 12,0
Demander 1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 1,0
Demander 2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 7,0 0,0
Table 9.3 Capacity constraints
Xij shipping 
quantity from i to j
i \ j 1 2 3 4 5 6 Total
Plant 1 0,0 0,0 180,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 180,0
From 
(İ
)
Plant 2 0,0 0,0 0,0 120,0 0,0 180,0 0,0 300,0
Plant 3 0,0 0,0 0,0 80,0 200,0 0,0 0,0 280,0
Warehouse 1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 200,0 0,0 200,0
Warehouse 2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 200,0 0,0 200,0
Demander 1 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 180,0 180,0
Demander 2 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0 0,0
Total 0,0 0,0 180,0 200,0 200,0 580,0 180,0
Min Z = 3260 [$]Reverse logistics and green supply chain 329
Table 9.4 Solution values table
To (J)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Plant 1 Plant 2 Plant 3 Warehouse 1 Warehouse 2 Demander 1 Demander 2 Total output
From 
(i)
1 Plant 1 0 0 180 0 0 0 0 180
2 Plant 2 0 0 0 120 0 180 0 300
3 Plant 3 0 0 0 80 200 0 0 100
4 Warehouse 1 0 0 0 0 0 200 0 200
5 Warehouse 2 0 0 0 0 0 200 0 200
6 Demander 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 180
7 Demander 2 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Total input 0 0 180 200 200 580 180330 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Variables:
i, j: The network’s generic (suppliers, transit points, and demanders) 
node; Generic (Suppliers, Transshipment points, Demanders) node 
of the network; i: From node; j: To node
xij: Transportation amount from node i to node j (ton); Shipping quan￾tity from node i to node j [ton]
cij: Transportation expense/cost from node i to node j ($/ton) – Unit 
shipment Cost from node i to node j
Objective Function:
min z       

j i
x c ij ij
1
7
1
7
Constrains:
j
j
i
x xi
 
  
1
7
1
1
7
1 200 Observed Production Capacity of Factory1: (9.1)
j
j
i
x xi
 
  
1
7
2
1
7
2 300 Observed Production Capacity of Factory 2 : (9.2)
j
j
i
x xi
 
  
1
7
3
1
7
3 100 Observed Production Capacity of Factory3 : (9.3)
x i j ij   200 , : Shipping Capacity (9.4)
i
i
j
x x j
 
  
1
7
6
1
7
6 400 Observed Demand of Customer : 6 (9.5)
i
i
j
x x j
 
  
1
7
7
1
7
7 180 Observed Demand of Customer : 7 (9.6)
x x ij x x x x x x x
i j
i
i
j
j
       



   
   12 13 21 23 31 32  1
7
1
7
6
1
7
6
1
7





 







  
 
  x x i
i
j
j
7
1
7
7
1
7
No waste Production Demand :
(9.7)Reverse logistics and green supply chain 331
if   c i ij  0 , ARCfrom to j i is Disabled D  j isabling Transitions: (9.8)
Not just transition but also persistence in node 6
Not just transition but also persistence in node 7
i
i
j
x x j
 
  
1
7
4
1
7
4 0 4 Noinventory in Transposition : (9.9)
i
i
j
x x j
 
  
1
7
5
1
7
5 0 5 Noinventory in Transposition : (9.10)
x c i j ij   0 0 ; , ij  NoNegative Variables : (9.11)
According to this linear modeling, Constraint (1) minimizes transporta￾tion costs. Constraint (2) states that every vehicle must start its route from 
the factory. Constraint (3) states that each vehicle must complete its route at 
the factory. Constraint (4) states that it is absolutely necessary to come to 
each dealer from another place, and Constraint (5) states that one must go 
to another place from each dealer. Constraint (6) ensures that the same vehi￾cle is linked between dealers i and j. In this case, reverse logistics – SCM may 
choose to close some collection centers and merge some collection centers in 
order to reduce costs and increase efficiency.
However, customer dissatisfaction that may arise as a result of such an 
improvement should be carefully analyzed. The modeled values are as fol￾lows: the best capacity production of Plant 1 is 180 tons; the best capacity 
production of Plant 2 is 300 tons; the best capacity production of Plant 3 is 
100 tons; disabling transitions is 0; permanence in node 6, not only transi￾tion is 400 tons; permanence in node 7, not only transition is 180 tons; there 
is no waste (Production = Demand); therefore, the capacity of total demand 
equals the capacity of total production which is 580 tons. According to the 
solution values, the cost has the optimum value. This minimizes the cost. 
Minimum Z (cost) is 3250 $. Thus, the model of this problem reaches the 
optimum solution values.
9.5 CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS, AND FUTURE 
RESEARCH
Responsibility for the environment is one of today’s most pressing issues. 
Environmental consciousness has grown during the previous few genera￾tions. Green concepts have spread to a variety of industries, particularly the 
supply chain. GSCM has grown in popularity in recent years. This concept 332 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
encompasses all stages of production, from the beginning to the end of the 
life cycle, or from product design through recycling. GSCM is used in vari￾ous economic areas outside manufacturing, such as governance and ser￾vices. Descriptions of Green SCM have been provided in this research. The 
research was conducted in order to comprehend the aspects, drivers, and 
challenges of GSCM.
RLs and green logistics applications have started to increase in Türkiye 
in recent years. RLs and green logistics are implemented by logistics com￾panies operating in Türkiye in order to survive in a competitive environ￾ment and contribute to sustainable development. Based on the reverse 
logistics and green logistics indicators, the research reveals that green 
logistics activities are observed in companies in Türkiye and the measures 
and actions implemented by some companies in line with sustainable 
development are presented with examples in the research. In terms of 
future studies, this method can be applied in different sectors depending 
on different variables determined. Thus, the importance of the concept of 
sustainability is emphasized for different sectors. Apart from this, this 
issue can be handled with the network structure of businesses operating in 
different sectors under deterministic assumptions as a solution approach. 
The solution approach can be evaluated by taking the data and the detected 
variables as input to the modeling and making sensitivity analyses over 
different scenarios. In addition, the model could be made more dynamic 
using decision support systems in future studies. Apart from this, the appli￾cation part of the study can be expanded with different decision-making 
techniques as a method of decision-making at the strategic level during the 
decision-making phase.
The current research is confined to product recovery options for RLs and 
GCSM for long-term development. Additional recovering options, vari￾ables, and drivers may be gathered for future research, and an empirical 
statistical study might be carried out to obtain insight into the relationships 
between the discovered drivers and recovering options. Experts from many 
fields may be recruited in future research to provide their recommendations. 
A disadvantage is the omission of organizational-specific elements such as 
firm size, organizational structure, region, and so on, which alter the inclina￾tions and connection of the drivers. For future study, it is advised that the 
work be extended to the industrial generic domain. The chapter also identi￾fies critical future research directions, stressing possible facilitators of 
Industry 5.0 improvement in the framework of GSCM as well as incorpo￾rating industrial advancements such as Industry 5.0, as industry initiatives 
play a significant role in simplifying efforts toward sustainability. Future 
research demands a platform for national and international collaboration, 
industry associations, and civic groups collaborating on global initiatives to 
solve the drivers for RL, GSCM, which is incorporated into Industry 5.0, 
and sustainability objectives. This research may be expanded to discover the 
finest strategies and practices for implementing numerous sectors and 
industries.Reverse logistics and green supply chain 333
REFERENCES
Andiç, E., Yurt, Ö., & Baltacıoğlu, T. (2012). Green supply chains: Efforts and poten￾tial applications for the Turkish market. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 
58, 50–68.
Application Areas in the Industry (2022a), www.dell.com, Access date: 12. 10. 2022.
Application Areas in the Industry (2022b), www.caterpillar.com, Access date: 12. 
10. 2022.
Aras, N., Aksen, D., & Gönül Tanuğur, A. (2008). Locating collection centers for 
incentive-dependent returns under a pick-up policy with capacitated vehicles. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 191(3), 1223–1240.
Azevedo, S. G., Carvalho, H., & Cruz Machado, V. (2011). The influence of green 
practices on supply chain performance: A case study approach. Transportation 
Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review, 47(6), 850–871.
Batista, L., Bourlakis, M., Smart, P., & Maull, R. (2018). In search of a circular 
supply chain archetype – a content-analysis-based literature review. Production 
Planning & Control, 29(6), 438–451.
Beamon, B.M. (1999), Designing the Green Supply Chain. Logistics Information 
Management, 12(4), 332–342.
Bovea, M.D., & Powell, J.C. (2006). Alternative scenarios to meet the demands of sus￾tainable waste management. Journal of Environmental Management, 79(2), 115–132.
Boyle, C. (2000). Solid waste management in New Zealand. Waste Management, 
20(7), 517–526.
Burnley, S. (2001). The impact of the European landfill directive on waste manage￾ment in the United Kingdom. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 32(3–4), 
349–358.
Cardinali, R. (2001). Waste management: A missing element in strategic planning. 
Work Study, 50(5), 197–201.
Carter, C. R., & Jennings, M. M. (2002). Logistics Social Responsibility: An 
Integrative Framework. Journal of Business Logistics, 23(1), 145–180.
Çetik, M.O., & Batuk, S.(2013). Tersine Lojistikte Teknoloji Kullanımı ve Yaşanan 
Sorunlar, Sosyal ve Beşeri Bilimler Dergisi, 5(1), 364–375.
Chakrabarti, S., Majumder, A., & Chakrabarti, S. (2009). Public–community par￾ticipation in household waste management in India: An operational approach. 
Habitat International, 33(1), 125–130.
Chawla, P., Kumar, A., Nayyar, A., & Naved, M. (Eds.). (2023). Blockchain, IoT, and 
AI Technologies for Supply Chain Management. CRC Press.
Christensen, W.J., Germain, R., & Birou, L. (2005). Build-to-order and just-in-time 
as predictors of applied supply chain knowledge and market performance. Journal 
of Operations, 23, 470–481.
Chung, S. L., Wee, H. M., & Yang, P. C. (2008). Optimal policy for a closed-loop sup￾ply chain inventory system with remanufacturing. Mathematical and Computer 
Modeling, 48, 867–881.
Coşkun, A. (2011). The factors that affect the reverse logistic activities of producers: 
A practice in house appliance industry. 26, 29, 30, 38, 48–52. Nevşehir: Nevşehir 
University Institute of Social Sciences, Department of Business Administration, 
Master’s Thesis.
Das, S., & Nayyar, A. (2020). Effect of consumer green behavior perspective on 
green unwavering across various retail configurations. In Green marketing as a 
positive driver toward business sustainability (pp. 96–124). IGI Global.334 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Defee, C.C., Esper, T., & Mollenkopf, D. (2009). Leveraging closed-loop orientation 
and leadership for environmental sustainability. Supply Chain Management: An 
International Journal, 14(2), 87–98.
Diabat, A., & Govindan, K. (2011). An analysis of the drivers affecting the imple￾mentation of green supply chain management. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, 55(6), 659–667.
Dinç, K., Erol, S., & Yücer, Ü. (2008). Tersine Dağıtım Sisteminde Yeni Bir Model. 
Mühendislik ve Teknoloji Sempozyumu. 328. Ankara: Çankaya Üniversitesi.
Dinç, M. & Erol Genevois, M. (2023). Design of Reverse Logistics Network for 
Waste Tire Incineration in Cement Factories. Journal of Polytechnic-Politeknik 
Dergisi, 1–1 (Early View).
Dubey, R., Gunasekaran, A., & Papadopoulos, T. (2017). Green supply chain man￾agement: Theoretical framework and further research directions. Benchmarking: 
An International Journal, 24(1), 184–218.
Dwivedi, A., Agrawal, D., Jha, A., & Mathiyazhagan, K. (2023). Studying the inter￾actions among Industry 5.0 and circular supply chain: Towards attaining sustain￾able development, Computers & Industrial Engineering, 176, 108927, 1–17.
Fleischmann, M., Bloemhof-Ruwaard, J. M., Dekker, R., van der Laan, E., van Nunen, 
J. A. E. E., & Van Wassenhove, L. N. (1997). Quantitative models for reverse logis￾tics: A review. European Journal of Operational Research, 103(1), 1–17.
Fritz, M. M.C. (2022). A supply chain view of sustainability management, Cleaner 
Production Letters 3, 1–13.
Ghadge, A., Mogale, D.G., Bourlakis, M., Maiyar, L.M., & Moradlou, H. (2022). 
Link between Industry 4.0 and green supply chain management: Evidence from 
the automotive industry, Computers & Industrial Engineering, 169, 1–14.
Green Supply Chain - Examples of Companies, https://www.mbaskool.com/
business-articles/operations/16360-green-supply-chain-examples-of-companies.
html, Access date: 12.04.2023.
Haastrup, P., Maniezzo, V., Mattarelli, M., Mazzeo Rinaldi, F., Mendes, I., & 
Paruccini, M. (1998). A decision support system for urban waste management. 
European Journal of Operational Research, 109(2), 330–341.
Hong, P., Liu, X.S., Zhou Q., Lu, X., Liu, J.S., & Wong, W.H. (2005). A boost￾ing approach for motif modeling using ChIP-chip data. Bioinformatics, 21(11), 
2636–2643.
Hsu, C.-C., Tan, K.-C., & Mohamad Zailani, S. H. (2016). Strategic orientations, 
sustainable supply chain initiatives, and reverse logistics. International Journal of 
Operations & Production Management, 36(1), 86–110.
Hugos, M. (2010). Essentials of supply chain management, 2nd edition, (304 p). 
New York, NY: John Wiley.
H’Mida, S. (2009). Factors contributing in the formation of consumers’ environ￾mental consciousness and shaping green purchasing decisions (pp. 957–962). In: 
Proceedings of the international conference on computers & industrial engineering.
James, R. Stock, & Douglas M. Lambert (2000). Strategic Logistics Management, 
4th Edition, (pp.1–896). Irwin: McGraw Hill.
Joseph, K. (2006). Stakeholder participation for sustainable waste management. 
Habitat International, 30(4), 863–871.
Kaçtıoğlu, S, & Şengül, Ü. (2010). Erzurum Kenti Ambalaj Atıklarının Geri Dönüşümü 
İ
çin Tersine Lojistik Ağı Tasarımı ve Bir Karma Tamsayılı Programlama Modeli. 
Atatürk Üniversitesi Iktisadi ve I ̇ dari Bilimler Dergisi ̇ , 24(1), 89–112.Reverse logistics and green supply chain 335
Kahhat, R., Kim, J., Xu, M., Allenby, B., Williams, E., & Zhang, P. (2008). Exploring 
e-waste management systems in the United States. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, 52(7), 955–964.
Karmaker, L.C., Baria, M. A.B.M., Anama, Z.M., Ahmed, T., Alia, M.S., Pacheco, 
J.A., & Moktadir, A.M. (2023). Industry 5.0 challenges for post-pandemic supply 
chain sustainability in an emerging economy, 250, 108806, 1–12.
Karpak, B., Kumcu, E., & Kasuganti, R. R. (2001). Purchasing materials in the sup￾ply chain: Managing a multi-objective task. European Journal of Purchasing & 
Supply Management, 7(3), 209–216.
Kaymak, G. (2010). Tıbbi Atık sterilizasyon Sisteminde Tersine Lojistik Uygulaması 
(pp. 23–26). İ
stanbul: Marmara University Institute of Social Sciences, Department 
of Business Administration, Master’s Thesis.
Koban, E., & Keser, H.Y. (2013). Dış Ticarette Lojistik (352 p.). Ekin yayınevi 
yayınları, Bursa.
Kocabasoglu, C., Prahinski, C., & Klassen, R. (2007). Linking forward and reverse 
supply chain investments: The role of business uncertainty. Journal of Operations 
Management, 25(6), 1141–1160.
Krumwiede, D. W., & Sheu, C. (2002). A model for reverse logistics entry by third￾party providers. Omega, 30(5), 325–333.
Kumar, S., & Malegeant, P. (2006). Strategic alliance in a closed-loop supply chain, 
a case of manufacturer and eco-non-profit organization. Technovation, 26(10), 
1127–1135.
Li, L. (2020). Education supply chain in the era of Industry 4.0, Systems Research 
and Behavioral Science 37(2) 37 (4), 579–592.
Louwers, D., Kip, B. J., Peters, E., Souren, F., & Flapper, S. D. P. (1999). A facility 
location allocation model for reusing carpet materials. Computers & Industrial 
Engineering, 36(4), 855–869.
Maddikuntaa, R.K.P., Pham, Q.V., Prabadevi, B., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, 
R.T., Rubya, R., & Liyanage, M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling tech￾nologies and potential applications, Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 
25, 100257, 1–19.
Mathiyazhagan, K., Govindan, K., NoorulHaq, A., & Geng, Y. (2013). An ISM 
approach for the barrier analysis in implementing green supply chain manage￾ment, Journal of Cleaner Production, 47, 283–297.
Matthew, J. Realff, Jane C. Ammons, & David J. Newton (2004) Robust reverse 
production system design for carpet recycling, IIE Transactions, 36(8), 767–776.
Mazzanti, M., & Zoboli, R. (2008). Waste generation, waste disposal and policy 
effectiveness. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 52(10), 1221–1234.
McAuley, J. W. (2003). Global sustainability and key needs in future automotive 
design. Environmental Science and Technology, 37(23), 5414–5416.
Min, H., Jeung Ko, H., & Seong Ko, C. (2006). A genetic algorithm approach to 
developing the multi-echelon reverse logistics network for product returns. Omega
34(1), 56–59.
Mohan, R., Spiby, J., Leonardi, G. S., Robins, A., & Jefferis, S. (2006). Sustainable waste 
management in the UK: The public health role. Public Health, 120(10), 908–914.
Nahavandi, S. (2019). Industry 5.0 - A human centric solution, Sustainability, 
11(16), 4371, 1–13.
Nakıboğlu, G. (2007). Tersine Lojistik: Önemi ve Dünyadaki Uygulamaları. Gazi 
Üniversitesi Iktisadi ve I ̇ dari Bilimler Fakültesi Dergisi ̇ , 9(2), 181–196.336 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Ng, W. L. (2008). An efficient and simple model for multiple criteria supplier selec￾tion problem. European Journal of Operational Research, 186(3), 1059–1067.
Paksoy, T. (2012). Lojistik ve Tedarik Zinciri Yönetimi, www.turanpaksoy.com, 
Access Date: 11.05.2015.
Pati, R., Vrat, P., & Kumar, P. (2008). A goal programming model for paper recycling 
system, Omega, 36(3), 405–417.
Pitt, M., & Smith, A. (2003). Waste management efficiency at UK airports. Journal 
of Air Transport Management, 9(2), 103–111.
Pokharel, S., & Mutha, A. (2009). Perspectives in reverse logistics: A review. 
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 53(4), 175–182.
Pongrácz, E., & Pohjola, V. J. (2004). Re-defining waste, the concept of ownership 
and the role of waste management. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 40(2), 
141–153.
Porter, M. E. (1985). The Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior 
Performance (557 p.). New York, NY: Free Press.
Porter, M. E., & van der Linde, C. (1995a). Green and Competitive: Ending the 
Stalemate. Harvard Business Review, 73(5), 120–134.
Porter, M. E., & van der Linde, C. (1995b). Toward a New Conception of the 
Environment-Competitiveness Relationship. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 
9(4), 97–118.
Rada, F.F., Oghazi, P., Palmie, M., Chirumallad, K., Pashkevich, N., Patele, C.P., 
& Sattarif, S. (2022). Industry 4.0 and supply chain performance: A systematic 
literature review of the benefits, challenges, and critical success factors of 11 core 
Technologies, 105, 268–293.
Rao, P., & Holt, D. (2005). Do green supply chains lead to competitiveness and 
economic performance? International Journal of Operations & Production 
Management, 25(9), 898–916.
Rogers, D. S., & Tibben-Lembke, R. (2001). An Examination of Reverse Logistics 
Practices. Journal of Business Logistics, 22(2), 129–148.
Rogers, D. S., Ronald S., & Tibben-Lembke, R. (1998). Going Backwards: Reverse 
Logistics Trends and Practices (pp. 1–283). University of Nevada, Reno Center for 
Logistics Management.
Sahoo, K. S., Tiwary, M., Luhach, A. K., Nayyar, A., Choo, K. K. R., & Bilal, M. 
(2021). Demand–Supply-Based Economic Model for Resource Provisioning in 
Industrial IoT Traffic. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 9(13), 10529–10538.
Saini, N., Malik, K, & Sharma, S. (2023). Transformation of Supply Chain 
Management to Green Supply Chain Management: Certain investigations for 
research and applications, Cleaner Materials, 7, 100172, 1–14.
Sarkis, J. (2003). A Strategic Framework for Green Supply Chain Management, 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 11, 397–409.
Schmidheiny, S. (1992). Changing course: A global business perspective on develop￾ment and the environment, (448 p). The MIT Press; English Language edition.
Sheu, J.-B., Chou, Y.-H., & Hu, C.-C. (2005). An integrated logistics operational 
model for green-supply chain management. Transportation Research Part E: 
Logistics and Transportation Review, 41(4), 287–313.
Singhvi, A., Madhavan K. P., & Shenoy, U. V. (2004). Pinch analysis for aggregate 
production planning in supply chains. Computers & Chemical Engineering, 28, 
993–999.Reverse logistics and green supply chain 337
Srivastava, S. K. (2007). Green supply-chain management: A state-of-the-art litera￾ture review. International Journal of Management Reviews, 9(1), 53–80.
Stevels, A. (2002). Green supply chain management much more than question￾naires and ISO 14.001. IEEE International Symposium on Electronics and the 
Environment, San Francisco, CA, 96–100.
Sundin, E., & Bras, B. (2005). Making functional sales environmentally and econom￾ically beneficial through product remanufacturing. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
13(9), 913–925.
Sustainability (2023). https://www.migroskurumsal.com/en/sustainability/our￾reports#surdurulebilirlik Access date: 12.01.2023
Sustainability Reports (2021). https://www.sutas.com/assets/uploads/hakkimizda/
Sutas_Sustainability_Report_2021.pdf, Access date: 12.01.2023.
Tan, R. B. H., & Khoo, H. H. (2005). An LCA study of a primary aluminum supply 
chain. Journal of Cleaner Production, 13(6), 607–618.
Tayal, A., Solanki, A., Kondal, R., Nayyar, A., Tanwar, S., & Kumar, N. (2021). 
Blockchain-based efficient communication for food supply chain industry: 
Transparency and traceability analysis for sustainable business. International 
Journal of Communication Systems, 34(4), e4696.
Türkay, M., Oruç, C., Fujita, K., & Asakura, T. (2004). Multi-company collaborative 
supply chain management with economical and environmental considerations. 
Computers & Chemical Engineering, 28(6–7), 985–992.
Vollmann, T. E., Berry, W. L., & Whybark, D. C. (2005). Manufacturing planning 
and control systems. New York: Irwin/McGraw-Hill.
Walker, H., Di Sisto, L., & McBain, D. (2008). Drivers and barriers to environmental 
supply chain management practices: Lessons from the public and private sectors. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 14(1), 69–85.
Wang, J., Zhu, L., Feng, L. and Feng, J. (2023). A meta-analysis of sustainable supply 
chain management and firm performance: Some new findings on sustainable sup￾ply chain management, Sustainable Production and Consumption, 38, 312–330.
Waste Framework Directive of 2008 (WFD) (2023), https://www.eea.europa.eu/policy￾documents/waste-framework-directive-2008–98-ec, Access Date: 12. 01. 2023.
What Is Green Supply Chain Management? (2023), https://www.gep.com/knowledge￾bank/glossary/what-is-supply-chain-management#:~:text=Green%20supply%20
chain%20management%20(GSCM,recycle%2C%20reclaim%20and%20
degradable, Access Date: 12. 01. 2023.
Wells, P., & Seitz, M. (2005). Business models and closed-loop supply chains: A 
typology. Supply Chain Management: An International Journal, 10(4), 249–251.
What Is a Closed-Loop Supply Chain and How Can it Help? https://revolutionized.
com/closed-loop-supply-chain/, Access Date: 12. 05. 2022.
Wright, E., Azapagic, A., Stevens, G., Mellor, W., & Clift, R. (2005). Improving recy￾clability by design: A case study of fibre optic cable. Resources, Conservation and 
Recycling, 44(1), 37–50.
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heusers, B., & Wang, L. (2021). Industry 4.0 and Industry 
5.0-Inception, conception and perception, Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 61, 
530–535.
Yuan, S., & Pan, X (2023). The effects of digital technology application and supply 
chain management on corporate circular economy: A dynamic capability view, 
Journal of Environmental Management, 341, 1–13.338 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J., & Lai, K. (2007). Initiatives and outcomes of green supply chain 
management implementation by Chinese manufacturers. Journal of Environmental 
Management, 85(1), 179–189.
Zhu, Q., Sarkis, J., & Lai, K. (2008). Green supply chain management implications for 
“closing the loop”. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation 
Review, 44(1), 1–18.
Zhu, Q., & Sarkis, J. (2006). An inter-sectoral comparison of green supply chain 
management in China: Drivers and practices. Journal of Cleaner Production, 
14(5), 472–486.DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-10 339
10.1 INTRODUCTION
Organizations worldwide are facing increasing pressure to prioritize ESG 
(Environmental, Social, and Governance) aspects alongside profits. However, 
many organizations continue to prioritize profits over ESG factors, includ￾ing some of the largest and most influential companies such as Exxon Mobil, 
Chevron, Toyota, Southern Company, Sempra Energy, Conoco Philips, 
Glencore, British Petroleum, and OMV Petroleum (Armstrong, 2021). 
Despite being from various sectors and countries that promote and fund 
ESG initiatives, these organizations have negative impacts on environmental 
policies. While regulatory requirements for ESG are swelling every day, the 
disclosure requirements for ESG compliance are not sufficient. Thus, inter￾nal auditing activity (IA) is crucial in ensuring ESG compliance.
IA is an objective assurance and independent authority available within 
an organization and designed to add value (Rehman, 2021). IA is the agent 
to the principal (shareholders) that provides satisfaction and assurance for 
the risk management, control, governance, and achievement of organiza￾tional mission and vision. However, IA is not part of the formation of the 
mission, vision, and goals of an organization. In this case, if organizations 
opt not to include the ESG as part of their mission, then it would be difficult 
for IA to provide any sort of assurance and IA would be concentrated only 
on the assurance of internal controls and governance issues (Stojanović & 
Andrić, 2016).
Industry 5.0, also referred to as the “human-centered industry,” signifies the 
latest stage in the progression of industry and manufacturing. It emphasizes 
Chapter 10
Influence of Internal Audit on 
Implementation of Environmental, 
Social, and Governance Factor
Case of Public Listed Companies in Oman
Ali Rehman
A’Sharqiyah University, Ibra, Oman
Yuvaraj Ganesan
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Penang, Malaysia
Nahad Al-Maskari
A’Sharqiyah University, Ibra, Oman340 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
the human experience, with technology serving a supporting role. Within 
IA, organizations can utilize IA’s expertise to facilitate their transition to 
Industry 5.0. IA’s crucial role involves helping organizations identify and 
mitigate risks, ensuring compliance, establishing effective governance struc￾tures, measuring performance, and managing change, as highlighted in a 
recent report by the Society of Corporate Compliance and Ethics & Health 
Care Compliance Association (SCCE & HCCA) (Kuldova, 2022). By lever￾aging IA’s guidance in areas such as risk assessment, energy management, 
sustainable supply chain, emissions management, and reporting, organiza￾tions can successfully navigate the transition, optimize operations, meet 
ethical and social responsibilities, and achieve sustainability objectives.
Industry 5.0, the next stage of industrial evolution, shifts its focus from 
purely technological advancements to a more human-centric approach (De 
Giovanni, 2023). It integrates ESG initiatives with technological innovation. 
Organizations prioritizing ESG initiatives aim to meet sustainability stan￾dards, including addressing climate change and waste management. ESG 
investments help industries reduce energy consumption, manage waste, 
comply with regulations, and enhance overall performance (Madsen & 
Slåtten, 2023). Industry 5.0 emphasizes environmental sustainability, social 
inclusivity, fair labor practices, and responsible governance, emphasizing the 
well-being of workers and the planet (Kasinathan et al., 2022). By embrac￾ing Industry 5.0 and prioritizing ESG initiatives, companies can create a 
positive image, attract customers and investors, and contribute to a more 
sustainable and socially conscious future (Fontaine, 2013).
Industry 5.0 represents a departure from Industry 4.0, focusing on inte￾grating ESG initiatives into technological advancements (Ghobakhloo 
et al., 2022). ESG encompasses environmental sustainability, waste man￾agement, and adherence to regulations. By implementing ESG initiatives, 
industries can reduce operational costs, improve employee motivation, and 
gain support from governments and stakeholders (Kuo et al., 2016). 
Industry 5.0 places a strong emphasis on societal well-being, promoting 
inclusivity, diversity, and fair labor practices. Effective governance is crucial 
for responsible practices in Industry 5.0, with considerations such as data 
privacy, cybersecurity, and corporate transparency. This transformation in 
industry governance centers on human-centric strategies that prioritize tal￾ent, diversity, empowerment, and creating unique value for employees. 
Embracing Industry 5.0 and ESG initiatives enables organizations to navi￾gate the challenges of sustainability, societal impact, and ethical practices 
while fostering a culture of innovation and social responsibility (Mourtzis 
et al., 2022).
Much focus is provided by the United Nations (UN) and European Union 
(EU) on the issues of ESG and now the environment is one of the main fac￾tors of governance. Regulatory requirements for ESG are swelling with 
every passing day and organizations are pushed to provide disclosures in 
their financial statements which are related to ESG. In August 2010, the Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 341
International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) was established with the 
aim of providing a universally accepted framework and disclosures related 
to ESG information (Soh & Martinov-Bennie, 2015). However, after a 
decade of IIRC provided framework, organizations are still in the early 
stages of the implementation of ESG and they are not able to assess the 
effectiveness of the ESG disclosures on organizational performance and its 
behavior toward society (IIA, 2021). There are more than 600 ESG assess￾ment methods available but none of them can be considered a standard 
system applicable to all organizations. In accordance with recent research, it 
was identified that due to several evaluation standards, investors assess ESG 
differently as compared to asset managers and ratings materially differ from 
one assessment method to the other (Wong & Petroy, 2020).
The environmental part of ESG is focused on the climate only. In the USA, 
the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) proposed changes to the 
disclosure requirements which will demonstrate the climate-related risk that 
can adversity impact businesses. Under the new requirements organizations 
which follow the USA SEC’s requirements are necessitated to provide infor￾mation related to the climate risk, the material impact of this risk on orga￾nizational operations and financial performance, and how such risk can 
impact organizations’ strategies. SEC believes that such disclosures will help 
investors to make appropriate decisions for their future investments (SEC, 
2022). With the focus on climate only, control environment is completely 
ignored (Rehman, 2023). Control environment is defined by the Committee 
of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway (COSO) as
the set of standards, processes, and structures that provide the basis 
for carrying out internal control across the organization. The board of 
directors and senior management establish the tone at the top regard￾ing the importance of internal control including expected standards of 
conduct.
(Schandl & Foster, 2019)
IA is required to monitor, provide recommendations, and give assurance 
on the control environment. A strong and auditable control environment 
ensures that organizations are operating in accordance with the approved 
policies, regulatory requirements, and industry standards (Barišić & Tušek, 
2016; Diamond, 2013; Fourie & Ackermann, 2013). The control environ￾ment assists governance management in carrying out their oversight respon￾sibilities. It is highly recommended that the environmental factor of ESG 
should not only focus on the climate factor but also emphasize on control 
environment. If a control environment is properly implemented, it can cover 
the issues related to climate and its related impact on organizational perfor￾mance (Rehman, 2023).
The social part of ESG focuses on the promotion of equality among 
employees and society, relationship with laborers, and investment in 342 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
human-related capital (Commission, 2021). Social issues are often confused 
with or perceived as corporate social responsibility (CSR). The social aspect 
of ESG considers society as a whole and tries to create a positive impact this 
includes data protection, respecting privacy, fair dealing of business affairs, 
and helping the community to grow with the growth of the organization; 
furthermore, the social aspect of ESG is controlled and regulated. CSR deals 
with the organizational commitment of what they choose to commit; fulfill￾ment of this commitment is entirely dependent upon the executive/senior 
management (Polley, 2022; Sila & Cek, 2017).
The social aspect of ESG has existed in our society for generations; how￾ever, few considerations are provided by the governments or the corporate 
world. Many policies were drafted, and provisional laws were created but to 
date, there is no visible impact available. In accordance with the study, it 
was identified that there is no relationship between the social responsibility 
of an organization with its financial performance (Han et al., 2016). The 
social aspect is included in the organizational budget or fewer contributions 
are made for the sake of attracting the investment and to please sharehold￾ers (Ellemers & Chopova, 2021). The purpose of society was completely 
ignored and financial gains were Fraud cases like Formosa Plastics and 
Atlantic Richfield are recent evidence where organizations are harming soci￾ety for the sake of their profits and the legislative authorities are busy impos￾ing petty fines and not mitigating the root cause (Patton & Reisch, 2021; 
Jobin, 2021; Justice, 2020).
In the current business environment, it is necessary for organizations to 
identify which social aspects are necessary for their organization that can 
have a positive impact on its employees, customers, and society. Clear mes￾sages and communication should be made with the stakeholders and not 
only with the shareholders with the embedded accountability. The role of IA 
is very critical in the manner of auditing and providing opinions for the 
social aspect of ESG. In order to ensure routine and rigorous investigation 
and reporting of incidents, IA should clearly define risks and materiality. It 
is essential that the IA can identify the tools it needs to accurately collect and 
measure performance data, with adequate segregation between information 
providers and approvers. In general, companies should align their policies 
and assurance activities such as IA with their business risks and strategic 
goals. It is particularly important for IA to take necessary accountability 
steps as a growing number of companies release annual reports and incor￾porate ESG-related key performance metrics into executive compensation 
contracts and shareholders reports (IIA, 2021).
The governance aspect of ESG deals with the governance of the organiza￾tion which can have an impact on the company and society. Governance of 
ESG is defined as decision-making and segregation of duties among the 
board of directors (BOD) and executive management with the focus of mak￾ing the organization more responsible toward environmental and social 
aspects. Governance in this scenario also impacts organizational culture and 
responsible investment (Global S&P, 2020; Miler, 2021; Bank, 2020). It is Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 343
worth noting that to date, there is no specific definition of the governance 
aspect of ESG, and it cannot be utilized interchangeably with the corporate 
governance available and imposed by many governments as codes of corpo￾rate governance.
Corporate governance has standard definitions across several codes devel￾oped by many countries; however, all the definitions explain the policies, 
processes, and controls toward individuals and businesses in the develop￾ment of the organization and its related economic system. Corporate gover￾nance also obliges organizations to demonstrate relevant information that is 
comparable and enables stakeholders to make appropriate decisions 
(Rehman & Hashim, 2018; Broni & Velentzas, 2012). Codes of corporate 
governance in Oman were first issued in the year 2002 and revised codes 
were issued in the year 2016 (Rehman, 2021). Fewer changes to these codes 
are made as and when required. Public listed companies in Oman are neces￾sitated to follow the codes and the Commercial Companies Law for better 
control and disclosure purposes. Codes in Oman require that all boards of 
directors must have expertise in finance and accounts, understand general 
business trends, be aware of industry best practices, have proper experience 
in the business of the company, and have the ability to contribute as an effec￾tive steward of the organization (CMA, 2016). Under the code, the BOD is 
not required to have knowledge of ESG, and they are not answerable for the 
impact on the environment or social aspects of their businesses.
The role of IA in corporate governance is obvious and regulators in Oman 
have given more authority to IA to perform their work with complete inde￾pendence and objectivity (Rehman, 2021). IA is required to perform audits 
and provide meaningful recommendations which enhance the organiza￾tional value. IA’s key focus area is governance, risk, and compliance within 
organizations which enables it to provide opinions and recommendations. 
IA reports to the Audit and Risk Committee (ARC) and provides overall 
opinion during the financial yearend of the company. Capital Market 
Authority (CMA) is the regulatory authority in Oman that governs and 
manages the codes of corporate governance. IA in public listed companies is 
obliged to follow the guidelines provided by the CMA and the standards 
provided by the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) (CMA, 2021; Thottoli,
2022). There are several other mandatory guidelines issued by many other 
authorities but in Oman, IA is required to follow only the guidelines pro￾vided by CMA and IIA. To date, both CMA and IIA are silent about the 
guidance or standards of ESG and the role of IA in it. IIA is considering 
adding or amending their framework to reflect ESG in IA’s charter; whereas 
there is no visible effort available from CMA that can demonstrate that they 
are planning to amend codes of corporate governance or guidelines for IA 
to include ESG parameters or ESG-related clauses.
With the application of stewardship theory and agency theory, this chapter 
intends to define the impact of IA on ESG within Omani public listed compa￾nies. IA is the agent for its principle under agency theory (Adams, 1994; 
Colbert & Jahera, 1988), and investors or shareholders are responsible 344 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
stewards of the organization (Chevrollier et al., 2020). Stewardship theory 
provides a supportive basis for change and has the potential to initiate signifi￾cant changes in the behavior of the investors (Klettner, 2021). This study 
identified the potential improvements within the codes of corporate gover￾nance and the framework of IA. Recommendations were also be provided for 
the inclusion or incorporation of the ESG clauses within organizational poli￾cies and the inclusion of a control environment along with the climate factor. 
This study can be beneficial to regulators, standard-setting bodies, and 
organizations.
This study aims to fill the research gap by examining the impact of IA on 
ESG implementation and offering recommendations for the integration of 
ESG clauses into organizational policies, amendments to corporate gover￾nance codes, and the advancement of knowledge regarding ESG factors spe￾cific to the Omani context. By addressing these objectives, this research aims 
to contribute to the existing body of knowledge, inform future research and 
practice, and promote alignment with international ESG standards and reg￾ulations. Furthermore, by examining the experiences of companies in Oman, 
this research can provide valuable insights that can be used for research and 
practice in other regions with similar social, economic, and regulatory con￾texts such as Gulf Corporation Council (GCC) countries.
Till date, there is no study conducted for the Omani public listed compa￾nies which identify the impact of IA on ESG. This study is an effort to 
enhance the existing body of knowledge and, if adopted by CMA, will 
enable the Omani listed companies to be aligned with the regulations of 
many other countries of the world such as the European Union and the USA. 
This alignment will also assist in capturing the ESG funds committed by 
several authorities.
10.1.1 Objectives of the chapter
The objectives of the chapter are as follows:
• To identify the impact of IA on ESG implementation within Omani 
public listed companies;
• To offer recommendations for the integration of ESG clauses into 
organizational policies and amendments to corporate governance 
codes;
• To advance knowledge regarding ESG factors specific to the Omani 
context;
• To contribute to the existing body of knowledge, inform future 
research and practice, and promote alignment with international ESG 
standards and regulations;
• And, to provide valuable insights for research and practice in other 
regions with similar social, economic, and regulatory contexts, such as 
GCC countries.Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 345
10.1.2 Organization of the chapter
The rest of the chapter is organized as: Section 10.2 defines the literature 
review, Section 10.3 defines associated theories, Section 10.4 describes meth￾odologies, Section 10.5 defines results and discussion, and, finally, Section 
10.6 concludes the chapter with future scope.
10.2 LITERATURE REVIEW
This section will discuss the relevant literature and associated theories. This 
section will also identify the gaps within literature and ESG-related codes 
and shed light on the correlation of ESG and IA with Industry 5.0.
10.2.1 Environmental, social, and governance (ESG) 
factors
Organizational sustainability is now linked with the ESG factors of gov￾ernance. ESG highlights the facts that are relevant to the organizational 
survival and its future viability to support society. The The environmental 
factor focuses on the climate aspect which can be impacted by the orga￾nization and how organizations are reducing environmental emissions. 
Social factors identify how organizations are socially active in generat￾ing ethical values, respecting and promoting their employees, and assuring 
the proper human rights. The governance factor of ESG is related to the 
organizational efforts to maintain good investor relations through proper 
management systems and efficient processes (Dicuonzo et al., 2022). ESG￾related matters will be going to impact the organizations positively and 
negatively (OCEG, 2021). ESG will impact positively when organizations 
make their ESG efforts more visible and not only limited to financial state￾ment disclosures. The negative impact will be obvious when organizations 
fail to demonstrate their efforts toward ESG. In accordance with recent 
research, it was identified that organizations are more focused on the dis￾closure of the governance factor, and very little transparency is provided 
for the environmental factor, whereas social factor information varies 
materially from organization to organization and from sector to sector 
(Tamimi & Sebastianelli, 2017). These factors are discussed in detail in the 
below sub-sections.
10.2.2 Environmental factor
The environmental factor in ESG highlights the importance of protecting the 
environment and minimizing environment-related damages. Environment 
caters for the controlling of pollution, protection of natural resources, 
and having a positive impact on climate change (Lee & Suh, 2022). 346 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Organizations are required to be knowledgeable about energy conservation 
or consumption, water usage, greenhouse gas emissions, and reduction of 
carbon footprints. With this knowledge, organizations might end up earning 
more profits and at the same time create a positive impact on the climate.
Organizations like Google set the example of achieving environmental 
sustainability by investing in energy-efficient data centers, having green 
transportation, and utilizing recyclable materials to build their offices (Team, 
2022). There are other examples of a similar sort where garment industries 
utilize recyclable materials to produce their products; however, there is no 
established link between environmentally friendly organizations and their 
increased earnings (Lee & Suh, 2022). In the year 2016, Volkswagen admit￾ted to conducting environmental fraud (Jong & Linde, 2022) and was 
penalized for USD 2.8 billion; however, its sales grew from USD 216 billion 
to USD 250 billion from the year 2016 to 2021 (Carlier, 2022). The environ￾mental factor is a sentiment that is difficult to measure and differs from 
person to person.
The environmental factor only relates to the climate and does not con￾sider the organizational environment which impacts the social and gover￾nance factors. It is important to note that the satisfaction of all stakeholders 
is necessary including customers and employees and without emphasizing 
the organizational environment ESG cannot succeed. There are no specific 
environmental measures available for the organizations and there is no clear 
link between the environmental factor of ESG with social and governance 
factors. Available measures are only for specific industries and restricted to 
a few countries (Worker, 2015; Lee & Suh, 2022). Furthermore, there is no 
application or software available which can measure the environmental 
impact of the organizations, and hence reliable reporting cannot be made 
properly (Parmelee, 2021).
Despite the non-availability of a standard definition, basis for measure￾ment, or disclosure, it is understood by the organizational executives that 
climate change is not a distant threat anymore, and mitigating actions are 
required to reduce or diminish any adverse effects created by their organiza￾tion. Many organizations are facing the threats of scarcity of resources and 
natural disasters; however, a gap exists between organizational feelings and 
actual actions (Parmelee, 2021; Mazzotta, 2021). It is required that coun￾tries translate their environmental policies into the codes of corporate gov￾ernance and develop related standards. Compliance with the codes and 
standards can be assured via regulators and IA. This could be the first step 
toward environmental policy implementation. Organizations are facing 
pressure from their customers to be environmentally friendly; however, in 
the absence of any measures or specific requirements, it would be difficult to 
identify whether customers’ needs were met or not. Furthermore, it is also 
required to develop standardized mechanisms to measure the environmental 
effect regardless of the nature of the organization and the country of its 
operations (Lee & Suh, 2022).Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 347
10.2.3 Social factor
Social factors deal with the organizational relationship with their employ￾ees, their behavior toward the society in which they operate, and their con￾tribution to the political environment. The social factor can also be termed 
as social investment toward sustainability. The social factor of ESG has a 
financial impact and could also impact the organizational reputation. The 
social aspect can also be termed as corporate social responsibility; how￾ever, the social of ESG is different from CSR (Park et al., 2022; Pelosi & 
Adamson, 2016). When organizations are socially active, they think beyond 
numbers invest in their human capital, and also try to build the society 
(Escrig-Olmedo et al., 2019).
CSR is required to be focused on the social well-being of the organization 
which increases the organizational value (Feroz & Kumar, 2012). 
Organizations are obliged by the law and codes of corporate governance to 
be socially responsible and for this reason, many directives have been issued 
and implemented in many countries, whereas the social aspect of ESG tries 
to link it with the environmental and governance aspects of the organization 
(Gerard, 2019). Social factors play a major role in the organizations’ dem￾onstration of their non-financial performance and therefore it is the focus of 
many potential investors; however, there is no clarity available in the shape 
of standards on what should be considered a socially active organization 
(Waas, 2021) and the social aspect is not integrated into many organiza￾tional business models (Pelosi & Adamson, 2016).
There is a lack of board oversight on the social aspects and less concentra￾tion is provided by the executive management on this factor; furthermore, 
organizations do not have any data to identify and mitigate social risk 
(Pelosi & Adamson, 2016). This highlights the fact that there is a lack of 
accountability and organizations are not eager to build positive associations 
with the communities in which they are operating.
Similar to the environmental aspect, there is no definitive measurement 
available for the social aspect (Wong & Petroy, 2020; Berg et al., 2019). The 
social factor is utilized by the organizations just to fulfill the disclosure needs 
as organizations do not see any potential benefits toward investment in the 
social aspect (Becchetti et al., 2022). A similar context was provided by 
Zeilina and Toth (2021) where it was stated that the environment is the more 
important factor for organizations as compared to the social factor; organi￾zations do not have any data to act on the social contribution and organiza￾tions fail to measure the qualitative data as social aspect cannot be measured 
in quantitative terms. If the social factor is properly implemented, then it can 
assist organizations in reducing economic uncertainties, eliminating bias in 
bonus distributions and salary increments, mitigating the risk of human traf￾ficking, and helping society progress toward sustainability. Social factors help 
in creating societies with socio-economic equality, diversity, and inclusion 
and provide rights to all individuals.348 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
10.2.4 Governance factor
Governance factors refer to the organizational governance available within 
the organization. Governance refers to the policies and procedures that are 
adopted by the organizations enabling them to achieve their mission and 
vision. Governance management refers to those who are responsible for the 
implementation of policies and the achievement of good/mature governance 
(Rehman & Hashim, 2018).
For ESG, the governance factor is working toward the achievement of 
social and environmental factors. Poor/immature governance can lead to 
many environmental or social frauds (Global S&P, 2020; Jong & Linde, 
2022). Governance in an organization gives authority and creates account￾abilities for the BOD and executive management (EM). The policies are 
approved by the BOD and implemented by EM. For the assurance part of 
governance, the ARC and IA play a vital role. Assurance is provided to the 
shareholders to ensure that the established policies are achieving the desired 
results and EM is implementing the policies properly (Rehman, 2021).
For the development of sustainable business practices, good/mature cor￾porate governance is required. Mature corporate governance is essential for 
effective capital allocation, preserving long-term growth, employment sus￾tainability, and providing better services for society and its related develop￾ment (Khan, 2019). The governance factor assists in creating openness and 
trust, shareholders’ rights, and control executives’ payments, and develop￾ing stakeholder engagement plans (Li et al., 2021).
Governance reporting provides information related to the economic, 
environmental, and social aspects of the organizations (Pritchard & Çalıyurt, 
2021). These aspects can also be considered as dimensions for sustainable 
corporate governance. These dimensions were further extended by adding 
two more aspects namely political and territorial dimensions. In the year 
2019, two additional dimensions were added namely corporate governance 
and the nature of the product (Dvořáková & Zborkova, 2014; Lombardi 
et al., 2019).
Corporate sustainability can be achieved by integrating all seven dimen￾sions of sustainable development. However, several scholars believe that the 
economic dimension provides the strongest financial foundation and pre￾vents organizations from collapsing due to financial issues. Through organi￾zations’ governance practices and economic development, companies can 
achieve corporate governance sustainability (Rehman & Hashim, 2021) 
and it can be established that by achieving sustainable corporate gover￾nance, organizations can achieve environmental and social goals.
In the current business environment, sustainability reports do not address 
the governance aspect of ESG, and their prime focus is on the environmental 
aspect only. This highlights the issue that complete metrics of ESG cannot be 
obtained and still rating agencies are gauging these factors in silos (OCEG, 
2021).Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 349
10.2.5 ESG and Industry 5.0
The concept of Industry 5.0 has sparked numerous discussions, leaving peo￾ple curious about what lies ahead. While Industry 4.0 primarily centered on 
technological advancements (Kumar & Nayyar, 2020) such as AI, block￾chain, and the Internet of Things in various industries, Industry 5.0 brings 
a humanistic approach to the machine-dependent nature of Industry 4.0 
(Pramanik et al., 2022). Industry 5.0 represents a leap forward, merging the 
realms of technology, humanity, society, environment, and sustainability. In 
Industry 5.0, the focus shifts toward integrating ESG initiatives into techno￾logically innovative.
Organizations that prioritize the development of ESG initiatives aim to 
adhere to a set of standards that uphold their socially conscious image in the 
eyes of investors and customers. Kotsantonis and Serafeim (2019) explained 
that ESG initiatives encompass environmental criteria that allow organiza￾tions to operate sustainably on a global and local scale, including corporate 
policies geared toward addressing climate change. Another influential factor 
within ESG initiatives is waste management, considering the increasing pol￾lution levels worldwide and their impact on human lifestyles in different 
countries (Li et al., 2021).
Since early industrialization, industries have been expanding and develop￾ing; however, this has also led to an increase in solid waste generated from 
these industries. This necessitates the implementation of environmental 
measures throughout the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals 
2030 (UN SDG). Waste management involves the proper utilization of waste 
materials through recycling or reusing, thereby reducing landfill volumes 
and waste (Pedersen et al., 2021). ESG initiatives encompass investments in 
waste management, which not only mitigate environmental impact but also 
reduce raw material costs through recycling. Managing the entire supply 
chain, from manufacturing to packaging and delivery, is crucial for minimiz￾ing carbon footprint and waste generation. Consequently, ESG investments 
help assess and improve overall industry performance, ultimately enhancing 
the sustainability of the entire industry area.
Implementing ESG propositions facilitates the reduction of energy con￾sumption and water usage, enabling industries to lower their overall opera￾tional costs. Organizations that prioritize sustainability in their operations 
can gain greater flexibility through deregulation, earning governmental sup￾port and subsidies (Phillips et al., 2019). Moreover, by embracing ESG ini￾tiatives industries can also boost employee motivation levels (Sachin and 
Rajesh, 2022). Industries are increasingly leveraging benefits from suppliers, 
compliance, and enhanced visibility to promote their operations in an eco￾friendly manner (Stranieri et al., 2019). Therefore, prioritizing ESG initia￾tives in industrial operations not only showcases progress in environmental 
sustainability but also creates a positive image that attracts customers and 
investors.350 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
10.2.5.1 Environmental transformation in Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0 is not solely focused on efficiency and productivity like its pre￾decessor, Industry 4.0 (Madsen & Slåtten, 2023). Industry 5.0 embraces 
sustainability as a core principle, placing the well-being of workers and the 
planet at the center of its vision (Xu et al., 2021). It examines the integra￾tion of technologies and practices that minimize ecological footprints and 
promote renewable energy, efficient waste management, and eco-friendly 
manufacturing processes. Additionally, it highlights the importance of 
adhering to environmental regulations and standards, addressing climate 
change, and preserving natural resources within the context of Industry 5.0 
(Maddikunta et al., 2022).
Embracing Industry 4.0 has been a significant focus for many companies, 
driven by technological advancements and automation. However, the next 
revolution, Industry 5.0, is already emerging, bringing with it a paradigm 
shift toward environmental sustainability (Broo et al., 2022). Industry 5.0, 
according to the European Union, envisions an industry that goes beyond 
efficiency and productivity to emphasize its role in society (Saniuk et al., 
2022). It prioritizes the well-being of workers and utilizes new technologies 
to create prosperity while respecting the planet’s ecological limits. This rep￾resents a radical departure from the traditional profit-oriented approach, 
highlighting the urgent need to repurpose the core objectives of the industry 
toward a more environmentally conscious and sustainable future.
10.2.5.2 Social transformation in Industry 5.0
Social factors are an integral part of Industry 5.0, as it emphasizes the human 
aspect of technological innovation. Industry 5.0 fosters inclusivity, diversity, 
and fair labor practices, ensuring that technological advancements benefit 
all members of society. Furthermore, the sub-section explores the impact of 
Industry 5.0 on employment, skill development, and the redistribution of 
wealth. It also investigates the potential social challenges and ethical consid￾erations that arise from the implementation of Industry 5.0 (Carayannis & 
Morawska-Jancelewicz, 2022; Carayannis & Morawska, 2023; Kasinathan 
et al., 2022).
Industry 5.0 goes beyond economic value and places a strong emphasis on 
societal value and well-being. This shift from a welfare-oriented approach to 
one focused on well-being reflects a growing awareness of the importance of 
considering the social impact of businesses (Cenci & Cawthorne, 2020). 
While concepts such as CSR, ESG, and the Triple Bottom Line have existed 
for some time, Industry 5.0 takes this idea further by centering the definition 
of industry around people and the planet rather than solely on profits and 
growth (De Giovanni, 2023). This aligns with a broader trend in recent 
years on business and economics that integrates social value and the well￾being of humans and society.Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 351
10.2.5.3 Governance transformation in Industry 5.0
Effective governance is crucial in harnessing the benefits of Industry 5.0 and 
ensuring responsible and ethical practices (Ghobakhloo et al., 2023). The 
role of governments, regulatory bodies, and policymakers in shaping the 
development and deployment of Industry 5.0 technologies is critical (Saniuk 
et al., 2022) and this can include legal and ethical considerations related to 
data privacy and cybersecurity, and intellectual property rights are given 
additional value within Industry 5.0. Furthermore, transparency, account￾ability, and corporate governance are the major pillars in facilitating the 
successful implementation of Industry 5.0 initiatives.
Industry 5.0’s impact extends to the governance of organizations 
(Olaizola et al., 2022). A human-centric strategy is at the core of Industry 
5.0, promoting talent, diversity, and empowerment (Huang et al., 2022). 
This shift in perspective implies a departure from viewing people as mere 
resources to seeing them as the ultimate beneficiaries of organizational 
efforts. In a job market where attracting and retaining talent has become 
increasingly challenging, organizations need to adapt their strategies to pri￾oritize the well-being and unique value creation of their employees (Earle, 
2003). By placing human-centricity at the forefront, Industry 5.0 challenges 
the traditional notion of a strategy focused solely on gaining a competitive 
advantage for customers. Instead, it calls for strategies that prioritize a 
competitive advantage through creating unique value for employees, foster￾ing a culture of empowerment, and supporting individual growth and 
fulfillment.
10.2.6 Internal audit
Internal audit has evolved significantly over the past century, from its origins 
as a compliance-focused function to a strategic and value-added service. In 
the early 20th century, internal audit was primarily focused on ensuring 
compliance with accounting standards and preventing fraud. However, with 
the growth of large corporations and the increased complexity of business 
operations, the role of internal audit expanded to include broader risk man￾agement and control functions.
The IIA was established in 1941, as a professional organization dedicated 
to promoting the importance and value of internal audit. The organization 
initially focused on providing education and training to internal auditors, as 
well as establishing professional standards for the industry. The IIA also devel￾oped a code of ethics, which set the standard for the ethical conduct of inter￾nal auditors. Over the years, the IIA has grown to become a global organization 
with more than 200,000 members in over 170 countries. The organization 
has also expanded its scope beyond traditional internal audit functions, to 
include areas such as risk management, governance, and control.
The International Professional Practices Framework (IPPF) for the IIA is 
one of the most significant developments in the history of internal auditing; 352 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
it is a comprehensive framework that provides guidance and standards for 
the practice of internal auditing. The framework was established in 1999 
and has been revised multiple times since then to account for changes in the 
profession and business environment. The IIA is currently in the process of 
introducing a new IPPF. The Topical Requirements and Guidance is a newly 
proposed IPPF element that is undergoing preliminary consideration and 
development for future IPPF (Ruud et al., 2011).
The IIA officially defined the internal audit function as an independent, 
objective assurance and consulting activity designed to add value and 
improve an organization’s operations. The function is aimed at aiding an 
organization to accomplish its objectives by bringing a systematic, disci￾plined approach to evaluate and improve the effectiveness of risk manage￾ment, control, and governance processes. The internal audit function is 
responsible for providing assurance by thoroughly reporting and assessing 
the organization’s control process, risk management as well as the effective￾ness of corporate governance to achieve organizational objectives. It is 
essential for the internal audit function to provide assurances that are on 
par with the organizational strategies and follow the Institute of Internal 
Audit standards. For an internal audit function to perform at its best imple￾mentation, it should be free from any influences (Christopher et al., 2009). 
Having an independent internal audit function, an internal audit is able to 
carry out its assessment objectively, assisting management in internal con￾trol, organization risk management, and governance processes (Chang 
et al., 2019).
In recent years, the role of internal audit has continued to evolve, with a 
greater focus on strategic risk management and the use of data analytics and 
technology (Foronda et al., 2023). Internal auditors are increasingly expected 
to provide insights and recommendations to management and the BOD, 
based on their analysis of organizational risks and opportunities. In line 
with the development, the IIA revised the Internal Audit Competency 
Framework in 2022. This is a comprehensive tool that helps internal audi￾tors assess their skills and identify areas for development, while also provid￾ing organizations with guidance on how to develop and manage internal 
audit talent. The new IA competency framework consists of four dimen￾sions, namely Professionalism, Performance, Leadership & Communication, 
and Environment. The framework provides an explicit and concise profes￾sional development plan for internal auditors at all career levels. The frame￾work identifies four knowledge areas centered on diverse standards, 
situation-specific functions, and key proficiencies, with three distinct compe￾tency levels that progress from general awareness to applied knowledge to 
expert practitioner. The comprehensive and concurrent strategy defines and 
imparts the knowledge and skills required to navigate a successful career in 
internal auditing, with an emphasis on best practices and practical applica￾tions (Auditors, 2023).Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 353
The history of IA and the IIA’s role has been instrumental in shaping the 
profession and promoting its value within organizations. The Standards 
have been contributing to providing a framework for IAs to follow, and the 
IIA’s ongoing efforts to promote good governance and responsible business 
practices have helped to ensure that IA continues to play a vital role in orga￾nizations today.
10.2.6.1 Internal audit and Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0, also known as the “human-centered industry,” represents the 
latest stage in the evolution of industry and manufacturing. In this new era, 
the focus shifts toward the human experience, with technology playing a 
supportive role. Within the context of IA, organizations can leverage IA’s 
expertise to support their transition to Industry 5.0. According to a recent 
report by the Society of Corporate Compliance and Ethics & Health Care 
Compliance Association (SCCE & HCCA), IA can play a vital role in help￾ing organizations identify and mitigate risks, ensure compliance with regu￾lations and standards, establish effective governance structures, measure 
performance, and manage change.
By leveraging IA’s guidance in these areas, organizations can successfully 
navigate the transition to Industry 5.0, optimize their operations, and 
achieve their goals while meeting ethical and social responsibilities. It is 
important to note that Industry 5.0 can also contribute significantly to 
achieving sustainability objectives. IA can play a crucial role in supporting 
Industry 5.0 initiatives, particularly in the following areas.
• Risk assessment: IA can help organizations identify and manage risks 
associated with the adoption of new technologies and processes. By 
analyzing data from various sources, such as environmental impact 
reports and supply chain data, IA can assist in identifying areas where 
sustainability risks are most significant. This enables organizations to 
take proactive measures to mitigate these risks.
• Energy management: IA can contribute to optimizing energy con￾sumption in buildings and manufacturing facilities. By analyzing data 
from sensors and other sources, IA can help identify energy usage pat￾terns and guide organizations in optimizing their operations to reduce 
energy consumption. IA can also ensure the effectiveness and efficiency 
of energy management systems.
• Sustainable supply chain: IA can monitor and improve the sustain￾ability of the supply chain by analyzing data from suppliers and other 
sources. This helps identify risks and opportunities for improvement 
in areas such as carbon emissions, waste reduction, and ethical sourc￾ing. Proactive measures can be taken to address potential issues and 
promote a more sustainable supply chain.354 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
• Emissions management: IA can help organizations monitor and 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions. By analyzing data from emissions 
monitoring systems and energy usage data, IA can identify areas where 
emissions can be reduced and assist in implementing solutions such as 
renewable energy sources and energy efficiency measures.
• Reporting: IA can contribute to improving sustainability reporting by 
ensuring the accuracy and completeness of sustainability reports. By 
analyzing data from various sources, IA helps verify the integrity of 
the information included in the reports. Furthermore, IA can leverage 
machine learning algorithms to automate the reporting process, reduc￾ing the time and effort required to prepare reports.
IA plays a vital role in supporting organizations’ transition to Industry 5.0 
and their sustainability initiatives. Through effective risk assessment, energy 
management, supply chain sustainability, emissions management, and report￾ing, IA helps organizations navigate the challenges and seize the opportunities 
presented by Industry 5.0 while promoting a more sustainable future.
10.2.7 Integration of internal audit and ESG
To effectively address the complexities associated with ESG practices, IA 
should be positioned as enablers of learning and change, while also consid￾ering the professional demands for independence and objectivity. To maxi￾mize their value, IA should engage in discussions with senior management 
and the board to determine how best to leverage IA in successfully man￾aging ESG-related risks. As ESG practices continue to be a hot topic for 
forthcoming generations, IA must seize opportunities to enhance their con￾tributions to these efforts. Although external consultants may be considered, 
their usage should be selective and wise due to the ongoing, complex nature 
of ESG-related challenges. In essence, the ESG “Garden” is never finished, 
and there is no panacea or expert who can single-handedly address these 
challenges other than IA (Lenz & Hoos, 2023).
Due to the most significant financial frauds of the last century, IA emerged 
as the most advanced and excellent form of control. There are several stud￾ies available that assure IA is an effective and central part of corporate gov￾ernance (Soh & Martinov-Bennie, 2015; Harasheh & Provasi, 2022). It is 
possible to enhance the reliability of financial statements by implementing 
effective internal controls and embedding IA as a control-assuring activity/
function (Rehman, 2021). Several countries have introduced new directives 
requiring organizations to disclose nonfinancial disclosures (NFD). NFD 
among many aspects also includes ESG reporting. IA serves as a primary 
assurance for the quality of NFD and the integration of ESG by providing 
assurance on the functionality, reliability, and credibility of the internal con￾trols implemented for NFD and providing assurance for their related disclo￾sures in financial statements (Harasheh & Provasi, 2022).Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 355
IA can play a crucial role in ensuring that the company’s ESG practices 
are implemented effectively. This is done by monitoring, assessing, and 
reporting on the company’s ESG risks and performance. The role of IA in 
ESG practices is important because it helps the company identify areas 
where it may need to improve its ESG practices, such as reducing its envi￾ronmental footprint or enhancing its social and governance practices. 
Additionally, an internal audit can help ensure that the company is comply￾ing with applicable laws and regulations related to ESG practices. Having 
an effective IA function that is focused on ESG practices has several benefits, 
such as improved risk management, enhanced stakeholder trust and confi￾dence, and increased transparency and accountability.
IA is an essential function in any organization. With the ever-growing 
concerns for the integrity of organizational operations, IA plays a vital role 
in providing their independent opinion which develops the shareholders’ 
and stakeholders’ satisfaction. ESG factors and their utilization in organiza￾tions require maturity in reporting as many of the organizations focus 
mainly on the climate factor of their organization and very little importance 
is given to the social and governance aspects (OCEG, 2021). Moreover, 
there is no clear link available to how achieving the environmental goals will 
help in achieving the social and governance goals (Winteroll, 2020). ESG 
should be linked with each other so that three factors enhance each other’s 
efficiency and the decline of one factor will also decline the other factors. 
This scenario itself requires some standard ESG framework; however, assur￾ance of IA is required to ensure that the provided indices are correct and 
that they are measuring what they are designed for.
IA not only provides reporting requirements but also acts as an agent of 
change. IA also provides training on many issues to the BOD, ARC, and EM. 
There are no requirements for the BOD to have knowledge of ESG-related 
matters (Pelosi & Adamson, 2016); furthermore, there is no standard frame￾work available that can measure ESG performance. Although there are 
many regulatory requirements and agencies available such as environmental 
authorities, labor ministries, and ISO standards; however, the closest frame￾work for the measurement could be considered as COSO framework 
(Annandale et al., 2022). In this scenario, IA is the best-suited function that 
can educate the governance management and assist organizations in achiev￾ing their ESG-related goals by implementing the COSO framework and 
embed in its audit plans.
It is globally accepted and acknowledged that internal controls are 
required for the effective implementation of sustainable corporate gover￾nance and its efficient utilization (Rehman, 2021). These internal controls 
enhance the reliability of reports and ensure compliance with laws and regu￾lations (Harasheh & Provasi, 2022). Once the controls are developed for 
ESG then assurance on these controls is required. IA can provide this assur￾ance by ensuring that compliance is made and the developed controls are 
achieving desired results. IA also provides meaningful recommendations 356 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
(Dzikrullah et al., 2020) which assists in updating the controls in a timely 
manner to avoid any potential risk.
IA must work with agility and shift from their traditional ways of audit￾ing. Although there are no standards made by the IIA that can cater to ESG, 
with a professional attitude and effective leadership qualities, IA can deliver 
the requirements. By adopting new technologies and methods, IA’s function/
department is capable of demonstrating readiness for identifying risks and 
opportunities. IA is continuously required to identify skills and should 
define a plan to fill these gaps by continually assessing its staff competencies. 
This will allow the IA to add value and assist in achieving ESG objectives 
(Foundation, 2021).
ESG has become a critical aspect of business operations. However, orga￾nizations must not focus solely on compliance, as it may not achieve the 
desired results. Instead, they should concentrate on creating a control envi￾ronment that enhances the controls around their ESG actions. This is where 
IA can play a crucial role by providing assurance and advice on governance, 
risk, and compliance. The control principles that are necessary to mitigate 
the risk of fraud or ethical malpractices include a commitment to ethics and 
integrity, board independence, organizational governance structure, risk 
assessment, and control activities. IA can ensure that these principles are in 
place and effective in enhancing the organization’s ESG practices. Therefore, 
IA is the only activity available in the organization that can provide assur￾ance for the control environment and support the ESG initiatives (Rehman, 
2023).
10.2.8 ESG in Oman
Similar to many countries, Oman implemented codes of corporate gov￾ernance in the year 2002. These codes were updated in year 2016 CMA, 
and they are mandatory on all public listed companies. CMA introduced 
several changes after the second update and included many codes related 
to IA and safeguarding of minority shareholders (CMA, 2016; Sanyal & 
Hisam, 2017). Codes developed by CMA cover E and S factors in their 
13 principles under CSR and define Corporate Social Responsibility as 
“linked to the company purposes and activities. The company shall seek 
to exercise its role as good citizen and to mitigate any adverse impact of its 
activities on the national economy, community or environment at large” 
(CMA, 2016).
In the year 2015, a charter for the Oman Center for Governance and 
Sustainability was established where rules were suggested for the organiza￾tions to be socially active and responsible (Sustainability, 2015). CMA via its 
codes made it obligatory for public listed companies to develop policies for 
CSR, its related budget support of the board, community engagements/
developments targeted by organizations, and NFD related to CSR (CMA, 
2016).Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 357
Recently Oman also established the Environment Authority (EA) via 
Royal Decree No. 106/2020. EA is responsible for the development of poli￾cies, procedures, and plans directed toward the protection of environment, 
preserving natural resources, combating pollution, and achievement of UN 
SDG goals related to the environment. EA is tasked to develop an environ￾ment management system and to control all environmental issues. However, 
there is no link created between the CSR defined by CMA which is also 
targeting the environment and EA which is responsible for the development 
of policies. Furthermore, it is obligatory for all organizations to provide for 
their 20% of the social responsibility budget for the institutions under 
Oman Charitable Association (Team O. O., 2021).
As of October 2022, there are 114 companies listed in the Muscat Stock 
Exchange distributed into the sectors defined in Table 10.1.
From the above 114 companies, researchers performed an analysis of dis￾closures made by companies listed under the industrial sector to identify the 
level of disclosures for ESG for the last three years. The reason for selecting 
the industrial sector is that they are more prone to environmental damage. 
Although this is out of the scope of this research, however, it would be ben￾eficial to provide such a study for this research.
After analyzing all 39 companies, it was identified that none of the com￾panies are providing disclosure for CSR which is inclusive of E and S fac￾tors. All companies provided detailed disclosures related to governance. 
This can be considered as non-compliance with the codes of corporate gov￾ernance and there are no visible efforts available from EA to issue any notice 
to them. CMA and EA both are working in silos and there is no link or 
relationship between them. This creates the necessity for another empirical 
research to be conducted in this area in which non-compliances can be iden￾tified and recommendations can be developed.
In terms of environmental performance, Oman is ranked 110 out of 180 
countries (Barbuscia, 2021); however, Oman is aiming to be among the top 
20 countries by the year 2040. For the social factor and based on the 
Government’s efforts only, Oman is ranked 70 out of 180 countries 
(Economics, 2021). In ranking related to governance factors, Oman’s score 
is below moderate (Economics, 2021). Furthermore, other rating agencies 
Table 10.1 Number of companies listed in Muscat Stock Exchange
Sectors Number of companies
Financial 35
Mutual Funds 2
Industry 39
Service 38
Total 114
Source: MSX (2022)358 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
ranked Oman’s banks as high risk for ESG reporting and ESG-related policy 
implementation (Sustainanalytics, 2021).
10.3 ASSOCIATED THEORIES
Internal audit is the control activity available within an organization and 
works toward the attainment of governance, risk, and compliance features 
of an organization. ESG is the strategic direction and governance factor 
which obliges organizations to be socially active and ethically strong to 
develop satisfied stakeholders. Control and strategic orientation of the 
organizations can be viewed from the lens of both agency theory and stake￾holder theory. This study utilized stewardship theory and agency theory to 
define the influence of internal audit over ESG. These theories are explained 
below.
10.3.1 Stewardship theory
Stewardship theory was introduced by Donaldson and Davis in the year 
1989. This theory emphasizes that the governance management of an orga￾nization will act as a responsible steward toward developing a positive 
relationship between stakeholders’ satisfaction and the success of the orga￾nization. Organizational management is responsible for making the correct 
decisions that enhance the long-term value of the organization and can cre￾ate an environment of sustainability (Hernandez, 2012).
Organizations implement ESG as they perceive that it is the right thing to 
do, and it also creates strategic direction. Stewardship theory focuses on 
identifying and solving societal issues and motivates governance manage￾ment to report NFD. Stewardship theory obliges the commitment of organi￾zational management to dedication, passion, and care. This theory 
emphasizes support for innovation and encourages communication between 
governance management and stakeholders (Chevrollier et al., 2020).
Stewardship theory creates commitment as governance management is 
obligated to develop and implement policies. Policies are directed toward 
the achievement of organizational mission, vision, and goals; accordingly, if 
ESG is embedded in mission, vision, and objectives, then organizational 
management will develop policies that will be inclusive of ESG and will be 
directed toward stakeholders (Aguilera et al., 2007; Davis et al., 1997). 
Employee empowerment is supported by stewardship theory, which pre￾vents employees from becoming unmotivated due to external pressures 
(Reeve & Deci, 1996). Once employees are empowered, they can also 
emphasize the implementation of ESG.
It is clear from all of these arguments that when an organization develops 
strong strategic values, it is highly likely that it will perform well in terms 
of  ESG in the future, as stewardship theory is a long-term approach Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 359
(Chakrabarty & Wang, 2012). High ESG performance will result from the 
implementation of stewardship theory (Chevrollier et al., 2020).
10.3.2 Agency theory
Agency theory defines the relationship between the principal and the agent. 
A principal is a person or a group of persons who appoints agents to per￾form the task on their behalf. In the corporate world, a principal is the 
shareholders who appoint the BOD to act on their behalf. The BOD hires 
executive/senior management to run the organizational affairs which should 
be aligned with the interests of the BOD. In this scenario, the BOD becomes 
the principal as representative of shareholders and executive management is 
the agent that performs the tasks assigned by the BOD.
It is a well-known fact that IA is one of the pillars of good corporate gov￾ernance (Rehman, 2021). As per the codes of corporate governance devel￾oped by many countries including Oman, IA is hired by the BOD (CMA, 
2016) to ensure that governance is assured, and tasks performed by execu￾tive management are in accordance with their instructions or not (Adams, 
1994). In this scenario, IA becomes the agent for the BOD who is hired to 
perform the task on behalf of the BOD (Jahera & Colbert, 1988).
IA performs the assignments and engagements that are approved by the 
board or its related committee and provides their independent opinion 
accordingly. IA tasks as an agent support the organizational cause in the 
achievement of organizational mission, vision, and related objectives.
10.4 METHODOLOGY
In order to determine the appropriate sample size for this study, G*Power3 
was employed. The analysis indicated that a sample size of 70 organizations 
would be required to adequately represent the population of 114 compa￾nies. However, for the present study, questionnaires were distributed to all 
114 companies listed on the Muscat Stock Exchange, and responses were 
received from 70 companies. The respondents, who were carefully selected 
based on their ability to represent their respective companies, were requested 
to complete a questionnaire consisting of 26 questions and provide five 
demographic details. Data collection was conducted using an internet-based 
tool. It is important to note that the questionnaire was specifically targeted 
toward one individual per company, resulting in only one response being 
received from each company. The research methodology employed in this 
study was descriptive in nature, and the questionnaire items were adapted 
from relevant studies in the field. Adopted questions are from the studies 
conducted by the Open Compliance and Ethics Group (OCEG), Deloitte, 
and the Internal Auditor Foundation (Parmelee, 2021; OCEG, 2021; 
Foundation, 2021).360 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
10.5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Table 10.2 shows the demographic information from 70 respondents, which 
included data on gender, position, highest qualification, years of experience, 
and sector of work. The results showed that there was significant male dom￾inance in the group, with 92% of the respondents being male and only 8% 
being female. This indicates that the group is primarily made up of male 
individuals, with only a small representation of female individuals.
Meanwhile, regarding the positions held by respondents, 72% of the 
respondents held the position of CAE/Head of Internal Audit, 18% were on 
the ARC, and 10% were on the BOD. This shows that the majority of the 
respondents were in leadership positions and had a significant role in 
decision-making processes. On the other hand, the highest qualification held 
by the respondents was also analyzed, with 35% holding the highest qualifi￾cation of CA/CPA/CIMA/ACCA, 20% holding the CIA qualification, 21% 
holding a Master degree, 13% holding a Bachelor degree, 3% holding a 
PhD, and 8% holding others. This data demonstrates that the majority of the 
respondents had professional qualifications and a higher level of education.
In terms of years of experience, 41% of the respondents had more than 20 
years of experience, 24% had 16–20 years of experience, 20% had 11–15 
years of experience, 7% had 6–10 years of experience, and 8% had 1–5 years 
Table 10.2 The profile of respondents
Details Description Percent (%)
Gender Male 92
Female 8
Position CAE/Head of Internal Audit 72
Audit and Risk Committee 18
Board of Director 10
Highest Qualification CA/CPA/CIMA/ACCA 35
CIA 20
PhD 3
Masters 21
Bachelor 13
Others 8
Year of Experience More than 20 years 41
16–20 years 24
11–15 years 20
6–10 years 7
1–5 years 8
Sector Financial 39
Service 34
Industrial 27Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 361
of experience. This data highlights that the group has a significant number 
of individuals with extensive experience in their field. Finally, the data also 
revealed that the group represents a diverse range of industries, with 39% of 
the respondents working in the financial sector, 34% in the service sector, 
and 27% in the industrial sector.
The results of the survey provide a comprehensive picture of the demo￾graphic information of the group and demonstrate that the group is male￾dominant, led by individuals with professional qualifications and extensive 
experience, and represents a diverse range of industries.
The results of a survey as shown in Figure 10.1 regarding a company’s 
ESG program and its level of maturity have been analyzed; 56% of the 
respondents answered “Yes” to the question of whether the company has a 
formal, documented ESG program in place, while 41% answered “No” and 
3% answered “Not aware.”
Figure 10.2 depicts the respondents who answered “Yes” to the presence 
of an ESG program, 6% believed that the program is highly mature and has 
a strong impact on the company’s operations; 29% believed that the pro￾gram is moderately mature and has a significant impact on the company’s 
Figure 10.1 Does your company have a formal documented ESG program?
0%
20%
40%
60%
Yes No Not aware
56%
41%
3%
Does your company have formal documented ESG program
Figure 10.2 The maturity level of the ESG-developed program.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50%
High
Moderate
Minimal
Not at all mature
Not Applicable
6%
29%
16%
6%
43%
ESG Developed program is at which level of maturity362 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
operations; 16% believed that the program is in the early stages of develop￾ment and has a limited impact on the company’s operations; 6% believed 
that the program is not mature and has no significant impact on the com￾pany’s operations; 43% of the respondents answered “Not Applicable” to 
the question about the level of maturity of the ESG program, indicating that 
the question is not applicable to their knowledge of the company’s ESG 
program.
Figure 10.3 shows that a majority of companies (59%) have not pub￾lished any ESG-related metrics. This could indicate that many companies 
are not yet fully aware of the importance of measuring and reporting their 
ESG impact. Nevertheless, the fact that almost half of the companies (49%) 
have Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) on ESG suggests that some compa￾nies are taking steps to track their ESG performance. Furthermore, the fact 
that 44% of companies have a dedicated budget for ESG is a positive sign, 
as it indicates that some companies are willing to invest resources in sustain￾able business practices. However, the fact that 50% of companies do not 
have a dedicated budget for ESG suggests that there is still a long way to go 
before ESG practices become mainstream. The results suggest that while 
some companies are taking ESG seriously, many others are still in the early 
stages of adopting ESG practices. The results of this survey could be useful 
for companies looking to benchmark their own ESG performance against 
their peers and identify areas for improvement.
Figure 10.4 summarizes the results of a survey conducted among 70 
respondents regarding the initiators of inquiries related to ESG in a com￾pany. From Figure 10.4, the largest group of respondents who initiated 
inquiries for ESG in the company were those in the “None” category, 
accounting for 44% of the respondents. The second largest group of initia￾tors were investors, accounting for 34% of respondents. This suggests that 
Figure 10.3 Companies that have dedicated budgets and KPIs for ESG and pub￾lishing ESG metrics.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
Publishing any ESG related metrics
Have KPIs on ESG
Have dedicated budget for ESG
36%
49%
44%
59%
46%
50%
5%
5%
6%
Does Your Company:
Yes No Not awareInfluence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 363
investors are increasingly interested in a company’s ESG performance and 
are more likely to inquire about ESG practices. The Customers group 
accounted for 15% of respondents, while Employees and Suppliers 
accounted for 4% and 3%, respectively. This suggests that customers and 
employees are relatively less likely to initiate inquiries about ESG practices, 
and suppliers are the least likely group to do so. Figure 10.4 highlights the 
importance of ESG considerations for companies and the need to engage 
with a diverse set of stakeholders on ESG-related matters. The four catego￾ries of stakeholders amounted to more than 50% therefore suggests that 
companies need to proactively address ESG issues and engage with a broad 
range of stakeholders to build trust and demonstrate their commitment to 
responsible business practices.
Figure 10.5 depicts the impact of ESG on various areas of their business 
which is measured by four categories of impact, ranging from high to no 
impact. According to Figure 10.5, the area of the business most impacted by 
ESG is brand and reputation, with 39 respondents indicating a high impact, 
followed by customer satisfaction, with 33 respondents indicating a high 
impact. This indicates that ESG considerations are increasingly important 
for a company’s brand and reputation, as well as its ability to satisfy cus￾tomers. The area of the business with the least impact from ESG is employee 
satisfaction, with only 20 respondents indicating a high impact. This may 
indicate that employees are relatively less affected by a company’s ESG prac￾tices, although it is worth noting that 27 respondents indicated a minimal 
impact, indicating that ESG may still be a consideration for some employ￾ees. Figure 10.5 also shows that financial outcomes are impacted by ESG, 
with 30 respondents indicating a high impact, although 19 respondents 
indicated only a minimal impact, suggesting that the impact of ESG on 
financial outcomes may vary depending on the company and industry. 
Overall, they revealed that ESG considerations are increasingly important 
for various areas of a company’s business, particularly brand and reputation 
and customer satisfaction. Further, the a need for companies to proactively 
Figure 10.4 The company’s adoption of ESG practices is influenced by which 
stakeholders.
0%
20%
40%
60%
Investor Customer Suppliers Employees None
34%
15%
3% 4%
44%
Inquiries in your company for ESG is initiated by364 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
address ESG issues to protect their reputation and maintain customer 
loyalty.
Figure 10.6 summarizes the results of a survey conducted among 70 
respondents regarding ESG issues that are negatively impacting their com￾panies. Three categories of responses: “Yes,” indicating that the issue is neg￾atively impacting the company; “No,” indicating that the issue is not 
negatively impacting the company; and “Not aware,” indicating that the 
respondent is not aware of the issue or unsure whether it is negatively 
impacting the company. Figure 10.6 highlights the ESG issue that is most 
commonly identified as negatively impacting companies is the cost of 
resources/raw materials, with 49 respondents indicating a negative impact. 
This is followed closely by reputation, with 49 respondents also indicating 
a negative impact. Therefore, companies need to carefully consider the 
potential negative impact of their ESG practices on their reputation and the 
cost of resources.
Meanwhile, the operational impacts, such as those related to climate 
change, floods, and wars, were identified as negatively impacting companies 
by 47 respondents. This suggests that companies need to be aware of and 
manage the risks associated with such events. The ESG issue that was least 
commonly identified as negatively impacting companies was employee 
health, with only 16 respondents indicating a negative impact. However, it 
is worth noting that 47 respondents indicated that they were not aware of 
whether employee health was negatively impacting their company, suggest￾ing that this issue may not be receiving sufficient attention from companies. 
Figure 10.5 Impacting area of business by ESG.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
Brand and reputaon
Customer sasfacon
Employee sasfacon
Financial outcomes
Investor sasfacon
Producon design
39
33
20
30
32
28
17
18
14
12
16
15
9
13
27
19
14
19
5
6
9
9
8
8
ESG is impacng which area of your business:
No Impact Minimal Impact Moderate Impact High ImpactInfluence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 365
The result depicts that there is a need for companies to be aware of and 
manage the potential negative impacts of ESG issues on their business. 
Further, it also implies that there may be a lack of awareness among compa￾nies regarding certain ESG issues, such as employee health, and the need for 
more attention to be given to these issues.
Three categories of responses revealed the consideration of ESG issues in 
various aspects of their companies: “Yes,” indicating that ESG issues are con￾sidered in the respective area; “No,” indicating that ESG issues are not con￾sidered in the respective area; and “Not aware,” indicating that the respondent 
is unaware of whether ESG issues are considered in the respective area. 
Figure 10.7 demonstrates that the ESG issue that is most frequently consid￾ered is ESG in relation to investors investing in the company, with 50% of 
respondents indicating that this is taken into account. This suggests that 
companies may be more concerned with satisfying their investors’ ESG crite￾ria than with their own ESG considerations. ESG is also taken into account 
by a sizeable proportion of respondents when making investments (41%) 
and selecting vendors (36%). This indicates that ESG factors are becoming 
increasingly significant in the decision-making processes of companies.
In contrast, only 16% of respondents indicated that ESG is considered 
when determining executive management salaries and company employee 
salaries. This could suggest that companies have not yet fully integrated ESG 
factors into their compensation structures. Figure 10.7 illustrates the grow￾ing significance of ESG considerations in various aspects of businesses. In 
addition, it suggests that companies may need to integrate ESG factors more 
Figure 10.6 The ESG issues are negatively impacting the company.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Operaonal impact (climate change, floods, wars etc..)
Cost of resources/ raw material
 Regularity uncertainty
Increase insurance cost
Reputaon
Shareholder pressure for disinvestment
Addional taxes such as climate tax
Employee health
Modificaon of organizaonal processes
Supply chain disrupon
47
49
32
30
49
36
23
16
31
32
19
20
32
34
20
30
39
47
37
35
4
1
6
6
1
4
8
7
2
3
Which of the following ESG issues are negavely 
impacng your company
Not aware No Yes366 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
deeply into their decision-making processes, particularly in regard to com￾pensation structures.
According to Figure 10.8, 79% of respondents stated their company uses 
software for ESG reporting. This indicates that businesses recognize the 
importance of ESG reporting and are using tools to streamline the reporting 
process. Despite this, just 20% of respondents said their company uses soft￾ware to collect ESG data. This demonstrates that companies may be able to 
improve their ESG data collection methods by adopting software. Figure 
10.8 depicts the various levels of software usage in firms for ESG reporting 
and data collection. It also argues that the mechanisms for collecting ESG 
data may be improved.
Figure 10.7 ESG consideration: Responses and frequency analysis.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
By investors while invesng in your company
By company in making any investment
By company while selecng vendors
In deciding Execuve Management salaries
In deciding company employees’ salaries
50%
41%
36%
16%
16%
44%
51%
59%
76%
76%
6%
7%
6%
9%
9%
Consideraon of ESG
Yes No Not aware
Figure 10.8 The company utilizing software in ESG data collection and reporting.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
ESG reporng ESG data collecon
79%
20%
17%
76%
4% 4%
The Company Ulizing any Soware for
Not aware
No
YesInfluence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 367
Figure 10.9 reveals that the biggest percentage of respondents (44%) indi￾cated that ESG is included in their company’s objectives/goals, followed by 
ESG’s incorporation into their mission (43%) and vision (40%) These find￾ings indicate that many companies recognize the significance of ESG and are 
incorporating it into their fundamental principles and goals. A large number 
of respondents, however, claimed that their company’s vision, mission, and 
objectives/goals do not include ESG. This suggests that ESG integration into 
the strategic planning of businesses is not yet complete. Figure 10.9 illustrates 
the varied levels of ESG incorporation in the vision, purpose, and objectives/
goals of companies. It also implies that companies are becoming increasingly 
aware of the significance of ESG, although there is still space for improve￾ment in terms of properly incorporating ESG into strategic planning.
Table 10.3 shows the IA department competency level in various knowl￾edge areas related to their internal audit department which was rated by 70 
respondents. The competency levels are categorized into five levels: Expert, 
Advance, Applied Awareness, General Knowledge, and No Knowledge. 
Among the knowledge areas listed, the highest competency levels were in 
the “Mission of internal audit” (33 respondents rated the IA department are 
Expert; Advance is 30 respondents) and Organizational independence (26 
respondents rated as Expert; Advance level is rated by 37 respondents) 
categories.
These areas are critical for an effective internal audit department as they 
set the tone for the department’s purpose and independence from manage￾ment. In contrast, the lowest competency levels were in the areas of Social 
Responsibility (Expert (14), Advance (28)) and Sustainability (Expert (9), 
Advance (30)), indicating that many respondents may not have a good 
understanding of the importance of ESG issues for their internal audit 
function. Overall, Table 10.3 suggests that respondents have a good 
Figure 10.9 Incorporate ESG in the company’s vision, mission, and objectives/
goals.
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Vision
Mission
Obejcves/Goals
40%
43%
44%
56%
54%
50%
4%
3%
4%
Incorporang ESG in Company's
Yes
No
Not aware368 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
understanding of the core competencies required for an internal audit 
function, such as ethical behavior, individual objectivity, and internal con￾trol. However, there may be room for improvement in some of the more 
specialized areas, such as agile auditing and data analytics, which are 
becoming increasingly important in today’s business environment. 
Companies may need to invest in training and development programs to 
ensure that their internal audit teams have the necessary skills and knowl￾edge to meet these emerging challenges.
The study also has a survey regarding the internal audit function of the 
company. Figure 10.10, presents the results of a survey conducted on 70 
respondents regarding the necessary skills of their internal audit function to 
effectively audit specific areas. The survey asked respondents to indicate 
Table 10.3 Internal audit department competency level related to the knowledge area
Area Expert Advance Applied 
awareness
General 
knowledge
No 
knowledge
Ethical behavior 27 34 8 1 0
Individual objectivity 28 35 5 2 0
Mission of internal audit 33 30 6 1 0
Due professional care 24 34 10 2 0
Organizational 
independence 26 37 5 2 0
Internal control 22 37 7 4 0
Internal audit charter 27 35 4 3 1
Audit engagement 21 44 3 2 0
Professional development 16 32 17 4 1
Reporting 23 32 13 2 0
Engagement planning 27 33 8 2 0
Engagement outcome 21 34 11 4 0
Audit planning 27 33 8 2 0
Soft skills 22 24 22 2 0
Business processes 21 27 21 1 0
Relationship building 21 25 20 4 0
Strategic planning 19 34 9 7 1
Strategic management 19 30 14 7 0
Quality assurance and 
improvement program 16 23 22 9 0
Fraud audits 20 33 10 6 1
Fraud investigations 22 32 7 8 1
Social responsibility 14 28 20 8 0
Sustainability 9 30 19 12 0
Agile auditing 10 25 22 13 0
Data analytics 9 35 21 5 0
IT controls 7 21 32 10 0Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 369
whether their internal audit function has the necessary skills to audit in the 
areas listed.
Figure 10.10 shows that the majority of respondents indicated that their 
internal audit function is able to conduct audits in the areas of business con￾tinuity and crisis management (76%), dynamic risk assessment (71%), and 
extended enterprise risk management (70%). Cybersecurity, cloud and virtual 
computing environments, and disruptive technologies, on the other hand, 
received a lower proportion of positive responses: 64%, 60%, and 59%, 
respectively. These results emphasize the need for internal audit functions to 
continuously develop and improve their skills in order to keep up with the 
ever-changing business environment. As the world becomes increasingly digi￾tal and interconnected, it is unsurprising that areas related to technology, such 
as cybersecurity, cloud and virtual computing environments, and disruptive 
technologies, have received lower proportions of positive responses. This sug￾gests that internal audit functions may need to invest more resources in devel￾oping and enhancing their technology-related skills and knowledge in order 
to keep up with the rapid pace of technological progress.
Notably, while the majority of respondents indicated that their internal 
audit function has the necessary skills to audit in the areas of business con￾tinuity, crisis management, and dynamic risk assessment, a significant num￾ber of respondents indicated that their internal audit function lacks the 
necessary skills in these areas (24% and 29%, respectively). This indicates 
that there is still room for improvement in these areas, and internal audit 
functions should consider investing additional resources in the development 
of these skills. The results of this survey shed light on the areas in which 
internal audit functions may need to concentrate their efforts in order to 
advance their skills and knowledge. To effectively support the organization’s 
objectives and mitigate risks, it is crucial that internal audit functions 
Figure 10.10 Areas that the internal audit function has the necessary skills to 
effectively audit.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80%
Business connuity and crisis management
Dynamic risk assessment
Cybersecurity
Extended enterprise risk management
Cloud and virtual compung environments
Disrupve technologies
76%
72%
64%
70%
60%
59%
24%
28%
36%
30%
40%
41%
The following areas that internal audit funcon have the 
necessary skills to effecvely audit
No Yes370 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
continually assess their skills and identify areas where they need to develop 
and enhance their capabilities.
Figure 10.11 depicts the distribution of respondents based on the level of 
ESG audit maturity of their internal audit department. Respondents were 
asked to categorize the ESG audit maturity of their department into five 
levels: Expert, Advanced, Applied Awareness, General Knowledge, and No 
Knowledge. No respondent categorized their internal audit department as 
“Expert” in ESG audits, as indicated by the results. The majority of respon￾dents (35%) rated the maturity level of their internal audit department’s 
knowledge of ESG audits as “General knowledge.” Moreover, 31% of 
respondents indicated that their internal audit department has “Applied 
Awareness” regarding ESG audits. Around 21% of the respondents catego￾rized their department as having an “Advanced” level of maturity toward 
ESG audits; 13% of respondents indicated that their internal audit depart￾ment has “No Knowledge” of ESG audits.
This number suggests that the majority of internal audit departments have a 
fundamental understanding of ESG audits. Nonetheless, few possess advanced 
knowledge or expertise in this field. This finding underscores the need for 
internal audit departments to develop their knowledge and expertise in ESG 
audits in order to better address the associated risks and opportunities.
10.6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
Integrating internal audit with ESG practices is essential for enhancing effec￾tive corporate governance. This integration improves the accuracy of finan￾cial statements and provides assurance regarding the quality of nonfinancial 
disclosures. In addition, the role of IA in providing independent opinions 
and training on ESG-related matters is essential for achieving stakeholder 
Figure 10.11 The maturity level of the internal audit department toward ESG 
audits.
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
Expert Advance Applied
awareness
General
knowledge
No knowledge
0%
21%
31% 35%
13%
How mature your internal audit department towards 
ESG auditsInfluence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 371
satisfaction and ESG-related objectives. To achieve these goals, IA must be 
adaptable, adopt new technologies and methods, and continuously assess 
the competencies of its employees. In addition, organizations should con￾template incorporating ESG-related issues into their internal audit processes 
and incorporating IA as a control assurance activity. Organizations should 
develop a standard ESG framework, such as the COSO framework, and 
collaborate with IA to ensure compliance with the framework and attain 
desired ESG-related goals. IA should identify skill gaps and create plans to 
fill them, adopt new technologies and methods, and abandon conventional 
auditing practices.
The descriptive analysis yielded valuable insights into the demographic 
characteristics of the respondents and their perspectives on ESG practices. 
The results revealed a notable gender imbalance, with male participants sig￾nificantly outnumbering their female counterparts. Moreover, a majority of 
respondents possessed professional qualifications and possessed consider￾able industry experience. The sample encompassed a diverse range of sec￾tors, with the financial industry exhibiting the highest representation.
Regarding ESG considerations, the analysis indicated that a significant 
proportion of companies had implemented formal ESG programs, although 
the maturity levels of these programs varied. The survey explored the inte￾gration of ESG considerations into business decisions, as well as their align￾ment with the company’s vision and objectives. Furthermore, the utilization 
of software for ESG reporting was examined. Additionally, the analysis shed 
light on the specific ESG issues that had the greatest impact on businesses 
and highlighted the adverse consequences associated with certain ESG fac￾tors. The study also assessed the competency levels of the internal audit 
department across various knowledge domains.
In conclusion, the survey results indicate that while some companies take 
ESG seriously, the adoption of ESG practices by most companies is still in its 
infancy. The fact that the majority of companies have not published any 
ESG-related metrics suggests that many are still unaware of the significance 
of measuring and reporting their ESG impact. However, some companies 
have ESG-related KPIs and an ESG-specific budget is a positive sign, indicat￾ing that some companies are willing to invest in sustainable business prac￾tices. Companies seeking to benchmark their ESG performance against their 
peers and identify areas for improvement may find the results of this survey 
useful. Investors are becoming increasingly interested in a company’s ESG 
performance and are more likely to inquire about ESG practices, as evi￾denced by the findings of this survey. ESG considerations are becoming 
increasingly vital to a company’s brand, reputation, and ability to satisfy 
customers. Companies must carefully consider the potential negative effects 
of their ESG practices on their reputation and resource costs.
On the basis of the findings, it is recommended that companies adopt and 
implement a formal, documented ESG program and develop KPIs for ESG 
metrics. This can be accomplished by incorporating ESG into their strategic 372 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
planning to ensure that ESG considerations are integrated into their core 
principles and objectives. This may involve establishing ESG KPIs and col￾laborating with internal audits to ensure compliance with ESG frameworks. 
Additionally, companies should allocate specific budgets for ESG practices 
and report their ESG impact. In addition, companies should engage with a 
variety of stakeholders, including investors, customers, employees, and sup￾pliers, on ESG-related issues. In addition, companies should carefully con￾sider the potential negative impact of their ESG practices on their reputation 
and the cost of their resources, as well as the operational risks associated 
with climate change, floods, and wars. In addition, companies should recog￾nize the significance of ESG factors for various aspects of their operations, 
particularly brand and reputation and customer satisfaction, and take pro￾active measures to address these issues.
IA should evaluate their current skill sets and identify areas in which they 
need to develop and improve their capabilities, particularly in technology 
and ESG audits. In addition, departments of internal audit should invest in 
training and development programs to enhance their skills and knowledge 
in these areas. Due to ESG audits, the majority of IA have a fundamental 
understanding of ESG audits, whereas only a small percentage have advanced 
knowledge or expertise in this area. Therefore, IA should invest in develop￾ing their knowledge and expertise in ESG audits to better address the risks 
and opportunities associated with these audits. Finally, IA should evaluate 
their ESG audit maturity level on a regular basis and strive to attain a higher 
level of expertise in this crucial area. This enables IA to more effectively sup￾port their companies’ objectives and mitigate risks.
The study refers to the agency theory in the context of defining the influ￾ence of IA over ESG practices. The agency theory is a concept that describes 
the relationship between the principals (e.g., shareholders) and agents (e.g., 
managers) of an organization. It highlights the potential conflicts of interest 
that arise between these two parties due to their differing objectives. In this 
context, IA acts as an agent of the shareholders, providing independent 
opinions and training on ESG-related matters to ensure that the organiza￾tion’s ESG practices align with its stakeholders’ interests. Therefore, the 
integration of IA with ESG practices is critical to ensure effective corporate 
governance and mitigate potential agency problems.
The stewardship theory suggests that governance management is inher￾ently motivated to act in the best interest of their stakeholders and will take 
responsibility for the success or failure of their actions. In the context of the 
study, governance managements that adopt ESG practices and develop and 
implement ESG-related initiatives are acting as stewards of their stakehold￾ers. By taking a proactive approach to sustainability and addressing ESG 
concerns, companies can enhance their reputation, brand, and customer sat￾isfaction. Furthermore, by evaluating their ESG, governance management 
can act as stewards of their companies, ensuring that they are well-positioned 
to support ESG-related initiatives and mitigate risks.Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 373
The study can be beneficial to regulators, policymakers, governance man￾agement, and standard-setting bodies in several ways. First, it highlights the 
importance of integrating IA with ESG practices for effective corporate gov￾ernance and to mitigate potential agency problems. This information can be 
used by regulators and policymakers to develop guidelines and regulations 
that encourage companies to adopt ESG practices and ensure that IAs are 
adequately trained and equipped to address ESG-related risks and opportu￾nities. Second, the study emphasizes the need for companies to develop and 
implement a formal, documented ESG program and to report their ESG 
impact. This information can be used by standard-setting bodies to develop 
ESG frameworks and guidelines for reporting ESG-related metrics. Finally, 
the study provides insights into the current state of ESG practices and the 
challenges companies face in implementing ESG-related initiatives. This 
information can be used by governance management to develop strategies 
and initiatives that address these challenges and enhance their ESG perfor￾mance. Overall, the study can be a valuable resource for stakeholders inter￾ested in promoting sustainable business practices and improving ESG 
performance.
REFERENCES
Adams, M. (1994). Agency Theory and the Internal Audit. Managerial Auditing 
Journal, 9 (8), 8–12. https://doi.org/10.1108/02686909410071133
Aguilera, R., Rupp, D., Williams, C., & Ganapathi, J. (2007). Putting the S back in 
corporate social responsibility: a multilevel theory of social change in organiza￾tions. Academy of Management Review, 32 (3), 836–863. https://doi.org/10.5465/
AMR.2007
Annandale, D., Fuente, L.D., Hileman, D., Hjelm, C. L., & Olson, E. (2022). The 
ESG Risk Landscape Part 2 – Implementation, reporting, and internal audit’s role. 
FL: Institute of Internal Auditors.
Armstrong, M. (2021, November 4). Lobbying for Profits over Planet. Retrieved from 
www.statista.com: https://www.statista.com/chart/26125/companies-exerting-most￾negative-influence-on-climate-policy/
Auditors, I. O. (2023). Standards Mapping. LA: Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA).
Bank, D. (2020, Feb 14). What is the “G” in ESG? Retrieved from https://deutsche
wealth.com/en: https://deutschewealth.com/en/our-capabilities/esg/what-is-esg￾investing-wealth-management/corporate-governance-g-in-esg-governance.html
Barbuscia, D. (2021, September 6). Oman working on ESG framework to widen 
funding base - sources. Retrieved from https://www.reuters.com: https://www.
reuters.com/business/sustainable-business/oman-working-esg-framework-widen￾funding-base-sources-2021-09-06/#:~:text=In%20its%20Vision%202040%20
%2D%20an,110%20out%20of%20180%20countries
Barišić, I., & Tušek, B. (2016). The importance of the supportive control environ￾ment for internal audit effectiveness – the case of Croatian companies. Economic 
Research-Ekonomska Istraživanja, 29 (1), 1021–1037. https://doi.org/10.1080/
1331677X.2016.1211954374 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Becchetti, L., Bobbio, E., Prizia, F., & Semplici, L. (2022). Going Deeper into the 
S of ESG: A Relational Approach to the Definition of Social Responsibility. 
Sustainability, 14, 9668. https://doi.org/10.3390/su14159668
Berg, F., Kölbel, J. F., & Rigobon, R. (2019). Aggregate Confusion: The Divergence of 
ESG Ratings. Forthcoming Review of Finance, https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3438533
Broni, G., & Velentzas, J. (2012). Corporate Governance, Control and Individualism as 
a Definition of Business Success. The Idea of a “Post - Heroic” Leadership. Procedia 
Economics and Finance, 1, 61–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/S2212-5671(12)00009-3
Broo, D. G., Kaynak, O., & Sait, S. M. (2022). Rethinking engineering education at 
the age of industry 5.0. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 25, 100311.
Carayannis, E. G., & Morawska, J. (2023). University and Education 5.0 for 
Emerging Trends, Policies and Practices in the Concept of Industry 5.0 and Society 
5.0. In: Machado, C.F., Davim, J.P. (eds) Industry 5.0. Springer, Cham. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-031-26232-6_1
Carayannis, E. G., & Morawska-Jancelewicz, J. (2022). The futures of Europe: 
Society 5.0 and Industry 5.0 as driving forces of future universities. Journal of the 
Knowledge Economy, 1–27.
Carlier, M. (2022, June 10). Volkswagen AG’s sales revenue 2006-2021. Retrieved 
from https://www.statista.com/: https://www.statista.com/statistics/264349/
sales-revenue-of-volkswagen-ag-since-2006/
Cenci, A., & Cawthorne, D. (2020). Refining value sensitive design: A (capability￾based) procedural ethics approach to technological design for well-being. Science 
and Engineering Ethics, 26 (5), 2629–2662.
Chakrabarty, S., & Wang, L. (2012). The long-term sustenance of sustainability 
practices in MNCs: a dynamic capabilities perspective of the role of R&D and 
internationalization. Journal of Business Ethics, 110 (2), 205–217. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s105
Chang, Y.-T., Chen, H., Cheng, R. K., & Chi, W. (2019). The impact of internal audit 
attributes on the effectiveness of internal control over operations and compli￾ance. Journal of Contemporary Accounting & Economics, 15 (1), 1–19. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jcae.2018.11.002
Chevrollier, N., Zhang, J., Leeuwen, T.V., & Nijhof, A. (2020). The predictive value 
of strategic orientation for ESG performance over time. Corporate Governance, 
20 (1), 123–142. https://doi.org/10.1108/CG-03-2019-0105
Christopher, J., Sarens, G., & Leung, P. (2009). Acritical analysis of the indepen￾denceoftheinternalaudit function: evidence from Australia. Accounting, Auditing 
& Accountability Journal, 22 (2), 200–220. https://doi.org/10.1108/095135709
10933942
CMA. (2016). Code of Corporate Governance for Public Listed Companies. Muscat: 
Capital Market Authority.
CMA. (2021). Decision No. 27/2021 Issuing the Regulation for Public Joint Stock 
Companies. Muscat: Capital Market Authority.
Colbert, J. L., & Jahera, J. S. (1988). The Role of the Audit and Agency Theory. 
Journal of Applied Business Research, 4 (2), 7–12. https://doi.org/10.19030/jabr.
v4i2.6427
Commission, E. (2021, Sep 11). Overview of sustainable finance. Retrieved from 
https://ec.europa.eu: https://ec.europa.eu/info/business-economy-euro/banking-and￾finance/sustainable-finance/overview-sustainable-finance_enInfluence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 375
Davis, J., Schoorman, F., & Donaldson, L. (1997). Toward a stewardship theory of 
management. The Academy of Management Review, 22 (1), 20–47.
De Giovanni, P. (2023). Sustainability of the Metaverse: A transition to Industry 5.0. 
Sustainability, 15 (7), 6079.
Diamond, J. (2013). Internal Control and Internal Audit. In R. H. Allen, The 
International Handbook of Public Financial Managemen (pp. 374–395). London: 
Palgrave Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137315304_18
Dicuonzo, G., Donofrio, F., Ranaldo, S., & Dell’Atti, V. (2022). The effect of innovation 
on environmental, social and governance (ESG) practices. Meditari Accountancy 
Research, 30 (4), 1191–1209. https://doi.org/10.1108/MEDAR-12-2020-1120
Dvořáková, L., & Zborkova, J. (2014). Integration of Sustainable Development 
at Enterprise Level. 24th DAAAM International Symposium on Intelligent 
Manufacturing and Automation (pp. 686–695). Vienna: Procedia Engineering. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2014.03.043
Dzikrullah, A. D., Harymawan, I., & Ratri, M. C. (2020). Internal audit functions 
and audit outcomes: Evidence from Indonesia. Cogent Business & Management, 
7 (1), 1750331. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311975.2020.1750331
Earle, H. A. (2003). Building a workplace of choice: Using the work environment 
to attract and retain top talent. Journal of Facilities Management, 2 (3), 244–257. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/14725960410808230
Economics, W. (2021, Dec 16). Oman’s Average Years of Schooling and Other 
Social Factors. Retrieved from https://www.worldeconomics.com/: https://www.
worldeconomics.com/ESG/Social/Average-Years-Of-Schooling/Oman.aspx
Ellemers, N., & Chopova, T. (2021). The social responsibility of organizations: 
Perceptions of organizational morality as a key mechanism explaining the rela￾tion between CSR activities and stakeholder support. Research in Organizational 
Behavior, 41, 100156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.riob.2022.100156
Escrig-Olmedo, E., Fernández-Izquierdo, M. Á., Ferrero-Ferrero, I., Rivera-Lirio, 
J. M., & Muñoz-Torres, M. J. (2019). Rating the Raters: Evaluating how ESG 
Rating Agencies Integrate Sustainability Principles. Sustainability, 11, 915. https://
doi.org/10.3390/su11030915
Feroz, S., & Kumar, M. R. (2012). Corporate Social Responsibility Initiatives in 
Oman Organizations– A review. The first international conference on corporate 
social responsibility, business and human rights (Iccsrbhr 2012) (pp. 1–6). Jakarta: 
Human Rights Resource Center.
Fontaine, M. (2013). Corporate social responsibility and sustainability: the new bot￾tom line?. International Journal of Business and Social Science, 4 (4), 110–119.
Foronda, R. Á., De-Pablos-Heredero, C., & Rodríguez-Sánchez, J.-L. (2023). 
Implementation model of data analytics as a tool for improving internal audit pro￾cesses. Frontiers in Psychology, 14, 1140972. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.
1140972
Foundation, I. A. (2021). Assesing Internal Audit Competancy: Minding the Gaps to 
Maximize Insight. Florida: Institute of Internal Auditor Foundation.
Fourie, H., & Ackermann, C. (2013). The impact of COSO control components on 
internal control effectiveness: An internal audit perspective. Journal of Economic 
and Financial Sciences, 6 (2), 495–518. https://doi.org/10.4102/jef.v6i2.272
Gerard, B. (2019). ESG and Socially Responsible Investment: A Critical Review. 
Beta, 33 (1), 61–83. https://doi.org/10.18261/issn.1504-3134-2019-01-05376 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Ghobakhloo, M., Iranmanesh, M., Morales, M. E., Nilashi, M., & Amran, A. (2022). 
Actions and approaches for enabling Industry 5.0-driven sustainable indus￾trial transformation: A strategy roadmap. Corporate Social Responsibility and 
Environmental Management, 1473–1494. https://doi.org/10.1002/csr.2431
Ghobakhloo, M., Iranmanesh, M., Tseng, M. L., Grybauskas, A., Stefanini, A., & 
Amran, A. (2023). Behind the definition of Industry 5.0: a systematic review 
of technologies, principles, components, and values. Journal of Industrial and 
Production Engineering, 1–16.
Global S&P (2020, Feb 24). What is the “G” in ESG? Retrieved from https://www.
spglobal.com: https://www.spglobal.com/en/research-insights/articles/what-is-the￾g-in-esg
Han, J.-J., Kim, H. J., & Yu, J. (2016). Empirical study on relationship between 
corporate social responsibility and financial performance in Korea. Asian Journal 
of Sustainability and Social Responsibility, 1, 61–76. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s41180-016-0002-3
Harasheh, M., & Provasi, R. (2022). A need for assurance: Do internal control sys￾tems integrate environmental, social, and governance factors? Corporate Social 
Responsibility and Environmental Management, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1002/
csr.2361
Hernandez, M. (2012). Toward an understanding of the psychology of steward￾ship. Academy of Management Review, 37 (2), 172–193. https://doi.org/10.5465/
amr.2010.0363
Huang, S., Wang, B., Li, X., Zheng, P., Mourtzis, D., & Wang, L. (2022). Industry 
5.0 and Society 5.0—Comparison, complementation and co-evolution. Journal of 
manufacturing systems, 64, 424–428.
IIA. (2021). American Corproate Governance Index; Grappling with Fatigue Factor. 
Florida: Institute of Internal Auditors.
Jahera, J. S., & Colbert, J. L. (1988). The Role of the Audit and Agency Theory. Journal 
of Applied Business Research, 4 (2). https://doi.org/10.19030/jabr.v4i2.6427
Jobin, P. (2021). Our ‘good neighbor’ Formosa Plastics: petrochemical damage(s) 
and the meanings of money. Environmental Sociology, 7 (1). https://doi.org/10.10
80/23251042.2020.1803541
Jong, W., & Linde, V. (2022). Clean diesel and dirty scandal: The echo of Volkswagen’s 
dieselgate in an intra-industry setting. Public Relations Review, 48 (1). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pubrev.2022.102146
Justice, D. O. (2020). In Settlement with United States and Montana, Atlantic 
Richfield Agrees to Framework for Cleanup of Mining Contamination in Butte, 
Montana. Montana: U.S. Attorney’s Office District of Montana.
Kasinathan, P., Pugazhendhi, R., Elavarasan, R. M., Ramachandaramurthy, V. K., 
Ramanathan, V., Subramanian, S., … Alsharif, M. H. (2022). Realization of sus￾tainable development goals with disruptive technologies by integrating Industry 
5.0, Society 5.0, smart cities and villages. Sustainability, 14 (22), 15258.
Khan, M. (2019). Corporate governance, ESG, and stock returns around the world. 
Financial Analysts Journal, 75 (4), 103–123. https://doi.org/10.1080/0015198X.
2019.1654299
Klettner, A. (2021). Stewardship codes and the role of institutional investors in cor￾porate governance: An international comparison and typology. British Journal of 
Management. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8551.12466Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 377
Kotsantonis, S., & Serafeim, G. (2019). Four things no one will tell you about ESG 
data. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 31 (2), 50–58.
Kuldova, T. Ø. (2022). The Anti-policy Syndrome. In: Compliance-Industrial Complex. 
Palgrave Macmillan, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-19224-1_2
Kumar, A., & Nayyar, A. (2020). si 3-Industry: A sustainable, intelligent, innovative, 
internet-of-things industry. A roadmap to Industry 4.0: Smart production, sharp 
business and sustainable development, 1–21.
Kuo, T. C., Kremer, G. E. O., Phuong, N. T., & Hsu, C. W. (2016). Motivations and 
barriers for corporate social responsibility reporting: Evidence from the airline 
industry. Journal of Air Transport Management, 57, 184–195.
Lee, M. T., & Suh, I. (2022). Understanding the effects of Environment, Social, and 
Governance conduct on financial performance: Arguments for a process and inte￾grated modelling approach. Sustainable Technology and Entrepreneurship, 1 (1), 
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stae.2022.100004
Lenz, R., & Hoos, F. (2023). The future role of the internal audit function: Assure. 
build. The EDP Audit, Control, and Security Newsletter, 67 (3), 39–52. https://
doi.org/10.1080/07366981.2023.2165361
Li, T.-T., Wang, K., Sueyoshi, T., & Wang, D. D. (2021). ESG: research progress and 
future prospects. Sustainability, 13, 11663. https://doi.org/10.3390/su132111663
Lombardi, R., Trequattrini, R., Cuozzo, B., & Cano-Rubio, M. (2019). Corporate 
corruption prevention, sustainable governance and legislation: First exploratory 
evidence from the Italian scenario. Journal of Cleaner Production, 217, 666–675. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.01.214
Maddikunta, P. K. R., Pham, Q. V., Prabadevi, B., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T. 
R., … Liyanage, M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and 
potential applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26, 100257.
Madsen, D. Ø., & Slåtten, K. (2023). Comparing the evolutionary trajectories 
of Industry 4.0 and 5.0: A management fashion perspective. Applied System 
Innovation, 6 (2), 48.
Mazzotta, M. (2021, Feb 21). 2021 Climate Check: Business’ views on environ￾mental sustainability. Retrieved from https://www2.deloitte.com: https://www2.
deloitte.com/global/en/pages/risk/articles/2021-climate-check-business-views-on￾environmental-sustainability.html
Miler, O. (2021, Oct 11). Governance Investing: What does the ‘G’ in ESG mean?
Retrieved from https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/
governance-investing-what-does-g-esg-mean-olga-miler-/
Mourtzis, D., Angelopoulos, J., & Panopoulos, N. (2022). A Literature Review of the 
Challenges and Opportunities of the Transition from Industry 4.0 to Society 5.0. 
Energies, 15 (17), 6276.
MSX. (2022, Oct 15). Companies. Retrieved from Muscat Stock Exchange: https://
www.msx.om/companies.aspx
OCEG. (2021). ESG Planning and Performance Survey. FL: Open Ethics and 
Compliance Group.
Olaizola, I. G., Quartulli, M., Garcia, A., & Barandiaran, I. (2022). Artificial 
Intelligence from Industry 5.0 perspective: Is the Technology Ready to Meet the 
Challenge? Proceedings http://ceur-ws.org ISSN, 1613, 0073.
Park, J., Choi, W., & Jung, S.-U. (2022). Exploring Trends in Environmental, Social, 
and Governance Themes and Their Sentimental Value Over Time. Front. Psychol, 
13, 890435. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.890435378 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Parmelee, M. (2021). 2021 Climate Check: Business’ Views on Environmental 
Sustainability; Disruptive 2020 slows climate action, but executives determined 
to act. LA: Deloitte.
Patton, J., & Reisch, N. (2021). Formosa Plastics Group: A Serial Offender of 
Environmental and Human Rights (A Case Study). Delware: Center of International 
Environmental Law.
Pedersen, L. H., Fitzgibbons, S., & Pomorski, L. (2021). Responsible investing: The 
ESG-efficient frontier. Journal of Financial Economics, 142 (2), 572–597. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2020.11.001
Pelosi, N., & Adamson, R. (2016). Managing the “S” in ESG: The Case of Indigenous 
Peoples and Extractive Industries. Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, 28 (2). 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jacf.12180
Phillips, S., Thai, V. V., & Halim, Z. (2019). Airline value chain capabilities and 
CSR performance: The connection between CSR leadership and CSR culture 
with CSR performance, customer satisfaction and financial performance. The 
Asian Journal of Shipping and Logistics, 35 (1), 30–40. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ajsl.2019.03.005
Polley, C. (2022, Feb 10). ESG vs. CSR: what’s the difference? Retrieved from https://
thesustainableagency.com: https://thesustainableagency.com/blog/esg-vs-csr/#:~:
text=In%20short%2C%20CSR%20is%20a,a%20company’s%20overall%20
sustainability%20performance
Pramanik, P. K., Mukherjee, B., Pal, S., Kumar, B., Upadhyaya, & Dutta, S. (2022). 
Ubiquitous manufacturing in the age of Industry 4.0: A state-of-the-art primer. In 
A. Nayyar, & A. Kumar. (eds), A Roadmap to Industry 4.0: Smart Production, 
Sharp Business and Sustainable Development (pp. 73–111). Singapore: Springer.
Pritchard, G. Y., & Çalıyurt, K. T. (2021). Sustainability Reporting in Cooperatives. 
Risk, 9 (6), 117. https://doi.org/10.3390/risks9060117
Reeve, J., & Deci, E. (1996). Elements of the competitive situation that affect intrin￾sic motivation. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22 (1), 24–33. https://
doi.org/10.1177/0146167296221003
Rehman, A. (2021). Can Sustainable corporate governance enhance internal audit 
function? Evidence from Omani Public Listed companies. Journal of Risk and 
Financial Management, 14 (11), 537. https://doi.org/10.3390/jrfm14110537
Rehman, A. (2023, April 23). A strong control environment is needed to support 
environmental, social, and governance initiatives. Internal Auditor, 57–61.
Rehman, A., & Hashim, F. (2018). Corporate governance maturity and its related 
measurement framework. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on 
Accounting Studies (ICAS 2018) (pp. 16–28). Penang: UUM.
Rehman, A., & Hashim, F. (2021). Can forensic accounting impact sustainable 
corporate governance? Corproate Governance, 21 (1), 212–227. https://doi.org/
10.1108/CG-06-2020-0269
Ruud, F., Friebe, P., Schmitz, D., & Isufi, S. (2011). International Professional 
Practices Framework – Overview of the current guidance of the Institute of 
Internal Auditors. In Global Management Challenges for Internal Auditors: 
ECIIA Yearbook of Internal Audit 2010/11. (pp. 17–24). Berlin: Erich Schmid.
Sachin, N., & Rajesh, R. (2022). An empirical study of supply chain sustainabil￾ity with financial performances of Indian firms. Environment, Development and 
Sustainability, 24 (5), 6577–6601. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10668-021-01717-1Influence of Internal Audit on Implementation of ESG Factor 379
Saniuk, S., Grabowska, S., & Straka, M. (2022). Identification of social and economic 
expectations: Contextual reasons for the transformation process of Industry 4.0 
into the Industry 5.0 Concept. Sustainability, 14 (3), 1391.
Sanyal, S., & Hisam, M. W. (2017). Corporate governance in emerging econo￾mies: A study of the Sultanate Of Oman. International Journal of Business and 
Administration Research Review, 3 (20), 27–31.
Schandl, A., & Foster, P. L. (2019). COSO Internal Control – Integrated Framework: 
An Implementation Guide for the Healthcare Provider Industry. Durham: Crowe.
SEC. (2022, March 21). SEC Proposes Rules to Enhance and Standardize Climate￾Related Disclosures for Investors. Retrieved from https://www.sec.gov: https://
www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2022-46
Sila, I., & Cek, K. (2017). The Impact of environmental, social and governance dimen￾sions of corporate social responsibility on economic performance: Australian 
Evidence. Procedia Computer Science, 120, 797–804. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
procs.2017.11.310
Soh, D. S., & Martinov-Bennie, N. (2015). Internal auditors’ perceptions of their role 
in environmental, social and governance assurance and consulting. Managerial 
Auditing Journal, 30 (1), 80–111. https://doi.org/10.1108/MAJ-08-2014-1075
Stojanović, T., & Andrić, M. (2016). Internal Auditing and Risk Management in 
Corporations. Strategic Management, 21 (3), 31–42.
Stranieri, S., Orsi, L., Banterle, A., & Ricci, E. C. (2019). Sustainable development 
and supply chain coordination: The impact of corporate social responsibility 
rules in the European Union food industry. Corporate Social Responsibility and 
Environmental Management, 26 (2), 481–491. https://doi.org/10.1002/csr.1698
Sustainability, O. C. (2015). Establishing the Oman Centre for Governance and 
Sustainability and Promulgating its Charter. Muscat: Capital Market Authority.
Sustainanalytics. (2021, Oct 19). Company ESG Risk Ratings. Retrieved from 
https://www.sustainalytics.com/: https://www.sustainalytics.com/esg-rating/
national-bank-of-oman/1018123150
Tamimi, N., & Sebastianelli, R. (2017). Transparency among S&P 500 companies: 
an analysis of ESG disclosure scores. Management Decision, 55 (8), 1660–1680. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/MD-01-2017-0018
Team, C. (2022, June 6). The 3 Pillars of ESG. Retrieved from https://www.countable.
com: https://www.countable.com/blog/the-three-pillars-of-esg
Team, O. O. (2021, Dec 26). Muscat: The Ministry of Commerce, Industry, and 
Investment Promotion (MOCIIP) has issued a decision to deduct 20 percent of 
the budget of institutions and companies allocated to social responsibility pro￾grams for the benefit of the Oman Charitable Association. Retrieved from https://
www.omanobserver.om: https://www.omanobserver.om/article/1111670/business/
economy/20-of-csr-budget-to-be-marked-for-oman-charitable-association
Thottoli, M. M. (2022). A study on listed companies’ compliance with value-added tax: 
the evolving role of compliance officer in Oman. Public Administration and Policy: 
An Asia-Pacific Journal, 25 (1), 89–98. https://doi.org/10.1108/PAP-02-2021-0017
Waas, B. (2021). The “S” in ESG and international labour standards. International 
Journal of Disclosure and Governance, 18, 403–410, https://doi.org/10.1057/
s41310-021-00121-5
Winteroll, M. (2020). Sustainable Finance - Environment, Social and Governance 
Criteria Feed Back from Deutsche Börse Group. Frankfurt: European Commission.380 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Wong, C., & Petroy, E. (2020). Rate the Raters 2020: Investor Survey and Interview 
Results. LA: SustainAbility.
Worker, J. (2015, May 20). The Best and Worst Countries for Environmental 
Democracy. Retrieved from https://www.wri.org: https://www.wri.org/insights/
best-and-worst-countries-environmental-democracy
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B., & Wang, L. (2021). Industry 4.0 and Industry 
5.0—Inception, conception and perception. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 
61, 530–535.
Zeilina, L., & Toth, J. (2021). Amplifying the “S” in ESG: Investor Myth Buster. LA: 
International Sustainable Finance Centre.DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-11 381
11.1 INTRODUCTION
Industry 4.0, a drive from Germany, has turned into a universally embraced 
term in the last 10 years. Numerous nations have given similar key drives, 
and a great deal of research and development work has gone into devel￾oping and implementing some of the Business 4.0 innovations (Sindhwani 
et al. 2022). At the 10-year mark since the inception of Industry 4.0, the 
European Commission declared Industry 5.0. Industry 4.0 is viewed as 
innovation-driven, while Industry 5.0 is esteem-driven (Venaik et al. 2023). 
The concurrence of two modern industrial revolutions welcomes questions 
and thus requests conversations and explanations. Industry 5.0, otherwise 
called the Fifth Industrial Revolution, is a new and arising period of indus￾trialization that sees people working close by trend-setting innovation and 
artificial intelligence (AI)-fueled robots to upgrade working environment 
processes (Minculete et al., 2021). This is combined with a more human￾driven center in addition to increased adaptability and an improved spot￾light on manageability (Xu et al., 2021).
Enveloping something beyond assembling, this new stage expands upon 
the Fourth Modern Industrial Revolution (Industry 4.0) and is empowered 
by advancements in information communication technology (ICT) that 
incorporate the features, for example, man-made brainpower, computeriza￾tion, Big Data examination, the Internet of Things (IoT), Artificial 
Intelligence, mechanical technology, brilliant frameworks, and virtualiza￾tion (Ozdemir & Hekim, 2018; Al-Turzman et al., 2021). Expanding the 
ideas of Industry 4.0, this new industrial revolution is portrayed by the 
European Association as giving, “a dream of an industry that points past 
proficiency and efficiency as the sole objectives, and builds up the job and 
the commitment of industry to society” (Zong et al., 2021).
This is a significant differentiation from the methodology of Industry 4.0, 
as depicted by the EU, since “it puts the prosperity of the laborer at the focal 
Chapter 11
Foresight the future of Industry 
5.0 in perspective of sustainable 
services in developing countries 
Pankaj Singh
GLA University, Mathura, India
Ruchi Kushwaha and Jyoti Kushwaha
Jiwaji University, Gwalior, India382 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
point of the creative interaction and uses new advances to give thriving past 
positions and development while regarding the creation furthest reaches of 
the planet.” This is a shift away from an emphasis on monetary worth toward 
a more extensive idea of cultural worth and prosperity. While this idea has 
been addressed previously, through Corporate Social Obligation regarding 
the model, the thought of putting individuals and the planet before benefits 
makes another concentration for the industry (Saniuk et al., 2022).
Industry 5.0, also known as the Fifth Industrial Revolution, is the latest 
phase of industrial transformation that builds on Industry 4.0 by integrating 
human workers with advanced robotics and automation technologies that 
helps in better work–life balance (Kushwaha et al., 2022). While Industry 
4.0 focuses on digitalization and automation, Industry 5.0 emphasizes the 
importance of human touch and creativity in the manufacturing process 
(Madsen & Berg, 2021).
Industry 5.0, simply known as the “human-centric” or “integrated” industry, 
emphasizes the integration of advanced technologies with human skills and 
values to achieve sustainable production and consumption (Ghobakhloo et al., 
2022). In recent years, there has been growing interest in understanding how 
sustainable service production and consumption can be achieved in Industry 
5.0 (Majerník et al., 2022). Notwithstanding, the possibility of Industry 5.0 
goes past industry to envelop all associations and business systems to make a 
more extensive viewpoint than seen with Industry 4.0 (Table 11.1).
11.1.1 Industry 4.0 versus Industry 5.0
There are hybrids between these two transformations, yet while Industry 
4.0 is innovation-driven, Industry 5.0 is esteem-driven (Kumar & Nayyar, 
2020). Though 4.0 focuses on computerization and the expanded spotlight 
on innovation, 5.0 brings humankind back into the field, consolidating with 
innovation to give frameworks and cycles that serve individuals and our 
general surroundings first (Rajput et al., 2022). The distinction of the Fifth 
Industrial Revolution is the way current innovation is being utilized to drive 
helpful working among people and trend-setting innovations and simulated 
intelligence-empowered robots to upgrade working environment cycles to 
convey a more human-driven, strong, and earth-mindful, feasible future 
(Chander et al., 2022). Industry 5.0 has started to happen now, although it 
needs to build up progress to thrive (Leng et al., 2022).
Numerous organizations are centered on Industry 4.0, yet, as additional 
organizations move to consolidate the thoughts of Industry 5.0, we ought to 
see it grow further (Nayyar & Kumar, 2020). Industry 5.0 has started, with 
simulated intelligence-controlled frameworks taking up dreary errands and 
permitting individuals to zero in on more useful and esteem-adding assign￾ments (Akundi et al., 2022). Industry 5.0 is still in its beginning phases, with 
numerous organizations actually zeroing in on Industry 4.0 but this is sup￾posed to change as additional organizations adjust themselves to the Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 383
objectives of Industry 5.0. Industry 5.0 calls out worldwide modern change. 
It expects to put people’s prosperity at the focal point of assembling frame￾works, accordingly accomplishing social objectives past businesses and devel￾opment for the reasonable improvement of all mankind. Notwithstanding, 
the flow investigation of Industry 5.0 is still in its early stages where research 
discoveries are moderately scant and minimally efficient. The three driving 
attributes of Industry 5.0 are human-centricity, manageability, and versatility. 
The implication arrangement of Industry 5.0 is examined, and its broadened 
embodiment is broken down. Industry 4.0 has been accommodated for the 
last 10 years to help businesses and deficiencies; at last, the ideal opportunity 
for Industry 5.0 has shown up.
Brilliant manufacturing plants are improving business efficiency; accord￾ingly, Industry 4.0 has impediments. Industry 5.0 is changing the worldview 
and brings the goal since it will diminish accentuation on the innovation and 
expect that the potential for progress depends on joint effort among the 
people and machines. The modern upheaval is further developing consumer 
loyalty by using customized items. In present-day business with the paid 
Table 11.1 Evolution and transition shift of Industrial Revolution from 1.0 to 5.0
S. No. Stages of the 
Industrial 
Revolution
Major features in each phase
1 Industry 1.0 Starting in around 1780, this first upheaval zeroed in on 
modern creation in light of machines that were fueled by 
steam and water.
2 Industry 2.0 Nearly 100 years later, in 1870, this Second Industrial 
Revolution depended on electrification and occurred with 
large-scale manufacturing through sequential assembly line 
systems.
3 Industry 3.0 Venturing forward an additional 100 years, to 1970, Industry 
3.0 saw robotization using PCs and hardware. This was 
upgraded by globalization (Industry 3.5), including offshoring 
of creation to minimal expense economies.
4 Industry 4.0 At present, we are living in the fourth modern revolution, 
which is based around the idea of digitalization and 
incorporates mechanization, man-made brainpower (man￾made intelligence) advancements, associated gadgets, 
information examination, digital actual frameworks, 
computerized change, and that’s just the beginning.
5 Industry 5.0 We are currently entering the fifth modern unrest with an 
emphasis on man and machines cooperating. In light of 
personalization and the utilization of cooperative robots, 
laborers are allowed to convey esteem-added undertakings 
for clients. This most recent emphasis goes past assembling 
cycles to incorporate expanded strength, a human-driven 
approach, and attention to supportability, which we 
investigate in more detail underneath.384 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
mechanical turns of events, Industry 5.0 is expected to acquire the upper 
hand as well as financial development for the plant.
11.1.2 Scope of Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0 is viewed as the following modern advancement, and its goal 
is to use the imagination of human specialists in a joint effort with profi￾cient, smart, and precise machines, to get asset-effective and client-favored 
assembling arrangements contrasted with Industry 4.0. Various promising 
advancements and applications are supposed to help Industry 5.0 to incre￾ment creation and convey redid items in an unconstrained way. To give 
an absolute first conversation of Industry 5.0, in this chapter, we mean to 
give an overview put together instructional exercise with respect to pos￾sible applications and supporting advances of Industry 5.0. We initially 
present a few new ideas and meanings of Industry 5.0 according to the 
viewpoint of various industry professionals and scientists. We then, at 
that point, extravagantly examine the expected utilization of Industry 5.0, 
for example, keen medical services, cloud fabricating, inventory network 
the executives, and assembling creation. Consequently, we examine a few 
supporting innovations for Industry 5.0, for example, edge processing, 
computerized twins, cooperative robots, the Web of Each and Everything, 
blockchain, and 6G (Rupa et al., 2021). Finally, we feature a few examina￾tion difficulties and open issues that ought to be additionally evolved to 
acknowledge Industry 5.0.
11.1.2.1 Objectives of the chapter
To address the above-mentioned queries on the consequences of Industry 
5.0, the following objectives are formulated:
• To foresee the future consequences of Industry 5.0 in the context of 
sustainable services;
• To analyze the role of Industry 5.0 in sustainable service production 
and consumption in developing countries;
• And, to detect the significance of Industry 5.0 in the attainment of 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
11.1.2.2 Organization of the chapter
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. Section 11.2 provides a 
review of related studies in the area of Industry 5.0. Section 11.3 discusses 
technology enabled for Industry 5.0. In Section 11.4, the consequences of 
Industry 5.0 for major service sectors of developing economies are delib￾erated. Section 11.5 presents the significance of Industry 5.0 in attaining 
SDGs. And, finally, Section 11.6 concludes the chapter with future scope.Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 385
11.2 REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Industry 5.0 is a relatively new concept that has emerged as an evolution of 
Industry 4.0, with a focus on integrating human skills, creativity, and sus￾tainability into the industrial production process. Here is a brief review of 
some of the literature on Industry 5.0.
11.2.1 Implications of Industry 5.0
Ivanov (2022) provided an overview of the Industry 5.0 concept, its main 
principles, and potential benefits. The author argues that Industry 5.0 could 
help address some of the challenges of Industry 4.0, such as the displacement 
of jobs and the neglect of human creativity and sustainability, by putting 
human needs and values at the center of the production process. Salgado 
and Rodríguez (2022) explored the role of human skills and creativity in 
Industry 5.0 and the potential for this new paradigm to enhance human 
well-being and creativity in the workplace. Authors argued that Industry 
5.0 could lead to a more equitable and inclusive industrial production pro￾cess that values the contributions of all workers. Ullah (2022) provided an 
overview of the main concepts and technologies associated with Industry 
5.0, such as cyber-physical systems, artificial intelligence, and blockchain. 
Authors argued that Industry 5.0 has the potential to transform the indus￾trial production process by enabling greater customization, flexibility, and 
sustainability.
Thakur and Sehgal (2021) discussed the potential impact of Industry 5.0 
on the manufacturing sector, with a focus on the Indian context. Authors 
argued that Industry 5.0 could help India transform its manufacturing sec￾tor by improving efficiency, reducing waste, and promoting sustainability. 
Gorodetsky et al. (2020) explored the implications of Industry 5.0 for the 
future of work, with a focus on the role of human skills and creativity. 
Authors argued that Industry 5.0 could lead to a more diverse and inclusive 
workforce, with greater opportunities for creativity and innovation. 
Mourtzis et al. (2022) provided an overview of the current state of sustain￾ability in Industry 5.0, including the challenges and opportunities for sus￾tainable service production and consumption. Authors identified several 
key sustainability goals for Industry 5.0, such as reducing resource con￾sumption, minimizing waste, and promoting social and environmental 
responsibility.
Nahavandi (2019) explored the challenges and opportunities of Industry 
5.0, such as the need for new skills and competencies, the potential for job 
displacement, and the opportunities for innovation and entrepreneurship. 
Authors argued that Industry 5.0 requires a comprehensive approach that 
addresses the social, economic, and environmental dimensions of sustain￾able development. Zengin et al. (2021) explored the role of service￾oriented computing in promoting sustainable service production and 386 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
consumption in Industry 5.0. Authors highlighted that service-oriented com￾puting can facilitate the integration of advanced technologies and human 
skills and values, enabling more sustainable and efficient production and 
consumption processes. Bryndin (2020) examined the current state of 
research on sustainable service systems in the industry, with a focus on 
Industry 4.0 and beyond, and identified several key themes in the literature, 
such as the importance of collaboration between stakeholders, the need for 
flexible and adaptable service systems, and the role of technology in promot￾ing sustainability.
Adel (2022) examined the role of sustainable smart services in Industry 
5.0, including the challenges and opportunities for promoting sustainability 
in service production and consumption. Authors elaborated that sustainable 
smart services can enable more efficient and sustainable production and con￾sumption processes, while also promoting social and environmental respon￾sibility. Aslam et al. (2020) provided an overview of the current state of 
research on sustainable service systems in Industry 5.0 and identified several 
key research directions for future studies. Authors deliberated that future 
research should focus on developing innovative service models and business 
models that promote sustainability, as well as exploring the role of advanced 
technologies in enabling sustainable service production and consumption.
11.2.2 Industry 5.0 consequences in developed and 
developing countries
Research on the possibilities of Industry 5.0 in developed and third-world 
countries is still in its early stages, but several studies have examined this 
topic. Here is a brief review of some of the literature on Industry 5.0 in both 
types of countries.
• Industry 5.0 in developed countries
A study by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) highlights the potential of Industry 5.0 in 
developed countries to create more flexible, human-centered produc￾tion processes that can respond to changing customer demands and 
market conditions. Another study by the German Federal Ministry for 
Economic Affairs and Energy emphasizes the potential of Industry 5.0 
to improve sustainability and reduce environmental impact through 
the use of advanced robotics and additive manufacturing. A study by 
McKinsey and Company highlights the potential of Industry 5.0 to 
create new business models and increase competitiveness in developed 
countries (Tiwari et al., 2022).
• Industry 5.0 in third-world countries
A study by the United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
(UNIDO) explores the potential of Industry 5.0 in third-world 
countries to create more inclusive and sustainable industrialization, Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 387
improve productivity, and create employment opportunities. Another 
study by the World Economic Forum (WEF) emphasizes the potential 
of Industry 5.0 in third-world countries to promote economic devel￾opment and reduce poverty through the adoption of advanced manu￾facturing technologies (Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2023). Previous 
studies highlighted the potential of Industry 5.0 to create a more equi￾table and inclusive global industrial system by enabling third-world 
countries to participate in global value chains and access new markets.
Overall, the literature suggests that Industry 5.0 has the potential to trans￾form manufacturing processes in both developed and third-world countries, 
creating new opportunities for economic growth, sustainability, and social 
inclusion by integrating human skills, creativity, and sustainability. However, 
realizing this potential will require significant investments in technology, 
infrastructure, and human capital development. Generally, these studies sug￾gest that sustainable service production and consumption is a critical goal 
for Industry 5.0 and that achieving this goal will require collaboration 
between stakeholders, the development of innovative service models and 
business models, and the integration of advanced technologies with human 
skills and values. However, there is also a need to address potential chal￾lenges and risks associated with this new paradigm, such as the displace￾ment of jobs and unequal distribution of benefits.
11.3 TECHNOLOGIES ENABLED FOR INDUSTRY 5.0
Industry 5.0 is viewed as the following modern advancement and its goal is 
to use the innovativeness of human specialists in a joint effort with produc￾tive, smart, and exact machines, and to obtain additional asset efficiency, 
that is, the client’s preferred assembly arrangements, contrary to Industry 
4.0. There are various promising developments in addition; applications are 
supposed to help Industry 5.0 to increment creation and convey modified 
items in an unconstrained way (Maddikunta et al., 2022).
11.3.1 Industry 5.0 benefits and burdens
The principal benefit of Industry 5.0 is the making of higher-worth positions 
that manage the cost of more prominent personalization for clients and 
further develop plan opportunities for laborers. By permitting fabricating 
cycles to be taken care of through robotization, human specialists can zero 
in a greater amount of their experience on conveying improved, custom￾tailored administrations and items. At that time, this began with Industry 
4.0, yet Industry 5.0 drives this further through better mechanization and 
input to make a help-based model where people can zero in on adding an 
incentive for end clients.388 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
11.3.2 Futuristic applications of Industry 5.0
Basically, Industry 5.0 is supported by three systems, namely, human￾centricity, versatility, and manageability.
(a) Human-centricity
Industry 5.0 incorporates a system that moves individuals from being 
viewed as assets to being real resources. As a result, this implies that 
instead of individuals serving associations, associations will serve indi￾viduals. Thus, rather than ability essentially being utilized to make an 
upper hand and an incentive for clients, Industry 5.0 pulls jointly to 
also create additional incentive for laborers to draw in and keep the 
best representatives.
(b) Versatility
As the world has become more signed up, over time, more people 
joined up; we have seen the far-reaching effect of worldwide issues 
like the Coronavirus pandemic and global inventory deficiencies. 
While numerous organizations hope to further develop efficiencies 
and advancing benefits, these variables don’t further develop flexibil￾ity. As a matter of fact, there is a conviction that a focus on deftness 
and adaptability can make organizations less versatile, not more. As 
opposed to focusing on development, benefit, and effectiveness, stron￾ger associations would hope to expect and respond to any emergency 
to guarantee soundness through testing times.
(c) Manageability
Industry 5.0 broadens maintainability from just lessening, limiting, or 
relieving environmental harm to effectively chasing after endeavors 
to make a positive change. At times alluded to as “Net Positive,” this 
objective means to make the world a superior spot with organizations 
turning out to be important for the arrangement instead of being an 
issue or just offering empty talk to supportability objectives through 
“green washing.”
11.3.3 Applications of Cobots in Industry 5.0
While robots have performed hazardous, dull, or truly debilitating work in 
assembling plants and different work environments, Industry 5.0 stretches 
out this to permit them to work cooperatively with human laborers (Batth 
et al., 2018). For instance, rather than being fenced off for security, another 
age of “Cobots” that can work securely close by individuals is setting out 
new open doors for organizations. Human and machine laborers working 
one next to the other permit individuals to zero in on esteem-adding cycles 
to take personalization of items to another level. Cobots, or collaborative 
robots, are robots designed to work alongside humans in a shared workspace. Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 389
They are equipped with sensors, cameras, and other safety features to detect 
human presence and ensure that they work safely and efficiently.
• Manufacturing: Cobots are commonly used in manufacturing envi￾ronments to handle repetitive or dangerous tasks, such as assem￾bling components, packaging, and machine tending. They can work 
alongside human workers to improve productivity, reduce errors, and 
increase safety.
• Healthcare: Cobots can assist healthcare workers by handling routine 
tasks such as delivering medications and supplies, taking vital signs, 
and cleaning hospital rooms. They can also be used in rehabilitation 
and therapy to assist patients with mobility and exercise.
• Logistics and warehousing: Cobots are increasingly used in ware￾houses and logistics facilities to handle tasks such as picking and 
packing, inventory management, and transportation of goods. They 
can work alongside human workers to improve efficiency and reduce 
errors.
• Agriculture: Cobots can be used in agriculture to automate tasks such as 
planting, weeding, and harvesting crops. They can work in tandem with 
human workers to increase productivity and efficiency in the field.
• Education: Cobots are being used in classrooms and educational set￾tings to teach students about robotics and programming. They can 
help students learn about technology and automation in a hands-on 
way, preparing them for future careers in different fields.
For instance, the clinical calling could utilize this signed-up, helpful way to 
deal with making gadgets that are custom-fitted for an individual, for exam￾ple, with a diabetes application that can follow your way of life and illuminate 
the production regarding a gadget to suit your singular requirements. Fitting 
items to suit individual necessities can be reached out to different businesses, 
including gadgets, and auto, and that’s only the tip of the iceberg; adding an 
individual, human touch broadens the contributions made through Industry 
5.0. The main applications of Cobots are shown in Figure 11.1.
11.4 CONSEQUENCES OF INDUSTRY 5.0 AS SMART 
SERVICES IN MAJOR SECTORS OF DEVELOPING 
ECONOMIES
Industry 5.0 is significant as it permits organizations and industries to effec￾tively convey answers for society to protect assets, guarantee social depend￾ability, and address environmental targets (Huang et al., 2022). With benefits 
zeroed in on the more extensive world, including workers, as opposed to 
just efficiency and benefit, Industry 5.0 transforms associated organizations 390 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
into part of the arrangement as opposed to presenting possible ecological 
and cultural issues. Major sectors affected by Industry 4.0 such as medical 
services, supply chains, and assembly are likely to profit from Industry 5.0 
due to the use of massive data analysis, the IoT, cooperative robots, com￾puterized twins, and, recently, an increased focus on personalization and 
maintainability (Mourtzis et al., 2022).
With the speedy improvement of development in the digitalization era, 
Industry 4.0 has transformed into an expression that transformed into a 
reference for imaginative work in the space of development in various 
regions. This continues to set off all people to encourage development to 
engage. Society 5.0 is an idea that gets a handle on the change in people’s 
lives with the improvement of the fourth present-day upset. The possibility 
that should be looked into is how there is a disturbance in the public eye 
that both utilizes advancement and considers humanity’s points of view. A 
few areas of work and needs are starting to enter digitalization that uses 
man-made brainpower, Big Data, mechanical technology, robotization, AI, 
and the Web of Things.
11.4.1 Smart healthcare practices
Industry 5.0 permits the assembling of a precisely tailored brilliant embed 
according to changing client necessities. In any case, this is reasonable. 
The field of clinical calling is moving toward automated reasoning that 
addresses a range of problems, for example, glucose levels in blood convey 
insulin into the blood and change the control framework. Industry 5.0 can 
change an existence with various innovations. It will, in general, robotize 
the assembling framework in a superior manner by making savvy plants, 
Figure 11.1 Major applications of Cobots in different sectors.Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 391
and fabricated item imparts carefully. The modern robot will computerize 
the entirety of the presentation cycle and proceed with the backward seating 
arrangement of human knowledge in this revolution (Sharma et al., 2020).
Industry 5.0 can assist with carrying out mass personalization by making 
inserts according to patient match which is an essential necessity for muscu￾lar health. It will change the conventional assembling techniques for patient 
inserts and is fit for updating various instruments and gadgets. Advances 
utilized in this unrest are likewise useful to carry out procedures in a more 
precise manner. It is likewise useful for a clinical understudy to give the best 
instruction, education, learning, treatment, and innovative work process 
(Carayannis & Morawska-Jancelewicz, 2022).
In muscular health, businesses need top-notch modified inserts with 
improved lifetimes that can be customized. Industry 5.0 is to tackle various 
difficulties such as overproduction, absence of straightforwardness, and 
wrong device choice. This unrest affects item dependability, item lifecycle, 
benefit, proficiency, administration, plan of action, IT security, climate, and 
machine and human safety. It will globally bring closer to worldwide busi￾nesses by creating great collaborations between humans and machines. It 
interfaces smart assembling frameworks through gadgets to make better 
mechanization by using human brainpower. Industry 4.0 creates digitiza￾tion, where various advancements and gadgets such as brilliant machines, 
information examination, and man-made consciousness robotize the assem￾bling system.
The primary utilization of Industry 5.0 is personalization. It centers on 
the co-activity between man and machine, prompting mass customization 
and personalization for the client. Humans smartly used mental processing 
and upskilled to provide some added value to the ongoing task. It adapts to 
the client’s individual requirements. Industry 5.0 is useful for giving top￾notch customized inserts, instruments, and gadgets with a necessary scope 
of detail according to the patient’s prerequisites. In the future, this upheaval 
will be useful in muscular health by tackling issues over a drawn-out deli￾cate life cycle. It can take information on illnesses from the different arrange￾ments of patients, examine them, and effectively make changes in 
distinguishing the individual degree of sicknesses and aiding therapies with￾out even understanding requesting something very similar.
In impending years, it will upgrade the job of machines that give imagina￾tive and creative thoughts in clinical and muscular health fields. It gives excel￾lent customized inserts and contraptions. The utilization of trend-setting 
innovations has expanded radically to keep up with any delicate records con￾nected with schooling, well-being, or money. It assists with safeguarding the 
information from unapproved access by assailants. Notwithstanding, every 
one of the current cutting-edge innovations faces a few issues in light of their 
vulnerabilities. These innovations have a few omissions to give security, 
assault-free, straightforwardness, dependability, and adaptability. These attri￾butes are fundamental while dealing with any touchy information such as 
instructive declarations or clinical testaments (Haleem & Javaid, 2019).392 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
11.4.2 Smart online education practices
The possibility of Society 5.0 and Industry 5.0 is unquestionably not an 
essential successive continuation or choice as opposed to the Industry 4.0 
perspective. Society 5.0 means to put individuals at the midpoint of advance￾ment, exploiting the impact of development and Industry 4.0 results with 
the mechanical blend to chip away at individual fulfillment, social com￾mitment, and viability. This notable perspective has typically centered on 
the objectives of the gathered sensible improvement targets for the nation. 
It moreover has huge repercussions on school modifications. Schools are 
called after transmitting information for fresh headways and social turn of 
events. Digitalization opens new perspectives for schools and can become 
one of the essential drivers of their change. Coordinating the speculations of 
Society 5.0 and Industry 5.0 into the school’s practices and approaches will 
allow the universities and social orders to totally benefit from the cutting￾edge change (Paschek et al., 2019).
Making the human-organized progression of the school’s image name and 
developing new pleasing models will in like manner help with achieving 
prudent requirements. During the last 20 years, huge imaginative changes 
have happened around us, maintained by inconvenient advances, both on 
the item and hardware sides. A blend of data, correspondence, and comput￾erized reasoning is occurring, as well as the cross-treatment of many ideas 
alluded to as advanced change. While the conversation on the most profi￾cient method to operationalize the new keen frameworks of the fourth mod￾ern upheaval, Industry 4.0, is yet going on, the prevailing attributes of the 
fifth modern transformation, Industry 5.0 – going past delivering labor and 
products for benefit – expects all to think and act in an unexpected way. 
Because of the combination peculiarity, the limits between various disci￾plines are disintegrating, requiring an exhaustive conversation on what 
designing schooling ought to resemble from now on. Subsequent to thinking 
about the fifth modern transformation, significant patterns/impacting fac￾tors that will influence designing instruction essentially and dissecting the 
requirement for abilities from the future, we have recognized three proce￾dures that might end up being useful to the advanced education foundations 
to overhaul their projects (Mitchell & Guile, 2022). These systems are as 
follows:
• deep-rooted learning and transdisciplinary training
• manageability, versatility, and human-driven plan modules
• involved information familiarity and the executives’ courses
Contemporary advanced education is changing step by step. Gatherings 
of educators and understudies from auditoriums are progressively moving 
into the advanced space of the Web, embracing the recipe of distance learn￾ing. The coming of Society 5.0 and Economy 5.0 will infer further changes. Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 393
The need to coordinate the genuine and virtual worlds, expanded interest 
for the time being, assets, and the need to join proficient work with school￾ing will prompt advanced education to plan future residents to work in 
the space of sharing assets, to be compelled to additional versatile changes. 
Industry 5.0 turned into the reason for the creators to set up a proposition 
for a model of future instructive ways as per the Economy 5.0 pattern where 
the adaptability of spot and time, customization of the deal, collaboration, 
versatility of showing techniques and instruments, and the proactive job 
of the educator as a tutor and mentor comprise a bunch of set rules in the 
showing model representing things to come (Broo et al., 2022).
11.4.3 Smart logistic services
Given the significance of human centricity, versatility, and supportability, 
the arising idea of Industry 5.0 has pushed forward the examination boon￾docks of the innovation-centered Industry 4.0 to brilliant and amicable 
financial progress driven by innovations, where the job of the human in the 
mechanical change is transcendently centered around. A few examinations 
talk about the effects of problematic advances on smart strategic tasks in 
Industry 4.0. Nonetheless, since Industry 5.0 is another idea regardless of 
its outset, its suggestions for brilliant strategies have not been examined. 
The center components of Industry 5.0 show that following the innovation￾driven change of Industry 4.0, the cultural, natural, and human viewpoints 
require more consideration, which will yield critical effects on coordinated 
factors tasks and the board. For example, the personalization of requests 
infers a customized conveyance framework. Integrating clients into the plan 
requires a profoundly insightful CPS and framework combination. Human–
machine collaboration sets off the communication of different subjects such 
as security and the human way of behaving (Jafari et al., 2022).
Industry 5.0 gives potential chances to work on the astuteness and support￾ability of different strategies and activities through digitalization and human–
machine coordinated effort. Notwithstanding, there is an absence of laid-out 
research and instructive modules in this field. The objective of the task is to 
empower industry 5.0 savvy operations from global perspective in order to 
lay out a stage for information building and move, foster new instructive 
modules, and advance understudy and staff trades (Qahtan et al., 2022).
11.4.4 Smart financial and insurance services
Innovation has created new possibilities for assembling enterprises 
with Industry 4.0 and has promoted the development of the assembling area. 
This chapter centers around the following stage, which is Industry 5.0, 
and the moves toward making mechanization powerful by expanding pro￾cesses and functional effectiveness, as well as diminishing labor force size. 
In a modern economy, Industry 5.0 examines the mix of items, processes, 394 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
machines, programming, and modern robots in acknowledging Industry 
5.0. It covers the double combination of human insight with machine 
knowledge and audits the consequences of utilizing the Modern Web of 
Things (IoT) and computerized reasoning (simulated intelligence). The 
production of another classification of robots named Cooperative Robots 
(Cobots) explicitly intended to accelerate the assembling system and benefit 
is investigated.
Innovation, alongside political and financial variables, is one of the prin￾cipal forces influencing future developments in banking (Nicoletti & 
Nicoletti, 2021). Banking chiefs direly need to know innovative patterns to 
pursue vital choices, know the future precisely, and take advantage of exist￾ing open doors. Industry 5.0 is the fantasy of present-day banking, in light 
of techniques for fruitful section into the field in something else entirely 
(Mehdiabadi et al., 2022).
The world has gone into the fifth modern upheaval which is portrayed as 
a human-driven upset as it depends on experts’ imaginative and inventive 
capacities to direct quick, smart, and exact machines. The issues of breaking 
down and loss of efficiency during mechanization essentialized the utiliza￾tion of people’s ability to guide and control the assembling of merchandise 
and items. With regards to monetary establishments (banks), the use of I5.0 
advances, for example, edge registering, computerized twins, Cobots, Web 
of Everything, Big Data examination, and 6G network, can work with banks 
to diminish the expense of their items and administrations, hold existing 
clients, keep up with classification and protection of clients, further develop 
their gamble the board rehearses, offer blunder-free monetary administra￾tions, advance information-driven culture in the right direction, and enable 
effective joining of digitalization. This formative review is supposed to 
establish the groundwork for future investigations to investigate the prog￾ress of Industry 5.0 advancements inside banks experimentally.
Smart insurance services in Industry 5.0 play an important role in climate 
change resilience and weather risk mitigation, especially in rural areas (Al 
Faruqi, 2019; Jain and Singh, 2023). Weather index insurance is a type of 
insurance that provides protection against losses due to adverse weather 
events, such as droughts, floods, and hurricanes (Singh, 2022). Instead of 
indemnifying the actual losses, these policies pay out based on predeter￾mined weather indexes, which can serve as proxies for the damage caused 
by weather-related risks (Singh & Agrawal, 2019). Over the past two 
decades, weather index insurance has gained popularity as a tool for manag￾ing weather-related risks among farmers, herders, and other vulnerable pop￾ulations in developing countries (Singh & Agrawal, 2020). Weather index 
insurance can increase resilience and improve welfare among vulnerable 
populations (Singh & Agrawal, 2021). Weather index insurance can be an 
effective tool for managing weather-related risks (Singh & Agrawal, 2022).
Weather index insurance can provide significant benefits to farmers and 
other vulnerable populations (Singh et al., 2023). Weather index insurance Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 395
was less likely to experience food insecurity during a drought and had higher 
levels of income and consumption (Singh et al., 2021a). Different studies 
prove that weather index insurance can be an effective tool for managing 
weather-related risks and improving welfare among vulnerable populations 
(Singh et al., 2024). However, the success of these insurance programs 
depends on careful design and implementation, especially for an unorga￾nized sector (Singh, 2014).
11.4.5 Development practices in smart cities and 
smart villages
Savvy urban areas focus on an economical way of life with a greener and 
more secure metropolitan climate. The futurists have proactively begun 
examining Industry 5.0 as a subject of adding human contact or personal￾ization in view of joint effort and collaboration of humans and robots. This 
chapter analyzes the idea of what Industry 5.0 can mean for brilliant urban 
communities and what sort of changes are expected – how it will make a 
different arrangement of chances (Kasinathan et al., 2022).
The quickly expanding lack of assets and energy, falling-apart foundation, 
ecological emergency, and interest in social advantages have prompted the 
improvement of the idea of a smart city or computerized city which bargains 
in applying brilliant advances to infrastructural administrations and parts. 
This incorporates the utilization of registering innovations to smooth-out 
city organization, training, medical services, public security, land, and trans￾portation. In addition, various utilities in a smart city likewise make prog￾ress toward upgrading its assets by arranging its preventive support and 
security exercises. The principal point is to coordinate the physical, IT, 
social, and business foundations (Sharma et al., 2020).
The engineering of smart urban communities can be isolated into two sec￾tions: outside and interior. The outer design is utilized for observing roads, 
parks, recreation regions, and so on. The total city is observed through 
extended-run conventions for correspondence, for example, the utilization 
of sensors exposed to the daylight. Inward engineering is relatively less 
expensive to carry out and utilizes short-range conventions like Wi-Fi, 
Bluetooth, and RFID, for example, grasping the mathematical condition of 
the structures, accountability for, and so on. The smart urban communities 
are totally reliant upon IoT. The different sensors, gadgets, and applications 
are utilized for gathering the information which is subsequently examined 
to make innovation arrangements more viable (Visvizi & Lytras, 2019).
Smart urban communities are viewed as a venture that utilizes mechanical 
advances as an instrument to support and work on the nature of living. 
Information replaces the heart while planning and carrying out the idea of 
smart urban areas. The residents of a smart city are supposed to completely 
be mindful of its applications and follow protection, well-being, and secu￾rity rehearses, which can be accomplished through suitable preparation and 396 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
mindfulness crusades. The public authority is ought to be well-composed 
with the information and should have legitimate documentation and code￾books as the onus of planning information approaches lies on the public 
authority (Ullah, 2022).
Savvy urban community’s research has set up a good foundation for 
itself as one of today’s most dynamic inter- and multidisciplinary centers. 
Research in this field is driven by the acknowledgment that advances in 
complex data and correspondence innovation (ICT), from one viewpoint, 
set out the freedom to ease a few difficulties that dynamic urbanization 
makes, and then again, may considerably add to the prosperity of urban 
areas’ occupants. Unquestionably, basic voices exist and these ought to be 
noted. Smart towns remain a specialty idea, the connected discussion is yet 
to begin, and the exploration plan is actually open. Also, on account of the 
savvy urban communities’ research, the brilliant town banter is driven by 
the subject of how and in which ways ICT can work on prosperity in pro￾vincial regions. Regardless of whether wise significant contrasts between 
the two strands of exploration exist, the extensively imagined basis of 
maintainability is normal in the two discussions. By uniting these two dis￾cussions, the target of this subject is twofold, i.e., to empower research on 
savvy urban areas and brilliant towns, individually, and, at the same time, 
to ponder the chance of building spans between the two discussions (Aslam 
et al., 2020).
Right away, the possibility of a Smart Metropolitan people group (metro￾politan settlement) began from the IoT advancement, in any case, the usage 
of IoT development can contact the possibility of Splendid Towns (common 
settlement) as well, dealing with the presence of the occupants, and the orga￾nizations overall (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021).
Notwithstanding, the country settlements have fairly unforeseen essen￾tials in contrast with the metropolitan settlements. If the utilization of IoT 
in the Splendid Metropolitan people group can be portrayed by the densifi￾cation of IoT to regular daily existence, following metropolitan regions’ 
essential characteristics of being thickly settled places, IoT-empowered Keen 
Towns are commonly a course of action of dispersing and need, as illus￾trated in Figure 11.2.
Figure 11.2 Application of Internet of Things in smart city and village.Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 397
11.5 SIGNIFICANCE OF INDUSTRY 5.0 IN ATTAINING 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT GOALS
Researchers accept that the recently presented Industry 5.0 can possibly move 
past the benefit-focused efficiency of Industry 4.0 and advance reasonable 
improvement objectives like human-centricity, socio-ecological maintainabil￾ity, and versatility (Singh et al., 2021b). Nonetheless, little has been com￾pleted to understand how this badly characterized peculiarity might convey 
its indented maintainability values notwithstanding these speculative commit￾ments. To address this information hole, the current review fostered a meth￾odology guide that makes sense of the system by which Industry 5.0 conveys 
its planned manageable improvement capabilities (Chourasia et al., 2023). 
Authors previously created and presented the Business 5.0 reference model 
that portrays the specialized and utilitarian properties of this peculiarity. Huge 
changes in the public arena were underlined as being expected to accomplish 
Maintainable Improvement Objectives, a need which was additionally height￾ened with the development of the pandemic (Javaid et al., 2020). The immi￾nent society ought to be coordinated toward a feasible turn of events, a cycle 
in which innovation assumes a critical part (Zengin et al., 2021).
11.5.1 SDG 1 (no poverty)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 1 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• Developments upheld by troublesome innovations can make the items 
and administrations reasonable and open.
• Troublesome innovations can make a quick reskilling situation which, at 
the point when acknowledged by low-pay gatherings, would be profoundly 
advantageous to lift themselves from destitution through positions.
• Other digitalization approaches like portable banking and outstand￾ing teleopenness can work on the availability and, thus, associate them 
with the possible openings on Earth.
11.5.2 SDG 2 (zero hunger)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 2 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• Unstable advancements like artificial intelligence, machine learning, 
and the IoT may be able to reduce food waste and potentially connect 
the underprivileged and generous.
• The innovation can drastically improve and reinforce the food pro￾duction network by giving flexibility, even in a debacle, for example, 
the Coronavirus pandemic.398 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
• Consistent checking of natural variables through complex trouble￾some innovations can give continuous criticism to the food makers so 
that early activities can be carried out to forestall crop harm.
11.5.3 SDG 3 (good health and well-being)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 3 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• Broadens medical care productivity and openness through digitalized 
processes. A few models incorporate telehealth and visit chat-bot facility.
• The fortified availability between organizations of specialists and 
patients would lean toward critical improvement in the prosperity of 
all age gatherings.
11.5.4 SDG 4 (quality education)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 4 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• The digitalization-driven schooling components like smart classes, far￾off schooling, and edu-tech organizations stretch the boundaries and 
approaches for instructing individuals.
• Then again, the development of troublesome innovations gives reason￾able and quality training to all spaces of individuals. It makes the more 
youthful age totally ready for the quick changes in the mechanical area 
as well as to complete the changes in the forthcoming climate.
11.5.5 SDG 5 (gender equality)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 5 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• Orientation uniformity is more articulated with regard to availability. 
In such a case, troublesome innovations assume an essential part in 
getting to the credits, food, and different assets. The gifted positions, 
on the other hand, ought to be guaranteed equivalent pay across sexes.
11.5.6 SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 6 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• With the guide of data and correspondence advances, more productive 
and powerful methods for gathering, screening, and improving water 
use information for public, business, cultural, and biological system 
needs are conceivable.Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 399
• Incorporated executives for water asset and brilliant home frameworks 
are a portion of the innovations that can profoundly lean toward ensur￾ing clean water.
11.5.7 SDG 7 (affordable and clean energy)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 7 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• With the development of ecologically friendly power, the significance 
of smart lattices and observation of ongoing energy requests are of 
extreme significance. These are the endless commitments from prob￾lematic advances.
• The consistent joining of different power age units and fulfillment of 
the unique burdens would open various potential doors. This makes 
society tough as well as makes more open positions.
• Digitalization can possibly grow admittance to clean energy access as 
well as upgrade its moderateness.
11.5.8 SDG 8 (decent work and economic growth)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 8 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• Problematic advances support nature-comprehensive plans of action 
as well as circular economy approaches.
• The future worth or commitment of problematic advances in the 
economy.
11.5.9 SDG 9 (industry, innovation, and infrastructure)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 9 in Industry 5.0 is as 
follows:
• Problematic innovations support the change to Industry 4.0 as well as 
Industry 5.0. This eventually improves efficiency, proficiency, network, 
versatility, and manageability.
• Problematic innovations open a wide new field and incorporate appli￾cations where the potential for advancement is high. It might likewise 
turn into a central substance in the public eye, like power in present 
society. Hence, progress in troublesome innovation can be valuable to 
the social order framework.400 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
11.5.10 SDG 11 (sustainable cities and communities)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 11 in Industry 5.0 is 
as follows:
• Savvy portability, rebuilt society, and Society 5.0 are a portion of the 
high-expected ideas for advancing maintainable urban communities 
that are brought into the world from problematic innovations.
11.5.11 SDG 12 (responsible consumption and production)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 12 in Industry 5.0 is 
as follows:
• One of the remarkable advantages that disruptive advancements can 
give is enhancement. For diminished utilization of assets, streamlined 
creation and utilization are the best approaches.
• Diminish, reuse, and reuse can be supported by disruptive advances.
11.5.12 SDG 17 (partnerships for the goals)
The major disruptive technological support for SDG 17 in Industry 5.0 is 
as follows:
• Execution of troublesome advancements at a large scale requires sys￾tems administration of associations. This can support drawing in capi￾talization also, cultivating the advancement of different objectives.
As an example, for SDG 17, the case of Sweden is so great at reusing that, 
for quite a long time, it has imported junk from different nations to keep 
its reusing plants going. Under 1% of Swedish family squander was shipped 
off landfill last year or any year starting around 2011. Over the long haul, 
Sweden has executed a firm public reusing strategy so that, although pri￾vately owned businesses embrace the greater part of the matter of bringing 
in and consuming waste, the energy goes into a public warming organization 
to warm homes through the freezing Swedish winter. “That is a key expla￾nation that how Sweden can utilize the warming from the waste plants” 
(Kushwaha et al., 2023a). In the southern part of Europe, they don’t utilize 
the warming from the waste, it simply goes out the smokestack. Despite this 
fact, it will be utilized as a substitute for non-renewable energy sources.
11.6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
Industry 5.0 is a concept that envisions a new paradigm of industrial pro￾duction that combines the benefits of Industry 4.0 technologies, such as 
automation and artificial intelligence, with a renewed focus on human skills, Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 401
creativity, and sustainability (Rozanec et al., 2022). While the full impact of 
Industry 5.0 is yet to be seen, it has the potential to transform the way we 
produce and consume goods and services, particularly in developing coun￾tries where sustainable development is a key priority. Some potential future 
consequences of Industry 5.0 in sustainable services production and con￾sumption in developing countries are mentioned below.
• Increased adoption of sustainable production practices: Industry 5.0 
technologies can enable more sustainable and resource-efficient pro￾duction processes, such as 3D printing, robotics, and renewable energy. 
This could lead to increased adoption of sustainable production prac￾tices in developing countries, which could help reduce environmental 
impacts and promote more circular and low-carbon economies.
• More inclusive and human-centered services: Industry 5.0 emphasizes 
the importance of human skills and creativity in industrial production, 
which could lead to more inclusive and human-centered services in 
developing countries. For example, small-scale producers and artisans 
could use Industry 5.0 technologies to enhance their production pro￾cesses and create unique and customized products that cater to local 
markets and cultures.
• Increased access to digital services: Industry 5.0 technologies can 
enable greater access to digital services, such as e-commerce, telemedi￾cine, and education, particularly in rural and remote areas of develop￾ing countries. This could help bridge the digital divide and improve 
access to essential services, while also reducing the need for physical 
infrastructure and travel.
• New business models and opportunities: Industry 5.0 could enable 
new business models and opportunities in developing countries, par￾ticularly in the areas of sustainable production and consumption. For 
example, circular economy models, such as product-as-a-service or 
sharing economy platforms, could become more viable with the help 
of Industry 5.0 technologies (Martynov et al., 2019).
However, there are also potential challenges and risks associated with 
Industry 5.0 in developing countries, such as increased dependence on tech￾nology, displacement of jobs, and unequal distribution of benefits. It will be 
important to ensure that the benefits of Industry 5.0 are shared equitably 
and that the transition to this new paradigm is guided by principles of sus￾tainability, inclusivity, and social responsibility.
Nonetheless, Industry 5.0 alludes to robots and savvy machines working 
close by individuals with added strength and maintainability objectives 
included. Where Industry 4.0 zeroed in on advancements, for example, the 
Web of Things and enormous information, Industry 5.0 looks to add human, 
ecological, and social viewpoints back into the situation. Because of the 
expanded information streams, sensors, and observation related to Industry 402 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
5.0, one of the biggest difficulties includes energy for the executives. This 
can be improved to permit huge brilliant gadgets to be associated with more 
astute energy utilization and energy gathering. Different difficulties for 
Industry 5.0 include insight and the eagerness, capacity, and monetary 
extent of organizations to embrace these new working techniques. Industry 
5.0, while working at a full limit, will take into consideration the better 
mechanization of assembling processes, offering continuous information 
and yet permitting individuals to work close by hardware to further develop 
processes and give personalization to clients (Kushwaha et al., 2023b).
In such a manner, Industry 5.0 should be visible as supplementing the 
advances made in Industry 4.0 to help as opposed to overriding people. 
This permits people to intercede where expected and gets away from over￾the-top computerization to consolidate decisive reasoning and flexibility, 
while as yet exploiting the accuracy and repeatability of machines. The 
future for Industry 5.0 incorporates the production of robots, including 
modern robots, with efforts toward advances in mental registration and 
computerized reasoning to further develop efficiencies and speed of con￾veyance, while simultaneously permitting individuals to zero in on differ￾ent regions.
Innovation has made imaginative new possibilities for assembling enter￾prises and service providers with Industry 4.0 and has encouraged the devel￾opment of the assembling area. This chapter centers around the following 
stage, which is Industry 5.0, and the moves toward making mechanization 
powerful by expanding processes and functional products, as well as lessen￾ing labor force size.
Further research on Industry 5.0 will examine the coordination of items, 
processes, machines, programming, and modern robots in acknowledging 
Industry 5.0 (Kolade & Owoseni, 2022). It will cover the double incorpora￾tion of human insight with machine knowledge and audit the aftereffects of 
utilizing the Modern Web of Things (IoT) and man-made consciousness 
(computer-based intelligence). The formation of another class of robots 
named Collaborative Robots (Cobots), explicitly intended to accelerate the 
assembling system and productivity, is investigated. This chapter likewise 
investigates the assembling system and offers more customized and tweaked 
items for clients.
REFERENCES
Adel, A. (2022). Future of industry 5.0 in society: human-centric solutions, chal￾lenges and prospective research areas. Journal of Cloud Computing, 11(1), 1–15.
Akundi, A., Euresti, D., Luna, S., Ankobiah, W., Lopes, A., & Edinbarough, I. (2022). 
State of Industry 5.0—Analysis and identification of current research trends. 
Applied System Innovation, 5(1), 27.
Al Faruqi, U. (2019). Future service in industry 5.0. Jurnal Sistem Cerdas, 2(1), 
67–79.Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 403
Al-Turjman, F., Nayyar, A., Devi, A., & Shukla, P. K. (Eds.). (2021). Intelligence 
of things: AI-IoT based critical-applications and innovations. New York, US: 
Springer.
Aslam, F., Aimin, W., Li, M., & Ur Rehman, K. (2020). Innovation in the era of 
IoT and industry 5.0: Absolute innovation management (AIM) framework. 
Information, 11(2), 124.
Batth, R. S., Nayyar, A., & Nagpal, A. (2018, August). Internet of robotic things: 
driving intelligent robotics of future-concept, architecture, applications and tech￾nologies. In 2018 4th International Conference on Computing Sciences (ICCS)
(pp. 151–160). IEEE.
Broo, D.G., Kaynak, O. & Sait, S.M. (2022). Rethinking engineering education at 
the age of industry 5.0. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 25, 100311.
Bryndin, E. (2020). Formation and management of Industry 5.0 by systems with arti￾ficial intelligence and technological singularity. American Journal of Mechanical 
and Industrial Engineering, 5(2), 24–30.
Carayannis, E. G., & Morawska-Jancelewicz, J. (2022). The futures of Europe: 
Society 5.0 and Industry 5.0 as driving forces of future universities. Journal of the 
Knowledge Economy, 13(4), 3445–3471.
Chander, B., Pal, S., De, D., & Buyya, R. (2022). Artificial intelligence-based internet 
of things for industry 5.0. In Artificial intelligence-based internet of things systems
(pp. 3–45). Springer, Cham.
Chourasia, S., Pandey, S. M., Gupta, K., Murtaza, Q., & Walia, R. S. (2023). Industry 
5.0 for sustainable manufacturing: New product, services, organizational and 
social information. In Surface Engineering (pp. 243–255). CRC Press.
Fraga-Lamas, P., Lopes, S. I. & Fernández-Caramés, T.M. (2021). Green IoT and 
edge AI as key technological enablers for a sustainable digital transition towards a 
smart circular economy: An industry 5.0 use case. Sensors, 21(17), 5745.
Ghobakhloo, M., Iranmanesh, M., Mubarak, M. F., Mubarik, M., Rejeb, A., & 
Nilashi, M. (2022). Identifying industry 5.0 contributions to sustainable devel￾opment: A strategy roadmap for delivering sustainability values. Sustainable 
Production and Consumption, 33, 716–737.
Gorodetsky, V., Larukchin, V., & Skobelev, P. (2020). Conceptual model of digital 
platform for enterprises of Industry 5.0. In: Kotenko, I., Badica, C., Desnitsky, 
V., El Baz, D., Ivanovic, M. (eds) Intelligent Distributed Computing XIII. IDC 
2019. Studies in Computational Intelligence (vol. 868). Springer, Cham. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-32258-8_4
Haleem, A., & Javaid, M. (2019). Industry 5.0 and its applications in orthopaedics. 
Journal of Clinical Orthopaedics & Trauma, 10(4), 807–808.
Huang, S., Wang, B., Li, X., Zheng, P., Mourtzis, D. & Wang, L., (2022). Industry 
5.0 and Society 5.0—Comparison, complementation and co-evolution. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 64, 424–428.
Ivanov, D. (2022). The Industry 5.0 framework: viability-based integration of the 
resilience, sustainability, and human-centricity perspectives. International Journal 
of Production Research, 1–13.
Jafari, N., Azarian, M. & Yu, H. (2022). Moving from Industry 4.0 to Industry 5.0: 
what are the implications for smart logistics? Logistics, 6(2), 26.
Jain, P., & Singh, P. (2023) ‘Lethargic approach in expediting financial reporting 
system: a case of construction firm’, International Journal of Teaching and Case 
Studies, 14(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1504/IJTCS.2023.10055878404 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Javaid, M., Haleem, A., Singh, R.P., Haq, M.I.U., Raina, A. & Suman, R. (2020). 
Industry 5.0: Potential applications in COVID-19. Journal of Industrial Integration 
and Management, 5(4), 507–530.
Kasinathan, P., Pugazhendhi, R., Elavarasan, R.M., Ramachandaramurthy, V.K., 
Ramanathan, V., Subramanian, S., Kumar, S., Nandhagopal, K., Raghavan, R.R.V., 
Rangasamy, S. & Devendiran, R. (2022). Realization of sustainable development 
goals with disruptive technologies by integrating Industry 5.0, Society 5.0, smart 
cities and villages. Sustainability, 14(22), 15258.
Kolade, O., & Owoseni, A. (2022). Employment 5.0: The work of the future and the 
future of work. Technology in Society, 71, 102086.
Kumar, A., & Nayyar, A. (2020). si 3-Industry: A sustainable, intelligent, innovative, 
internet-of-things industry. A roadmap to Industry 4.0: Smart production, sharp 
business and sustainable development, 1–21.
Kushwaha, J., Sharma, A., & Singh, P. (2022). Exploration and prioritization of 
enablers to organization work–family balance planning for working sole Indian 
mothers integrating fuzzy Delphi and AHP. International Journal of Social 
Economics, 50(3), 398–418. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSE-05-2022-0348
Kushwaha, J., Singh, P., & Kushwaha, R. (2023a), “Predicting working sole Indian 
mothers’ satisfaction towards work-family balance integrating Kano model and 
weighted average method” Vol. ahead-of-print No. ahead-of print. https://doi.
org/10.1108/IJSE-02-2023-0074
Kushwaha, J., Singh, P., & Sharma, A. (2023b) “Modelling the enablers of work￾family balance among working single mothers integrating expert-mining 
and TISM-MICMAC”, Journal of Organizational Effectiveness: People and 
Performance, Vol. ahead-of-print No. ahead-of print. https://doi.org/10.1108/
JOEPP-05-2022-0106
Leng, J., Sha, W., Wang, B., Zheng, P., Zhuang, C., Liu, Q., Wuest, T., Mourtzis, D. & 
Wang, L. (2022). Industry 5.0: Prospect and retrospect. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 65, 279–295.
Maddikunta, P. K. R., Pham, Q. V., Prabadevi, B., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, 
T. R., Ruby, R. & Liyanage, M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling tech￾nologies and potential applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 
26, 100257.
Madsen, D. Q., & Berg, T. (2021). An exploratory bibliometric analysis of the birth 
and emergence of industry 5.0. Applied System Innovation, 4(4), 87.
Majerník, M., Daneshjo, N., Malega, P., Drábik, P., & Barilová, B. (2022). 
Sustainable development of the intelligent industry from industry 4.0 to industry 
5.0. Advances in Science and Technology Research Journal, 16(2), 12–18.
Martynov, V. V., Shavaleeva, D. N., & Zaytseva, A. A. (2019, September). Information 
technology as the basis for transformation into a digital society and industry 
5.0. In 2019 International Conference “Quality Management, Transport and 
Information Security, Information Technologies”(IT&QM&IS) (pp. 539–543). 
IEEE.
Mehdiabadi, A., Shahabi, V., Shamsinejad, S., Amiri, M., Spulbar, C., & Birau, R. 
(2022). Investigating Industry 5.0 and Its Impact on the Banking Industry: 
Requirements, Approaches and Communications. Applied Sciences, 12(10), 5126.
Minculete, G., Bârsan, G., & Olar, P. (2021). Conceptual Approaches of Industry 
5.0. Correlative Elements with Supply Chain Management 5.0. Revista de 
Management Comparat International, 22(5), 622–635.Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 405
Mitchell, J., & Guile, D. (2022). Fusion skills and industry 5.0: conceptions and 
challenges. Insights Into Global Engineering Education After the Birth of Industry
5(0), 53.
Mourtzis, D., Angelopoulos, J., & Panopoulos, N. (2022). A Literature Review of the 
Challenges and Opportunities of the Transition from Industry 4.0 to Society 5.0. 
Energies, 15(17), 6276.
Nahavandi, S. (2019). Industry 5.0—A human-centric solution. Sustainability, 
11(16), 4371.
Nayyar, A., & Kumar, A. (Eds.). (2020). A roadmap to industry 4.0: smart produc￾tion, sharp business and sustainable development (pp. 1–21). Berlin: Springer.
Nicoletti, B., & Nicoletti, B. (2021). Industry 5.0 and Banking 5.0. Banking 5.0: 
How Fintech Will Change Traditional Banks in the’New Normal’Post Pandemic, 
13–53.
Ozdemir, V., & Hekim, N. (2018). Birth of industry 5.0: Making sense of big data 
with artificial intelligence, “the internet of things” and next-generation technology 
policy. Omics: A Journal of Integrative Biology, 22(1), 65–76.
Paschek, D., Mocan, A., & Draghici, A. (2019, May). Industry 5.0—The expected 
impact of next industrial revolution. In Thriving on future education, industry, 
business, and Society, Proceedings of the MakeLearn and TIIM International 
Conference, Piran, Slovenia (pp. 15–17).
Qahtan, S., Alsattar, H. A., Zaidan, A. A., Pamucar, D., & Deveci, M. (2022). 
Integrated sustainable transportation modelling approaches for electronic passen￾ger vehicle in the context of industry 5.0. Journal of Innovation & Knowledge, 
7(4), 100277.
Raja Santhi, A. & Muthuswamy, P. (2023). Industry 5.0 or industry 4.0 S? 
Introduction to industry 4.0 and a peek into the prospective industry 5.0 technol￾ogies. International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing (IJIDeM), 
1–33.
Rozanec, J. M., Novalija, I., Zajec, P., Kenda, K., Tavakoli Ghinani, H., Suh, S., & 
Soldatos, J. (2022). Human-centric artificial intelligence architecture for industry 
5.0 applications. International Journal of Production Research, 1–26.
Rupa, C., Midhunchakkaravarthy, D., Hasan, M.K., Alhumyani, H. & Saeed, R.A., 
(2021). Industry 5.0: Ethereum blockchain technology based DApp smart con￾tract. Mathematical Biosciences & Engineering, 18(5), 7010–7027.
S. Rajput, E. Jain, A. Mehra, K. S. Thakur, O. Gupta and P. Singh, “Technology 
Driven Tourism: A PLS SEM Model of its Antecedents in Tourist Behavior 
Intention,” 2022 IEEE Conference on Interdisciplinary Approaches in Technology 
and Management for Social Innovation (IATMSI), Gwalior, India, 2022, pp. 1–6. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IATMSI56455.2022.10119265
Salgado-Reyes, A.P. & Rodríguez-Aguilar, R. (2022). Profile of the Business Science 
Professional for the Industry 4.0. In Intelligent Computing & Optimization: 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and 
Optimization 2021 (ICO2021), vol. 3 (pp. 820–831). Springer International 
Publishing.
Saniuk, S., Grabowska, S. & Straka, M. (2022). Identification of Social and Economic 
Expectations: Contextual Reasons for the Transformation Process of Industry 4.0 
into the Industry 5.0 Concept. Sustainability, 14(3), 1391.
Sharma, I., Garg, I. & Kiran, D. (2020). Industry 5.0 and smart cities: A futuristic 
approach. European Journal of Molecular & Clinical Medicine, 7(8), 2515–8260.406 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Sindhwani, R., Afridi, S., Kumar, A., Banaitis, A., Luthra, S., & Singh, P. L. (2022). 
Can industry 5.0 revolutionize the wave of resilience and social value creation? A 
multi-criteria framework to analyze enablers. Technology in Society, 68, 101887.
Singh, P. (2014). Unorganized sector and India’s informal economy: Challenges and 
prospects. New Man International Journal of Multidisciplinary Studies, 1(2), 
209–218.
Singh, P. (2022). Weather index insurance viability in mitigation of climate change 
impact risk: A systematic review and future agenda. Journal of Science and 
Technology Policy Management. https://doi.org/10.1108/JSTPM-07-2021-0102
Singh, P., & Agrawal, G. (2019). Efficacy of weather index insurance for mitigation of 
weather risks in agriculture: An integrative review. International Journal of Ethics 
and Systems, 35(4), 584–616. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJOES-09-2018-0132
Singh, P., & Agrawal, G. (2020). Development, present status and performance anal￾ysis of agricultural insurance schemes in India: Review of evidence. International 
Journal of Social Economics, 47(4), 461–481. https://doi.org/10.1108/IJSE-02-
2019-0119
Singh, P., & Agrawal, G. (2021). Modelling the barriers of weather index insur￾ance service adoption integrating expert mining and ISM Fuzzy-MICMAC. 
Benchmarking, 29(8), 2527–2554. https://doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-04-2021-0183
Singh, P., & Agrawal, G. (2022). Mapping the customer centric weather index insur￾ance service design using quality function deployment. The TQM Journal, 34(6), 
1800–1822 https://doi.org/10.1108/TQM-08-2021-0236
Singh, P., Agrawal, G., & Kushwaha, R. (2021a, November). Evaluating customer 
satisfaction of weather index insurance service quality using Kano model. In 2021 
IEEE Bombay Section Signature Conference (IBSSC) (pp. 1–6). IEEE. https://doi.
org/10.1109/IBSSC53889.2021.9673370
Singh, P., Kushwaha, R., & Kushwaha, J. (2021b, September). Assessing visitors sat￾isfaction about museum service quality using Kano model. In 2021 IEEE 9th 
Region 10 Humanitarian Technology Conference (R10-HTC) (pp. 1–6). IEEE.
Singh, P., Kushwaha, R., & Kushwaha, J. (2023). Evaluating farmer participation in 
weather index insurance in a socio-demographic perspective: Evidence from the 
crop insurance data of India. In Handbook of Research on Managing the Urban￾Rural Divide Through an Inclusive Framework (pp. 69–88). IGI Global.
Singh, P., Kushwaha, R., & Kushwaha, J. (2024). Analyzing accountability of weather 
index insurance service in attainment of sustainable development goals: A sustain￾able accounting perspective. In Springer Sustainable International Business: Smart 
strategies for business and society. 978-3-031-43784-7, 531340_1_En, (Chapter 
10), Contributions to Management Science, Pratik Arte et al. (Eds): Sustainable 
International Business. Springer Nature.
Thakur, P., & Sehgal, V. K. (2021). Emerging architecture for heterogeneous smart 
cyber-physical systems for industry 5.0. Computers & Industrial Engineering, 
162, 107750.
Tiwari, S., Bahuguna, P. C., & Walker, J. (2022). Industry 5.0: A macroperspective 
approach. In Handbook of Research on Innovative Management Using AI in 
Industry 5.0 (pp. 59–73). IGI Global.
Ullah, F. (2022). Smart Tech 4.0 in the built environment: Applications of disruptive 
digital technologies in smart cities, construction, and real estate. Buildings, 12(10), 
1516.Future of Industry 5.0 in developing countries 407
Venaik, A., Jain, S., & Nayyar, A. (2023). Industry 4.0—Its Advancement and Effects 
on Security of Whistle-Blowers on Dark Web. In Industry 4.0 and the Digital 
Transformation of International Business (pp. 103–121). Singapore: Springer 
Nature Singapore.
Visvizi, A. & Lytras, M.D. (2019). Sustainable smart cities and smart villages research: 
Rethinking security, safety, well-being, and happiness. Sustainability, 12(1), 215.
Xu, X., Lu, Y., Vogel-Heuser, B. & Wang, L. (2021). Industry 4.0 and Industry 5.0—
Inception, conception and perception. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 61, 
530–535.
Zengin, Y., Naktiyok, S., Kaygın, E., Kavak, O. & Topçuoğlu, E. (2021). An investi￾gation upon industry 4.0 and society 5.0 within the context of sustainable devel￾opment goals. Sustainability, 13(5), 2682.
Zong, L., Memon, F. H., Li, X., Wang, H., & Dev, K. (2021). End-to-end transmis￾sion control for cross-regional industrial internet of things in industry 5.0. IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 18(6), 4215–4223.408 DOI: 10.1201/9781003489269-12
12.1 INTRODUCTION
Technologies have been playing an essential role in society and Industry for 
years recently. They influence changing processes or employees’ behaviors 
and focus on holistic, sustainable, and human-centered value creation (Hein￾Pensel et al., 2023). Since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution, many 
adjustments have been made to the production process. The term “innova￾tion” may be used to refer to various things, from machines that are driven 
by steam or water (Industry 1.0) to ones that are powered by electricity or 
digital electronics (Industry 2.0), automation (Industry 3.0), and robotics 
(Industry 4.0), respectively. These improvements have extended the equip￾ment’s dependability, efficiency, and consistency while also simplifying and 
automating the production process. In addition, these improvements have 
shortened the manufacturing time. Furthermore, Industry 4.0 increases the 
complexity of digitalization when humans and machines collaborate during 
the implementation process. In this era, technologies support large compa￾nies and small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) to work more effec￾tively. In Industry 4.0, SMEs mainly focused on gaining economic objectives 
via digital transformation and automation of monotonous work procedures 
(Hein-Pensel et al., 2023). Regarding this industry, producers can reduce 
production, logistics, and quality management costs. Several approaches 
indicated that Industry 4.0 primarily emphasized replacing human work￾ers’ input with machines, artificial intelligence, and cyber–physical systems 
(TWI, 2023) to boost enterprises’ efficiency, productivity, and revenue 
(AMFG, 2023). In another way, Industry 4.0 refers to intelligent systems, 
Chapter 12
Readiness of enterprises to 
implement Industry 5.0
Challenges and security concerns
Nguyen Huu Phuoc Dai
Can Tho Technical Economics College, Vietnam
FPT University, Vietnam
Pham Phi Giang
Can Tho Technical Economics College, Vietnam
Truong Hong Vo Tuan Kiet
FPT University, VietnamReadiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 409
innovative products, smart machines, and data storage as cyber–physical 
production systems (acatech – National Academy of Science & Engineering, 
2013). Industry 4.0 enhanced the efficiency of enterprises by increasing mass 
production; however, it also skipped the human cost via process optimiza￾tion (Maddikunta et al., 2022). As a result, it challenges employers to adopt 
this Industry. At this time, robots are essential to the day-to-day operations 
of Industry 4.0, while artificial intelligence (AI) will be used by Industry 
5.0 in order to make mass customization possible (Prescient Technologies, 
2022). The core of Industry 4.0 is centered on the concept of mass person￾alization. The industrial sector will shift significantly due to the enhanced 
mobility and decision-making capabilities of cooperative robots available in 
Industry 5.0. It can be seen that people may change from mass manufactur￾ing to mass customization with the assistance of Industry 5.0. The incor￾poration of a personal touch is necessary for mass customization. Artificial 
intelligence, the digitization of industrial systems, and fast developments in 
production processes are the three pillars of Industry 5.0 that make mass 
customization possible. Besides, the Fifth Industrial Revolution (5.0) offers 
many benefits for our lives. Industry 5.0 paves the way for the production of 
personal devices that are less expensive, more covert, and more dependable.
Industry 5.0 is supposed to tackle this problem via human roles with 
machines. In another way, Industry 5.0 is an extension of Industry 4.0 with 
the primary purpose of putting the employee’s well-being at the production 
process center. Likewise, the primary objective of Industry 5.0 is to liberate 
employees’ time so that they may devote it to more fruitful pursuits, such 
as creative problem-solving and thinking outside the box. Taking advan￾tage of all individuals’ creative and analytical talents is of the utmost 
importance. For the manufacturing industry to transition from mass pro￾duction to personalized manufacture, fast developments in manufacturing 
processes and the digital intelligence of its production systems are essential. 
The concept of “Industry 5.0” refers to the next generation of manufactur￾ing, with the primary goal of which is to create an economy that places a 
higher priority on people and society than production (Sharp, 2021). It is 
essential to consider a company’s resource footprint in today’s climate when 
governments and investors are figuring out solutions to reduce their nega￾tive effects on the environment. For instance, various issues might be con￾sidered, including the procurement of raw materials, the management of 
garbage, the impact on the environment, and even the organization’s capa￾bility to save energy and operate using renewable power sources. Renewable 
energy sources’ usage is increasing among businesses, and many companies 
are also taking steps to reduce their overall carbon footprints. In order to 
achieve socio-ecological sustainability, it will be necessary to implement 
newly developed materials and composites in place of those based on petro￾leum, in addition to recycling and reusing the already available resources. 
The technological strategy of the firm was designed with Industry 4.0 serv￾ing as the cornerstone for its development. The market’s overall state has 410 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
improved in terms of productivity, competitiveness, and efficiency. In addi￾tion, with the development of a completely automated manufacturing facil￾ity supported by AI and other technologies, various factors need to be 
considered, including some further instances of how technology has 
advanced. Only through the collaboration of humans and machines can 
one hope to attain better results. It can be seen that Industry 5.0 will thrive 
now that the market has matured sufficiently to support its existence. A 
collaborative effort between humans and machines would minimize the 
amount of robotic manufacture and increase the amount of customized 
production. Consequently, we need not only technology and automated 
process advancements but also the originality and curiosity of human 
beings. Several companies were among the first to use the technologies that 
were developed for Industry 5.0. Apple, Tesla, and Boeing are three exam￾ples of organizations that have achieved extraordinary levels of success. In 
contrast, SMEs are now having difficulty with the adoption of Industry 4.0 
while these global corporations can see beyond it. They are aware that, in 
addition to using cutting-edge technology, a successful firm is also required 
to keep its processes up to date and emphasize its people. The manufactur￾ing sector needs the Industry 5.0 strategy to maintain its position as a sus￾tainable and competitive industry. Therefore, organizations have the 
possibility of realizing their revolutionary potential. Models of technical 
governance that are innovative have the potential to increase the long-term 
profitability and stability of a corporation. Last but not least, a practical 
technique for Industry 5.0 would evaluate the strength and endurance of 
the existing industrial ecosystems. Providing workers with digital devices, 
endorsing a human-centric approach to technology, paving the way for 
environmentally sustainable technology usage, expanding the responsibil￾ity of businesses to include their entire value chains, and empowering work￾ers are all components that will be necessary for a successful Industry 5.0 
strategy. As a consequence, enterprises operating in the 21st century may be 
significantly affected by Industry 5.0. First, it fosters the expansion of value 
into new areas of the economy and across society as a whole. Second, it 
makes it easier to find realistic solutions to problems that arise in the politi￾cal and economic spheres. Third, it contributes to consolidating the foun￾dation upon which science and technology are constructed. A positive 
feedback loop is produced due to the resourceful use of the system’s human, 
intellectual, and financial components. The present era of industrial growth 
is referred to as “Industry 5.0,” and it is characterized by combining digital 
technology with human intelligence to produce methods of production that 
are individualized, favorable to the environment, and ethically acceptable. 
Two concepts that must be included in company plans are social responsi￾bility and ecologically sound supplier chains. However, they face many 
challenges in achieving digitalization strategies in implementing restricted 
resources and security concerns related to new technology in the Industry 
5.0 era.Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 411
Therefore, in this chapter, a meta-analysis of the literature review to 
describe the benefits of Industry 5.0 is conducted. In addition, several com￾ponents and related technologies of Industry 5.0 are illustrated. Furthermore, 
the challenges of this technology to enterprises; for example, human–robot 
interaction, human factors, and security concerns are discussed to raise 
awareness and minimize the gaps between Industry 4.0 and 5.0. It is clear 
that Industry 5.0 is the future; however, its information is limited. The chap￾ter aims to provide helpful information about Industry 5.0 via several 
aspects: main components of Industry 5.0, challenges of Industry 5.0 appli￾cation for enterprise, outstanding opportunities of Industry 5.0, humans 
and Industry 5.0, and potential contribution of Industry 5.0 in future pro￾duction and business. All of them lead to insight and knowledge about 
Industry 5.0, as well as readiness and confidence in applying it in the future.
12.1.1 Organization of the chapter
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: Sections 12.2 and 12.3 pres￾ent a general background of Industry 5.0, its components and related tech￾nologies; and the opportunities of Industry 5.0 for enterprises, respectively. 
Section 12.4 lists the challenges of Industry 5.0 for companies. Section 12.5
discusses the human factors in Industry 5.0. Section 12.6 expresses several 
representative examples. Section 12.7 explains future research directions. 
And, finally, Section 12.8 concludes the chapter with future scope.
12.2 BACKGROUND
12.2.1 A brief history of Industry 1.0 to 5.0
Industry 1.0, or the First Industrial Revolution, was first known as the exten￾sive use of mechanized production and energy sources; for example, coal 
and steam & water power, during the late 18th century (1784) (Reddy et al., 
2021). This revolution enhanced manufacturers’ mass production; however, 
the drawbacks of this revolution were pollution, the time to operate, and 
a great demand for production machines (Vinitha et al., 2020). Industry 
2.0 included electrical power and mass production in 1870 in many fields, 
such as iron, steel, rail, electrification, machine tools, and the like (Akundi 
et al., 2022), but it took a high cost to use electrical power, making people 
lose their jobs due to machine replacement (Vinitha et al., 2020). Industry 
3.0 was related to electronics, automation, and information technologies in 
1969 (Reddy et al., 2021). The notable achievements of this revolution were 
computers and programmable logic controllers in the factory processes, as 
well as the development of Internet and connectivity access. One of the dis￾advantages of this era was that automated systems wouldn’t operate in spe￾cial situations (Vinitha et al., 2020). Industry 4.0 combines the smart factory 412 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
with the Internet of Things (IoT), artificial intelligence, machine learning, 
big data, and cognitive computing. Moreover, Industry 4.0 was established 
in 2011 using smart and connected technologies to decrease time in produc￾tion processing (Gehlot et al., n.d.). Besides, the systems in this revolution 
were applied in different industrial processes in analyzing, guiding, and shar￾ing smart actions or making devices smarter (Vinitha et al., 2020; Wang et al., 
2017). This revolution enhanced higher productivity and quality, better effi￾ciency and client experience, reduced costs (Azemi et al., n.d.), and increased 
profitability (Woboton, 2023). The main challenges of this revolution were 
data security, skilled human resources, team support, leveraging data (Mistry, 
2023), reliability and stability for Machine to machine (M2M) communica￾tion, and so on (Happiestminds, 2023). Industry 5.0 enhances Industry 4.0 by 
applying innovation and research with human-centric, sustainable, flexible, 
advanced technologies (AI, robotics) (Nayyar & Kumar, 2020; Jha, 2023; 
George and George, 2020; Pramanik et al., 2020) (Figure 12.1). In other 
words, Industry 5.0 involves the combination of human workers and intelli￾gent machines to develop the productivity of the factory industry and extend 
the efficiency of industrial production (Adel, 2022). In another way, several 
definitions related to Industry 5.0 were listed in Maddikunta et al. (2022). 
Adel (2022) offered five explanations of the meanings of the term Industry 
5.0. This era opens new opportunities for companies to increase the over￾view of the maintenance plan (Stefanini, 2022), make factories sustainable, 
enhance human efficiency and productivity, manage environmental control 
inside the factory, and forecast line production efficiency (Cojocariu, 2023).
12.2.2 Industry 5.0 components
In this section, diverse components that make up Industry 5.0 are discussed 
as follows.
12.2.2.1 Robots
The term “Robot” was coined by a Czech novelist—Karel Capek, in 1920 in 
his play R.U.R (Rossum’s Universal Robots) (Jordan, 2019; A brief history 
of robotics: The origin of the first humanoid robot, 2021; The History of 
Robotics, 2021; The WIRED Guide to Robots, 2020). In addition, a robot 
Figure 12.1 The revolution of industry.
1.0
Steam & 
Water Power, 
Mechanization
2.0
Electrical
Power & Mass
Production
3.0
Automation,
robotics, IT
systems
4.0
Smart factory,
IoT, AI, Big
data
5.0
Advanced 
robotics,
human centric, 
bionicsReadiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 413
can be defined as “a mechanical device which performs automated tasks, 
either according to direct human supervision, a pre-defined program or a set 
of general guidelines, using artificial intelligence techniques” (Goris, 2004). 
Likewise, robotics needs to follow three primary laws of robotics (Williams, 
1991): (i) A robot may never hurt a human or not allow a human to come 
to harm via inaction, (ii) a robot has to follow human beings’ orders, except 
when such orders conflict with the first law, and (iii) a robot needs to protect 
itself without breaking the previous rules. Robots bring many benefits to 
support and enhance our lives more conveniently and better. For instance, 
they can perform several dangerous and repetitive tasks in many areas which 
people can’t do well, such as working 24/7, working in harsh environments 
(such as without the air, underwater, and in fire), working in industrial, mili￾tary, and medical aspects, and the like. Industry 5.0 focuses on combining 
robots and human beings during the working process whenever and wher￾ever (van den Bergh, 2017).
12.2.2.2 Artificial intelligent and big data
Artificial intelligence is related to using computers to simulate intelligent 
behavior with the least human involvement. It is frequently described as a 
scientific method for creating innovative devices that can make choices on 
their own (Khan et al., 2023). Big data is related to massive data collected 
from various sources that can’t be analyzed and handled using conventional 
methods (Sydorenko, 2021). AI and big data have many advantages for enter￾prises, like lower costs, high productivity, improved operation and efficiency, 
competitive advantages, and better customer service (TP&P Technology, 
2021) Indeed, the expected total market value is approximately USD 190.61 
billion by 2025, and the global economy is expected to be USD 15.7 trillion 
in 2030 due to AI technology contribution (Woodward, 2023). AI positively 
impacts enterprises and businesses but has several negative consequences, 
including eliminating many jobs and requiring workers with high-tech skills. 
For instance, there were 1.8 million jobs removed globally because of AI. 
Likewise, big data also have critical effects on companies, industries, supply 
management (Bag et al., 2020), and management processes (Grover & Kar, 
2017) by improving decision-making and effectiveness in many aspects, for 
instance, banks, information technology (IT), healthcare, financial services, 
and so on (Omoyiola, 2022). On the one hand, big data can increase rev￾enue, profit, and value for companies; for example, its market is estimated at 
USD 274.3 billion (Zhaohao Sun, 2021), and the global big data analytics 
market’s every-year revenue could be approximately USD 68.09 billion by 
2025 (Palvia et al., 2021). Besides, according to Reinsel et al. (2018), the 
global data sphere is expected to grow from 33 Zettabytes (ZB) in 2018 to 
175 ZB in 2025. As a result, big data strongly impacts developing compa￾nies and economic growth. Academics and entrepreneurs are discussing big 
data (Cheng et al., 2018). Industry 5.0 demands big data analytics. Big data 
analytics may assist “Industry 5.0” companies in understanding customers, 414 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
enhancing pricing, production efficiency, overhead expenses, etc. Big data 
analytics may boost sales by tracking consumer happiness on Facebook, 
Twitter, and LinkedIn. Industry 5.0 relies on data, personalized production, 
and intelligent manufacturing—real-time big data analytics (Zhaohao Sun, 
2021). According to Joglekar et al. (2023), big data analytics customizes 
Industry 5.0. To foresee and react adequately, AI, sensor-based networked 
systems, social media, and digital communication devices must evaluate 
massive amounts of data in real time. Big data began in the 1960s with 
the first database management system and data centers. IoT data is every￾where due to high-speed Internet. Since raw data is worthless, many firms 
do descriptive, exploratory, predictive, prescriptive, and preventive data 
studies (Bihani & Patil, 2014). This research helps major firms with client 
acquisition and retention, targeted advertising, new product creation, con￾sumer behavior-based price optimization, supply chain management, risk 
reduction, and faster decision-making (Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2022). 
Oracle showed that organizations underestimate data growth by 100% 
yearly. Zicari (2013) examined big data issues. Human-like computer “intel￾ligence”—AI—humanizes robots-tech powers in Industry 4.0. Tankt and 
Hopfieldt (1987) pioneered AI, and Recurrent Graph Transformer, Deep 
Belief, and Convolutional Neural Networks enabled statistical learning 
(Vapnik, 1999) and the Greedy learning algorithm. Industry 4.0 employs AI 
in machine vision, industrial robots, supply chain management, inventory 
management, and predictive maintenance (Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 
2022). AI-driven rotating equipment fault identification reduced machine 
downtime, maintenance costs, and safety risks. Since each solution has pros 
and cons in accuracy, speed, and robustness, they recommend a hybrid intel￾ligent system for future problems. Wang et al. (2017) evaluated milling tool 
wear and gearbox/bearing failure using Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) 
models. Deutsch et al. (2017) investigated hybrid ceramic bearing lifespan. 
Raja Santhi and Muthuswamy (2022) studied AI-based industrial material 
flow solutions.
12.2.2.3 Smart machines
An intelligent machine refers to one that can have the capacity to think 
and make decisions on its own. It also functions as a cognitive computing 
device and solves problems without human help (Pereira, 2019). Besides, the 
smart machine is also a machine that can enhance connectivity, flexibility, 
efficiency, and safety (Beudert, 2018). In addition, it is integrated with sev￾eral innovative technologies like AI and machine learning, or deep learning 
to figure out solutions, make decisions, and take action instead of human 
beings (Pratt, 2017). There are four categories of smart machines (Pereira, 
2019). Smart devices play an essential role in boosting economic growth by 
adopting industrial robots, especially their impact on the Industry is about 
USD 153 billion by 2020, according to the Bank of America Merrill Lynch 
report (Matthews, 2015).Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 415
12.2.2.4 Cloud computing
Cloud computing is related to delivering services on the Internet, includ￾ing data storage, servers, software, databases, and networking (Frankenfield, 
2023). There are three main types of cloud computing: Software as a 
Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), Infrastructure as a Service 
(IaaS) (Frankenfield, 2023; Wesley Chai, 2023). In addition, cloud comput￾ing offers many benefits. For example, it serves companies, organizations, 
and industrial services. It allows users to create a virtual environment to 
back up their data (music, files, photos, data, etc.) and a virtual desktop to 
access data flexibly. Moreover, the impact of cloud computing is on many 
industrial aspects. It can enhance businesses by reducing costs, increasing 
productivity, improving customer service (Aparna, 2023), ensuring secu￾rity, and improving performance, speed, and efficiency. According to pre￾dictions, the worldwide cloud computing market will develop at a 16.3% 
compound annual growth rate (CAGR) from USD 445.3 billion in 2021 to 
USD 947.3 billion in 2026 (Srushti Shah, 2022). The servers and informa￾tion stored in the cloud are located in another location. Access to servers, 
data, and analytics/intelligence is provided through this system’s “cloud” 
infrastructure. Data and software management can’t compare to the reli￾ability, scalability, and user-friendliness of cloud computing. On-demand 
ISPs facilitate communication between businesses and consumers. Unlike 
“cloud computing in manufacturing,” which uses digital technology to sim￾plify the process, “cloud manufacturing” refers to industrial sectors’ indi￾rect adoption of cloud computing. Production software, gear, and personnel 
are all watched by cloud computing. It was possible to “Design Anywhere 
and Manufacture Anywhere” (DAMA) using cloud manufacturing in the 
early 2000s. Productivity, effectiveness, and adaptability are all improved. 
Technologies like the IoT, radio frequency identification, sensors, global 
positioning systems, cyber–physical systems, and cloud computing make 
cloud manufacturing possible (Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2023).
12.2.2.5 Cobotics and cyber–physical systems
12.2.2.5.1 Cobotics
“Cobot” refers to collaborative robots that can react to their surroundings 
parallel to humans to finish tasks or processes using sensor and machine 
learning technology (Essentracomponents, 2022). Cobots can help facto￾ries work more efficiently, cost-effectively, and accurately. They bring many 
benefits to enterprises, such as higher productivity, increased safety and 
flexibility, ease of use, fewer human resources, and better product quality 
(Essentracomponents, 2022). In the era of Industry 4.0, cobots seem to take 
on the human role in manufacturing, which could negatively impact sus￾tainability development. The Fifth Industrial Revolution requires cobots to 
support human missions but work in sync so that the role of human work￾ers becomes central, balancing with the part of cobots. In other words, in 416 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Industry 5.0, cobots are designed to understand the needs of employees, 
determine if they need support, and predict risks and safety factors to pro￾tect the workers (Verma et al., 2022). In fact, according to Bi et al. (2021), 
researchers estimated the market size of cobots was USD 649 million in 
2019 will increase to about 45% from 2019 to 2025. SMEs can use them 
to enhance working capabilities in autonomous production or assembly 
procedures. Furthermore, current cobots are sensor-driven, human-signal￾forming, and no longer mechanical. Industry 5.0 cobots modify products. 
Tomography and 3D vision let surgical cobots perform complex surgeries in 
Healthcare 5.0. Another example is Telesurgery, where a surgeon instructs a 
cobot online. Cobots enhance output and automate tedious tasks, making 
them essential to the industrial workforce (Verma et al., 2022; Resende et 
al., 2021; Romero et al., 2016c). Automation needs humans. AI makes all 
computers cobots. Automation boosts teamwork. Cooperative robots fail. 
Cobots may aid humans and animals. Due to its sensors and fragility, cobots 
may shut down if employees find missing merchandise. Industrial robots are 
risky, and robots enjoy assembly lines. Product personalization may chal￾lenge supervised robots. Cooperative robots learn faster. Industry 5.0 may 
include healthcare cobots and smart applications that enable patients to 
combine medical and lifestyle objectives into a customized workout regi￾men—robotic surgery involves the use of mechanical tools to remove tis￾sue. Da Vinci surgical robots improve precision. Gynecology and urology 
employ Da Vinci cobots. Human–machine cobots rule Industry 5.0. Cobots 
may improve competitive marketplaces (Maddikunta et al., 2022). German 
dryer-maker Stela Laxhuber says that adding a cobot to their welding cell has 
boosted production and component quality. Medicine, agriculture, food pro￾cessing, electronics manufacturing, storage, transportation, vehicle produc￾tion, metalworking, packaging, and logistics employ cobots more. Liability, 
public opinion, and job security must be addressed before cobots become 
mainstream (Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2023).
12.2.2.5.2 Supply Chain Management
Supply chain (SC) is essential in industrial supply-chain ecosystems 
because of the various players and interactions. The supply chain is unreli￾able. The SC may automate cash transfers after supply chain peer agree￾ments. SCs execute directives autonomously. SCs may be hosted on public, 
private, or permission BCs. User wallets hold contract native code. The 
parties’ consent seals it. SCs can reliably preserve status or computation 
data in BCs with a few mouse clicks. Go, Solidity, or Serpent can program 
Ethereum. Ethereum runs contract bytecode. Ethereum contracts may 
express algorithms using branching and loops. Private hyperledger chain 
codes require instruction and cooperation. Verma et al. (2022) described 
a fifth-generation supply chain with human–robot cooperation utilizing 
cobots and AI. Hype personalization requires human–machine interaction. Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 417
Robots handle massive industrial supply networks. Supply chain Industry 
5.0 may attract new careers and boost society’s sustainability and intellect 
(Joglekar et al., 2023). Industry 5.0 widespread customization may opti￾mize the supply chain. Industry 5.0 affects logistics. Industry 5.0 supply 
network models need conceptual breakthroughs. Human ingenuity with 
the Fourth Industrial Revolution (Digital Transformation (DT), cobots, 5G 
and beyond, machine learning, IoT, and the like) may help Industry 5.0 
firms meet the need for personalized goods. Industry 5.0 requires SCM 
mass customization. DT digitizes logistics, stock, and assets. Design think￾ing may help SCM (Marmolejo-Saucedo et al., 2020). SCM-like DT collects 
IoT data. Logs, machine learning, big data, etc., may predict SCM issues. 
Simchenko et al. (2019) suggested simplifying the supply chain to speed up 
personalized product delivery. DT analyzes the production, service, inven￾tory, and land prices. Moreover, DT also improves supply chain profitabil￾ity. SCM proposes DT. Based on (Defraeye et al., 2019) advocate mango 
fruit thermal modeling. DT monitored plant climate. Logistics preserve 
fresh fruit. DT-optimized logistics improve refrigeration and waste. Greif et 
al. (2020) redesigned the construction DT. This research examined whether 
DT lowers SCM construction costs. This strategy was developed using sev￾eral solvers, simulators, and analytical tools. Pharmaceutical distribution 
was predicted and studied. Drug analyses promote discussion. Cobots may 
simplify and help logistics. Simchenko et al. (2019) advocated SCM life 
cycle packaging, inspection, and lifting robots. Collaborative robots may 
help with material preparation, packing, quality assurance, shipping, cus￾tomer service, and undesired item retrieval. Cobots simplify stocktaking, 
ordering, refunding, and quality monitoring (Maddikunta et al., 2022).
12.2.2.5.3 Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality (AR/VR) and Metaverse
• AR/VR
The merging of digital data with the users’ environment in real-time 
is called Augmented Reality (AR). On the other hand, using data such 
as text, graphics, audio, video, and others in real-time integrated with 
natural objects is recognized as AR. Unsimilar to AR, Virtual Reality 
(VR) creates an entirely virtual environment that helps users discover 
and interact with a 3D environment. This environment is created by 
using software and hardware to simulate virtual objects. AR/VR tech￾nologies can be used in various aspects, such as healthcare, education, 
entertainment, and visualization (Batth et al., 2019).
• Metaverse
Metaverse refers to a combination of “meta” and “universe” in a sci￾fi novel called Snow Crash in 1992, and it is linked to cyberspace, 
where people can experience life in different ways they couldn’t do 
in the physical world (Tucci & Needle, 2023). There are two primary 
technologies to enhance the metaverse: VR and AR. The metaverse 418 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
will play an essential role in seven technologies: AI, IoT, extended 
reality, 3D modeling and reconstruction, spatial and edge computing, 
blockchain, and brain–computer interfaces. Moreover, it can be used 
in many industrial sectors like entertainment, real estate, and gaming.
12.2.2.6 6G networks and beyond
6G is the next generation and the successor to 5G cellular technology. 
Furthermore, 6G networks offer higher frequencies and capacity than 5G 
networks (Kranz & Christensen, 2022). Researchers believe that the 6G 
technology can improve imaging, presence technology, and location aware￾ness. Besides, 6G can allow access points to handle multiple clients concur￾rently via Orthogonal Frequency-Division Multiple Access (OFDMA)—a 
feature of Wi-Fi 6 (802.11ax) (Kranz & Christensen, 2022). According to 
the EU Parliament report, 6G is one of the main trends for 2030 to enhance 
connectivity and autonomy in Industry and transportation (Angelica Mari, 
2020). Several pioneer countries are working on 6G projects, like Finland, 
South Korea, China, the USA, Japan, Australia, and the EU. 6G promises 
a future way for workplaces by enhancing the way of online connectiv￾ity, using VR and AR in training workers, experiencing a new social media 
world (3D world), transforming healthcare, and managing the road (Marr, 
2023).
In addition, the benefits of future 6G services to Industry 5.0 are promis￾ing. Tens of thousands of sensors, hardware nodes, and robots may compli￾cate radio networking (Rajatheva et al., 2020). Smart infrastructure and 
apps will rule 4G and 5G. The 6G and beyond may aid Industry 5.0 because 
of its lower latency, enhanced service, calculable IoT infrastructure, and inte￾grated AI (Chowdhury et al., 2020). Intelligent spectrum management, AI￾powered mobile EC, and 6G networks help Industry 5.0 applications (Tariq 
et al., 2020). In a smart information society, Industry 5.0 applications will 
need 6G networks with rapid data transfer rates, low latency, high reliability, 
low energy consumption, huge traffic capacity, etc. Mobility and handover 
allow Industry 4.0 with 6G. 6G networks are large and complicated, requir￾ing frequent handovers (Alwis et al., 2021): AI-predicted mobility and hand￾off maintenance service. Industry 5.0’s Internet speeds exceed existing 
software (Yang et al., 2020). Open-space 6G optical quantum communica￾tion may work. Industry 5.0’s growing energy use and networked gadgets 
emphasize energy management. Novel approaches increase 6G energy har￾vesting and utilization. Digital worlds demand tools beyond digital and com￾putational (Maddikunta et al., 2022). Telecoms want 6G by 2030. Smart 
gadgets may use 6G wireless connectivity, 6G capacity, and latency improve￾ments. Nobody knows about 6G technology yet. Spectrum efficiency, cover￾age, bandwidths up to 100 GHz, power consumption, latency, stability, and 
data rates up to 1Tbps are some significant performance characteristics that 
may be improved. Strinati et al. (2019) briefly compare 5G and 6G key Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 419
performance indicators (KPIs). The 6G and subsequent networks improve 
latency, quality, connected device infrastructure, and AI (Chowdhury et al., 
2020) The 6G networks should use less energy due to linked devices and 
Industry 5.0 data volumes. 
12.2.2.7 Blockchain
A distributed database or ledger shared by the nodes of a computer network 
is known as a blockchain (Hayes, 2023). However, they are not just used 
in cryptocurrency systems, where they play a vital function in keeping a 
secure and decentralized record of transactions. Any sector may utilize the 
blockchain to make data immutable, which is the phrase for the inability 
to be changed. This new technology can improve enterprises’ performance 
and work more efficiently by tracking easily, reducing transactions, add￾ing security, facilitating international trade, revolutionizing future business 
operations, and bringing future prospects in business operations (Lysak, 
2023). Blockchain may help Industry 5.0. Industry 5.0 faces hardware 
diversity. Viriyasitavat and Hoonsopon (2019) said blockchain’s safe peer￾to-peer interactions enable permanent recording. Absolute ledgers enable 
Industry 5.0 transparency. Industry 5.0 smart contracts may analyze data 
and simplify procedures. Blockchain-based distributed and partitioned sys￾tems safeguard data and transact (Deepa et al., 2022). Blockchains may 
store digital identities in Industry 5.0. Businesses must manage network 
access. These changes may improve asset, commodity, and service manage￾ment. Blockchain increases cloud manufacturing machine communication 
(Wang et al., 2022a). Industry 5.0 might benefit from blockchain technol￾ogy. Industry 5.0 emphasizes device decentralization. Blockchain technology 
may boost trust in Distributed Ledger Technologies (DLTs) (Viriyasitavat 
& Hoonsopon, 2019). Blockchain-encrypted peer-to-peer interactions 
are here to stay (Viriyasitavat & Hoonsopon, 2019). Distributed ledgers 
make Industry 5.0 functions transparent and accountable. Industry 5.0 
disputes require transparency (Hämäläinen & Inkinen, 2019). Smart 
contracts may help Industry 5.0 authentication and service-oriented 
behavior. Decentralizing and partitioning blockchains may increase 
data and transaction security (Xu et al., 2021). Blockchains may speed 
data collection and processing. Blockchain-stored IDs control Industry 
5.0 subscribers. Check-in with staff and limit Internet access and digi￾tally managed services (Mushtaq & Haq, 2019). Blockchain and smart 
contracts may simplify contracting. Blockchain-based cloud production 
may help machines share data (Tao et al., 2011). Blockchains record 
business network digital and physical asset transactions. Veracity, trans￾parency, and traceability improve financial transactions. Block files 
archive recent transactions like ledger pages (Prabhadevi et al., 2021). 
Decentralized, unchangeable ledgers hold encrypted, time-stamped data. 
Blockchain is ideal for quickly, securely, and reliably exchanging data and 420 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
information with stakeholders. Blockchain’s decentralized, distributed, and 
irreversible characteristics allow organizations to transmit data securely 
(Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2022).
12.3 INDUSTRY 5.0 OPPORTUNITIES
12.3.1 Smart manufacturing
The smart factory of the Fifth Industrial Revolution is based on IoT. Artificial 
intelligence is used to collect and evaluate cloud data. Edge computers, sen￾sors, actuators, and ever-present robots on the factory floor hold the promise
of fully automated factory processes. Edge computing allows for the inte￾gration of actuators and sensors. Smart manufacturing facilities, efficient 
production lines, and state-of-the-art consumer items all need high techni￾cal purity. Businesses today may be able to save expenses while minimizing 
their influence on the environment and the availability of natural resources, 
according to the opinions of (Sanchez et al., 2020). Environmentally friendly 
additive manufacturing produces thinner and more resilient layers. The real￾ism of the 3D models improves. In smart additive manufacturing (SAM), AI 
and computer vision increase the quality and desirability of 3D printing and 
better supplies for 5D printing. Businesses and universities alike benefit from 
using intelligent manufacturing wares. The growth of smart manufacturing 
may be traced back to the incorporation of AI, IoT, the cloud, massive vol￾umes of data, CPS, DT, and EC. Smart manufacturing improves both profit￾ability and sustainability. In the recent decade, SAM has emerged as a subfield 
of smart manufacturing. Additive manufacturing, more commonly known as 
3D printing, facilitates user input in Industry 4.0, and eco-friendly output in
Industry 5.0 opens, automates, and provides access to valuable data. SAM 
is in charge of keeping an eye on the stuff in the layers. SAM reduces manu￾facturing’s energy use, trash output, and material consumption. Supply chain 
management and product delivery in Industry 5.0 may benefit from SAM and 
integrated automation (Maddikunta et al., 2022).
12.3.2 Smart logistics
After Industry 4.0’s technology-centric change, Industry 5.0 emphasizes 
social, environmental, and human views, which will impact logistics oper￾ations and management. Customizable distribution models are needed 
(Kumar et al., 2021a). Consumer inclusion requires intelligent CPS and 
system integration. Human–robot interactions raise security, psychologi￾cal, and other difficulties (Gaiardelli et al., 2021). Thus, Industry 5.0 smart 
logistics issues may be handled from several aspects. “Smart logistics,” 
which includes smart automation, devices, systems, and materials, focuses 
on human–technology interaction (Nahavandi, 2019).Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 421
12.3.3 Smart automation
Industry 5.0’s system-centricity prioritizes humans. Industry 5.0 (Pathak, 
2019) requires intelligent automation to balance human integration with 
automation (Nahavandi, 2019). Lean collaboration demands more plan￾ning and undermines the logistics system (Mekid et al., 2007). “Operator 
4.0” was coined to characterize logistics system technologies in 2016. 
Assisted, collaborative, and enhanced work boost productivity in this 
notion (Romero et al., 2016a). The priority is human–technology interac￾tion. In the second case, people and robots must collaborate. Third, employ 
technology to enhance hearing and sight. These applications improve pro￾duction, storage, material handling, and information flow (Cimini et al., 
2020a). Industry 5.0 emphasizes resilience and people. Romero and Stahre 
(2021) suggested an “Operator 5.0” who uses information and technology 
to unleash human imagination and resourcefulness in the face of adver￾sity to develop creative, cost-effective solutions to keep production flowing 
and people safe. Industry 5.0 requires self- and system resilience to progress 
technologically. Self-resilience is centered on overcoming hardship (Romero 
& Stahre, 2021) and due to its resilience, humans and robots may share 
duties (Inagaki, 2003).
12.3.4 Smart devices
The purpose of Industry 5.0 is to leverage technology to improve logis￾tics and supply chain management, with people as the primary emphasis. 
Wearable technologies are improving workers’ cognitive and physical per￾formance and are becoming more popular in the workplace (Longo et al., 
2020). Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) have profoundly affected intralo￾gistics, material handling, and personalized shipment. A substantial investi￾gation has been devoted to auto-ID and RFID in smart logistics and supply 
chains (Fraga-Lamas et al., 2021) because they improve traceability, ware￾house operations, and inventory management.
12.3.5 Smart systems
Industry 5.0 requires improved supply chain decision-making and informa￾tion sharing for customized and case-based production. Stakeholder data 
and information transmission improve smart logistics system responsive￾ness and savviness. It needs to transmit and analyze massive sensor data 
(Kumar, 2019). Smart Cyber–Physical Systems (SCPS) in Industry 5.0 
might improve data transmission and logistics networks. Green processes 
like green manufacturing, recycling/disposal, and G-IoT are vital; how￾ever, the digital revolution may only enable a small circular economy (CE). 
Information technology revolutionized blockchain technology (Carayannis 
et al., 2022). Recommender systems assist the supply chain in targeting 422 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
specialized markets by analyzing social media, language, and analytics. 
Online tracking and verification may enhance output (Kumar et al., 2021b). 
Real-time decision-making and high-quality visualization enable smart digi￾tal twins for logistics systems in Industry 5.0’s virtual intelligent logistics 
system (Hakanen & Rajala, 2018).
12.3.6 Smart materials
Industry 5.0 developed smart materials. The malleability and versatility of 
these cutting-edge materials may affect logistics and respond differently 
to different temperatures, lighting conditions, stress levels, and the like 
(Li et al., 2017). Most obviously, it can be used in 4D printing (Javaid & 
Haleem, 2020). 4D printing, like 3D printing, relies on the adherence of 
successive layers of material (Pei et al., 2017). The material used is the most 
crucial factor (Li et al., 2017). Smart materials allow things to modify their 
behavior in response to their surroundings and increase their robustness, 
flexibility, and dependability, such as medicine, aircraft, and electronics.
12.4 CHALLENGES OF INDUSTRY 5.0 FOR 
ENTERPRISES
The core of Industry 5.0 is about sustainability, human-centricity, and resil￾ience, and human-centric manufacturing has been and is one of the much￾discussed topics. For fulfilling this kind of manufacturing, the role of human 
workers must be pivotal and as equitable as possible to the machine’s posi￾tion in manufacturing production. A crucial question is how humans and 
machines can work together effectively. Genuinely, human–machine col￾laboration is currently one of the most challenging aspects of Industry 5.0. 
Within the scope of this chapter, this challenge will be discussed in the fol￾lowing three approaches: human workers, machine teammates, and intel￾ligent manufacturing.
12.4.1 Human workers
The cognitive capacity of humans, in general, and factory workers, in spe￾cific, is vital and constantly evolves in the historical timeline of the industrial 
revolution. In the Fifth Industrial Revolution, the understanding and skills 
of human workers are the elementary requirements for discovering new 
knowledge. Due to the development of advanced technology in Industry, 
human workers face limitations on job positions and roles in the manu￾facturing environment, such as the competency to interact and communi￾cate with modern machines in high-tech factories. Accordingly, to adapt to 
technological changes, human workers must raise their sense of initiative 
in learning and training, which seems to be a challenge worth considering. Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 423
In fact, associated with focus conversion from machines to humans, the 
active learning approach is an essential strategy enabling humans to actively 
improve and enhance craftsmanship, which could increase and preserve the 
central human-worker position (Güğerçin, 2021). A valuable forecast is that 
the labor force will be widely reallocated so that job guarantees will be 
highly competitive (Yücebalkan, 2020). To take advantage of the future, 
either active learning or self-learning of human workers is feasible not only 
for the age of discovery but also for lifelong benefits (Komiyama & Yamada, 
2018). Once human workers take ownership of knowledge, human well￾being can be achieved through care, satisfaction, motivation, and self￾expression. Learning would bring necessary knowledge to the workforce, 
whereas training could help enhance their competency skills. Human 
strength is the ability to reason, creativity, adaptability, etc., which could 
improve employees’ ability to handle new and diverse situations, especially 
technical circumstances. Therefore, the problem-solving ability of workers 
is precious in Industry 5.0, while machines do not automatically respond to 
unexpected technical situations. For the cyber–physical-system vision, the 
problem-solving competency of human workers is expected to contribute to 
the development of smart manufacturing. In intelligent factories equipped 
with complex problem-solving processes based on digital systems, out￾standing human worker skills are still essential such as creativity, analysis, 
and design (Bellet et al., 2013). The core of Industry 5.0 is about advanced 
technology rapidly evolving, which has made the global industrial environ￾ment full of technical engineering systems. Working in such an environment 
requires the competency to use and develop technology. Typically, interact￾ing and communicating with machines and technical systems would enable 
human workers to enhance controlling, monitoring, recovering, operating, 
etc., and raise the level of work safety proactively. Advanced technology 
skills have been in great demand for prospective job positions relating to 
data analytics, big data analytics, AI, and machine learning (Güğerçin, 
2021). In addition, the digital transformation era always needs the digi￾tization capacity of human resources, which organizations and businesses 
are looking for and expecting in that workforce (Knudsen et al., 2021). In 
addition, researching and inventing new techniques or improving them is 
also essential to serving technology development. With the experience and 
creativity of humans, the improvement and upgrading of production pro￾cesses and production methods are expected to both improve productivity 
and ensure flexibility. On the other hand, technology development capacity 
can positively impact the workforce transition between manual and mental 
labor-related job positions (Morgan-Thomas et al., 2020). The development 
of technology is also associated with the social revolution, where human 
life is always appreciated. Thus, human workers, in addition to work and 
technical skills, need to adapt to changes and impacts outside the factory. 
Normal problems of modern life, such as work pressure and family respon￾sibilities, require human workers to have the ability to deal with them. Thus, 424 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
stress management skills are necessary and valuable for humans to maintain 
life balance (Wu et al., 2013). In addition, to adapt to various work and 
life conditions, time and functional flexibility are considered relevant skills 
for human workers, which could make an advantage in choosing the type 
of work, such as full-time, part-time, remote, and job positions, such as 
IT, Marketing, Sales (Güğerçin, 2021). Overall, the knowledge and com￾petency skills mentioned above toward human challenges in Industry 5.0 
would promise to contribute to enhancing and ensuring good collaboration 
with machine teammates to increase productivity and efficiency for manu￾facturing production.
12.4.2 Machine teammates
In the context of teamwork with human workers, cobots are called machine 
teammates.
There are three categories of human–robot interaction in industrial 
robotic systems (García Olaizola et al., 2022). In reality, ensuring labor 
safety, providing jobs for humans, and enhancing production efficiency are 
considered urgent challenges to maintain and improve the centric role of 
humans (Cimini et al., 2020b). To understand human behavior, machine 
intelligence applied in cyber–physical systems requires deep learning and 
advanced training to acquire human understanding and skills directly or 
indirectly (Nahavandi, 2019). Implementing automated learning systems is 
a complex requirement due to human biological characteristics such as cog￾nitive, physical, and social factors (Munir et al., 2013). The ability of high￾tech machines would help replace the limitations of human abilities and 
calculation, and it also supports human strengths such as intelligence, cre￾ativity, and problem-solving. With this approach, the role of human workers 
is increased in manufacturing and has become a central goal for technology 
applications (Pathak, 2019).
12.4.3 Intelligent manufacturing
While Industry 4.0 focuses on intelligent automation, Industry 5.0 aims at 
the intelligent collaboration of humans and machines. This collaboration is 
known as new-generation intelligent manufacturing or human–robot col￾laboration (Zhou et al., 2018; Rachel, 2018). The main challenge of smart 
manufacturing is to create a working environment that fosters a good rela￾tionship between humans, machines, and organizations in terms of both 
technology and culture. As for the technology aspect, notable achievements 
such as AI, big data, cloud computing, IoT, and digital twins are being widely 
applied. Of those, the big expectation is reducing the gap between AI training 
results and the real world of human–robot collaboration systems (Wang et 
al., 2021). Quality of AI training would support automated learning systems 
that are well-adapted to real and human tasks. In addition, the effectiveness Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 425
of human–machine cooperation could be preserved and enhanced by mutual 
self-learning with digital twin-based training (Liu et al., 2021). Behaviors, 
skills, operational tasks of human workers and technical space, and physi￾cal elements of smart factories could be digitalized by virtual modeling and 
visualization for digital twin applications. Human workers could train and 
enhance their expertise with digital twin space, while machine intelligence 
could use mine scenario data from the digital twin operation (Pan & Zhang, 
2021). The development of mutual learning could contribute to the col￾laborative intelligence of humans and machines, promising flexible applica￾tion of AI and human intelligence to resilient production (Daugherty, 2018). 
Through this harmonious intellectual integration, handling new, complex, 
unexpected problems benefits from leadership between humans and machine 
teammates, whose strengths are used harmoniously and effectively (Leng et 
al., 2022). While the technical aspect is seen as the backbone of this new 
generation of smart manufacturing, the organizational culture would play 
the role of the heart of the administration. The well-being of human work￾ers, central to smart factories, could not be preserved without the impact 
of organizational culture. Creativity, innovation, investment in technology, 
and resource management are always strongly influenced by administration 
policies, which could bring satisfaction, such as income, promotion, and 
passion, to human workers, employees, and other stakeholders. This vision 
is unlikely to be a simple business strategy when critical analysis of return 
on investment, time, revenue, and benefits management is always a glaring 
challenge for any organization (Cimini et al., 2017). Besides management 
culture, education plays a crucial role in educating and training a generation 
of humans with modern skills and knowledge to meet the requirements of 
the new industrial revolution. Along with the rapid change of technology, 
education engineering must constantly develop, as well as from educational 
methods, goals, facilities, and teaching staff. For instance, knowledge-based 
and outcome-based methods could be flexibly combined to enhance pro￾fessional and soft skills rather than focusing on academic understanding 
(Diaz Lantada, 2020). Ethical issues have always been of particular con￾cern in a hi-tech society, where the educational environment must address 
critical issues such as gender and racial bias. In addition, transdisciplinary 
education is considered a potential challenge in this generation of Industry 
because the requirements for job positions and the workforce’s competitive￾ness interfere with many fields and areas. Education engineering outcomes 
and lifelong learning would contribute to the well-being of humans and 
the binding relationship between humans, technology, and society (Gürdür 
Broo et al., 2022).
12.4.4 Wage disparity
Technological advancements have reduced the salary gap between vari￾ous workforce groups over the last several decades. The median salary of 426 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
middle-educated and experienced workers has fallen over the 1990s, while 
the pay gap has grown, according to 2016 World Bank research. The infor￾mation economy and cognitive jobs have raised the demand for knowledge￾able workers. Acemoglu and Restrepo (2018) discovered that low-educated 
workers lost the most employment to automation. Pervasive automation 
and AI have revived the idea of a universal basic income (Raja Santhi & 
Muthuswamy, 2023) for everyone. Industry 5.0 builds on the human￾centered concepts of “4.0.” Human–robot collaboration would boost the 
economy. Tech businesses targeting Gen Z and Millennial workers must 
accommodate their diverse interests. Community activities, scheduling flexi￾bility, and promotion of historically underrepresented groups retain younger 
employees. Human-centered design requires rethinking workplace robot–
human collaboration. Frontline workers may benefit from digital twins and 
collaborative robots in industrial operations. Valued personnel work harder 
for the company (Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2023).
12.4.5 Loss of craftsmanship
Technocrats have witnessed computer programs beat grandmasters since 
the 1980s. AI excels in visual recognition, verbal comprehension, strategic 
games, and autonomous cars. AI outperforms attorneys in contract flaw 
detection and songwriting (Miley, 2018). In 2016, “The Next Rembrandt” 
used AI to generate Rembrandt-like paintings. Researchers used AI to repro￾duce Rembrandt’s style pixel-by-pixel (NPR Staff, 2016). AI can compete 
with humans in many categories requiring creativity, subtlety, and expertise 
(Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2023).
12.4.6 New role for the Industry Worker
Employee roles and histories will evolve as a consequence of Industry 
5.0. Workers contribute to the success of a company and their own per￾sonal development; they are not an expense. The organization cares 
deeply about its employees and is committed to their professional and 
personal development. This technique prioritizes human capital over 
monetary resources in favor of a more conventional cost–benefit analysis. 
In Industry 5.0, humans should take precedence over robots. The needs of 
those who work in the manufacturing sector should drive technological 
development, not the other way around. The employee-employer rela￾tionship becomes closer. To achieve this goal, workers might take part in 
developing industrial technologies that rely on artificial intelligence and 
robots.
12.4.7 Unemployment
The Industrial Revolution, the Great Depression, and the World Wars increased 
unemployment. Due to industrialization and population concentration, rural Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 427
and urban employment markets differed. Humans developed and created 
during the First Industrial Revolution, while machines and robots handled 
the dirty jobs. AI in Industry 4.0 can tackle complex problems and replace 
human intelligence. AI will help experienced and educated people, but not 
others. Wage gaps may grow. AI-enabled robots may replace software engi￾neers, doctors, and architects (Gay et al., n.d.). The United Nations anticipates 
6 billion working-age people by 2050, whereas AI and robotics are progres￾sively infiltrating human-only fields (Raja Santhi & Muthuswamy, 2023).
12.4.8 Security concerns
• Phishing
Phishing is an attack in which scammers send messages to the vic￾tims, showing them as a prestige site but leading to a trap. In this 
way, attackers can steal all credentials of victims. This attack attempts 
to gain sensitive data from victims, which can cause financial losses 
(Gupta et al., 2017). Five stages of a phishing cycle and various types 
of this attack were described in Gupta et al. (2017). They indicated that 
these attacks have significant impacts on enterprises’ financial losses. 
Indeed, a phishing attack is one of the most popular cyber crimes now￾adays (approximately more than USD 4 million of the average cost for 
an organization’s data breach, based on AAG (2023a)).
• Intellectual Property (IP) theft
Intellectual Property (IP) is related to creative expressions/works, designs, 
inventions, trade secrets, or valuable information known as company 
property (De Groot, 2021; Proofpoint, 2023; Simpson, 2022; Thales, 
2023). In another way, it is also the intangible property of a company. IP 
theft is a threat when someone unauthorized exploits or uses company 
property, and it can lead to serious financial issues for individuals, busi￾nesses, and governmental offices. There are several types of intellectual 
theft, including copyright, trademark, design, patent infringement, and 
trade secret theft. These types can influence financial loss, remediation 
cost, and reputational damage for enterprises.
• Ransomware
Ransomware is a malicious code that prevents users from accessing their 
data until it is paid (AAG, 2023b). There are four types of the latest ran￾somware: crypto, locker, scareware, and double extortion ransomware 
(Blackfog, 2023). Ransomware is becoming one of the most dangerous 
attacks on enterprises, even big companies, and SMEs; in fact, a big meat 
processing company (JBS) in Brazil was under attack by ransomware 
and forced to shut down temporarily several branches of it in Australia, 
Canada, and the USA from May 30, 2021, to June 2, 2021, with USD 
11 million payment in bitcoin to resume regular activity (Jones, 2022). 
This attack can impact enterprises in many ways; for example, opera￾tion interruption, company reputation damage, sensitive data exposure, 
and financial problems. According to global statistics (Figure 12.2), the 428 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
number of ransomware attacks slightly increased in 2017 and 2018 and 
marginally decreased in 2019. However, it was nearly 1.5 times rising in 
2020 and approximately double that in 2021 compared to 2020, but a 
slight decrease in 2022. Besides, Figure 12.3 shows that the percentage 
of companies under attack by ransomware increased continuously from 
2018 to 2022; particularly, over 71 percent of companies were victim￾ized by ransomware. This leads to significant challenges for enterprises 
and SMEs in adopting new technologies in Industry 5.0.
• Supply chain attack
This attack targets the weak links in an enterprise’s supply chain involv￾ing producing and selling product processes (Gillis, 2023). Moreover, 
cyber hackers often exploit the companies’ trust in third-party vendors 
by using integrated malware in hardware and software while deliver￾ing materials from the supplier to the producers’ procedure. Supply 
chain attacks are similar to Advanced Persistence Threats (APT) by 
using complex methods and taking a long time; even organizations’ 
systems are quite good (Helpnet Security, 2021). This attack can 
cause massive damage to enterprises. Recently, there have been several 
critical supply chain attacks, such as Solarwinds, Kaseya, Codecov, 
NotPetya, Atlassian, and British Airways (Checkpoint, 2023). There 
are many categories of supply chain attacks with the primary purpose 
of creating or taking benefits of security vulnerabilities by malicious 
code in software (Fortinet, 2023).
Figure 12.2 Total number of global ransomware attacks from 2017 to 2022 (in 
millions) (Statista, 2023a).Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 429
12.5 HUMAN FACTORS IN INDUSTRY 5.0
The Fifth Industrial Revolution places the human factor at the heart of the 
evolutionary strategy of both technology and society, where the human fac￾tor is not only a clear premise but also a key driving force for changes 
and development toward total success. This vision is also differentiating, 
supplementing, and perfecting the achievements of the Fourth Industrial 
Revolution because the opposite impact of high-tech machines and 
technology-driven one-way management overshadows the role of human 
workers. In fact, it seems that in any stage of science–technology evolu￾tion, human factors engineering is always a top concern. This is obvious 
because its goal is to help humans overcome their own capacity limits and 
promote their specific strengths to achieve comfort, safety, and efficiency in 
work (Kadir et al., 2019). As human worker satisfaction increases, so does 
their creativity and dedication to production goals. Therefore, in intelligent 
manufacturing, replacing human workers completely with machines is not 
recommended or expected. Furthermore, other focus areas of Industry 5.0, 
such as healthcare, infrastructure, mobility, fintech, and more, human fac￾tors engineering must be considered. For example, in the healthcare sector, 
human factors engineering and human–computer interaction application 
continues to be of practical importance in the future through human-driven 
design and evaluation for clinical informatics systems (Holden et al., 2022). 
During industrialization, the machine components and hardware elements of 
engineering are often called physical systems. These have also been integrated 
with human factors toward sustainability and resilience for production. 
Figure 12.3 Total percentage of global organizations under attack by ransom￾ware from 2018 to 2022 (Statista, 2023b).430 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Human–physical  systems are the popular model in traditional factories, 
where workers work with the support of machines in certain stages of 
production (Wang et al., 2022b). As technology advanced, machines with 
digital and computerized integration, known as cyber–physical systems, 
gradually replaced workers in many specific jobs in smart factories (Wang 
et al., 2022a). The priority of modern machinery in the factory has affected 
human job security, adversely affecting society’s sustainable development. 
Considered an inevitable achievement, the human factor is once again placed 
at the heart of the production process, known as the human–cyber–physical 
system (HCPS), which is the harmonious integration of the role of workers 
in the cyber–physical system (Fantini et al., 2020). The central role of work￾ers is actively demonstrated in operation, control, and decision-making in 
HCPS, in which human inputs are always ensured and maintained (Tehrani 
et al., 2019). In special situations, the decision and action to solve the prob￾lem are due to the reasonable flexibility between workers and machines. 
For example, in human–machine collaborative systems in the healthcare 
sector, safety is enhanced through both operational efficiency and reduced 
errors related to human decisions (Fu et al., 2017). In addition, human input 
also plays a key role in personalization, one of the essential goals of the 
human-oriented Industry 5.0. Unlike in Industry 4.0, in the new genera￾tion of Industry, personalization enables humans to be directly or indirectly 
involved in production through the design, trial, and maintenance phases 
(Zhang et al., 2017; Zheng et al., 2017). Typically, in HCPS, the application 
of metaverse and digital twin using human input for product personaliza￾tion both contribute to improved human satisfaction and is an enjoyable 
experience of the human-centric role (Wang et al., 2022a). In order to meet 
the resiliency of the Industry, the human factor is indispensable in leveraging 
human intelligence and perception in handling failures and unexpected situ￾ations. Thanks to this strong human support of the cyber–physical system, 
HCPS can ensure stability and adaptability in production, limiting or avoid￾ing unnecessary interruptions affecting work efficiency (Chen et al., 2019). 
Moreover, the knowledge and understanding of humans at every position 
in organizations is a precious asset, having high value when contributing to 
collective wisdom (Tuptuk & Hailes, 2018). Making full use of collective 
intelligence is an indispensable requirement in human resource policy to 
ensure sustainable development, not only in the immediate but also in the 
long term.
12.6 REPRESENTATIVE EXAMPLES
12.6.1 Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)-based solution for 
human-centric Digital Twins (DTs)
Most DTs are currently made with models that don’t support reusability 
and scalability well. In addition, modeling humans as data-driven agents Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 431
and visualizing their interactions in factories remains limited. An Industrial 
IoT-based platform, named Clawdite, can help customize data visualiza￾tion of human factors and manufacturing systems (Montini et al., 2022). 
Besides, it can also provide a flexible mechanism for easy DT initialization 
and acceleration. Clawdite’s design is suitable for specific purpose applica￾tions, supporting data flows of varying volumes, velocities, and variations. 
The flexibility of the reference model allows the representation of diverse 
data structures (time series, JSON, XML). Different types of input and out￾put data streams in special situations are also well supported by this solu￾tion. Typical scenarios that have been successfully evaluated are estimating 
worker location, optimizing autonomous Mobile Robot fleet, estimating 
worker fatigue, detecting worker activities, and profiling human workers, 
as well as skills assessment.
12.6.2 Augmented Reality (AR) enhancing human–
machine collaboration
AR is a prominent technology that enables real-time visual interaction 
between the real world and virtual space on computers. AR applications can 
help improve awareness, train workers, train robots, and enhance the abil￾ity to evaluate blueprints related to products and manufacturing systems. 
However, widespread use of this tool is hampered by the complexity of 
creating and deploying AR content. The ARContent tool (Moya et al., 2023) 
is a potential solution to the challenge. The ARContent tool offers extended 
usability for non-experts as no programming skills are required and faster 
access using the Internet interface, which can enhance the active participa￾tion of employees in creating context-aware AR content. As a result, the 
benefit is less cognitive and mental effort in engineering operations, pilot￾testing design, human–robot training, and maintaining production quality.
12.7 FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The ideal of Industry 5.0 is human well-being at the heart of the manu￾facturing world, sustainable development, and guaranteed resilience. 
Contributing to the realization of that vision, from a technical perspective, 
to ensure the central role of humans in production, solutions to improve the 
efficiency of cooperation between humans and machines must be studied 
in-depth. Potential strategies and methods of enhancing mutual understand￾ing, empathy, and learning between humans and machines will be essential 
in the future. AI, IoT, big data, human-centric digital twins, and Augmented 
Reality are expected to play a key role in serving the specification of a 
human-driven industry. These technologies need to be researched for ease 
of use, deployment, and accessibility to a wide range of people, helping to 
improve human satisfaction both inside and outside the factory. In addition, 432 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
multidisciplinary researchers should pay attention to the harmony of eco￾logical, economic, and social characteristics toward the overall goal of not 
only Industry 5.0 but also of the coming era.
People’s trust in modern technology is essential to be part of the path to 
Industry 5.0. When machines act as colleagues, they must create empathy, 
understanding, and interest in the factory space in order to facilitate and 
enhance human trust. Therefore, solutions for improving and enhancing the 
characteristics and requirements in human cognitive science for smart tech￾nology, smart manufacturing, and smart society will be one of the most stud￾ied topics. This, very clearly, could push AI into a new stage of development 
where deep learning and cognitive computing can rely on cognitive or unsu￾pervised models instead of structured or predefined ones. Besides, the trans￾parency and explainability of AI-based decision-making need further 
investigation. The achievements of this field will enhance the quality of mutual 
learning between humans and machines, making it possible to customize and 
personalize the communication between human life and the engineering space.
On the other hand, Industry 5.0 will open a new door to a smart society 
where people can enjoy life to the best of their ability. To achieve this vision, 
lifelong learning is an effective tool for maintaining and enhancing social 
and technical human capacity. Therefore, researchers should seek answers 
on how to make lifelong learning a habit and a common culture and custom 
as possible in a smart life.
The Fifth Industrial Revolution warrants skepticism. Many worries about 
the economy, job losses, and the value of “humans” eroding. Industry 5.0 
brings humans and robots/AI together to innovate. Not replacing humans, 
it inspires creativity. Industry 5.0 must balance production and efficiency. 
Industry 5.0 seeks perfection. Future manufacturing complexity and person￾alization will necessitate a more robotized and collaborative human–
machine approach.
Industry 5.0 aims to enhance people’s lives worldwide by changing peo￾ple’s views on AI and supporting people-centered digital technology develop￾ment. The Skills Agenda and Digital Education Action Plan should prepare 
workers for AI and robotics. If we extend our knowledge base and provide 
upskilling opportunities, people can take advantage of Industry 5.0’s imagi￾native advantages and employ their creative skills in high-value industrial 
jobs. Human-centered solutions based on the IoT and artificial intelligence 
will improve healthcare by identifying, treating, and assessing contemporary 
society’s many diseases. To deliver mass customization with a human touch, 
the healthcare sector needs business 5.0’s networked machines’ productivity, 
efficiency, safety, and waste reduction. Industry 5.0 is a once-in-a-lifetime 
opportunity to improve the world. Sustainability underpins Industry 5.0. 
UN-supported companies get financing. Industry 5.0 may inspire sustainable 
government, business, and climate initiatives. A new idea will succeed if it 
improves the economy, culture, and ecology. Industry 5.0 will change every￾thing. We must include it in our technological sphere as it expands Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 433
worldwide. We’re only starting a significant transformation that might lead 
to a more optimistic, creative, and prosperous future for everyone.
12.8 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
Industry 5.0 offers many advantages for all criteria. It is changing the way 
workers behave in their jobs by applying innovative technologies inherited 
from Industry 4.0; for example, AI, machine learning, big data, blockchain, 
and cobots. Industry 5.0 is an option for businesses. Meaning “predictive 
maintenance” is the natural progression from “preventive maintenance.” 
Smart sensors, IoT gadgets, and computer programs lessen inaccuracies. 
They are repairing the most broken devices. In Industry 5.0, manufacturing 
is centered on meeting the client’s demands. Business models may shift to 
accommodate human–machine interaction. Local economies benefit from 
manufacturing and employment. The revival of the manufacturing sector is 
facilitated by technological re-employment. With the help of collaborative 
robots, people may focus on more complex mental activities without risk or 
boredom. Skilled workers who are invested in their jobs accomplish more. 
The human–robot collaboration will accelerate the next industrial revolu￾tion. Industry 5.0 excels at customization. Industry 5.0 rapidly develops vir￾tual worlds, supercomputers, and other information technologies. “Industry 
5.0” reduces complexity. Industry 5.0 includes big data, AI, IoT, cloud, col￾laborative robots, and inventive problem-solving. Industry 5.0 improves 
money and freedom. Individualization and productivity improve. Preparing 
employees for increasingly automated situations is difficult. Industry 5.0’s 
broad usage of standard communication protocols makes critical industrial 
systems and production lines more vulnerable. Industry 5.0 will give robots 
more independence, but humans will face moral dilemmas. Industry 5.0 
favors human–robot manufacturing.
This chapter comprehensively overviews Industry 5.0 technology by criti￾cally reviewing scientific papers and publications. Furthermore, several fea￾tures and opportunities of Industry 5.0 for enterprises are discussed in this 
chapter. Although large enterprises and SMEs can benefit from technologies 
in Industry 5.0, they face many challenges, such as human–machine collabo￾ration, intelligent manufacturing, human factors, and security concerns. 
Therefore, this chapter plays an essential role in raising awareness for com￾panies and motivates them to figure out solutions in order to mitigate these 
issues.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A brief history of robotics: The origin of the first humanoid robot. (2021). https://
www.lucarobotics.com/blog/first-humanoid-robot434 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
AAG. (2023a). The Latest 2023 Phishing Statistics (updated May 2023). https://aag￾it.com/the-latest-phishing-statistics/
AAG. (2023b). The Latest 2023 Ransomware Statistics (updated May 2023). https://
aag-it.com/the-latest-ransomware-statistics/
acatech – National Academy of Science, & Engineering. (2013). Recommendations 
for implementing the strategic initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0. Final report of the 
Industrie 4.0 Working Group. April.
Acemoglu, D., & Restrepo, P. (2018). The race between man and machine: Implications 
of technology for growth, factor shares, and employment. In American Economic 
Review (Vol. 108, Issue 6, pp. 1488–1542). American Economic Association. 
whttps://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20160696
Adel, A. (2022). Future of industry 5.0 in society: human-centric solutions, chal￾lenges and prospective research areas. Journal of Cloud Computing, 11(1). https://
doi.org/10.1186/s13677-022-00314-5
Akundi, A., Euresti, D., Luna, S., Ankobiah, W., Lopes, A., & Edinbarough, I. (2022). 
State of Industry 5.0—Analysis and Identification of Current Research Trends. 
Applied System Innovation, 5(1), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.3390/asi5010027
Alwis, C. De, Kalla, A., Pham, Q. V., Kumar, P., Dev, K., Hwang, W. J., & Liyanage, M.
(2021). Survey on 6G Frontiers: Trends, Applications, Requirements, Technologies 
and Future Research. IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society, 2, 836–
886. https://doi.org/10.1109/OJCOMS.2021.3071496
AMFG. (2023). Industry 4.0 vs. Industry 5.0: Understanding the Real Difference. 
https://amfg.ai/2023/03/17/industry-4-0-vs-industry-5-0-understanding-the-real￾difference/
Angelica Mari. (2020). 6G, European internet, censorship: EU Parliament sets out 
vision for digital services. https://www.computerweekly.com/news/252484423/6G￾European-Internet-Censorship-EU-Parliament-sets-out-vision-for-digital-services
Aparna. (2023). The Impact Of Cloud Computing On Business Efficiency. https://stefanini.
com/en/insights/articles/the-impact-of-cloud-computing-on-business-efficiency
Azemi, F., Šimunovic, G., Lujic ́ , R., Tokody, D., & Rajnai, Z. (n.d.). The Use of ́
Advanced Manufacturing Technology to Reduce Product Cost. In Acta Polytechnica 
Hungarica (Vol. 16, Issue 7).
Bag, S., Wood, L. C., Xu, L., Dhamija, P., & Kayikci, Y. (2020). Big data analytics 
as an operational excellence approach to enhance sustainable supply chain per￾formance. Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2019.104559
Batth, R. S., Nayyar, A., & Nagpal, A. (2019). Internet of Robotic Things: Driving 
Intelligent Robotics of Future - Concept, Architecture, Applications and 
Technologies. Proceedings - 4th International Conference on Computing Sciences, 
ICCS 2018, 151–160. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCS.2018.00033
Bellet, T., Hoc, J. M., Boverie, S., & Boy, G. (2013). From Human-Machine 
Interaction to Cooperation: Towards the Integrated Copilot. In Human-Computer 
Interactions in Transport (pp. 129–155). John Wiley and Sons. https://doi.org/
10.1002/9781118601907.ch5
van den Bergh, A. (2017). The pros and cons of robotics and its implementation. Quint 
Wellington Redwood, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(13)70172-5
Beudert, R. (2018). Understanding Smart Machines: How They Will Shape the Future. 
https://www.techbriefs.com/component/content/article/tb/pub/features/technology￾leaders/28863Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 435
Bi, Z. M., Luo, M., Miao, Z., Zhang, B., Zhang, W. J., & Wang, L. (2021). Safety 
assurance mechanisms of collaborative robotic systems in manufacturing. 
Robotics and Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, 67(June 2020). https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.rcim.2020.102022
Bihani, P., & Patil, S. (2014). A Comparative Study of Data Analysis Techniques.
Blackfog. (2023). 4 Key Types of Ransomware – And How to Guard Against Them. 
https://www.blackfog.com/4-types-of-ransomware-how-to-recognize-them/
Carayannis, E. G., Christodoulou, K., Christodoulou, P., Chatzichristofis, S. A., 
& Zinonos, Z. (2022). Known Unknowns in an Era of Technological and Viral 
Disruptions—Implications for Theory, Policy, and Practice. Journal of the Knowledge 
Economy, 13(1), 587–610. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13132-020-00719-0
Checkpoint. (2023). Supply Chain Attacks Are Surging. https://www.checkpoint.
com/cyber-hub/threat-prevention/what-is-a-supply-chain-attack/
Chen, B., Wan, J., Lan, Y., Imran, M., Li, D., & Guizani, N. (2019). Improving 
Cognitive Ability of Edge Intelligent IIoT through Machine Learning. IEEE 
Network, 33, 61–67. https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.001.1800505
Cheng, Y., Chen, K., Sun, H., Zhang, Y., & Tao, F. (2018). Data and knowledge min￾ing with big data towards smart production. Journal of Industrial Information 
Integration, 9, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2017.08.001
Chowdhury, M. Z., Shahjalal, M. D., Ahmed, S., & Jang, Y. M. (2020). 6G Wireless 
Communication Systems: Applications, Requirements, Technologies, Challenges, 
and Research Directions. IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society, 1, 
957–975. https://doi.org/10.1109/ojcoms.2020.3010270
Cimini, C., Lagorio, A., Romero, D., Cavalieri, S., & Stahre, J. (2020a). Product 
Avatar View project SO SMART-Socially Sustainable Manufacturing for the 
Factories of the Future View project Smart Logistics and The Logistics Operator 
4.0. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340952295
Cimini, C., Pinto, R., Pezzotta, G., & Gaiardelli, P. (2017). The transition towards 
industry 4.0: business opportunities and expected impacts for suppliers and man￾ufacturers. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology, 513, 
119–126. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-66923-6_14
Cimini, C., Pirola, F., Pinto, R., & Cavalieri, S. (2020b). A human-in-the-loop 
manufacturing control architecture for the next generation of production sys￾tems. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 54, 258–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jmsy.2020.01.002
Cojocariu, O. (2023). Industry 5.0 opportunities and challenges: bring your factory 
into the future. https://digitalya.co/blog/industry-5-opportunities-and-challenges/
Daugherty, P. R. (2018). Collaborative Intelligence: Humans and AI Are Joining 
Forces.
De Groot, J. (2021). IP Theft: Definition and Examples. https://www.digitalguardian.
com/blog/ip-theft-definition-and-examples
Deepa, N., Pham, Q. V., Nguyen, D. C., Bhattacharya, S., Prabadevi, B., Gadekallu, T. 
R., Maddikunta, P. K. R., Fang, F., & Pathirana, P. N. (2022). A survey on block￾chain for big data: Approaches, opportunities, and future directions. In Future 
Generation Computer Systems (Vol. 131, pp. 209–226). Elsevier B.V. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.future.2022.01.017
Defraeye, T., Tagliavini, G., Wu, W., Prawiranto, K., Schudel, S., Assefa Kerisima, 
M., Verboven, P., & Bühlmann, A. (2019). Digital twins probe into food cooling 
and biochemical quality changes for reducing losses in refrigerated supply chains. 436 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Resources, Conservation and Recycling, 149, 778–794. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
resconrec.2019.06.002
Deutsch, J., He, M., & He, D. (2017). Remaining useful life prediction of hybrid 
ceramic bearings using an integrated deep learning and particle filter approach. 
Applied Sciences (Switzerland), 7(7). https://doi.org/10.3390/app7070649
Diaz Lantada, A. (2020). Engineering Education 5.0: Continuously Evolving Engineering 
Education. International Journal of Engineering Education, 36, 1814–1832.
Essentracomponents. (2022). How are cobots benefiting manufacturers? https://
www.essentracomponents.com/en-gb/news/trends/industry-40/how-are-cobots￾benefiting-manufacturers
Fantini, P., Pinzone, M., & Taisch, M. (2020). Placing the operator at the centre 
of Industry 4.0 design: Modelling and assessing human activities within cyber￾physical systems. Computers and Industrial Engineering, 139. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cie.2018.01.025
Fortinet. (2023). Supply Chain Attacks: Examples and Countermeasures. https://
www.fortinet.com/resources/cyberglossary/supply-chain-attacks
Fraga-Lamas, P., Varela-Barbeito, J., & Fernandez-Carames, T. M. (2021). Next 
Generation Auto-Identification and Traceability Technologies for Industry 5.0: A 
Methodology and Practical Use Case for the Shipbuilding Industry. IEEE Access, 
9, 140700–140730. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3119775
Frankenfield, J. (2023). What is Cloud Computing? Pros and Cons of Different 
Types of Services. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/cloud-computing.asp
Fu, Z., Guo, C., Ren, S., Ou, Y., & Sha, L. (2017). Modeling and Integrating Human 
Interaction Assumptions in Medical Cyber-Physical System Design. 373–378. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/CBMS.2017.50
Gaiardelli, S., Spellini, S., Lora, M., & Fummi, F. (2021). Modeling in industry 5.0: 
What is there and what is missing: Special session 1: Languages for industry 5.0. 
Forum on Specification and Design Languages, 2021-September. https://doi.
org/10.1109/FDL53530.2021.9568371
García Olaizola, I., Quartulli, M., Garcia, A., & Barandiaran, I. (2022). Artificial 
Intelligence from Industry 5.0 perspective: Is the Technology Ready to Meet the 
Challenge?
Gay, D., Ng, L., Cheng, H. W., Vergara, S., Ernst, E., Tobin, S., Milasi, S., Pin-Heiro, 
V., Kraft, C., Women, U. N., Fernandez, A., Renner, S., Roig, M., Jimenez, M., 
Perry, J., Mukherjee, S., Roehrl, R. A., & Freire, C. (n.d.). Substantive contribu￾tions in the form of draft text for sections and boxes and research assistance were 
made by of the Division of Social Policy and Develop-ment (DESA/DSPD); and.
Gehlot, A., Duggal, A. S., Malik, P. K., Gaba, G. S., Masud, M., & Al-Amri, J. F.
(n.d.). Original Research Paper A sequential roadmap to Industry 6.0: Exploring 
future manufacturing trends. https://doi.org/10.1049/cmu2.12284
George, A. S., & George, A. S. (2020). Industrial Revolution 5.0: The transformation 
of the modern manufacturing process to enable man and machine to work hand 
in hand. Seybold Report, 15, 214–234. https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.6548092
Gillis, A. S. (2023). Supply chain attack. https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/
definition/supply-chain-attack
Goris, K. (2004). Eindwerk ingediend tot het behalen van de academische graad 
burgerlijk werktuigkundig-elektrotechnisch ingenieur.
Greif, T., Stein, N., & Flath, C. M. (2020). Peeking into the void: Digital twins for 
construction site logistics. Computers in Industry, 121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
compind.2020.103264Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 437
Grover, P., & Kar, A. K. (2017). Big Data Analytics: A Review on Theoretical 
Contributions and Tools Used in Literature. Global Journal of Flexible Systems 
Management, 18(3), 203–229. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40171-017-0159-3
Güğerçin, S. (2021). HOW EMPLOYEES SURVIVE IN THE INDUSTRY 5.0 
ERA: IN-DEMAND SKILLS OF THE NEAR FUTURE. International Journal 
of Disciplines In Economics and Administrative Sciences Studies (IDEAstudies), 
7(31), 524–533. https://doi.org/10.26728/ideas.452
Gupta, B. B., Tewari, A., Jain, A. K., & Agrawal, D. P. (2017). Fighting against 
phishing attacks: state of the art and future challenges. In Neural Computing and 
Applications (Vol. 28, Issue 12, pp. 3629–3654). Springer London. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s00521-016-2275-y
Gürdür Broo, D., Kaynak, O., & Sait, S. M. (2022). Rethinking engineering educa￾tion at the age of industry 5.0. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 25, 
100311. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2021.100311
Hakanen, E., & Rajala, R. (2018). Material intelligence as a driver for value creation 
in IoT-enabled business ecosystems. Journal of Business and Industrial Marketing, 
33(6), 857–867. https://doi.org/10.1108/JBIM-11-2015-0217
Hämäläinen, E., & Inkinen, T. (2019). Industrial applications of big data in dis￾ruptive innovations supporting environmental reporting. Journal of Industrial 
Information Integration, 16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2019.100105
Happiestminds. (2023). Industry 4.0. https://www.happiestminds.com/insights/
industry-4-0/
Hayes, A. (2023). Blockchain Facts: what is it, How it works, and How it can be 
used. https://www.investopedia.com/terms/b/blockchain.asp
Hein-Pensel, F., Winkler, H., Brückner, A., Wölke, M., Jabs, I., Mayan, I. J., 
Kirschenbaum, A., Friedrich, J., & Zinke-Wehlmann, C. (2023). Maturity assessment 
for Industry 5.0: A review of existing maturity models. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 66(December 2022), 200–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.12.009
Helpnet Security. (2021). Supply chain attacks expected to multiply by 4 in 2021.
Holden, R., Abebe, E., Hill, J., Brown, J., Savoy, A., Voida, S., Jones, J., & 
Kulanthaivel, A. (2022). Human Factors Engineering and Human-Computer 
Interaction: Supporting User Performance and Experience (pp. 119–132). https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-93765-2_9
Inagaki, T. (2003). Chapter 8 of the Handbook of Cognitive Task Design pp Adaptive 
Automation: Sharing and Trading of Control.
Javaid, M., & Haleem, A. (2020). Critical components of industry 5.0 towards a 
successful adoption in the field of manufacturing. Journal of Industrial Integration 
and Management, 5(3), 327–348. https://doi.org/10.1142/S2424862220500141
Jha, A. (2023). The Evolution of Industry: From 1.0 to 6.0. https://www.linkedin.
com/pulse/evolution-industry-from-10-60-arnav-jha
Jones, N. (2022). 5 Ways Ransomware Can Negatively Impact Your Business. 
https://www.egnyte.com/blog/post/5-ways-ransomware-can-negatively-impact￾your-business
Jordan, J. M. (2019). The Czech Play That Gave Us the Word ‘Robot’. https://
thereader.mitpress.mit.edu/origin-word-robot-rur/
Kadir, B., Broberg, O., & Conceição, C. (2019). Current Research and Future 
Perspectives on Human Factors and Ergonomics in Industry 4.0. Computers & 
Industrial Engineering, 137, 106004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2019.106004438 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Khan, M., Haleem, A., & Javaid, M. (2023). Changes and improvements in Industry 5.0: 
A strategic approach to overcome the challenges of Industry 4.0. Green Technologies 
and Sustainability, 1(2), 100020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.grets.2023.100020
Knudsen, E. S., Lien, L. B., Timmermans, B., Belik, I., & Pandey, S. (2021). Stability 
in turbulent times? The effect of digitalization on the sustainability of competitive 
advantage. Journal of Business Research, 128, 360–369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jbusres.2021.02.008
Komiyama, H., & Yamada, K. (2018). New Vision 2050: A Platinum Society. https://
doi.org/10.1007/978-4-431-56623-6
Kranz, G., & Christensen, G. (2022). What is 6G? Overview of 6G networks & 
technology. https://www.techtarget.com/searchnetworking/definition/6G
Kumar, P., Mangal, P., Ahmed, S., Al-Absi, A., & Kumar, P. (2021a). Lecture Notes 
in Networks and Systems 149 Proceedings of International Conference on Smart 
Computing and Cyber Security Strategic Foresight, Security Challenges and 
Innovation (SMARTCYBER 2020). http://www.springer.com/series/15179
Kumar, R. (2019). Sustainable Supply Chain Management in the Era of Digitialization
(pp. 446–460). https://doi.org/10.4018/978-1-5225-8933-4.ch021
Kumar, R., Gupta, P., Singh, S., & Jain, D. (2021b). Human Empowerment by 
Industry 5.0 in Digital Era: Analysis of Enablers. Lecture Notes in Mechanical 
Engineering, 401–410. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-33-4320-7_36
Leng, J., Sha, W., Wang, B., Zheng, P., Zhuang, C., Liu, Q., Wuest, T., Mourtzis, D., & 
Wang, L. (2022). Industry 5.0: Prospect and retrospect. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 65, 279–295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2022.09.017
Li, X., Shang, J., & Wang, Z. (2017). Intelligent materials: A review of applications 
in 4D printing. Assembly Automation, 37(2), 170–185. https://doi.org/10.1108/
AA-11-2015-093
Liu, Q., Leng, J., Yan, D., Zhang, D., Wei, L., Yu, A., Zhao, R., Zhang, H., & Chen, 
X. (2021). Digital twin-based designing of the configuration, motion, control, 
and optimization model of a flow-type smart manufacturing system. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 58, 52–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2020.04.012
Longo, F., Padovano, A., & Umbrello, S. (2020). Value-oriented and ethical technol￾ogy engineering in industry 5.0: A human-centric perspective for the design of the 
factory of the future. Applied Sciences (Switzerland), 10(12), 1–25. https://doi.
org/10.3390/APP10124182
Lysak, A. (2023). Blockchain and its Impact on Business Operations. https://planet
compliance.com/blockchain-and-its-impact-on-business-operations/
Maddikunta, P. K. R., Pham, Q. V., B, P., Deepa, N., Dev, K., Gadekallu, T. R., Ruby, 
R., & Liyanage, M. (2022). Industry 5.0: A survey on enabling technologies and 
potential applications. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 26(August 
2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2021.100257
Marmolejo-Saucedo, J. A., Hurtado-Hernandez, M., & Suarez-Valdes, R. (2020). 
Digital Twins in Supply Chain Management: A Brief Literature Review. Advances 
in Intelligent Systems and Computing, 1072, 653–661. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-33585-4_63
Marr, B. (2023). 6G Is Coming: What Will Be The Business Impact? https://
www.forbes.com/sites/bernardmarr/2023/03/17/6g-is-coming-what-will-be-the￾business-impact/?sh=7efa0c242f10
Matthews, D. (2015). Industry 4.0: smart machines are new industrial revolution. https://
www.raconteur.net/industry-4-0-smart-machines-are-new-industrial-revolution/Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 439
Mekid, S., Schlegel, T., Aspragathos, N., & Teti, R. (2007). Foresight formulation in 
innovative production, automation and control systems. Foresight, 9(5), 35–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/14636680710821089
Miley, J. (2018). 11 Times AI Beat Humans at Games, Art, Law and Everything in Between. 
https://interestingengineering.com/innovation/11-times-ai-beat-humans-at-games￾art-law-and-everything-in-between
Mistry, P. (2023). Industrial Internet of things (IIoT) and Industry 4.0: Are you 
ready for it? https://radixweb.com/blog/what-is-industry-4-0
Montini, E., Cutrona, V., Bonomi, N., Landolfi, G., Bettoni, A., Rocco, P., & 
Carpanzano, E. (2022). An IIoT Platform For Human-Aware Factory Digital Twins. 
Procedia CIRP, 107, 661–667. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2022.05.042
Morgan-Thomas, A., Dessart, L., & Veloutsou, C. (2020). Digital ecosystem and 
consumer engagement: a socio-technical perspective author details digital ecosys￾tem and consumer engagement: a socio-technical perspective digital ecosystem 
and consumer engagement: a socio-technical perspective.
Moya, A., Bastida, L., Aguirrezabal, P., Pantano, M., & Abril-Jiménez, P. (2023). 
Augmented Reality for Supporting Workers in Human–Robot Collaboration. 
Multimodal Technologies and Interaction, 7(4). https://doi.org/10.3390/mti7040040
Munir, S., Stankovic, J., Lin, S., Stankovic, J. A., & Liang, C.-J. M. (2013). Cyber 
Physical System Challenges for Human-in-the-Loop Control Cognitive Assistant 
Systems for Emergency Response View project breadcrumb system View project 
Cyber Physical System Challenges for Human-in-the-Loop Control. https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/259933586
Mushtaq, A., & Haq, I. U. (2019, May 9). Implications of blockchain in industry 
4.O. 2019 International Conference on Engineering and Emerging Technologies, 
ICEET 2019. https://doi.org/10.1109/CEET1.2019.8711819
Nahavandi, S. (2019). Industry 5.0-a human-centric solution. Sustainability 
(Switzerland), 11(16). https://doi.org/10.3390/su11164371
Nayyar, A., & Kumar, A. (2020). A Roadmap to Industry 4.0: Smart Production, 
Sharp Business and Sustainable Development (A. Nayyar & A. Kumar, Eds.). 
Springer International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14544-6
NPR Staff. (2016). A “New” Rembrandt: From The Frontiers Of AI And Not The Artist’s 
Atelier. https://www.npr.org/sections/alltechconsidered/2016/04/06/473265273/
a-new-rembrandt-from-the-frontiers-of-ai-and-not-the-artists-atelier
Omoyiola, B. O. (2022). The social implications, risks, challenges and opportu￾nities of big data. Emerald Open Research, 4, 23. https://doi.org/10.35241/
emeraldopenres.14646.1
Palvia, P., Ghosh, J., Jacks, T., & Serenko, A. (2021). Information technology issues 
and challenges of the globe: the world IT project. Information and Management, 
58(8). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2021.103545
Pan, Y., & Zhang, L. (2021). A BIM-data mining integrated digital twin framework 
for advanced project management. Automation in Construction, 124, 103564. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2021.103564
Pathak, P. (2019). Fifth revolution: applied AI and human intelligence with cyber 
physical systems. In International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology 
(IJEAT) (Issue 3). https://www.researchgate.net/publication/331966435
Pei, E., Loh, G. H., Harrison, D., De, H., Almeida, A., Domingo, M., Verona, M., 
& Paz, R. (2017). A Study of 4D Printing and Functionally Graded Additive 
Manufacturing.440 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
Pereira, A. (2019). What are smart machines? https://www.careerinstem.com/
what-are-smart-machines/
Prabadevi, B., Deepa, N., Pham, Q. V., Nguyen, D. C., Maddikunta, P. K. R., Reddy, 
T., Pathirana, P. N., & Dobre, O. (2021). Toward Blockchain for Edge-of-Things: 
A New Paradigm, Opportunities, and Future Directions. https://doi.org/10.1109/
IOTM.0001.2000191
Pramanik, P. K. D., Mukherjee, B., Pal, S., Upadhyaya, B. K., & Dutta, S. (2020). 
Ubiquitous Manufacturing in the Age of Industry 4.0: A State-of-the-Art Primer. 
In Advances in Science, Technology and Innovation (pp. 73–112). Springer Nature. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-14544-6_5
Pratt, M. K. (2017). Smart machines. https://www.techtarget.com/searchcio/definition/
smart-machines
Prescient Technologies. (2022). Benefits of Industry 4.0. https://www.pre-scient.com/
knowledge-center/industry-4-0/benefits-of-industry-4-0.html
Proofpoint. (2023). What Is Intellectual Property Theft? https://www.proofpoint.
com/us/threat-reference/intellectual-property-theft
Rachel. (2018). 7 Advantages of Robots in the Workplace. https://www.robotics
tomorrow.com/story/2018/08/7-advantages-of-robots-in-the-workplace/12342/
Raja Santhi, A., & Muthuswamy, P. (2022). Influence of Blockchain Technology in 
Manufacturing Supply Chain and Logistics. In Logistics (Vol. 6, Issue 1). MDPI. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/logistics6010015
Raja Santhi, A., & Muthuswamy, P. (2023). Industry 5.0 or industry 4.0S? 
Introduction to industry 4.0 and a peek into the prospective industry 5.0 tech￾nologies. International Journal on Interactive Design and Manufacturing. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s12008-023-01217-8
Rajatheva, N., Atzeni, I., Bjornson, E., Bourdoux, A., Buzzi, S., Dore, J.-B., Erkucuk, 
S., Fuentes, M., Guan, K., Hu, Y., Huang, X., Hulkkonen, J., Jornet, J. M., Katz, 
M., Nilsson, R., Panayirci, E., Rabie, K., Rajapaksha, N., Salehi, M., … Xu, W. 
(2020). White Paper on Broadband Connectivity in 6G. http://arxiv.org/abs/2004.
14247
Reddy, P. K., Pham, V. Q., & Deepa, N. (2021). Industry 5.0: A Survey on Enabling 
Technologies and Potential Applications Industry 5.0: A Survey on Enabling Tech￾nologies and Potential Applications. July. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2021.100257
Reinsel, D., Gantz, J., & Rydning, J. (2018). The Digitization of the World From 
Edge to Core.
Resende, A., Cerqueira, S., Barbosa, J., Damasio, E., Pombeiro, A., Silva, A., & 
Santos, C. (2021). Ergowear: An ambulatory, non-intrusive, and interoperable 
system towards a Human-Aware Human-robot Collaborative framework. 2021 
IEEE International Conference on Autonomous Robot Systems and Competitions, 
ICARSC 2021, 56–61. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICARSC52212.2021.9429796
Romero, D., & Stahre, J. (2021). Towards the Resilient Operator 5.0: The Future 
of Work in Smart Resilient Manufacturing Systems. Procedia CIRP, 104, 1089–
1094. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2021.11.183
Romero, D., Stahre, J., Wuest, T., Noran, O., Bernus, P., Fast-Berglund, Å., & Gorecky, 
D. (2016a). Towards An Operator 4.0 Typology: A Human-Centric Perspective 
On The Fourth Industrial Revolution Technologies. 29–31.
Romero, D., Stahre, J., Wuest, T., Noran, O., Bernus, P., Fast-Berglund, Å., & 
Gorecky, D. (2016c). Towards an Operator 4.0 Typology: A Human-Centric 
Perspective on the Fourth Industrial Revolution Technologies Demonstrating and Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 441
testing smart digitalisation for sustainable human-centred automation in produc￾tion View project Additive Manufacturing: Sensors and Electronics Integration 
for 3D printed Structural Electronics View project TOWARDS AN OPERATOR 
4.0 TYPOLOGY: A HUMAN-CENTRIC PERSPECTIVE ON THE FOURTH 
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION TECHNOLOGIES. 29–31. https://www.
researchgate.net/publication/309609488
Sanchez, M., Exposito, E., & Aguilar, J. (2020). Autonomic Computing in 
Manufacturing Process Coordination in Industry 4.0 Context. https://www.
elsevier.com/open-access/userlicense/1.0/
Sharp, N. (2021). Industry 5.0 and the future of sustainable manufacturing. https://
www.escatec.com/blog/industry-5.0-and-the-future-of-sustainable-manufacturing
Shweta Joglekar, Sachin Kadam, Sonali Dharmadhikari, & Bharati Vidyapeeth. 
(2023). Industry 5.0: Analysis, Applications And Prognosis.
Simchenko, N. A., Tsohla, S. Y., & Chyvatkin, P. P. (2019). IoT & Digital Twins 
Concept Integration Effects on Supply Chain Strategy: Challenges and Effects. In 
Int. J Sup. Chain. Mgt (Vol. 8, Issue 6). http://excelingtech.co.uk/
Simpson, A. (2022). What is Intellectual Property (IP) Theft? https://www.code42.
com/blog/what-is-intellectual-property-theft/
Srushti Shah. (2022). Impact of Cloud computing in Different Industries. https://www.
business2community.com/cloud-computing/impact-of-cloud-computing-in-different￾industries-02451160
Statista. (2023a). Annual number of ransomware attacks worldwide from 2017 to 2022. 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/494947/ransomware-attacks-per-year-worldwide/
Statista. (2023b). Percentage of organizations victimized by ransomware attacks world￾wide from 2018 to 2022. https://www.statista.com/statistics/204457/businesses￾ransomware-attack-rate/
Stefanini. (2022). What Is Industry 5.0? How Shifting Objectives Enables Transfor￾mation. https://stefanini.com/en/insights/news/what-is-industry-50-how-shifting￾objectives-enables-transformation
Strinati, E. C., Barbarossa, S., Gonzalez-Jimenez, J. L., Kténas, D., Cassiau, N., & 
Dehos, C. (2019). 6G: The Next Frontier. http://arxiv.org/abs/1901.03239
Sydorenko, I. (2021). Big Data and Its Business Impacts: Benefits, Challenges, and 
Use Cases. https://labelyourdata.com/articles/big-data-business-impact
Tankt, D. W., & Hopfieldt, J. J. (1987). Neural computation by concentrating infor￾mation in time (neural network/connectionist/speech recognition/parallel pro￾cesing) (Vol. 84). https://www.pnas.org
Tao, F., Zhang, L., Venkatesh, V. C., Luo, Y., & Cheng, Y. (2011). Cloud manufactur￾ing: A computing and service-oriented manufacturing model. Proceedings of the 
Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture, 
225(10), 1969–1976. https://doi.org/10.1177/0954405411405575
Tariq, F., Member, S., Khandaker, M. R., Wong, K.-K., Imran, M. A., Bennis, M., & 
Debbah, M. (2020). A Speculative Study on 6G (Vol. 27, Issue 4).
Tehrani, B. M., Wang, J., & Wang, C. (2019, May). Review of Human-in-the-Loop 
Cyber-Physical Systems (HiLCPS): The Current Status from Human Perspective. 
https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784482438.060
Thales. (2023). What is Intellectual Property Theft & Why it Matters. https://cpl.
thalesgroup.com/software-monetization/what-is-intellectual-property-theft
The History of Robotics. (2021). https://www.thomasnet.com/articles/automation￾electronics/history-of-robotics/442 Modern Technologies and Tools Supporting the Development of Industry 5.0
The WIRED Guide to Robots. (2020). https://www.wired.com/story/wired-guide-to￾robots/
TP&P Technology. (2021). The Impact Of Big Data On Businesses, Workforce, and 
Society. https://www.tpptechnology.com/blog/the-impact-of-big-data-on-businesses￾workforce-and-society/
Tucci, L., & Needle, D. (2023). What is the metaverse? An explanation and in-depth 
guide. https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/feature/The-metaverse-explained-Every
thing-you-need-to-know
Tuptuk, N., & Hailes, S. (2018). Security of smart manufacturing systems. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 47, 93–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2018.04.007
TWI. (2023). What is Industry 5.0? (Top 5 Things You Need To Know). https://
www.twi-global.com/technical-knowledge/faqs/industry-5-0#Evolutionofthe
IndustrialRevolutionIndustry10to50
Vapnik, V. N. (1999). An Overview of Statistical Learning Theory. In IEEE transac￾tions on neural networks (Vol. 10, Issue 5).
Verma, A., Bhattacharya, P., Madhani, N., Trivedi, C., Bhushan, B., Tanwar, S., 
Sharma, G., Bokoro, P. N., & Sharma, R. (2022). Blockchain for Industry 5.0: 
Vision, Opportunities, Key Enablers, and Future Directions. IEEE Access, 10, 
69160–69199. https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3186892
Vinitha, K., Ambrose Prabhu, R., Bhaskar, R., & Hariharan, R. (2020). Review on 
industrial mathematics and materials at Industry 1.0 to Industry 4.0. Materials 
Today: Proceedings, 33(xxxx), 3956–3960. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.
06.331
Viriyasitavat, W., & Hoonsopon, D. (2019). Blockchain characteristics and consen￾sus in modern business processes. Journal of Industrial Information Integration, 
13, 32–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jii.2018.07.004
Wang, B., Tao, F., Fang, X., Liu, C., Liu, Y., & Freiheit, T. (2021). Smart manufac￾turing and intelligent manufacturing: A comparative review. In Engineering (Vol. 
7, Issue 6, pp. 738–757). Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2020.07.017
Wang, B., Zheng, P., Yin, Y., Shih, A., & Wang, L. (2022a). Toward human-centric 
smart manufacturing: A human-cyber-physical systems (HCPS) perspective. 
Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 63, 471–490. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.
2022.05.005
Wang, B., Zhou, H., Yang, G., Li, X., & Yang, H. (2022b). Human Digital Twin (HDT) 
Driven Human-Cyber-Physical Systems: Key Technologies and Applications. 
Chinese Journal of Mechanical Engineering (English Edition), 35(1). https://doi.
org/10.1186/s10033-022-00680-w
Wang, J., Zhao, R., Wang, D., Yan, R., Mao, K., & Shen, F. (2017). Machine health 
monitoring using local feature-based gated recurrent unit networks. IEEE 
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 65(2), 1539–1548. https://doi.org/10.1109/
TIE.2017.2733438
Wesley Chai, S. J. B. (2023). Cloud computing. https://www.techtarget.com/
searchcloudcomputing/definition/cloud-computing
Williams, B. (1991). An Introduction to Robotics in Catalonia. Catalònia, 23, 28–29.
Woboton. (2023). 5 key benefits of Industry 4.0 for factories. https://woboton.
com/5-key-benefits-of-industry-40-for-factories/
Woodward, M. (2023). Artificial Intelligence Statistics For 2023. https://www.search
logistics.com/learn/statistics/artificial-intelligence-statistics/Readiness of enterprises to implement Industry 5.0 443
Wu, G., Feder, A., Cohen, H., Kim, J. J., Calderon, S., Charney, D. S., & Mathé, A. A.
(2013). Understanding resilience. In Frontiers in Behavioral Neuroscience (Issue 
January 2013). https://doi.org/10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00010
Xu, L. Da, Lu, Y., & Li, L. (2021). Embedding Blockchain Technology into IoT for 
Security: A Survey. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 8(13), 10452–10473. https://
doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2021.3060508
Yang, H., Alphones, A., Xiong, Z., Niyato, D., Zhao, J., & Wu, K. (2020). Artificial￾Intelligence-Enabled Intelligent 6G Networks. IEEE Network, 34(6), 272–280. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MNET.011.2000195
Yücebalkan, B. (2020). Endüstri 4.0’dan endüstri 5.0’a geçiş sürecine genel bakiş. 
IEDSR Association, 5(9), 241–250. https://doi.org/10.46872/pj.181
Zhang, Y., Ren, S., Liu, Y., Sakao, T., & Huisingh, D. (2017). A framework for Big 
Data driven product lifecycle management. Journal of Cleaner Production, 159. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.04.172
Zhaohao Sun. (2021). Intelligent Analytics with Advanced Multi-industry 
Applications. IGI Global.
Zheng, P., Xu, X., Yu, S., & Liu, C. (2017). Personalized product configuration 
framework in an adaptable open architecture product platform. Journal of 
Manufacturing Systems, 43, 422–435. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmsy.2017.03.010
Zhou, J., Li, P., Zhou, Y., Wang, B., Zang, J., & Meng, L. (2018). Toward New￾Generation Intelligent Manufacturing. In Engineering (Vol. 4, Issue 1, pp. 11–20). 
Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2018.01.002
Zicari, R. V. (2013). 3 Big Data: Challenges and Opportunities.444
Index
Pages in italics refer to figures and pages in bold refer to tables.
Aaltonen, I., 6
Acemoglu, D., 426
active learning approach, 423
Adams, A. C., 222
adaptability, 12, 128
ADDMAN, 54
Adel, A., 120, 386, 412
Advanced Persistence Threats (APT), 428
aerospace industry, 124
affordable and clean energy (SDG7), 
270, 399
agency theory, 344, 359
Agenda for Sustainable Development 
(2030), 220
Age of Augmentation, 43
agriculture
AI in, 60–61
cobots in, 389
Ahlemann, F., 90
AHP, see analytic hierarchy process
AI, see artificial intelligence
AIoT, see Artificial Intelligence of 
Things
Alexa Voice Assistant, 62
Al Faruqi, U., 126
Alves, J., 112
Amazon, 62
analytic hierarchy process (AHP)
data collection, 17
defined, 15–16
estimations in, 17–19, 19
factors and parameters for, 20, 20
local ranking, 31–32, 33
pairwise comparisons matrix
average responses of, 21, 22, 25, 
28
normalized, 21, 23, 26, 29
preference response scale, 16, 16
reliability test matrix for, 21, 24, 
27, 30
survey design, 16–17
Andiç, E., 323
Apple, 410
AR, see augmented reality
ARContent tool, 431
artificial intelligence (AI), 2, 12, 41–42, 
226, 267, 409, 413
agriculture, 60–61
algorithms, 274, 276
in cobots, 161–162, 171, 416
collect and evaluate cloud data, 420
customer service, 59
in digital twins, 44
education, 62–63
entertainment industry, 64–65
environmental challenges, 64
finance, 59–60
futuristic human-centric assembly, 
57–59, 58
healthcare, 54–55
in human resource management, 
63–64
in Industry 4.0, 54, 427
law and legal services, 65
with machine learning, 42
manufacturing industry, 56–57
opportunities, for start-ups and 
entrepreneurs, 66
retail and supply chain management, 
61–62
security, 64
smart hospital, 55–56Index 445
space exploration, 65
training quality, 424
transportation, 60
uses, in factories, 54
Artificial Intelligence of Things (AIoT), 
281
Arya, R., 124
Aslam, F., 386
assembly cobots, 152, 153
assembly task, cobot-human 
collaboration of, 166, 166
Association of Certified Fraud 
Examiners (ACFE), 211
attention to detail, in co-bot workspace, 
13
Audit and Risk Committee (ARC), 343
augmented reality (AR), 58, 282, 417, 
431
augmented robot, 57–58
authentication, 286
automation, 2, 12, 113, 115, 259
opportunities of Industry 5.0, 65–66
political economy of, 50
skill development, 67
work polarization, 67
automotive industry, 124, 179
automotive sector, 184
autonomous manufacturing systems, 
272
Average Lambda, 21
Baker, J., 89
Bakir, A., 126
Bartlett’s test, 83
Bednar, P. M., 181
Big Data, 52–53, 284, 413–414
energy management, 63
environmental challenges, 64
financial institutions, 59
healthcare, 55
law and legal services, 65
manufacturing industry, 56
opportunities, for start-ups and 
entrepreneurs, 66
retailers, 61
transportation, 60
bio-economy, 5
biologization, principle of, 5
Bi, Z. M., 6, 416
blockchain technology, 53, 227–228, 
281, 310, 419–420
based voting systems, 64
energy management, 63
in financial sector, 60
healthcare, 55
law and legal services, 65
manufacturing industry, 56
retailers, 61
Bloomberg, 4
BMW, 54, 57
BMW AI assistant, 57
board of directors (BOD), 348, 352, 
355, 359
Boeing, 410
Borovik, S. Y., 112
brain robotic, 58
Bras, B., 315
Bryndin, E., 386
Buchner, R., 7
Business 5.0 reference model, 397
business skills, 130–131
Cakmakci, M., 126
Calitz, A. P., 6
cannibalization, 303
Capek, Karel, 412
Capital Market Authority (CMA), 
343–344, 356–357
Carayannis, E. G., 122, 124
Caterpillar, 324
CB-SEM approach, 90
CFA, see confirmatory factor analysis
chatbot, 62
Chin, S. T. S., 126
Chung, S. L., 315
Churchill, G., 79, 81, 96
circular supply chain management 
(CSCM), 322
class-based technological change 
(CBTC), 49
Clawdite, 431
clean water and sanitation (SDG6), 
270, 398–399
climate action (SDG13), 270
closed-loop supply chain (CLSC), 321, 
321–323
cloud computing, 51–52, 415
CLSC, see closed-loop supply chain
CMA, see Capital Market Authority
cobots, see collaborative robots (cobots)
co-bot workspace
analytic hierarchy process
data collection, 17
defined, 15–16446 Index
estimations in, 17–19, 19
preference response scale, 16, 16
survey design, 16–17
demographic profile, 19, 19–20
hierarchical model, development of, 
20–21
implications and limitations, 33–34
literature review, 3–5
employee and organizational 
readiness, 9–15, 12, 16
human-robot collaboration, 
issues in, 7–9
in manufacturing industries, 6–7
objectives of, 3
organization of, 3
overview of, 1–2
primary research, 2–3
cognitive computing, 241, 282
cognitive system, 58
collaboration of humans and robots 
(HRC), see human-robot 
collaboration
collaborative intelligence (co￾intelligence), 58
collaborative robots (cobots), 52, 67, 
280–281, 283, 415–416
applications of, 388–389, 390
artificial intelligence methods in, 
161–162
characteristics/features of, 155, 156
collaborative workforce, 263–264
defined, 149
development of, 149
digital twin technology, 159–160
evolution of, 150, 151, 152
generations, timeline of, 151
generic architecture of, 162–163, 
163
human and machine work defects, 
155–156
human-centered design, 157–159, 
158
human-machine cooperation and, 
171–172
in Industry 5.0
benefits and drawbacks, 168, 169
ethical and legal issues of, 
170–171
real-time operation of, 170
work support and productivity, 
168–170
integrating with human workers, 157
integration, in production process, 
163–165, 164
potential benefits of, 150
real-life cobot-human collaboration
of assembly task, 166, 166
operation scenario of, 165–166
of painting-coating task, 167, 
167–168
types and their applications, 152, 
153–154, 155
user interface design of, 159, 160
collaborative skills, 125, 129–130, 132, 
134
collaborative workforce, advantages of, 
263–265
Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the 
Treadway (COSO), 341, 355
communication skill, 129, 132, 134
in co-bot workspace, 13
competitive profile matrix, 310
complementarity, 155
complex system integration, 14
comprehensive approach, 313
computer-based technology, 49
computer vision algorithms, 161
confirmatory factor analysis (CFA), 83, 
96
conflict resolution, 130
consistency index (CI), 21
consistency ratio (CR), 17–19, 21
construction industry, 124
consumer-centricity, 131
content analysis, 190
continuous learning, 126
control environment, 341–342
conventional industrial robots, 263
cooperative robots (cobots), 394
coordinators of robots, 108, 111
Corbin, J. M., 191
core values, of Industry 5.0, 279
corporate governance, 343
Corporate Governance 5.0, 290
Corporate Social Obligation, 382
corporate social responsibility (CSR), 
120, 179, 309, 343, 347, 
356–357
corporate sustainability, 348
COSO, see Committee of Sponsoring 
Organizations of the 
Treadway
costs of implementation, 14Index 447
COVID-19 pandemic, 212, 220, 222, 
277, 311
CPPS, see cyber-physical production 
system
CPS, see cyber-physical system (CPS)
craftsmanship, loss of, 426
creative intelligence, 49
critical thinking skills, 126–127
Cronbach’s α value, 81, 85
Cross-Impact Matrix Multiplication 
Applied to Classification 
(MICMAC), 310, 322
CSCM, see circular supply chain 
management
CSR, see corporate social responsibility
cultural collaboration, 268
cultural competence, 130
customer-centric approach, 121, 126
customer obsession, 268
customer service, AI in, 59
customisation, of product, 272
cutting-edge technologies, 114, 179, 
184, 260, 276
cyber-physical cognitive systems, 268
cyber-physical production system 
(CPPS), 42
cyber-physical system (CPS), 45–46, 46, 
107, 115, 183, 261, 277
cybersecurity, 14–15, 64
cybersecurity readiness, 85
Dahlan, M., 126
Das, S., 312
data analysis, 130
human-centric approach, 191, 192, 
193–194, 196
resilience, 193–195, 196
sustainability, 195, 196–197
data collection, 189–190, 190
data management, 15
data normalization, 326
Da Vinci cobots, 416
decent work and economic growth 
(SDG8), 239, 270, 399
deep learning algorithms, 161
Defee, C.C., 322
Dell, 323–324
Deloitte analysis, on skills gaps, 263
demand forecasting, 61
Demir, K. A., 7
Design Anywhere and Manufacture 
Anywhere (DAMA), 415
Design for Environment, 325
Deutsch, J., 414
DeVellis, R. F., 80–81, 96
digital economy, 88
digital factory, 44
digitalization, 2, 260, 272, 390, 392
digital literacy, 130
digital services, 401
digital transformation, 277
digital twins (DTs), 44, 58, 159–160, 
181, 281, 430–431
digitization, of internal audit, 214–215
discriminant validity, hypothesized 
model, 90, 93
distributed ledger technologies (DLTs), 
419
diversity, human-centricity, 198
drone technology, 60
eco-design, 315–316
economic growth and development, 210
Economy 5.0 pattern, 393
ecosystem actor readiness, 84
edge computing, 281–282, 420
EDM theory, see ethical decision￾making (EDM) theory
education
AI in, 62–63
of cobots, 154, 155, 172, 389
eigenvalues, 18, 21
electronics industry, 124
emissions management, internal audit, 
237, 354
emotional intelligence, 127, 186, 200
empathy, 130
employee empowerment, 198
employee readiness
pairwise comparisons matrix
average responses of, 21, 22, 25, 
28
normalized, 21, 23, 26, 29
reliability test matrix, 21, 24, 27, 30
employees’ perceptions, of co-bots, 
9–10
energy industry, 124
energy management
AI in, 63
internal audit, 237, 353
enterprise agility, 267–268
Enterprise Resource Planning-Internet 
of Things (ERP-IoT) systems, 
311448 Index
entertainment industry, AI in, 64–65
entrepreneurship, 131
environmental challenges, 64
environmental factors
in ESG, 341, 345–346, 350
measurement scale for, 89, 92
structural characteristics of, 95–97
environmental, social, and governance 
(ESG), 290, 339
audit maturity, 370, 370
climate risk, 342
company’s vision, mission, and 
objectives/goals, 367, 367
considerations, 365–366, 366
data collection and reporting, 366, 
366
environmental factor, 341, 345–346
governance factor, 342–343, 345, 
348
impacting area of business by, 
363–364, 364
and Industry 5.0, 349
environmental transformation 
in, 350
governance transformation in, 351
social transformation in, 350
initiatives, 340, 349
internal audit, see internal audit
key performance indicators for, 362, 
362
negatively impacting their company, 
364–365, 365
in Oman, 356–358
organizational sustainability, 345
program
formal documented, 361, 361
maturity level of, 361–362, 362
regulatory requirements for, 340
social factor, 341–342, 345, 347
survey, 362–363, 363
Environment Authority (EA), 357
ESG, see environmental, social, and 
governance
Espina-Romero, L., 78
ethical concerns, 132, 134
ethical decision-making (EDM) theory, 
215–216, 244–245
ethics and social responsibility, 
126–127, 171
EU Parliament report, 418
European Commission, 4–5, 187, 
264–265
European Economic and Social 
Committee, 78
executive management (EM), 348
exploratory factor analysis (EFA), 83, 
84–85, 96
extended reality technologies, 282
external auditors, fines on, 233, 233
familiar logistics, 303
FANUC, 54
Fatima, Z., 265
Fayol, H., 180
FedEx, 325
Fifth Industrial Revolution, see Industry 
5.0 (I5.0)
Fifth Science and Technology Basic 
Plan, 278
finance domain, AI in, 59–60
financial loss, 211, 211
financial readiness, 85
First Industrial Revolution, 41, 43, 
112–113, 113, 115, 
224, 259
activities in manufacturing facilities, 
262
evolution of, 182
history of, 411–412
vs. Industry 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0, 
115, 116
SDGs, 229
Fleischer, M., 77
Fliedner, G., 279
fog computing, 281–282
food and beverage industry, 124
Food Supply Chain (FSC), 310
Ford Motor Company, 325
Fornell, C., 90
Fourth Industrial Revolution, 
see Industry 4.0 (I4.0)
Fourth Modern Industrial Revolution, 
381
Foxconn Intelligent Robotics Initiative, 
57
fraud
in internal audit, 232–233, 233
prevention, 211, 212
Frey, C. B., 49
GAMS software program, 327
gender equality (SDG5), 269, 398
General Electric (GE), 56
generative AI, 54Index 449
German Federal Ministry for Economic 
Affairs and Energy, 386
Ghobakhloo, M., 112
Gide, E., 88
goal programming (GP) approach, 327
“Go Green” initiatives, 212
Gola, A, 121
good health and wellbeing (SDG3), 
269, 398
Gorodetsky, V., 385
Gotfredsen, S., 262, 274–275
governance factor, in ESG, 342–343, 
345, 348, 351
government laws, 88
green drivers, 316
green logistics, 302–303
green manufacturing, 269
green production, 4
green supply chain management 
(GSCM), 301, 303
advantages of, 314, 315
application, challenges and barriers 
to, 316–318
climate change, 313
in commercial and manufacturing 
sectors, 306
defined, 312
eco-design, 315–316
green drivers, 316
importance of, 313–314, 314
to manufacturing and 
remanufacturing, 314–315
procedures, 307, 308
Greif, T., 417
grounded theory technique, 188
Grybauskas, A., 273
GSCM, see green supply chain 
management
Guile, D., 125
Gupta, B. B., 427
Ha, D. T., 81
Hair, J. F., 90
Haleem, A., 126
healthcare
artificial intelligence in, 54–55
cobots in, 154, 155, 389
industry, 124
Hekim, N., 78, 273
Hermann, M., 272
hierarchical model, development of, 
20–21
H&M, 62
Hong, P., 327
Hoonsopon, D., 419
Hopfieldt, J. J., 414
Hopwood, B., 219
HRC, see human-robot collaboration
Hsu, C.-C., 321
Hugos, M., 307–308
human-centric approach, 51, 279, 401
assembly, in future factories, 57–59, 
58
of cobots, 157–159, 158, 172
diversity and inclusion, 198
employee empowerment, 198
manager competencies, 185–186, 
191, 192, 193–194, 196
skill development and lifelong 
learning, 199
work-life balance, 198–199
human-centric system (HCS), 46, 47
human-cyber-physical system (HCPS), 
430
human factors, in Industry 5.0, 
429–430
human-focused industrial sector, 78
human-machine collaboration, see 
human-robot collaboration
human-machine interface (HMI), 15, 
163
human productivity, 283–284
human resources, 68
AI tools in, 63–64
readiness, 84
human-robot collaboration (HRC), 
108, 117, 119, 121, 171, 211, 
282, 426
and cobots, 171–172
communication and coordination, 
138–139
designing effective teams, 
137–138
in Industry 5.0, 96, 136–137, 137
risks and safety in, 139–140
human-robot co-working, 5, 7–9, 68, 
96
human skills, 184
human workers, 422–424
integrating cobots with, 157
of assembly task, 166, 166
operation scenario of, 165–166
of painting-coating task, 167, 
167–168450 Index
Hung, R. Y.Y., 180
hypothesized model, 86–90, 87, 91–93, 
93
Iannotta, M., 186
ICT, see information communication 
technology
IIA, see Institute of Internal Auditors
IIoT, see Industrial Internet of Things
IIRC, see International Integrated 
Reporting Council
inclusion, human-centricity, 198
Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), 
182–184, 430–431
Industrial Upcycling, 78
Industry 1.0, see First Industrial 
Revolution
Industry 2.0, see Second Industrial 
Revolution
Industry 3.0, see Third Industrial 
Revolution
Industry 4.0 (I4.0), 41, 75, 107, 225
AI and its applications in, 54
on automation, 107–108
characteristics, 261
components of, 272
CPPS, 42
cutting-edge technologies, 179
cyber-physical system, 183
defined, 179
degree of automation, 48
digital factory, 44
digitalization and AI-driven 
technologies, 42–43
efficiency of enterprises, 409
evolution of, 113, 114
focus on productivity, 78
history of, 411–412
human-augmented intelligence, 114
in industrial paradigm, 77
vs. Industry 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, and 5.0, 
115, 116
to Industry 5.0, 265–267, 268, 
275–277
vs. Industry 5.0, 115, 117, 117, 
277–278, 382–384
integration, characteristics of, 272
internal productivity mechanism, 261
mass customization, 42
methodology of, 381–382
neoliberal capitalism models, 262
pillar technologies, 259
SDGs, 230
small-and medium-sized businesses, 
260
Society 5.0, 286–287
supply chain exchange, components 
of, 272
sustainable manufacturing, 262
technology developments, 271–272
Industry 5.0 (I5.0)
artificial intelligence, 226, 274
automotive sector and technologies 
in, 184
benefits and burdens, 387
blockchain technology, 227–228
career development and growth in, 
125, 125–127
challenges of, 68–70, 131–132, 
285–286
characteristics of, 108, 119, 119
agility and flexibility, 120–121
customer-centric approach, 121
customisation and flexibility, 119
human-machine collaboration, 
119, 121
innovative technologies, 120, 122
knowledge-intensive work, 121
social responsibility, 120, 122
sustainability, 119–120, 122
upskilling and reskilling, 120
cornerstone of, 267–269
definitions of, 78, 110–112, 179
in developed countries, 386
education and training programmes, 
109
effect on employees, 122–123, 123
employment opportunities, 108–109
evolution and transition, from 1.0 to 
5.0, 383
evolution of, 43–45, 43
expected benefits from, 89, 92
factors for, 50, 50
5W and H analysis table, for 
employment in, 117, 118
future research directions, 431–433
futuristic applications of, 388
growth of, 181
history of, 412, 412
humans and machines collaboration 
of, 410
impact on employment, in 
prominent industries, 124, 
124–125Index 451
implications of, 385–386
vs. Industry 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 115, 
116
vs. Industry 4.0, 115, 117, 117, 
277–278, 382–384
Industry 4.0 to, 265–267, 268, 
275–277
Internet of Things, 227
machine learning, 229
management tasks, 180
man-machine cooperation for, 
262–263
methodological limitations, 289
model diagram, 51
new materials and nanotechnology, 
228–229
opportunities of, 65–66
potential technologies and 
applications, 280, 280–282
production, 260–261, 274
purpose of, 409
remonstrance under, 67
robot coordinators, 108
robotics and automation, 226–227
scope of, 384
skills for employees in, 127, 128
business skills, 130–131
interpersonal skills, 129–130
personal skills, 128–129
socio-technical viewpoint, 180
strategies, 133–136, 136
technology enablers of, 51–53
in third-world countries, 386–387
transition/evolution of Industry 1.0 
to 5.0, 112–115, 113
industry, innovation, and infrastructure 
(SDG9), 239, 270, 399
industry-specific applications, of cobots, 
172
industry worker, 426
information communication 
technology (ICT), 277, 381
innovation, 131, 186, 394, 402, 408
inspection cobots, 152, 153
Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA), 235, 
343, 351–353
institutional readiness, 84
Intel, 57
intellectual property (IP), 427
intelligent manufacturing, 424–425
intelligent traffic management, 60
intensified collaboration, 4
intergenerational divide, 132, 134
Internal Audit Competency Framework, 
352
internal audit (IA)
agency theory, 359
competency framework, 352
control environment, 342
controls, 234–235
in corporate governance, 343
defined, 217, 232, 339
department competency level, 
367–368, 368
digitization, 214–215
EDM theory, 244–245
and ESG, integration of, 354–356
external auditors, fines on, 233, 233
fraud in, 232–233, 233
function, necessary skills of, 
368–369, 369
governance and, 234
IIA, 351–353
and Industry 5.0, 235–237, 240–
242, 353–354
machine learning and, 215, 237, 
240–242
maturity level of, 370, 370
methodology, 359
RBV theory, 243–244
respondents, profile of, 360, 
360–361
risk and, 234
in social factor, 342
Stakeholder Theory, 242–243
stewardship theory, 358–359
three lines model, 235, 235, 236
internal productivity mechanism, 261
International Geosphere-Biosphere 
Programme (IGBP), 219
International Integrated Reporting 
Council (IIRC), 342
International Professional Practices 
Framework (IPPF), 232, 
351–352
Internet of Everything, 281
Internet of Services (IoS), 261
Internet of Things (IoT), 52, 183, 227, 
261
in smart city and village, 396, 396
interpersonal skills, 129–130, 179–180, 
183–184
interview guide, 190–191
inventory management, 62452 Index
IoT, see Internet of Things
IPPF, see International Professional 
Practices Framework
item-total correlation, 83, 85
Ivanov, D., 385
Javaid, M., 124, 126
job insecurity, 132–133
Joglekar, Shweta, 414
Johansson, H., 274–275
joint attention, 139
Kagermann, H., 272
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) test, 83
Karpak, B., 327
Kasinathan, P., 124
Kaynak, H., 83, 90
Key Enabling Technologies (KET), 267
key performance indicators (KPIs), 362, 
362, 418–419
Knowledge-Based Theory (KBT), 313
knowledge-intensive work, 121
Kodak, 325
Kolade, O., 47
Koolen, D., 230
Kotsantonis, S., 349
KPIs, see key performance indicators
Kumar, A., 273
Larcker, D. F., 90
Lasi, H., 272
law and legal services, 65
leadership
resilience, 200
skills, 126–127, 130
lean manufacturing system, 47, 47, 262
Lee, J., 272
Leng, J., 78, 125
Li, Fei-Fei, 42
lifelong learning, 194, 199
life on land (SDG15), 270
life under water (SDG14), 270
Likert-type scale, 80
logistics and warehousing, cobots in, 389
logistics optimization, 62
Louwers, D., 313
Lu, Y., 271
machine learning (ML), 42, 211, 217, 
229
adoption of, 213–214
in agriculture, 61
algorithms, 54
application of, 215
cobots, 161
EDM theory, 244–245
and Industry 5.0, 237–242, 238
internal audits and, 215, 237, 
240–242
overreliance on, 231
RBV theory, 243–244
in SDGs, 229–232
Stakeholder Theory, 242–243
machine teammates, 424
Maddikunta, P. K. R., 5, 95, 273, 412
Mahratta Chamber of Commerce, 
Industries and Agriculture 
(MCCIA) database, 189
management readiness, 84
managerial competencies, 180
human-centricity values, 185–186, 
191, 192, 193–194, 196
strategic resilience, 187, 193–195, 
196
sustainability, 187–188, 195, 
196–197
managerial skills, 184–185
manufacturing industry
artificial intelligence in, 56–57
cobots in, 6–7, 389
Marchetti, G., 186
Massaro, A., 124
mass customization, 41–42, 268, 311, 
391, 409
mass personalization, 42, 391
material-handling cobots, 152, 153, 155
mathematical programming (MP), 326
Matheson, E., 9
Matthew, J., 313
mature corporate governance, 348
Ma, X., 122
McAuley, J. W., 316
McKinsey and Company, 386
measurement model
assessment, 83, 85–86, 90, 92
outcomes of, 93, 93
mechanical structure, of cobot, 162
Mehdiabadi, A., 78
mental health, 132–133
Meret, C., 186
metaverse, 417–418
MICMAC, see Cross-Impact Matrix 
Multiplication Applied to 
ClassificationIndex 453
Migros, 324–325
Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs), 219
Min, H., 327
Mitchell, J., 125
mixed-integer linear programming 
model, 327
mixed reality, 58
Morawska-Jancelewicz, J., 122
motion control system, 163
Mourtzis, D., 385
m-TISM, see Total Interpretive 
Structural Model
Mukherjee, A. A., 94
Muller, J. M., 271
multidisciplinary approach, 137
multi-level organizational framework, 
307
Muscat Stock Exchange. companies in, 
357, 357, 359
Muthuswamy, P., 414
Nahavandi, S., 78, 273, 310, 385
nanotechnology, 228–229
natural language processing, 161
Nayyar, A., 312
neoliberal capitalism models, 262
Neubert, J. C., 125
new business models and opportunities, 
401
nonfinancial disclosures (NFD), 354
nonverbal communication, 8–9
no poverty (SDG1), 269, 397
Nutella, 54
NVivo 12 Pro software, 191
NVivo version 12.2, 80
Oesterreich, T. D., 272
Oman
ESG in, 356–358
public listed companies in, 344–345
Oman Center for Governance, 356
Onday, O., 274
operational intelligence, 309
operational technologies (OT), 277
Operator 4.0, 265, 421
Operator 5.0, 421
organisational agility, 278–279
organizational culture, co-bots, 10
organizational factors
measurement scale for, 89, 92
structural characteristics of, 94–95, 
97
organizational sustainability, with ESG 
factors, 345
Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), 386
Orthogonal Frequency-Division 
Multiple Access (OFDMA), 
418
Osborne, M. A., 49
Ostergaard, E. H., 4
Owoseni, A., 47
Özdemir, V., 78, 273
Pacher, C., 122
packaging cobots, 152, 153
Packaging Sustainability scorecard, 325
painting-coating task, cobot-human 
collaboration of, 167, 
167–168
pairwise comparisons matrix
average responses of, 21, 22, 25, 28
normalized, 21, 23, 26, 29
paper-and-pencil questionnaire survey, 
81
partnerships for the goals (SDG17), 
271, 400
Patel, P. H., 124
Pati, R., 312
peace, justice, and strong institutions 
(SDG16), 271
peer review, 80
peer-to-peer energy trading, 63
people-centric environment, 269
perception and manipulation task, 
skill-based model, 49
personalized treatment plan, 55
personal skills, 128–129
pharmaceuticals industry, 124
phishing, 427
physical fitness, in co-bot workspace, 
13
physical systems, 429
pilot survey study, 80–81
Pizoń, J., 121
political economy, of automation, 50
Porter, M. E., 307, 313
Posada, J., 271, 273
power supply system, 163
predictive analytics, 55, 309
primary industries, 209
principal component analysis (PCA), 
310
prioritized vector (PV), 21454 Index
privacy and security concerns, 132–133
problem-solving skills, 13, 125, 
128–129
Product Recovering Options, 303
Programmable Logic Controllers 
(PLCs), 182
project management abilities, 126
Prysm Industries, 264
Qahtan, S., 124
Qin, R., 274
qualitative scale development
analysis strategy, 80
construct specification/content 
analysis domain, 79, 79–80
peer review, 80
pilot survey study, 80–81
scale construction phase, 81
qualitative study, 188–189
quality control, 62
quality education (SDG4), 269, 398
quality services, 66
quantitative scale validation
core pillars, 94
data analysis and construct 
evolution, 94, 95
environmental factors, 95–96
measurement models, 83, 85, 85–86, 
86
model development and testing, 
86–90, 87, 91–94, 93
organizational factors, 94–95
scale purification and refinement, 81, 
82, 83, 84–85
quaternary industries, 209–210
Rada, M., 265–266
radiology, image analysis in, 55
Rahayu, D. K., 124
Raja Santhi, A., 414
ransomware, 427–428, 428–429
rapid technological changes, 131, 133
Rastogi, R., 124
RBV theory, see resource-based view 
(RBV) theory
reactive method, 313
readiness, employee and organizational
conceptual model for, 15, 16
employees’ perceptions of, 9–10
HR professionals, 11–14
job design, 13
organizational culture, 10
performance management, 13–14
recruitment, 14
requirements for, 12, 12–13
safety policies, 14
technological adaptation challenges, 
14–15
technology literacy, 9
training/development, 10, 14
readiness for Industry 5.0 
implementation (RII), 76
nomological validity of, 98
qualitative scale development
analysis strategy, 80
construct specification/content 
analysis domain, 79, 79–80
peer review, 80
pilot survey study, 80–81
scale construction phase, 81
quantitative scale validation
core pillars, 94, 97
data analysis and construct 
evolution, 94, 95
environmental factors, 95–96
measurement models, 83, 85, 
85–86, 86
model development and testing, 
86–90, 87, 91–94, 96
organizational factors, 94–95
scale purification and refinement, 
81, 82, 83, 84–85
research contribution, 76
structural characteristics of, 97
TOE framework, 77
real-time data analysis, 121
real-time operation, of cobots, 170
recycling, 303
reduce, reuse, recycle, reclaim, and 
degradable (4R1D), 313
reduced inequalities (SDG10), 270
reference model, 289
reinforcement learning 
algorithms, 161
Reinsel, D., 413
reliability test matrix, 21, 24, 27, 30
remanufacturing option, 303
remote sensing, in agriculture, 61
Rendall, M., 262, 274–275
repairing option, 303
reporting, internal audit, 354
resilience, 128–129, 277, 279
adaptability and flexibility, 199
decision making, 199–200
emotional intelligence, 200
leadership, 200Index 455
manager competencies, 187, 
193–195, 196
risk management, 199
strategic thinking, 199
resistance to change, 132–134
resource-based view (RBV) theory, 
215–216, 243–244
responsible consumption and 
production (SDG12), 270, 400
Restrepo, P., 426
retailers, 61
return on investment (ROI), 318
reverse logistics (RLs), 302–303
activities, 319, 319–321
advantages of, 323
closed-loop supply chain, 321, 
321–323
description of, 318
mathematical model, 327
transportation model, 327, 328–329
constrains, 328, 330–331
linear modeling, 331
objective function, 330
variables, 330
in waste management, 303, 304
RII, see readiness for Industry 5.0 
implementation
risk assessment, internal audit, 237, 353
risk management, 62
RLs, see reverse logistics
robophobia, 8
robot, 412–413
Robot Activity Support Scale, 139
robotic civilization, 9
robot coordinators, 108, 111
robotic process automation (RPA), 235
robotisation, 272
Rodríguez-Aguilar, R., 385
Romero, D., 421
Saaty, T., 15
random index table, 18, 19
safety awareness, in co-bot workspace, 
13
Sahoo, K. S., 311
Salgado-Reyes, A.P., 385
Salmi, T., 6
Sandu, R., 88
Saptaningtyas, W. W. E., 124
savvy urban communities’ research, 396
SBTC, see skill-based technological 
change
Schwab, K., 272
SCM, see supply chain management
SDGs, see sustainable development 
goals
secondary industries, 209
Second Industrial Revolution, 41, 43, 
113, 113, 115, 224
electricity, 262
evolution of, 182
vs. Industry 1.0, 3.0, 4.0, and 5.0, 
115, 116
SDGs, 229
Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC), 341
security concerns
intellectual property, 427
phishing, 427
ransomware, 427–428, 428–429
supply chain attack, 428
Sehgal, V. K., 385
Seitz, M., 321
self-awareness, 128–129
self-resilience, 421
SEM, see structural equation modeling
semi-structured interviews, 79
semi-structured questions
human-centricity, 192, 193
resilience, 193, 195, 196
sensor and perception system, of cobot, 
163
Sephora, 62
sepsis, early detection of, 55
Serafeim, G., 349
Sharma, M., 112, 124
Sharma, R., 124
Shirokii, V., 2
Siemens Digital Enterprise, 57
Simchenko, N. A., 417–418
Simoes, A. C., 6
Singh, S., 89–90
6G networks, 282, 418–419
six R methodology, 266
skill-based technological change 
(SBTC), 49–50
skill development, 199
Skills Agenda and Digital Education 
Action Plan, 432
skills gap, 132, 134
Skobelev, P. O., 112
small-and medium-scale enterprises 
(SMEs), 9, 75, 408, 410, 416
for digital transformation, 75–76
improvement, in ecological 
efficiency, 317456 Index
practical implications, 97–98
RII, see readiness for Industry 5.0 
implementation
smart additive manufacturing (SAM), 
320
smart automation, 421
smart cities and villages, development 
practices in, 395–396, 396
smart cyber-physical systems (SCPS), 421
smart devices, 421
smart financial and insurance services, 
393–395
smart healthcare practices, 390–391
smart hospital, 55–56
Smart Industry 4.0, 283
smart logistic services, 393, 420
smart machines, 414
smart manufacturing systems, 67, 420
smart materials, 422
smart online education practices, 
392–393
smart sensors, 281
smart society, 274
smart systems, 421–422
smart working, 185–186
SMEs, see small-and medium-scale 
enterprises
social factor, in ESG, 341–342, 345, 
347, 350
social intelligence, 49
social responsibility, 120
social sustainability, 219–220, 284
Society 5.0, 276–278, 286–287, 289, 
392
Society of Corporate Compliance 
and Ethics & Health Care 
Compliance Association 
(SCCE & HCCA), 236, 340, 
353
socio-technical systems, 47–49, 48, 180
soft skills, 126
space exploration, AI in, 65
Spencer, D., 50
Srivastava, S. K., 89–90, 302, 312–313, 
315
Stahre, J., 421
Stakeholder Theory, 215–216, 242–243, 
306
Starbucks, 62
Stevels, A., 314, 316
stewardship theory, 343–344
internal audit, 358–359
strategic management, 131
Strauss, A., 191
Strinati, E. C., 418–419
structural equation modeling (SEM), 
83, 96–97
structural model analysis, 93, 93
Sundin, E., 315
supervised learning, 229
supplier selection, 62
supply chain attack, 428
supply chain management (SCM), 301, 
416–417
AI in, 61–62
cooperation, 301
corporate social responsibility, 309
defined, 305, 307
Food Supply Chain, 310
information, 309
innovations, 312
inventory, 308
location, 308
mass customization, 311
production, 307
reverse logistics, 302
SSCM, 305–306
sustainability, 309
transportation, 308–309
surplus, 320
sustainability, 279, 356
change management, 202
employee engagement, 202
environmental awareness, 200–201
in Industry 4.0, 275
innovation, 201
manager competencies, 187–188, 
195, 196–197
performance, 201
roadmap to, 284–285
strategic planning for, 201
supply chain management, 309
sustainability trilemma, 283
sustainable cities and communities 
(SDG11), 270, 400
sustainable development
defined, 211
earth’s temperature, 218, 218–219
implications, 287–288
industry commitment to, 282–284
machine learning risks, 231–232
risks with, 213
SDGs, see sustainable development 
goals
social sustainability, 219–220
technological advancements, 212Index 457
sustainable development goals (SDGs), 
211–212, 238, 277–278
affordable and clean energy, 270, 
399
clean water and sanitation, 270, 
398–399
climate action, 270
collaboration, 222–224
decent work and economic growth, 
270, 399
five “P”s of, 223, 225
gender equality, 269, 398
good health and well-being, 269, 
398
index score over time, 220, 223
industrial revolutions and machine 
learning in, 229–232
industry, innovation, and 
infrastructure, 270, 399
Interlinking of, 222, 224
life on land, 270
life under water, 270
no poverty, 269, 397
partnerships for the goals, 270, 400
peace, justice, and strong 
institutions, 271
quality education, 269, 398
reduced inequalities, 270
responsible consumption and 
production, 270, 400
sustainable cities and communities, 
270, 400
target and indicators, 220, 221–222
zero hunger, 269, 397–398
sustainable production, 51, 401
sustainable supply chain, internal audit, 
237, 353
Sustainable Supply Chain Management 
(SSCM), 305–306
Systematic Literature Reviews (SLRs), 
309
Systems Theory (ST), 313
Tankt, D. W., 414
task readiness, 84
Tayal, A., 310
teamwork, in co-bot workspace, 13
technical expertise, 125
technical skills, 183–184
in co-bot workspace, 13
techno-functional design, 287
technological factors
measurement scale for, 89, 92
structural characteristics of, 94, 97
technological revolution, 182
technology integration, 14
technology literacy, 9, 15
technology-organization-environment 
(TOE) framework, 77
environmental dimension in, 88
organizational elements, 88
technological component of, 86
technology readiness, 85
tertiary industries, 209
Tesla, 410
Teuteberg, F., 272
text analytics, 241
Thakur, P., 385
Third Industrial Revolution, 41, 43–44, 
113, 113–115, 218, 224–225, 
259
automation, 262
evolution of, 182–183
vs. Industry 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, and 5.0, 
115, 116
SDGs, 229–230
Thorpe, C. T., 81, 96
3B Fibreglass, 54
3D printing, 54, 420
three lines model, 235, 235, 236
time management, 128–129
Tire Industrialists’ Association 
(LASDER), 324
Tiwari, S., 120
Tizghadam, A., 230
TOE framework, see technology￾organization-environment 
(TOE) framework
Topical Requirements and Guidance, 
352
Tornatzky, L.G., 77
Total Interpretive Structural Model 
(m-TISM), 310, 322
Toth, J., 347
training, of cobots, 172
transparency, 268
transportation, AI in, 60
Ullah, F., 385
unemployment, 426–427
United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization (UNIDO), 386458 Index
United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals 2030 (UN 
SDG), 349
universal collection center operations, 
303
Universal Robots, 264
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), 60, 
421
upgrading skills, 131–133
upskilling and reskilling programmes, 
120
Urbach, N., 90
user experience (UX), of cobot 
interfaces, 159, 160
van der Linde, C., 313
Verma, A., 416
versatility, 388
Viriyasitavat, W., 419
virtual assistants, for patients, 56
virtual reality (VR), 159, 417
visual search technologies, 61
Vokurka, R. J., 279
wage disparity, 425–426
Walmart, 62, 325
Wang, F. Y., 274
Wang, J., 414
Wang, X., 274
Waste Framework Directive of 2008 
(WFD), 323
waste management, 323
weather index insurance, 394–395
Wee, H. M., 315
weighted vector, 18, 21
Welch, C., 181
welding cobots, 153, 155
Wells, P., 321
Weyer, S., 273
Wolf, E. J., 90
workforce retraining, 15
work-life balance, 198–199
World Economic Forum (WEF), 219, 
283, 387
Xu, X., 273, 310
Yang, P. C., 315
Yuan, Y., 274
Zeilina, L., 347
Zengin, Y., 385–386
zero hunger (SDG2), 269, 397–398
Zhang, Q., 126–127
Zhang, Y., 274
Zhu, K., 88
Zicari, R. V., 414
Zizic, M. C., 122
