MODERN ARCHITECTURE
Modern Architecture: The Basics examines technological, stylistic, 
socio-political, and cultural changes that have transformed the 
history of architecture since the late 18th century. Broad definitions 
of modernity and postmodernity introduce the book, which 
comprises 24 short thematic chapters looking at the concepts behind 
the development of modern and postmodern architecture. These 
include major historical movements, key figures, and evolving 
building typologies. There is also an emphasis on the changing city 
during the 19th and 20th centuries. Approaches to representation 
and its impacts on architecture are studied, along with the changing 
global role of architecture as cultural expression. The book introduces 
new topics, including gender, race, postcolonialism, and indigeneity. 
An undaunting, contemporary, and inclusive account of modern 
architectural history, this is a must-read for all students of architecture 
as well as those outside the discipline approaching the subject for the 
first time.
Graham Livesey is Emeritus Professor in the School of Architecture, 
Planning and Landscape at the University of Calgary.The Basics Series
The Basics is a highly successful series of accessible guidebooks which provide 
an overview of the fundamental principles of a subject area in a jargon-free 
and undaunting format.
Intended for students approaching a subject for the first time, the books 
both introduce the essentials of a subject and provide an ideal springboard 
for further study. With over 50 titles spanning subjects from artificial 
intelligence (AI) to women’s studies, The Basics are an ideal starting point 
for students seeking to understand a subject area.
Each text comes with recommendations for further study and gradually 
introduces the complexities and nuances within a subject.
SIMONE DE BEAUVOIR
Megan Burke
INTERVIEWING: THE BASICS
Mark Holton
SHAKESPEARE (FOURTH EDITION)
Sean McEvoy
DREAMS
Dale Mathers and Carola Mathers
JEWISH ETHICS
Geoffrey D. Claussen
MODERN ARCHITECTURE
Graham Livesey
For a full list of titles in this series, please visit www.routledge.com/
The-Basics/book-series/BMODERN ARCHITECTURE
THE BASICS
Graham Livesey
Drawings by Mohammad MoezziDesigned cover image: Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 
Credit: Mondadori Portfolio
First published 2025
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2025 Graham Livesey
The right of Graham Livesey to be identified as author of this work has been asserted 
in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in 
any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to 
infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-1-032-51796-4 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-51794-0 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-40397-5 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975
Typeset in Bembo
by Apex CoVantage, LLCCONTENTS
Acknowledgments vii
1 Modernism and Postmodernism 1
2 Revolution and Republicanism 7
3 Picturesque and Sublime 16
4 Technology and Materials 25
5 Functionalism and Rationalism 35
6 Style and Nationalism 44
7 Urbanization and Landscape 54
8 Arts and Crafts 66
9 Ornament and Structure 77
10 Space and Form 88
11 Avant-Garde and Representation 100
12 Internationalism and Universalism 112
13 Machines and Systems 123
14 Authoritarianism and Monumentality 135vi Contents
15 Vernacular and Tradition 146
16 Education and Professionalism 156
17 Gender and Discrimination 166
18 History and Order 177
19 Regionalism and Tectonics 187
20 Place and Invention 199
21 Theory and Practice 209
22 Postcolonialism and Hybridity 219
23 Race and Resistance 230
24 Environmentalism and Indigeneity 241
Index 250ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to acknowledge the support I have received from vari￾ous people who were essential to the realization of this book. I am 
indebted to my training at McGill University, which was shaped by 
two important architectural historians: Prof. Peter Collins and Dr. 
Alberto Pérez-Gómez. I would like to thank the many students I 
taught at the University of Calgary; they have been a continuous 
source of inspiration. I would like to express deep gratitude to my 
esteemed colleague and friend Julia Gersovitz, O.C., who graciously 
agreed to review and edit the text. The book would not have been 
the same without the evocative drawings created by Mohammad 
Moezzi. I am also grateful to the staff at Routledge, especially 
Lydia Kessell and Jake Millicheap, who made the task of producing 
the book very easy. The libraries at the University of Calgary and 
Queen’s University (Kingston, Ontario) provided research material 
for the book. Finally, I could not have undertaken this project with￾out the loving support of my wife, Allison (and her family), and my 
sons, Aidan and Ellis.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-1
We tend to associate the terms “modern” and “modernity” with 
meaning up to date, as opposed to belonging to the past. However, 
they also can imply a break with tradition or history. Although we 
typically think of “modernism” as a style of the 20th century, the ori￾gins of the modern world began during the European Renaissance. 
This book will examine the development and evolution of modern 
architecture from the late 18th century. It will focus primarily on 
concepts that shaped the emergence of a new international architec￾ture in the 1920s and 1930s. It will also examine the “postmodern” 
period, beginning in the 1950s, that challenged the fundamental 
premises of modernity.
This history of modern architecture begins around 1775, dur￾ing the period often referred to as the Enlightenment. Peter Gay 
expresses the ambitions of the period as follows:
The men of the Enlightenment united on a vastly ambitious program, a 
program of secularism, humanity, cosmopolitanism, and freedom, above 
all, freedom in its many forms – freedom from arbitrary power, freedom 
of speech, freedom of trade, freedom to realize one’s talents, freedom of 
aesthetic response, freedom, in a word, of moral man to make his own 
way in the world.1
The Enlightenment was characterized by the rationalism and meth￾odological empiricism that emerged from the Scientific Revolution. 
It also demonstrated a tendency towards secularism, the pursuit of 
knowledge, the triumph of modern views over traditional ones, the 
MODERNISM AND 
POSTMODERNISM
12 Modernism and Postmodernism
belief in the marketplace, and a focus on liberalism, egalitarianism, 
and humanitarianism. It was also a period of great political, social, and 
technological revolutions. A key example of an Enlightenment pro￾ject was the Encyclopédie (or the Encyclopedia, or a Systematic Dictionary 
of the Sciences, Arts, and Crafts), edited by philosophers Denis Diderot 
and Jean le Rond d’Alembert and published between 1751 and 1772 
in 28 volumes. The Encyclopédie was intended to be a comprehensive 
effort to describe all human knowledge in text and images.
In his book All That is Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience of 
Modernity, political scientist Marshall Berman outlines the history 
of modernism and describes its paradoxical nature. Berman identi￾fies three phases of modernity.2
 The first started at the beginning 
of the 16th century and ended in the late 18th century, this phase 
encompassed the lives of influential figures like Leonardo da Vinci 
(1452–1519), Nicolaus Copernicus (1473–1543), René Descartes 
(1596–1650), Sir Isaac Newton (1643–1727), Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
(1712–1778), and Adam Smith (1723–1790). These men were part 
of a scientific and intellectual revolution that challenged the religious 
teachings of the age that placed humans at the centre of the universe. 
They personified an age of human invention and exploration that 
led to discoveries at all scales, from the microscopic to the cosmic.
The second phase of modernity started at the end of the 18th cen￾tury and coincided with the American and French Revolutions and 
the Industrial Revolution. This second phase ended in the 1890s. 
The revolutions launched enormous political, social, and techno￾logical changes and would draw America into a central role in the 
modern project. The third phase coincided with the 20th century, as 
the forces of modernism created new modes of living and new styles. 
At this point, modernity had spread across the world through coloni￾zation and conquest. Its imposition on numerous non-Western cul￾tures led to its adaptation to differing cultural situations.3
 As Berman 
suggests, to be modern is to live in an age full of both promise and 
destruction. He writes of its characteristics:
The maelstrom of modern life has been fed from many sources: great 
discoveries in the physical sciences, changing our images of the universe 
and our place in it; the industrialization of production, which transforms 
scientific knowledge into technology, creates new human environments 
and destroys old ones, speeds up the whole tempo of life, generates new 
forms of corporate power and class struggle; immense demographic 
upheavals, severing millions from their ancestral habitats, hurtling them 
half way across the world into new lives; rapid and often cataclysmic Modernism and Postmodernism 3
urban growth; systems of mass communication, dynamic in their devel￾opment, enveloping and binding together the most diverse people and 
societies; increasingly powerful nation states, bureaucratically structured 
and operated, constantly striving to expand their powers; mass social 
movements of people, and peoples, challenging their political and eco￾nomic rulers, striving to gain some control over their lives; finally, bearing 
and driving all these people and institutions along, an ever-expanding, 
drastically fluctuating capitalist world market.4
The factors that Berman describes had a significant impact on society 
as many traditional practices were challenged; this was the case with 
architecture, particularly during the 19th and early 20th centuries.
* * *
In the 1950s and 1960s, modernity itself came under attack from 
multiple vantage points. Some cultural theorists describe this period 
as a late stage of modernism; others describe this new era as “post￾modern,” defined by factors that are opposite to the tendencies of 
modernism. In this book, postmodernism is accepted as a new his￾torical period. Beverley Brown has characterized postmodernism as:
pastiche, self-referentiality, fragmentation, hybridization of styles, linguis￾tic multiplicity, and as a movement in philosophy registering a crisis in 
the legitimation of Western knowledge through a breakdown of meta￾narratives and the consequent end therefore of metaphysics and of all 
thought attempting to ground itself in first principles or final causes, 
such as God, Nature, Spirit. Similarly, “postmodernity” has been vari￾ously defined as the Age of the Hyperreal, where all distinctions between 
truth and appearance, depth and surface, latent and manifest have bro￾ken down . . . as an era of capitalist expansion where spatial and tem￾poral compression of the globe (through new information technologies, 
search for new markets, financial development) is producing a crisis in 
traditional conceptualizations of identity and history; as a new political 
age of “difference” where notions of democracy and consensus have 
failed under pressure from the emerging voices of those ‘others’ whose 
exclusion has facilitated the establishment of the dominants as part of an 
ostensible regime of truth, not one of power.5
We can break down various key ideas embedded in this quotation. The 
notion of “pastiche, self-referentiality, fragmentation, hybridization 
of styles, linguistic multiplicity” is found particularly in postmodern 
architecture. Starting in the 1960s, hybrid designs were often cre￾ated which referenced the history of architecture and popular culture 
and questioned the dominance of modernism.6
 The “breakdown of 4 Modernism and Postmodernism
meta-narratives” is a concept developed by the French philosopher 
Jean-François Lyotard to explain the end of large, over-arching ideas 
such as those contained in religious and political systems.7
 The “Age 
of the Hyperreal” refers to the work of another French philosopher, 
Jean Baudrillard, and his accusation that the postmodern era empha￾sizes surfaces, screens, spectacles, and simulations over the real.8
There is no doubt that since the 1950s, increasing globalization has 
resulted from the dominance of capitalism and the rise of commu￾nication and information technologies that have compressed space 
and time into what media theorist Marshall McLuhan termed the 
“global village.”9
 Not only are information, capital, and trends mov￾ing at lightning speed across the world, but in recent decades, there 
has been the proliferation of new voices and communities that have 
not had any power or presence in the modern age. Identity factors 
such as gender, race, religion, and sexual orientation are increasingly 
being accepted on their own terms.
* * *
This book begins towards the end of the 18th century, coinciding 
with the beginning of Berman’s second phase, as the great political 
and industrial revolutions take hold. It examines the development of 
modern architecture using a format that focuses on the vital concepts 
that define modern and postmodern architecture until the beginning 
of the 21st century. Like all histories, this book presents a particular 
interpretation of the vast historical resources available on the subject. 
This book is an introduction to the concepts and ideas that shaped 
architecture since the late 18th century and is intended to bring in 
diverse contributors to the story. History remains important as a sub￾ject, as José Ortega y Gasset states:
one must recognize that the past is here among us, that we are its sum￾ming up, that our present is made out of the material of that past, which 
past is therefore the moment at hand, the heart, the hidden core, of the 
present.10
As far as possible, the book will attempt a global approach to the 
subject and will generally follow an overall historical chronology. 
The text is intended to give an overview of modern and postmodern 
architecture by presenting key concepts that shaped the evolution 
of architecture. Each section will present key concepts and provide 
a short historical overview. The book will also be inspired by the 
writings of important architectural historians and by various other Modernism and Postmodernism 5
thinkers. It will strive to provide a new approach to the history of 
modern architecture while recognizing that certain historical nar￾ratives are widely accepted. The suggested readings at the end of 
each section will provide the reader with sources that can provide 
more detail on specific architects, types of buildings, materials, and 
periods. The date included for each building is the completion date, 
which does not necessarily take into account that some buildings 
have a long gestation period.
In his essay “The Beholding Eye: Ten Versions of the Same 
Scene,” geographer D.W. Meinig demonstrates that a landscape can 
be viewed as nature, habitat, artefact, system, problem, wealth, ide￾ology, history, place, and aesthetic.11 If this model is transposed to 
architecture, it can be suggested that a building plays a complex role 
in any society of which it is a part. A building belongs to a physical 
and cultural context; it provides a shelter for a broad range of human 
activities, and it is a tangible construction that involves materials and 
techniques. Buildings can solve problems but can also create prob￾lems, such as global warming. Buildings represent an investment on 
the part of those who build and maintain them. Buildings also use a 
wide range of resources. Every building involves political and social 
expression and occupies a place in the small and large histories that 
shape communities and their inhabitants. Finally, a building belongs 
to an aesthetic or cultural order that influences its appearance. This 
book attempts to be conscious of these complex concepts that shape 
modern and postmodern architecture.
NOTES
1 Peter Gay, The Enlightenment (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1995), p. 3.
2 See Marshall Berman, All That Is Solid Melts Into Air (New York: Viking 
Penguin Inc., 1988), pp. 16–17.
3 Ibid.
4 Ibid., p. 16.
5 Beverley Brown, “Postmodernism,” in Elizabeth Wright et al., eds., 
Feminism and Psychoanalysis: A Critical Dictionary (Oxford: Blackwell, 1992), 
pp. 341–342.
6 See Charles Jencks, The Language of Post-Modern Architecture (New York: 
Rizzoli, 1991).
7 See Jean-François Lyotard, “Answering the Question: What Is Post￾modernism?” in Charles Jencks, ed., The Post-Modern Reader (London: Aca￾demy Editions, 1992), pp. 138–150.6 Modernism and Postmodernism
8 See Jean Baudrillard, “The Ecstasy of Communication,” in Hal Foster, ed., 
Postmodern Culture (London: Pluto Press, 1985), pp. 126–134.
9 See Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1964).
10 J. Ortega y Gasset, Man and Crisis (London: George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 
1959), p. 53.
11 See D.W. Meinig, “The Beholding Eye: Ten Versions of the Same Scene,” 
in D.W. Meinig, ed., The Interpretation of Ordinary Landscapes (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1979), pp. 33–48.
SUGGESTED READING
Berman, Marshall. All That Is Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience of Modernity. 
New York: Penguin Books, 1988.
Foster, Hal, ed., Postmodern Culture. London: Pluto Press, 1985.
Jencks, Charles, ed. The Post-Modern Reader. London: Academy Editions, 1992.
McLeod, Mary. “Modernism,” in Iain Borden, Murray Fraser, and Barbara 
Penner, eds., Forty Ways to Think About Architecture: Architectural History and 
Theory Today. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2014.
Weston, Richard. Modernism. London: Phaidon, 1996.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-2
The concept of “revolution” has been essential to the development 
of modern architecture. This occurred politically, culturally, techno￾logically, and stylistically. A revolution implies a sudden and signifi￾cant change in a situation. A political revolution can be defined as 
“the forcible overthrow of a government through mass mobilization 
(whether military or civilian or both) in the name of social justice, 
to create new political institutions.”1
 According to historian Jack A. 
Goldstone, there are five conditions necessary for a political revolu￾tion, “economic or fiscal strain, alienation and opposition among the 
elites, widespread popular anger at injustice, a persuasive narrative of 
resistance, and favorable international relations.”2
 This section will 
concentrate on how architecture has expressed political systems in 
two major revolutions, which both attempted to remove the author￾ity of the monarch and to install more democratic forms of repub￾lican government: the American Revolution (1765–1783) and the 
French Revolution (1789–1799).
The concept of a monarchy has a king or queen as the head of state, 
either as an absolute authority or in a more restricted role defined by 
a constitution. A good example of an absolute monarch was Louis 
XIV (1638–1715), who ruled as the king of France for 72 years and 
was responsible for the creation of the enormous palace and gar￾dens at Versailles. The counterposition of monarchy is democracy, 
in which power is held by the people based on free elections and 
the principle of equality. Democracy was first developed in ancient 
Athens, where a limited form of vote was given to property-owning 
REVOLUTION AND 
REPUBLICANISM
28 Revolution and Republicanism
male citizens. The concept of democracy gained momentum with 
the English Civil War (1642–1651), which removed power from the 
monarch, and with the American Revolution, which resulted in a 
republic. A republic involves elected representatives, usually under a 
president. In the aftermath of the American War of Independence, 
a democratic republic was established, while the French Revolution 
ultimately failed with the rise of Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821), 
who seized power in 1799 and crowned himself emperor in 1804.
The role of architecture role in supporting various political sys￾tems is central, both in the functional definition of institutions and 
in the expression of political order. As French philosopher Michel 
Foucault suggests, “power” informs all relationships and can emanate 
from anywhere in a system.3
 All forms of government exercise power 
represented through the architecture of governing institutions: pal￾aces, parliaments, congresses, presidential homes, etc. Power is exer￾cised by national governments, something that has emerged since the 
18th century. The state exerts totalizing and individualizing forms of 
power.4
 States have a multitude of modes for exerting power on indi￾viduals, including economic factors, laws, systems of surveillance, 
violence, and architecture. Democratic political systems tend to use 
two chambers (elected and appointed) as part of a governing struc￾ture, typically with a president or a prime minister and various politi￾cal parties. The selection of various architectural styles to represent 
government often looks to the past, often to a time of imagined or 
real glory in a nation’s past. Architects, whether knowingly or not, 
often become involved in the activities perpetuated by the regime 
in power.
* * *
In late 18th century America, where tensions had brewed for years 
between the emerging American nation and Britain, war erupted 
in 1775. On July 4, 1776, the Second Continental Congress issued 
the United States Declaration of Independence, initially drafted by 
future US President and architect Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826). 
The document famously states “that all men are created equal” and 
cites many grievances against the British before claiming independ￾ence. The American Revolutionary War would last until 1783 when 
the terms of independence from Britain were ratified by the Treaty 
of Paris. The Constitution of the United States came into effect on 
March 4, 1789. In this document, one of the most important in his￾tory, the structure of the republic was defined with the office of the Revolution and Republicanism 9
president and the Congress. The document contains a Bill of Rights 
and has been amended 27 times. As a result of revolution, there came 
the enormous task of building a nation, including its capital city and 
major governmental institutions.
A key figure in the definition of the new nation was Thomas 
Jefferson, statesman, architect, and slave owner. Jefferson began his 
interest in architecture as a young man when he started work on his 
own neo-Palladian house, Monticello, in Virginia, as early as 1769, 
a project he continued to develop for the next three decades. As a 
plantation owner, he owned dozens of black slaves who built his 
property as the centre of a carefully controlled world. Jefferson served 
a term as the governor of Virginia from 1779 to 1781, during which 
he was also asked to design the State Capitol in Richmond. In 1784, 
he was appointed the American Minister to France, where he would 
remain for five years. While in France, he befriended various archi￾tects and visited the Maison Carrée, a well-preserved Roman temple 
in southern France. This ancient monument provided Jefferson with 
a model for the Virginia State Capitol, which was eventually com￾pleted according to Jefferson’s design in 1796. The scheme incor￾porated the House of Delegates and Senate, along with rooms for 
committees and clerks. Jefferson’s design was intended to provide a 
model for future American institutional buildings based closely on 
ancient Roman architecture.
Jefferson’s third significant architectural project was his design for 
the campus of the University of Virginia (1826), which he developed 
after the two terms of his presidency (1801–1809).5
 Based on the 
concept of the “academical village,” the campus includes a rotunda 
building to house the library, ten pavilions housing classrooms and 
offices, a common green space, and “hotels” for students. The cam￾pus design relied heavily on black labour for its construction and 
maintenance. As historian Louis P. Nelson demonstrates, the origi￾nal scheme did not adequately allow for the accommodation of the 
enslaved workers, but this changed over time. The area between 
the teaching pavilions and student hotels (transformed into gardens 
between 1948 and 1964) was separated by walled work yards where 
slaves prepared food and undertook other tasks, altering our under￾standing of the ideal nature of the original plan.6
As architectural historian Mabel O. Wilson shows, despite his 
writings, Jefferson considered blacks and indigenous peoples as being 
inferior to whites, although blacks, both free and enslaved, built 
many of the nation’s key monuments. Wilson writes that Jefferson 10 Revolution and Republicanism
carefully sited his buildings so that “the white-columned Neoclassical 
buildings appeared to visitors as idyllic beacons of democratic values 
overlooking sublime nature unsullied by the presence of those spaces 
in which unsightly slaves toiled to make the land fertile and the 
lives of white citizens comfortable.”7
 At the heart of the American 
Revolution were significant injustices and contradictions, which 
architecture underscored. The burgeoning American democracy did 
not grant the right to vote for black men until after the American 
Civil War (1870), and women did not until 1920.
In 1790 the decision was made to establish a new capital city on 
the banks of the Potomac River. The city of Washington, D.C., was 
laid out according to the Baroque designs of a French engineer and 
soldier named Pierre Charles l’Enfant (1754–1825). Featuring wide 
avenues, many on a diagonal, and focal points, the heart of the plan is 
the Mall, which is prominently located at the future President’s House 
and the Capitol. The design for the landmark White House was 
by the architect James Hoban (1756–1821). Following in Jefferson’s 
footsteps, it was also inspired by Roman architecture. L’Enfant’s plan 
provided a framework for the long-term development of the city. 
Today, the Mall is lined with many national institutions; it is one of 
the world’s great expressions of government and nationalism.
The Capitol is organized around its two primary spaces of gov￾ernment, the Senate and the House of Representatives (and origi￾nally the Supreme Court), where elected senators and representatives 
develop federal policies and laws. An unsuccessful competition was 
held in 1792 for the design of the Capitol. The commission was 
awarded to William Thornton (1759–1828) the following year, a 
doctor and amateur architect. Thornton was supported by Etienne 
(Stephen) Sulpice Hallett (1755–1825), a French-born architect. 
Years of conflict over the design followed, which impeded progress. 
After a fire in 1814, Charles Bullfinch (1763–1844) and Benjamin 
Latrobe (1794–1820), two of the most important early American 
architects, were involved in the completion of the initial build￾ing. Later in the century, the Capitol underwent further expan￾sion, including the completion of the great cast-iron dome over the 
Rotunda by Thomas U. Walter (1804–1887) in 1868.
The governmental buildings of Washington were designed to 
express the democratic aspirations of a new democratic republic 
in which an elected president and Congress governed the nation. 
This expression of government would extend to state capitols such 
as the Massachusetts State House (1798) by Charles Bullfinch and Revolution and Republicanism 11
the Nebraska State Capitol (1932) by Bertram Grosvenor Goodhue 
(1869–1924). The impact of the American Revolution would be 
wide-reaching, as historian Gordon S. Wood states:
The Revolution not only radically changed the personal and social rela￾tionships of people, including the position of women, but also destroyed 
the aristocracy as it had been understood in the Western world for at 
least two millennia . . . it actually reconstituted what Americans meant by 
public or state power and brought about an entirely new kind of popular 
politics and a new kind of democratic officeholder . . . it made the inter￾ests and prosperity of ordinary people – their pursuits of happiness – the 
goal of society and government.8
* * *
In France, the Revolution was shorter lived. One notable event 
was the execution of the monarch Louis XIV and his family in 1793. 
Figure 2.1 Main Floor Plan, William Thornton, United States Capitol, c. 1793–
1797, Washington, D.C., USA. This early plan was organized around a central 
rotunda, with the House of Representatives located to the left and the smaller 
Senate chamber to the right; the second central circular space above the rotunda 
was deleted in later schemes. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.12 Revolution and Republicanism
As a result of economic and class turmoil in France, the French 
Revolution started in May 1789. The Revolution involved many, 
often violent, historical twists and turns. Important events included 
the publication of the “Declaration of the Rights of Man” in August 
1789, the ratification of a new constitution in 1791, and the estab￾lishment of the First French Republic in 1792. However, this was 
followed by the infamous and bloody “Reign of Terror” (1793–
1794). Various internal struggles culminated in the rise to power 
of Napoleon Bonaparte in November 1799. While the Revolution 
itself largely failed, its impact would be significant in France and 
beyond, with its emphasis on liberty, egality, and brotherhood.
Three French architects would capture the revolutionary spirit of 
the age despite all having pre-revolutionary careers: Etienne-Louis 
Boullée (1728–1799), Claude-Nicolas Ledoux (1736–1806), and 
Jean-Jacques Lequeu (1757–1826). Boullée lived a long and une￾ventful life. Despite the radicalness of his ideas, he held various offi￾cial positions and became a member of the Académie d’Architecture 
in 1762. Boullée’s output as a practicing architect was limited to a 
few domestic works. He is best remembered for his sublime “vision￾ary” or “theoretical” drawings that depict the institutions of a new 
city and various funerary monuments. His renderings of funerary 
monuments were celebrated, as was his cenotaph project to Sir Isaac 
Newton (1784), the great British scientist. In this unrealized project, 
an immense spherical structure intended to represent the cosmos is 
rendered in dramatic shadow and light.
Boullée expressed his core ideas in an unpublished manuscript, 
“Architecture, Essay on Art,” in which he argues that buildings 
should be “poems” that “should arouse in us sensations that cor￾respond to the function of the building in question.”9
 In this essay, 
he also describes institutions for a city in text and drawings. These 
include a basilica, a theatre, a palace of justice, a national palace, 
a municipal palace, a coliseum, a public library, a city entrance, 
etc. The drawing of the National Palace (1785) depicts a building 
with constitutional laws inscribed into its façade, a tangible way of 
describing the purpose of the building.
Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, arguably the greatest French architect of 
the second half of the 18th century, was an architect who devised a 
recognizable style and tackled new challenges. Ledoux came from a 
humble background. After he completed his education, he quickly 
established himself as an architect with wealthy and influential cli￾ents. Important designs included the Hôtel Guimard (1771), a house Revolution and Republicanism 13
for a famous dancer, and various works for Mme du Barry, the offi￾cial mistress to King Louis XV. With his patrons’ support, Ledoux 
was appointed inspector of saltworks and became a member of the 
Academy in 1773, giving him the title of “Architecte du Roi” or 
architect to the king.
His first important public commission was the saltworks at Arc 
et Senans (1779), near the forest of Chaux in eastern France. Salt 
was a vital and expensive commodity that was produced from saline 
springs that required large quantities of wood to boil down the salty 
liquid. Ledoux’s design is an early work of industrial architecture. 
The complex is organized in a semi-circle around the house of 
the director from which operations could be monitored. Flanking 
the house of the director are sheds where the evaporation process 
occurred. Arranged around the semi-circle are storage buildings, 
apartments for workers, offices, and a grotto-like entry building. 
Like Boullée, Ledoux was also an advocate for the use of primary 
forms. His design is a prime example of “architecture parlante,” a 
concept often attached to Ledoux’s work. This means that the archi￾tect uses techniques that “speak” to the function of the building. 
This concept was important as a wide range of new building types 
were emerging at the time.
In the 1780s, Ledoux was again employed by the governmen￾tal agency responsible for collecting customs and monitoring the 
tobacco and salt industries. He designed offices for the organization 
and the controversial custom/toll houses, or barrières, that were con￾structed around Paris. This commission involved the design of over 
50 toll houses, each an essay on primary form and on Ledoux’s force￾ful use of the classical orders. Intended to demonstrate the power 
of the state and to prevent smuggling, the barrières would become 
symbols of government oppression during and after the Revolution. 
Ledoux became a despised public figure as a result. In 1793, He was 
imprisoned for a year during the Reign of Terror.
After his release from prison Ledoux developed his visionary text 
L’architecture considérée sous le rapport de l’art, des moeurs et de la legisla￾tion (or Architecture Considered in Relation to Art, Mores, and Legislation) 
published in 1804 and 1847. In the text, Ledoux developed his 
scheme for the Royal Saltworks into a vision of an ideal city. His 
design doubled the original saltworks plan and scattered through￾out a pastoral surrounding landscape a series of novel institutions, 
each a demonstration of the concept of “architecture parlante.” The 
most explicit example of this is the Oïkéma, or the house of sexual 14 Revolution and Republicanism
instruction, which features a plan based on the phallus. The scheme, 
dedicated to “artistic workmen” in an Eden-like setting, featured 
designs for houses for rural caretakers, coopers, woodcutters, char￾coal burners, and the like. Ledoux writes:
You must come to terms with the site, allowing it to suggest methods of 
relating the building both to its function and to its position in the plan. 
Any shape that can be drawn by a single compass stroke is recognized by 
good taste. The circle and the square are the letters of the alphabet with 
which the author will spell out his best work. With these, epic poems and 
elegies, hymns to the gods and simple airs for shepherds, are composed; 
temples can rise up to Valour, Strength, and Voluptuousness; houses are 
built as well as the humblest places used by the community.10
Jean-Jacques Lequeu is the least known of the three “revolution￾ary” architects. His legacy is a series of fantastical drawings, including 
manuscripts for several unpublished treatises, that he deposited in 
the Bibliothèque Royale (now the national library) just before he 
died. Celebrated for his meticulous draftsmanship, his design for a 
“Temple of Equality” (1794) demonstrated his vision for revolution￾ary architecture.11
* * *
A political revolution, usually triggered by an uprising of people, 
is intended to result in a better society. Architecture is one mode for 
expressing the aspirations of revolutionary forces. In America, the use 
of architecture derived from Roman precedents to express the new 
republic can be seen as an ironic choice of styles, given that Rome 
was ruled by emperors. And, as architectural historian Anthony 
Vidler argues, in the end, there isn’t really an architecture that con￾sistently captures the French Revolution. In fact, the destruction 
of monuments representing the French monarchical system more 
accurately portrays the revolutionary spirit of the age.12 Nevertheless, 
the political revolutions of the late 18th century resulted in many 
changes that would affect the course of modern architecture.
NOTES
1 Jack A. Goldstone, Revolutions: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2014), p. 4.
2 Ibid., p. 19.
3 See Richard A. Lynch, “Foucault’s Theory of Power,” in Dianna Taylor, ed., 
Michel Foucault: Key Concepts (London: Routledge, 2014), pp. 13–26.Revolution and Republicanism 15
4 Michel Foucault, “The Subject and Power,” in James D. Faubion, ed., Michel 
Foucault: Power (New York: The New Press, 2000), p. 332.
5 See Lloyd De Witt and Corey Piper, eds., Thomas Jefferson, Architect: 
Palladian Models, Democratic Principles, and the Conflict of Ideals (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2019).
6 Louis P. Nelson, “The Architecture of Democracy in a Landscape of Slavery: 
Design and Construction of Jefferson’s University,” in Lloyd De Witt and 
Corey Piper, eds., Thomas Jefferson, Architect: Palladian Models, Democratic 
Principles, and the Conflict of Ideals (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2019), 
p. 115.
7 Mabel O. Wilson, “Notes on Thomas Jefferson’s Virginia Capitol,” Architect 
Magazine, Posted Dec. 28, 2020. https://www.architectmagazine.com/
design/notes-on-thomas-jeffersons-virginia-capitol_o. Accessed August 20, 
2021.
8 Gordon S. Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (New York: 
Vintage Books, 1993), pp. 7–8.
9 Etienne-Louis Boullée, “Architecture, Essay on Art,” in H. Rosenau, ed., 
Boullée and Visionary Architecture (London: Academy Editions, 1976), p. 82.
10 Claude-Nicolas Ledoux, “Architecture Considered in Relation to Art, 
Mores, and Legislation,” in E.G. Holt, ed., From the Classicists to the 
Impressionists: Art and Architecture in the Nineteenth Century (New York: 
Anchor Books, 1966), p. 242.
11 Lequeu’s manuscripts on Architecture Civile, Nouvelle Methode, Figures Lascives, 
and Figures et Architecture are reproduced in Philippe Duboy, Lequeu: An 
Architectural Enigma (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986).
12 See Anthony Vidler, “Researching Revolutionary Architecture,” Journal of 
Architectural Education, vol. 44, no. 4 (August 1991), pp. 206–210.
SUGGESTED READING
Bergdoll, Barry. European Architecture 1750–1890. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2000.
De Witt, Lloyd and Corey Piper, eds. Thomas Jefferson, Architect: Palladian Models, 
Democratic Principles, and the Conflict of Ideals. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2019.
Fontana-Giusti, Gordana. Foucault for Architects. London: Routledge, 2013.
Reps, John W. Monumental Washington: The Planning and Development of the 
Capital Center. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1967.
Vidler, Anthony. Claude-Nicholas Ledoux: Architecture and Utopia in the Era of the 
French Revolution. Basel: Birkhäuser, 2020.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-3
The Picturesque, a popular style of landscape architecture devel￾oped in Britain during the 18th century, emphasized naturalistic 
landscapes that a viewer moved through. In the Picturesque garden, 
visitors encountered carefully composed views, or “pictures,” that 
were inspired by the landscape paintings of various 17th-century art￾ists.1
 The English approach to landscape was in direct opposition to 
the French formal tradition of the previous century, with its geo￾metrically composed landscapes and plantings. Ideas developed in 
landscape design were then transposed to architecture. The great 
Scottish architect Robert Adam (1728–1792) describes a picturesque 
architecture:
Movement is meant to express, the rise and fall, the advance and recess, 
with other diversity of form, in the different parts of a building, so as to add 
greatly to the picturesque of the composition. For the rising and falling, 
advancing and receding, with the convexity and the concavity, and other 
forms of the great parts, have the same effect in architecture, that hill and 
dale, fore-ground and distance, swelling and sinking have in a landscape: 
That is, they serve to produce an agreeable and diversified contour, that 
groups and contrasts like a picture, and creates a variety of light and shade, 
which gives great spirit, beauty and effect to the composition.2
Adam suggests an architecture that is irregular in form and silhou￾ette, producing “great spirit, beauty and effect.” The Picturesque 
style invoked new concepts of “beauty” and the notion that a garden 
or a building could evoke a wide range of emotions and sensations, 
in particular those associated with the “sublime.”
PICTURESQUE AND SUBLIME
3Picturesque and Sublime 17
Various developments during the 18th century were vital for lay￾ing the foundations for the emergence of fully modern architecture 
at the beginning of the 20th century. Beyond conjuring emotional 
responses, this involved new ways of composing and moving through 
landscapes and buildings. These factors are particularly evident in the 
evolution of the villa, an important building type in the development 
of modern architecture.3
* * *
A new approach to aesthetics occurred in the 18th century and 
was inspired by the philosopher John Locke’s Essay on Human 
Understanding (1690) and the subsequent writings of Joseph Addison 
entitled “The Pleasures of the Imagination” (1712). When consider￾ing buildings, Addison, an influential writer, places emphasis not on 
“beautiful proportions” but on how they create thoughts and ideas 
in the mind of an observer.4
 Both Locke and Addison introduced 
psychology into design. These ideas were further developed in the 
philosopher Edmund Burke’s A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of 
Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1757), which presents the new 
concepts of beauty and the “sublime.” In his introductory section on 
Taste, Burke writes:
On the whole it appears to me, that what is called Taste, in its most gen￾eral acceptation, is not a simple idea, but is partly made up of a percep￾tion of the primary pleasures of sense, of the secondary pleasures of the 
imagination, and the conclusions of the reasoning faculty, concerning the 
various relations of these, and concerning the human passions, man￾ners, and actions.5
Burke goes on in the first part to examine a range of human emo￾tions, from pain and pleasure, to delight and pleasure, and joy and 
grief. He introduces the “sublime” as producing the strongest human 
emotions, linking it to the sensation of terror. And he introduces the 
notion of “beauty” as a counterpart, along with behaviours such as 
sympathy, imitation, and ambition.
The second part of Burke’s text is devoted to the concept of the 
sublime, one of the defining ideas of the 18th century. It is one that 
captured many of the complexities of the period. The feeling of the 
sublime, as astonished terror, can be evoked by experiencing the 
immensity of mountains or the vastness of the ocean; it can be felt 
around certain animals, such as poisonous snakes, and by being in the 
presence of vast power. Further, certain conditions, such as darkness, 18 Picturesque and Sublime
solitude, and silence, can induce feelings of the sublime. The sublime 
can be manifest in the infinite, in the play of light and dark, and 
in the impact of certain sounds, smells, and tastes.6
 Often associ￾ated with sensations of awe, gloom, and melancholy, the sublime was 
captured in a series of drawings for enormous funeral monuments 
produced in the late 18th century by the French visionary architect 
Etienne-Louis Boullée (1728–1799) that expressed the mood of a 
changing time in which the role of religion was being questioned.
In the third part of the text on beauty, Burke claims that classical 
ideals such as proportion, fitness, and perfection are not the basis for 
the beautiful. He states that beauty is not related to reasoning, nor 
is it related to measure, geometry, or calculation.7
 In a direct chal￾lenge to classical principles, he argues that beautiful humans can have 
a wide range of proportions, questioning the ideal classical figure of 
a young man described by the ancient Roman architect Vitruvius (c. 
80–15 BC) and famously drawn by the Renaissance artist Leonardo da 
Vinci around 1487.8
 Further, Burke raises the question of “deformity” 
and the idea that “ugliness” is the opposite of beauty. In discussing the 
relationship between utility (fitness) and beauty, Burke states that many 
useful things are not beautiful, and therefore, utility is not a quality 
of beauty.9
 Beauty, as opposed to the sublime, encompasses smallness, 
smoothness, gradual variation, delicacy, and clear colour.10 Ultimately, 
he concludes that the sublime is based on pain, while beauty is based 
on pleasure. In the writings of these British thinkers, new concepts 
based on human experience challenged tradition and pointed forward 
to subsequent developments.
* * *
By abandoning many traditional determinants of good design, 18th 
century British landscape architects and architects were free to intro￾duce new concepts of beauty and taste. Instead of relying on clas￾sical principles, which Vitruvius equated with order, arrangement, 
eurythmy, symmetry, propriety, and economy,11 these designers were 
interested in how the experience of a landscape or building could 
evoke sensations and emotions. As noted previously, Vitruvius also 
referenced the human body as the perfect paradigm of design. This 
association with the human figure is found in the three basic classical 
orders: the Doric (a mature man), the Ionic (a mature woman), and 
the Corinthian (a young woman).
The English Picturesque gardens of the 18th century were part 
of large country estates of the land-owning classes. These vast Picturesque and Sublime 19
estates often featured a country house inspired by the influential late 
Renaissance Italian architect Andrea Palladio (1508–1580). The gar￾dens used carefully placed architectural “follies” to create histori￾cal and narrative associations. These were usually classical temples, 
ruined structures, or grottoes. Architecture was used to support pic￾torial compositions in the landscape that were experienced as one 
moved through a garden. The gardens were highly evocative, able 
to express a broad range of emotions, including the beautiful and 
the sublime. It is worth noting that in the 18th century, there was an 
awareness in Britain of Chinese garden design, which traditionally 
featured naturalistic landscapes, although on a smaller scale.
Garden designers work with the earth, landforms, vegetation, 
architecture, and water. Garden commentator Thomas Whately’s 
description of the qualities of water in an English garden from 
his Observations on Modern Gardening (1770) demonstrates how 
Picturesque garden designers could trigger the imagination of those 
viewing the gardens:
So various are the characters that water can assume, that there is scarcely 
an idea in which it may not concur, or an impression which it cannot 
enforce: a deep stagnated pool, dank and dark with shades which it dimly 
reflects befits the seat of melancholy . . . a brisker current, which wan￾tons in little eddies over a bright sandy bottom, or babbles among peb￾bles, spreads cheerfulness all around . . . the roar and rage of a torrent, 
its force, its violence, its impetuosity, tend to inspire terror; that terror, 
which, whether as cause or effect, is so nearly allied with sublimity.12
The “characters” that Whately describes, including those inspired 
by artificial architectural ruins, evoke the passing of time and, ulti￾mately, the decay that everything experiences.
The early phase of the English Picturesque garden was defined 
by the painter and designer William Kent (1685–1748), who often 
reworked gardens. A significant early work by Kent is his redesign 
of the Rousham Garden in Oxfordshire (1744), which involved sof￾tening the features of the garden, introducing various architectural 
and sculptural elements, and creating the impression that the gar￾den extended into the surrounding landscape. Kent used a similar 
approach at the much larger garden at Stowe (1748). A particularly 
distinctive garden is Stourhead (1783) in Wiltshire, designed by own￾ers Henry Hoare and Richard Colt Hoare, where the visitor to the 
garden journeys around an artificial lake encountering various care￾fully composed views. Lancelot “Capability” Brown (1716–1783), 20 Picturesque and Sublime
who defined the second phase of the English Picturesque garden, 
was responsible for many gardens that used simple and open designs 
that were less reliant on a pictorial approach. Ultimately, the English 
Picturesque garden was the product of a wealthy society prepared to 
question traditional values and to draw inspiration from a variety of 
sources.
* * *
The defining building type during the late 18th and early 19th 
century, according to architectural historian Peter Collins, was the 
villa, which would also be a formative building type for modern 
architects including Frank Lloyd Wright and Le Corbusier.13 As 
a more informal type of country house, the villa descends from 
Roman times. And while most large English country houses of the 
18th century were neo-Palladian, various garden designers began to 
introduce Gothic elements into the garden. Gothic architecture is 
commonly associated with the great medieval cathedrals of Europe 
and features the use of elements such as pointed arches, flying but￾tresses, and steep roofs. It is a style that had largely been out of fash￾ion until it was revived in the 18th and 19th centuries. Further, in 
the middle of the 18th century, architects also began to consider 
ordinary buildings, such as cottages, as worthy of study, which intro￾duced rustic features to landscape and building design as well.
Two early neo-Gothic houses were Strawberry Hill (1754) at 
Twickenham by the writer and politician Horace Walpole (1717–
1797) for himself and Fonthill Abbey (1813) in Wiltshire for William 
Beckford, designed by the architect James Wyatt (1746–1813). Both 
houses were asymmetrical in design and composition, composed of 
Gothic elements, and built to create a range of affects. The emer￾gence of neo-Gothic villas in the 18th century responded to the 
Picturesque, as Gothic was seen as a more varied and flexible style of 
architecture capable of creating a response to a landscape and evok￾ing feelings of the sublime. As Collins states, “in these structures 
originated the notion of free planning,” resulting in “freely designed 
shapes.”14 Eventually, this would lead to a relationship which matched 
form and function (see Chapter 5).
Richard Payne Knight (1750–1824) was a somewhat controversial 
writer, collector, and politician who inherited family wealth. Like 
many rich Englishmen of his generation, he travelled to Italy and 
Europe as part of a “Grand Tour” of historical sites. Knight became 
one of the late promoters of the Picturesque tradition. His Analytical Picturesque and Sublime 21
Inquiry into the Principles of Taste, published in 1805, discusses the 
concept of the “association of ideas,” he writes:
As all the pleasures of intellect arise from the association of ideas, the 
more the materials of association are multiplied, the more the sphere of 
these pleasures be enlarged. To a mind richly stored, almost every object 
of nature or art, that presents itself to the senses, either excites fresh 
trains and combinations of ideas, or vivifies and strengthens those which 
existed before.15
This was a development of notions that had been circulating for over 
a century with an emphasis on ideas over emotions.
Between 1772 and 1778, Knight built Downton Castle in 
Hertfordshire, England as an expression of his ideas, particularly the 
radical use of an irregular plan. The design was inspired, it seems, 
by the medieval castle as an older building type, one that was ideal 
for expressing qualities of the beautiful and the sublime. However, 
Knight did not opt for a medieval style in the original design; instead, 
the building was designed in his interpretation of the Classical style. 
Gothic additions to the house were undertaken in the mid-19th 
Figure 3.1 Main Floor Plan, Horace Walpole, Strawberry Hill, 1754, Twicken￾ham, England. The design features a series of regular spaces arranged in an irreg￾ular and Picturesque manner along a central corridor. Drawing by Mohammad 
Moezzi.22 Picturesque and Sublime
century. The plan is innovative in that it uses function to create an 
irregular design. As architectural historian Andrew Ballantyne writes:
Knight’s plan . . . was remarkable. Internally its arrangements abided by 
the conventions of the day, but the conventional rooms were grouped in 
a strikingly original effect, giving rise to the irregular and unaccountable 
appearance of the exterior.16
Downton Castle is an early example of picturesque architecture and 
the use of the irregular plan organized according to function and 
the site.
The emphasis on dynamic asymmetrical compositions, such as 
Downton Castle, foreshadows The International Style exhibition held 
at the Museum of Modern Art in New York in 1932 (see chap￾ter 12). According to Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, 
the curators of the exhibition, the International Style, as the cul￾mination of modern architectural developments in the 1920s, was 
defined by volume, regularity, and the avoidance of applied decora￾tion.17 In the catalogue, Hitchcock and Johnson expand on the idea 
of “regularity,” which involved structural consistency, avoided axial 
symmetry, diverged from pure functionalism, and sought to create 
visual interest.18 Ultimately, modern architects used compositional 
approaches that were not classical; instead, they employed a func￾tional organization of spaces that resulted in form.19
Finally, the picturesque was also adopted in urban design, espe￾cially to create dynamic vistas and interesting sequences of spaces in 
cities. This is found in Georgian cities, such as Bath and Edinburgh, 
and in John Nash’s (1752–1835) transformation of London with 
Regent’s Park and Regent’s Street. John Summerson, the important 
British architectural historian, confirms that Nash took an approach 
to urban design inspired by landscape design:
This curious mixture of laissez-faire and spasmodic control reflects Nash’s 
philosophy of street design as it evolved in the unique circumstances 
with which it faced. It was nothing if not realistic. It allowed individual 
expression by different users but at the same time aimed at shuffling 
the accidental into picturesque coherence. It was a landscape philosophy 
brought to bear on townscape.20
The concept of carefully composed streetscape design was also a fea￾ture of late 19th-century urban design trends, including the City 
Beautiful and Garden City movements (see Chapter 7).
* * *Picturesque and Sublime 23
During the 18th century, designers were willing to break from 
history, redefine beauty, and employ concepts such as the sublime in 
their work. The notion of expressing feelings of melancholy, sadness, 
awesomeness, ugliness, and strangeness introduced psychology into 
design. At the same time, the Picturesque inspired new and dynamic 
approaches to landscape and building design that would become a 
hallmark of modern architecture. The concept of the sublime has 
continued to impact 20th-century thinking. The American abstract 
expressionist painter Barnett Newman (1905–1970) wrote in 1948, 
while discussing the sublime, that the “impulse of modern art was 
this desire to destroy beauty.”21 The sublime has also been taken up by 
various Postmodern philosophers, including Jean-François Lyotard.22
NOTES
1 Such as Nicholas Poussin (1594–1665) and Claude Lorrain (1600–1682).
2 Robert Adam quoted in Robin Middleton, Neoclassical and 19th Century 
Architecture (New York: Harry N. Abrams Inc., 1980), p. 48.
3 See James S. Ackerman, The Villa: Form and Ideology of Country Houses
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1990).
4 Peter Collins, Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture, 1750–1950 (Montreal: 
MQUP, 1967), p. 45.
5 Edmund Burke, A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the 
Sublime and Beautiful (London: Vernor and Hood et al., 1798), p. 30.
6 See Ibid., pp. 41–159.
7 See Ibid., pp. 164–166.
8 See Ibid., pp. 181–183.
9 See Ibid., pp. 191–202.
10 See Ibid., pp. 209–221.
11 Vitruvius, The Ten Books of Architecture (New York: Dover Publications Inc., 
1960), pp. 13–16.
12 Thomas Whately quoted in John Dixon Hunt and Peter Willis, eds., The 
Genius of the Place: The English Landscape Garden 1620–1820 (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1988), pp. 302–303.
13 Collins, Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture, pp. 42–43.
14 Ibid., p. 58.
15 Richard Payne Knight quoted in Hunt and Willis, eds., The Genius of the 
Place, p. 348.
16 Andrew Ballantyne, “Downton Castle: Function and Meaning,” Architectural 
History, vol. 32 (1989), p. 114.
17 Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style (New 
York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1966), p. 13.
18 See Ibid., pp. 56–68.24 Picturesque and Sublime
19 The relationship between modernity and the picturesque is examined 
in: Caroline Constant, “The Barcelona Pavilion as Landscape Garden: 
Modernity and the Picturesque,” in The Modern Architectural Landscape
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012), pp. 45–60.
20 John Summerson, The Life and Work of John Nash, Architect (London: George 
Allen & Unwin, 1980), p. 132.
21 Barnett Newman, “The Sublime Is Now,” in Herschel B. Chipp, ed., 
Theories of Modern Art (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968), 
p. 552.
22 See Jean-François Lyotard, The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1984).
SUGGESTED READING
Collins, Peter. Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture, 1750–1950. Montreal: 
MQUP, 1967.
Hitchcock, Henry-Russell and Philip Johnson. The International Style. New 
York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1966.
Hunt, John Dixon and Peter Willis, eds. The Genius of the Place: The English 
Landscape Garden 1620–1820. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1988.
Vidler, Anthony. The Architectural Uncanny: Essays in the Modern Unhomely. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
Watkin, David. The English Vision: Picturesque in Architecture, Landscape and 
Garden Design. London: J. Murray, 1982.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-4
Beyond the American and French Revolutions, the other great revo￾lution of the late 18th century was the Industrial Revolution (1760–
1830), which would radically change the planet by creating expanded 
mining operations, extensive transportation systems, factory cities, 
taller buildings, and the destructive by-products of technological 
innovation. The Industrial Revolution produced new manufactur￾ing processes and materials, including steel, plate glass, and rein￾forced concrete, that were essential to defining modern architecture. 
New machines such as the railway locomotive, the steamship, the 
elevator, the automobile, and the airplane would collapse people’s 
sense of time and space. The 19th century also witnessed the emer￾gence of early forms of “communications” technology, including the 
telegraph, light bulb, and the telephone, ultimately creating media 
theorist Marshall McLuhan’s concept of the “global village.”1
 The 
heroes of the period were engineers and inventors, such as George 
Stephenson (1781–1848), Isambard Kingdom Brunel (1806–1859), 
and Thomas Alva Edison (1847–1931), who created marvels with 
the new technologies. They essentially married the knowledge of 
modern science to practical inventions that changed lives around the 
world.
The effect on architecture would be dramatic as the new materi￾als enabled new forms of expression. Major societal and economic 
changes led to the design of new types of commercial and industrial 
buildings: factories, docks and warehouses, railway stations, hotels, 
markets, department stores, banks, and office buildings. The rapid 
TECHNOLOGY AND MATERIALS
426 Technology and Materials
change brought on by industrialization and social/political change 
meant many new types of institutions were established, from hos￾pitals, asylums, and prisons to public museums, concert halls, and 
libraries. Globally, cities rapidly expanded, drawing millions of peo￾ple from rural areas. As urban populations dramatically increased and 
new types of buildings and services appeared, the modern city was 
born (see Chapter 7).
* * *
The discipline of engineering, which was so essential for defin￾ing the modern architecture of the early 20th century, began with 
military engineering, particularly in France in the late 17th and early 
18th centuries. Military figures such as Sébastien le Prestre de Vauban 
(1633–1707) and Bernard Forest de Bélidor (1698–1761) systema￾tized the design of military fortifications. This included developing 
specifications for construction and early efforts to calculate the forces 
on retaining walls. By the middle of the 18th century, civil engineer￾ing, devoted mainly to the design of bridges and roads, emerged as a 
separate discipline from architecture. The creation of the École des 
Ponts et Chaussées (School of Bridges and Roads) by Jean-Rodolphe 
Perronet (1708–1794) in Paris in 1747 was a turning point in the his￾tory of civil engineering. Perronet’s design for a bridge at Neuilly 
near Paris, completed in 1772, used early forms of structural calcula￾tion. The establishment of the École Polytechnique in Paris in 1795, 
during the French Revolution, was also a key moment in the history 
of engineering.2
According to historian Hans Straub, Charles Auguste Coulomb 
(1736–1806) must be considered the founder of structural analy￾sis or building statics.3
 However, it was Louis Marie Henri Navier 
(1785–1836) who truly established the field, particularly in his lec￾tures to students at the École Polytechnique, first published in 1826. 
This would lead to further theoretical developments in the field of 
structural design, something for which the French were famous.4
An early example of the new methods modifying traditional prac￾tices occurred at St. Peter’s Basilica in Rome after cracks appeared 
in the dome; a controversial report produced in 1748 outlined solu￾tions to the problem that used early forms of analysis. Probably the 
earliest work of architecture to use an “engineering” or scientific 
approach in its structural design was the church of Ste. Geneviève 
in Paris (1790) by the architect Jacques-Germain Soufflot (1713–
1780). The design significantly reduced the structural footprint of a Technology and Materials 27
typical 18th-century neo-Classical church based on new ideas about 
the strength of materials. Unfortunately, soon after completion, Ste. 
Geneviève (now the Panthéon) developed structural cracks due to 
poor construction. This situation fuelled an intense debate between 
traditionalists who argued for time-tested approaches to construction 
and proponents of the new methods of scientific calculation.5
* * *
The Industrial Revolution began in 18th-century Britain and, over 
the next century, would spread around the world, driven by inven￾tions such as the iron blast furnace, the steam engine, and the spin￾ning jenny.6
 Vital to the development of the Industrial Revolution 
were advances during the 17th and 18th centuries in the design of 
steam engines. Large, crude versions were developed for coal min￾ing since coal was an essential energy source. In 1776, the Scottish 
inventor and engineer James Watt (1736–1819) introduced a set of 
improvements which would lead to the broad use of steam power for 
railways, shipping, and manufacturing.
In the early 19th century, the railway locomotive was pioneered 
by various figures; the first experiment with passenger rail occurred 
on the Stockton and Darlington line (1825), built by George 
Stephenson. A significant feat of engineering, the line was designed 
primarily to transport coal. It launched the railway era, which over￾took the world.7
 The design of rails for the new railway industry 
progressed quickly, resulting first in the use of cast iron and then the 
stronger wrought iron. Early structural iron beams could now be 
manufactured in a way similar to rails and were first used in ware￾houses and factory structures where there was a need for open spaces 
to accommodate machinery placement.
By the late 18th century, the bridge, as a structure, began to increase 
in span as new materials and methods drove innovation. Historically, 
bridges were designed by architects and built of masonry, but by the 
19th century, they were the domain of engineers and began to incor￾porate cast and wrought iron, and eventually steel and reinforced 
concrete. The Coalbrookdale Bridge (1779), with a span of 30.6 
metres (100.5 feet), by Abraham Darby III, T.F. Pritchard, and John 
Wilkinson, was the first important structure made of cast iron arches. 
However, the expressive potential inherent in the new material was 
yet to be realized as the design essentially mimicked a stone bridge.8
In the 19th century, the suspension bridge, an old form of bridge 
construction, was revived as engineers realized how iron chains and 28 Technology and Materials
steel cables could allow for much longer spans. The Clifton Suspension 
Bridge in Bristol, completed in 1864, designed by Isambard Kingdom 
Brunel, William Henry Barlow, and John Hawkshaw, is a striking 
example of a suspension bridge that used wrought iron chains for a 
span of 214.0 metres (702 feet). The later Brooklyn Bridge (1873) 
by the engineer John A. Roebling (1806–1869) used a steel cable 
for the suspension system; its long span is 486 metres (1595 feet). 
Other notable 19th-century bridges include the Britannia Bridge 
(1850) across the Menai Straits, by Robert Stephenson (1803–1859) 
and William Fairbairn, built using box girders of wrought iron plate. 
The Firth of Forth Bridge (1890) in Scotland, by engineers Sir John 
Fowler and Sir Benjamin Baker, dramatically used a tubular steel 
cantilever structure.9
Despite the significant difference in scale between works of engi￾neering infrastructure and architecture, key developments occurred 
in the structuring of buildings. Iron was first used in a limited way 
for certain structural elements in industrial buildings and then for 
entire structural and exterior envelope systems. An important early 
example was the Library of Ste. Geneviève (1850) in Paris by Henri 
Labrouste (1801–1875), where iron was used for the columns in 
the reading room and for the roof structure. A similar approach was 
employed by Labrouste for the Bibliothèque Nationale, which was 
completed a few years later. These two buildings demonstrated how 
much more slender iron columns are than stone ones. Architects 
throughout the second half of the 19th century struggled with the 
design challenges associated with the new structural properties and 
proportions of iron and steel.
Developments in the manufacture of glass, where larger sheets 
of high-quality glass could be manufactured in quantity, were also 
essential to creating new types of buildings. Iron and glass were used 
extensively in the construction of large railway sheds, greenhouses, 
market halls, and exhibition buildings. The greenhouse designer 
and landscape architect Joseph Paxton (1801–1865) designed one 
of the pivotal buildings of the 19th century, the Crystal Palace in 
London, for the Great Exposition of 1851. The building was 564 
metres (1851 feet) long and built of prefabricated cast iron and glass 
panels on a 2.4 metre module (8 feet). Paxton demonstrated that a 
very large temporary building could be manufactured and erected in 
less than eight months. In many ways, the Crystal Palace celebrated 
the aspirations and innovations of the 19th century.10 The 300 metre 
(974 feet) tall Eiffel Tower, completed for the 1889 Paris Exposition Technology and Materials 29
by the distinguished engineer Gustave Eiffel (1832–1923), was built 
of wrought iron and demonstrated how the material performed in 
a vertical configuration. It would become an iconic symbol of Paris 
and of the age.
* * *
In 1855, the English inventor Henry Bessemer (1813–1898) 
devised a new way of mechanically pushing air through a furnace, 
resulting in the creation of steel, a material with important tensile 
properties and the strongest and most versatile form of iron. This 
innovation resulted in the development of two signature materials 
of modern architecture: steel and reinforced concrete. In 1857, the 
American industrialist Elisha Graves Otis (1811–1861) patented a 
“safe” elevator, guaranteed not to plunge out of control if the cable 
should break (see Chapter 13). Architects and engineers in Chicago 
and New York soon employed these innovations to create the tall 
commercial office building. As Louis H. Sullivan (1856–1924), a 
pioneering figure in the development of the skyscraper, describes 
the “modern office building”:
offices are necessary for the transaction of business; the invention and 
perfection of high-speed elevators make vertical travel, that was once 
tedious and painful, now easy and comfortable; development of steel 
manufacture has shown the way to safe, rigid, economical constructions 
rising to a great height; continued growth of centers and rise in value of 
ground, stimulate an increase in the number of stories; these successfully 
piled one upon another, react on ground values.11
The Chicago fire of 1871 provided an opportunity for rede￾velopment. The city was rebuilt as a modern city with a down￾town business core defined by tall office buildings, hotels, and 
department stores. The first skyscraper is attributed to William Le 
Baron Jenney (1832–1907), a Paris-trained engineer who opened 
his design practice in Chicago in 1868. He produced a tall fire￾protected steel frame building, the Home Insurance building of 
1885. The façade was hung from the structure, effectively cre￾ating the “curtain” wall and resulting in the building plan and 
façade operating independently of the structure. Jenney’s pio￾neering concept was then advanced by other architects and engi￾neers. The development of the steel “Chicago Frame” during the 
1880s and 1890s was a crucial idea in the progress towards a fully 
modern architecture.1230 Technology and Materials
A series of designs in the next few years by several large Chicago 
firms advanced the expression of the tall building. The 12-storey 
Tacoma Building by Holabird & Roche from 1889 emphasized 
each floor rather than an expression of vertical continuity. Much the 
same can be said of Burnham & Root’s 15-storey Reliance Building 
(1895). Its modernity comes from other innovations: large expansive 
windows (known as the “Chicago window”), glazed white tile clad￾ding, and a simple top, creating a light modern feeling.
The firm of Adler & Sullivan combined the talents of engineer 
Dankmar Adler (1844–1900) with the genius of Sullivan. It would 
play a crucial role in the Chicago architectural scene, contributing to 
the refinement of the tall building as a type. Sullivan was a vital figure, 
influenced by the architecture of Henry Hobson Richardson (1838–
1886), the Boston-based architect prolific in a neo-Romanesque 
style, and the idiosyncratic Philadelphia-based architect Frank Furness 
(1839–1912) for whom he had worked. Sullivan was also the mentor 
for a young Frank Lloyd Wright (see Chapter 10). Sullivan, like several 
19th century American architects, studied architecture at the famous 
École des Beaux-Arts in Paris before beginning his employment with 
Adler in 1879. An iconoclastic poet, he developed a lush and unique 
approach to ornamentation that employed vegetation in a geometric 
order inspired by Islamic design and consistent with the Art Nouveau 
design of the period.
An important early work for the Adler & Sullivan firm was the 
Auditorium Building (1890) in Chicago, a very large multi-use 
urban building incorporating a grand performance space, a hotel, 
and offices. Another breakthrough design for Sullivan was the 
Wainwright Building (1891) in St. Louis, which was the first tall 
building to truly express its verticality. It is a robust building executed 
in red brick and terracotta, employing an extruded order that uni￾fies the middle seven stories and luxurious ornamentation featured 
on spandrel panels and in the cornice. This emphasis on vertical￾ity would inspire many subsequent skyscraper designs, like the neo￾Gothic Woolworth Building (1913) in New York by Cass Gilbert 
(1859–1934). Sullivan’s design for the Carson Pirie Scott Store 
(1904) would consolidate the use of the Chicago window in com￾mercial buildings.
In 1922, the Chicago Tribune newspaper sponsored an interna￾tional design competition for the design of its new headquarters. 
It pitted traditionalists proposing neo-Gothic and neo-Classical 
schemes against modernists such as Walter Gropius (1883–1969). Technology and Materials 31
The competition signalled the end of traditional design, although the 
great American Art Deco skyscrapers of the 1930s retained a sense 
of this along with ornamentation that referenced modern industry.
Ultimately, the tall building, normally devoted to office and resi￾dential functions, represents the use of technology to create “the 
most obvious symbol of capitalistic speculation and private property 
ownership.”13 The tall building continues to symbolize economic 
Figure 4.1 Main Elevation, Adler & Sullivan, Wainwright Building, 1891, 
St.  Louis, Missouri, USA. The elevation is structured by a solid two-storey 
commercial base which supports seven storeys of office space in a unified expres￾sion of verticality; the building is topped off with a highly ornamented cornice. 
Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.32 Technology and Materials
progress for cities across the world. Another result of the develop￾ments in Chicago and New York was the creation of the large profes￾sional architectural firm, scaled for large commercial buildings. The 
modern architect Richard Neutra writes of working at Holabird & 
Roche in the 1920s:
[T]he firm was surprisingly capable of breeding its own designers, its 
own engineers, its methodic and technological ideas of procedure. And 
original procedure begets the original product. Such an office was really 
a training camp for structural talent and a generator of technical deter￾minants of design.14
The drive towards modern architecture in Chicago was briefly inter￾rupted by the World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893, which marked 
a return to traditional principles of composition and style. Based on a 
plan developed by Daniel H. Burnham (1846–1912) and the impor￾tant landscape architect Frederick Law Olmstead (1822–1903), the 
formal design incorporates a number of large white neo-Classical 
buildings designed by a host of New York and Chicago firms. It 
would foreshadow Burnham and Edward H. Bennett’s later plan for 
Chicago (1909) and the emergence of the City Beautiful movement 
(see Chapter 7).
* * *
The development of reinforced concrete occurred during the 19th 
century, although concrete, as a naturally occurring material known 
as pozzolana, has been employed since Roman times. In the 18th 
century, natural concrete or forms of Portland cement were used 
for industrial applications. Concrete uses a combination of cement 
and aggregate and is initially a thick liquid that is poured or laid 
into a formwork. The introduction of steel reinforcing rods into 
concrete resulted in a material that was strong in compression, with 
new tensile properties that allowed it to be shaped in complex and 
unconventional ways.15 Following a series of experiments by various 
French and German pioneers, François Hennebique (1843–1921) 
developed a system of reinforcing concrete. Patented in 1892, it 
proved ideal for the construction of buildings, and his company 
erected numerous structures using the new method. An early exam￾ple of a building employing reinforced concrete is the church of 
St. Jean de Montmartre (1894) in Paris by Anatole de Baudot. In the 
early 20th century, bridges of reinforced concrete were constructed 
with ever-increasing long spans. The Swiss engineer Robert Maillart Technology and Materials 33
(1872–1940) was particularly adept at using reinforced concrete to 
create striking bridges in the Alps. In the early 20th century, Auguste 
Perret (1874–1954) and Le Corbusier (1887–1965) pioneered the 
use of reinforced concrete as an important material for architectural 
expression (see Chapter 10).
* * *
The break between architecture and engineering began in the 
middle of the 18th century and continued through the 19th cen￾tury. This meant that engineering forged ahead with technological 
innovation without being hindered by historical styles, while archi￾tects became increasingly anxious about how to create the archi￾tecture of the Industrial Age.16 This exploration also underscored 
the relationship between structure and ornament that would bedevil 
architects throughout the 19th century. Le Corbusier, in his cel￾ebrated text Toward an Architecture, published in 1923, noted that 
engineers were not encumbered by architectural tradition and thus 
could express the pure function of form in structures like American 
and Canadian grain elevators. In the 20th century, various architects 
and architectural movements exploited advanced technologies for 
conceptualizing buildings, continuing a tradition that had its origins 
in 19th-century engineering (see Chapter 13).
NOTES
1 See Marshall McLuhan, “The Gutenberg Galaxy,” in Eric McLuhan and 
Frank Zingrone, eds., Essential McLuhan (Concord, Ont.: House of Anansi 
Press, 1995), p. 126.
2 See Peter Collins, Changing Ideals in in Modern Architecture, 1750–1950
(Montreal: MQUP, 1967), pp. 185–197.
3 Hans Straub, A History of Civil Engineering (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1964), p. 151.
4 See Ibid., pp. 152–162.
5 See Collins, Changing Ideals in in Modern Architecture, pp. 188–189.
6 See Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture: The Growth of a New 
Tradition, 5th edition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982), 
pp. 164–290.
7 See Straub, A History of Civil Engineering, pp. 163–173.
8 See Ibid., pp. 174–175.
9 See Ibid., pp. 175–177.
10 See L.T.C. Rolt, Victorian Engineering (Harmondsworth: Penguin Press, 
1970), pp. 148–157.34 Technology and Materials
11 Louis Sullivan, “The Tall Building Artistically Considered,” in Kindergarten 
Chats and Other Writings (New York: Dover Publications, 1979), p. 202.
12 See Colin Rowe, “Chicago Frame,” in The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa and 
Other Essays (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982).
13 Joanna Merwood-Salisbury, “The First Chicago School and the Ideology of 
the Skyscraper,” in Peggy Deamer, ed., Architecture and Capitalism: 1845 to 
the Present (New York: Routledge, 2013), p. 37.
14 Richard Neutra, Life and Shape (New York: Appleton, Century Crofts, 
1962), p. 201.
15 See Peter Collins, Concrete, The Vision of a New Architecture, 2nd edition 
(Montreal: MQUP, 2004).
16 See Collins, Changing Ideals in in Modern Architecture, pp. 185–197.
SUGGESTED READING
Braham, William and Jonathan Hale, eds. Rethinking Technology: A Reader in 
Architectural Theory. London: Routledge, 2007.
Condit, Carl W. The Chicago School of Architecture: A History of Commercial 
and Public Building in the Chicago Area, 1875–1925. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1964.
Elliot, Cecil D. Technics and Architecture: The Development of Materials and Systems 
for Buildings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
Forty, Adrian. Concrete and Culture: A Material History. London: Reaktion 
Books, 2012.
Straub, Hans. A History of Civil Engineering. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1964.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-5
The emphasis placed on reason during the 18th-century European 
Enlightenment would lead to an alignment of architecture with sci￾ence. This resulted in two key concepts that have been central to the 
development of modern architecture: functionalism and rationalism. 
Although both address the form or shape of a building and what this 
expresses, functionalism places an emphasis on the organization of 
spaces, while rationalism focuses on the structure of form.
One of the enduring expressions associated with the development 
of modern architecture, particularly in the 1920s and 1930s, is “form 
follows function,” coined by the American architect Louis H. Sullivan 
(1856–1924), one of the pioneers of the skyscraper. However, the 
idea of the function of architecture is a much older concept that can 
be found in Vitruvius’s text, The Ten Books of Architecture. Vitruvius 
(c. 80–15 BC), a Roman architect, states that the three require￾ments of architecture are durability (firmitas), convenience (utilitas), 
and beauty (venustas).1
 Describing convenience or utility, Vitruvius 
writes: “when the arrangement of the apartments is faultless and 
presents no hindrance to use, and when each class of building is 
assigned to its suitable and appropriate exposure.”2
 The functional 
organization of buildings has always been important since buildings 
must respond to practical needs; however, they also respond to cul￾tural, economic, political, technological, and environmental factors.
The word function derives from the Latin word functio; however, 
it was not used commonly in the history of architectural writing 
before the 20th century. Starting in the 18th century, the concept of 
FUNCTIONALISM AND 
RATIONALISM
536 Functionalism and Rationalism
“function” or “purpose” was associated with various fields of science, 
particularly in biology. For example, 18th-century scientists involved 
in identifying and classifying plants relied on function and structure 
as key distinguishing factors.3
 The 18th-century Italian monk Carlo 
Lodoli was the first person to bring the concept of function into the 
theory of architecture, along with the idea of “representation.”4
* * *
In the early 19th century, the French architectural teacher Jean￾Nicholas-Louis Durand (1760–1834) put forward the idea of archi￾tecture as largely based on “utility” and “economy.” Advocating 
for the “composition” of standard elements using a planning grid, 
Durand proposed an architecture devoid of traditional forms, sym￾bolisms, and notions of beauty. Durand writes that a building will 
be commodious “if the number and size of all its parts, their form, 
situation, and arrangement, are in the closest possible relation to its 
purpose.”5
 Referencing the work of earlier French theorists, such as 
Claude Perrault (1613–1688), and the debates between the “ancients” 
and the “moderns,” Durand’s theories approximated a modern for￾mulation of architecture.6
In the 19th century, key architectural figures, including Gottfried 
Semper (1803–1879) and Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc (1814–
1879), addressed architectural function in their writings, along with 
concepts associated with rationalism. Louis H. Sullivan’s famous 
statement from 1896 was inspired by various sources, including a 
reverence for nature,7
 Sullivan writes:
Whether it be the sweeping eagle in his flight or the open apple-blossom, 
the toiling work-horse, the blithe swan, the branching oak, the winding 
stream at its base, the drifting clouds, over all the coursing sun, form 
ever follows function, and this is the law. Where function does not change 
form does not change.8
This quote is taken from the essay “The Tall Office Building 
Artistically Considered,” in which Sullivan discussed how to appro￾priately express the new “tall” building (see Chapter 4).9
 Sullivan 
and Frank Lloyd Wright were particularly inspired by the writings 
of the English philosopher and biologist Herbert Spencer (1820–
1903). Spencer, who derived ideas from Charles Darwin’s theory of 
“evolution,” influenced Sullivan’s understanding of nature and the 
“organic,” a unifying concept that would also be essential for Wright 
(see Chapter 10).10Functionalism and Rationalism 37
The most militant approach to functionalism can be found in the 
work of Hannes Meyer (1889–1954), the Swiss “objectivist” archi￾tect, who was one of the leading proponents of modern architecture 
during the late 1920s and a key member of the ABC Group. In 1927, 
he joined the Bauhaus school in Dessau. From 1928–1930, Meyer 
was its controversial director, the successor to the original founder, 
Walter Gropius. In his 1925 writings, Meyer unites function and 
form, often in a manifesto style. He developed a formula for archi￾tecture: function x economics. Attacking the notion of “composition” 
in art, Meyer shifted from a technical to a biological definition of 
purpose or function.11 Meyer wrote in 1928: “this functional, bio￾logical interpretation of architecture as giving shape to the functions 
of life, logically leads to pure construction: this world of constructive 
forms knows no native country.”12 According to Meyer, by analyz￾ing the technical requirements, economic factors, and the social and 
psychological routines of those using a building, a building can be 
organized.13 Meyer, along with others, including the Dutch archi￾tect Mart Stam (1899–1986), proposed a highly objective concept of 
functionalism that was understood by many to be the most extreme 
formulation of modern architecture.
Figure 5.1 Perspective, Hannes Meyer, Petersschule, 1926, Basel, Switzerland. 
The design features a rectilinear block housing various school spaces from which 
a large recreational platform and circulation elements are suspended in a clear 
expression of function. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.38 Functionalism and Rationalism
By the 1930s, the term “function” had displaced the word “pur￾pose,” and the concept of “functionalism” was commonly used in 
association with modern architecture.14 However, as curators Henry￾Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson write in the 1932 catalogue 
of the International Style exhibition in New York, “functionalists 
make a particular fetish of planning.”15 In other words, the func￾tional organization of spaces results in a formal solution, where each 
part is expressed according to its function; this is consistent with Le 
Corbusier’s phrase that the “plan is the generator.”16 This also raises 
the concept of the building “program,” or the list of spaces (and 
their functions/requirements), the analysis of which is a common 
part of the design process in modern architecture.17 While recogniz￾ing that function was essential to modern architecture, Hitchcock 
and Johnson also realized that architecture could not be based on 
it alone. This foreshadowed the death of functionalism, which was 
announced by a wide range of architects and critics in the 1960s.18
* * *
The concept of “rationalism” in architecture is often linked to 
functionalism, as noted previously. However, the two positions are 
very different, as rationalism addresses form following structure, 
whereas functionalism emphasizes space and the plan in its focus on 
form following function. The differences are articulated in German 
writer Adolf Behne’s (1885–1948) book The Modern Functional 
Building, published in 1926, in which he
distinguishes between a “functionalist” concept of the individual building 
as a natural organism, a “utilitarian” concern with the “economic prin￾ciple,” and a rationalist’s representative view of the virtues of standardi￾zation and typification. Purposefully, Behne lists rationalist prerogatives: 
a predilection for the “general case” against a functionalist concern for 
the “unique”; an acceptance of purposefulness but a disregard for the 
“tyranny” of instrumentality; a search for the most “appropriate” general 
solution as opposed to the most specifically adept, and an assertion of 
the collective “norm” in contrast to individual particularity.19
Rationalism, therefore, places an emphasis on repeatable elements 
and building solutions or types. It emphasizes the structure of form. 
Rationalism in architecture is found in the French tradition dating 
back to the 17th century and has links to the thinking of the French 
philosopher René Descartes (1596–1650). It gathered momentum 
in the 18th century with the emergence of biological classification Functionalism and Rationalism 39
systems and the publication of Marc-Antoine Laugier’s text An Essay 
on Architecture in 1753,20 in which he argues for an essential approach 
to architecture based on the “primitive hut” and Greek classicism.
The concept of a “type” can be defined “as a concept which 
describes a group of objects characterized by the same formal struc￾ture.”21 It was developed in the late 18th century by architectural 
theorist A.-C. Quatremère de Quincy (1755–1849), who modified 
Laugier’s concept of the “model” in architecture.22 The use of type 
implies that there are consistent, stable, and repeatable forms that 
endure over time; however, it is also evident from architectural his￾tory that types evolve and transform. The use of types also suggests 
that an architect is less concerned with new and imaginative solu￾tions to problems and is more interested in maintaining continuity 
with history. In this model, the architect “composes” a building’s 
form using various type elements and solutions, as suggested by Jean￾Nicholas-Louis Durand, who proposed a rationalist use of architec￾tural typologies in his books.23 The contemporary architect Rafael 
Moneo writes:
In these terms it can be said that the essence of the architectural object 
lies in its repeatability. . . . The identification of an architectural element 
like “column,” or of a whole building – “courthouse” – implies an entire 
class of similar objects with common characteristics.24
During the late 18th century and early 19th century, as new social, 
political, and technological demands arose, a wide range of new 
building types emerged, each of which needed specific expression. 
These included museums, art galleries, public libraries, concert halls, 
legislative buildings, hotels, factories, railway stations, warehouses, 
housing schemes, prisons, hospitals, etc.
The emphasis on structure made by rationalists in the 19th cen￾tury overlapped with the Battle of the Styles, or the conflict between 
Classicism and Gothicism (see Chapter 6). The proponents of the 
Gothic style argued that it was a language of construction better 
suited to express structure; this is captured in A.W.N. Pugin’s book 
True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture (1841), in which he 
writes: “there should be no features about a building which are not 
necessary for convenience, construction, or propriety . . . all orna￾ment should consist of enrichment of the essential construction of 
the building.”25
The great structural rationalist and theorist of the 19th century 
was E.-E. Viollet-le-Duc, a figure who would have a wide influence 40 Functionalism and Rationalism
on Art Nouveau architecture; he published various writings on the 
subject, including his Lectures on Architecture (1863 and 1872). Viollet￾le-Duc argued for the efficiency of Gothic structures. In his writings, 
he expressed admiration for both functionalism and rationalism:
There are two ways of expressing truth in architecture: it must be true 
according to the programme of requirements, and true according to the 
methods and means of construction. To be true according to the pro￾gramme, is to fulfil with scrupulous exactness all the conditions imposed 
by necessity; to be true according to the methods and means of con￾struction, is to employ materials with a due regard for their qualities and 
capacities.26
Violet-le-Duc’s nation of “the nature of materials” would also be 
an important concept for architects like Frank Lloyd Wright (see 
Chapter 10). Each material has its own structural properties and 
should be expressed honestly. Modern architects in the early 20th 
century largely rejected rationalism and the concept of type and 
instead emphasized functionalism. However, type can be found in 
the work of the prominent architect Le Corbusier, with his notion of 
the “type-objects” which respond to “type-needs” described in his 
book The Decorative Art of Today (1925) which refers to standardized 
and mass-produced objects.27
During the 20th century, Italian Rationalist movements sprang up 
between 1920–1940 and 1960–1990. In their alternative vision of 
modern architecture, they resurrected the idea of type. The Italian 
Rationalists of the 1920s and 1930s were a group of architects, many 
part of Gruppo 7, aligned closely with the Fascist regime of Benito 
Mussolini (1883–1945). They developed an architectural approach 
that fused together modernism and Classicism, often relying on 
existing typologies or creating new ones (see Chapter 14).
In the 1960s, Italian Neo-Rationalist architects, or the Tendenza, 
began to analyze the city in terms of types and typologies, look￾ing at the morphological shape of cities. Morphology deals with 
the internal structure of form. Aldo Rossi (1931–1997), the lead￾ing proponent of the “architecture of the city,” developed an 
interpretation of type (and typology and morphology) based on 
memory and reason. Rossi was one of the most influential archi￾tects of the second half of the 20th century, and his book The 
Architecture of the City (1966), remains a key text for architects. 
Referencing Quatremère de Quincy, Rossi discusses the concept 
of type: “typology presents itself as the study of types of elements Functionalism and Rationalism 41
that cannot be further reduced, elements of a city as well as of 
an architecture.”28 Opposed to what he terms “naïve functional￾ism,” he attacks modernism by stating: “we reject that concept of 
functionalism dictated by an ingenuous empiricism which holds 
that functions bring form together and in themselves constitute urban 
artifacts and architecture.”29 Rossi argues that architectural forms 
should provide a permanent order in the city, within which human 
events occur. The persistence of an urban artefact also participates 
in a collective memory. Neo-Rationalism during the 1960s and 
1970s also attempted to resurrect urban typologies that had been 
eliminated from modern cities: the street, the square, the park, the 
urban block, the quarter or district, and urban monuments.
* * *
The modern architecture developed in the 1920s strove to break 
away from historical languages by emphasizing the formal expres￾sion of function and structure. In his essay “Form and Figure,” Alan 
Colquhoun suggests that beyond the functional, typological, and 
structural approaches to architectural form, there is also the “figural.” 
He argues that a form can have a complex set of cultural ideas embed￾ded in it; this invokes the connection of metaphor or “poetic” lan￾guage to architectural form. Architects such as Aldo Rossi achieved 
a figural attitude to form by referencing the history of architecture 
through the use of historical fragments.30
NOTES
1 Vitruvius, The Ten Books on Architecture (New York: Dover Publications, 
1960), p. 17.
2 Ibid.
3 See Ute Poerschke, Architectural Theory of Modernism: Relating Functions and 
Forms (New York: Routledge, 2016), pp. 1–19.
4 See Ibid., pp. 28–43.
5 Jan-Nicholas-Louis Durand, “From Précis of the Lectures on Architecture
(1802),” in Harry Francis Mallgrave, ed., Architectural Theory, Volume I
(Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2006), p. 337.
6 See Alberto Pérez-Gómez, Architecture and the Crisis of Modern Science
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983), pp. 298–314.
7 See Poerschke, Architectural Theory, pp. 88–92.
8 Louis H. Sullivan, “The Tall Office Building Artistically Considered,” in 
Kindergarten Chats and Other Writings (New York: Dover Publications, 
1979), p. 208.42 Functionalism and Rationalism
9 Louis H. Sullivan’s partner, Dankmar Adler (1844–1900), had a somewhat 
different approach to the “form follows function” concept; see Thomas 
Leslie, “Dankmar Adler’s Response to Louis Sullivan’s ‘The Tall Office 
Building Artistically Considered’: Architecture and the ‘Four Causes’,” 
Journal of Architectural Education, vol. 64, no. 1 (2010), pp. 83–93.
10 See Peter Collins, “The Biological Analogy,” in Changing Ideals in Modern 
Architecture, 1750–1950 (Montreal: MQUP, 1967), pp. 149–158.
11 See Poerschke, Architectural Theory, pp. 104–112.
12 Hannes Meyer, “Building,” in Ulrich Conrads, ed., Programs and Manifestoes 
of 20th-Century Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971), p. 119.
13 Ibid., p. 120.
14 See Poerschke, Architectural Theory, pp. 141–143.
15 Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style (New 
York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1966), p. 85.
16 Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture (Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2007), 
p. 117.
17 See Collins, Changing Ideals, pp. 227–230.
18 See, for example, Reyner Banham, “Conclusion: Functionalism and Tech￾nology,” in Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (London: The Archi￾tectural Press, 1960), pp. 320–330; and Stanford Anderson, “The Fiction of 
Function,” Assemblage, no. 2 (February 1987), pp. 18–31.
19 Andrew Peckham and Torsten Schmiedeknecht, “The Rationalist 
Legacy: Complement and Contradiction,” Andrew Peckham and Torsten 
Schmiedeknecht, eds., The Rationalist Reader: Architecture and Rationalism in 
Western Europe 1920–1940/1960–1990 (Abingdon: Routledge, 2014), p. 11.
20 See Marc-Antoine Laugier, An Essay on Architecture (Los Angeles: Hennessey 
& Ingalls, 1977).
21 Rafael Moneo, “On Typology,” Oppositions, no. 13 (Summer 1978), p. 23.
22 See Anthony Vidler, “From the Hut to the Temple: Quatremère de Quincy 
and the Idea of Type,” in The Writing of the Walls; Architectural Theory in 
the Late Enlightenment (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1987), 
pp. 147–164.
23 See Moneo, “On Typology,” pp. 23–32.
24 Ibid., p. 23.
25 A.W.N. Pugin, “From The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture
(1841),” in Mallgrave, Architectural Theory, p. 385.
26 E.E. Viollet-le-Duc, “Tenth Discourse,” in Elizabeth Gilmore Holt, ed., 
A Documentary History of Art, Vol. III (New York: Anchor Books, 1966), 
p. 216. See also M.F. Hearn, ed., The Architectural Theory of Viollet-le-Duc: 
Readings and Commentary (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990).
27 See Le Corbusier, The Decorative Arts of Today (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1987), pp. 67–79.
28 Aldo Rossi, The Architecture of the City (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982), 
p. 41.Functionalism and Rationalism 43
29 Ibid., p. 46.
30 See Alan Colquhoun, “Form and Figure,” in Essays in Architectural Criticism: 
Modern Architecture and Historical Change (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1981), pp. 190–202.
SUGGESTED READING
Behne, Adolf. The Modern Functional Building. Santa Monica, CA: Getty 
Research Institute, 1996.
Moneo, Rafael. “On Typology.” Oppositions, no. 13 (Summer 1978).
Peckham, Andrew and Torsten Schmiedeknecht, eds. The Rationalist Reader: 
Architecture and Rationalism in Western Europe 192–1940/1960–1990. Abing￾don: Routledge, 2014.
Poerschke, Ute. Architectural Theory of Modernism: Relating Functions and Forms. 
New York: Routledge, 2016.
Rossi, Aldo. The Architecture of the City. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-6
As influential 19th-century Gothic revivalist architect Augustus 
Welby Northmore Pugin (1812–1852) writes, “different nations 
have given birth to so many various styles of Architecture, each 
suited to their climate, customs, and religion.”1
 Here, Pugin links 
architectural style to nationalism, a phenomenon that was evident 
in 19th-century architecture at a time when modern nation-states 
were emerging. The debates around architectural “style” overshad￾owed the 19th century as architects struggled to create an architec￾ture representative of the modern age. This resulted in what some 
have described as the “Battle of the Styles,” as Classicists (including 
advocates for Greek, Roman, and Renaissance architecture) fought 
with Gothicists (including various approaches to Romanesque and 
Gothic architecture). The word “style” reflects the battle between 
differing camps, including those advocating for a new architecture. 
Style typically means a “characteristic . . . manner of expression” or 
a “manner of living or behaving,” often associated with literature, 
manners, and fashion. It can also mean a “characteristic way, form, 
or technique of making or producing a thing,” which is closer to an 
architecture where it refers to a recognized architectural language. 
Style often implies elegance and refinement.2
 First used in literature, 
style as a concept spread to other disciplines, especially after 1764 
with the publication of Johann Joachim Winckelmann’s History of the 
Art of Antiquity.
3
In the mid-18th century, ancient Greek architecture became 
more accessible to European architects who carried out studies of 
STYLE AND NATIONALISM
6Style and Nationalism 45
ancient temple ruins, particularly at Paestum in Italy and on the 
Acropolis in Athens. The publication of Marc-Antoine Laugier’s 
book An Essay on Architecture in 1753 also created an interest in the 
subject. Eventually, Greek revival architecture would be important 
for defining the national aspirations of Scotland, Prussia, and vari￾ous northern European countries, along with the adoption of it in 
America in the 19th century. The Greek revival was often used for 
museums, art galleries, banks, and national monuments, building 
types that expressed solidity and continuity. In Britain, a noteworthy 
example is the British Museum by Sir Robert Smirke (1780–1867) 
and Sydney Smirke (1798–1877), executed during 1823–1846, 
which adjusted the Greek style to the needs of a modern museum.
Extensive studies of Roman ruins were also undertaken in the 
18th century, including the excavation of the site at Pompeii, 
which began in 1748. Important proponents of Roman architec￾ture included the Italian archaeologist, architect, and visionary Italian 
architect Giovanni Battista Piranesi (1720–1778) and the Scottish 
architect Robert Adam (1728–1792). Adam’s particular interpreta￾tion of Roman architecture was a popular style in the 18th century. 
The English architect John Soane (1753–1837) produced several 
important designs in a free interpretation of Roman and English 
Baroque architecture. Further, Roman architecture inspired the new 
Republican architecture in America, particularly buildings designed 
by Thomas Jefferson (see Chapter 2). Roman revivalism would have 
less impact on the 19th century than the Renaissance revival, which 
was popular due to its adaptability to the demands of the period and 
new building types.4
Likewise, Romanesque architecture, as an early form of medi￾eval architecture, proved suitable for the demands of the 19th cen￾tury. An exceptional example of the Romanesque revival is the 
Natural History Museum (1881) in London by Alfred Waterhouse 
(1830–1905). The style was particularly popular in America, espe￾cially in the hands of Henry Hobson Richardson (1838–1886). 
Richardson developed a robust interpretation of the Romanesque 
that he manifested in numerous buildings, including Trinity Church 
(1877) in Boston and the Allegheny County Courthouse (1888) in 
Pittsburgh. The Richardsonian style effectively became a national 
American style in the late 19th century and was copied by many 
architects; it would inspire architects such as Louis H. Sullivan (see 
Chapter 4).46 Style and Nationalism
The Gothic revivalism of the 19th century was widely adopted 
for churches and governmental buildings and was employed as a 
national style. In 18th-century England, experiments with Gothic 
architecture can be considered novelties, but by the 19th century, 
Gothic was revived as a serious style, one intended to rival the 
dominance of Classicism. Gothic architecture provided a range 
of opportunities for expression because of its association with 
nationalism, romanticism, rationalism, religion, and social reform.5
However, as the architectural historian Peter Collins argues, Gothic 
revivalists often used the style to create affect rather than to solve 
the problems of planning and function necessary in building types 
of the period.6
The leading proponents of Gothic were the famous art and social 
commentator John Ruskin (1819–1900), who promoted a Protestant 
form of Italian Gothic architecture captured in his books The Seven 
Lamps of Architecture (1849) and The Stones of Venice (1851–1853), 
and A.W.N. Pugin, an ardent Catholic and promoter of northern 
Gothic architecture. Pugin was very active as an architect before his 
premature death. He managed to publish two key works advocating 
for Gothic architecture: Contrasts: Or, a Parallel Between the Noble 
Edifices of the Middle Ages, and Corresponding Buildings of the Present 
Day; Shewing the Present Decay of Taste (1836) and The True Principles 
of Pointed or Christian Architecture (1841). Beyond Pugin, noteworthy 
and prolific Gothic revivalists included Sir George Gilbert Scott 
(1811–1878), William Butterfield (1814–1900), and George Edmund 
Street (1824–1881). In France, Eugène Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc 
(1814–1879) believed that Gothic was structurally rational and the 
logical architecture for the 19th century.
The Battle of the Styles was very evident in the competition 
for Foreign Office in London in 1857, where proponents of the 
Renaissance style clashed with Gothic revivalists.7
 In an era of sty￾listic uncertainty and complexity, where various styles were popular, 
architects often, for expedient reasons, practised in various styles. 
These men could be called “indifferent,” as opposed to those who 
championed an orthodox adherence to one style; the architect John 
Nash (1752–1835) falls into this category. Another result was the 
emergence of Eclecticism, or the blending together of various styles 
to create a design.8
 This was evident in the British style known as 
the Queen Anne revival, which was practised by architects such as 
Richard Norman Shaw (1831–1912), and the Second Empire style 
in France exemplified in the Paris Opéra (1875) by Charles Garnier Style and Nationalism 47
(1825–1898). The notion of Eclecticism, or a hybrid design, was 
resurrected in the postmodern era of the 1960s and 1970s.
* * *
The rise of modern nation-states during the 19th century led to 
various expressions of nationalism (see Chapter 2), a movement fos￾tered by governing elites and based on notions of citizenship and “the 
needs of capitalism, the rise of socialism, working-class activism, and 
the fear of crime.”9
 Nationalism can be defined as “the attitude that 
the members of a nation have when they care about their national 
identity” and “the actions that the members of a nation take when 
seeking to achieve (or sustain) self-determination.”10 Nationalism is 
linked to “national identity,” which can evoke notions of ethnicity, 
shared culture (religion, government, etc.), and land (borders, cli￾mate, etc.). Prior to the modern era, territories tended to be ruled by 
autocratic monarchs, dukes, and princes. Here, we will look at three 
national situations (Scotland, Prussia, and England) and how spe￾cific examples of architecture expressed nationalism. Governmental 
institutions, such as parliaments, were typically overt expressions 
of nationalism. Parliaments and congresses were also an emerging 
building type as nations began to adopt various forms of democracy.
Scotland had retained a form of independence under its own 
monarchs until the Acts of Union with England in 1707. As early 
as 1018, Edinburgh has been considered the capital of Scotland. 
Edinburgh is a distinctive city that takes advantage of its dramatic 
landscape. Medieval Edinburgh stretches along the sloping “Royal 
Mile,” which begins at Edinburgh Castle and ends at Holyrood 
Palace (the Abbey). The city features a striking form of medieval 
architecture that integrates with the topography. In the 18th and 
19th centuries, the city expanded greatly with the addition of a large 
Georgian area made up of streets, squares, circuses, and crescents 
lined with townhouses (see Chapter 7). Edinburgh was also home 
to the Scottish Enlightenment of the 18th century, whose heroes 
included David Hume (1711–1776) and Adam Smith (1723–1790).
After 1810, a series of new Scottish national institutions were 
built primarily in the Greek revival manner. Calton Hill, one of 
the high points in the city, became a kind of acropolis for various 
national monuments, including an unfinished copy of the Parthenon 
by architects C.R. Cockerell (1788–1863) and W.H. Playfair (1790–
1857) known as the National Monument (1829). Playfair, a local 
architect, went on to design the Royal Scottish Institution (1836) 48 Style and Nationalism
using the Greek Doric order and the National Gallery of Scotland 
(1854) in the Greek Ionic style. Sited on the south side of Calton 
Hill is the Royal High School (1829) by Thomas Hamilton (1784–
1858), another example of Greek revival architecture.11 Due to the 
extensive use of the Greek revival style, Edinburgh is known as the 
“Athens of the North.”
The transformation of Berlin, the capital of Prussia, primarily 
under the guidance of the architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel (1781–
1841), is another important example of a society using architecture 
to express nationhood. In his early career, Schinkel was primarily 
involved in painting and designing Romantic theatre sets. A man 
with diverse abilities and approaches to architecture, Schinkel was 
appointed State Architect in 1815. This gave him the opportunity to 
design several public institutions in Berlin. His first project, the small 
guardhouse called the Neue Wache (1818), signaled his approach.12
Executed in a precise manner and using the Greek Doric order, it 
follows on from the design of the Brandenburg Gate (1791) by Carl 
Gotthard Langhans, a structure that would be a backdrop to many 
subsequent political events. Friedrich Gilly’s project for a monument 
to Frederick the Great (1797) would also be a source of inspiration 
for Schinkel.
Schinkel’s design for the Berlin Schauspielhaus (1821) is the first 
of his major neo-Classical public institutions. This would be fol￾lowed by his most important building and one of the key public 
institutions of the 19th century: the Altes Museum (1828). With its 
simple yet dramatic façade, laid out like a Greek stoa and employ￾ing the Ionic order, the museum faces a square (the Lustgarten) and 
the Unter den Linden boulevard beyond. Schinkel also designed 
a bridge, the Schlossbrücke (1824), to complete the ensemble. 
Planned in a rational manner that recalls the theories of French 
architectural theorist J.N.L. Durand, the ensemble of buildings is 
notable for its clarity. Adapted from a previous building, Schinkel 
also designed the Berlin Cathedral (1822) adjacent to the Altes 
Museum.13
As architectural historian Hermann G. Pundt has demonstrated, 
Schinkel carefully sited his buildings to both take advantage of exist￾ing opportunities and to correct deficiencies in Berlin’s urban fabric. 
Pundt writes: “Constantly struggling against the realities of financial 
restrictions and repeated curtailments by a vacillating and reluctant 
monarch, he [Schinkel] nevertheless succeeded in unifying the core 
of Prussia’s capital city into a comprehensive organism of buildings, Style and Nationalism 49
spaces, streets, and waterways.”14 Schinkel’s reorganization of Berlin 
gave the city a series of contemporary institutions and expressed 
Prussian, and later German, nationalism. The architect Leo von 
Klenze (1784–1864) undertook a similar transformation of Munich 
in Bavaria, also using the Greek revival style.
Following the creation of the German Empire in 1871, the 
Reichstag (1894) by Paul Wallot was built near the Brandenberg Gate. 
Part of the monumental core of Berlin, the original neo-Classical 
design featured one central legislative chamber for the German par￾liament, or the Imperial Diet. The Reichstag was badly damaged 
by fire in 1933 after Adolf Hitler and the National Socialists took 
control of Germany; it remained unoccupied until after German 
reunification in 1990.15
* * *
Figure 6.1 Main Floor Plan, Karl Friedrich Schinkel, Altes Museum, 1828, 
Berlin, Germany. The precise plan for the museum features galleries organized 
around a circular sculpture rotonda and two courts; a stoa-like colonnade runs 
across the entry façade. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.50 Style and Nationalism
A justifiably famous case of expressing nationalism can be found 
in the design and construction of the new Houses of Parliament in 
London. The British parliamentary system is a form of government 
that descends from the signing of the Magna Carta in 1215. In the 
14th century, two chambers emerged, with the formalization of a 
House of Lords and a House of Commons occurring in the 16th 
century. The English Civil War of the 17th century, culminating 
in the Act of Settlement of 1701, redefined the authority of the 
monarchy and government based on an elected parliament with two 
houses (the elected House of Commons and the appointed House of 
Lords) under a “constitutional monarch.” The Parliament of Britain 
was formed in 1707.16
The new Palace of Westminster and Houses of Parliament was the 
subject of a design competition held in 1836 after a fire destroyed 
the previous building. The rules of the competition stipulated that 
the design had to be in the Gothic or Elizabethan styles. These were 
considered to be most suitable for the expression of the British nation. 
This was in keeping with the concept of a northern nation and the 
history of architecture during the medieval period and coincided 
with the emergence of Gothic Revivalism in the 19th century. The 
competition was won by the team of Sir Charles Barry (1795–1860), 
known primarily for his Renaissance revival designs, and A.W.N. 
Pugin. The Houses of Parliament are based on a highly rational plan 
designed by Barry and organized around a central hall and the two 
houses. Pugin was responsible for the exterior Gothic detailing and 
elaborate interiors. For both, he interpreted the language and orna￾ment of late English Gothic cathedrals. An older medieval structure, 
Westminster Hall, was incorporated into the scheme. The whole 
complex is flanked by Victoria Tower and the clock tower known as 
“Big Ben,” and was completed in 1870. Designed to accommodate 
all the functions of a parliament, it includes the two primary govern￾ing chambers, offices for the Members of Parliament and their staff, 
and committee rooms.17
As befits a large complex, the Houses of Parliament incorporated 
the latest advances in building technologies for structure, heat￾ing, ventilation, and acoustics (see Chapter 13). Some, such as the 
ventilation theories of the Scottish physician David Boswell Reid 
(1805–1863), were controversial. The Parliament remains one of the 
most important buildings of the 19th century, both in terms of 
the complex technical requirements of a government building and in Style and Nationalism 51
achieving a lasting expression of British nationalism. As Peter Collins 
writes:
Barry created a structure which at least harmonized with the surround￾ing mediaeval monuments, and expressed, by its ornament at least, the 
mediaeval origins of the great constitutional principles which it was built 
to administer and maintain. . . . Indeed, few nineteenth century buildings 
look so modern as this, with its rectilinear grid of windows and infilling 
panels stretching nine hundred feet.18
The dramatically-sited Canadian parliament in Ottawa follows the 
British precedent. The Centre Block was originally designed in 1859 
by Fuller & Jones (completed in 1866) and re-designed after a major 
fire destroyed much of the earlier building in 1916. Other notewor￾thy examples of 19th-century parliamentary complexes include the 
Hungarian Parliament in Budapest (1902) by Imre Steindl.19
* * *
As architects in the 19th century struggled to define modern 
architecture, which was consistent with the age, debates over style 
were waged. The rise of the International Style in the 1920s and 
1930s produced a style intended for all cultures and the conquest 
of modernity over historical revivalism (see Chapter 12). By the 
1960s, architects disillusioned with modernity established a pleth￾ora of new styles, including Post-Modern Classicism, Regionalism, 
and Neo-Rationalism that incorporated aspects of revivalism (see 
Chapter 18).20 As the American architectural historian Dell Upton 
argues, beyond the issues discussed previously, style has always been 
linked to fashion. He notes that styles often “change capriciously 
and unpredictably” and that “one must keep a close eye on the scene 
to remain current.” And knowledge of popular styles and trends is 
evidence “of membership in an aesthetic élite.”21
NOTES
1 A.W.N. Pugin, “From Contrasts (1836),” in Harry Francis Mallgrave, ed., 
Architectural Theory, Volume 1 (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2006), 
p. 384.
2 See “Style,” in Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, Volume 2 (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2007), p. 3077.
3 Peter Collins, Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture (Montreal: MQUP, 
1967), pp. 72–73.52 Style and Nationalism
4 See Ibid., pp. 96–99.
5 Ibid., p. 100.
6 See Ibid., pp. 104–105.
7 See Ibid., pp. 121–122.
8 See Ibid., pp. 117–123.
9 C.A. Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, 1780–1914: Global Connections 
and Comparisons (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2004), p. 203.
10 “Nationalism,” Stanford Dictionary of Philosophy. Accessed January 6, 2022. 
See: https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/nationalism/
11 The Royal High School was outfitted as the parliament-in-waiting after 
1968 prior to the construction of the new Scottish Parliament (2004) 
designed by the Barcelona-based firm Miralles Tagliabue EMBT. The 
design was inspired by various Scottish precedents.
12 Located on the Unter den Linden boulevard, the Neue Wache was a royal 
guard house until 1918. In 1931 the architect Heinrich Tessenow (1876–
1950) converted it to a war memorial. In 1960, it became the Memorial to 
Victims of Fascism and Militarism, and today, it is the Central Memorial of 
the Federal Republic of Germany for the Victims of War and Tyranny.
13 Schinkel’s Berlin Cathedral was demolished in 1893 to make way for the 
present cathedral.
14 Hermann G. Pundt, Schinkel’s Berlin: A Study in Environmental Planning
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1972), p. 189.
15 During the period when Germany was divided after World War II, the 
West German parliament was in Bonn. In 1983, the Bundeshaus, a new 
West German parliament in Bonn, was designed by Behnisch & Partner. 
Completed in 1992, it features remarkable openness and must be considered 
a prime example of democratic architecture. Following German reunifica￾tion, the Reichstag was re-established as the German parliament and was 
renovated according to a scheme by Norman Foster’s firm. Completed in 
1999, it is an important reimagining of a historic building.
16 In Britain the monarch is the ceremonial head of state, while the prime 
minister leads the government (executive) based on the results of an elec￾tion. The British parliamentary system is used in many former colonies.
17 The monarch, who attends certain events at the parliament in the House of 
Lords, uses an entrance under Victoria Tower and a series of spaces, includ￾ing the Royal Staircase and Royal Gallery, during royal processions through 
the building.
18 Collins, Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture, p. 102.
19 More recent buildings include the Parliament Building in Chandigarh, India 
(1963) by Le Corbusier, the Brazilian Parliament buildings in Brasilia (1960) 
by Oscar Niemeyer, the National Assembly Building of Bangladesh (1982) 
by Louis I. Kahn, and the Australian Parliament complex in Canberra 
(1988) by Romaldo Giurgola.Style and Nationalism 53
20 See the chart of styles in Charles Jencks, The Language of Post-Modern 
Architecture (New York: Rizzoli, 1991), pp. 67–68.
21 Dell Upton, Architecture in the United States (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1998), pp. 258–259.
SUGGESTED READING
Bergdoll, Barry. European Architecture 1750–1890. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2000.
Collins, Peter. Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture. Montreal: MQUP, 1967.
Lewis, David Frazer. A.W.N. Pugin. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2021.
Lewis, Michael J. The Gothic Revival. London: Thames & Hudson, 2002.
Snodin, Michael, ed. Karl Friedrich Schinkel: A Universal Man. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 1991.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-7
The relationship between architecture and the city it populates has 
been radically changing since the late 18th century under new social 
and political systems, technologies, and infrastructure. The Georgian 
city in Britain provided a model for reimagining the composition 
and choreography of urban environments. The Georgian period 
coincided with the rule of King George I to King George IV (1714–
1830s), during which Britain expanded its empire and launched 
the Industrial Revolution. The era produced a restrained form of 
Classicism that created elegant and enduring urban environments in 
cities like London, Bath, and Edinburgh.1
Beginning in the late 18th century, the city of London was expanded 
towards the west on estates held by wealthy aristocratic landowners. 
Portions of this land were leased to speculative builders, who, together, 
created the residential squares of London.2
 As architectural historian 
John Summerson suggests, the use of private speculation resulted in 
a relative lack of planning. Building on a tradition established by the 
construction of the Covent Garden Piazza in the 1630s by Inigo Jones 
(1573–1652), the residential squares of Georgian London were simple 
classical spaces, typically surrounded by standardized Georgian town￾houses and supporting a private garden in the square itself. The first of 
these new squares was Bloomsbury Square (c. 1661), which would be 
followed by the construction of many others.3
 The Georgian period 
was also defined by a standardized housing type for the wealthy: a 
rowhouse arranged on a long, narrow lot. The residence was separated 
by a garden from the coach-house and stable at the rear. A timeless 
URBANIZATION AND 
LANDSCAPE
7Urbanization and Landscape 55
organization of rooms, the Georgian house came in varying sizes and 
degrees of finish, expressing the relative wealth of the owner.4
The city of Bath in West England predates the Roman occupation 
of Britain. In the early 18th century, it was popular with the wealthy 
as a spa town famous for its restorative baths. Capitalizing on its fame, 
various key figures launched an expansion of the city. Beginning in 
the 1720s, a number of remarkable projects, primarily designed by 
the father-and-son team of John Wood the Elder (c. 1700–1754) 
and John Wood the Younger (1728–1782), were developed. The 
first space was Queen Square (1734) by John Wood the Elder. Using 
a common façade, individual builders could then build the interi￾ors according to their own designs. Taking advantage of the sloping 
site, the next stage featured the creation of Gay Street, leading from 
Queen Square to the north and the Circus (1768), by father and son. 
John Wood the Younger extended Brock Street to the magnificent 
Royal Crescent (1774). The square, Circus, and crescent created one 
of the great urban ensembles of Europe.5
A significant example of Georgian urban design can be found in 
Edinburgh, Scotland. In 1766, following a competition, the city 
began a series of expansions. The plan established Princes Street, 
which would become Edinburgh’s principal shopping street. Craig’s 
New Town, as the first phase, comprised eight urban blocks stretch￾ing between Charlotte Square and St. Andrew’s Square along George 
Street. The first phase was followed by subsequent developments to 
the west and north that continued Georgian planning themes. The 
architecture is more diverse than that found in London or Bath; 
regardless, these extensions of the city provide a consistent structure 
and scale to a new order of urbanism (see Chapter 6).6
John Nash (1752–1835) came from humble origins but rose 
quickly through British society, largely due to his amusing and 
ambitious personality.7
 Under the patronage of the Prince Regent 
(who would become King George IV), his 1811 design for Regent’s 
Park is a significant work of landscape design capping a tradition in 
London that began in the 17th century when various royal grounds 
in the city began to be opened to the public. Nash designed a 
series of scenic residential terraces surrounding Regent’s Park that 
united the city with a landscaped park. He also composed Regent’s 
Street as choreographed sequences of moments which connected 
the new park to the centre of London.8
 The street thus became a 
“picturesque” corridor through London inspired by garden design 56 Urbanization and Landscape
(see Chapter 3).9
 In contrast to the Baroque city, with its emphasis 
on long axial boulevards and vistas linking locations in space, the 
Georgian city employed “episodic”10 spaces within the fabric of the 
city or along a path.
* * *
Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821) established the First Empire 
(1804–1815) in France; it ended with his defeat at Waterloo. The 
French briefly restored the monarchy, which lasted until 1848. 
The Second Empire (1852–1870), under Napoleon III, would result 
in a rejuvenation of French architecture. The substantial reconstruc￾tion of Paris during this period was one of the greatest urban trans￾formations in history. The result was a carefully ordered city with 
modern infrastructure. The new plan for Paris was carried out under 
the prefect Baron Georges-Eugène Haussmann (1809–1891), who 
oversaw the major demolition of existing buildings and the construc￾tion of numerous new projects. The new boulevards, dramatic focal 
points, public parks, and unified residential architecture created a city 
of remarkable coherence and beauty. The plan also incorporated new 
important building types such as railway stations, libraries, markets, 
department stores, and museums. Nevertheless, the transformation 
of the city displaced thousands of residents and resulted in a city that 
was much easier to police. The relatively uninspired French architec￾ture of the 19th century was briefly challenged during the Second 
Empire by buildings such as the new opera house (1875) by Charles 
Garnier (1825–1898). This centrepiece of the new city featured an 
ostentatious and eclectic design. The fabric of the city was supplied 
by the standardized Parisian apartment building, which framed new 
streets and accommodated a broad spectrum of residents.11 In 1900, 
almost 40 years after the establishment of the London Underground 
Railway, the Métropolitain subway system opened its first line, rap￾idly becoming a comprehensive transportation network. In a similar 
manner to Paris, the expansion of Barcelona, Spain, with the Cerdá 
plan (1859), also resulted in a consistent urban form, in this case 
based on a square grid design.
The Austrian Camillo Sitte (1843–1903) published the popular 
book City Planning According to Artistic Principles in 1889. Trained as 
an architect, he became an educator and writer with an emphasis 
on Arts and Crafts design. The Ringstrasse, based on a competition 
scheme (1857), transformed Vienna with new institutions and spaces 
constructed on the former fortifications. These changes were an Urbanization and Landscape 57
impetus for Sitte’s study of the history of old European town centres. 
In his examination of the “relationships between buildings, monu￾ments, and their plazas,” he sought to discover artistic and timeless 
principles of urban design.12 His theories had a significant impact on 
German city planning in the early 20th century and on the work of 
planners outside of Germany.
The City Beautiful movement was an American initiative that 
influenced urban design in the first decade of the 20th century, with 
an emphasis on grand schemes and Beaux-Arts civic architecture.13
It also drew inspiration from the park designs of Frederick Law 
Olmstead (1822–1903) and Calvert Vaux (1824–1895), particularly 
their design for Central Park in New York City (1876). Central Park 
sparked a wave of urban park construction across North America. 
The urban park would play an evolving role in the development of 
cities through the 20th century.14 Another source of inspiration for 
the City Beautiful was the enormously successful World’s Columbian 
Exposition held in Chicago in 1893. Based on a plan by Olmsted, 
the “White City” was organized by Daniel Burnham (1846–1912), 
the energetic Chicago architect, and featured temporary white 
neo-classical buildings designed by various prominent New York, 
Boston, and Chicago architectural firms. The City Beautiful was also 
inspired by the reformist social and political movements of the late 
19th century that sought to “improve” the American city.15 During 
its brief history, the City Beautiful movement had an impact on the 
McMillan plan for the National Mall in Washington, D.C. (1902) 
and numerous urban ensembles across North America. Burnham 
and Edward H. Bennett’s visionary drawings for the Plan of Chicago
(1909) signaled the end of the movement as more pragmatic and 
modern ideas took hold.
* * *
The Industrial Revolution began about 1760. As its impact spread 
over the next 60 years, large rural populations moved to the new 
industrial cities looking for work (see Chapter 4). The miserable liv￾ing and working conditions that resulted were the subject of numer￾ous proposals by reformers, leading to the creation of various utopian 
models for recalibrating the city. These gained momentum in the 
second half of the century. The Industrial Revolution led to great 
migrations of people from rural areas to cities, resulting in over￾crowded living conditions and infrastructure ill-equipped to respond 
to the needs of growing urban populations (see Chapter 4). The 58 Urbanization and Landscape
notoriously bad living and working conditions in expanding indus￾trial cities are described in 1845 by Friedrich Engels (1820–1895), 
the co-author of the Communist Manifesto (1848):
These slums are pretty equally arranged in all the great towns of England, 
the worst houses in the worst quarters of the towns; usually one or two￾storied cottages in long rows, perhaps with cellars used as dwellings, 
almost always irregularly built. These houses of three or four rooms and 
a kitchen form . . . the general dwellings of the working class. The streets 
are generally unpaved, rough, dirty, filled with vegetable and animal 
refuse, without sewers or gutters, but supplied with foul, stagnant pools 
instead.16
Reformers and “utopians” emerged with the Industrial Revolu￾tion. They sought to influence legislation and create better living 
and working conditions for the new working classes. Two men of 
note were Robert Owen (1771–1858) and Charles Fourier (1772–
1837). Owen, through his business skills, became a part-owner of 
spinning mills in New Lanark, Scotland, in 1799. Here, he intro￾duced “modern machinery, reasonable working hours, good wages 
and good living accommodation,”17 and a school. It was a profitable 
enterprise that made Owen famous. Later, he attempted to establish 
model communities in other parts of Britain and America, including 
a community in New Harmony, Indiana (1825–1827) that was not 
successful. In contrast to Owen, Fourier developed a community 
model based on the “phalanstery,” which was a large collective hous￾ing structure organized around three covered courtyards. Fourier’s 
efforts to build a community failed, but a similar structure was built 
at Guise (1871) in France by J.B. Godin (1817–1889), using a suc￾cessful manufacturing and living arrangement known as a familistère.
The Garden City was the brainchild of Ebenezer Howard 
(1850–1928), who spent much of his career working as a parlia￾mentary reporter in London. The publication in 1898 of Howard’s 
To-Morrow; A Peaceful Path to Real Reform (republished as Garden Cities 
of To-Morrow in 1902) effectively launched the Garden City, one of 
the most important concepts in modern urban history. Through 
text and diagrams, Howard outlined his idea of compact communi￾ties that “married”18 together the best of town and country living. 
Howard’s book describes the management of a town encircled by a 
“greenbelt” featuring a broad range of greenspaces from the private 
garden to the public park. In 1899, the Garden City Association was 
established. Four years later, work began on the first Garden City at Urbanization and Landscape 59
Figure 7.1 Plan, Parker and Unwin, Letchworth Garden City, 1903, England. 
The plan of the first Garden City shows the organization of the main functional 
zones, the railway line that bisects the town, the surrounding green belt, and 
existing towns that were in the area. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.60 Urbanization and Landscape
Letchworth, England, based on designs by the architects Barry Parker 
(1867–1947) and Raymond Unwin (1863–1940). They interpreted 
Howard’s theories in a scheme that placed emphasis on the single￾family house and gardens organized in well-designed neighbour￾hoods. Letchworth initially attracted residents who subscribed to 
radical and alternative ideas; however, as industry developed, it began 
to attract working-class families. Incorporating the latest concepts in 
infrastructure and zoning Letchworth slowly developed over several 
decades. The Garden City, with its emphasis on low-density healthy 
living, would have widespread impact.19 The Garden City move￾ment also helped established city planning as a new discipline at the 
beginning of the 20th century and influenced the spread of suburban 
communities after World War II.
* * *
The modernist city of the 1920s and 1930s was built upon ear￾lier developments with an emphasis on modern transportation sys￾tems, commodious housing, green space, and employment centres. 
Early examples can be found in Arturo Soria y Mata’s “Linear City” 
(1882), Tony Garnier’s “Cité Industrielle” (1904–1917), Eugène 
Hénard’s “City of the Future” (1910), and Antonio Sant’Elia’s “Citta 
Nuova” (1914). The modernist city was also a reaction to substand￾ard living and working conditions found throughout cities globally. 
A pivotal project in the development of the modern city was Le 
Corbusier’s controversial “A Contemporary City for Three Million 
Inhabitants” (1922). Effectively destroying the traditional structure of 
the city, the design features 24 skyscrapers at its centre surrounded 
by highspeed transportation, extensive greenspace, and housing 
superblocks. The project was subsequently reorganized as the Plan 
Voisin (1922–1925) and the Ville Radieuse (1930).20 By the 1930s, 
Le Corbusier began to modify his urban concepts with the plan for 
Algiers (1930–1933); he would continue to develop his influential 
urban schemes, culminating in his design for Chandigarh, India 
(1950–1965). Other noteworthy modernist urban schemes include 
Ludwig Hilberseimer’s Highrise City (1924), Richard Neutra’s Rush 
City Reformed (1926–1927), and Frank Lloyd Wright’s Broadacre 
City (1932–1935).21
The first meeting of the Congrès Internationaux d’Architecture 
Moderne (CIAM) occurred at the Château La Sarraz in Switzerland 
in 1928. Initiated by Le Corbusier, Siegfried Gideon, and others, 
the event gathered 24 European architects to promote modernist Urbanization and Landscape 61
architecture and urbanism. The group subsequently released the La 
Sarraz Declaration affirming the concept of the “functionalist” city.22
The second meeting was held in Frankfurt, Germany, in 1929 with 
a focus on Existenzminimum, or minimum standards for housing 
design.23 Frankfurt was chosen because of several housing projects 
that had been built (1925–1930) under the direction of Ernst May 
(1886–1970), which united Garden City principles with modern 
architecture. Walter Gropius, in a lecture at the congress, advocated 
for parallel rows of tall apartment slabs separated by green space 
dimensioned according to building heights; this formula had a sig￾nificant impact on subsequent housing design.24
Eventually, CIAM would hold meetings in various locations, 
along with the work of active groups in various countries. The 
fourth meeting was held in 1933 on a cruise ship, and in Athens, 
the sessions concentrated on the functionalist city and resulted in 
“The Athens Charter,” published in 1943.25 In 95 points, the Athens 
Charter, written by Le Corbusier, emphasized four functions of the 
city: housing, work, recreation, and traffic. However, as the eminent 
American critic and historian Lewis Mumford (1895–1990) pointed 
out, “what of the political, educational, and cultural functions of 
the city?”26 After World War II, the CIAM meetings were progres￾sively taken over by a younger generation who promoted alternative 
views on the city, culminating in the tenth meeting at Dubrovnik 
in Yugoslavia in 1956 and the formation of the Team 10 group (see 
Chapter 18).
Sweden, which remained neutral during World War II, was able 
to experiment with Garden City and CIAM concepts in housing 
and urban design. A similar opportunity arose in Britain after the 
war with the establishment of the New Towns programme in 1946, 
which resulted in the construction of many new communities also 
based on modernist principles. The reconstruction of Rotterdam in 
Holland, after significant war damage, is another example of modern 
urbanism.
Prominent examples of modernist urban design were Le Corbusier’s 
scheme for Chandigarh as the new capital of the Punjab region of 
India and Brasília (1956–1960), the new capital of Brazil, designed 
by Lúcio Costa and Oscar Niemeyer. Le Corbusier (1887–1965) and 
his primary collaborators (Pierre Jeanneret, Maxwell Fry, and Jane 
Drew) were appointed by Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in 1950 
to design the new city based on a plan by a previous team. The plan 
features a loose grid of neighbourhoods, or superblocks, with the 62 Urbanization and Landscape
Capitol complex located in the northeast sector. Le Corbusier was 
responsible for the design of the major legislative buildings, includ￾ing the Legislative Assembly (1963), the High Court (1955), and the 
Secretariat (1962). The housing areas were designed by other team 
members.
A decision was made in 1956 by Juscelino Kubitschek (1902–
1976), the president of Brazil, to build a new capital city in the 
centre of the country. While Lúcio Costa (1902–1998) was engaged 
to develop the plan for Brasília, the architect Oscar Niemeyer 
(1907–2012) was tasked with designing many of the buildings along 
the monumental axis, including the National Congress (1960), the 
Supreme Court (1960), the Presidential Residence (1958), and the 
Metropolitan Cathedral (1971). The buildings were designed to 
express the aspirations of the Brazilian nation. However, the scale 
of the plan opposed tenets of modernism that looked for “demo￾cratic” expressions of government.27 Both Chandigarh and Brasília 
have been widely criticized, largely as a result of their openness and 
use of modernist planning principles. There is no doubt there are 
many shortcomings in the conception of the two cities, especially 
in terms of providing diverse and vital environments and addressing 
growth. However, there have been successes as well, especially in 
standards of living.28
* * *
Widespread discontent with the modernist city emerged in the 
1950s and 1960s (see Chapter 18), resulting in a return to the neo￾traditional city, which resurrected older forms of urbanism. The 
publication of Jane Jacobs’s popular book The Death and Life of Great 
American Cities in 1961 provided a substantial critique of the mod￾ernist city. She fought against it and invasive urban renewal projects 
by promoting clear distinctions between public and private realms, 
“eyes upon the street,” continuous sidewalks, safe neighbourhoods, 
diversity, mixed uses, small urban blocks, the preservation of heritage 
buildings, and other factors that are generally accepted as good urban 
planning and design today.29
Neo-traditionalism manifested itself in Europe with a movement 
led by Léon and Rob Krier, Aldo Rossi and the Italian Tendenza (see 
Chapter 5), and Maurice Culot, which advocated for a reconnection 
with the historic European city.30 Léon Krier (1946–) is a prominent 
advocate for the Classical city and has written and taught exten￾sively on the topic. Krier designed the master plan for Poundbury in Urbanization and Landscape 63
England (1993–2025), a traditional community supported by Prince 
Charles. In America, Peter Calthorpe, Andrés Duany, and Elizabeth 
Plater-Zyberk are leaders of a movement known as New Urbanism, 
which also has promoted older urban models. Duany and Plater￾Zyberk have designed many neo-traditional communities in North 
America, including Seaside (1980) in Florida, according to the ideas 
found in their book Towns and Town-Planning Principles.
31
* * *
The legacy of the Industrial Revolution resulted in brutal and 
oppressive urban environments for the working classes. The rise of 
reformist movements in the 19th century led to the creation of the 
modernist city of the 1920s with its own set of problems. The resur￾rection of traditional forms of urban design, beginning in the 1960s, 
has done much to improve cities around the world. However, in the 
early 21st century, the city is the focus of widespread study, largely 
due to global issues such as climate change and the housing cri￾sis. As the architect Thom Mayne states: “The contemporary city 
is dynamic, unstable, and increasingly difficult to trace as a linear 
process.”32 In other words, the city has reached a state of complexity 
that presents significant challenges to planners, architects, politicians, 
corporations, and citizens.
NOTES
1 See Kerry Downes, The Georgian Cities of Britain (Oxford: Phaidon, 1979).
2 A.E.J. Morris, The History of Urban Form, Before the Industrial Revolutions
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1979), p. 263.
3 See John Summerson, Georgian London (Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 
1962), pp. 98–112, 191–197.
4 See Ibid., pp. 65–83.
5 See Morris, The History of Urban Form, pp. 272–275.
6 See Ibid., pp.  275–279. See also A.J. Youngson, The Making of Classical 
Edinburgh, 1750–1840 (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1966).
7 See John Summerson, The Life and Work of John Nash, Architect (London: 
George Allen & Unwin, 1980).
8 See Morris, The History of Urban Form, pp. 266–272.
9 Summerson, The Life and Work of John Nash, p. 132.
10 Ibid., p. 131.
11 See: Leonardo Benevolo, History of Modern Architecture, Volume 1 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977), pp.  62–95; and Anthony Sutcliffe, 
Paris: An Architectural History (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1993).64 Urbanization and Landscape
12 See George R. Collins and Christine Crasemann Collins, Camillo Sitte: The 
Birth of Modern City Planning (New York: Rizzoli, 1986).
13 See William H. Wilson, The City Beautiful Movement (Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1989).
14 See Galen Cranz, The Politics of Park Design: A History of Urban Parks in 
America (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982).
15 See Wilson, The City Beautiful Movement, pp. 35–52.
16 Friedrich Engels, The Conditions of the Working Class in England (London: 
Penguin Books, 1987), pp. 70–71.
17 Benevolo, History of Modern Architecture, p. 149.
18 Ebenezer Howard, Garden Cities of To-Morrow (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1965), p. 48.
19 See Walter L. Creese, The Search for Environment: The Garden City Before and 
After (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1992).
20 See Le Corbusier, The City of To-Morrow and Its Planning (New York: Dover 
Publications, 1987).
21 See Frank Lloyd Wright, The Living City (New York: Horizon Press, 1958); 
and L. Hilberseimer, The New City: Principles of Planning (Chicago: Paul 
Theobald, 1944).
22 See Eric Mumford, The CIAM Discourse on Urbanism, 1928–1960
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), pp. 9–27.
23 See Karel Teige, The Minimum Dwelling (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2002).
24 See Mumford, The CIAM Discourse on Urbanism, pp. 27–44.
25 See Ibid., pp. 73–91.
26 Ibid., p. 133.
27 See Styliane Philippou, Oscar Niemeyer: Curves of Irreverence (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2008), pp. 211–313.
28 See James Holston, The Modernist City: An Anthropological Critique of Brasilia
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1989).
29 See Jane Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American Cities (New York: 
Vintage Books, 1961).
30 See Léon Krier, Rational Architecture (Brussels: AAM Editions, 1978).
31 See Andrés Duany and Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, Towns and Town-Planning 
Principles (New York: Rizzoli, 1991).
32 Thom Mayne, Combinatory Urbanism: The Complex Behavior of Collective 
Form (Culver City, CA: Stray Dog Café, 2100), p. 27.
SUGGESTED READING
Cranz, Galen. The Politics of Park Design: A History of Urban Parks in America. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.
Fishman, Robert. Urban Utopias in the Twentieth Century. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1982.Urbanization and Landscape 65
Jacobs, Jane. The Death and Life of Great American Cities. New York: Vintage 
Books, 1961.
Le Corbusier. The City of to-Morrow and Its Planning. New York: Dover 
Publications, 1987.
Sennett, Richard. The Fall of Public Man. New York: Vintage Books, 1978.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-8
The Arts and Crafts movement was inspired by A.W.N. Pugin (1812–
1852), John Ruskin (1819–1900), and William Morris (1834–1896). 
Pugin effectively launched the Gothic Revival movement through 
his work on the new Houses of Parliament (1834–1870); Ruskin was 
one of the most important writers of the 19th century, dedicated to 
a wide range of topics, including art, architecture, and society; and 
Morris, as a devoted follower of Ruskin’s ideas, was a primary force 
behind the Arts and Crafts movement. During the latter part of the 
19th century, proponents of the Arts and Crafts reacted against the 
Industrial Revolution and its inherent mechanization to preserve and 
promote traditional building construction traditions. Their inspira￾tion was often rooted in ordinary forms of rural building, such as 
cottages and barns.
Through two of his most influential books on architecture, The 
Seven Lamps of Architecture (1849) and The Stones of Venice (1851–
1853), John Ruskin advocated for Italian Romanesque and Gothic 
architecture styles (see Chapter 6). In the first text, he defines the 
seven “lamps” as Sacrifice, Truth, Power, Beauty, Life, Memory, and 
Obedience. In the book, Ruskin defines architecture as the “art 
which disposes and adorns the edifices raised by man, for whatsoever 
uses, that the sight of them contribute to his mental health, power, 
and pleasure.”1
 In “The Lamp of Truth,” Ruskin argues against deceit 
in buildings by showing structure, honest expression, and “avoid￾ing machine-made ornaments.”2
 It is evident that these ideas would 
directly inspire the Arts and Crafts movement with its emphasis on 
ARTS AND CRAFTS
8Arts and Crafts 67
hand-crafted construction. Further, in a period where the use of 
iron as a primary structural material was accelerating, Ruskin argued 
against its use except in limited applications.3
Ruskin writes of the effects created by architecture through the 
composition of mass and elements, light and shade, ornamentation, 
material, and colour. Ruskin’s ideas about nature had a significant 
impact on late 19th-century design. In the chapter “The Lamp of 
Life,” he states that beauty depends “on the expression of vital energy 
in organic things.”4
 The life in a building is expressed through the 
labour of those who built it by hand rather than in the “lifeless” 
results produced by machines. In “The Lamp of Memory,” he pro￾poses that it is the role of architecture and poetry to overcome for￾getfulness and preserve the past through enduring construction and 
the use of ornament that provides historical meaning.5
 In the final 
section, “The Lamp of Obedience,” Ruskin states that “we want no 
new style of architecture” and that originality is a misunderstood 
aspiration.6
 Later in his life, Ruskin examined labour and produc￾tion. In The Stones of Venice, Ruskin strongly advocates for creative 
manual work that challenges the intellect, that is not repetitive, and 
is not the creation of another; he argues that mechanization divides 
labour and humans into “small fragments.”7
Ruskin’s theories were put into practice with the design and con￾struction of the Oxford University Museum for Physical Sciences 
(1860), designed by the Irish architects Thomas Newenham Deane 
(1828–1899) and Benjamin Woodward (1816–1861).8
 The result 
captures the notion of “Ruskinian Gothic,” inspired by Italian influ￾ences. The plan of the Oxford Museum is organized around an 
exhibition court covered in an iron and glass roof, a feature that 
did not please Ruskin. Teaching spaces (including lecture rooms and 
laboratories) dedicated to various scientific disciplines were arranged 
around it on two levels. Facilities for medicine and chemistry were 
detached from the main building for safety reasons. The design uses 
the material of the building and its ornamentation as part of an edu￾cational programme that showcases a wide range of British stone 
(mineralogy and geology), plants (botany and biology), and animals 
(zoology). Representations of British flora and fauna are carved into 
the stone column capitals and incorporated into the iron ornamen￾tation. The original group of capitals were carved by James and 
John O’Shea and Edward Whellan from Ireland, who executed the 
work with “remarkable and original talent.”9
 Richly coloured, the 68 Arts and Crafts
building is an excellent example of 19th-century “polychromy,” or 
the use of colour in architecture.10
Despite the success of many buildings inspired by his writings, 
Ruskin had a “historically inaccurate” view of medieval labour and 
artistic practices, especially when it came to building the great cathe￾drals.11 Ultimately, Ruskin always advocated for a romantic form of 
medievalism, even in the face of radical social, political, and techno￾logical upheaval. Nevertheless, his theories on production (and craft) 
and nature influenced the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood, the Arts and 
Crafts movement, and the emergence of Art Nouveau design (see 
Chapter 9).
* * *
William Morris was a complex figure who grew up in a wealthy 
family and would turn to Socialism later in life; he was a poet, crafts￾man, manufacturer, social reformer, and environmentalist.12 While at 
Oxford University, Morris discovered Oxford as an ideal city which 
had retained its medieval history. At Oxford, Morris met impor￾tant future collaborators, including the artist Edward Burne-Jones 
(1833–1898), and took to reading Ruskin’s works, especially his text 
“On the Nature of Gothic Architecture” with its emphasis on art and 
workmanship.13
In 1856, Morris entered the office of George Edmund Street as 
an apprentice. Street was an important Oxford-based Gothic Revival 
architect. There, he encountered Philip Webb (1831–1915), who 
would also become a close friend and collaborator. However, it was 
evident that Morris was not suited for architectural practice and left 
the firm after a year. Morris moved to London, where he encoun￾tered another important figure, the painter Dante Gabriel Rosetti 
(1828–1882). Rosetti was the leading figure in the Pre-Raphaelite 
Brotherhood, established in 1848. The Pre-Raphaelites were 
inspired by medieval and 15th-century Renaissance art and nature. 
Under Rosetti’s influence, Morris decided to concentrate on draw￾ing, painting, and poetry.14
In 1859, Morris commissioned Webb to design a house for him￾self and his wife, Jane Burden, in Upton outside of London. This 
house, the first independent work by Webb and known as the Red 
House (1860), would become one of the most important works of 
19th-century residential architecture. Inspired by medieval architec￾ture and yet executed in an austere red brick and with simple interi￾ors, the house features a shallow L-shaped plan with internal spaces Arts and Crafts 69
carefully placed to respond to Morris’s lifestyle. Unusually, the main 
living rooms are on the first floor with the bedrooms, and the serv￾ant’s areas are generous. In particular, the interiors broke from the 
conventions of the time and were furnished and decorated accord￾ing to Morris and Webb’s developing approach to design. Hermann 
Muthesius writes: “It is the first private house of the new artistic 
culture, the first house to be conceived and built as a unified whole 
inside and out, the very first example in the history of the modern 
house.”15
In 1861, Morris began the company Morris, Marshall, Faulkner & 
Co. (or the Firm), which would be his major contribution to design 
and the Arts and Crafts movement. The Firm would become “the 
best-known decorating business in Victorian Britain, and a byword 
Figure 8.1 Main and First Floor Plans, Philip Webb, Red House, 1860, Upton, 
England. The design of the house uses a single-loaded corridor that provides a 
comfortable organization of spaces, addressing both internal and external fac￾tors. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.70 Arts and Crafts
in good taste amongst the intellectual classes.”16 The mandate of 
the Firm was to produce better quality products (for decorating the 
home) and to put into practice the theories of Ruskin. The company 
produced stained glass, furniture, murals, carvings, metalwork, tapes￾tries, and wallpapers using the talents of its partners and employees. 
Surprisingly knowledgeable of many hand craft methods, Morris 
guided much of the work of the enterprise. At this time, Morris also 
began to design wallpaper, which, along with tapestries and fabrics, 
would be his most important contributions to design.17 As its reputa￾tion and influence grew, the Firm began to take on important inte￾rior commissions, often in collaboration with Philip Webb.
In 1871, the Morris family and Rossetti took on the mainly 17th￾century house of Kelmscott Manor, near Oxford. The next decade 
would be a highly productive one for Morris. Simultaneously, he 
was becoming more aware of the conditions of the working classes 
in Great Britain, fuelling his growing interest in Socialism. He also 
devised the Society for the Protection of Ancient Monuments, an 
early heritage organization inspired by Ruskin. His growing public 
presence led to him giving lectures on design and politics. In 1879, 
Morris and his family moved to a house in Hammersmith on the 
Thames, which he named Kelmscott House. The redecoration of 
Kelmscott House is considered the most refined example of Morris’s 
ideas about interior design. Two years later, he acquired Merton 
Abbey (a former silk-weaving factory) in South London, where he 
could move all the various production operations.18
His most popular book, News from Nowhere (1890), was writ￾ten in the utopian literary tradition (see Chapter 7). Set after 1952, 
Morris’s book describes: “a place of communistic freedom, where 
men, women and children are equal, beautiful and healthy; money, 
prisons, formal education and central government have been abol￾ished; the countryside has been reclaimed from industrial squalor and 
pollution.”19 By the early 1890s, Morris moved away from politics, 
returning to his love of art and craft. His efforts inspired the establish￾ment of many collective organizations (such as the Century Guild, 
the Art Worker’s Guild, the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, and 
the Central School of Arts and Crafts).20 He also influenced numer￾ous craft colonies and educational institutions, such as the Darmstadt 
Artists’ Colony, the Wiener Werkstätte, the Deutscher Werkbund, 
and the foundation of the Bauhaus.
Morris worked tirelessly to preserve a host of craft techniques, and 
he inspired a generation of architects and designers in Britain and Arts and Crafts 71
abroad. He advocated for a simpler and more authentic approach to 
living. His reforming ideas can be summarized as follows:
[T]he supremacy of utility over luxury; the moral responsibility of design￾ers and manufacturers to produce objects of quality; the use of design as 
a democratic tool for social change. Through the European avant-garde’s 
espousal of these precepts, Morris must be seen as having a funda￾mental impact on the early origins of the Modern Movement. But it was 
Morris’s advocacy of a holistic approach to the design and manufacturing 
processes for aesthetic, social and environmental reasons that was of the 
most lasting relevance and will remain his greatest legacy.21
The Arts and Crafts movement became widespread, inspired by 
the works of Ruskin and Morris. It placed a particular emphasis on 
domestic environments and studying local vernacular traditions. In 
Britain important architects included: Arthur Heygate Mackmurdo 
(1851–1942), William Richard Lethaby (1857–1931), Charles 
Francis Annesley Voysey (1857–1941), Charles Robert Ashbee 
(1863–1942), Mackay Hugh Baillie Scott (1865–1945), Charles 
Rennie Mackintosh (1868–1928), and Edwin Landseer Lutyens 
(1869–1944). In America, Gustav Stickley (1857–1942), Bernard 
Maybeck (1862–1957), Charles Sumner Greene (1868–1957), and 
Henry Mather Greene (1970–1954) were the leading proponents of 
the style. Women were also actively involved in the Arts and Crafts 
movement as designers, makers, and clients.22 Exceptional examples 
of Arts and Crafts houses include Munstead Wood (1896) in Surrey, 
England, designed by Edwin Lutyens for the distinguished garden 
designer Gertrude Jekyll (1842–1932); Broadleys (1898), overlook￾ing Lake Windemere in northern England, by C.F.A. Voysey which 
represents a “total work of design” (or Gesamtkunstwerk) in which 
all aspects of the house, included the furnishings are designed; and 
the Gamble House (1909) in Pasadena, California by the Greene 
Brothers which is constructed primarily in wood.23
Hermann Muthesius (1861–1927), a German architect and writer 
working in the German embassy in London from 1896 to 1904, 
published his monumental three-volume book entitled Das englische 
Haus in 1904 and 1905. His book essentially celebrates and docu￾ments the English house as redefined by the Arts and Crafts move￾ment. Muthesius begins his discussion by commenting on British 
individualism, general dislike of the city, passion for gardening, and 
love for the private house (or home). Muthesius points out that it 
was Philip Webb, Eden Nesfield, and Richard Norman Shaw who 72 Arts and Crafts
initiated the reform of the English house.24 As it evolved, the late 
19th-century middle-class English house was developed as modest 
and comfortable, espousing a certain informality of living, a house 
that addressed its locale and the climate.25 As Muthesius writes:
[T]he genuinely and decisively valuable feature of the English house is its 
absolute practicality. Whatever it is, it is a house in which people want to 
live. There is nothing extravagant, no desire to impress upon its concep￾tion, no flights of fancy in ornament and jumbles of forms; it does not 
give itself airs or try to be artistic, there is no pretentiousness, nor even 
any “architecture.”26
* * *
Inspired by the Arts and Crafts movement, the Deutscher 
Werkbund was established in Munich in 1907 to raise design and 
manufacturing standards for German industry. The primary figures 
behind this organization were politician Friedrich Naumann, educa￾tor Karl Schmidt, architect Henry van de Velde (1863–1957), and 
Muthesius. Muthesius was key. He returned to Germany in 1904 
to develop his architectural practice and to work in the Prussian 
Ministry of Trade. He was appointed a professor in 1907 at the 
Berlin Commercial University.27 The Werkbund initially expressed 
itself through its publications and the “encouragement of fruitful 
cooperation among art, industry, and craft for the enhancement of 
the quality of work,” which concentrated on promoting excellence, 
education, and the economic benefits of good design.28 Muthesius 
provides an overview of the organization’s objectives by linking 
design to cultural expression:
For its culture is and remains the true index of a nation’s culture as a 
whole. If a nation produces good furniture and good light fittings, but 
daily erects the worst possible buildings, this can only be a sign of het￾erogeneous, unclarified conditions, conditions whose very inconsistency 
is proof of a lack of discipline and organization. Without a total respect 
for form, culture is unthinkable, and formlessness is synonymous with 
lack of culture.29
The Werkbund spread to Berlin, Dresden, Munich, and Vienna. It 
attracted a diverse group of proponents to “create a working alliance 
between art and industry.”30 A group of architects (including Josef 
Hoffmann, Hans Maria Olbrich, and Peter Behrens (1868–1940)) 
and various companies were asked to join the initiative to develop 
and promote good design using mainly machine production. Morris’s Arts and Crafts 73
vision for a return to craft largely failed because he “could only pro￾duce high-quality craft objects, for the most part at luxury prices, 
within a world dominated by the processes of mass production.”31
Between 1908 and 1914, the Werkbund was involved in a range 
of activities, including publications and exhibitions, aimed mainly 
at the German middle class, culminating in the important 1914 
Werkbund exhibition held in Cologne. An organization that began 
with a strong commitment to an Arts and Crafts approach was, by 
1914, championing well-designed industrial production. During the 
Cologne exhibition, a debate raged between those like Muthesius, 
arguing for standardized architectural “types,” and those like Van de 
Velde, advocating for the role of art and individualism.
The exhibition of 1914 comprised almost 100 buildings filled 
with a wide range of products and objects. Among the buildings 
were a small number of important works, including Bruno Taut’s 
Expressionist Glass Pavilion and Walter Gropius’s model factory 
design. Behrens was responsible for the central hall building, which 
was built in a more conservative style. Overall, the quality of design 
and production was uneven, demonstrating the monumental chal￾lenge the Werkbund had undertaken. However, the exhibition did 
attract a large audience.32 After World War I, the foundation of the 
Bauhaus school in Weimar (1919) under Walter Gropius (1883–
1969) was a testimony to Werkbund ideals (see Chapter 16).
Peter Behrens, as the primary interpreter of Werkbund princi￾ples, came from a comfortable background in Hamburg, Germany. 
Initially an artist, he was invited to join the Darmstadt artist’s colony 
in 1899, where he designed a house for his family (1901). Increasingly 
involved in architecture and design, by 1907, Behrens’s work attracted 
the attention of AEG (Allgemeine Elektricitäts-Gesellschaft), the large 
German manufacturer of electrical equipment. Behrens was hired 
to design products; as a result, he moved to Berlin and established 
his studio, which would eventually employ several important future 
architects, including Gropius, Le Corbusier, and Ludwig Mies van 
der Rohe. Behrens designed arc lamps, kettles, fans, clocks, and other 
products for the AEG, overall improving design and manufacturing 
standards for the company. Behren’s design work was not revolution￾ary; nevertheless, he was a pioneer in German industrial design.33
Behrens also designed buildings for AEG, starting with exhibition 
pavilions. Despite his lack of formal training, he became involved in 
larger permanent structures for the company. His most famous pro￾ject is the AEG Turbine Hall (1909) in Berlin, a large manufacturing 74 Arts and Crafts
space serviced by travelling gantries or cranes. Described as a “cathe￾dral” to industry by Le Corbusier, the building is long and precise 
and constructed mainly in steel and glass, with strong concrete ele￾ments defining the corners and the gabled roof form. The building 
is a landmark in the continuing development towards fully modern 
architecture because it fuses together architecture and engineering 
despite its “monumentalizing” references. The Behrens office then 
designed several large factories and housing schemes for AEG.34 His 
later career involved an eclectic range of designs, teaching, and sev￾eral failed attempts in the 1930s to align himself with the Austrian 
wing of the Nazi Party.35
* * *
Sociologist Richard Sennett notes that craft “focuses on the inti￾mate connection between hand and head”36 and materiality. During 
the 19th century, due to industrialization, there was an effective 
loss of many hand-crafted building traditions and skills despite the 
best efforts of the Arts and Crafts movement. The Arts and Crafts 
movement attempted to demolish the historical divide between “art” 
and “craft.” However, there are examples of craft traditions prevail￾ing during the 20th century in many parts of the world, and the 
employment of various forms of craft exists today in a wide range 
of disciplines. Historically, craft in architecture has been associated 
with workshops, guilds, and traditional methods of construction and 
training builders. The prevalence of the machine has muddied the 
waters, but as many architects, like Frank Lloyd Wright, demon￾strated in the early 20th century, the machine could be intelligently 
employed in architectural construction and craft.
NOTES
1 John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture (London: Cassell and Co. Ltd., 
1909), p. 35.
2 Ibid., pp. 69–70.
3 See Ibid., pp. 74–77.
4 Ibid., p. 211.
5 See Ibid., pp. 249–250.
6 See Ibid., pp. 281–283.
7 John Ruskin, “The Stones of Venice II,” in E.T. Cook and A. Wedderburn, 
eds., The Works of John Ruskin, Volume 10 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2011), p. 196.Arts and Crafts 75
8 See Eve Blau, Ruskinian Gothic: The Architecture of Deane and Woodward 
1845–1861 (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1982), pp. 48–81.
9 Ibid., p. 69.
10 See Peter Collins, Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture (Montreal: MQUP, 
1967), pp. 111–116.
11 See John Unrau, “Ruskin, the Workman and the Savageness of Gothic,” in 
R. Hewison, ed., New Approaches to Ruskin (London: Routledge, 1981), 
pp. 33–50.
12 Fiona MacCarthy, William Morris: A Life for Our Time (London: Faber and 
Faber, 1994), p. vii.
13 See Ibid., pp. 52–81.
14 See Ibid., pp. 110–153.
15 Hermann Muthesius, The English House (London: Crosby Lockwood 
Staples, 1979), p. 17.
16 MacCarthy, William Morris, p. 166.
17 See Ibid., pp. 166–196.
18 See Ibid., pp. 391–461.
19 Ibid., p. 585.
20 See Ibid., pp. 589–605.
21 Charlotte and Peter Fiell, William Morris (1834–1896) (Köln: Taschen, 
1999), p. 52.
22 See, for example, Anthea Callen, Women in the Arts and Crafts Movement, 
1870–1914 (London: Astragal Books, 1979).
23 See Peter Davey, Arts and Crafts Architecture (London: Phaidon, 1995).
24 Muthesius, The English House, p. 15.
25 See Witold Rybczynski, Home: A Short History of an Idea (New York: Viking 
Penguin Inc., 1986).
26 Muthesius, The English House, p. 149.
27 See Joan Campbell, The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the 
Applied Arts (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978), pp. 9–32.
28 Reproduced in Stanford Anderson, Peter Behrens and a New Architecture for 
the Twentieth Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), p. 110.
29 Hermann Muthesius, “Aims of the Werkbund,” in Ulrich Conrads, ed., 
Programs and Manifestoes of 20th Century Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1971), p. 27.
30 Campbell, The German Werkbund, p. 28.
31 Anderson, Peter Behrens, p. 95.
32 See Campbell, The German Werkbund, pp. 57–81.
33 See Anderson, Peter Behrens, p. 113–128.
34 See Alan Windsor, Peter Behrens: Architect and Designer (New York: Whitney 
Library of Design, 1981), pp. 77–105.
35 See Ibid., pp. 127–176.
36 Richard Sennett, The Craftsman (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008), 
p. 9.76 Arts and Crafts
SUGGESTED READING
Campbell, Joan. The German Werkbund: The Politics of Reform in the Applied Arts. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978.
Davey, Peter. Arts and Crafts Architecture. London: Phaidon, 1995.
MacCarthy, Fiona. William Morris: A Life for Our Time. London: Faber and 
Faber, 1994.
Ruskin, John. The Seven Lamps of Architecture. New York: Dover Publications, 
1989.
Rybczynski, Witold. Home: A Short History of an Idea. New York: Viking 
Penguin Inc., 1986.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-9
The abandonment of traditional forms of ornament was one of the 
major distinguishing factors in the development of modern archi￾tecture in the early 20th century. Historically, the ornamentation of 
buildings in all traditional cultures served various purposes, primarily 
to embellish the structure of a building (or an object or the human 
body), to provide a patterning of surfaces, and to establish a language 
or style of design. For example, this is evident in Classical, Gothic, 
and Islamic architecture. As the Gothic Revival architect A.W.N. 
Pugin wrote in 1841, “all ornament shall consist of enrichment of the 
essential construction of the building.”1
 For Pugin, ornament should 
be integral to the structure of the building, not merely applied.
According to architectural historian Antoine Picon, ornament tra￾ditionally displayed political power through “pleasure and beauty, 
social rank and prestige, communication and knowledge.”2
 Picon 
also notes that ornament was “connected to enduring visual codes” 
and was intended to stimulate thought in the spectator.3
 Ornament 
contributes to the beauty of a design and creates a certain “delight” 
in the viewer; it expresses wealth and power, signals the purpose of a 
building, and is essential to an architectural language articulating the 
elements and the joints and giving an overall coherence that can be 
“read.” In the 19th century, the implementation of machine-made 
ornamentation challenged the “craft” of architecture and the legiti￾macy of ornamentation itself, often resulting in the arbitrary and 
misunderstood use of ornament.
* * *
ORNAMENT AND STRUCTURE
978 Ornament and Structure
The Art Nouveau movement emerged in 1895 with the open￾ing of Samuel Bing’s shop in Paris called Maison de l’Art Nouveau. 
In many ways, it pointed forward to the emergence of modernism 
in the 20th century; however, it also reached a dead end by the 
time it faded away. And yet, embedded in the several movements 
(also known as Jugenstil in Germany, Sezessionstil in Vienna, and 
Modernista in Catalonia) are some of the most unique experiments 
in the history of architecture. The various Art Nouveau groups 
sought to preserve craft traditions, often in a spectacular fashion, 
and looked for new forms of expression based on formal precedents, 
metaphors, and ornamental systems outside of traditional architec￾tural languages. And while similarities occurred across the various 
groups, no general approach emerged.
The movement had its origins in the visionary artwork of William 
Blake (1757–1827), the work of the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood 
painters, Symbolist art, and the ideas of John Ruskin, William Morris, 
and E.E. Viollet-le-Duc. A sensuous naturalism is evident in Art 
Nouveau design, inspired by Ruskin’s idea that nature should be the 
source of inspiration but not directly copied. As art historian Robert 
Schmutzler notes, the “whiplash” line is one of the defining charac￾teristics of Art Nouveau: “[it] had as its main theme a long, sensitive, 
sinuous line that reminds us of seaweed or of creeping plants. Such 
a line might also be suggested by the way the spots are scattered in 
a leopard skin or by the flick of a whiplash, flowing or flaring out.”4
It was in Belgium that a fully formed Art Nouveau architecture first 
emerged in the early 1890s. During a decade of dramatic achievement, 
Victor Horta (1861–1947) developed a “language” of innovative archi￾tecture based on his own interpretations of naturalistic form; this pre￾sented itself in a series of urban houses for wealthy clients in Brussels. 
At the time, Brussels was a busy European capital, fully engaged in the 
latest developments in art and architecture.5
 Horta produced his full￾fledged architectural system for the Tassel house (1892) in Brussels, in 
which he introduced Art Nouveau motifs to the façade. However, it 
is in the interior where the most innovative aspects of Horta’s vision 
occur. Working within the tight confines of the site, Horta introduced 
spatial continuities that were also realized in his fluid use of form and 
sumptuous use of materials. The main floor plan is effectively sym￾metrical, divided into spatial cells, and naturally lit from the façades 
and the main staircase. The staircase, as it ascends towards a glass and 
iron skylight, is one of the most startling and famous examples of 
Art Nouveau design. One crucial innovation is Horta’s integration Ornament and Structure 79
of exposed iron into his architecture, which is unusual in a domes￾tic setting. An important non-domestic work was Horta’s Maison du 
Peuple, commissioned by the local Socialist organization as a meet￾ing place. It was completed in 1899 and employed a striking use of 
ironwork and form. The Italian architectural historian Franco Borsi 
identifies several repeating tendencies in Horta’s architecture. These 
include the whiplash line, tangential structural connections, the curve 
as optical correction, folding surfaces, complex rhythms, a dialogue of 
materials, polygonal compositions, the whirling arrangement of space, 
and transparency.6
 As Borsi notes, Horta was inspired by nature but 
did not reference specific plants in his elongated, curving, and folding 
forms. Ultimately, Horta realized Viollet-le-Duc’s vision for a new 
iron, masonry, and glass architecture.
The development of Art Nouveau architecture in Belgium would 
have a strong connection to what occurred in France, mainly in 
Paris and Nancy. The dominant French figure was Hector Guimard 
(1867–1942), known primarily for Parisian apartment buildings, 
including his Castel Béranger (1898). In 1898, a competition was 
held to design the entrances to the new Parisian subway system, 
known as the Métropolitain, or Métro. Guimard was awarded the 
commission to design three different types of entrances using a mod￾ular system of cast iron and glass elements. His novel design used nat￾uralistic elements to introduce a surreal aspect to the streets of Paris.
A third important architect from this period is Antoni Gaudí 
I Cornet (1852–1926), whose very unusual work is a product of 
Barcelona and the Catalan region of northern Spain. His career 
occurred at a time when Barcelona was expanding dramatically and 
implementing the Cerdà grid plan (1856 and 1859). Gaudí was born 
in the town of Reus, near Tarragona. In 1873 he moved to Barcelona 
to study at the new school of architecture. There, he worked for var￾ious local practices before qualifying as an architect in 1877.7
 By this 
time, he had been exposed to a wide range of styles and approaches, 
including Gothic and Moorish, along with the theories of Viollet￾le-Duc. Discussing this period in Gaudí’s life, the Catalan architec￾tural historian Ignasi de Solà-Morales writes:
From the very start of his career, too, we can see Gaudí’s encyclopedic 
taste for using the most varied repertoire of symbols: those of classicism, 
those of medieval heraldry, those of ecclesiastical symbology, those of 
nature taken realistically in plant or animal forms. All these cases are 
accumulated in complex systems of discordant scales, creating a multi￾ple approach to the object designed.880 Ornament and Structure
The Palau Güell (1890), a large urban house for a wealthy Barcelona 
family, represents the best of his early designs. As Gaudí formulated 
his mature style in relative obscurity, he was involved in an “experi￾mental eclecticism.”9
 Later, Gaudí designed a small housing develop￾ment and the Park Güell (1900–1914), inspired by the Garden City 
movement, on the western edge of Barcelona. By the early 20th cen￾tury, he had refined an approach to an architecture of unprecedented 
originality. Arguably the most unusual is Gaudí’s Casa Battló (1906), 
a narrow apartment building which features a façade that incorpo￾rates a bony structural expression reminiscent of prehistoric animals 
at lower levels, several storeys that capture an underwater world, and 
Figure 9.1 Main Entrance, Hector Guimard, Castel Béranger, 1898, Paris, 
France. The ironwork in the entry gate captures the curvilinear and natural￾istic approach characteristic of Art Nouveau design. Drawing by Mohammad 
Moezzi.Ornament and Structure 81
at the top, a dragon-like form that references the Christian story of 
St. George slaying the dragon. The adjacent Casa Milà (1910) is a 
larger residential building, which allowed Gaudí more freedom to 
plan a variety of apartments with fluidity. The stone façade evokes a 
cliff face, with balcony railings that recall undulating seaweed. The 
roof is designed as a landscape surveyed by silent figures that encase 
the numerous chimneys.
After 1908, Gaudí concentrated mainly on designing and con￾structing the Expiatory Church of the Sagrada Familia (1883–1926), 
or the main cathedral for Barcelona. Taking over the commission 
in 1883, Gaudí transformed a more conventional Gothic Revival 
design into a fantastical one based on his synthesis of sources and his 
signature use of the repeating catenary arch. Gaudí laboured over 
an evolving design, which remained unfinished at the time of his 
accidental death in 1926. For many decades, the construction of the 
immense cathedral languished. However, in the 21st century, a major 
effort has been initiated to complete the design using digital fabrica￾tion methods.10
* * *
A second school of Art Nouveau design, based on a cooler, more 
graphic approach, is found in the axis between Glasgow and Vienna, 
encompassing the work of Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1868–1928) 
in Scotland, and various architects in central Europe. Early in his 
career, Mackintosh, who studied at the Glasgow School of Art, 
established a group called The Four and apprenticed as an architect. 
The Four comprised Mackintosh, James Herbert MacNair (1868–
1955), and the sisters Margaret (1865–1933) and Frances (1874–
1921) Macdonald. Together they developed a distinctive graphic 
style featuring elongated figures, naturalistic lines, and stylized flow￾ers inspired by Pre-Raphaelite artists, Japanese art, and Ruskin.
The Four found some commercial and critical success.11
Mackintosh was the only member of The Four directly involved in 
architectural practice; Margaret maintained an important influence 
on his designs.12 In 1889, Mackintosh joined the architectural firm 
Honeyman & Keppie. He became a partner in 1904 before giving 
up practice in 1914. The 1896 competition for the new Glasgow 
School of Art was a significant moment in Mackintosh’s career.13
The programme was for a contemporary art school; the designs had 
to address a challenging site and a very limited budget. The win￾ning scheme was designed by Mackintosh. The first phase of the 82 Ornament and Structure
building opened in 1899; the design demonstrated many novel fea￾tures, including an asymmetrical main façade with large north-facing 
windows for the spacious studios and innovative ornamental detail￾ing. The remarkable library wing was completed in a second phase 
between 1907 and 1909.14 The West façade for the library wing also 
incorporates Mackintosh’s interest in historic Scottish architecture, 
particularly “baronial” castles. According to the architectural histo￾rian Thomas Howarth the façade,
is one of the architect’s most daring compositions. . . . With its exciting 
horizontal rhythms and soaring verticals of glass and metal, its large plain 
surfaces of masonry, and rigid clean-cut angularity of form, this elevation 
represents not a step forward of a mere decade, but a stride forward of 
twenty or thirty years in British architectural development.15
The Glasgow School of Art has become a much-regarded building 
of international importance. Other important institutional projects 
designed by Mackintosh include the Queen’s Cross Church (1899) 
and the Scotland Street School (1906).
Inspired by the Arts and Crafts movement (see Chapter 8), 
Mackintosh was also committed to interpreting Scottish vernacular 
architecture, especially in two important houses he designed in the 
early 1900s: Windyhill at Kilmalcolm (1900) and the Hill House 
at Helensburgh (1903). Both houses employ functional L-shaped 
plans, a clear articulation of forms, and plain exteriors finished in 
grey harled plaster, a traditional Scottish coating. The Hill House 
is the more developed of the two, with the massing of the house 
and the arrangement of windows reflecting a comfortable function￾alism. The interior features a strong interplay between dark wood 
panelling and stark white surfaces; stencilled ornamentation is inte￾grated along with carefully designed and located pieces of furniture. 
The main bedroom is a striking example of one of Mackintosh’s 
“white” spaces.16 Another important body of work in Mackintosh’s 
oeuvre is a series of popular tearooms that he executed primarily 
for Miss Catherine Cranston, a successful Glasgow entrepreneur.17
Committed to a total work of design, Mackintosh designed over 400 
pieces of furniture in a wide variety of types; most of his furniture 
designs were designed for specific spaces.
* * *
Vienna, Austria, at the beginning of the 20th century, was a 
fertile and modern city as philosophers, artists, musicians, and Ornament and Structure 83
architects challenged historical conventions. In particular, the rev￾olutionary psychoanalytical work of Sigmund Freud (1856–1939) 
captured the zeitgeist of the period.18 It was also a period during 
which the Austro-Hungarian empire began to decline, coming to 
an end in 1918. A leading figure in architecture was Otto Wagner 
(1841–1918), who was born in Vienna and studied architecture at 
the Technical University and at the Academy of Fine Arts. After 
graduating in 1863, he established a successful and normative prac￾tice. By 1889, Wagner, influenced by younger colleagues known as 
the “Wagnerschule,” embraced an emerging modernity. In 1894, he 
won the competition to design the infrastructure for Vienna’s new 
commuter train system, the Stadhbahn, a project that would involve 
40 stations, bridges, and viaducts. The same year, he was appointed 
head of one of the architecture programmes at the Academy of Fine 
Arts.19
A trio of younger architects both inspired Wagner and followed 
in his footsteps: Joseph Maria Olbrich (1867–1908), Josef Hoffmann 
(1870–1956), and Jože Plečnik (1872–1957). Olbrich was born in 
Troppau, Silesia (now Opava in Czechia); at the age of 14 he trav￾elled to Vienna to study architecture. In 1897, a group of leading 
artists and architects, led by the painter Gustav Klimt (1862–1918) 
and Olbrich, formed a group known as the “Vienna Secession.” As 
the name suggests, the movement was a protest against the estab￾lishment art and architecture then in favour. Almost immediately, 
the group decided it would publish a magazine called Ver Sacrum
(or Sacred Spring) to disseminate their work and promote the 
work of key European artists and the Art Nouveau movement. The 
group secured a site to build a new exhibition building designed by 
Olbrich. The Secession building instantly announced the presence 
of a new architecture with its bold one-storey form for the exhibi￾tion space, topped by a light gilded dome of laurel leaves supported 
on four piers.20 In 1899, after working with Wagner, Olbrich moved 
to Darmstadt, Germany, to be involved in the creation of a new art￾ist’s colony where he designed houses and other facilities in a lyrical 
and unique interpretation of Art Nouveau.21
As Wagner embraced the Secessionist approach of the younger 
generation, his designs for the Majolica Apartment House (1899), 
the Karlsplatz station (1899), and the Postal Savings Bank (1906 and 
1912) were projects where he came closest to achieving a modern 
Secessionist architecture. Wagner’s book Moderne Architektur, first 
published in 1896, was a radical and influential book; as architectural 84 Ornament and Structure
historian Harry Francis Mallgrave states: “There are three principal 
themes of Modern Architecture: a plea for simplicity in the accommo￾dation of modern needs, the artistic and ethical ruin of eclecticism, 
and the demand for a new style based on present technologies and 
methods of construction.”22 Mallgrave argues that Wagner was the 
first European architect “to state publicly his break with the past.”23
Josef Hoffmann was born in Pirnitz, Moravia (now Brtnice in 
Czechia) into a locally important family and studied architecture 
under Wagner at the Academy of Fine Arts in Vienna (1892–1895). 
Wagner was one of the co-founders of the Secession group; he was 
also involved with the Wiener Werkstätte, an organization dedicated 
to the production of well-designed and crafted products. Hoffmann 
had a strong interest in the English Arts and Crafts movement, par￾ticularly the work of Mackintosh.24 Hoffmann’s most significant 
building is the large Stoclet House in Brussels (1908), which exists 
as one of the finest examples of Secession design. Hoffmann contin￾ued to practise into the 1940s, experimenting with modernism and 
executing some work during the National Socialist era in Austria.
Another intriguing architect to emerge from Vienna during the 
Secession era was the Slovenian architect Jože Plečnik. He first stud￾ied at a vocational college in Ljubljana, then in Graz (Austria), before 
moving to Vienna in 1894 to work for Wagner. He entered the 
Academy of Fine Arts in 1895, graduating in 1898. Soon after, he 
started his own practice, experimenting with Art Nouveau, Secession, 
and even Expressionist influences. Plečnik moved to Prague in 1911 
to take a teaching position. In 1920, he was appointed the architect 
of Prague Castle. Although he would return to Ljubljana in 1922 
to take a professorship at the university, he worked diligently on 
an inventive and sensitive transformation of the Castle until 1935.25
Plečnik’s other major commission in Prague was the Sacred Heart 
Church (1932). In the mid-1920s, Plečnik began a series of impor￾tant urban projects in Ljubljana, including various interventions 
along the city’s rivers.
* * *
The great opponent to the Art Nouveau and Secessionist move￾ment was the Moravian/Austrian architect Adolf Loos (1870–1933). 
Born in Brno in Moravia (now in Czechia), he studied architecture 
in Vienna and Dresden before spending several years in the United 
States. Returning to Vienna in 1896, he established himself as a 
cultural critic and architect, and a vocal opponent of Art Nouveau Ornament and Structure 85
design. A champion of English design, Loos’s essay “Ornament and 
Crime” (1908) defined a new attitude to ornament. Loos begins the 
essay with a racist attack on indigenous cultures by comparing the 
tattoos of “Papuans” with those of criminals. He categorically states 
that the evolution of a culture equates to the removal of ornamenta￾tion.26 In the essay, he writes:
Ornament means squandered manpower and thus squandered health. 
It has always been so. But today it also means squandered material and 
both together mean squandered capital. . . . As the ornament is no longer 
organically connected with our culture, ornament is no longer the expres￾sion of our culture.27
Loos argues that ornament was not necessary for contemporary 
design. In his architectural practice, Loos developed a distinctive 
approach to modern architecture based on abstracted and timeless 
Classicism. He also developed the Raumplan concept for designing 
houses in which a series of rooms of differing sizes are carefully fit￾ted into a simple volume, creating striking spatial relationships.28
Noteworthy projects include the Goldman & Salatasch (1911) com￾mercial building in Vienna and a series of houses culminating in the 
Müller house (1930) in Prague. Loos’s impact on modern architecture 
was complex, based on his challenging of existing ideas and models.29
* * *
The Art Nouveau movement, as expressed differently in various 
cities and by various architects, was short-lived. Deeply idiosyncratic, 
the designs often required exceptional craft to execute, and while 
there are characteristic features, they did not coalesce into a repeat￾able language of architecture. It quickly became dated as the forces of 
modernism gained momentum after 1910. As architectural historian 
Alan Colquhoun observes, it blurred the line between ornament and 
form (and structure):
In Art Nouveau, this ‘functional’ dependency on ornament led to a para￾doxical reversal. Instead of merely obeying the form of the object, orna￾ment began to merge with the object, animating it with new life. This had 
two effects: first, the object became thought of as a single organic entity 
rather than as an aggregation of separate parts, as in the classical tradi￾tion; second, ornament was no longer thought of as “space filling,” and a 
dialogue was set up between two positive values – ornament and empty 
space. The discovery of what might be called “spatial silence” – probably 
mainly derived from Japanese prints – was one of Art Nouveau’s chief 
contributions to Western aesthetics.3086 Ornament and Structure
NOTES
1 A.W.N. Pugin, “From The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture
(1842),” in Harry Francis Mallgrave, ed., Architectural Theory, Volume 1 
(Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2006), p. 385. See also Owen Jones, 
The Grammar of Ornament (London: Day & Son, 1856).
2 Antoine Picon, Ornament: The Politics of Architecture and Subjectivity
(Chicester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2013), p. 50.
3 Ibid., p. 54.
4 Robert Schmutzler, Art Nouveau (London: Thames & Hudson, 1978), p. 7.
5 See Franco Borsi and Paolo Portoghesi, Victor Horta (London: Academy 
Editions, 1991), pp. 37–47.
6 See Ibid., pp. 21–35.
7 See Ignasi de Solà-Morales, Antoni Gaudí (New York: Harry N. Abrams, 
2003), pp. 7–19.
8 Ibid., p. 18.
9 See Ibid., pp. 20–25.
10 See Joan Norell Núñez, “Gaudí and the Catalan Craftsmen of His Time,” in 
Maria Antonietta Crippa, ed., Living Gaudí: The Architect’s Complete Vision
(New York: Rizzoli, 2002), pp. 85–100.
11 Mackintosh and Margaret Macdonald married in 1900, a year after McNair 
and Frances Macdonald married.
12 See Roger Billcliffe, Mackintosh Furniture (Cambridge: Lutterworth Press, 
1984). See also Alan Crawford, Charles Rennie Mackintosh (London: Thames 
& Hudson, 1995), pp. 66–100.
13 See Thomas Howarth, Charles Rennie Mackintosh and the Modern Movement
(London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1977), pp. 53–68.
14 See Ibid., pp. 69–92.
15 Ibid., p. 75.
16 See Ibid., pp. 93–120.
17 See Ibid., pp. 121–147.
18 See Carl E. Schorske, Fin-de-siècle Vienna: Politics and Culture (New York: 
Vintage Books, 1981).
19 Harry F. Mallgrave, “Introduction,” in Otto Wagner, ed., Modern Architecture
(Los Angeles: The Getty Center, 1988), pp. 1–51.
20 See Ian Latham, Joseph Maria Olbrich (New York: Rizzoli, 1980), pp. 9–47.
21 See Ibid., pp. 49–119.
22 Mallgrave, “Introduction,” p. 29.
23 Ibid., p. 30.
24 See Eduard F. Sekler, Josef Hoffmann: The Architectural Work (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1985).
25 See Damjan Prelovšek, “The Life and Work of Jože Plečnik,” in François 
Burkhardt, Claude Eveno, and Boris Podrecca, eds., Jože Plečnik, Architect: 
1872–1957 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), pp. 26–81.Ornament and Structure 87
26 Adolf Loos, “Ornament and Crime,” in Ornament and Crime (London: 
Penguin Book, 2019), pp. 187–189.
27 Ibid., p. 195.
28 See Alan Colquhoun, Modern Architecture (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2002), pp. 81–84.
29 In 1928, Loos was charged with the sexual abuse of young girls and pos￾sessing child pornography; he was acquitted on the sexual abuse charges but 
received a suspended sentence for “seduction to indecency.” The charges 
effectively ended his career. See Christopher Long, Loos on Trial (Prague: 
Kant, 2017).
30 Colquhoun, Modern Architecture, p. 17.
SUGGESTED READING
Brett, David. C.R. Mackintosh: The Poetics of Workmanship. London: Reaktion 
Books, 2004.
Pevsner, Nikolaus. Pioneers of Modern Design. Harmondsworth: Penguin Books, 
1960.
Picon, Antoine. Ornament: The Politics of Architecture and Subjectivity. Chicester: 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2013.
Safran, Y., and W. Wang, eds. The Architecture of Adolf Loos. London: Arts 
Council, 1985.
Schmutzler, Robert. Art Nouveau. London: Thames & Hudson, 1978.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-10
Architecture has always contained space, space that supports a vari￾ety of culturally specific functions, and yet it wasn’t until the 19th 
century that German theorists began to identify space as a distinct 
aspect of architecture.1
 With the advent of modern architecture in 
the early 20th century, space, or volume, became a primary feature 
of architecture along with new concepts of form. As art historian 
Charles W. Millard writes: “In modernist architecture . . . space is 
the very substance of the building itself. It penetrates and shapes the 
structure, and can be said to be neither behind or around it, it is 
through it and of it, undelimited and re-entrant.”2
 In modern archi￾tecture, the interconnection between interior and exterior space was 
also emphasized, along with movement through space. Some of the 
thinking about modern architectural space was inspired by Albert 
Einstein’s Theory of Special Relativity (1905) and Cubist art that 
fused space and time together (see Chapter 11).
It was the American architect Frank Lloyd Wright (1867–1959) 
who first created a new vision of modern architecture. Wright was 
influenced by architects like Henry Hobson Richardson (1838–
1886) and Louis H. Sullivan (1856–1924), his interest in the Arts 
and Crafts, his love of the mid-Western American landscape, and his 
passion for Japanese art and design. Wright’s distinctive Prairie archi￾tecture, developed in the first years of the 20th century, would have 
an immediate impact on architects, particularly on European archi￾tects, after the publication of the Wasmuth portfolio of his drawings 
in 1910.
SPACE AND FORM
10Space and Form 89
Wright grew up in rural Wisconsin in a family with Welsh ori￾gins. His mother pushed him to become an architect and introduced 
him at a young age to the Froebel building block system, a popular 
German children’s toy, which was influential on his later ideas of 
architectural order. He briefly studied engineering at the University 
of Wisconsin before moving to Chicago in 1887 to pursue architec￾ture. After apprenticing for the architect Joseph Lyman Silsbee, he 
joined the well-known firm of Adler & Sullivan in 1888. Sullivan, 
whom Wright always referred to as his Leiber Meister or “dear mas￾ter,” mentored him. Wright was fired from the firm in 1893 due to 
his “moonlighting” activities, something he did to support his grow￾ing family.
After leaving Adler & Sullivan, Wright established his practice. His 
first project, the Winslow House (1893) in River Forest, Illinois, sig￾nalled the beginning of a series of experiments that culminated in the 
Prairie Style house first published in drawings for the Ladies’ Home 
Journal (February and July 1901). Houses such as the Ward Willits 
House in Highland Park, Illinois (1901) were the first built examples 
of the new style. This launched a period of immense creative activity 
that resulted in designs such as the Martin House (1904) in Buffalo, 
New York, and the Robie House (1907) in Chicago, Illinois. At the 
same time, he extended his concepts into larger buildings such as the 
Unity Temple (1905) in Oak Park, Illinois, and the Larkin Company 
Administration Building (1908) in Buffalo, New York.
Wright described his early accomplishments in a text entitled 
“Prairie Architecture,” published in 1931, in which he wrote about 
how he defined the Prairie Style. In the text, he describes his reac￾tion in the early 1890s to the contemporary American house; as a 
result, he eliminated the attic, the basement, and “the room as a 
box.”3
 The Prairie house that Wright developed was horizontally 
organized to match the prairie, carefully integrated with its site, and 
employed an open set of interconnected spaces on the main level 
typically organized around a large fireplace. Wright’s emphasis on 
horizontality was expressed in long overhanging hip roofs and his 
definition of space through the ordered use of piers and horizontal 
and vertical planes. Wright’s architecture strove for a simple integra￾tion of all elements, including heating, lighting, and furniture, creat￾ing what he described as an “organic” totality in which every part 
belongs to the whole. Wright recognized the role of William Morris 
and the Arts and Crafts movement (see Chapter 8), but unlike them, 90 Space and Form
he was prepared to employ the machine in building construction.4
Ultimately, the Prairie house was the breakthrough architects had 
been seeking during the 19th century.
Architectural historian Robert McCarter provides a comprehen￾sive analysis of the ordering of Wright’s buildings, particularly his 
systemic use of various planning grids and his strict use of geometry. 
In the early Prairie houses, Wright typically used a pinwheel or a 
cruciform plan arrangement. McCarter writes that by “disconnect￾ing walls, ceilings, and floors and using them as independent ele￾ments, Wright simultaneously defined spaces more precisely and fused
them into larger and more ambiguous compositions.”5
 By creating 
buildings with open plans that broke down the traditional bounda￾ries of space, Wright produced rich spatial systems that were both 
Figure 10.1 Main Floor Plan, Frank Lloyd Wright, Ward Willits House, 1901, 
Highland Park, Illinois, USA. The cruciform plan, organized around a central 
fireplace, demonstrates the features typical of the Prairie Style; these include 
the interpenetration of space and the union of inside and outside. Drawing by 
Mohammad Moezzi.Space and Form 91
sheltering and expansive. The spatial organization of a Wright build￾ing is related to the way it addresses the site and the choreography of 
movement through space. His distinctly ordered plans typically used 
a tartan grid to organize the location of the structure and to create 
a spatial “weave” that introduced multiple spatial overlaps. Linear 
shafts, or channels, of space extend through the building and into 
the landscape; the removal of the corner of rooms and the introduc￾tion of corner windows created diagonal movements. The breaking 
down of the abrupt interface between interior and exterior is usually 
modulated by covered terraces. The placement of the fireplace at the 
centre of the house created a condition of movement through the 
house, consistent with Wright’s ideas of living for modern families 
in suburban Chicago, “to make images of flow a fact, to celebrate 
continuous space.”6
As Wright’s reputation grew, his personal life became increas￾ingly unconventional and ultimately tragic. As a result of his personal 
problems and the tumult of World War I, Wright had few commis￾sions until the 1930s, when his reputation revived. Important pro￾jects during this difficult period include Taliesin East (1911–1925) in 
Spring Green, Wisconsin, the Imperial Hotel (1922) in Tokyo, and 
a series of concrete block houses in California. In 1932, Wright and 
his third wife, Olgivanna Lazovic, established the Taliesin Fellowship 
for aspiring architects who wanted to work and learn under Wright. 
In the 1930s, he developed his sprawling urban scheme known as 
Broadacre City (1934) and produced designs for low-cost Usonian 
houses.7
 In a forceful response to the International Style, Wright 
designed several seminal projects in the last decades of his life, 
including Fallingwater (1935) in Mill Run, Pennsylvania, the S.C. 
Johnson and Son Company Buildings (1936) in Racine, Wisconsin, 
Taliesin West (1937) in Scottsdale, Arizona, and the Solomon R. 
Guggenheim Museum (1956) in New York.
Wright never fully abandoned the use of ornament and traditional 
materials, but he used steel and concrete throughout his career. 
Wright did not produce an “abstract” form of architecture, such as 
designed by Le Corbusier in the 1920s.8
 One of the most influential 
architects of the 20th century, Wright’s designs would inspire the 
De Stijl movement in Holland and various European architects. His 
work would launch regional modernisms in North America, par￾ticularly on the West Coast and in the Southwest.
* * *92 Space and Form
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886–1969) acknowledged that the 
publication of Wright’s designs in 1910 had a dramatic impact on 
him, as it did on other young European architects.9
 Mies was born 
in Aachen, Germany, where his father worked as a master mason and 
produced architectural elements. He worked for his father, studied 
for two years in a local trade school, and was employed in other areas 
of the building industry. He then took several draughting jobs in 
local architect’s offices before moving to Berlin in 1905. By 1907, he 
was designing his own houses, and between 1908 and 1911 worked 
for Peter Behrens (see Chapter 8). In 1911, he established his own 
practice. His early projects were inspired by Behrens and the classi￾cism of Karl Friedrich Schinkel (see Chapter 6).
During the period 1919–1925, Mies produced drawings for 
five projects that would have a dramatic impact on his own career 
and the development of modern architecture. In the drawings he 
digested the influence of German Expressionism, along with Wright 
and the De Stijl movement (see Chapter 11). The projects were for 
two Glass Skyscrapers (1919 and 1921), the Reinforced Concrete 
Office Building (1922), the Brick Country House (1923), and the 
Concrete Country House (1924). The drawings for the skyscrapers 
explored the expressive properties of glass, while the plan for the 
Brick Country House shows spatial ideas indebted to Wright and 
the De Stijl group. In 1925, Mies was appointed the director of the 
Weissenhofseidlung Exhibition held in Stuttgart in 1927, an impor￾tant display of residential buildings by noteworthy modern architects 
(see Chapter 12).10
In the years 1925–1938, Mies collaborated with the designer Lilly 
Reich (1885–1947). Together, they designed exhibitions and sev￾eral important pieces of furniture, including the MR Chair (1927) 
and the Barcelona Chair (1929).11 Reich, a self-taught designer, had 
joined the Deutscher Werkbund in 1912, an organization she was 
active in throughout her life.12 In 1930, Mies was appointed the third 
and last director of the Bauhaus (see Chapter 16). At the Bauhaus, 
Reich was appointed to head various workshops during 1931–1933. 
By 1933, the Bauhaus was closed by the National Socialists (Nazis). 
Reich remained in Germany after Mies moved to Chicago in 1938 
to escape Nazism. She would look after his interests in Germany 
until her death.
Mies’s quest for a highly ordered and yet metaphysical architecture 
was first fully achieved in the Barcelona Pavilion, which was built for 
an international exposition in 1929. Lacking any real programme the Space and Form 93
design features a “free plan” of vertical and horizontal planes, often in 
luxurious materials. As architectural historian David Spaeth writes, 
“the pavilion exhibits profound structural clarity; simultaneously, it 
is spatially ambiguous.”13 A significant work of modern architecture, 
the Barcelona pavilion existed for a year before it was demolished (it 
was reconstructed in 1986). Abstracting the use of walls and floating 
roof planes on a raised podium, Mies united a set of influences to 
create a scheme as architect Philip Johnson describes:
The design is simultaneously simple and complex: its ingredients are 
merely steel columns and rectangular planes of various materials placed 
vertically as walls or horizontally as roofs; but they are disposed in such 
a way that space is channeled rather than confined – it is never stopped, 
but is allowed to flow continuously.14
The Tugendhat House (1930) in Brno, Moravia (Czechia) was 
his first functional building in his mature style; it carried on many 
themes found in the Barcelona Pavilion.
In Chicago, Mies took up the directorship of architecture at the 
Armour Institute of Technology. Two years later, the Institute merged 
with another college to become the Illinois Institute of Technology 
(IIT). Mies was then asked to design the new campus for a site in an 
existing neighbourhood in Chicago’s South Side. Mies devised a for￾mal spatial organization of the campus based on a strict module that 
governed a simple industrial language of architecture with a palette 
of steel, brick, and glass. The most significant building on the cam￾pus is Crown Hall (1956), designed for the School of Architecture.
In the late phase of his career, Mies developed an austere and pre￾cise architecture based on “logic and reason” that was well-suited 
for corporate clients in America. As Spaeth writes, “It was charac￾teristic of Mies’s approach to architecture to reduce every building 
problem to its clearest most elemental form or state.”15 He invested 
in the design of the modern skyscraper, devising his signature 
approach to the curtain wall found in important projects such as 
the Lake Shore Drive Apartments (1951) in Chicago, the Seagram 
Building (1958) in New York, and the Federal Center (1973) in 
Chicago. Among other building typologies, the Farnsworth House 
(1951) in Plano, Illinois and the New National Gallery (1967) in 
Berlin stand out. And while his building designs were formal and 
unyielding in later years, his urban spaces remained subtle and 
well-considered.
* * *94 Space and Form
The third major figure of modern architecture is Le Corbusier 
(1887–1965), born Charles-Édouard Jeanneret-Gris in La Chaux￾de-Fonds, Switzerland. He is known for focusing on the role of form 
in architecture. However, Le Corbusier’s important architecture, 
beginning in the early 1920s, has a strong spatial sense. During his 
formative years, before moving to Paris in 1917, Le Corbusier briefly 
studied in the local Arts and Crafts school in his hometown, under￾took several tours of Europe and Turkey, worked for prominent 
architects, including Auguste Perret and Peter Behrens, and designed 
various houses and small buildings in different styles. During this 
period, he produced the Dom-ino drawing (1915), showing a basic 
slab and column diagram in concrete that would foreshadow his pio￾neering work of the 1920s. Later, in 1919, he devised the Maison 
Monol system and, in 1920, the Maison Citrohan as complementary 
structural ideas.
Le Corbusier had learned to paint prior to 1917. However, meet￾ing the artist Amédée Ozenfant (1886–1966) later that year would 
have a transformative impact on his career. Ozenfant instructed him 
in the avant-garde painting methods of the time. Together, they 
created Purism, a rationalized interpretation of late Cubism, that 
featured precise paintings of everyday objects in formal still-life com￾positions that emphasized the depiction of pure forms. From 1920 
to 1925, Le Corbusier and Ozenfant edited a sophisticated journal 
called L’Esprit Nouveau, which allowed them to investigate a wide 
range of topics and promote their ideas to a wider audience.
Le Corbusier’s Vers une architecture (Toward an Architecture), pub￾lished in 1923, was a collection of texts from the journal and is 
arguably the most important book published on modern architec￾ture. He divides the book into sections devoted to mechanical and 
classical themes.16 He expresses his admiration for works by engi￾neers, including bridges, grain elevators, and modern machines, an 
echo of the long debates of the 19th century. In the section “Three 
Reminders to Architects,” he writes: “Volume and surface are the 
elements through which architecture manifests itself. Volume and 
surface are determined by the plan. It is the plan that is the genera￾tor.”17 Further, he notes: “The architect, through the ordonnance 
[arrangement] of forms, realizes an order that is a pure creation of 
mind; through forms, he affects our senses intensely, provoking plas￾tic emotions.”18 By forms, he means pure primary forms, and by 
“volume,” he alludes to space. In the section “Eyes That Do Not 
See . . .” he discusses ocean liners, airplanes, and automobiles. He Space and Form 95
states that “the lesson of the airplane is in the logic that governed the 
statement of the problem and that led to the success of its realization. 
. . . The problem of the house has not been posed.”19 He goes on 
to outline his ideas for the modern house, suggesting that a modern 
house should be as precise as a modern machine. Despite the appear￾ance of being a functionalist, there is a complexity to Le Corbusier’s 
architecture that challenges this interpretation.
As Le Corbusier developed the formal and spatial aspects of Purist 
painting, he transferred this to his architecture, particularly during 
the 1920s. Art historian Christopher Green states:
Le Corbusier approached each Purist building very much as if it were 
a Purist painting; they were conceived as groupings of smoothly func￾tioning parts composed within the discipline of geometry and a grid of 
“regulating lines” based on the Golden Section ratio, each functioning 
part, from light-fitting to radiator, to ramp, an architectural objet-type to 
be placed within an ordered whole. And these buildings are set against 
their natural surroundings; they are geometric containers, prismatic 
volumes, each visible façade a frontally composed screen through 
which light passes to model the surfaces of austere but richly sculp￾tured interiors.20
Le Corbusier developed a painting method that typically framed a 
set of ordinary objects that are viewed frontally in a way that used 
a plan/elevation method similar to an axonometric. The shallow 
spaces of the paintings also emphasized the outline of objects, or 
what the Purists called “a marriage of contours,” this informed Le 
Corbusier’s paintings, building plans, and concepts of form and sur￾face.21 His Purist architecture truly began with a studio house he 
designed for Ozenfant (1924) in Paris; this was followed by a series 
of revolutionary designs that gained him international recognition.
Le Corbusier articulated his architectural vision with his architect 
cousin Pierre Jeanneret (1896–1967) in a text entitled “Five Points of 
a New Architecture.” The five points are: 1) pilotis, 2) roof gardens, 
3) le plan libre, or the free plan, 4) la fenêtre en longueur, or the hori￾zontal strip window, and 5) la façade libre, or the free façade. These are 
a reversal of historical ideas about architecture, supplemented by the 
“promenade architecturale,” which describes the movement through 
a building’s volumes and surfaces. In projects such as the Maison 
La Roche-Jeanneret (1925) in Paris, the Maison Cook (1927) in 
Boulogne-sure-Seine, the Villa Stein de Monzie (1928) in Garches, 
and the Villa Savoye (1931) in Poissy, Le Corbusier presented his 
fully developed concepts for a modern architecture, particularly his 96 Space and Form
Figure 10.2 First Floor Plan, Le Corbusier, Villa Stein-de Monzie, 1928, 
Garches, Paris, France. The design features an organization of space that is func￾tional, unified by the promenade architecturale with its emphasis on movement 
through space and the careful location of vertical circulation elements such as 
stairs. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.Space and Form 97
notion of the free plan. The villas encompassed deep and shallow 
volumes of space, spaces carved out of defined cubic volumes, and 
spaces understood through choreographed motion.22 In the 1920s, 
he also designed a series of important furniture pieces with Charlotte 
Perriand (1903–1999)23 and Pierre Jeanneret. In this period, he also 
began to produce visionary projects for the city, and his commitment 
to urban design continued throughout his career (see Chapter 7).
By 1930, Le Corbusier’s work took a dramatic shift in direction as 
he abandoned the strict Purist architecture of the 1920s. As he took 
on larger projects, he developed an interest in new ways of work￾ing with materials, along with a commitment to regional forms of 
expression. During the 1930s and early 1940s he was involved in 
wide-ranging exploration, important projects included the Cité de 
Refuge for the Salvation Army (1933) and the Pavillon Suisse (1933), 
both in Paris. After World War II, he began a phase distinguished by 
the use of béton brut, or rough poured-in-place concrete, that has 
become known as the Brutalist style (see Chapter 18). Important 
late works include the Unité d’Habitation (1952) in Marseilles, the 
Chapelle Notre-Dame du Haut (1955) at Ronchamp, the Convent 
of Sainte-Marie de la Tourette (1960) in Eveux-sur-l’Arbresle, and a 
series of projects in India (1950–1965).
* * *
The invention of the open or free plan is one of the hallmarks of 
early 20th-century modern architecture. This ranges from the geo￾metrically ordered space of Frank Lloyd Wright to the Purist space 
of Le Corbusier. The union of space with movement creates a four￾dimensional experience, what the architectural historian Sigfried 
Giedion termed “space-time” in architecture.24 Ultimately, as Mies 
van der Rohe wrote in 1923: “Architecture is the will of the age 
conceived in spatial terms. Living. Changing. Now.”25
NOTES
1 See Peter Collins, Changing Ideals in Modern Architecture (Montreal: MQUP, 
1967), pp. 285–293.
2 Charles W. Millard, “Modernist Architectural Space,” The Hudson Review, 
vol. 20, no. 3 (Autumn 1967), p. 450.
3 See Frank Lloyd Wright, “Prairie Architecture,” in Edgar Kaufmann and 
Ben Raeburn, eds., Frank Lloyd Wright: Writings and Buildings (New York: 
Meridian, 1960), pp. 38–47.98 Space and Form
4 See Frank Lloyd Wright, “The Art and Craft of the Machine,” in Kaufmann 
and Raeburn, eds., Frank Lloyd Wright, pp. 55–73.
5 Robert McCarter, “The Integrated Ideal: Ordering Principles in Wright’s 
Architecture,” in Robert McCarter, ed., On and By Frank Lloyd Wright: A 
Primer of Architectural Principles (London: Phaidon, 2005), p. 309.
6 Vincent Scully, Frank Lloyd Wright (New York: George Braziller, Inc., 
1960), p. 11.
7 See Frank Lloyd Wright, The Natural House (New York: Horizon Press, 
1954).
8 See Neil Levine, “Abstraction and Representation in Modern Architecture: 
The International Style of Frank Lloyd Wright,” AA Files, no. 11 (Spring 
1986), pp. 3–21.
9 See Mies van der Rohe, “A Tribute to Frank Lloyd Wright,” in H. Allen 
Brooks, ed., Writings on Wright (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1981), 
pp. 129–130.
10 See Karin Kirsch, The Weissenhofseidlung: Experimental Housing Built for the 
Deutscher Werkbund, Stuttgart, 1927 (New York: Rizzoli, 1990).
11 See Christian Lange, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe & Lilly Reich: Furniture and 
Interiors (Ostfildern: Hatje Cantz Verlag, 2006).
12 See Carmen Espegel, Women Architects in the Modern Movement (New York: 
Routledge, 2018), pp. 136–163.
13 David Spaeth, “Ludwig Mies van der Rohe: A Biographical Essay,” in 
Robert V. Sharp, ed., Mies Reconsidered: His Career, Legacy, and Disciples
(New York: Rizzoli, 1986), p. 18.
14 Philip C. Johnson, Mies van der Rohe (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 
1975), p. 58.
15 Spaeth, “Ludwig Mies van der Rohe,” p. 33.
16 Reyner Banham, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age (New York: 
Praeger Publishing, 1967), pp. 223–224.
17 Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture (Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2007), 
p. 102.
18 Ibid., p. 92.
19 Ibid., pp. 161–162.
20 Christopher Green, “The Architect as Artist,” in Michael Raeburn and 
Victoria Wilson, eds., Le Corbusier: Architect of the Century (London: Arts 
Council of Great Britain, 1987), p. 114.
21 See Richard Ingersoll, Le Corbusier: A Marriage of Contours (New York: 
Princeton Architectural Press, 1990).
22 Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture; The Growth of a New Tradition
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1982), p. 529.
23 See Mary McLeod, “Furniture and Femininity,” Architectural Review, vol. 
CLXXXI, no. 1079 (January 1987), pp. 43–46.
24 See Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture.Space and Form 99
25 Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, “Working Theses,” in Ulrich Conrads, ed., 
Programs and Manifestoes on 20th-Century Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1990), p. 74.
SUGGESTED READING
Frampton, Kenneth. Le Corbusier. New York: Thames & Hudson, Inc., 2001.
Le Corbusier. Toward an Architecture. Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2007.
McCarter, Robert, ed. On and By Frank Lloyd Wright: A Primer of Architectural 
Principles. London: Phaidon, 2005.
Mertins, Detlef. Mies. London: Phaidon, 2014.
Wright, Frank Lloyd. The Natural House. New York: Horizon Press, 1954.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-11
Architects have been employing an evolving set of architectural draw￾ing methods and types for centuries. These can be described as two￾dimensional (2D) drawings (such as orthographic drawings: plan, 
section, and elevation), three-dimensional (3D) drawings (such as 
perspective and axonometric drawings), and even four-dimensional 
(4D) approaches which include animations and videos. Architectural 
drawings include sketches, “presentation” drawings, and construc￾tion documents. The word “representation” is often given to a broad 
range of architectural drawing types and media, which are employed 
by architects to design and depict buildings.1
 Since the invention of 
perspective in the 1420s by Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446) there 
have been many transformations in 3D architectural representation. 
Perspective was initially realized in one-point drawings and paint￾ings, but this would develop into two, three, and multi-point images 
over time.
Challenges to the conventions of perspective began seriously in 
the 18th century with Giovanni Battista Piranesi (1720–1778), who 
produced conventional views of Rome, along with his hallucino￾genic and frightening depictions of prison interiors. The prison 
images, the Carceri engravings (1750 and 1761, two editions), broke 
down the concept of a single viewing position. These suggested a 
moving observer, something more like the way humans experience 
the world, as opposed to the static view typically found in perspec￾tive compositions.2
 The invention of photography in the 19th cen￾tury by pioneers such as Louis Daguerre (1787–1851) completely 
AVANT-GARDE AND 
REPRESENTATION
11Avant-Garde and Representation 101
altered the human perception and representation of the world. This 
would be augmented by the invention of cinema late in the century. 
Challenged by these new technologies, painters turned to new sub￾ject matters (the Realists) and to new ways of capturing colour, light, 
and space (the Impressionists).
By the early 20th century, a host of “avant-garde” art movements 
emerged that were devoted to experimentation and innovation and 
radically transformed approaches to representation. Some also intro￾duced the concept of abstract art. Avant-garde movements include 
Cubism, Expressionism, Fauvism, Futurism (see Chapter 13), De 
Stijl, Surrealism, and Dada. Some of these impacted developments 
in architecture, and some did not. These new movements invoke 
the concept of the avant-garde, which dates from the 1850s. The 
expression comes from French and is a military term that refers to 
an “advance guard” or “vanguard.” The notion of avant-garde is also 
linked to the concept of the “new” in modernism.
* * *
Paul Cézanne (1839–1906) was a crucial figure in the develop￾ment of modern art in the 20th century; his paintings are situated 
between the atmospheric works of the Impressionists and the devel￾opment of Cubism. Cézanne’s attempts to capture a new approach 
to painting, “with its brilliant use of colour and its mysterious defor￾mations, which suggested a range of new pictorial concepts,”3
 was 
immensely influential. In a famous statement, Cézanne writes:
[T]reat nature by the cylinder, the sphere, the cone, everything in proper 
perspective so that each side of an object or a plane is directed towards a 
central point. Lines parallel to the horizon give breadth. . . . Lines perpen￾dicular to this horizon give depth. But nature for us men is more depth 
than surface, whence the need of introducing into our light vibrations, 
represented by reds and yellows, a sufficient amount of blue to give the 
impression of air.4
Avoiding the use of perspective, Cézanne painted objects and space 
as though they were shaped into a perceptual unity. His techniques 
prefigured the development of Cubism.
The development of Cubism by Pablo Picasso (1881–1973) and 
Georges Braque (1882–1963), during 1907–1914, produced a new 
way of depicting a 3D image on a 2D surface. As John Golding 
states, “Cubism was a completely new pictorial language,”5
 it would 
have an enormous impact on developments in 20th-century art and 102 Avant-Garde and Representation
design. Picasso already had a well-established reputation and had 
painted the very important Les Demoiselles d’Avignon canvas (1907), 
a painting representing a group of five prostitutes that foreshadowed 
the birth of Cubism. Severe, distorted, and angular, the painting 
captures the figures in a shallow space. While making the painting, 
Picasso was inspired by traditional African and Polynesian sculpture.6
Picasso also broke the conventions of perspective by introduc￾ing multiple viewpoints. Braque quickly took up the challenge of 
Picasso’s experimentation. By 1908, the two artists were meeting 
daily, establishing an intense relationship focused on devising new 
representational techniques.
The two artists achieved a truly Cubist representation in 1909, 
after which the rate of their invention accelerated. Within months, 
the complexity of the work had increased, resulting in what is termed 
“analytical” Cubism. Golding describes this in the following terms:
These paintings give the sensation that Braque [and Picasso] has felt his 
way visually around each object and examined its relationships with the 
other objects around it from several viewpoints. By rendering the areas 
between the objects in a tactile, material fashion, Braque succeeds in 
fusing objects and space into a spatial continuum composed of small, 
fluid, interpenetrating planes [passage]. It is this concrete rendering of the 
space around the highly fragmented objects that gives these paintings a 
sensation of unprecedented complexity.7
During 1910–1911, Braque began to introduce lettering and other 
devices into his compositions, anticipating later developments, 
including the invention of collage. The Cubist paintings from this 
period radically reduced the colour palette to compensate for the 
complexity of the technique, which involved breaking down the 
image into planes, incorporating a moving observer, and establish￾ing a fusion of space, time, and object. The subjects of the paint￾ings were typically portraits or still-lifes of ordinary objects. Cubism 
emphasized the “materialization” of space. By 1910, other artists 
and patrons had joined the Cubist cause, producing works of great 
controversy.
A major aspect of Cubism was collage (and/or papier collé, as gluing 
paper to the canvas), a technique pioneered in Picasso’s 1912 canvas 
entitled Still Life with Chair-caning. It is “the first painting in which 
extraneous objects or materials are applied to the picture surface.”8
By adding materials to canvases, such as fragments of newspaper and 
wallpaper, the Cubists further challenged the established conventions 
of art.9Avant-Garde and Representation 103
How did the pictorial inventions of the Cubists translate into 
architecture? The sculptor Raymond Duchamp-Villon (1876–1918) 
was one of the first to attempt a Cubist sculpture, which is evident 
in his Le Cheval from 1914. He was also one of the first to propose 
Cubist architecture in his earlier façade project for the Maison Cubiste
(1912). Simultaneously, a form of Cubist architecture was also devel￾oped by various Czech architects, primarily in Prague.10 Colin Rowe 
and Robert Slutzky’s seminal essay entitled “Transparency: Literal 
and Phenomenal,” published in 1963, was an effort to link Cubism to 
architecture through the concept of “transparency,” or “overlapping 
figures.”11 Undoubtedly, the most successful architecture derived 
from Cubism is found in the Purist work of Le Corbusier from the 
1920s (see Chapter 10).
* * *
German Expressionism emerged as an art movement in 1905 when 
a group of architecture students established die Brücke (The Bridge) 
in Dresden. Inspired by the German Art Nouveau, indigenous Non￾Western ritual art (from Africa, Oceania, Asia, and the Americas),12
older Western art, the paintings of Vincent van Gogh (1853–1890) and 
Paul Gauguin (1848–1903), and the philosophy of Friedrich Nietzsche, 
the group’s name alluded to a “bridge” between the artist and the pub￾lic.13 The die Brücke group developed a similar approach to the French 
Fauvist movement under Henri Matisse (1869–1954). Depictions were 
angular and often executed in black-and-white woodcuts or highly col￾oured canvases, often representing urban scenes.
A second group formed in Munich in 1911 around Wassily 
Kandinsky (1866–1944), known as the Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue 
Rider) exhibiting society. Deeply committed to spiritualism in art 
and movements such as Theosophy and Anthroposophy, the group 
was influenced by sources similar to their Dresden predecessors. In 
his text Concerning the Spiritual in Art (1911), Kandinsky advocates for 
expressing spirituality through colour, form, and specific shapes (the 
triangle and pyramid). He writes: “The mutual influence of form and 
colour now becomes clear. A yellow triangle, a blue circle, a green 
square, or a green triangle, a yellow circle, a blue square – all these 
are different and have different spiritual values.”14 There was also a 
stronger tendency towards abstraction with the Der Blaue Reiter 
group, particularly in the paintings of Kandinsky, he is often credited 
with painting the first “abstract” work of art with his Composition V
painting of 1911.104 Avant-Garde and Representation
The relationship between painting and architecture in Expres￾sionism was often tangential, with artists and architects exploring 
similar themes in their works. A preoccupation with unconventional 
forms, often angular and jarring, and spiritualism and emotional￾ism characterized the movement. Expressionism in architecture 
covers several initiatives, primarily in Holland and Germany. The 
Amsterdam School is an early manifestation of Expressionism, cen￾tring on the work of Michel de Klerk (1884–1923), Piet Kramer 
(1881–1961), and Johan van der Mey (1878–1949), all of whom 
worked in the offices of the architect Eduard Cuypers (1859–1927). 
The first building associated with the Amsterdam movement is 
the Scheepvaarthuis (1916), designed by Van der May with input 
from De Klerk and Kramer. Active between 1915 and 1930, the 
Amsterdam group established its reputation primarily through the 
design of housing blocks. Inspired by an exalted idea of the architect, 
the School “stressed the notion of the artist as a prophet, an indi￾vidual endowed with the gift of special insight and therefore some￾one capable of recognizing essential truths and transmitting them to 
society as a whole.”15
In Germany, the work of an older generation of architects, such 
as Hans Poelzig (1869–1936), laid the groundwork for the emer￾gence of Expressionist architecture. The figure most associated with 
German Expressionist architecture was Bruno Taut (1880–1938), 
who tirelessly promoted the movement until the early 1920s. Taut’s 
own ideas about architecture were inspired by the writings of 
Paul Scheerbart (1863–1915), who would dedicate his 1914 book 
Glasarchitektur to Taut. In the book, Scheerbart describes the benefits 
of a glass architecture:
Our culture is to a certain extent the product of our architecture. If we 
want our culture to rise to a higher level, we are obliged, for better or 
worse, to change our architecture. And this is only possible if we take 
away the closed character from the rooms in which we live. We can only 
do that by introducing glass architecture, which lets in the light of the 
sun, the moon, and the stars, not merely through a few windows, but 
through every possible wall, which will be made entirely of glass – of col￾oured glass.16
Inspired by Gothic cathedrals, this new glass architecture sought to 
cover the earth in a sparkling array of coloured light. Taut trans￾lated Scheerbart’s ideas in his most developed Expressionist building, 
the temporary Glass Pavilion for the Cologne Werkbund exhibition Avant-Garde and Representation 105
of 1914 (see Chapter 8). The construction featured a kaleidoscopic 
use of glass and light and included a double skin, coloured glass, 
and inscriptions devised by Scheerbart.17 In 1919, Taut published 
two important books on architecture: Die Stadtkrone and Alpine 
Architektur. Alpine Architektur features 30 highly evocative drawings 
executed in pencil and ink, which show a fantastical and colourful 
crystalline architecture that sits on mountain tops and fills valleys.18
Another architect associated with Expressionism was Erich 
Mendelsohn (1887–1953), a Jewish-German contributor to mod￾ernism; his architecture can also be described as “dynamic func￾tionalism” with its emphasis on curvilinear forms.19 Mendelsohn’s 
most striking building is his early Einstein Tower at the astrophysical 
observatory in Potsdam, completed in 1921. A laboratory dedicated 
to the study of Albert Einstein’s theories of relativity, the building 
employs sculptural and organic forms expressing motion. During 
the 1920s, Mendelsohn established an influential practice in Berlin. 
He moved to the forefront of modernism with the distinctive use 
of “sweeping” horizontally banded and curved forms,20 an expres￾sion of the speed of modern life that foreshadowed the development 
of “streamlining” in design. During the 1920s, many of his clients 
were Jewish businessmen for whom he designed department stores.21
The rise of Nazism forced Mendelsohn into exile. After working 
in England and Palestine, he settled in the United States, where he 
designed several synagogues.
By 1923, the impact of Expressionism was in decline; however, the 
movement influenced the formation of the Bauhaus and the early glass 
skyscraper designs of Mies van der Rohe (see Chapter 10). Beyond 
the rationalist principles of modern functionalism, Expressionism 
revealed a spiritual and emotional role in architecture.
* * *
Space and time. The new architecture takes account not only of space 
but also the magnitude of time. Through the unity of space and time the 
architectural exterior will acquire a new and completely plastic aspect.22
Another vital 20th-century avant-garde movement was the De 
Stijl group. It arose out of World War I and sought a universalist 
abstraction by “striving for a precision such as found in the prod￾ucts of the machine” and in the Dutch landscape.23 Primarily a 
Dutch movement, it was led by the artist and polemicist Theo van 
Doesburg (1883–1931), although the formative abstract paintings of 106 Avant-Garde and Representation
Piet Mondrian (1872–1944) would be the real source of inspira￾tion for the artists, architects, and furniture makers who comprised 
the loose-knit collective. The De Stijl movement was very effective 
in integrating “architecture into a universal theory of art” that had 
widespread appeal, along with an emphasis on rectangular shapes, 
separated volumes, and asymmetrical compositions (what would 
become the hallmarks of the International Style, see Chapter 12).24
Mondrian, Kandinsky, and the Russian artist Kazimir Malevich 
(1879–1935) were the first artists to produce abstract or non￾figurative paintings (see Chapter 14). Beginning with Fauvist and 
Symbolist modes of painting, Mondrian discovered Cézanne and 
Cubism by 1911. From his Cubist phase, he steadily transformed 
towards what he called “neo-plasticism.” He would paint his first 
truly abstract canvas in 1917 with Composition in Line. Striving for 
harmony and balance, Mondrian developed his famous mature 
paintings in the 1920s; these were “reduced to a group of “univer￾sal,” atomic elements: planes of primary color opposing planes of 
“non-color” – gray, black, white; vertical lines opposing horizontal 
lines while probing the various planes that delimit the surface of the 
canvas.”25
The De Stijl group first met in 1917 and included Van Doesburg, 
Mondrian, and the architects J.P.P. Oud (1890–1963) and Robert 
van ‘t Hoff; Gerrit Reitveld (1888–1964) would join in 1918. The 
first edition of the De Stijl magazine was published in October 1917. 
Between 1917 and 1931, Van Doesburg tirelessly promoted De Stijl 
ideas, which included universalism over individualism, and a union 
of all the arts, especially painting and architecture.
In the early period of De Stijl, Van Doesburg collaborated with 
various architects; his most important creative collaboration was with 
the young architect Cornelis van Eesteren (1897–1988). Together, 
they developed projects such as the Maison Particulière (1923) and 
Maison d’Artiste (1923) in drawings and models for an exhibition of 
De Stijl work held at the Léonce Rosenberg Gallery in Paris in 1923. 
The models, known as “counterconstructions,” described the move￾ment’s approach. The art historian Nancy J. Troy writes:
The sense of floating planes of color is conveyed even more powerfully by 
van Doesburg’s counterconstructions, a series of drawings he made on 
the basis of van Eesteren’s axonometric projections. . . . In the counter￾constructions, color itself functions as an architectural material identical 
to the plane it identifies. In this respect the counterconstructions seem to 
embody Mondrian’s conception of architecture as a multiplicity of planes.26Avant-Garde and Representation 107
In particular, Van Doesburg’s analytical axonometric drawings under￾scored the planar composition of the design, something implied in 
Frank Lloyd Wright’s Prairie houses designed 20 years earlier.27 The 
use of axonometric drawings by Van Doesburg and Van Eesteren was 
an important innovation in architectural representation, although 
they did not invent the drawing type.28
The Schröder-Schräder house (1924) in Utrecht, by Gerrit 
Rietveld, remains one of the truly seminal works of modern archi￾tecture. Reitveld was trained as a furniture maker and produced a 
prototype (1917–1918) of what would become the famous red/
blue chair. One of the most iconic examples of De Stijl design, the 
chair possesses a precise structural armature painted black and yellow 
that supports two planks in red and blue; the design creates a fusion 
between structure, space, and colour. The Schröder-Schräder house 
was a collaborative work between the client Mrs. Truus Schröder￾Schräder and Rietveld that began in 1923. The design is composed 
of coloured planes and lines in a 3D realization of De Stijl princi￾ples.29 The lower floor is quite conventional, whereas the upper floor 
features an open plan subdivided by sliding partitions, fixed elements, 
and furniture designed by Reitveld. The house is an extraordinary 
collaboration between client and designer, as Schröder-Schräder 
lived in the house for 60 years.
* * *
There were other avant-garde groups from the early 20th century 
who had some impact on architecture; these include Surrealism and 
Dada. The Surrealism group, created by the writer André Breton 
(1896–1966) in 1924, was an impactful movement primarily devoted 
to writing and painting. Inspired by the theories of Sigmund Freud 
(1856–1939), the Surrealists examined the subconscious through 
the analysis of dreams and techniques such as automatic writing. 
Surrealist painters included Max Ernst (1891–1947), René Magritte 
(1898–1967), and Salvador Dali (1904–1989). And while there were 
no architects aligned with Surrealism, various architectural works 
were identified as having Surrealist qualities.30 A precursor move￾ment to Surrealism was Dadaism, an international and informal 
group of artists operating in Zurich, New York, Berlin, Cologne, 
Hanover, and Paris.31 Dadaism was renowned for its anarchic and 
negative approach to art.
Linked to both Surrealism and Dadaism was Marcel Duchamp 
(1887–1968). After flirting with Cubism (for example, Nude 108 Avant-Garde and Representation
Figure 11.1 First Floor Axonometric, Gerrit Rietveld, Schröder-Schräder 
House, 1924, Utrecht, Netherlands. The plan is divided into four quadrants 
organized around the stairs. The deployment of sliding partitions and the care￾ful placement of furniture means the space can be organized as either open or 
closed. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.Avant-Garde and Representation 109
Descending a Staircase (1912)), Duchamp began to radically question 
the role of the artist. This was most obvious in his “ready-mades,” 
begun in 1913, in which Duchamp selected industrially produced 
objects that were objectively recontextualized as works of art. 
During this period, Duchamp also began a careful study of the his￾tory of Western representation, rejecting what he called “retinal” art, 
pointing toward experiments such as The Bride Stripped Bare by Her 
Bachelors, Even (1915–1923).32 Ultimately, Duchamp would become 
one of the most influential artists of the 20th century.
The connections between painting, sculpture, and architec￾ture were unified in the avant-garde movements such as Cubism, 
Expressionism, and De Stijl. They also challenged the conventions of 
representation, particularly perspective. The materialization of space 
and the use of planar elements were also common to Cubism and 
De Stijl, both vital concepts in the development of modern archi￾tecture. Later, there were other important art movements, such as 
Abstract Expressionism, Pop Art (see Chapter 18), Conceptual Art, 
Minimalism, and Land Art, that also advanced methods of represen￾tation. Finally, the advent of computer-aided design (CAD) since the 
1960s has revolutionized architectural representation in significant 
ways, closing the gaps between conceptualizing a building, drawing 
it, and having it constructed.
NOTES
1 See Alberto Pérez-Gómez and Louise Pelletier, “Architectural Represent￾ation and Perspectivism,” Perspecta, vol. 27 (1992), pp.  20–39; and Mark 
Hewitt, “Representational Forms and Modes of Conception: An Approach 
to the History of Architectural Drawing,” Journal of Architectural Education, 
vol. 39, no. 2 (Winter 1985), pp. 2–9.
2 See John Wilton-Ely, The Mind and Art of Giovanni Battista Piranesi (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 1988).
3 John Golding, Cubism: A History and an Analysis 1907–1914 (London: 
Faber and Faber, 1988), p. 59.
4 Paul Cézanne, “Letter to Emile Bernard, Aix, 15 April 1904,” in Herschel 
B. Chipp, ed., Theories of Modern Art: A Source Book of Artists and Critics
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1968), p. 19.
5 Golding, Cubism, p. xv.
6 See Ibid., pp. 33–51.
7 Ibid., p. 82.
8 Ibid., p. 104.
9 See Ibid., pp. 96–108.110 Avant-Garde and Representation
10 See Eve Blau and Nancy J. Troy, eds., Architecture and Cubism (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1997).
11 See Colin Rowe and Robert Slutzky, “Transparency: Literal and 
Phenomenal,” Perspecta, vol. 8 (1963), pp. 45–54.
12 One of the significant issues affecting movements such as Fauvism, Cubism, 
and Expressionism was the use of non-Western indigenous ritual objects 
(from Africa, Oceania, Asia, and the Americas) as sources of inspiration. 
There is also the use of problematic terms such as “primitive” and “tribal” 
that perpetuate racist and colonial stereotypes. The practice of interpreting 
works from other traditions raises the issue of “cultural appropriation.” See 
William Rubin, ed., Primitivism in 20th Century Art: Affinity of the Tribal and 
the Modern (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1984): and Hal Foster, 
“The ‘Primitive’ Unconscious of Modern Art,” October, vol. 34 (Autumn 
1985), pp. 50–51.
13 Jill Lloyd, German Expressionism: Primitivism and Modernity (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1991), p. 18.
14 Wassily Kandinsky, Concerning the Spiritual in Art (New York: Dover 
Publications, 1977), p. 29.
15 Wim de Wit, “The Amsterdam School: Definition and Delineation,” in 
Wim de Wit, ed., The Amsterdam School: Dutch Expressionist Architecture, 
1915–1930 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983), p. 35.
16 Paul Scheerbart, “Glasarchitektur,” in Josiah McElheny and Christine 
Burgin, eds., Glass! Love!! Perpetual Motion!!! A Paul Scheerbart Reader
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2014), p. 26.
17 Iain Boyd Whyte, Bruno Taut and the Architecture of Activism (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1982), p. 35.
18 See Matthias Schirren, ed., Bruno Taut: Alpine Architektur, A Utopia (Munich: 
Prestel, 2004).
19 See Kathleen James, Erich Mendelsohn and the Architecture of German Modernism
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997).
20 Ibid., p. 88.
21 See Ibid., pp. 108–139.
22 Theo van Doesburg, “Towards a Plastic Architecture,” in Ulrich Conrads, 
ed., Programs and Manifestoes on 20th Century Architecture (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1971), p. 78.
23 Hans L.C. Jaffé, “Introduction,” in Mildred Friedman, ed., De Stijl, 1917–
1931: Visions of Utopia (New York: Abbeville Press, 1982), p. 12.
24 Philip C. Johnson, “Foreword,” in Alfred H. Barr, Jr., ed., De Stijl (New 
York: Museum of Modern Art, 1961), p. 5.
25 Yves-Alain Bois, “The Iconoclast,” in Yves-Alain Bois et al., eds., Piet 
Mondrian (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1994), p. 315.
26 Nancy J. Troy, “The Abstract Environment of De Stijl,” in Friedman, ed., 
De Stijl, 1917–1931, p. 184.Avant-Garde and Representation 111
27 See Allan Doig, Theo van Doesburg: Painting into Architecture, Theory into 
Practice (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), pp. 152–165.
28 See Yves-Alain Bois, “Metamorphosis of Axonometry,” Daidalos (September 
1981), pp. 41–58.
29 See Ida van Zijl, Gerrit Rietveld (London: Phaidon, 2010), pp. 46–71.
30 See Thomas Mical, ed., Surrealism and Architecture (Adington: Routledge, 
2005); and Jane Allison, ed., The Surreal House (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2010).
31 See Hans Richter, DADA: Art and Anti-Art (London: Thames and Hudson, 
1965).
32 See Octavio Paz, Marcel Duchamp: Appearance Stripped Bare (New York: 
Viking Press, 1978).
SUGGESTED READING
Evans, Robin. The Projective Cast. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
Friedman, Mildred, ed. De Stijl, 1917–1931: Visions of Utopia. New York: 
Abbeville Press, 1982.
Golding, John. Cubism: A History and an Analysis 1907–1914. London: Faber 
and Faber, 1988.
Pérez-Gómez, Alberto and Louise Pelletier. Architectural Representation and the 
Perspective Hinge. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997.
Porter, Tom. How Architects Visualize. London: Studio Vista, 1979.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-12
After decades of struggle, various European architects developed 
modern architecture in the 1920s, building on earlier work by fig￾ures like Frank Lloyd Wright (1867–1959), Adolf Loos (1870–1933), 
and Walter Gropius (1883–1969). For example, Gropius and Adolf 
Meyer’s Fagus Factory (1913), a shoe-last factory in Alfeld-an-der￾Leine, Germany, was one of the earliest works of modern architecture 
in Europe. The arrival of modern architecture was also recognized 
in two important exhibitions: the Weissenhofseidlung building exhi￾bition (1927) in Stuttgart, Germany, and the “International Style” 
exhibition held at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New 
York in 1932. Despite the Western origins of the new approach, it 
was proclaimed an “international” style by its proponents, applicable 
to any place in the world. As Gropius writes:
In modern architecture the objectivization of what is personal and 
national is quite clearly noticeable. A modern unifying tendency, con￾ditioned by world communications and world techniques, is making 
headway in every field of culture, going beyond the national boundaries 
to which individuals and peoples are still bound. Architecture is always 
national, but it also always individual, but of the three concentric circles 
– individual, people, humanity – the third and largest embraces the other 
two: hence the title: international architecture!1
The universal aspects of this approach would lead to its downfall. 
The architectural historian Charles Jencks proclaimed that the death 
of modern architecture occurred exactly at 3:32 pm on July 15, 
INTERNATIONALISM AND 
UNIVERSALISM
12Internationalism and Universalism 113
1972, in St. Louis, Missouri, when the Pruitt-Igoe Housing scheme 
(1954) by Minoru Yamasaki was demolished.2
* * *
In 1927, the Weissenhofseidlung building exhibition opened. It 
featured designs by 16 emerging modernist architects and was organ￾ized by the Deutscher Werkbund under the direction of Mies van 
der Rohe. Projects by Mies, Le Corbusier, Walter Gropius, J.P.P. 
Oud, and others demonstrated a relatively consistent cubic language 
that featured flat roofs, light-coloured exterior surfaces, industrial 
detailing, and no traditional ornament. The designs were “a pure 
representation of structure, function, and the means of production, 
taking its form from the fulfillment of these requirements in an 
entirely “objective” or sachlich manner.”3
 In signalling the emergence 
of a modern style, the exhibition of housing projects featuring apart￾ment buildings, single-family houses, and rowhouses received wide 
attention in the press.
The Modern Architecture: International Exhibition at MoMA was 
organized by Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson at the 
invitation of Alfred Barr, the museum’s director. The work of over 
40 architects from 15 countries was chosen based on adherence to 
three principles:
[F]irst, a new conception of architecture as volume rather than as mass. 
Secondly, regularity rather than axial symmetry serves as the chief means 
of ordering design . . . a third proscribing arbitrary applied decoration.4
The exhibition recognized the formative contributions of Frank 
Lloyd Wright but focused on the leadership of four European archi￾tects: Le Corbusier, J.P.P. Oud, Walter Gropius, and Mies van der 
Rohe (see Chapter 10). Apart from projects by these architects, 
noteworthy projects that captured the new style included Brinkman 
& Van der Vlugt’s Van Nelle Factory (1930) in Rotterdam; Howe & 
Lescaze’s PSFS Building (1931) in Philadelphia; Ludvik Kysela’s Bata 
Shoe Store (1929) in Prague; and Richard J. Neutra’s Lovell House 
(1929) in Los Angeles. The designs tended to be stark, placing an 
emphasis on hygiene and employing modern materials of glass, steel, 
and concrete. The forms and details referenced modern machines, 
and the “whiteness” of the designs seemed to invoke Mediterranean 
vernacular construction. This monochromatic impression was 
underscored by black-and-white photography that eliminated the 114 Internationalism and Universalism
colours that were often used by early modernists. The book that was 
published following the exhibition was titled The International Style: 
Architecture since 1922.
Following the exhibition, the International Style would gain wide￾spread adoption throughout the world, particularly in Europe, in the 
Americas, and in countries colonized by Europeans, particularly in 
Africa and the Middle East (see Chapter 22). An important case study 
is the Israeli city of Tel Aviv, which adopted modern architecture, 
or the “Bauhaus Style,” following 1934 and is home to hundreds of 
modernist buildings.5
 After World War II, the International Style 
was widely embraced by corporations, particularly for the design 
of office buildings. A late example of a modernist housing exhibi￾tion was the Interbau exhibition in West Berlin which opened in 
1957. It featured projects by 48 architects, including Alvar Aalto, Le 
Corbusier, Walter Gropius, and Oscar Niemeyer.
* * *
Latin America is an immense area defined in the modern era by its 
colonial history. Despite the complex differences between the many 
countries and regions in Latin America, there is also a common his￾tory that has created a shared destiny.6
 The development of mod￾ern architecture throughout Latin America was impacted by major 
figures such as Le Corbusier and the emergence of several impor￾tant regional figures in the post-World War II era.7
 During his first 
visit to Latin America (1929–1930), Le Corbusier visited Argentina, 
Paraguay, Uruguay, and Brazil, where he gave lectures and was cel￾ebrated as a visionary architect. He experienced the landscape from 
the air, which gave him a particular perspective on Latin America, 
and he developed design proposals for several cities.8
The earliest modernist house in Latin America was by Gregori 
Warchavchik in São Paulo, Brazil, and dates from 1927. Shortly 
afterwards, in 1929, Juan O’Gorman (1905–1982) designed a mod￾ernist house for his father in Mexico City. This project caught the 
attention of the muralist Diego Rivera (1886–1957), who commis￾sioned O’Gorman to design linked house/studios for himself and 
Frida Kahlo (1907–1954) on an adjacent property. Brightly coloured 
and inspired by the early Purist architecture of Le Corbusier, the 
resulting compound (1932) is an important early example of Latin 
American modernism.9
Le Corbusier would make a subsequent trip to Rio de Janeiro in 
1936, during which he worked with a local team, under the direction Internationalism and Universalism 115
of Lúcio Costa (1902–1998) and with the young Oscar Niemeyer 
(1907–2012), on a design for the new Ministry of Education and 
Public Health (MESP). The resulting MESP building, completed 
in 1945, is a refined 15-story slab building over an auditorium/gal￾lery block employing a brise-soleil on the northern façade, vari￾ous Corbusian features, references to local traditions, and an early 
modernist landscape design by Roberto Burle Marx (1909–1994). 
The project effectively launched the important career of Niemeyer 
and underscored the influence Le Corbusier would have on Latin 
American architecture.
Oscar Niemeyer was educated in Rio de Janeiro and eventu￾ally found his own unique interpretation of modernism. Niemeyer 
would also be an ardent leftist for most of his career, which put him 
in opposition with the ruling military dictatorship during the years it 
operated in Brazil (1964–1985). In his work, Niemeyer was:
Deliberately suspending and subtly undermining the rules of Modernist 
composition, he was able to manipulate and extend its formal possibili￾ties, liberating a much-repressed architectural imagination and demys￾tifying the socialist, rationalist and functionalist rhetoric of doctrinaire 
Modernism. His architecture of ‘liberated . . . sensual curve[s]’ and deco￾rated surfaces, privileged the senses over reason.10
A crucial project in the development of modern Latin American 
architecture is the series of buildings that Oscar Niemeyer designed 
in Belo Horizonte, Brazil (1940–1943). The city’s mayor, Juscelino 
Kubitschek, later the president of Brazil responsible for the new capi￾tal city of Brasília, commissioned Niemeyer to design a chapel, casino, 
dance hall, yacht club, and a hotel for a new development outside 
the city. Organized around an artificial lake, each of the designs is an 
experimental essay in modern architecture, particularly the Capela 
da Pampulha (1942), a small chapel with four thin parabolic vaults 
clad in painted ceramic tiles. Diverging from a strict adherence to Le 
Corbusier’s tenets, the five buildings signal a more regionally suitable 
modernism, inflected by local methods.11
Brazilian modernism became widely celebrated in the 1940s and 
1950s, largely due to Niemeyer’s flamboyance as an architect and 
his focus on employing evocative forms in his designs. Niemeyer 
was also on the international team assembled to design the United 
Nations Building (1952) in New York, which included Le Corbusier. 
The design, mainly attributed to Niemeyer, also includes compro￾mises that resulted from the team’s approach to the design. During 116 Internationalism and Universalism
the 1940s and 1950s modernist housing projects were constructed 
throughout Latin America, following concepts devised in Europe 
and North America. A striking example of this is Niemeyer’s 
Edificio COPAN in São Paulo (1953–1966), an enormous curvi￾linear residential building. Niemeyer was also responsible for most 
of the major institutional buildings built at Brasília in the late 1950s 
(see Chapter 7).
Early modern architecture in Argentina was overshadowed by 
the dramatic output of Brazilian architects. However, an important 
Argentinian figure was Amancio Williams (1913–1989), who stud￾ied both engineering and architecture in his native city of Buenos 
Aires. He produced an enigmatic and relatively small body of work. 
He “approached contemporary programs with an innovative atti￾tude, rooting his designs in patient research and elaboration.”12
Williams developed research on typologies and technologies in pro￾jects such as Houses in Space (1943), Suspended Office Building 
(1946), Shells of Minimal Thickness (1951–1966), and High Roofs 
(1964). Williams’s House over the Brook (1945) in Mar del Plata is 
a well-known design constructed for his father, in which he synthe￾sizes his ideas into a single project.13
In the tradition of innovative structural engineering pioneered by 
figures like the Swiss engineer Robert Maillart (1872–1940), the 
works of Eladio Dieste (1917–2000) in Uruguay and Félix Candela 
(1910–1997) in Mexico are important. Dieste was trained as an 
engineer and spent much of his career working on warehouses that 
employed long-span brick vaults. Relatively late in his career, he 
became involved in architecture when he was asked to design the 
Iglesia de Cristo Obrero (Church of the Christ the Worker, 1960) in 
a working-class community near Atlántida, Uruguay. Eager to dem￾onstrate his knowledge of brick vaulting, he created a space defined 
by undulating walls and ceiling to produce a harmonious and inex￾pensive solution. Dieste would subsequently produce several other 
works of architecture.14
In the late 1930s, a wave of European architects and artists emi￾grated to different parts of Latin America, some briefly and some for 
the rest of their careers. One such figure was Candela, who estab￾lished himself as a pioneer in the use of thin-shelled reinforced con￾crete structures. Born in Madrid, he studied architecture and fought 
in the Spanish Civil War before being sent to Mexico in 1939. In 
the 1940s, he established a design and construction company, and 
by the early 1950s, important commissions began to appear after Internationalism and Universalism 117
he perfected his methods. In his more utilitarian projects, such as 
warehouses, he often used a repeating thin-shelled concrete inverted 
umbrella form. In his more remarkable projects, such as the Chapel 
Lomas de Cuernavaca (1958) and Los Manantiales Restaurant (1958) 
at Xochimilco, Mexico City, he exploited a hyperbolic paraboloid 
form.15
* * *
There were several women who contributed significantly to the 
early Modern Movement and were key figures in the practices of 
famous male architects. These include Marion Mahony Griffin 
(1871–1961) who was an instrumental member of Frank Lloyd 
Wright’s office in the early 20th century; Lilly Reich (1885–1947) 
who worked with Mies van der Rohe in the 1920s and 1930s on 
furniture and interiors; Aino Maria Marsio-Aalto (1894–1949) who 
collaborated closely with Alvar Aalto until her untimely death; and 
Charlotte Perriand (1903–1999) who designed pioneering furniture 
and interiors while employed with Le Corbusier in the 1920s and 
1930s, before launching a successful solo career as a designer (see 
Chapters 10 and 19). Several other key women also emerged during 
the formative stages of modern architecture.
Eileen Gray (1878–1976), the Irish-born designer and architect, 
was an important contributor to the development of modernism in 
the 1920s. She studied art in London and Paris; early on, she learned 
the technique of lacquering. After World War I, she was involved in 
interior and furniture design, mainly in the Art Deco style. During 
1922–1930, she operated a store called Jean Désert in Paris to sell her 
products. After 1921, when she met the architect Jean Badovici, she 
became involved in architecture and modernist design. Two houses 
were built according to her designs: the E-1027 house (1929) in 
Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, France, and the Tempe à Pailla house 
(1934) in Castellar, France. The two houses by Gray demonstrate 
that despite appearances of coldness modern architecture can be han￾dled in sensitive and distinctive ways. Several pieces of Gray’s furni￾ture remain among the most well-known works of modernist design 
and are still in production.16
Margarete Schütte-Lihotzky (1897–2000) was born in Vienna, 
where she was trained in both art and architecture. In the early 
1920s, she worked with the Viennese Ministry of Housing (under 
Adolf Loos). During this decade, she began to make a name for 
herself in housing and furnishing design. In 1926, she was invited to 118 Internationalism and Universalism
join the team working under Ernst May (1886–1970) on the devel￾opment of new housing districts for Frankfurt am Main in Germany. 
During her time in Frankfurt, Schütte-Lihotzky designed the famous 
“Frankfurt Kitchen,” a pioneering design featuring a modern, effi￾cient, ergonomic, and ingenious arrangement of appliances, storage, 
and counter surfaces. An early example of a standardized design, it 
was developed as a prefabricated unit and used 6.50 meters (70 square 
feet) of space (see Chapter 13). The Frankfurt Kitchen was installed 
in 10,000 homes in Frankfurt. Inspired by compact kitchens found 
on trains and ships, “the Frankfurt Kitchen was the realization of 
the kitchen as machine.”17 Schütte-Lihotzky would go on to write 
articles and lecture on domestic design, adding importantly to the 
notion of minimum space design, or Existenzminimum, a concept 
popular among modernists in the late 1920s and early 1930s.18
Figure 12.1 First Floor Plan, Eileen Gray, E-1027 House, 1929, Roquebrun, 
France. The plan reflects Gray’s detailed attention to all aspects of the house as a 
responsive environment; the precise incorporation of her own furniture designs 
reinforces this. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.Internationalism and Universalism 119
Hana Kučerová-Záveská (1902–1944) designed two single-family 
villas for the Baba Housing estate in Prague: the Villa Suk (1932) 
and the Villa Balling (1933). Commissioned by a builder, the design 
of the Villa Suk reflects Kučerová-Záveská’s interest in the work of 
Le Corbusier from the 1920s. The Villa Balling was designed for 
a composer of popular songs and educator; the building demon￾strates a sophisticated handling of its volumes and terraces. These 
projects are consistent with the modernist functional architecture of 
the 1920s and 1930s and survive as part of an important modernist 
housing estate from the period, developed with the Czechoslovak 
Werkbund. Kučerová-Záveská also designed modernist interiors and 
furniture and was an important writer on architecture and design.19
A distinctive Scandinavian architect was Greta Magnusson￾Grossman (1906–1999), who studied in Stockholm. Magnusson￾Grossman emigrated to Los Angeles in 1940 after working in 
Sweden. In Los Angeles, she designed objects, furniture, and inte￾riors for various clients during the 1940s and 1950s, including the 
Grasshopper floor lamp (1947) and the Cobra desk lamp (1949). She 
also designed several modernist houses, including the well-known 
Magnusson-Grossman (Hillside) House (1957) in Beverly Hills, 
which is structurally expressive as it juts out of its hillside site.20
Jane Drew (1911–1996) was born in Thornton Heath on the edge 
of London and studied architecture at the Architectural Association 
in London. Following graduation in 1934, she worked for several 
years, including with her first husband. After that, she worked pri￾marily in partnership with her second husband, Edwin Maxwell Fry 
(1899–1987), who she met in 1940. During World War II, Drew 
developed her skills in interior/industrial design, town planning, and 
post-war reconstruction.21 In the late 1940s, Drew and Fry were 
asked to design town housing areas for Harlow New Town as part 
of the massive drive to develop suitable housing and communities 
throughout Britain after the war. During the 1940s and 1950s, Drew 
worked extensively in West Africa, mainly in Nigeria and Ghana, 
where she and Fry designed buildings for educational institutions 
and were involved in town planning (see Chapter 23).
Between 1951 and 1954, Drew was part of the team leading 
the design and construction of Chandigarh, the new capital city of 
Punjab in India, planned by Le Corbusier (see Chapter 7), based 
largely on Drew and Fry’s experience in Africa.22 Le Corbusier 
revised the plan and concentrated on the design of the main govern￾ment buildings, while Drew, Fry, and Pierre Jeanneret concentrated 120 Internationalism and Universalism
on the design of housing, neighbourhoods (or sectors), and various 
other buildings.23 After working in India, Drew and Fry returned to 
Britain, where they continued a busy practice. Drew received many 
honours during her career in recognition of her contributions to 
architecture globally.24
* * *
Ultimately, the notion of an International Style as a universal lan￾guage failed. The lack of connection with history and an emphasis 
on the rational and functional employment of technology resulted in 
this failure. Ironically, the inability of modern architects to provide 
acceptable forms of mass housing was crucial, as the architectural 
historian Spiro Kostof notes:
When promoted as a forced choice between slum dwellings and the 
architecture of a new way of life, especially outside Europe, Modernist 
evangelism bore an uncomfortable resemblance to the colonial mis￾sion of “civilizing” subject peoples. The new materials – concrete, steel, 
glass – were installed universally, but primarily for high-style architecture 
and the landscape of industry and transportation.25
NOTES
1 Walter Gropius, from 1925, quoted in Leonardo Benevolo, History of Modern 
Architecture, Volume 2 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1977), p. 494.
2 Charles Jencks, The Language of Post-Modern Architecture (New York: Rizzoli, 
1991), p. 23.
3 Richard Pommer and Christian F. Otto, Weissenhof 1927 and the Modern 
Movement in Architecture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991), p. 2.
4 Henry-Russell Hitchcock and Philip Johnson, The International Style (New 
York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1966), p. 20.
5 See Michael Levin, White City: International Style Architecture in Israel (Tel 
Aviv: Tel Aviv Museum, 1984).
6 Marina Waisman, “Introduction,” in Malcolm Quantrill, ed., Latin American 
Architecture: Six Voices (College Station: Texas A&M University Press, 2000), 
p. 4.
7 See Patricio del Real and Helen Gyger, eds., Latin American Modern 
Architectures: Ambiguous Territories (New York: Taylor & Francis, 2013), 
pp. 1–29.
8 See Le Corbusier, Precisions on the Present State of Architecture and City Planning
(Zurich: Park Books, 2015).
9 See Luis E. Carranza and Fernando Luiz Lara, Modern Architecture in Latin 
America: Art, Technology, and Utopia (Austin: University of Texas Press, 
2014), pp. 71–72.Internationalism and Universalism 121
10 Styliane Philippou, Oscar Niemeyer: Curves of Irreverence (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2008), p. 12.
11 See Carranza and Lara, Modern Architecture in Latin America, pp. 108–112. 
See Oscar Niemeyer, The Curves of Time: The Memoirs of Oscar Niemeyer
(London: Phaidon, 2000).
12 Jorge Silvetti, ed., Amancio Williams (New York: Rizzoli, 1987), p. 62.
13 See Ibid., pp. 28–43.
14 See Carranza and Lara, Modern Architecture in Latin America, pp. 170–171.
15 See Maria E. Moreyra Garlock and David P. Billington, Félix Candela: 
Engineer, Builder, Structural Artist (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008).
16 See Peter Adam, Eileen Gray, Architect/Designer (New York: Henry N. 
Abrams, Inc., 1987).
17 Susan R. Henderson, “A Revolution in the Woman’s Sphere: Grete Lihotzky 
and the Frankfurt Kitchen,” in D. Coleman, E. Danze, and C. Henderson, 
eds., Architecture and Feminism (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 
1996), p. 235.
18 See Carmen Espegel, Women Architects in the Modern Movement (London: 
Routledge, 2018), pp. 164–198.
19 Information on Hana Kučerová-Záveská graciously provided by Dr. Irena 
Zantovská Murray in a personal communication (December 9, 2021).
20 See Harriet Harriss and Naomi House, “Greta Magnusson Grossman: 
Living in a Modern Way,” Places (October 2021).
21 See Iain Jackson and Jessica Holland, The Architecture of Edwin Maxwell Fry 
and Jane Drew (London: Routledge, 2014).
22 See Stanislaus von Moos, ed., Chandigarh 1956: Le Corbusier, Pierre Jeanneret, 
Jane B. Drew, Maxwell E. Fry (Zurich: Scheidegger & Speiss AG, 2010).
23 See Iain Jackson, “Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew’s Early Housing and 
Neighbourhood Planning in Sector-22, Chandigarh,” Planning Perspectives, 
vol. 28, no. 1 (2013), pp. 1–26.
24 It is worth noting that while her partner Maxwell Fry received the RIBA 
Gold Medal in 1964, the same recognition was not accorded to Drew, a 
discriminatory practice consistent with other major awards programmes, 
including the Pritzker Prize.
25 Spiro Kostof, A History of Architecture: Settings and Rituals (New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1995), p. 745.
SUGGESTED READING
Carranza, Luis E. and Fernando Luiz Lara. Modern Architecture in Latin America: 
Art, Technology, and Utopia. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2014.
Espegel, Carmen. Women Architects in the Modern Movement. London: Routledge, 
2018.
Hitchcock, Henry-Russell and Philip Johnson. The International Style. New 
York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1966.122 Internationalism and Universalism
Philippou, Styliane. Oscar Niemeyer: Curves of Irreverence. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2008.
Pommer, Richard and Christian F. Otto. Weissenhof 1927 and the Modern 
Movement in Architecture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-13
During the 19th century, architects struggled to adapt new technolo￾gies, materials, and processes to create contemporary architecture 
within existing languages and styles. However, the Crystal Palace 
(1851), built in London of prefabricated components, demonstrated 
the possibilities of new building materials and mechanized methods. 
Conversely, the Arts and Crafts movement which followed largely 
rejected industrial production (see Chapter 8). Frank Lloyd Wright 
struck a middle position which advocated for the inclusion of the 
machine as a necessary part of modern architectural production (see 
Chapter 10).
The machine has been central to the development of mod￾ern architecture. First, mechanized forms of production resulted 
in new technologies, materials, and processes (see Chapter 4). 
Second, new kinds of machinery were incorporated into build￾ings, such as elevators and air conditioners. Third, as a source of 
design inspiration for modern architects, as machines defined new 
architecture and new building typologies. Fourth, as a means for 
those architects who embraced machinist architecture. Ultimately, 
new mechanical and electrical systems allowed for the creation of 
new, highly controlled interior environments and faster forms of 
human movement.
Buildings today are operated by a plethora of machinery and are 
connected by pipes, cables, and wireless technologies. These mechan￾ical and electrical systems perform many functions and are expensive 
to install and maintain. The development of modern building systems 
MACHINES AND SYSTEMS
13124 Machines and Systems
was an essential contribution to the evolution of modern architec￾ture. The creation of controlled environments using heating and 
cooling systems introduced levels of comfort and health unknown 
previously but also resulted in buildings being significant consumers 
of energy and contributors to climate change. Traditionally, build￾ings were heated using fireplaces and stoves that burned fuels such as 
wood, coal, and gas. By the 19th century, advances occurred in the 
design of stoves, and heating systems came into use that circulated 
hot water or steam in pipes with radiators to disperse the heat.
The introduction of ventilation, or the circulation of hot or cool 
air, was an achievement of modernism that helped create artificial 
environments. An early example of a building incorporating these 
technologies was the Houses of Parliament in London which was 
completed in 1876 (see Chapter 6). Under the architects Charles 
Barry and A.W.N. Pugin, the Scottish scientist David Boswell 
Reid (1805–1863) was engaged to design heating and ventilation 
for the new project. He was let go in 1852 after many disputes 
and was followed by other engineers who attempted to correct 
Reid’s original design, which resulted in a flawed system that was 
difficult to manage. Reid was more successful with his subsequent 
design for St. George’s Hall (1854) in Liverpool.1
 Throughout 
the 19th century, developments occurred in the design of warm 
air heating systems that used ducts to supply and return heated 
air throughout a building. Further, advances in the design of 
thermostats and fans were part of the development of modern 
heating, ventilation, and air-conditioning (HVAC) systems in the 
20th century.
An early example of a building using an integrated heating, venti￾lation, and cooling system was the Royal Victoria Hospital (1903) in 
Belfast, Northern Ireland. Architectural historian Reyner Banham 
argues that Frank Lloyd Wright must be considered “the first mas￾ter of the architecture of the well-tempered environment.”2
 In the 
Larkin Building (1906) in Buffalo, Wright incorporated vertical 
shafts that handled the fresh, tempered, and exhaust air in the build￾ing. In his Prairie Style houses, Wright integrated “environmen￾tal technologies” into his designs in innovative ways and invented 
concealed lighting. Wright’s buildings foreshadowed Louis I. Kahn’s 
development of the concept of “served” and “servant” spaces, the 
servant spaces incorporating the building systems. This concept can 
be found in Kahn’s Richards Medical Research Building (1961) in 
Philadelphia, where service towers support the laboratory spaces. At Machines and Systems 125
the Salk Institute (1965) in La Jolla, California, Kahn instead used 
deep service floors to service the research labs (see Chapter 18).
The cooling of indoor environments began with the limited use of 
ice in conjunction with ventilation systems; this was usually applied 
in hospitals and places of assembly. The development of mechanical 
cooling in the 19th century, initially to preserve food, was eventually 
applied to buildings.3
 The refinement of air-conditioning by Willis 
H. Carrier (1876–1950) in the early 20th century had a dramatic 
impact on working and living environments globally after World 
War II. The first air-conditioned office building and the tallest rein￾forced concrete building in the world at the time was the 21-storey 
Milam Building (1928) in San Antonio, Texas. The development 
of the small domestic air-conditioning unit in the 1950s resulted 
in “the most sophisticated device for environmental management 
that mankind has ever possessed.”4
 The invention of the suspended 
ceiling in the 1930s provided a simple means of integrating lighting 
and acoustic control. As well, the ceiling system hid ductwork and 
wiring.5
 As Banham points out, the use of mechanical systems meant 
that architects no longer had to address local climate and context, 
reinforcing a kind of universal internationalism.6
The concept of hoisting is ancient, originally powered by humans, 
animals, or water. By the early 19th century, steam-powered eleva￾tors were used in factories, but they lacked reliability and safety. The 
improvement of the elevator in the 1850s by the American indus￾trialist Elisha Graves Otis (1811–1861), through his patented safety 
mechanism, was of critical importance in the development of the tall 
building. In 1857, Otis’s company installed the first passenger eleva￾tor in a 5-storey retail building in New York. Various mechanisms 
were invented over the next few decades, including hydraulic sys￾tems; however, the advancement of the electric motor in the 1870s 
resulted in further improvements to the elevator and widespread 
adoption after 1887. The introduction of the traction elevator by 
the Otis Elevator Company in 1903 introduced a modern elevator 
that was comfortable, fast, safe, and efficient. Further, the need to 
move large numbers of people up relatively few floors, in places like 
railway stations and department stores, resulted in the invention and 
perfection of the escalator in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.7
The advent of electricity generation and indoor and outdoor light￾ing first devised as a system by American inventor Thomas Alva 
Edison (1847–1931) between 1878 and 1882, transformed how inte￾rior and urban spaces functioned. Prior to this, lighting was provided 126 Machines and Systems
by unreliable and expensive candles, oil and gas amps, and electric arc 
lamps. The refinement of the incandescent electric light bulb, begin￾ning in the 1840s, was finalized by both Edison and English inventor 
Joseph Swan (1828–1914) in 1879, simultaneous with the develop￾ment of methods for generating electricity. The new electric light￾ing quickly began to replace gas lighting in cities, and indoor electric 
lighting transformed interior environments. Lighting systems would 
advance further during the 20th century with inventions in neon gas 
and mercury vapour methods. An important breakthrough occurred 
when Westinghouse and GEC launched the “Lumiline” fluorescent 
tube in 1938. This low-energy, uniform type of lighting immediately 
impacted the design vocabulary of modern architects. Interior light￾ing, especially in office buildings, allowed for much larger floor plates, 
with employees often placed far from daylight. Electricity also provided 
power for numerous new appliances that, in theory, made living easier.
* * *
The evolution of the house, particularly in America, during the 
19th century involved incorporating new technologies, appliances, 
and methods. Several prominent women wrote about and promoted 
the ideals of “domestic management,” and the home was the ongo￾ing subject of popular magazines, such as The Ladies’ Home Journal. 
Catharine Beecher (1800–1878) was a significant figure in 19th￾century American life as she advocated for Christian morality and 
domestic innovation. Beecher was involved in education before 
becoming a prolific and successful writer. In 1841, she published her 
Treatise on Domestic Economy, For the Use of Young Ladies at Home and 
at School, which outlines her notions on the “moral superiority of 
women” and their capacity for self-sacrifice. With her sister Harriet 
Beecher Stowe (1811–1896), the author of the popular Uncle Tom’s 
Cabin, she co-authored a book entitled The American Woman’s Home
(1869).8
 As architectural historian Dolores Hayden writes:
She [Beecher] proposes female supremacy in the home, enhanced by two 
metaphors of female authority: the “minister” and the skilled “profes￾sional,” harnessing the imagery of religion and business. . . . These meta￾phors of ministerial and professional activity are supported by a most 
unusual economic rationalization. Domestic servants are to be replaced 
by women doing their own housework.9
By the time The American Woman’s Home was published, Beecher’s 
conception of the home had developed into a full “marriage” Machines and Systems 127
between a woman and the house.10 The suburban house design that 
Beecher and Stowe presented in the book incorporated the latest in 
equipment and machinery and was carefully planned. Striving for 
innovation and efficiency, Beecher and Stowe proposed a modern 
house “to allow the “woman occupant” full visual control over the 
activities of the home without wasting time and energy walking back 
and forth.”11 Their ideas were extended into designs for urban tene￾ment buildings. Beecher’s publications foreshadowed later develop￾ments as the domestic realm continued to transform in the 20th 
century.
As architect Doris Cole argues, middle-class women in 19th-cen￾tury America were very invested in the evolving design of the home, 
embracing numerous technological innovations.12 By the early 20th 
century, housekeeping had transformed into “domestic science,” as 
promoted by figures such as Christine Frederick (1883–1970). She 
developed a school and published books modelled after advances in 
industrialization by figures like Frederick Taylor (1856–1915), the 
author of The Principles of Scientific Management (1911), and Henry Ford 
(1863–1947), the founder of the Ford Motor Company. Frederick’s 
most popular book was Household Engineering: Scientific Management 
in the Home (1915), which promoted efficient and organized house￾hold management, labour-saving appliances, and concepts such as 
“standardized operations.”13 Taylorism and Fordism, as methods of 
“scientific management” applied to industrial production, were also 
a source of inspiration for many architects at the time.14
* * *
The links between the modern machine and avant-garde art and 
architecture are very strong, particularly in the work of the Italian 
Futurists and Le Corbusier (1887–1965). Futurism was an Italian 
avant-garde art movement involving poets, painters, and architects. 
The “Founding Manifesto of Futurism,” published in early 1909 
by the poet Filippo Tommaso Marinetti (1876–1944), signaled the 
launching of a movement that whole-heartedly embraced moder￾nity, especially machinery, danger, speed, and “universal dynamism.” 
The use of manifestos was favoured by many of the art movements of 
the early 20th century (see Chapter 11), and the Futurists produced 
them on a variety of art forms.
Celebrating the modern industrial city, Futurist painting used a 
“cinematic” approach, where repeated images were used to capture 
motion along with “force-lines” to strengthen the appearance of 128 Machines and Systems
speed.15 The subject matter of many Futurist paintings concentrated 
on machines and movement. Rapid experimentation occurred 
between 1909 and 1911. A striking example of the fully developed 
Futurist approach is found in Giacomo Balla’s painting entitled 
Abstract Speed + Sound (1914). Umberto Boccioni brilliantly dem￾onstrated his “plastic” ideas in his Unique Forms of Continuity in Space
sculpture from 1913, in which a mechanized figure appears to move 
in and with space.
The only important architect associated with Italian Futurism 
was Antonio Sant-Elia (1888–1916). Born in Como and talented at 
drawing, Sant-Elia completed his education by 1911. During a trip 
to Rome in the same year, he encountered the work of Viennese 
Secession artists and architects, which had a tremendous impact on 
his designs. By 1912, Sant’Elia’s drawing style had evolved to pre￾sent dramatic perspectival images of vast monumental structures. 
Subsequently, a series of sketches, or dinamismi, produced in 1913, 
signaled an emerging interest in simpler modern monumental forms 
and industrial building typologies. In 1914, Sant-Elia and Marinetti 
published the “Manifesto of Futurist Architecture,” in it, they write:
We feel that we are no longer the men of the cathedrals, the palaces, the 
assembly halls; but of big hotels, railway stations, immense roads, colos￾sal ports, covered markets, brilliantly lit galleries, freeways, demolition 
and rebuilding schemes. . . . We must invent and rebuild the Futurist city; 
it must be like an immense, tumultuous, lively, noble work site, dynamic 
in all its parts; the Futurist house must be like an enormous machine.16
In an exhibition held in 1914, Sant’Elia showed drawings of his 
Città Nuova project. Captivated by the power and modernity of 
power stations, Sant-Elia paid particular attention to this new type 
of complex in evocative perspectival images.17 In the Città Nuova 
project, black and white drawings depicted tall stepped-back build￾ings that fuse together architecture and infrastructure. Accentuating 
new forms of transportation and modern construction materials, the 
drawings produced a vision of a new industrial city largely devoid of 
life, nature, or detail.
Throughout the 1920s, the development of a Machine Age style 
was led by Le Corbusier (see Chapter 10). In Toward an Architecture,
he praises the designs of engineers and celebrates modern machin￾ery, especially airplanes, automobiles, and ocean liners. Le Corbusier 
produced several famous statements in the book, one of which is: “A 
house is a machine for living in.”18 His analogy between architecture Machines and Systems 129
and machines has been widely misunderstood. Le Corbusier drew 
inspiration from modern machinery, stating that the “problem” 
of the airplane had been posed and solved by aviation designers, 
whereas the problem of the modern house had not been posed.19
He then presented the problem of the house and created a “Housing 
Manual,” in which he describes a modern house much like his Purist 
villas of the 1920s.20 In his famous statement, Le Corbusier argues 
for a house that has the precision and responsiveness of a modern 
machine; however, he did not suggest that the house is literally a 
machine. An important house from the period that took the mecha￾nization of the house much further was the Maison de Verre (1931) 
in Paris by Pierre Chareau and Bernard Bijvoet. Designed for a doc￾tor, the house comprehensively expressed a machine-like aesthetic 
and incorporated a wide range of environmental technologies.
* * *
Moving beyond the importance of technology and the machine 
analogy for modern architecture, one group of architects took their 
commitment to technology to another level. One of the most influ￾ential members of this group was the American inventor, engineer, 
mathematician, and futurist R. Buckminster Fuller (1895–1983). By 
1922, following an eclectic education which included stints at Harvard 
University and in the US Navy, Fuller was engaged in the manufac￾ture of building materials. Interested in universalist theories and effi￾ciency, in 1927, he devised his first major invention, the Dymaxion 
House. The design featured a metal construction organized around 
a central service core and mast, from which the rest of the house 
was suspended. It was a radical experiment in innovative, lightweight 
design. This led to the Dymaxion car (1933–1934), the prefabricated 
Dymaxion Bathroom (1937), and the Dymaxion Dwelling Machine 
(1946). After World War II he began to experiment in the design of 
lightweight spanning systems, which resulted in tensegrity structures 
and the invention of the Geodesic dome. The Geodesic dome became 
Fuller’s signature concept, resulting in numerous structures. The most 
famous realization was the US Pavilion for Expo ’67 in Montreal. 
Fuller fully embraced technology, always seeking optimal solutions 
that could be widely employed. Concerned about the state of the 
planet, he also devised the concept of “Spaceship Earth.”21 Another 
pioneer in the use of technology in buildings, also not trained as an 
architect, was the French designer Jean Prouvé (1901–1984), who 
innovated with lightweight uses of metal.130 Machines and Systems
The development of “megastructures” in the 1960s and 1970s 
resulted in projects that typically involved a large extendable 
framework or “megaform” into which “discrete, rapidly-changing 
functional units” can be “plugged-in.”22 In other words, the megas￾tructure employed a sizeable structural system in concrete or steel, 
into which repeating units were inserted. Groups such as the 
Metabolists in Japan (see Chapter 20), Archigram in Britain, and 
the “Urbanisme spatial” movement in France proposed daring and 
visionary schemes for walking, underground, and floating cities 
Figure 13.1 Main Floor Plan, Buckminster Fuller, Dymaxion Dwelling 
Machine, 1946. The circular plan is divided into living and sleeping areas using 
sculptural service and storage elements; these are arrayed around a central struc￾tural mast that supports the suspended roof. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.Machines and Systems 131
that celebrated technology, machinery, and systems. As Reyner 
Banham states:
[A]gainst the International Style’s classicizing view of technology and 
machinery as neat smooth regular solids of anonymous aspect, the 
younger megastructurists clearly saw technology as a visually wild rich 
mess of piping and wiring and struts and catwalks and bristling radar 
antennae and supplementary fuel tanks and landing-pads all carried on 
exposed lattice frames.23
In Britain, the megastructure was conceptualized by people like 
Cedric Price (1934–2003) and the Archigram group, with a series 
of unbuilt designs. Price proposed projects like the flexible Fun 
Palace (1962) as an entertainment facility, which inspired the six 
members of Archigram, who, in turn, promoted the “experimen￾tal” architecture of the early 1960s. Known for their Pop  Art￾inspired graphics and provocative designs, Archigram produced 
drawings of visionary schemes, including “Walking City” (1963) 
by Ron Herron and Brian Harvey and “Plug-In City” (1964) 
by Peter Cook. The “Plug-In City” drawings captured the vital￾ity of the megastructure idea. The group was particularly inter￾ested in expressing technology and exploring new forms of living 
that included prefabricated capsules, inflatable structures, and 
nomadic shelters.24
The megastructure phenomenon was short-lived; it essentially 
peaked at Expo ’67. In addition to the US Pavilion by Fuller, sev￾eral key projects were constructed, including the Habitat housing 
scheme by Moshe Safdie and the Theme Pavilions by ARCOP. 
Other important Canadian megastructure buildings include 
Scarborough College (1965) in Toronto by John Andrews, Place 
Bonaventure (1967) in Montreal by ARCOP, and the McMaster 
Health Sciences Centre (1972) in Hamilton, Ontario by Craig, 
Zeidler, and Strong. University campuses, new towns, and hous￾ing projects were briefly favoured for megastructure experimen￾tation. The size and machinic approach to the megastructure 
quickly contributed to its demise. Nevertheless, it spawned the 
High Tech movement, primarily in Britain, that maintained a 
commitment to the technological explorations of figures like 
Fuller.
Richard Rogers (1933–2021), Norman Foster (1935–), 
and Renzo Piano (1937–) are the pioneering figures in High 
Tech architecture, an approach that has continued into the 21st 132 Machines and Systems
century.25 Each developed a particular take on the role of tech￾nology, especially machines and systems, in their building designs. 
A noteworthy project remains the Centre Georges Pompidou in 
Paris (1971–1977) by Piano + Rogers, which inverts the tradi￾tional relationship between a building and its systems by placing all 
of its services on the exterior. A literal architectural machine, the 
building is designed to be highly flexible and adaptable. Despite an 
initial negative reaction to such a structure in the centre of Paris, it 
has been a popular facility since it opened.
* * *
The Canadian media theorist Marshall McLuhan (1911–1980) 
wrote extensively about technology and media and how these extend 
the human body. For example, examining the impact of electric 
light, McLuhan writes:
Electric light abolished the divisions of night and day, of inner and outer, 
and of the subterranean and the terrestrial. It altered every consideration 
of space for work and production as much as the other electric media 
[telephone, radio, television, etc.] had altered the space-time experience 
of society.26
Developments in heating, ventilation, cooling, lighting, and move￾ment systems continue to impact architectural design. More recently, 
the adoption of the computer has resulted in the concept of the 
“smart” building, in which a broad range of building systems are 
regulated by computers. However, the machinery and systems that 
have been essential to the development of modern architecture have 
also dramatically impacted the environment through the wide￾spread exploitation of resources and the production of waste (see 
Chapter 24).
NOTES
1 See Cecil D. Elliot, Technics and Architecture: The Development of Materials and 
Systems for Buildings (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), pp. 285–291.
2 Reyner Banham, The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1969), p. 70. Banham’s book is an attempt 
to correct what he saw as deficiencies in Sigfried Giedion, Mechanisation 
Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1948).
3 See Elliot, Technics and Architecture, pp. 308–325.Machines and Systems 133
4 See Banham, The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment, p. 190.
5 Ibid., pp. 213–233.
6 Ibid., p. 239.
7 See Elliot, Technics and Architecture, pp. 328–361.
8 See Dolores Hayden, The Grand Domestic Revolution (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1981), pp. 55–63.
9 Dolores Hayden, “Catharine Beecher and the Politics of Housework,” in 
Susana Torre, ed., Women in American Architecture: A Historic and Contemporary 
Perspective (New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1977), p. 42.
10 Ibid., p. 44.
11 Leslie Kanes Weisman, Discrimination by Design: A Feminist Critique of the 
Man-Made Environment (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 
1994), p. 89.
12 See Doris Cole, From Tipi to Skyscraper: A History of Women in Architecture
(Boston: i Press Inc., 1973).
13 See Gwendolyn Wright, “The Model Domestic Environment: Icon or 
Option?” in Torre, ed., Women in American Architecture, pp. 20–22.
14 See Mauro F. Guillén, The Taylorized Beauty of the Mechanical: Scientific 
Management and the Rise of Modern Architecture (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 2006).
15 See, Richard Humphreys, Futurism (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1999).
16 Antonio Sant’Elia and Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, “Futurist Architecture,” 
in Ulrich Conrads, ed., Programs and Manifestoes on 20th Century Architecture
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971), p. 36.
17 See Esther da Costa Meyer, The Work of Antonio Sant’Elia: Retreat into the 
Future (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995), pp. 108–110.
18 Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture (Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2007), 
p. 150.
19 Ibid., pp. 161–162.
20 See Ibid., pp. 165–176.
21 See R. Buckminster Fuller and Robert Marks, The Dymaxion World of 
Buckminster Fuller (Garden City, NY: Anchor Books, 1973).
22 Reyner Banham, Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past (New York: 
Harper & Row, 1976), p. 8.
23 Ibid., p. 17.
24 See: Peter Cook, ed., Archigram (London: Studio Vista, 1972); and Simon 
Sadler, Archigram: Architecture Without Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2005).
25 See Colin Davies, High Tech Architecture (London: Thames & Hudson, 
1999).
26 Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964), 
pp. 126–127.134 Machines and Systems
SUGGESTED READING
Banham, Reyner. The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1969.
Banham, Reyner. Megastructure: Urban Futures of the Recent Past. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1976.
da Costa Meyer, Esther. The Work of Antonio Sant’Elia: Retreat into the Future. 
New Haven: Yale University Press, 1995.
Elliot, Cecil D. Technics and Architecture: The Development of Materials and Systems 
for Buildings. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.
Hawkes, Dean. The Environmental Imagination: Technics and Poetics of the Archi￾tectural Environment. Abingdon: Routledge, 2008.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-14
The 1917 Communist Russian Revolution was one of the major 
revolutionary events in world history. Communism, as a political 
system, was originally defined by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels 
in The Communist Manifesto (1848) and can be defined as a “political 
and economic doctrine that aims to replace private property and a 
profit-based economy with public ownership and communal control 
of at least the major means of production (e.g., mines, mills, and 
factories) and the natural resources of a society. Communism is thus 
a form of socialism.”1
 Communism proposes a classless system, where 
each performs according to their abilities and needs, and differences 
between manual and intellectual labour, and rural and urban living 
are downplayed. Through the design of governmental institutions 
and infrastructure, architecture can express the power of a leader or 
the aspirations of a people.2
A year of civil unrest in Russia led to the February 1917 revolution, 
which resulted in the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II, the supreme 
ruler, the following month. Vladimir Lenin (1870–1924), the leader 
of the revolution, returned from exile two months later. During the 
October 1917 revolution, the Bolsheviks (or Communists) seized 
control of the city of Saint Petersburg. A civil war followed between 
the Red Army (Bolshevik) and the White Army (anti-Bolshevik) 
forces. Ultimately, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) 
was established in December 1922. The death of Lenin in 1924 
resulted in a power struggle, with Joseph Stalin (1878–1953) emerg￾ing as the Communist Party leader by 1927. Under Stalin, the Soviet 
AUTHORITARIANISM AND 
MONUMENTALITY
14136 Authoritarianism and Monumentality
Union would become a one-party state that became increasingly 
authoritarian, resulting in the deaths of millions of Soviet citizens. 
The Soviet Union ended officially in 1990.
In architectural terms, the first decade following the Russian 
Revolution has been described as a “heroic” period. The revolution 
allowed the artists and architects to escape the rigidity of the tsarist 
era. It was during this period that various new architectural move￾ments (Constructivist, Rationalist, and Formalist) emerged, each 
attempting to define the institutions of a new Communist system. 
They were typically avant-gardist, influenced by European art move￾ments such as Cubism and Futurism (see Chapter 11). This included 
the Suprematist movement founded in 1913 and led by the painter 
Kasimir Malevich (1879–1935), which produced abstract geometric 
works in vivid colours.
The younger generation of Soviet artists was inspired to forge 
strong alliances between painting, sculpture, and architecture. An 
impressive example of this is found in the work of Vladimir Tatlin 
(1885–1953). Inspired by avant-garde modern art, he produced 
“counter-relief” constructions or small abstract sculptures made from 
various materials. A particularly important post-revolutionary work 
was Tatlin’s design for a 400-metre (1,310-foot) high monument to 
the Third International (1920). A distinctive conical spiraling form, 
the open structure was intended to support four revolving geometric 
volumes (two cylinders, a pyramid, and a hemisphere) to accommo￾date a legislative function, reading rooms, gymnasia, flexible space, 
and an “agitation centre.”
Many of the designs for new Soviet building types were the sub￾ject of design competitions. This is the case of the Palace of Labour 
competition held in 1922. A watershed moment in Russian archi￾tecture, the third-place entry by the Vesnin brothers remains one of 
the most compelling examples of a design for a new Soviet institu￾tion and received high praise from the architect Moisei Ginzburg 
(1892–1946) as “the first demonstration of our new approach.”3
The Vesnin brothers (Alexandr (1883–1959), Leonid (1880–1933), 
and Viktor (1882–1950))4
 also produced a striking design for the 
Moscow Bureau of the Newspaper Leningrad Pravda competition 
of 1924, which is described as:
The design of the building represents a characteristic solution in a period 
yearning for glass, steel, and concrete. All accessories – which on a typical 
city street are usually tacked onto the building – such as signs, adver￾tising, clocks, loudspeakers, and even the elevator inside, have been Authoritarianism and Monumentality 137
incorporated as integral elements of the design and combined into a uni￾fied whole. This is the aesthetic of constructivism.5
Constructivism was the most recognizable form of Russian architec￾ture during the 1920s as an exuberant expression of a new society. 
Other striking examples include El Lissitzky’s (1890–1941) design 
for a Tribune for Lenin (1920) and his horizontal skyscrapers or 
“Sky-hooks” (1924) that expressed a new architectural language. 
Involved in numerous collaborations and exhibitions, El Lissitzky 
was an envoy for avant-garde design between Russia and Europe.
Ginzburg absorbed a wide range of influences, resulting in his 
book Style and Epoch in 1924, in part as a response to Le Corbusier’s 
book Toward an Architecture (1923). In the book, Ginzburg advocates 
for “constructive” architecture, which includes concepts of move￾ment and mechanization;6
 he writes:
Constructivism, as one of the facets of a modern aesthetic, born of clam￾orous life, steeped in the odors of the street, its maddening tempo, its 
practicality and everyday concerns, and its aesthetic . . . is unquestionably 
one of the characteristic aspects of the new style, avidly accepting moder￾nity in all of its positive and negative aspects.7
Housing was a special area of interest for a communist society.8
Ginzburg’s Narkomfin Communal House project (1930) remains the 
most famous and the most developed of all the residential experi￾ments. It was a housing prototype, combining bourgeois and com￾munist living units, along with communal facilities, that echoed 
contemporary designs by Le Corbusier and famously employed the 
“skip-stop” section where corridors are located on alternate floors.9
Konstantin Melnikov (1890–1974) made his early reputation with 
his scheme for the dynamic Soviet pavilion for the 1925 Exposition 
des Arts Décoratifs in Paris. Melnikov later designed his own idi￾osyncratic house in Moscow (1927) based on a cylinder. Creating 
a position between the avant-garde and traditionalists, Melnikov 
produced designs for workers’ clubs built by various trade unions, 
including the famous Rusakov Worker’s Club (1928) in Moscow for 
the Union of Municipal Workers. Defined by “the searing angles of 
the cantilevered forms,”10 or the protruding auditoria, the Rusakov 
Worker’s Club is expressive and dynamic, with a single large hall 
capable of being subdivided into six smaller spaces.
An important hotbed of Constructivist design thinking was found 
in the architecture schools in Moscow. Ivan Leonidov (1902–1959) 
demonstrated this with his diploma project for the Lenin Institute 138 Authoritarianism and Monumentality
of Librarianship (1927) as a “visionary” architecture, like much of 
the unbuilt work of the 1920s. The other young visionary architect 
of note was Iakov Chernikov (1889–1951), who produced several 
books of drawings between 1927 and 1933.
In the 1920s, Soviet architects took on the challenges of designing 
buildings for a Communist society. Eventually, conservative forces 
prevailed as the avant-garde architects were seen as too aligned with 
the West and modern technology. Echoing this opposition Lenin 
states, “Proletarian culture is not something dreamed up out of 
nowhere; nor is it the invention of people who call themselves spe￾cialists in proletarian culture.”11 The Palace of Soviets competition 
(1931–1932) ultimately signalled the end of the avant-garde phase. 
The competition called for the design of two large congress halls and 
various smaller auditoria. The competition winner was Boris Iofan, 
a conservative architect who established the eclectic and bombastic 
Stalinist “wedding cake” approach that became the official Socialist 
Realist style.
Beginning in the 1930s, this new style was used for numerous 
buildings that would transform Moscow and other cities. Projects for 
academies, administrative complexes, enormous public spaces, and 
hotels were favoured by Social Realist architects. In the executed 
buildings, monumentality is evident, combined with a richness of 
materials and details. The enormous Red Army Theatre project 
(1940) in Moscow by Karo Alabyan and Vasily Simbirtsev, based 
on the five-pointed Communist star, is a good example of Socialist 
Realism.12
In 1931, Moscow, as the capital of the Soviet Union, “was granted 
extraordinary political and economic advantages.”13 Stalin backed a 
plan to transform Moscow the following year. In 1935, a General 
Plan for the city was issued, which accommodated growth, greens￾pace, a monumental organization of key institutions, and new infra￾structure, including the celebrated Moscow underground metro 
system with its luxurious stations. Following the aftermath of World 
War II a taller type of building began to populate the Moscow sky￾line, such as the Moscow State University complex (1949–1953) by 
Lev Rudnev. The death of Stalin resulted in the demise of Socialist 
Realism. However, Communist monumentalism was adopted in 
countries like the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, various 
Soviet satellite countries, and the People’s Republic of China.
* * *Authoritarianism and Monumentality 139
The rise of Fascism in Europe in the 1920s, particularly in Italy and 
Germany, resulted in one of the darkest periods in human history. 
The dictatorships of Benito Mussolini (1883–1945) and Adolf Hitler 
(1889–1945) established “authoritarian” or “totalitarian” control in 
their respective countries. Both employed architecture to express the 
characteristics of their regimes. Fascists exploited the idea of a crisis 
where a group or nation perceives it is victimized or under attack, 
resulting in the group taking action against its identified enemies. 
Typically led by a charismatic leader, the group or nation resorts 
to trusting the leader’s rhetoric, often employing violent means in 
its creation of an authority over personal freedoms. The group, or 
nation, tends to be unified by race, religion, and a nation-state, and 
acts in righteous belief.14
Fascism has been an insidious force since it was born on March 23, 
1919, in Milan by a diverse group under the direction of Benito 
Mussolini, a disaffected former Socialist journalist.15 Following 
this, the movement spread rapidly in Italy, with Mussolini being 
appointed prime minister in October 1922. By removing the oppo￾sition, Mussolini established a one-party state. Under the Fascists, 
Italy moved to expand its colonial control and aligned itself with 
Germany and Japan at the start of World War II. After an armistice 
with the Allies was agreed on by Italy in September 1943, Mussolini 
was imprisoned. Briefly reinstalled in power by Germany, Mussolini 
was executed by Communists on April 28, 1945. During Mussolini’s 
two decades of tumultuous rule, the state commissioned numer￾ous works of architecture, often referencing the glorious past of the 
Roman Empire. Ambitious projects included a new plan for Rome 
(1925–1938) and a new Città Universitaria (1932–1935) in Rome, 
both under the direction of the leading Fascist architect Marcello 
Piacentini (1881–1960).
A state-sponsored Fascist style emerged that was a fusion of mod￾ernism, Rationalism, and classicism, particularly evident in the work 
of a group of architects known as Gruppo 7, who emerged in late 
1926. The most well-known member of Gruppo 7 was Giuseppe 
Terragni (1904–1943), who was from the Como region and joined 
the Fascist Party in 1928. He is known for designing a series of apart￾ment buildings in Como and Milan. The most important commis￾sion of his career was the Casa del Fascio in Como (1932–1936), the 
local headquarters of the Fascist party, or as he described it, the “glass 
house of Fascism.”16 Cubic in form and following the typology of the 
Renaissance palazzo, the Casa del Fascio supported offices, meeting 140 Authoritarianism and Monumentality
rooms, and a central atrium. The four differing facades and material 
qualities of the building are described as follows: “There is a curious 
ambiguity about the overall composition of the Casa del Fascio. . . . 
It is simultaneously more solid and more transparent.”17 Clad in mar￾ble, the primary façade supports a shallow balcony space across much 
of its length. During rallies, key members of the Fascist party were 
arrayed across the façade in a military and nationalistic spectacle. 
Terragni’s unbuilt Danteum project (1938) for Rome was intended 
to be a national centre for the study of Dante Alighieri (1265–1321), 
the great Italian poet. Terragni has developed a reputation in recent 
years for his sophisticated handling of volume, form, and surface.18
Of all the institutional projects built during the period, the 
Esposizione Universale di Roma (EUR) is the clearest expression of 
Italian Fascist architecture. Laid out by Piacentini to emulate Roman 
town planning, the site was intended for a failed 1942 World’s Fair 
to celebrate Fascist accomplishments. Ultimately developed as an 
economic centre, the complex was completed when facilities were 
added for the 1960 Summer Olympic Games. The most iconic of 
the buildings remains the Palazzo della Civiltà Italiana (1942) by 
Figure 14.1 Perspective, Giuseppe Terragni, Casa del Fascio, 1936, Como, Italy. 
The simple rectangular four-storey façade features five open colonnaded bays 
to the left and two closed bays to the right; the building supported displays of 
Italian Fascist authority. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.Authoritarianism and Monumentality 141
Giovanni Guerini, Ernesto La Padula, and Mario Romano. A sim￾ple six-storey block clad in Travertine marble, the Palazzo occupies 
the most prominent location in the EUR and features the use of 
a repeating arch motif. Adalberto Libera’s (1903–1963) Palazzo dei 
Congressi (1942) at the EUR remains one of the most important 
examples of the state style applied to a large congress hall. Libera was 
also a member of Gruppo 7 and another of the primary Italian archi￾tects of the era.19 Influenced by modernist developments elsewhere 
in Europe and yet retaining a certain formalism or traditionalism, 
Italian Fascist architecture remains controversial and enigmatic.
* * *
The rise of Adolf Hitler and the formation of the Nazi Party would 
unleash tremendous forces, particularly after Germany invaded 
Poland on September 1, 1939, triggering World War II. In 1921 
Hitler became the leader of the German Workers’ Party, later the 
National Socialist (or Nazi) Party. Incarcerated from 1923–1924 after 
a failed coup in Munich, Germany, he wrote his notorious autobiog￾raphy Mein Kampf while in prison. By late 1932 the Nazi Party held 
the most seats in the German Reichstag, and on January 30, 1933 
Hitler was appointed chancellor. This began the systematic transfor￾mation of Germany into a one-party totalitarian state with the help 
of the secret police or SS (Gestapo) and the subsequent elimination 
of “enemies,” especially Jews, intellectuals, and other opponents of 
the regime. Hitler’s mission was to establish the Third Reich, fol￾lowing the German Empire (1871–1918) and the Weimar Republic 
(1918–1933). By the end of 1941, Hitler had invaded the Soviet 
Union and controlled much of Europe and North Africa. Eventually, 
the Allied Forces defeated the German war machine in 1945.
Hitler was a failed architect and painter who devoted much time 
during his rule to Nazi architectural projects. Under Hitler’s con￾trol, National Socialist architecture was developed both for insti￾tutional buildings and for more ordinary structures which were 
either based on a monumental neo-classicism or on German ver￾nacular architecture; modern architecture was rejected outright as 
left-wing and “foreign.” Hitler’s first architectural advisor was Paul 
Ludwig Troost (1878–1934); they both admired the work of Karl 
Friedrich Schinkel (see Chapter 6). Together they produced the 
early House of German Art (1936) in Munich, which, with its 
austere Doric order and precise lines, became a blueprint for Nazi 
public architecture.142 Authoritarianism and Monumentality
After his death, Troost was replaced by Albert Speer (1905–1981), 
who had studied with and worked for the German traditional￾ist architect Heinrich Tessenow (1876–1950). Speer’s impact was 
immediate, beginning with his designs for the Zeppelinfeld grounds 
(1934) at Nuremberg, the location of enormous Nazi party ral￾lies (up to 100,000 people). The design employed an austere and 
monumental classicism; at rallies, this was supported by searchlights, 
flags, and insignia, which created frenzied displays of force. By 1938, 
Speer devised the New Chancellery in Berlin as Hitler’s office and 
salon. Carefully choreographed to enhance the persona of the leader, 
Speer’s design used rich materials, monumental classicism, and Nazi 
paraphernalia to create an intimidating experience for visitors. 
Together with Hitler, Speer devised a plan for Berlin, inspired by 
ancient Rome, to be the grandiose capital of the Third Reich. It ter￾minated on an immense domed Great Hall (a pantheon of German 
heroes). According to architectural historian Barbara Miller Lane:
To Hitler, architecture was thus better suited than any other art to express 
national greatness . . . architecture not only “expressed” the unity and 
power of the nation but could also help to create it. Great buildings, he 
[Hitler] told the assembled party members in 1937, could create the kind 
of common “will” which he had earlier called their necessary prerequisite 
. . . it was the function of architecture to impress the ideas of its creators 
upon other nations and, even more important, upon posterity.20
Along with their military machine, the Nazis developed an enor￾mous system of transit camps, concentration camps (such as Dachau, 
Bergen-Belsen, and Buchenwald), labour camps, and extermination 
camps (including the most notorious and largest camp Auschwitz￾Birkenau, located in Poland) throughout the territories they con￾trolled.21 Established as early as 1933, concentration (or labour) 
camps were used to house “undesirables” as the Nazis took control 
of Germany. Early inmates were incarcerated as slave labour devoted 
to realizing Nazi projects.22 The design of concentration and exter￾mination camps employed architects as part of the process.
The “Turn to the East,” launched by the Nazis with the invasion 
of Poland in 1939, had much to do with the history of Germany and 
Eastern Europe.23 The Germanification of the Polish territories by 
the Nazis consumed enormous amounts of building material which 
was manufactured by slave labour in the concentration camps.24 The 
largest camp was Auschwitz-Birkenau, which was originally estab￾lished in 1940 as a work camp for producing construction materials. Authoritarianism and Monumentality 143
It was abandoned early in 1945 with the arrival of Soviet troops. 
By the summer of 1942, following the Nazi command’s decision 
to implement the “Final Solution,” or the elimination of all Jews 
in Europe, it was converted to an extermination camp where over 
one million people were eventually murdered. Heinrich Himmler 
(1900–1945), a leading member of the Nazi party, is often described 
as the “architect” of the Holocaust.25
The initial Auschwitz camp had 22 brick barracks and a further 
22 wooden horse stable barracks, along with various other structures 
(including a crematorium), all surrounded by barbed wire. In the 
early phase of Auschwitz, Poles and prisoners of war were system￾atically executed, but horrendous living conditions also produced 
numerous deaths. As the camp grew, its development was overseen 
by an architectural office under the direction of August Schlachter 
(1901–1996). In 1941, a major expansion of the camp was designed 
by SS architects in Berlin under Hans Kammler (1901–1945). Karl 
Bischoff (1897–1950) became the new head architect at Auschwitz, 
where he oversaw further expansions of the camp and directed the 
on-site architects.26
In late 1941 the Nazis began to experiment with gassing Soviet 
prisoners using Zyklon B gas. The processing, housing, and extermi￾nation of prisoners were carefully designed, and in 1942, the adjoin￾ing camp at Birkenau was opened, planned to house up to 100,000 
prisoners. Eventually, at Auschwitz-Birkenau, buildings were devel￾oped that incorporated gas chambers, morgues, and crematoria in 
innocuous-looking structures. Prisoners, mainly Jews, were separated 
upon arrival at Auschwitz-Birkenau, either to join the workforce 
or to be murdered immediately. The atrocities of the Holocaust, in 
which millions died, were the result of a political system based on 
extreme nationalism and racism and, by a regime that depended on 
architects and architecture to support its programs.27
* * *
Both Communist and Fascist authoritarian regimes were opposed 
to the use of modern architecture, instead promoting monumental 
forms of architecture. In the case of the Soviet Union, the following 
objections to modern architecture were articulated in 1932 by Swiss 
architect Hans Schmidt:
1. The ideas of modern architecture, known in the West under the 
labels of “constructivism,” “functionalism,” and “mechanism,” 144 Authoritarianism and Monumentality
are an outgrowth of contemporary capitalism and its rational￾ized and standardized technology.
2. Modern architecture’s renunciation of monumentality and sym￾bolic expression, its disavowal of absolute beauty, and its inability 
to carry out the artistic and ideological mission of architecture, 
are an expression of the decline of bourgeois culture.28
NOTES
1 “Communism,” Encyclopedia Britannica. https://www.britannica.com/topic/
communism. Accessed January 6, 2022.
2 See Cecil D. Elliott, “Monuments and Monumentality,” Journal of Architectural 
Education, vol. 18, no. 4 (March 1964), pp. 51–53.
3 Quoted in Catherine Cooke, “Images in Context,” in Architectural Drawings 
of the Russian Avant-Garde (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1990), 
p. 23.
4 See S.O. Khan-Magomedov, Alexandr Vesnin and Russian Constructivism
(New York: Rizzoli, 1986).
5 El Lissitzky, Russia: An Architecture for World Revolution (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1984), p. 32.
6 See Anatole Senkeviotch, Jr., “Moisei Ginzburg and the Emergence of a 
Constructivist Theory of Architecture,” in Moisei Ginzburg, Style and Epoch
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982).
7 Ginzburg, Style and Epoch, p. 102.
8 El Lissitzky, Russia, p. 35.
9 See Victor Buchli, “Moisei Ginzburg’s Narkomfin Communal House in 
Moscow: Contesting the Social and Material World,” JSAH, vol. 57, no. 2 
(June 1998), pp. 160–181.
10 S. Frederick Starr, Melnikov: Solo Architect in a Mass Society (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1978), p. 136.
11 Quoted in Cooke, “Images in Context,” p. 27.
12 See Alexei Tarkhanov and Sergei Kavtaradze, Stalinist Architecture (London: 
Laurence King, 1992).
13 Ibid., p. 80.
14 Robert O. Paxton, The Anatomy of Fascism (New York: Vintage Books, 
2004), pp. 219–220.
15 Ibid., p. 5.
16 Thomas L. Schumacher, Surface and Symbol: Giuseppe Terragni and the Archi￾tecture of Italian Rationalism (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1991), 
p. 166.
17 Ibid., p. 168.
18 See Peter Eisenman, Giuseppe Terragni: Transformations, Decompositions, Criti￾ques (New York: Monacelli Press, 2003).Authoritarianism and Monumentality 145
19 See Francesco Garofalo and Luca Veresani, Adalberto Libera (New York: 
Princeton Architectural Press, 1992).
20 Barbara Miller Lane, Architecture and Politics in Germany 1918–1945
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1985), p. 188.
21 See Paul B. Jaskot, The Architecture of Oppression (London: Routledge, 2000).
22 See Deborah Dwork and Robert Jan Van Pelt, Auschwitz, 1270 to the Present
(New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2002), pp. 98–104.
23 See Ibid., pp. 38–91.
24 See Ibid., pp. 172–173.
25 See Ibid., pp. 276–283.
26 See Ibid., pp. 197–235.
27 See Ibid., pp. 307–353.
28 Hans Schmidt, “The Soviet Union and Modern Architecture,” in El 
Lissitzky, Russia, p. 220.
SUGGESTED READING
Cooke, Catherine. Russian Avant-Garde: Theories of Art, Architecture and the City. 
London: Academy Editions, 1995.
Dwork, Deborah and Robert Jan Van Pelt. Auschwitz, 1270 to the Present. New 
York: W.W. Norton & Co., 2002.
Jones, Kay Bea and Stephanie Pilat, eds. The Routledge Companion to Italian Fascist 
Architecture: Reception and Legacy. Abingdon: Routledge, 2021.
Lane, Barbara Miller. Architecture and Politics in Germany 1918–1945. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1985.
Tarkhanov, Alexei and Sergei Kavtaradze. Stalinist Architecture. London: Laurence 
King, 1992.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-15
Vernacular architecture is generally understood to encompass ordi￾nary buildings built using anonymous local knowledge and mate￾rials, precisely developed over time to meet the needs of a local 
culture and climate. Vernacular buildings comprise the majority of 
the world’s architecture.1
 This tradition does not place emphasis on 
innovation or authorship; instead, it concentrates on appropriateness 
and continuity. There are spatial, environmental, material, techno￾logical, formal, and cultural aspects of vernacular architecture that 
locally evolved over long periods of time. As architectural historian 
Paul Oliver writes about vernacular architecture:
[I]t embraces what is known and what is inherited about the dwelling, 
building or settlement; it includes the collective wisdom and experience of 
the society concerned, and the norms that have become accepted by the 
group as being appropriate to their built environment. It is also to do with 
the inherited knowledge of the natural environment of climate, topogra￾phy, seasonal variation, natural hazard, suitability of site. Inevitably this 
spills over into the values of the society and how they may affect, through 
belief, observance, ritual, and respect for ancestors or deities, what might 
be seen as more practical considerations to those outside the group.2
Historically, architects tended to focus on designing buildings for 
the powerful and wealthy, including monarchs, religious organiza￾tions, and rich merchants, in established styles, such as Classicism or 
Gothic. Ordinary types of buildings, such as urban and rural houses, 
agricultural structures, and industrial buildings, were not consid￾ered architecture and did not involve architects. In the 19th century, 
VERNACULAR AND TRADITION
15Vernacular and Tradition 147
the Arts and Crafts movement in Europe and America introduced 
the radical idea that ordinary vernacular buildings could be studied 
and interpreted by architects. For example, the “cottage,” as a sim￾ple rural building type, was the basis for many houses designed by 
Arts and Crafts architects. In places like England, where there was 
a long history of local building traditions, this meant drawing and 
recording the use of local materials and techniques, much as Richard 
Norman Shaw and Eden Nesfield did in the 1850s when they were 
young architects.3
 Likewise, in America in the late 19th century, 
the “Shingle Style” was popular in New England, where architects, 
including prominent figures like Henry Hobson Richardson and his 
Stoughton House (1883) in Cambridge, Massachusetts, drew inspi￾ration from ordinary local buildings.
The architect Adolf Loos famously described in his essay 
“Architecture” (1910) how a villa by an architect in a rural setting 
was like “an unnecessary scream” that shatters the peaceful envi￾ronment that seemed as though it had been created by God.4
 In 
the text, Loos underscores the distinction between architecture as 
a professional act and architecture as a vernacular act. Vernacular 
architecture was a source of inspiration for various nationalist move￾ments, including German Nazism (see Chapter 14), and it provided 
a basis for challenging the ubiquity of modern architecture in many 
cultures. Mediterranean traditional culture, which evolved typolo￾gies such as the courtyard house, the Italian hill town, and the North 
African casbah, also provided a continuing source of inspiration for 
architects in the 20th century.5
The advent of modernism, with its focus on progress, innova￾tion, and individual creativity, seemingly moved away from vernacu￾lar models. However, relatively soon after the development of the 
International Style in the 1920s and 1930s, architects in many coun￾tries, disillusioned with modernity, turned back to vernacular tradi￾tions to create regionally and culturally specific architecture. This 
effort to blend modernism and vernacular tradition could fall into 
what historian Eric Hobsbawm calls “invented tradition.”6
In the 1930s, Le Corbusier (1887–1965) shifted his architectural 
approach quite dramatically towards a “monumentalization of the 
vernacular,”7
 abandoning the Purist architecture of the 1920s that 
had made him the leader of the modern movement (see Chapter 10). 
Disillusioned with the Machine Age, Le Corbusier took inspiration 
from simple ordinary structures, such as those he encountered on 
his famous travels early in his career, especially in the Balkan region 148 Vernacular and Tradition
in 1911.8
 This would remain vital to his work for the remainder of 
his life and can be found in designs beginning with the de Mandrot 
house (1931) near Toulon, France, which interpreted the farmhouses 
of the region and was built of local stone. The vernacular was also 
evident in his work in Algeria in the 1930s and in his later Maisons 
Jaoul (1955) in Paris. These projects involved the use of natural 
materials and simple construction methods, what can be described as 
an “expressive bricolage”9
 that also employed a distinctive approach to 
form. Le Corbusier, rather than directly imitating vernacular tradi￾tions, derived a more fundamental inspiration from it. Other modern 
architects, including Alvar Aalto, also incorporated the vernacular 
into their designs (see Chapter 19).
Postmodernist architects, including Charles Moore (1925–1993) 
and Robert Venturi (1925–2018), drew inspiration from vernacular 
building traditions (see Chapter 18). This is evident in the widely 
influential Sea Ranch Condominium (1965) by Moore Lyndon 
Turnbull Whitaker north of San Francisco, with its use of simple 
forms and wood as a material that inspired many like-minded pro￾jects.10 Venturi and Rauch’s Trubek and Wislocki houses (1971) 
in Nantucket, Massachusetts, interpreted the colonial vernacular 
wooden buildings of New England.11 A student of Moore’s, the 
Canadian architect Brian MacKay-Lyons (1954–), has embedded his 
practice in the local building traditions of Nova Scotia and its coastal 
fishing communities. MacKay-Lyons writes:
Vernacular is not a style or an image. It is a process or cultural view, 
connected to material culture and the culture of building. By taking up 
new technologies and materials the vernacular is always contemporary 
and forward-looking rather than sentimental or backward-looking. For the 
architect, to embrace the vernacular is by definition to accept the idea of 
convention.12
* * *
The study of vernacular traditions intersected with modernism 
in Egypt, Turkey, and Iran; the three countries are predominantly 
Islamic, and each has a long cultural history. The Islamic world is, 
to a large extent, shaped by continuing traditions. Modern archi￾tects in the region have often interpreted traditional technologies 
(tents, wind towers, masonry methods, etc.) and typologies (souks, 
mosques, minarets, etc.) in innovative ways. This applies to Islamic 
architects practicing in their own countries and international firms 
who have been commissioned to undertake projects in the region.13Vernacular and Tradition 149
For 5,000 years, Egypt has been home to various important cul￾tures and remains a vital centre in the Arab and Islamic world. It is a 
desert country dominated by the Nile River and the cities of Cairo 
and Alexandria. With a well-established architectural profession, 
Egypt relies somewhat less than other countries on outside archi￾tectural firms. The most well-known and influential Egyptian archi￾tect was Hassan Fathy (1900–1989), who attacked modernism and 
advocated for the use of simple traditional construction methods and 
architectural forms. Despite a relatively modest body of work, his 
thinking has been inspirational to architects throughout the region. 
Early in his career, he learned about traditional mud brick con￾struction, particularly the vault and arch methods used by Nubian 
builders. He advocated for maintaining craft traditions in poor com￾munities and using their skills to build their settlements. His practice 
began in the 1930s. An early and critically important project was 
the village of New Gourna (1953) near Luxor. The village included 
housing and public facilities and was only partially completed due 
to various administrative problems. He also designed the unfinished 
village of New Bariz (1970), and several houses in Cairo. Integrating 
courtyards and natural ventilation principles, he sought an architec￾ture that was modest, suitable, locally built, and inspired by vernacu￾lar practices. Outside of Egypt, he designed projects in Iraq, Kuwait, 
and the United States.14 In his important book Architecture for the 
Poor, Fathy outlines his theories, experiences, and early projects. He 
writes about tradition in developing societies:
Tradition among the peasants is the only safeguard of their culture. They 
cannot discriminate between unfamiliar styles, and if they run off the rails 
of tradition they will inevitably meet disaster. Willfully to break a tradition 
in a basically traditional society like a peasant one is a kind of cultural 
murder, and the architect must respect the tradition he is invading.15
Concerned with the inappropriateness of modern techniques in poor 
rural communities in Egypt, Fathy argues that maintaining traditions 
“is not necessarily old-fashioned or synonymous with stagnation.”16
Traditions exist in cycles that can be long or short, old or new; the 
architect must override personal expression for the betterment of the 
community.
* * *
The secular modern Turkish republic was established in 1923 
following a War of Independence (1919–1923) and the end of the 150 Vernacular and Tradition
centuries-old Ottoman Empire. Mustafa Kemal Atatürk (1881–
1938) led the founding of a republic which resulted in many changes 
in Turkish society and the adoption of a programme of moderniza￾tion. This eventually resulted in a turning away from traditional styles 
of architecture and embracing the International Style. The construc￾tion of the new capital city of Ankara, beginning in 1923, was an 
important project in Turkey’s modernizing movement.17
The initial buildings in Ankara were built in a more traditional 
style known as the First National Style. However, by the 1930s, the 
impact of designs by European émigré modernist planners and archi￾tects, mainly from Germany and Austria, was widely evident. An 
international competition held in 1927 for the design of the new 
city was won by the German planner Herman Jansen, based on a 
Garden City-inspired scheme that encircled the existing city with 
planned neighbourhoods and wide streets. A series of “grand pro￾jects,” including a major dam, parks, and a model farm, supported 
the development of the new capital. Model villages were developed 
to improve the agricultural system, and new factory towns were 
built to promote industry.18 A new generation of Turkish architects, 
many trained in Europe, also began to emerge in the 1930s. A clas￾sical tendency was evident in many projects as well, exemplified in 
Atatürk’s Mausoleum (1942) in Ankara by Emin Onat and Orhan 
Arda, underscoring the close relations between Germany and Turkey 
during this era.
In reaction to the colonizing influence of European modernism, 
Turkish architects, such as Sedad Hakki Eldem (1926–1986), began 
to look carefully at Turkish traditional architecture. Eldem studied 
the traditional Turkish house as a specific set of spaces, evolving 
a modern version as a result. His Taslik Coffee House (1948) in 
Istanbul is an example of his approach.19 This resulted in a successful 
career designing houses in the 1950s and 1960s.
In 1950, Turkey moved from a secular authoritarian government 
to a populist democratic one. The modernization programme con￾tinued with great success, concentrating on the refurbishment of 
Istanbul as a cultural centre with new boulevards, parks, and institu￾tions. The dominance of the International Style was on full display 
in the Istanbul Hilton Hotel (1955) designed by Skidmore, Owings 
& Merrill with Sedad Eldem. A representation of American culture 
and the theories of Le Corbusier, the hotel has come to symbol￾ize the inappropriateness of imposing modern architecture on non￾Western cultures.20Vernacular and Tradition 151
From 1946 to 1980, Turkish cities grew significantly, triggering 
housing shortages and the emergence of informal settlements.21 After 
1960, instability marred the political situation in Turkey. At the same 
time, Turkish architects, like their colleagues in the Islamic world, 
became increasingly disillusioned with the International Style. Sedad 
Eldem’s Zeyrek Social Security Agency (1964) in Istanbul is a well￾known example of integrating local and international influences. By 
referencing the traditional Turkish house in a modern office build￾ing, Eldem broke down the mass into smaller pavilions interwoven 
with public spaces and pathways (the design won an Aga Khan award 
in 1986). The use of the “fragmented block,” or a collection of pavil￾ions of varying sizes, became a common plan diagram in the 1960s.22
Turkish architects and clients also embraced a variety of modern 
construction systems in industrial and commercial projects.
Despite Turkey being constitutionally a secular state, it is still 
a strongly Islamic country. The mosque remains a vital aspect of 
Turkish society. The Parliament Mosque Complex (1989) in Ankara 
by Behruz and Can Cincini is an example of contemporary mosque 
design. The architect Turgut Cansever (1920–2009) was widely 
respected for his ability to balance his religious values with the design 
of regionally sensitive secular buildings. As elsewhere, postmodern￾ism impacted Turkish architecture in the 1980s, primarily in the 
design of buildings for the tourism industry. More recently, architects 
like Han Tümertekin and Nevzat Sayin have again been involved in 
developing regionally appropriate modern architecture.
* * *
Figure 15.1 East Elevation, Sedad Eldem, Zeyrek Social Security Agency, 1964, 
Istanbul, Turkey. The design features articulated pavilions grouped along a major 
boulevard showcasing the inspiration derived from traditional Turkish houses; 
the scheme is designed to fit the context, acting as an interface between the 
building and surrounding neighbourhoods. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.152 Vernacular and Tradition
Iran began a “modernization” project in the 1920s, initiating an 
era known as the Pahlavi period (1925–1979), which ended with the 
Islamic Revolution and the removal of the Shah from power. The reign 
of Mohammad Reza Shah (1919–1980) can be broken down into 
three phases: the first phase involved a continuation of architectural 
traditions, the second phase during the 1960s saw the introduction of 
universal modernism that largely ignored local building and cultural 
practices and a third phase in the 1970s that saw the development 
of Iranian regional architecture.23 In the 1950s, Houshang Seyhoun 
(1920–2014) emerged as a transformative architect who designed sev￾eral key works, including the Omar Khayyam Mausoleum (1963) in 
Nishabur and the Ferdowsi Mausoleum Teahouse/Museum (1968) in 
Tus. Seyhoun also took on an important role as an educator. He left 
Iran after the Islamic Revolution and died in exile.
During the 1970s, projects such as the Iran Center for Management 
Studies in Tehran (1975) by Nader Ardalan, the Shustar New Town 
(1977), and the Tehran Museum of Contemporary Art (1977) by 
Kamran Diba (1937–) were among the most accomplished and 
important projects built.24 In the 1980s, the architect Hadi Mirmiran 
(1945–2006) had a significant impact on Iranian architecture. He 
graduated from Tehran University in 1968. He worked for various 
companies before becoming the principal architect for a large engi￾neering firm. An educator and the winner of several important com￾petitions, he is particularly remembered for his National Academies 
of the Islamic Republic of Iran competition entry (1994) and his 
Rafsanjan Sports Complex (2002). Mirmiran provided a model that 
blended international and Iranian influences in his designs.25
The Aga Khan Award for Architecture, sponsored by Prince Karim 
Aga Khan IV (Imam of the Nizari Ismaili community of Shia Muslims), 
was launched in 1977 and has raised the global profile of modern 
Islamic architecture. The programme brings together, every three years, 
a distinguished jury to select projects built for Islamic communities 
(architecture, planning, historic preservation, and landscape architec￾ture) around the world. The Aga Kahn Awards have raised the profile 
of Islamic architecture globally. The Mimar: Architecture in Development
journal was established in 1981 (and operated until 1992) for the study 
and dissemination of Islamic architecture. The programme places a par￾ticular emphasis on how architects interpret local conditions.
* * *Vernacular and Tradition 153
The relationship between vernacular and modern architecture has 
often been overlooked. In examining Le Corbusier’s connection to 
vernacular architecture, Francesco Passanti argues that he wanted to 
establish modern architecture as a widely practised form of the ver￾nacular. Passanti writes:
Its [the vernacular] principal role . . . was not as a source of architectural 
motifs but as a conceptual model for a natural relationship between 
society and its artifacts, hence society and architecture; specifically, a 
conceptual model for the notion of a modern vernacular – one as natu￾rally issuing from modern industrial society, and as representative of it, 
as the traditional vernacular of common parlance had been of earlier 
societies.26
NOTES
1 See Sibyl Moholy-Nagy, Native Genius in Anonymous Architecture (New York: 
Horizon Press, 1957); Mete Turan, ed., Vernacular Architecture: Paradigms 
of Environmental Response (Aldershot: Avebury, 1990); and D. Upton and 
J.M. Vlach, eds., Common Places: Readings in American Vernacular Architecture
(Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1986).
2 Paul Oliver, Built to Meet Needs: Cultural Issues in Vernacular Architecture
(London: Routledge, 2006), p. 110.
3 See Andrew Saint, Richard Norman Shaw (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
1976); and R.W. Brunskill, Illustrated Handbook of Vernacular Architecture
(London: Faber and Faber, 1987).
4 See Adolf Loos, “Architecture,” in Y. Safran and W. Wang, eds., The 
Architecture of Adolf Loos (London: Arts Council, 1985), p. 104.
5 See Michelangelo Sabatino, “Toward a Regionalist Modernism: Italian 
Architecture and the Vernacular,” in Leen Meganck et al., eds., Regionalism 
and Modernity: Architecture in Western Europe, 1914–1940 (Leuven: Leuven 
University Press, 2013), pp. 197–217.
6 Eric Hobsbawm, “Introduction: Inventing Traditions,” in E. Hobsbawm 
and T. Ranger, eds., The Invention of Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2012), p. 1.
7 Kenneth Frampton, Modern Architecture: A Critical History (London: Thames 
& Hudson, 2020), p. 255.
8 See Francesco Passanti, “The Vernacular, Modernism, and Le Corbusier,” 
JSAH, vol. 56, no. 4 (December 1997), pp. 438–451.
9 Frampton, Modern Architecture, p. 257.
10 See Gerald Allen, Charles Moore (New York: Whitney Library of Design, 
1980).154 Vernacular and Tradition
11 See Thomas Beeby, “Association and Dissociation: The Trubek and Wislocki 
Houses,” in Christopher Mead, ed., The Architecture of Robert Venturi (Albu￾querque: University of New Mexico Press, 1989), pp. 68–84.
12 Brian MacKay-Lyons, “Seven Stories from a Village Architect,” Design 
Quarterly, no. 165 (Summer 1995), p. 9.
13 See Udo Kultermann, Contemporary Architecture in the Arab States (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1999), pp. 1–18.
14 See Ibid., pp. 19–30. See also James Steele, An Architecture for People: The 
Complete Works of Hassan Fathy (London: Thames & Hudson, 1997); and 
Ahmad Hamid, Hassan Fathy and Continuity in Islamic Architecture: The Birth 
of a New Modern (Cairo: American University of Cairo Press, 2010).
15 Hasan Fathy, Architecture for the Poor: An Experiment in Rural Egypt (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1973), p. 25.
16 Ibid., p. 24.
17 See Sibel Bozdogan and Esra Akcan, Turkey: Modern Architectures in History
(London: Reaktion Books, 2012), pp. 17–20.
18 See Ibid., pp. 26–47.
19 See Ibid., pp. 96–103.
20 See Annabel Wharton, Building the Cold War: Hilton International Hotels and 
Modern Architecture (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2001). See also 
Bozdogan and Akcan, Turkey, pp. 114–130.
21 See Bozdogan and Akcan, Turkey, pp. 139–169.
22 See Ibid., pp. 175–185.
23 See Farshad Farahi, “World of Similitude: The Metamorphosis of Iranian 
Architecture,” Architectural Design, vol. 82, no. 3 (2012), p.  59. See also: 
Pamela Karimi, “Old Sites, New Frontiers: Modern and Contemporary 
Architecture in Iran,” in E.G. Haddad and D. Rifkind, eds., A Critical 
History of Contemporary Architecture, 1960–2010 (London: Routledge, 2014), 
pp. 339–358; and M. Reza Shirazi, Contemporary Architecture and Urbanism 
in Iran (Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2018). Mohammad Moezzi also pro￾vided information on modern Iranian architecture.
24 See Darah Diba, “Contemporary Architecture of Iran,” Architectural Design, 
vol. 82, no. 3 (2012), pp. 70–79.
25 See Saman Sayar, “Assimilating the Authentic with the Contemporary: The 
Work of Hadi Mirmiran 1945–2006,” Architectural Design, vol. 82, no. 3 
(2012), pp. 80–87.
26 Passanti, “The Vernacular, Modernism, and Le Corbusier,” p. 447.
SUGGESTED READING
Bozdogan, Sibel and Esra Akcan. Turkey: Modern Architectures in History. London: 
Reaktion Books, 2012.
Fathy, Hasan. Architecture for the Poor: An Experiment in Rural Egypt. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 1973.Vernacular and Tradition 155
Kultermann, Udo. Contemporary Architecture in the Arab States. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1999.
Lejeune, Jean-François and Michelangelo Sabatino. Modern Architecture and 
the Mediterranean: Vernacular Dialogues and Contested Identities. Abingdon: 
Routledge, 2010.
Rudofsky, Bernard. Architecture Without Architects. Garden City, NY: Doubleday 
& Co., 1964.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-16
The Roman architect Vitruvius (c. 80–15 BC) addresses the edu￾cation and necessary skills of an architect in the opening book of 
his famous Ten Books of Architecture; he writes the architect “should 
be equipped with knowledge of many branches of study and var￾ied kinds of learning.”1
 The medieval figure of the master mason 
combined both design and construction abilities as he directed the 
construction of the great Gothic cathedrals. During the Renaissance, 
it was often those trained as artisans or artists, such as Brunelleschi 
(1377–1446), Michelangelo (1475–1564), and Raphael (1483–1520) 
who became architects. Later, men such as Claude Perrault (1613–
1688) and Sir Christopher Wren (1632–1723) entered architecture 
with scientific backgrounds. In the 17th and 18th centuries, it was 
not uncommon to join the discipline with training in masonry con￾struction or military engineering. The formal education of archi￾tects began in France in the 18th century; it has evolved significantly 
since then. As the discipline evolved, aspiring architects could train 
through apprenticeships or by studying in schools of architecture.2
 It 
is worth noting that both Frank Lloyd Wright and Le Corbusier had 
little academic training; instead, they learned in various architectural 
offices before starting their own practices (see Chapter 10).
Architectural education in France descended from the estab￾lishment of the Académie Royale d’Architecture in 1671, an elite 
institution which provided lectures to architects. The first com￾prehensive school of architecture was a full-time private school 
established by Jacques-François Blondel in Paris in 1743. Blondel 
EDUCATION AND 
PROFESSIONALISM
16Education and Professionalism 157
became a professor in the school of the Académie Royale 
d’Architecture in 1762.3
 After the French Revolution (1789–1799), 
the educational system in France was reorganized. It was only in 
1819 that the celebrated École des Beaux-Arts was created as a strict 
educational system. Its curricula focussed on the three prominent 
“fine arts”: architecture, painting, and sculpture.
Architecture students of the École des Beaux-Arts experienced a 
unique educational approach. They had to belong to an atelier run 
by a respected architect, or “master,” in Paris, either in the school or 
externally. The atelier, comprising 50–100 students, was a home base 
where students undertook their design exercises, prepared for the 
qualifying exams, which included drawing, geometry, and history 
tests, and learned the discipline of architecture. Students admitted to 
the École des Beaux-Arts followed a rigourous programme of design 
exercises and competitions. They took courses on statics and strength 
of materials, descriptive geometry, stereotomy (the cutting of three￾dimensional solids into shapes, such as in masonry construction), 
perspective, construction, and history.
Eighteen design exercises of varying types were offered each year; 
these could be short sketch competitions or longer rendered ones. 
Students followed their studies at their own pace rather than fol￾lowing a set curriculum. After completing the second (lower) class 
and the first (upper) class, students then undertook the final thesis 
exercise, which involved a design and lengthy examination. Selected 
senior students then completed the prestigious Prix de Rome, 
which allowed the winner to study in Rome and usually guaranteed 
a successful career.4
 The École des Beaux-Arts was famous for its 
large and abstract design problems that focused on public institu￾tions, the results of which were typically formally composed and 
beautifully drawn (plans, sections, elevations, and perspectives). The 
École tended to promote a classical approach to design; however, as 
the 19th century progressed, the stylistic influences became more 
elaborate and eclectic. Various well-known architectural concepts 
were developed at the École including the esquisse, or short 12-hour 
“sketch” exercise; the parti, or fundamental plan organization for the 
design; the architectural “program”; and the charrette, or quick design 
exercise.
The École des Beaux-Arts architectural education was very influ￾ential, particularly in America, where the German polytechnical sys￾tem was also important.5
 Several well-known American architects 158 Education and Professionalism
studied at the École, including Richard Morris Hunt (1827–1895), 
Henry Hobson Richardson (1838–1886), and Louis H. Sullivan 
(1856–1924). Many American schools of architecture adopted its 
methods. By the 1930s, the influence of the École had declined, and 
in 1968 it was closed.
* * *
The rise of modern architecture in the early 20th century resulted 
in dramatic changes to architectural education. The most influen￾tial modern design school was the Bauhaus, established by Walter 
Gropius (1883–1969) in Weimar, Germany, in 1919. Before World 
War I, in which he served, he had made a name for himself as a 
young architect. He designed, with Adolf Meyer, the Fagus Factory 
in Alfeld an der Leine (1911–1912) the first important work of 
European modern architecture (see Chapter 12).
To create the Bauhaus, Gropius amalgamated two existing schools. 
His vision for the school sought to unite the Arts and Crafts tradi￾tion with modern art, especially Expressionist art (see Chapter 11). 
As Gropius writes in the initial programme: “Architects, sculptors, 
painters, we all must return to the crafts! For art is not a ‘profession.’ 
There is no essential difference between the artist and the crafts￾man.”6
 The role of learning crafts in a workshop was central to the 
Bauhaus pedagogy, an idea that was also consistent with the earlier 
Deutscher Werkbund (see Chapter 8).
Initially focusing on the training of painters, sculptors, and archi￾tects the school’s curriculum quickly evolved into the model that 
made it famous. Gropius hired several significant artists during the 
early phase to be “masters,” including painters Paul Klee (1879–
1940) and Wassily Kandinsky (1866–1944). Studies began with a 
six-month basic design course known as the Vorkurs, initially devel￾oped by the Swiss artist Johannes Itten (1888–1967). Students who 
completed this then selected a three-year workshop course in stone, 
wood, metal, clay, glass, colour, or textiles leading to a Journeyman’s 
Diploma. This, in theory, was to be followed by training in building 
design and construction. Less an architecture school than a design 
and art school, the students and teachers at the Bauhaus created in 
the 1920s an influential range of work in graphic design, furniture, 
art, industrial design, theatre design, and textiles.
The first few years in Weimar were difficult, given the German 
economy and political differences between the school and the local 
government. In 1925, Gropius was required to relocate the Bauhaus Education and Professionalism 159
to Dessau in 1925, where he found more sympathetic support. In 
Dessau, Gropius had the opportunity to design the most important 
building of his career, the new facilities for the school. A landmark 
work of modern architecture (1926), the design clearly articulates the 
various functions of the school in a dynamic pinwheel composition 
that is articulated by large amounts of glass and industrial detailing. 
Figure 16.1 Second Floor Plan, Walter Gropius, Bauhaus, 1926, Dessau, 
Germany. Dynamically and functionally composed, the design of the Bauhaus 
locates the student accommodations at the top, classrooms to the left, and work￾shops at the lower right. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.160 Education and Professionalism
The building was a prime example of the emerging International 
Style (see Chapter 12).
The introductory basic design course was the most important 
legacy of the Bauhaus educational system. After it was initially devel￾oped by Itten, it was taken over in 1923 by the Hungarian artist 
László Moholy-Nagy (1895–1946). A rational artist influenced by 
Russian Constructivism, Moholy-Nagy’s appointment signalled a 
change in direction towards a more objective and technological 
approach to design. A third key teacher involved in the introduc￾tory course was Josef Albers (1888–1976), an early graduate of the 
Bauhaus who worked with Moholy-Nagy. The course is famous for 
its emphasis on fundamental skill building in form, space, materials, 
and colour, and it was widely copied.
In Dessau, further changes were made to the curriculum, and new 
teachers joined the school, including the Austrian graphic designer 
Herbert Bayer (1900–1985) and the Hungarian-German furniture 
designer/architect Marcel Breuer (1902–1981). Both graduates of 
the Bauhaus, each contributed significantly to modernist design in 
the 1920s. In 1927, the controversial Swiss architect Hannes Meyer 
(1889–1954) was appointed to run the new architecture depart￾ment. In January 1928, Gropius resigned from the institution he had 
founded, appointing Meyer as his successor. Meyer was less sym￾pathetic to art and was strongly left-wing. His directorship led to 
a stronger focus on architecture and introduced new areas such as 
town planning and photography. Many of the teachers left or were 
disillusioned with the new practical approach. By 1930, Meyer was 
forced to resign and was replaced by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe 
(1886–1969). Under Mies, the designer Lilly Reich (1885–1947) 
ran the interior design and textiles workshops. Until her arrival, 
Greta Stölzl (1897–1983) was the only woman to run a Bauhaus 
workshop. Women comprised a significant portion of the student 
body throughout the school’s history. The early 1930s were a time of 
political instability, marked by the rise of the Nazi party. In 1932, the 
Bauhaus was again forced to move, this time to temporary facilities 
in Berlin. By the next year, the Bauhaus was permanently closed.7
In the aftermath of the Bauhaus, and with the rise of Nazism, 
many leading German architects left Germany. Gropius moved to 
Boston, where he chaired the Department of Architecture in the 
Graduate School of Design at Harvard University (1937–1952), 
and Mies van der Rohe moved to Chicago, where he chaired the 
Department of Architecture at the Illinois Institute of Technology Education and Professionalism 161
(1938–1959). Both men also had successful careers in private prac￾tice. Schools of design aligned with Bauhaus principles included 
the Vkhutemas school in Moscow (1920–1930), Black Mountain 
College in North Carolina (1933–1957), and the Hochschule für 
Gestaltung in Ulm, Germany (1952–1968).
* * *
The third important educational system is the American “environ￾mental design” model, which originated in the 1930s. Influential fig￾ures included historian Lewis Mumford, housing expert Catherine 
Bauer, and architect Vernon DeMars. The concept of environmental 
design placed an emphasis on collaborative design involving diverse 
teams of experts, an approach that concentrated more on social and 
environmental factors and less on design as an author-driven pro￾cess. This also involved uniting the design disciplines involved in the 
environment, which placed architecture, landscape architecture, and 
urban planning together in one academic unit. This occurred first in 
the 1940s and 1950s at Harvard University, the Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, and the University of Pennsylvania. However, it was 
in 1959 at the College of Environmental Design at the University of 
California in Berkeley under Dean William W. Wurster (1895–1973) 
that the most comprehensive approach to environmental design was 
developed.8
 After a career in practice, Wurster married Catherine 
Bauer (1905–1964) in 1940 and was the Dean at MIT before going 
to Berkeley in 1950.9
 In the 1960s, the Berkeley programme was 
driven by important thinkers and educators, including Christopher 
Alexander (1936–2022) and his seminal work on “pattern language” 
and Horst Rittel (1930–1990) and his concept of the “wicked prob￾lem.” With its emphasis on research, ecology, social behaviour, sys￾tems analysis, organizational structures, and unifying a wide range of 
disciplines, the environmental design paradigm was adopted by many 
design schools in North America during the 1960s and 1970s.
The School of Architecture at the Catholic University of Valparaíso 
in Chile began a radical experiment in 1952 under the architect 
Alberto Cruz and the poet Godofredo Iommi. Based on a collabora￾tive approach that united poetry and architecture, the programme 
involved working on architectural commissions, poetic journeys 
(travesias), and eventually, the creation of the Open City (Ciudad 
Abierta) in Ritoque in 1970.10 The Open City is an experimental 
community that comprises unusual structures built over time by the 
students working with contractors. The use of a “design-build,” or 162 Education and Professionalism
hands-on learning, has a long tradition in architectural education 
and has been used in programmes such as the Taliesin Fellowship, 
founded by Frank Lloyd Wright in 1932. More recently, the design￾build approach was made famous in the Rural Studio at Auburn 
University in Alabama, originally established in 1993 under the 
direction of the architects Samuel Mockbee and Dennis K. Ruth.
Other noteworthy schools of architecture include the schools 
associated with historically black colleges and universities in the 
USA, including the Tuskegee Institute and Howard University (see 
Chapter 23).11 The Cambridge School of Architecture and Landscape 
Architecture, associated with Smith College in Massachusetts, oper￾ated as a school for women from 1915 until 1942. More recently, 
the Cooper Union in New York under John Hejduk (1929–2000) 
and in London the Architectural Association under Alvin Boyarsky 
(1928–1990)12 created influential architectural programmes.
* * *
The birth of the modern profession of architecture, as opposed to 
architecture as an “art,” began at the beginning of the 19th century. 
The British architect Sir John Soane (1753–1837) can be regarded as 
“the father of the modern profession.”13 Soane writes:
The business of the architect is to make the designs and estimates, to 
direct the works and to measure and value the different parts; he is the 
intermediate agent between the employer, whose honour and interest he 
is to study, and the mechanic, whose rights he is to defend. His situa￾tion implies great trust; he is responsible for mistakes, negligences, and 
ignorances of those he employs; and above all, he is to take care that the 
workmen’s bills do need exceed his own estimates.14
Professionalism implied a more organized approach to the design 
and construction of buildings, with architects having defined train￾ing and roles. Furthermore, there was a defined relationship with 
clients, builders, and others involved in the process. It also meant 
public, legal, and ethical responsibilities and led to the establishment 
of new oversight organizations such as the Royal Institute for British 
Architects (RIBA), established in 1834, and the American Institute of 
Architects (AIA), created in 1857.15 Typically, governments allowed, 
through legislative acts, the power for the profession to self-govern. 
Professional architectural organizations can regulate the profession 
and advocate for the discipline of architecture. Many countries, espe￾cially those that operated under colonial regimes, adopted Western Education and Professionalism 163
forms of professional organization. For example, the Indian Institute 
of Architects, initially aligned with the RIBA, was created in 1929, 
and the Nigerian Institute of Architects was created in 1960. In Latin 
America, the Instituto Brasileiro de Arquitetos (Brazil) was estab￾lished in 1921, and the Colegio de Arquitectos de Chile in 1942. 
Elsewhere, the Architectural Institute of Japan was established in 
1887, and the Chamber of Architects of Turkey in 1954.
In America, Henry Hobson Richardson, who had studied at the 
École des Beaux-Arts, established his office in Boston in 1866. He 
instituted many ideas imported from his French experience to direct 
his practice and train his staff. In the last quarter of the 19th century, 
Chicago underwent a significant building boom (see Chapter 4). 
The many large-scale firms led to the creation of the modern com￾mercially oriented architectural office. These firms, such as Burnham 
and Root (1873–1891), Holabird and Roche (1880-present), and 
Adler & Sullivan (1883–1896), were highly organized and special￾ized; in these offices, architecture was treated as a business. In New 
York, a similar phenomenon occurred, with practices like McKim, 
Mead, and White (1872–1961) dominating the scene. Eventually, in 
the post-World War II era, firms of international impact emerged. 
These included the Chicago-based Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill 
firm (SOM, 1936-present) with multiple offices and hundreds of 
employees. SOM divided its office structure into administration, 
design, production, and construction, a model used by many large 
firms today. This model is based on team-oriented practice, where 
the role of the individual designer is downplayed.16
Architecture firms range in size from small to large and focus on 
a wide range of building types; they approach the design of the built 
environment in many ways depending upon culture and experi￾ence, ideology and regulation, and economic and material situations. 
However, by the 21st century, the educational and professional stand￾ards for the architecture profession globally are largely standardized.
* * *
Educational and professional models for architects responded to 
the eras in which they exist; however, as environmental theorist 
David Orr points out, current practices will need to change moving 
forward:
We have good reason to believe that humankind will build more buildings 
in the next fifty years than in the past 5,000. Done by prevailing design 164 Education and Professionalism
standards, we will cast a long shadow on the prospects of all subsequent 
generations. No longer can be substitute cheap fossil energy for design 
intelligence or good judgement. The implications for the education of 
architects and the design professions generally are striking.17
NOTES
1 Vitruvius, The Ten Books of Architecture (New York: Dover Publications, 
1960), p. 5.
2 See Mark Crinson and Jules Lubbock, Architecture – Art or Profession? Three 
Hundred Years of Architectural Education in Britain (Manchester: Manchester 
University Press, 1994).
3 See Peter Collins, “The Eighteenth Century Origins of Our System of 
Full-time Architectural Schooling,” Journal of Architectural Education, vol. 
xxxiii, no. 2 (November 1979), pp. 2–6.
4 See Jean Paul Carlhian, “The École des Beaux-Arts: Modes and Manners,” 
Journal of Architectural Education, vol. xxxiii, no. 2 (November 1979), 
pp. 7–10. See also Arthur Drexler, ed., The Architecture of the École des Beaux￾Arts (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1977).
5 See Michael J. Lewis, “The Battle Between Polytechnic and Beaux-Arts in 
the American University,” in Joan Ockman, ed., Architecture School: Three 
Centuries of Educating Architects in North America (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2012), pp. 66–89.
6 Walter Gropius, “Programme of the Staatliches Bauhaus in Weimar,” in 
Ulrich Conrads, ed., Programs and Manifestoes on 20th Century Architecture
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971), p. 49.
7 See Frank Whitford, Bauhaus (London: Thames & Hudson, 1984), 
pp. 166–196.
8 See Avigail Sachs, Environmental Design: Architecture, Politics, and Science 
in Postwar America (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2018), 
pp. 9–42.
9 See Richard C. Peters, “W.W. Wurster,” Journal of Architectural Education, vol. 
xxxiii, no. 2 (November 1979), pp. 36–41.
10 See Raúl Rispa, ed., Valparaíso School: Open City Group (Montreal: MQUP, 
2003).
11 See Craig L. Wilkins, “Race and Diversity: African Americans in Archi￾tecture Education,” in Ockman, ed., Architecture School, pp. 374–379.
12 See Igor Marjanovic and Jan Howard, Drawing Ambience: Alvin Boyarsky and 
the Architectural Association (St. Louis: Mildred Lane Kemper Art Museum, 
2014).
13 John Wilton-Ely, “The Rise of the Professional Architect in England,” 
in Spiro Kostof, ed., The Architect, Chapters in the History of the Profession
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000), p. 194. See also Barrington Education and Professionalism 165
Kaye, The Development of the Architectural Profession in Britain (London: 
George Allen & Unwin Ltd., 1960).
14 Wilton-Ely, “The Rise of the Professional Architect in England,” p. 194.
15 See Dell Upton, “Defining the Profession,” in Ockman, ed., Architecture 
School, pp. 36–65.
16 See Bernard Michael Boyle, “Architectural Practice in America 1865–
1965–Ideal and Reality,” in Kostof, ed., The Architect, pp. 309–344; Andrew 
Saint, The Image of the Architect (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1983); 
and Mary N. Woods, From Craft to Profession: The Practice of Architecture in 
Nineteenth-Century America (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999).
17 David Orr, “Architecture, Ecological Design, and Human Ecology,” in K. 
Tanzer and R. Longorio, eds., The Green Braid: Towards an Architecture of 
Ecology, Economy, and Equity (Abingdon: Routledge, 2007), p. 15.
SUGGESTED READING
Bergdoll, Barry and Leah Dickerman, eds. Bauhaus 1919–1933: Workshops for 
Modernity. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2009.
Colomina, Beatriz et al., eds. Radical Pedagogies. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2022.
Drexler, Arthur, ed. The Architecture of the École des Beaux-Arts. New York: 
Museum of Modern Art, 1977.
Kostof, Spiro, ed. The Architect, Chapters in the History of the Profession. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2000.
Sachs, Avigail. Environmental Design: Architecture, Politics, and Science in Postwar 
America. Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2018.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-17
For the most part, women have been excluded from practicing archi￾tecture until relatively recently due to sexist discriminatory practices 
perpetuated by men and male-dominated institutions. Despite this 
history, women have performed various roles in the conception and 
construction of architecture throughout history.1
 First, according to 
architect Susana Torre, in many cultures, “women were the original 
builders, [although] they were only passive, marginal actors in the 
intellectual process that resulted in the differentiation of “building” 
as a function of shelter and survival from “architecture” as a func￾tion of culture.”2
 Second, women were often accorded the role of 
the muse as objects of beauty or the source of inspiration for the 
male architect; this notion is captured in Greek mythology. Third, 
a significant number of women worked in partnership with their 
husbands or partners (occasionally same-sex partners), often over￾looked for their contributions to the field; notable figures include 
Margaret Macdonald, Aino Maria Marsio-Aalto, and Denise Scott 
Brown. Fourth, there were those “exceptional” women, begin￾ning in the 19th century, who had isolated opportunities and the 
strong character to become architects and, in some cases, to run their 
own practices; this was the case with figures like Julia Morgan and 
Eileen Gray.3
 Fifth, many women in the profession of architecture 
were effectively anonymous workers, unrecognized for their con￾tributions, or relegated to the “domestic” aspects of the discipline. 
Sixth, there were women immersed in architecture who contrib￾uted through communal organizations or by writing on the subject. 
GENDER AND DISCRIMINATION
17Gender and Discrimination 167
Seventh, women also acted as clients for important works of archi￾tecture, such as Dr. Edith Farnsworth commissioning Mies van der 
Rohe to design her house in the 1940s.
Historically, women who practiced architecture faced many obsta￾cles. Those women who were able to work as amateurs, trained as 
apprentices, or studied in the new schools of architecture were pio￾neers. Early women who worked in the field of architecture were 
typically well-to-do “amateurs,” such as Lady Wilbraham (1632–
1705), a British aristocrat who reputedly designed the Palladian￾style Weston Park country house in 1671. It has been suggested 
that she may have designed hundreds of projects by directing male 
colleagues.4
 Working-class women in the 19th century were often 
involved in the manufacturing of building materials. Women who 
did enter architectural firms were typically assigned more menial 
tasks and were prevented from active involvement in designing any￾thing but domestic interiors. And while Arts and Crafts architects in 
Europe and America were often willing to hire women as employ￾ees, they usually restricted their advancement in the profession.5
* * *
The US supported the formal education and training of women 
in architecture earlier than most countries. Pioneering women in 
American architecture have been relatively numerous, including 
Minerva Parker Nichols (1861–1948), Theodate Pope Riddle (1868–
1946), Isabel Roberts (1871–1955), Lilian J. Rice (1889–1938), and 
Jean Bodman Fletcher (1915–1965). Many women trained in the 
field tended to end up in domestic or interior design or landscape 
architecture, areas that were generally considered more suitable for 
women by men. In 1958, there were 320 women registered archi￾tects in the country, about 1% of the profession; of these, about 
24% had their own practices, shared practices with their husbands, 
or were partners in firms.6
 In 2020, approximately 20% of licenced 
American architects were women.7
Prior to 1900, despite numerous obstacles, there were a small num￾ber of women architects working in America.8
 These women took 
various paths to become successful in architecture. Mother Joseph 
of the Sacred Heart (1823–1902) was born Esther Pariseau near 
Montreal, Quebec. In 1845, she entered the Sisters of Providence, 
an order of nuns, taking her name from her father, who was a car￾riage maker and taught her practical skills. In 1856, she was sent 168 Gender and Discrimination
to the Pacific Northwest (Washington and Oregon states). There, 
she designed, built, and maintained hospitals, schools, and orphan￾ages for the Sisters throughout the region over many years, including 
Providence Academy (1873) in Vancouver, Washington. Although 
not formally trained, Mother Joseph performed all the functions of 
an architect.9
Louise Blanchard Bethune (1856–1913) was the first woman to be 
voted an associate member of the American Institute of Architects 
(AIA) in 1888. She was also the first woman to be made a Fellow of 
the AIA in the following year. After apprenticing at a firm in Buffalo, 
New York, at the age of 25 she decided to open an office with 
her husband, eventually known as Bethune, Bethune & Fuchs. The 
best-known work authored by Bethune is the large Hotel Lafayette 
(1904) in Buffalo. Active in the local architectural community, she 
was a pioneering figure in the profession.10
Sophia Hayden (1868–1953), the first woman to graduate from 
MIT in architecture in 1890, won a national competition for 
women only to design the Woman’s Building for the 1893 World’s 
Columbian Exposition in Chicago. One of 13 entrants, Hayden’s 
Italian Renaissance scheme was relatively simple, befitting a tempo￾rary exhibition building. Hayden contributed little to architecture 
after the Exposition. 
Mary E.J. Colter (1869–1958) was devoted to the study of desert 
landscapes of the American Southwest, including learning about 
local indigenous cultures. As a result, she developed a region￾ally suitable architecture mainly for the tourism and hospitality 
industry. Colter never became a registered architect; instead, her 
drawings were transformed into working drawings by company 
architects. She designed hotels, railway stations, and restaurants 
along the Santa Fe Railroad in the American Southeast from 1902 
to 1942, working mainly for the Fred Harvey Company. In 1913, 
she embarked on a series of designs for the Grand Canyon site, 
which was emerging as a major tourist destination.11 Through her 
work, she helped establish standards for buildings in the national 
parks.
Eleanor Raymond (1887–1989) graduated from the Cambridge 
School of Architecture and Landscape Architecture for women in 
1919. Raymond opened an office in partnership in the same year and, 
by 1928, was on her own, focusing mainly on the design of houses. 
Although she was trained in the classical style, she gravitated towards 
modernism. Often working with and for women, Raymond designed Gender and Discrimination 169
several noteworthy buildings, including the Rachel Raymond House 
(1931) in Belmont, Massachusetts, and a Sculptor’s Studio (1934) in 
Dover, Massachusetts. Always interested in new technologies, she 
designed a series of innovative model houses for her client, Amelia 
Peabody. These included the Plywood House (1940), the Masonite 
House (1944), and the Sun House (1948).12 In 1938, Raymond 
obtained a Master of Architecture from Smith College, and in 1961, 
she was elected a Fellow of the AIA.
Lutah Maria Riggs (1896–1984) won a scholarship to the 
University of California at Berkeley in 1917, where she studied 
architecture and graduated in 1919. After a brief internship, she 
joined the architectural office of George Washington Smith in Santa 
Barbara, California. By 1924 she was a partner in the practice, earn￾ing her licence in 1928. In 1931, Riggs launched her own firm. 
Despite the Depression, she continued to work on residential pro￾jects, including the Baron Maximilian von Romberg Villa and Estate 
(1938) in Montecito, California, and a series of houses (1940) in 
Rolling Hills, California. During World War II she worked on film 
sets for MGM and Warner Brothers. Known for her house designs 
in both the Spanish colonial and modernist styles, Riggs continued 
to practice actively into the late 1970s.13
More recently, Beverly Willis (1928–2023) has been an impor￾tant role model and an advocate for women in architecture through 
both her practice and the Beverly Willis Architecture Foundation 
(BWAF), which she established in 2002. She initially studied aer￾onautical engineering and fine arts. Willis established an interior 
design practice in San Francisco in 1958 before opening Beverly 
Willis Architect in 1966. Concentrating on housing and buildings 
for the performing arts, Willis’s firm gained a reputation for well￾designed projects such as the Nob Hill Court Condominiums (1972) 
in San Francisco and the San Francisco Ballet Building (1983). A 
pioneer in developing software for site analysis and the adaptive reuse 
of older buildings, Willis designed over 800 projects during her long 
career.14
In America, women have also been important contributors to 
architectural history, theory, and criticism. These have included 
Louisa Caroline Tuthill (1798–1879), who wrote the first book on 
the history of American architecture. Published in 1848, it was titled 
History of Architecture from the Earliest Times; its Present Condition in 
Europe and the United States; With a Biography of Eminent Architects and 
a Glossary of Architectural Terms by Mrs. L.C. Tuthill. With Numerous 170 Gender and Discrimination
Illustrations.
15 Other early architectural writers included Mariana Van 
Rensselaer (1851–1934), a well-known architectural critic and his￾torian who published an important biography on Henry Hobson 
Richardson in 1888.16 The influential architectural critic Ada Louise 
Huxtable (1921–2013) first honed her writing skills working at the 
Museum of Modern Art. In 1963, she was hired as the architectural 
critic for The New York Times newspaper, where she made a reputa￾tion for being tough and astute. She was awarded a Pulitzer Prize for 
Criticism in 1970 and published several books, including Frank Lloyd 
Wright: A Life (2008).17 In recent decades, many American women 
have contributed to architectural scholarship, particularly the his￾tory of women in architecture; these include Diana Agrest, Jennifer 
Bloomer, Beatriz Colomina, Diane Ghirardo, Dolores Hayden, 
Leslie Kanes-Weisman, Mary McLeod, Joan Ockman, Daphne 
Spain, Susana Torre, and Gwendolyn Wright.
* * *
The career of Julia Morgan (1872–1957) remains largely an anom￾aly in American architecture. Morgan, who was born and practiced 
in San Francisco, was the first woman to enter the prestigious École 
des Beaux-Arts in Paris, graduating in 1902. Returning to San 
Francisco, she briefly worked for California Crafts architect Bernard 
Maybeck (1862–1957) before establishing her own practice in 1904. 
During almost five decades, Morgan designed over 700 projects. She 
was adept at a wide range of styles (Beaux-Arts, California Crafts, 
Mediterranean, Mission, etc.) and building types (hotels, houses, 
churches, schools, etc.). Her most famous work is the William 
Randolph Hearst estate at San Simeon in central California, a pro￾ject she worked on for 20 years. Upon closing her office in 1951, 
Morgan destroyed the records from her years of practice.18
Morgan’s practice operated typically with about 10 employees, 
many of them women. One former employee wrote of Morgan: 
“Not only was she one of the most talented of West Coast architects; 
she was also far more accomplished in the area of building technol￾ogy than any of the men I have known.”19 An early commission was 
for a Mission-style bell tower in concrete at Mills College, known as 
El Campanil (1906). Subsequent projects for the college included the 
Margaret Carnegie Library (1906) and a gymnasium (1916). Schools 
were also an important part of Morgan’s portfolio, including the 
Ming Quong Chinese Girls School (1925) in Oakland.20Gender and Discrimination 171
Churches were a typology that Morgan designed in a range of 
styles, primarily for Baptist and Presbyterian congregations. One of 
her finest works of architecture was the Saint John’s Presbyterian 
Church and Sunday School (1910) in Berkeley. Executed largely in 
wood in the California Crafts style, the design incorporates both 
horizontality and banks of vertically proportioned windows. The 
interior employs a striking use of a redwood structure that modu￾lates the light entering the space.21 Throughout her career, Morgan 
also designed numerous houses in an eclectic range of styles varying 
in size from cottages to mansions.22
Many of Morgan’s clients were influential women and women’s 
organizations. During the first decades of the 20th century, there 
was significant growth in organizations dedicated to the better￾ment of women in society; these included women’s clubs, com￾munity groups, and the progressive Young Women’s Christian 
Association (YWCA). Morgan designed most of the YWCA facili￾ties in California and the surrounding states, including centres in 
Oakland (1915), Salt Lake City (1920), Honolulu (1927), and San 
Francisco (1930).23
Morgan designed many projects for the influential Hearst fam￾ily, starting with projects for the energetic mother of William 
Randolph Hearst (1863–1951).24 A 25-year alliance between 
Morgan and Hearst, who amassed a fortune in newspapers and 
other media, began when he commissioned her to design the 
Examiner Building in Los Angeles in 1915. In 1919, Hearst first 
discussed the development of a new home on a hilltop at San 
Simeon in central California. Designing for an informed client 
inspired Morgan to integrate many references and historical ele￾ments into the enormous complex. The project, mainly completed 
by 1939, comprised 127 rooms, all supporting pieces from Hearst’s 
substantial collection of art and objects.25
Morgan’s reputation has grown in recent years. She practiced 
“academic eclecticism,” an approach widely used by American archi￾tects between the 1880s and 1930s. As Richard Longstreth writes:
Architects of this period sought to foster a gradual evolution in their art 
by drawing from a wide range of historical precedents, modifying and 
combining them according to contemporary needs. In the process, they 
rejected the nineteenth-century conception of style. They believed in an 
all-encompassing order, unconfined by traditional stylistic parameters 
and based on broad, abstract principles.26172 Gender and Discrimination
In 2014, Morgan was awarded the AIA Gold Medal posthumously, 
the first woman to receive the medal.
* * *
Several women were key figures in the development of modern 
architecture (see Chapter 12). Following the collapse of modern 
architecture in the 1960s, a younger generation of women brought 
new visions to architecture globally, of which the following are 
representative.
Lina Bo Bardi (1914–1992) and her husband emigrated to Brazil 
from Italy in 1946, where she had worked with Gio Ponti and Bruno 
Zevi. Her early Casa de Vidro (1951) in São Paulo is a carefully planned 
example of a lightweight modernist house on a sloping site.27 In 1957, 
she was commissioned to design a new facility for the São Paulo 
Museum of Art (MASP), which was completed in 1968. Adjacent 
to a park, Bardi’s iconic solution was to place the main gallery in a 
glass box lifted above a public plaza to protect views. The gallery is 
supported by a long-span reinforced concrete structure later painted 
red; below the plaza is the auditorium and support functions.28 Bardi 
was particularly interested in expressing local cultures; this is evident 
in SSEC Pompeia Leisure Center in São Paulo (1986), which involved 
the transformation of several existing factory sheds into a facility for 
leisure, recreation, and culture. Designed for a working-class com￾munity, she described her approach as an architettura povera, or a “poor 
architecture.”29 She also wrote about architecture, designed furniture, 
and worked in theatre throughout her career.30
One of the most prominent Italian architects of the post-Second 
World War II period was Gae Aulenti (1927–2012). Educated at the 
Milan Polytechnic, she graduated in 1954 and went on to a very 
diverse career in Milan, designing architecture, interiors, exhibitions, 
furniture, and stage sets. Aulenti initially worked for the Italian jour￾nals Casabella and Lotus International. Her designs tend to employ a 
strict formalism, consistent with the Italian architecture of the period. 
Her work became increasingly postmodern during her career. She 
was internationally renowned for her museum work, her most sig￾nificant project being the Musée d’Orsay (1986) in Paris, in which 
she transformed a former railway station into a set of galleries dedi￾cated to Impressionist art. Aulenti was also commissioned to design 
the National Museum of Art at the Georges Pompidou Centre in 
Paris (1985) and major museums in Barcelona, San Francisco, and 
Genoa.31Gender and Discrimination 173
In Ireland, there is a vital architectural community, primarily in 
Dublin. Grafton Architects is a partnership established in 1978 by 
Yvonne Farrell (1951–) and Shelley McNamara (1952–), named 
after a prominent street in Dublin.32 Both partners were educated 
at University College Dublin. Early projects were relatively modest 
and included Temple Bar Square (1996) and The Long House (2001) 
in Dublin. Featuring a sensitive modernist approach that integrates 
into contexts and employs a precise use of materials, these early 
projects laid the groundwork for larger international commissions. 
The breakthrough occurred when Grafton Architects won a limited 
competition to design an extension to the Economics Faculty (2008) 
at Bocconi University in Milan. A difficult programme and site 
led Grafton Architects to a daring and celebrated solution that sus￾pends numerous offices above a major auditorium and other teach￾ing spaces. Much of the building is below grade, organized around 
numerous courtyards, and clad in a unifying local stone.33 Other 
significant projects include the University Campus UTEC (2015) 
in Lima, Peru, and the Toulouse School of Economics (2019). In 
2020, the two partners were awarded the RIBA Gold Medal and the 
Pritzker Architecture Prize.
Canadian-born Alison Brooks (1962–) was educated at the 
University of Waterloo, Ontario, prior to moving to London in 1988. 
Figure 17.1 Section, Grafton Architects, Economics Faculty, Bocconi University, 
2008, Bologna, Italy. The scheme features blocks of offices and classrooms 
located over a major auditorium; light wells are carefully shaped to bring natural 
illumination into the auditorium. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.174 Gender and Discrimination
She opened the award-winning Alison Brooks Architects in 1996. 
Disenchanted with the state of housing design in Britain, she made 
innovative housing design a cornerstone of her practice. An early 
commission, the Atoll Spa Hotel (2000) in Helgoland, Germany, 
launched her reputation for careful and thoughtful design. Brooks 
has expanded into university residences, cultural buildings, and large 
housing projects. Her award-winning Newhall Be Housing scheme 
(2012) for Harlow New Town demonstrates that dense and innova￾tive housing can be produced for a developer. The design features 
townhouses and apartments that strategically use courtyards and are 
clad in black siding and beige brick.
* * *
Opportunities for women in architecture have expanded signifi￾cantly since the 1980s, with figures such as Kazuyo Sejima and Zaha 
Hadid gaining international attention (see Chapters 20 and 21) and 
many women contributing to the profession globally. Nevertheless, 
women and minorities still face significant barriers to their success in 
architecture. As Leslie Kanes Weisman reminds us:
Space, like language, is socially constructed; and like the syntax of lan￾guage, the spatial arrangements of our buildings and communities 
reflect and reinforce the nature of gender, race, and class relations in 
society. The uses of both language and space contribute to the power 
of some groups over others and the maintenance of human inequality.34
NOTES
1 See Gwendolyn Wright, “On the Fringe of the Profession: Women in 
American Architecture,” in Spiro Kostof, ed., The Architect: Chapters in the 
History of the Profession (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2000).
2 Susana Torre, “Introduction: A Parallel History,” in Susana Torre, ed., 
Women in American Architecture: A Historic and Contemporary Perspective (New 
York: Whitney Library of Design, 1977), p. 11.
3 The use of the term “exceptional” is a reference to the derogatory use of 
the word by Pietro Belluschi in a 1955 article entitled “Should You Be an 
Architect?” in which he suggests only an “exceptional girl” should attempt 
to become an architect.
4 Lynne Walker, “Women in Architecture,” in J. Attfield and P. Kirkham, eds., 
A View from the Interior: Feminism, Women and Design (London: Women’s 
Press, 1989), p. 92.
5 See Ibid., pp. 96–98.Gender and Discrimination 175
6 Mary Otis Stevens, “Struggle for Place: Women in Architecture: 1920–
1960,” in Torre, ed., Women in American Architecture, p. 90.
7 See https://www.acsa-arch.org/resource/where-are-the-women-measuring￾progress-on-gender-in-architecture-2/. Accessed February 6, 2024.
8 See Judith Paine, “Pioneer Women Architects,” in Torre, ed., Women in 
American Architecture, pp. 54–69.
9 See Carla Blank and Tania Martin, Storming the Old Boys’ Citadel: Two 
Pioneer Women Architects in Nineteenth Century North America (Montreal: 
Baraka Books, 2014), pp. 43–57.
10 See Adriana Barbasch, “Louise Blanchard Bethune, The AIA Accepts Its 
First Woman Member,” in Ellen P. Berkeley and Matilda McQuaid, eds., 
Architecture, A Place for Women (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution 
Press, 1989), pp. 15–25.
11 Matilda McQuaid, “Educating for the Future: A Growing Archive on 
Women in Architecture,” in Berkeley and McQuaid, eds., Architecture, A 
Place for Women, p. 254. See also Arnold Berke, Mary Colter, Architect of the 
Southwest (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2002).
12 See Doris Cole, “Eleanor Raymond,” in Torre, ed., Women in American 
Architecture, pp. 103–107.
13 See Sarah Allaback, The First American Women Architects (Chicago: University 
of Illinois Press, 2008), pp. 193–204.
14 See K.H. Anthony and S. Dave, “Leaving a Lasting Legacy: Beverly Willis: 
Groundbreaking Architect, Artist, Designer, Filmmaker, and Philanthropist,” 
in Anna Sokolina, ed., The Routledge Companion to Women in Architecture
(Milton: Taylor & Francis, 2021), pp. 357–369.
15 See Lamia Doumato, “Louisa Tuthill’s Unique Achievement: First History 
of Architecture in the U.S.,” in Berkeley and McQuaid, eds., Architecture, A 
Place for Women, pp. 5–13.
16 See Lisa Koenigsberg, “Mariana Van Rensselaer, An Architecture Critic in 
Context,” in Berkeley and McQuaid, eds., Architecture, A Place for Women, 
pp. 41–54.
17 See Suzanne Stephens, “Obituary: Ada Louise Huxtable, 1921–2013,” 
Architectural Record (January 18, 2013), https://www.architecturalrecord.
com/articles/2780-obituary-ada-louise-huxtable-1921-2013. Accessed 
December 8, 2021.
18 See Sara Holmes Boutelle, Julia Morgan, Architect (New York: Abbeville 
Press, 1995), pp. 7–39.
19 Walter Steilberg, quoted in Ibid., p. 45.
20 See Ibid., pp. 51–66.
21 See Ibid., pp. 69–75.
22 See Ibid., pp. 129–166.
23 See Ibid., pp. 83–95.
24 See Ibid., pp. 169–173.
25 See Ibid., pp. 174–215.176 Gender and Discrimination
26 Richard Longstreth, On the Edge of the World: Four Architects in San Francisco 
at the Turn of the Century (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1983), p. 9.
27 See Luis E. Carranza and Fernando Luiz Lara, Modern Architecture in Latin 
America: Art, Technology, and Utopia (Austin: University of Texas Press, 
2014), pp. 160–161.
28 See Ibid., pp. 208–209.
29 Lina Bo Bardi, “The Architectural Project,” in Ibid., p. 98.
30 See Zeuler R.M. de A. Lima, Lina Bo Bardi (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2013).
31 See Margherita Petranzan, Gae Aulenti (New York: Universe, 2002).
32 See Robert McCarter, Grafton Architects (London: Phaidon, 2018).
33 Yvonne Farrell and Shelley McNamara, “In Dialogue with Gravity,” in 
Grafton Architects, ed., Dialogue and Translation (New York: GSAPP Books, 
2014).
34 Leslie Kanes Weisman, Discrimination by Design: A Feminist Critique of the 
Man-Made Environment (Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 
1994), p. 2.
SUGGESTED READING
Berkeley, Ellen P. and Matilda McQuaid, eds. Architecture: A Place for Women. 
Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989.
Rendell, Jane, Barbara Penner, and Iain Borden, eds. Gender Space Architecture: 
An Interdisciplinary Introduction. London: Routledge, 2000.
Sokolina, Anna, ed. The Routledge Companion to Women in Architecture. Milton: 
Taylor & Francis, 2021.
Spain, Daphne. Gendered Spaces. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina 
Press, 1992.
Torre, Susana, ed. Women in Architecture: A Historic and Contemporary Perspective. 
New York: Whitney Library of Design, 1977.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-18
In the 1950s and 1960s, several movements arose that challenged 
the orthodoxy of modern architecture. Many of these advocated for 
contextualism and a renewed connection to the history of architec￾ture. These movements can be described as postmodernist because 
they are consistent with the tendencies of the period (see Chapter 1). 
An important essay, “Nine Points on Monumentality,” published in 
1943 by Josep Lluís Sert, Fernand Léger, and Siegfried Giedion, sug￾gested the possibility of including monumentality in modern archi￾tecture, something that had been missing. Further, the Torre Velasca 
(1960) in Milan, Italy, by Belgiojoso, Perressutti, and Rogers, with 
its overt references to medieval architecture, generated debates at the 
time as to how history should be interpreted. Discussing the limita￾tions of modern architecture, the Italian architect and historian Paolo 
Portoghesi writes:
[T]he Modern Movement, beginning in the twenties, tended to translate 
into a set of constraining rules, into a real orthodoxy, three fundamen￾tal dogmas: the functionalist analysis as a starting point for architectural 
research; the annihilation of the traditional grammar of architecture with all 
its differences corresponding to places and civilizations; the identification 
between architectural progress and the use of new technologies understood 
as potential generators of language.1
The modern architecture that emerged in the 1920s and 1930s 
proved to be relatively short-lived, as disillusionment with the new 
architecture set in after World War II. This history is evident in the 
HISTORY AND ORDER
18178 History and Order
meetings held by the Congrès Internationaux d’Architecture Moderne
(CIAM), which was established in 1928 by a group of prominent 
modern architects led by Le Corbusier. During the tenth CIAM 
meeting, held in 1956 in Dubrovnik, a younger group emerged, 
announcing themselves as Team 10 (CIAM officially ended in 1959 
at the eleventh meeting in Otterloo, Holland). The younger genera￾tion considered modern architecture to be stark and repetitive and 
the modernist vision of the city was too restrictive (see Chapter 7). 
Team 10 was an evolving group which proposed a new approach to 
architecture and urbanism. The group disbanded in 1981.
The key members of Team 10 were Alison (1928–1993) and 
Peter (1923–2003) Smithson, Aldo van Eyck (1918–1999), Jacob B. 
Bakema (1914–1981), Georges Candilis (1913–1995), Giancarlo De 
Carlo (1919–2005), and Shadrach Woods (1923–1973). They were 
joined by an international group of like-minded architects who were 
experimenting with new approaches to urban form and architectural 
expression. Against the universal utopianism of modernism, Team 10 
emphasized local and regional contexts, including the “a profound 
interest in the historical and social dimensions of architecture and 
urbanism.”2
The Smithsons had established themselves as leaders of the New 
Brutalist group in Britain. They placed an emphasis on straightfor￾ward building assemblies such as those used in their Hunstanton 
School (1954) in Norfolk, England. This project was inspired by 
Mies van der Rohe’s Illinois Institute of Technology campus (1939–
1958) in Chicago. The Smithsons wrote and theorized a great deal, 
and they designed a small number of provocative buildings. The 
Robin Hood Gardens housing complex (1972) in London is a con￾troversial example of their thinking about mass housing.
A diverse group that generally lacked a central thesis, Team 10 
nevertheless produced some of the most compelling architecture of 
the 1960s. Interested in developing more community-responsive 
projects, Team 10 members were involved in the study of traditional 
settlements. They devised an idea of the city that unified the house, 
the street, the district, and the city. Noteworthy projects included the 
contextual Economist Building (1964) in London by the Smithsons; 
the Collegio del Colle student accommodations (1966) integrated 
into Urbino, Italy by Giancarlo De Carlo; the Free University (1973) 
in Berlin by Candilis-Josic-Woods (with Manfred Schiedhelm) 
that employed a mat-plan;3
 and the Byker housing estate (1981) in 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England by Ralph Erskine which involved History and Order 179
extensive community consultation. The Team 10 Primer, initially 
published in an architecture journal in 1962, was edited by Alison 
Smithson and subsequently republished in 1968 as a book. The 
document was a collection of texts and projects by the group that 
expounded on the role of the architect, the infrastructure of the city, 
and the arrangement of dwellings.4
The Dutch members of Team 10 were particularly active. Aldo van 
Eyck established himself in the late 1940s when he began a project 
to design hundreds of playgrounds for the city of Amsterdam (1947–
1978). Later, using his interests in children’s play, community, and 
the building as a city, he designed the Municipal Orphanage (1960) 
in Amsterdam based on a repeating structural and spatial system.5
This led to his architecture being labelled “structuralist.” The same 
label applies to works by Herman Hertzberger (1932–), including 
his Centraal Beheer corporate offices (1972) in Apeldoorn, Holland, 
which treated the building like a small city.
The emergence of Team 10 coincided with the appearance of 
Brutalism, somewhat different from British New Brutalism, as a post￾war phenomenon. Brutalism was initially linked to Le Corbusier 
and his Unité d’Habitation housing scheme (1954) in Marseilles, 
in which he “abandoned the pre-war fiction that reinforced con￾crete was a precise, ‘machine-age’ material.”6
 This building triggered 
a wave of imitators, built of rough cast-in-place concrete (béton brut) 
and employing bold forms. Most of Le Corbusier’s post-war pro￾jects were Brutalist in their execution (see Chapter 10). In the 1950s 
and 1960s, Brutalism was a widely practiced style evident in projects 
such as Atelier 5’s Siedlung Halen housing project (1961) in Berne, 
Switzerland, and Boston City Hall (1968) by Kallmann McKinnell 
and Knowles. Reyner Banham defines Brutalism as:
1. the building as a unified visual image, clear and memorable,
2. clear exhibition of its structure,
3. a high valuation of raw, untreated materials.7
Ultimately, Brutalist architecture was not well-received by the pub￾lic, and its influence waned.
A peripheral member of Team 10 was the Scottish-born architect 
James Stirling (1926–1992), who began his career as an admirer of Le 
Corbusier. Stirling established a partnership (1956–1963) with James 
Gowan (1923–2015). The firm produced a number of New Brutalist 
designs, including the Ham Common housing project (1958) in 180 History and Order
London. During the early 1960s, Stirling drew inspiration from a 
wide range of historical sources, including Russian Constructivism. 
This influence is reflected in the highly sophisticated Leicester 
University Engineering Building (1963), with its dramatic forms 
expressing various functions. The material palette is brick, tile, and 
glass. Stirling, a complex and enigmatic architect, steadily evolved his 
design approach. After a brief foray into High Tech architecture, he 
became a leading proponent of postmodernism. In the mid-1970s, 
Stirling executed a series of designs for museums in Germany, cul￾minating in his winning entry for the Neue Staatsgalerie (1984) in 
Stuttgart. This building, an eclectic and playful assemblage of ele￾ments and references, is still seen as a leading example of postmodern 
contextualism.8
* * *
Louis I. Kahn (1901–1974), the Estonian-born Jewish-American 
architect, was a pivotal figure in the transformation of 20th-century 
architecture away from modernism. Trained at the University of 
Pennsylvania during the 1920s in the Beaux-Arts style, Kahn pur￾sued his career in Philadelphia. In the 1930s and 1940s, he worked in 
partnership with various Philadelphia architects, mainly on modern￾ist housing projects. Finally, in 1947, he established his own office.9
It was at this time that Kahn became disillusioned with orthodox 
modernism and began a search for a new “monumentalism.” During 
a short stint at the American Academy in Rome in 1950–1951, 
he had the opportunity to study the ruins of Roman, Greek, and 
Egyptian architecture. This experience had a dramatic impact on 
his subsequent architectural designs. Architectural historian Vincent 
Scully argues that Kahn, in his mature work, was returning to the 
19th century to start modern architecture over again, to give it more 
weight, more order, and more mystery.10
In his essay entitled “Monumentality,” published in 1944, Kahn 
writes, “monumentality in architecture may be defined as a quality, a 
spiritual quality inherent in a structure which conveys the feeling of 
its eternity, that it cannot be added to or changed.”11 The search for a 
monumental architecture preoccupied Kahn for the rest of his career. 
His architecture would be of mass and light, built primarily of brick 
and concrete, based on an order informed by his Beaux-Arts training 
and passion for Roman architecture. Despite this, his buildings were 
not nostalgic, traditional, or authoritarian in their execution.History and Order 181
Beginning in the 1950s, Kahn brought a refreshing sense of 
order to his mature architecture. His first major building, the Yale 
University Art Gallery addition (1953), is described by Reyner 
Banham as a key work of Brutalism.12 The distinctive geometrical 
order in Kahn’s work was in part inspired by the input of his asso￾ciate Anne Griswold Tyng (1920–2011), who joined his office in 
1945. Tyng was a pioneering woman in American architecture (see 
Chapter 17); she worked with Kahn until 1964.
Following the completion of the Yale Art Gallery, the Jewish 
Community Center (1959) near Trenton, New Jersey, established 
Kahn’s use of “compartmented” space and his concept of “served” 
and “servant” spaces.13 This success was followed by the Richards 
Medical Research Building (1965) at the University of Pennsylvania. 
The design features glazed laboratories spanning between brick￾clad service towers. As Kahn’s work became more refined, his exte￾rior walls became thicker and openings more distinctive. The First 
Unitarian Church and School (1969) in Rochester, New York, 
was his first church and consolidated his new approach to mass and 
light.14 At this point, by “reconnecting architecture with the funda￾mentals of history, he revitalized its primary forms and principles, 
and he awakened an entire generation of architects who followed.”15
With his reputation secure, Kahn produced several significant 
commissions through the 1960s until his premature death in 1974. 
Several projects stand out: the Salk Institute for Biological Studies 
(1965) in La Jolla, California; the National Assembly Building (1983) 
in Dhaka, Bangladesh; the Phillips Exeter Academy Library (1972) 
in New Hampshire; the Kimbell Art Museum (1972) in Fort Worth, 
Texas; and the Yale Center for British Art (1974). The Salk Institute 
was commissioned by medical pioneer Jonas Salk (1914–1995) as a 
research centre. Here, Kahn organized open laboratories and offices 
around a tranquil courtyard overlooking the Pacific Ocean. The 
Kimbell Art Museum was designed with a repeating concrete vault 
that allowed the controlled entry of light into the gallery spaces. 
The building itself is surrounded by a generous greenspace. The Yale 
Center for British Art was Kahn’s last major project, one that allowed 
him to refine his ideas about the display and viewing of art in top-lit 
rooms in an urban building at the heart of the Yale campus.
Importantly, Kahn was a teacher and source of inspiration for a 
younger generation of architects, including the Team 10 group, who 
became the leaders of the postmodern movement.16 He also inspired 182 History and Order
others through short statements that poetically described his vision 
of architecture.17
* * *
A movement consistent with postmodernism, and the celebration 
of pluralism and diverse approaches, involved a group of architects 
in the United States, including Robert Venturi (1925–2018), Denise 
Scott Brown (1931–), Charles Moore (1925–1993), Michael Graves 
(1934–2015), and Robert A.M. Stern (1939–). They each proposed 
an architecture informed by history and the appreciation of popular 
culture. The work of American postmodernist architects would have 
links to similar architects in Europe and elsewhere, who often eclec￾tically borrowed from the history of architecture. The emergence of 
Pop Art in England and America at the same time, with artists like 
Andy Warhol (1928–1987) and Roy Lichtenstein (1923–1997), was 
no coincidence.18 Pop Art in the 1960s derived much of its imagery 
from popular culture and advertising.
Arguably, the most influential postmodernists were Robert 
Venturi and Denise Scott Brown, who operated a practice together 
for many years and were married. Venturi briefly worked for and 
taught with Kahn. Venturi outlines his ideas in his book Complexity 
and Contradiction in Architecture, published in 1966. It is an articulate 
challenge to modern architecture and one of the most important 
20th-century books on architecture. In formulating his argument, 
Venturi acknowledged the influence of Scott Brown, Vincent Scully, 
and Robert Stern, among others.
In the text, Venturi’s admiration for certain architects is evident in 
the many images he uses to support his arguments, including works 
by Michelangelo, Francesco Borromini, John Soane, Frank Furness, 
Edwin Lutyens, and Alvar Aalto. Venturi emphasizes the articulation 
of the visual languages, along with the notion of “meaning,” in archi￾tecture. He praises concepts such as ambiguity, “both-and,” contra￾diction, complexity, the double-functioning element, the inside and 
the outside, the obligation to the difficult whole, and many others. 
In the opening section entitled “Nonstraightforward Architecture: A 
Gentle Manifesto,” he writes:
Architects can no longer afford to be intimidated by the puritanically 
moral language of orthodox Modern architecture. I like elements which 
are hybrid rather than “pure,” compromising rather than “clean,” dis￾torted rather than “straightforward,” ambiguous rather than “articulated,” History and Order 183
perverse as well as impersonal, boring as well as “interesting,” conven￾tional rather than “designed,” accommodating rather than excluding, 
redundant rather than simple, vestigial as well as innovating, inconsist￾ent and equivocal rather than direct and clear. I am for messy vitality over 
obvious unity.19
Venturi’s theories are well-illustrated in his famous early house for 
his mother, the Vanna Venturi residence (1962) in Chestnut Hill, 
Pennsylvania, which plays with and modifies conventional ideas 
about the American house. In partnership with John Rauch and 
Scott Brown, Venturi had a successful career as a practicing archi￾tect and continued to write, teach, and lecture. Various projects 
can be singled out as a testimony to the ideas of the firm, includ￾ing Gordon Wu Hall (1983) at Princeton University. Together, 
Venturi and Scott Brown demonstrated a fascination with popular 
culture and how buildings can be read as symbolic and linguistic 
statements.20
Charles Moore was an influential architect, educator, and writer 
who emerged in the 1960s as an important advocate for postmodern 
Figure 18.1 Main Elevation, Robert Venturi, Vanna Venturi House, 1962, 
Chestnut Hill, Pennsylvania, USA. The simple house-like façade is broken in 
the middle by the entrance and slot above; Mannerist elements include an over￾sized window to the left, a strip window to the right, and an arch motif in the 
middle. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.184 History and Order
architecture and the concept of place-making. His early projects 
demonstrate some influence by Kahn (under whom he studied at 
Princeton University) and an interest in vernacular architecture. 
His most important early project was the well-known Sea Ranch 
Condominium in northern California (1965) by Moore, Lyndon, 
Turnbull, and Whitaker (MLTW). Subsequently, Moore’s work 
became more postmodern, often engaging in interpretations of archi￾tectural history and popular culture. This is explicit in the notorious 
Piazza d’Italia project (1975) in New Orleans, with its whimsical use 
of a classical language outlined in neon lights and bright colours. 
Moore’s legacy rests primarily on his many houses and thoughtful 
books such as The Place of Houses.
21
Michael Graves was a Princeton-based architect who began his 
career with the New York Five, a group of New York architects 
devoted to the works of Le Corbusier. The informal association 
included Richard Meier, John Hejduk, Charles Gwathmey, and Peter 
Eisenman.22 Graves’s early projects, such as the Hanselman House 
(1967) in Fort Wayne, Indiana, demonstrated his affiliation with Le 
Corbusier. However, by the mid-1970s, he embraced a new attitude 
to classical architecture supported by his distinctive drawing style. 
Arguing for a return to “figurative” or poetic23 architecture, Graves 
introduced a new formality into his planning and an exaggerated 
approach to classical elements. In 1980, his design for The Portland 
Building in Portland, Oregon, an ordinary office building clothed 
in Grave’s idiosyncratic architectural language, had a controversial 
impact on the world of architecture. His most successful project 
remains the Public Library (1980) in San Juan Capistrano, California, 
which presents a convincing interpretation of the California Mission 
Style.
By the 1980s, disillusionment with the often superficial and gim￾micky designs of many postmodernists effectively ended the interest 
in strong connections with history.
* * *
The American critic and historian Charles Jencks (1939–2019) 
championed postmodern architecture in his book The Language of 
Postmodern Architecture (1977). In the sixth edition of the book (1991), 
Jencks identifies his key categories of postmodern architecture:
The characteristics of the Post-Modern come from an attempt to cut 
across the spectrum of tastes with a variety of styles: thus it seeks a radical History and Order 185
eclecticism, or a multiple-coding, as well as the double logic I have already 
mentioned . . . as well as the other key definers: historicism, contextualism, 
the new complex post-modern space, metaphor and abstract representation. 
The motives extend beyond this to the search for a relevant ornament, a 
contextual symbolism, an anthropomorphism – in short, to the search for a 
suitable content to represent.24
NOTES
1 Paolo Portoghesi, “What Is Postmodern?” in Postmodern: The Architecture of 
the Postindustrial Society (New York: Rizzoli, 1983), p. 32.
2 Dirk van den Heuvel and Max Risselada, “Introduction: Looking into the 
Mirror of Team 10,” in Dirk van den Heuvel and Max Risselada, eds., Team 
10, in Search of a Utopia of the Present (Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2005), 
p. 13.
3 See Alison Smithson, “How to Recognize and Read Mat-Building: 
Mainstream Architecture as It Has Developed Towards the Mat-Building,” 
Architectural Design, no. 9 (September 1974), pp. 573–590.
4 See Alison Smithson, ed., Team 10 Primer (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1974).
5 See Liane Lefaivre and Alexander Tzonis, Aldo van Eyck: Humanist Rebel
(Rotterdam: 010 Publishers, 1999).
6 Reyner Banham, The New Brutalism: Ethic or Aesthetic? (New York: Reinhold 
Publishing, 1966), p. 16.
7 Ibid., p. 127.
8 See John Summerson, “Vitruvius Ludens,” Architectural Review, vol. 173 
(March 1983), pp. 18–21. See also Peter Arnell and Ted Bickford, James 
Stirling: Buildings and Projects (New York: Rizzoli, 1984).
9 See David B. Brownlee and David G. De Long, Louis I. Kahn: In the Realm 
of Architecture (New York: Rizzoli, 1991), pp. 20–49.
10 Vincent Scully, “Introduction,” in Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 
p. 13.
11 Louis Kahn, “Monumentality,” in Paul Zucker, ed., New Architecture and City 
Planning: A Symposium (New York: Philosophical Library, 1944), p. 577.
12 Banham, The New Brutalism, p. 44.
13 Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, p. 58.
14 See Ibid., pp. 65–68.
15 Ibid., p. 71.
16 See Scully, “Introduction,” in Brownlee and De Long, Louis I. Kahn, 
pp. 12–14.
17 See Richard Saul Wurman, ed., What Will Be Has Always Been: The Words 
of Louis I. Kahn (New York: Rizzoli, 1986).
18 See Lucy C. Lippard, ed., Pop Art (New York: Frederick A. Praeger Inc., 
1966).186 History and Order
19 Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York: 
Museum of Modern Art, 1977), p. 16.
20 See Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour, Learning from 
Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1977).
21 See Charles Moore, Gerald Allen, and Donlyn Lyndon, The Place of Houses
(New York: Holt, Reinhart and Winston, 1974).
22 See Five Architects: Eisenman, Graves, Gwathmey, Hejduk, Meier (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1975).
23 See Michael Graves, “A Case for Figurative Architecture,” in Karen Vogel 
Wheeler, Peter Arnell, and Ted Bickford, eds., Michael Graves: Buildings and 
Projects, 1966–1981 (New York: Rizzoli, 1982), pp. 11–13.
24 Charles Jencks, The Language of Postmodern Architecture (New York: Rizzoli, 
1991), p. 13.
SUGGESTED READING
Banham, Reyner. The New Brutalism: Ethic or Aesthetic? New York: Reinhold 
Publishing, 1966.
Ghirardo, Diane. Design After Modernism. New York: Thames and Hudson, 
1996.
Heuvel, Dirk van den and Max Risselada, eds. Team 10, in Search of a Utopia of 
the Present. Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2005.
Jencks, Charles. The Language of Post-Modern Architecture. New York: Rizzoli, 
1991.
Venturi, Robert. Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture. New York: Museum 
of Modern Art, 1966.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-19
As architectural theorist Liane Lefaivre demonstrates, “regionalism” 
has been an undercurrent in modern architecture since its incep￾tion in the 1920s. It gained strength after World War II. Prior to 
this, the concept of regionalism can be found in the Arts and Crafts 
movement (see Chapter 8) and the work of Frank Lloyd Wright (see 
Chapter 10). Lefaivre notes that the Museum of Modern Art in New 
York, which opened in 1929, showed regionally themed exhibi￾tions throughout its early history despite also advocating fiercely for 
modernism. She emphasizes the ideas of the prominent American 
writer Lewis Mumford (1895–1990), who promoted the virtues of 
regionalist designers in an article in 1947.1
 Lefaivre acknowledges 
that it was Mumford who developed the concept that “regionalism 
becomes a constant process of negotiation between the local and 
the global on the many different issues that traditionally make up 
regionalism.”2
Lefaivre and architectural theoretician Alexander Tzonis coined 
the term “critical regionalism” in an important 1981 essay entitled 
“The Grid and the Pathway.” In it, they examine designs by the Greek 
architects Dmitri Pikionis and Dimitris and Suzana Antonakakis. 
They take a long view of regionalism, invoking such traditions as the 
English Picturesque movement of the 18th century and the concept 
of genius loci or the “genius of the place” (see Chapter 3).3
 The will￾ingness to be self-critical results in a “critical” regionalism, with an 
emphasis on community and multi-culturalism rather than national￾ism and parochialism.
REGIONALISM AND TECTONICS
19188 Regionalism and Tectonics
The concept of critical regionalism was then elaborated upon by 
the historian and theoretician Kenneth Frampton in his influential 
text “Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six Points for an Architecture 
of Resistance,” published in 1983. Invoking the theories of philoso￾phers Martin Heidegger, Hannah Arendt, and Paul Ricoeur, he gives 
the concept a phenomenological interpretation (see Chapter 21). 
Frampton argues that there has been a “victory of universal civiliza￾tion over locally inflected culture.”4
 He notes the rise of universalism 
(or globalization), placelessness, technology, commodification, and 
the populism of the postmodern era. Frampton argues that a criti￾cally regional architecture would avoid the modernist obsession with 
progress, focusing instead on the “tectonic . . . as a potential means 
for distilling play between material, craftwork and gravity.”5
 Later, in 
a refinement of his argument, Frampton developed seven tenets that 
define critical regionalism as operating in the margins, being care￾fully bounded and sited, focused on tectonics, tactile, as opposed to 
a “sentimental” vernacular, and attempting to “escape the optimiz￾ing thrust of universal civilization.”6
 In the 1990s, Frampton made 
a strong case for a tectonic approach to architecture in his book 
Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics of Construction in Nineteenth and 
Twentieth Century Architecture (1995).
The rise of thoughtful regionalism in architecture was one response 
to the failings of the International Style (see Chapter 12). Attacks on 
the International Style often focused on the United Nations Building 
(1952) in New York, which was designed by an international team 
of architects including Le Corbusier, Oscar Niemeyer, and Wallace 
Harrison.
* * *
The northern European countries (Denmark, Norway, Sweden, 
and Finland) have had a strong history of architecture and design 
throughout the 20th century. Traditions that have become known as 
National Romanticism and Nordic Classicism dominated the region 
during the early part of the century. Several important architects 
emerged from these movements, including Erik Gunnar Aspund 
(1885–1940) and Sigurd Lewerentz (1885–1975) in Sweden and 
Alvar Aalto (1898–1976) in Finland.
Aalto was one of the dominant figures of modern architecture, 
famous for his buildings rooted in Finnish landscapes and cit￾ies. The Norwegian architectural theorist and historian Christian Regionalism and Tectonics 189
Norberg-Schulz (1926–2000) has described northern European 
landscapes, in contrast to those in southern Europe, in the following 
terms:
[I]n the North, the sun does not rise to the zenith but grazes things 
obliquely and dissolves in an interplay of light and shadow. The land 
consists not of clear massings and distinct spaces; it disperses as frag￾ment and repetition in the boundless. The vegetation is not character￾ized by particular species . . . but is instead network and thicket. And 
buildings lose much of their figural effect; houses lie scattered and 
hidden.7
The characteristics of climate and landscape that Norberg-Schulz 
describes defined Aalto’s architecture, even though Aalto also had a 
deep fondness for Mediterranean environments.
Aalto was born in Jyväskylä in central Finland and studied archi￾tecture in Helsinki, graduating in 1921. Two years later, he opened 
an office in his hometown. He married Aino Marsio (1894–1949), 
an assistant in his office, the following year. She was his partner in 
life and in architecture until her early death. In 1952, he married 
another architect, Elsa Kaisa Mäkiniemi (1922–1994), who was also 
key to the success of his practice.
Following his early career in the classicist tradition, Aalto made a 
radical change in direction when he designed several projects in the 
late 1920s, including the Paimio Sanitorium (1933) for tuberculosis 
patients; Aalto functionally organized the building into several wings 
(including sun-terraces) and provided thoughtful details throughout. 
The Paimio project was widely considered a prime example of the 
new International Style.8
 Another important early project was the 
Viipuri Public Library (1935) which balanced classicism, functional￾ism, and Aalto’s emerging personal style.
During the 1930s, the Aaltos moved their practice to Helsinki 
and established the Artek company to manufacture furniture and 
other works of industrial design. Aalto’s mastery of wood in both 
his architectural projects and furniture designs is an outgrowth of his 
Finnish background. His mature work is characterized by a distinc￾tive approach to form that played rational elements against expressive 
ones. Also, in the 1930s, Aalto designed important projects such as 
the Villa Mairea at Noormarkku (1941), which is one of the great 
modernist villas of the period. An exceptionally complex project 
that draws from Finnish vernacular traditions and modernism, the 
L-shaped house is organized around an outdoor space containing a 190 Regionalism and Tectonics
Figure 19.1 Courtyard Level Plan, Alvar Aalto, Town Hall, 1952, Säynätsalo, 
Finland. The design is organized by an elevated courtyard accessed by two major 
stairs; around the courtyard are apartments (bottom), administrative offices (left 
and top), and library block (right). Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.Regionalism and Tectonics 191
swimming pool. Juhani Pallasmaa, the noted Finnish architect and 
theorist, describes it:
The Mairea presents the entire spectrum of Aalto’s image play. The house 
is a combination of different volumes that appear to have grown around 
the courtyard through time. Scenes of deliberate artistic intention are jux￾taposed with items that appear as products of timeless traditions. The 
wealth of materials and formal variations tends to break the whole into 
independent episodes.9
After World War II, with his international reputation consolidated 
as one of the “masters” of modern architecture, Aalto designed build￾ings such as the Säynätsalo Town Hall (1952), the National Pensions 
Institute (1956) in Helsinki, the Seinäjoki town centre (1958–1987), 
and the Church of the Three Crosses (1959) in Vuokkseniska, Imatra. 
Although he was an architect intimately linked to a Nordic region, 
Aalto had a wide-ranging impact on architects around the world.
* * *
After World War II a new generation of Italian architects came 
to the fore, following hard on the heels of the Italian rationalists of 
the Fascist era. These include Pier Luigi Nervi (1891–1979), Gio 
Ponti (1891–1979), Luigi Moretti (1907–1973), and Ernesto Rogers 
(1909–1969). Although Carlo Scarpa (1906–1973) stood outside 
the main developments in Italian architecture during this period, he 
would eventually receive much international attention. In the 1960s, 
a younger generation, including Aldo Rossi, Giorgio Grassi, Vittorio 
Gregotti, and Carlo Aymonino, put forth an agenda to restore con￾nections to the history of the European city (see Chapter 5).10
Scarpa depended upon surviving craft traditions that allowed him 
to execute a unique body of work. Despite the influences of Frank 
Lloyd Wright, Josef Hoffmann, Piet Mondrian, and Japanese design, 
Scarpa was first and foremost an architect of the Veneto region of 
Italy. Scarpa was born in Venice and studied at the Royal Academy 
of Fine Arts for six years. He did not formally study architecture, 
nor did he ever become licensed. He began his working career in 
the mid-1920s, and throughout his life he taught at the Instituto 
Universitario di Architettura, Venezia (or the School of Architecture 
at the University of Venice). His distinctive approach to architecture 
started in the 1950s, with works such as the Venice Biennale ticket 
office (1952).11192 Regionalism and Tectonics
Scarpa is known for his heavily layered pencil drawings that record 
his labourious and iterative design process. These drawings rarely 
employed perspective, instead relying on orthographic methods. His 
drawings guided the design development and the eventual construc￾tion process. Scarpa also worked closely with builders. He employed 
a wide range of materials, often in unusual ways. He is known for his 
tectonic language and the “celebration of the joint,” as architectural 
historian Kurt W. Forster writes:
If one were to single out an aspect of Scarpa’s architecture that more than 
any other reveals the defining trait, it would have to be the edge, the bor￾der, the outermost limit. Be it merely the edge of a slab, the dividing lines 
among floor boards, the corner of a room, the gap between steps, or the 
narrow slot separating two different materials, Scarpa never overlooked 
the precariousness of the gap or underestimated the threat of an abyss 
opening within it.12
The renovation of the Castelvecchio Museum in Verona (1975) 
was one of the crowning achievements of Scarpa’s career. It is an 
exemplary example of working with the existing fabric of a build￾ing to permit new uses. The site is a medieval castle situated on 
the Adige River adjacent to a historic bridge. Scarpa both removed 
and added layers to establish a remarkable coherence throughout 
the complex. He meticulously installed each artefact, subtly under￾scoring the interface between historic and modern architecture and 
between construction details and large urban gestures. He carried 
this out with “surgical” precision.13 The later Banco Popolare di 
Verona (1981) project involved a sizable addition to an existing bank 
headquarters and its sensitive integration into the urban fabric of 
Verona.
Scarpa designed several relatively small interventions in the city of 
Venice, including the Olivetti Showroom (1958) and the Querini￾Stampalia Foundation (1963). The second of these involved the 
transformation of the ground floor and courtyard of a 16th-century 
Venetian palace. Accessed by a small bridge designed by Scarpa, the 
interiors account for the periodic flooding typical of Venice. Scarpa 
choreographed movement towards the courtyard that he designed as 
a garden.
The Brion Family Cemetery (1978) in the small town of San Vito 
d’Altivole was designed for a prominent couple involved in the elec￾tronics industry as both a private tomb and a public place on the edge 
of a small town. A veritable “city to the dead,” the walled L-shaped Regionalism and Tectonics 193
compound includes the tomb, a chapel, a meditation pavilion, a 
shrine, a garden, and two reflecting pools. Here, one of Scarpa’s 
favourite devices, a stepped ziggurat motif, is used throughout the 
project to unite the disparate parts of the scheme. Two canted tombs 
for the clients are covered by an arched form and act as a hinge in 
the overall composition. The main reflecting pool and associated 
structures create a place for contemplation.
As architect George Ranalli points out, it was Louis I. Kahn and 
Scarpa who, in the late 1950s, forged a new approach to architecture, 
distinct from the prevailing modernism. Ranalli argues that they 
established “a dialogue with the history of architecture, entering a 
new realm of thinking about interventions into the historic fabric, 
and returning to the idea of craft, construction method, and on-site 
invention as the ultimate creative acts in architecture.”14 Working 
closely with skilled craftsmen, Scarpa’s projects tend to contain con￾centrated moments within a relatively casual spatial order.15
* * *
The development of modern architecture in Australia after 1945 
occurred due to both external forces and regional approaches that 
emerged in the major cities. An important architectural event in 
Australia occurred in 1957 when the Danish architect Jørn Utzon 
won an international competition to design the Sydney Opera 
House. The result is an iconic building that opened in 1973. Initially, 
Melbourne was the cradle of modernism in Australia, but impetus 
soon shifted to Sydney, where work by Sydney Ancher (1904–1979), 
Harry Seidler (1923–2006), and Philip Cox (1939–) garnered atten￾tion. John Andrews (1933–2022) first made his reputation in Canada 
and the United States before returning to Sydney in the 1970s, where 
he executed a series of important commissions. Richard Leplastrier 
(1939–) and Glenn Murcutt (1936–) emerged in the late 1960s as 
Sydney-based regional modernists. Subsequently, regionalist firms 
developed elsewhere in the country.16
Glenn Murcutt, the award-winning architect, is internationally 
renowned for his carefully executed projects that address the chal￾lenges of climate and context. He studied architecture at the Sydney 
Technical College and worked for various Sydney firms before setting 
up his own small office in 1969. Because of his unusual dedication 
to working alone and using traditional design methods, most of his 
projects are small-scale, either houses or modest institutional works.194 Regionalism and Tectonics
Growing up in Sydney, Murcutt was exposed to the early mod￾ernist architecture in the region, much of it inspired by Mies van 
der Rohe, the Case Study houses in Los Angeles, and the Maison 
de Verre in Paris. Murcutt’s early work is clearly derived from these 
sources; however, eventually, he became interested in local agricul￾tural structures and Australian indigenous cultures. Murcutt’s mature 
work is distinguished by the clarity of the planning and the precision 
in the way that structure and materials are handled.17
The Marie Short house (1980) at Kempsey, New South Wales, 
was an important “turning point” in Murcutt’s work. The open 
rural site inspired the use of a curved roof, verandahs, tim￾ber structure and detailing, louvred glass openings, corrugated 
metal, and exposed service elements. An emerging regionalism 
in his architecture interpreted vernacular building methods and 
responded carefully to site factors. Agricultural buildings that 
were unpretentious and precise in the way they were constructed 
were particularly important. Murcutt’s use of corrugated metal as 
a lightweight and durable cladding material is a distinctive aspect 
of his architecture. Drawing from the functional aspects of com￾mon buildings, he became adept at siting his buildings to take 
advantage of the environment.18 As architect Françoise Fromonot 
writes, “He developed what might be termed a logical reinvention
of tradition .  .  . Murcutt does not see vernacular architecture 
in terms of a tradition to be copied, but as a manifestation of 
knowledge acquired through experience which is worth medi￾tating upon, maintaining and renewing.”19 In the early 1980s, 
Murcutt became more aware of Australian indigenous cultures 
and has attempted to adapt some of their teachings to his own 
work, to produce a “light touch” on the landscape. The move￾ment and catching of air, inspired in part by his longstanding 
interest in sailing and flying, has been an important aspect of 
his architectural expression; the same commitment applies to the 
handling of water and light.20
Designed typically for clients from Sydney, Murcutt’s houses are 
often vacation homes sited in dramatic landscapes. The Magney 
House (1984) at Bingie Point, New South Wales, is located on 
a site with dramatic ocean views. The plan employs a series of 
rooms arranged enfilade. The section reveals an unusually responsive 
approach to air movements and allows for the collection of rainwa￾ter. The Simpson-Lee House (1994) at Mount Wilson, New South 
Wales, is located on a wooded site. Two pavilions are separated by a Regionalism and Tectonics 195
reflecting pool. The slight offset in the plan was driven by the client’s 
demand that Murcutt refine his approach to environmental factors. 
The Marika-Alderton House (1994) in the Yirrkala Community in 
the Northern Territory was designed for an indigenous artist and her 
husband. The steel and timber building was prefabricated in Sydney 
and shipped in pieces to the remote site, where it sits above the 
ground plane.
Murcutt has also designed larger buildings such as the Bowali 
Visitor Information Centre (1994) in Kakadu National Park, 
Northern Territory, and the Arthur and Yvonne Boyd Art Centre 
(1999) in West Cambewarra, New South Wales. Winner of the 
Pritzker Prize in 2002, Murcutt has inspired a younger generation of 
like-minded architects around the globe.
* * *
Modern architecture first arrived in Canada on the West Coast 
in the 1930s. By the 1940s and 1950s, various modernist practices 
were established across the country. In the 1960s, regionally specific 
architecture emerged in the various parts of the country.21 The inter￾national career of Arthur Erickson (1924–2009) figures large in the 
Canadian context, starting with his West Coast modern houses (with 
Geoffrey Massey) from the 1950s and 1960s. Erickson eventually 
produced a host of major institutional and commercial commissions, 
including the Museum of Anthropology (1976) at the University of 
British Columbia and Robson Square (1983) in Vancouver. More 
recently, several Canadian firms have achieved widespread recogni￾tion, including Saucier + Perrotte architectes in Montreal, Shim￾Sutcliffe Architects in Toronto, and Patkau Architects in Vancouver.
Patkau Architects was formed by John Patkau (1947–) and Patricia 
Patkau (1950–) in Edmonton, Alberta, in 1978. They moved to 
Vancouver, BC, in 1984 and have since then established a body of 
work that carefully negotiates between local and international fac￾tors. Both original partners grew up in Winnipeg, Manitoba, and 
studied at the University of Manitoba (Patricia Patkau subsequently 
studied at Yale University). The work of the Patkaus has undergone 
an evolution as they have consistently challenged both themselves 
and architectural norms. The earliest phase in their career is cap￾tured by the urbane Pyrch House (1984) in Victoria, BC, which is 
carefully set on a rocky site exploiting distant views of the ocean. 
The scheme features a simple plan bent to create a sheltered terrace 
space.22196 Regionalism and Tectonics
The next phase featured an intense focus on tectonics or the 
thoughtful assembly of building systems. This is evident in 
the Seabird Island School (1991) at Agassiz, BC, designed for 
an indigenous community east of Vancouver. The form of the 
multi-purpose community building hints at local zoomorphic 
forms. Responsive to the site, a covered porch runs the length 
of the building, providing an urban gesture and referencing tra￾ditional indigenous structures. The Canadian Clay and Glass 
Museum (1992) in Waterloo, Ontario, continued the exploration 
of tectonic themes, with building assemblies revealed throughout. 
Kenneth Frampton states:
The Clay and Glass Gallery explicitly announces the emerging importance 
of expressive construction in the Patkau practice, not only in relatively 
small-scale joints – brackets, hinges, pivots, etc. – but also in the articula￾tion of larger components, such as the interface of servant and served 
spaces. This the museum visitor is presented with an assembly of readily 
identifiable archetypes, for example, stylobate, vestibule, lobby, stair hall, 
corridor, patio, terrace, wherein each successive element is rendered as 
a tectonic feature.23
The Barnes House (1993) in Nanaimo, BC, the Strawberry Vale 
School (1996) in Victoria, and the Grande Bibliothèque du Québec 
(2005) in Montreal extended the Patkaus’s thinking across other 
architectural scales. Their commitment to tectonics during this 
period is captured in a sequence of post-occupancy analytical models 
built by the firm. Acknowledging the complexity of projects such as 
the Strawberry Vale School, more recent projects are formally and 
tectonically simpler. In the last decade or so, the Patkaus have also 
invested significantly in materials research.24
* * *
The works by the architects discussed here show that critically 
regional architecture, while always locally specific, can also derive 
inspiration from a wide range of sources, including the intelligent 
reinterpretation of vernacular precedents and moments in modern 
architectural history. Arguing against the “scenographic” nature of 
many recent postmodern buildings, Kenneth Frampton writes:
building remains essentially tectonic rather than scenographic in charac￾ter and it may be argued that it is an act of construction first, rather than 
a discourse predicated on the surface, volume and plan, to cite the “Three 
Reminders to Architects,” of Le Corbusier.25Regionalism and Tectonics 197
NOTES
1 See Liane Lefaivre, “Critical Regionalism: A Facet of Modern Architecture 
since 1945,” in Liane Lefaivre and Alexander Tzonis, eds., Critical 
Regionalism: Architecture and Identity in a Globalized World (Munich: Prestel, 
2003), pp. 24–31.
2 Ibid., p. 34.
3 See Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaivre, “The Grid and the Pathway,” 
Architecture in Greece, no. 15 (1981).
4 Kenneth Frampton, “Towards a Critical Regionalism: Six Points for an 
Architecture of Resistance,” in H. Foster, ed., Postmodern Culture (London: 
Pluto Press, 1987), p. 17.
5 Ibid., p. 28.
6 See Kenneth Frampton, Modern Architecture: A Critical History (London: 
Thames & Hudson, 2020), pp. 365–366.
7 Christian Norberg-Schulz, Nightlands: Nordic Building (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1997), p. 1.
8 See Richard Weston, Alvar Aalto (London: Phaidon, 1995), pp. 40–60.
9 Juhani Pallasmaa, “Image and Meaning,” in Juhani Pallasmaa, ed., Alvar 
Aalto: Villa Mairea (Helsinki: Alvar Aalto Foundation, 1998), p. 89.
10 See Diane Ghirardo, Italy: Modern Architectures in History (London: Reaktion 
Books, 2013).
11 See F. Dal Co and G. Mazzariol, eds., Carlo Scarpa: The Complete Works
(New York: Rizzoli, 1985).
12 Kurt W. Forster, “The Architect of the Incalculable,” in G. Beltramini and 
I. Zannier, eds., Carlo Scarpa: Architecture and Design (New York: Rizzoli, 
2007), p. 24.
13 Licisco Magagnoto, “The Castelvecchio Museum,” in F. Dal Co and G. 
Mazzariol, eds., Carlo Scarpa: The Complete Works (New York: Rizzoli, 
1985), p. 159.
14 George Ranalli, “History, Craft, Invention,” in N. Olsberg et al., eds., Carlo 
Scarpa, Architect: Intervening with History (New York: Monacelli Press, 1999), 
p. 40.
15 Ibid.
16 Philip Goad, “Edge of Centre: Architecture in Australia and New Zealand 
after 1965,” in Haddad and Rifkind, eds., A Critical History of Contemporary 
Architecture, pp. 437–459.
17 See Françoise Fromonot, Glenn Murcutt: Buildings + Projects, 1962–2003
(London: Thames & Hudson, 2005), pp. 18–25.
18 Ibid., pp. 33–34.
19 Ibid., p. 36.
20 Ibid., p. 47–49.
21 See Elsa Lam and Graham Livesey, eds., Canadian Modern Architecture, 1967 
to the Present (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2019).198 Regionalism and Tectonics
22 See Brian Carter, ed., Patkau Architects: Selected Projects 1983–1993 (Halifax: 
Tuns Press, 1994).
23 Kenneth Frampton, “Reflective Practice,” in Patkau Architects (New York: 
The Monacelli Press, 2006), p. 9.
24 See Patkau Architects, Material Operations (New York: Princeton 
Architectural Press, 2017).
25 Kenneth Frampton, “Rappel à l’ordre, the Case for the Tectonic,” in Kate 
Nesbitt, ed., Theorizing a New Agenda for Architecture: An Anthology of 
Architectural Theory, 1965–1995 (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 
1996), p. 520.
SUGGESTED READING
Frampton, Kenneth. Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics of Construction in 
Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Architecture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1995.
Haddad, E.G. and D. Rifkind, eds. A Critical History of Contemporary Architecture, 
1960–2010. London: Routledge, 2014.
Lefaivre, Liane and Alexander Tzonis. Critical Regionalism: Architecture and 
Identity in a Globalized World. Munich: Prestel, 2003.
Tzonis, Alexander and Liane Lefaivre. “The Grid and the Pathway.” Architecture 
in Greece, no. 15 (1981).
Weston, Richard. Alvar Aalto. London: Phaidon, 1995.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-20
The emergence of Japan as an economic and cultural power after 
World War II catapulted modern Japanese architecture into the 
forefront of global architecture. Japan began a modernization 
programme under the rule of Emperor Meiji (1852–1912). This 
period of intense change was characterized by the adoption and 
adaption of Western construction technology and forms of archi￾tecture. Initially, Dutch, American, British, and German archi￾tects provided designs for Japanese buildings and infrastructure and 
often trained young Japanese architects. The British architect Josiah 
Conder (1852–1920), for example, went to Japan in 1877, where 
he designed many buildings, influenced education, and shaped 
the beginning of the architectural profession in Japan. By 1890, 
Western influence was diminished, and Japan forged ahead with its 
own programmes. In this period of transition, Japanese architects 
produced designs in various European styles and also employed 
a Japanese revival style, which fused modern building typologies 
with traditional Japanese architectural elements. Examples of this 
idiom include Tsumaki Yorinaka and Takeda Goichi’s Kangyo 
Bank (1899) in Tokyo and Tatsuno Kingo’s Nara Hotel (1908). 
The Meiji period remains a controversial period in Japanese his￾tory, but it was important in establishing the evolution of Japanese 
society during the 20th century.1
From 1913 to 1945, following the Meiji era, major Japanese cities 
expanded, triggering the need for new infrastructure.2
 One project 
that was important was the design and construction of the Imperial 
PLACE AND INVENTION
20200 Place and Invention
Hotel in Tokyo (1923) by Frank Lloyd Wright. Despite Wright’s 
claims that his architecture was influenced by his strong interest in 
Japanese art and culture, the elaborate hotel he designed for Tokyo 
showed little direct reference to Japanese architecture.3
 The Czech￾American architect Antonin Raymond (1888–1976), who worked 
for Wright and spent a year assisting on the Imperial Hotel, remained 
in Japan except during World War II. He continued to practice in 
Japan over the next 40 years. His own house in Tokyo (1924) was 
an early example of a modern building in Japan. Built-in mono￾lithic poured-in-place concrete, it featured a complicated massing 
and allusions to Wright’s architecture.
During the 1930s, Japan was increasingly imperialistic, engag￾ing in wars with China and Korea. Allied with Nazi Germany, 
Japan became involved in World War II following the attack on 
Pearl Harbor (December 7, 1941) in Hawaii. During this period 
of expansionist nationalism, Japanese architects worked in the 
Imperial Crown style, a form of architecture that incorporated tra￾ditional Japanese roofs and elements. One example is Jin Watanable’s 
Imperial Museum (1937) in Tokyo.4
 During the same decade, mod￾ern buildings designed by Japanese architects who were familiar with 
European developments also began to appear in major cities. Several 
projects by Tetsuro Yoshida (1894–1956) demonstrated a sophisti￾cated modern approach; these include the Osaka Higashi Post Office 
(1931) in Osaka. Further, several schools in Tokyo were designed 
in this period in the International Style.5
 Kikuji Ishimoto (1894–
1963) studied with Walter Gropius in the early 1920s. His Shirokiya 
Department Store (1931) in Tokyo seemed to be a reference to 
Erich Mendelsohn’s streamlined department stores in Germany.6
Antonin Raymond and his wife Noémi designed a number of key 
International Style buildings, including several large and elaborate 
houses that combined both modern and traditional Japanese spaces. 
Togo Murano (1891–1984) and Sutemi Horiguchi (1895–1984) also 
designed substantial houses for the Japanese elite.7
 However, by the 
end of the 1930s, the International Style effectively disappeared in 
Japan.
* * *
World War II ended with the surrender of Japan in August 
1945, following the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 
by US forces. The reconstruction of a world devasted by war was 
an enormous undertaking. The rebuilding heralded a new era Place and Invention 201
in modern architecture in Japan, initiated by several key build￾ings. The Raymonds returned to Japan in 1947. Shortly thereaf￾ter, they designed the Reader’s Digest Building (1951) in Tokyo. 
Executed with a discipline that acknowledged the work of Mies van 
der Rohe, the long linear scheme shares some similarities with the 
Atomic Memorial Museum at Hiroshima (1955). This commemo￾rative building was designed by the emerging early hero of postwar 
Japanese architecture, Kenzo Tange (1913–2005).
Tange grew up in Hiroshima and Shanghai, China, and stud￾ied architecture at the Imperial University in Tokyo where he was 
inspired by Le Corbusier. After graduation, he worked in the office 
of Kunio Maekawa (1905–1986). In 1942, he returned to univer￾sity to study urban environments. After the war ended, Tange began 
to establish himself. He won the 1949 competition to design the 
Peace Park at Hiroshima with the museum at its heart. During the 
1950s, Tange was immersed in urbanism and functionalist architec￾ture; however, by the early 1960s, he embraced a more expressive 
and brutalist form of architecture. During this decade, Tange exe￾cuted a series of daring and evocative projects, many built in con￾crete, which had become the modern material of choice in Japan. 
Of note are his Kagawa Prefectural Office (1958) in Takamatsu, 
the Toksuka Country Clubhouse (1961), and the Yamanashi Press 
and Broadcasting Headquarters (1966) in Kofu. Arguably, his most 
intense reconciliation of modern architecture with Japanese tradition 
were his designs for the Yoyogi National Indoor Stadiums in Tokyo 
for the 1964 Olympic Games.
The Metabolist movement was launched in 1960 with a manifesto 
and a series of evocative conceptual projects by a new generation 
of young Japanese architects. Tange was not officially a member of 
the Metabolists, but several of his projects were influential to them, 
including his “Tokyo Plan: 1960,” which included a comprehen￾sive traffic system and numerous structures floating in Tokyo Bay. 
Members of the group included Kiyonori Kikutake (1928–2011), 
Kisho Kurokawa (1934–2007), and Fumihiko Maki (1928–). They 
launched their manifesto at the World Design Conference held in 
Tokyo in 1960. This event proved to be a turning point in modern 
Japanese architecture. The following describes the basic principles of 
the group:
Metabolism’s name stressed the basic idea of an endless change that 
occurs within an organism and its nearby environment. The Japanese 
architects that joined under the name promoted flexible architecture and 202 Place and Invention
dynamic cities that could develop and grow through eliminating their 
exhausted parts and regenerating new components according to the 
needs of the socioeconomic environment. The city is conceived of as a 
metaphor of the human body.8
The Metabolists envisaged high-rise megastructure systems that 
relied on advanced technology to create large transformable modular 
environments (see Chapter 13). This was a response to shortages of 
suitable land for settlement and a drive for industrialization.
Early schemes by the Metabolists include Kikutake’s “Marine City” 
(1958) and Kurokawa’s “Agricultural City” (1960). Built projects by 
the group that demonstrated its concepts include Kikutake’s remark￾able Sky House (1958) in Tokyo, Maekawa’s Harumi Apartments 
(1958) in Tokyo, Tange’s Shizuoka Press and Broadcasting Centre 
(1967) in Tokyo, and Kurokawa’s Nakagin Capsule Building (1972) 
in Tokyo. The Nakagin Capsule Building famously employed small 
prefabricated living units attached to a vertical service core. The 
Metabolist group was one of the important architectural movements 
of the 1960s. Their efforts culminated in the Osaka ’70 exposition, 
where they designed several projects within a master plan by Tange. 
Afterwards, Kurokawa had a prolific career during which he pro￾moted Metabolist ideas and developed the concept of “symbiosis.” 
These ideas were promoted in books such as Metabolism in Architecture
(1977) and The Philosophy of Symbiosis (1994). Maki also had a highly 
successful career. His early research into the city was captured in his 
book Investigations in Collective Form (1964). Important buildings by 
Maki include the Fugisawa Municipal Gymnasium (1984) and the 
Spiral (1985) in Tokyo.
Arata Isozaki (1931–2022) began his career studying and working 
with Tange; this is reflected in formative projects such as the Oita 
Prefectural Library (1966). Early projects such as “City in the Air” 
(1962) and “Future City” (1962) demonstrated an affinity with the 
Metabolists. However, Isozaki quickly diverged from them, display￾ing an interest in both Japanese architectural traditions and quot￾ing Western architectural sources. By the 1970s, his work took on 
a distinctly postmodern character, captured in his use of cubical 
forms and square shapes. This was evident in his Gumma Prefectural 
Museum of Modern Art (1974) in Takasaki. He synthesized many 
of his themes in his Fujimi Country Club (1974) in Oita. His inter￾est in Western postmodernism culminated in his Tsukaba Centre 
Building (1983), with its overt references to Michelangelo. Isozaki Place and Invention 203
was a prolific architect who designed projects around the world. 
His thoughts on architecture are captured in his book Japan-ness in 
Architecture.
9
* * *
Experiments in working with traditional Japanese methods and 
forms occurred in the 1930s and after World War II, particularly in 
the design of the house. Architects during this period also recognized 
the historic importance of the Ise shrine, the ancient Shinto holy 
site, and the Katsura Palace (mid-17th century) in Kyoto. Architects 
such as Kazuo Shinohara (1925–2006), in his first important period, 
represented by the House in White (1966), designed provocative 
interpretations of traditional Japanese houses.10 Shinohara’s career 
took a shift between 1970 and 1973, which was captured by the 
Uncompleted House (1970). In 1974, he produced the Tanikawa 
House (1974) in Naganohara, which was organized around a large 
pitched-roof space supported by dramatic structural elements cover￾ing a sloping earthen floor. Shinohara’s architecture is defined by a 
distinctive approach to space and form and by inventive responses to 
the context. Shinohara continued to design highly unusual projects 
for the remainder of his career, including larger commissions.
Itsuko Hasegawa (1941–) graduated in architecture from Kanto 
Gakuin University (Yokohama) in 1964 and has since established 
herself as one of the most important architects in Japan. She followed 
her education with stints in various firms, including the Kazuo 
Shinohara Atelier (1971–1978). Hasegawa opened her own office in 
the 1970s. Since then, she has developed a substantial portfolio, taught 
at various universities, and won many awards.11 Known for her often 
whimsical architecture and experimental use of form, Hasegawa 
combines concrete with a lyrical use of metal, especially perfo￾rated metal. These qualities are evident in her Atelier in Tomigaya 
(1986) in Tokyo. One of her most significant commissions, obtained 
through a design competition, was the Shonandai Cultural Centre 
(1990) in Fujisawa. Concerned about modernization in Japan, she 
has focused her design work on references to nature, which is found 
in larger projects such as the Yamanashi Museum of Fruit (1995).
Tadao Ando (1941–) was born in Osaka, where he grew up in 
modest circumstances. He started his career as a professional boxer. 
A self-taught architect, he opened his own office in 1969. He made 
his early reputation with a small and austere row house (1976) in 204 Place and Invention
Osaka, constructed in exposed and precisely executed concrete. 
Known for his use of simple geometries and minimalist spaces that 
respond to changing light conditions, Ando has created an interna￾tionally recognizable approach to contemporary architecture; he has 
built projects across the world. Representative projects include the 
Koshino House (1984) in Hyogo, the Church on the Water (1988) 
in Hokkaido, the Naoshima Contemporary Art Museum (1995) in 
Kagawa, and the Museum of Wood (1994) in Hyogo. In his work, 
Ando has captured the essence of Japanese culture while employing 
modern materials and methods. His architecture provides an experi￾ence of calmness separated from the chaos of the world.12
Toyo Ito (1941–) is an architect whose work is very different from 
Tadao Ando’s. Ito studied architecture in Tokyo and then worked for 
Kiyonori Kikutake from 1965 to 1969. In 1971, he established his 
own practice. His early house for his sister, known as the White U 
(1976) in Tokyo, demonstrated an inventive use of space in a concrete 
Figure 20.1 Section, Toyo Ito, Sendai Mediatheque, 2000, Sendai, Japan. The 
building uses varying heights for the location of floor slabs and the inventive use 
of bundles of steel columns to support them; functions and circulation elements 
are dispersed as required. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.Place and Invention 205
building shaped around a courtyard. However, as his designs evolved, 
he became more interested in an architecture of openness, fluidity, 
and lightness. This is captured in his Tower of Winds (1986) pro￾ject in Yokohama. Of his many projects, the most outstanding is the 
Sendai Mediatheque (2000), a media-focused library and art gallery 
in which the floors of the building are supported by open bundles 
of structural tubes. The design can be understood as a contemporary 
essay on Le Corbusier’s Maison Dom-Ino concept drawing of 1915.
In the 1980s, Shin Takamatsu (1948–) executed a series of highly 
idiosyncratic buildings in Kyoto. Built precisely and predominately 
in concrete and metal, the projects have a very machine-like quality. 
Buildings such as Origin I (1981), Ark (1983), Pharoah (1984), and 
Syntax (1988) demonstrate theories of materiality, form, and expres￾sion that were circulating in the period.
SANAA is a Tokyo-based firm established by Kazuyo Sejima 
(1956–) and Ryue Nishizawa (1966–) in 1995. Known for daringly 
light and airy designs, SANAA has produced a number of notable 
projects. These include the 21st Century Museum of Contemporary 
Art (2004) in Kanazawa, the New Museum of Contemporary Art 
(2007) in New York, and the Rolex Centre (2009) in Lausanne, 
Switzerland. SANAA are known for their distinctive use of glass, 
often employing fluid and rounded shapes. They also use minimal 
structure and predominantly white surfaces. Describing their Glass 
Pavilion for the Toledo Art Museum in Toledo, Ohio (2001–2006), 
architect Ronnie Self writes:
The Glass Pavilion is an intriguing blend of the serious and the playful. It 
appears restrained and serene, but also fanciful – more like a garden folly 
set within its treed site than an addition to the existing architecture. . . . 
Inside it evokes reason and rigor combined with the sensations of a fun 
house or a house of mirrors. The plan is reasoned but appears diagram￾matic. The construction demands extreme precision and integration yet 
it appears effortless.13
Shigeru Ban (1957–) established his office in 1985 after study￾ing at SCI-Arc in Los Angeles and the Cooper Union School of 
Architecture in New York. His work is divided into two approaches: 
first, an inventive minimalism, rendered in a monochromatic white, 
and, second, a commitment to the use of paper, cardboard, bam￾boo, and wood, especially in projects designed for disaster relief. 
Examples of the first approach include the Curtain Wall House 
(1995) in Tokyo and the Naked House (2000) in Saitama. The 206 Place and Invention
second approach, with its emphasis on innovative materials, led to 
his involvement in post-disaster architecture after seeing the effects 
of the Rwandan Civil War in 1994. His non-governmental organi￾zation has been involved in constructing temporary facilities for 
numerous situations. Well-known examples are the Paper Church 
(1995) in Kobe, Japan, and the Cardboard Cathedral (2013) in 
Christchurch, New Zealand, both built after significant earth￾quakes. His pioneering use of paper and wood systems has earned 
him widespread recognition.
Since World War II, Japanese architects have realized many 
remarkable buildings. They have seized upon Western influences but 
ultimately have drawn from the rich architectural traditions of Japan 
to define unique interpretations of modernism.
* * *
Modern architecture in China by Chinese architects has a rela￾tively short history. In the late 1970s, the Chinese Communist Party 
launched a series of economic and trade reforms that resulted in 
changes to agriculture and rapid large-scale urbanization. The 
policies launched a building boom in the 1980s.14 This led to the 
emergence of Chinese architectural practices despite the closure of 
schools of architecture from 1966 to 1976. A debate ensued between 
the roles of modernism and tradition in a complex and ancient soci￾ety. A vital example of a work balancing modernity and tradition can 
be found in Feng Jizhong’s Songjiang Square Pagoda Garden (1987), 
which was treated as an open-air museum of ancient elements in a 
contemporary landscape. As China opened up to the world in the 
1980s, internationally-based architects executed many projects in the 
country. The work of Chinese-American architect Ieoh Ming Pei 
(1917–2019) and his Fragrant Hill Hotel (1982) outside Beijing was 
particularly important.15
In the 1990s, following the incidents at Tiananmen Square in 
1989, and as China shifted to a market economy, many more Chinese 
architectural firms were established. Yung Ho Chang (1956–), who 
trained in the United States, was a leader of this movement. Wang 
Shu (1963–), whose office Amateur Architecture Studio is located 
in Hangzhou, also began to build a strong reputation; in 2012, Shu 
won the Pritzker Architecture Prize. Much of this period falls under 
“experimental” architecture (aligned with Experimental Art), influ￾enced by contemporary developments in the West.16 Two important 
projects from this period reflect the transformations in China resulting Place and Invention 207
from massive change. The first is the Luyeyuan Stone Sculpture 
Museum (2002) in Chengdu by Liu Jiakun (1956–). Using concrete 
in a cluster of pavilions, he blends both Western and Chinese sources 
in a refreshing way that points forward to further developments in 
Chinese architecture in the 21st century. The second is Wang Shu’s 
China Academy of Art (Xiangshan Campus, 2007).
* * *
In Asia, architects digested the influence of Western modernism 
and then returned to local architectural traditions to create a distinc￾tive approach to a revitalized modern architecture. As Tadao Ando 
writes in 1991:
The most promising path open to contemporary architecture is that of 
development through and beyond modernism. This means replacing the 
mechanical, lethargic, and mediocre methods to which modernism has 
succumbed with the kind of abstract, meditative vitality that marked its 
beginnings, and creating something thought-provoking that will carry our 
age forward into the twenty-first century.17
NOTES
1 See Dallas Finn, Meiji Revisited: The Sites of Victorian Japan (New York: 
Weatherhill, 1995).
2 See David B. Stewart, The Making of a Modern Japanese Architecture (Tokyo: 
Kodansha International, 2002), pp. 90–91.
3 See Ibid., pp. 77–89.
4 See Ibid., pp. 107–100.
5 See Ibid., pp. 111–118.
6 See Ibid., pp. 118–123.
7 See Ibid., pp. 129–146.
8 Raffaele Pernice, “Introduction,” in Raffaele Pernice, ed., The Urbanism of 
Metabolism (Abingdon: Routledge, 2022), p. 3.
9 See Arata Isozaki, Japan-ness in Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2006).
10 See Stewart, The Making of a Modern Japanese Architecture, pp. 192–205.
11 See Maggie Toy, ed., Architectural Monographs No. 31: Itsuko Hasegawa
(London: Academy Editions, 1993). See also Island Hopping: Crossover 
Architecture (Rotterdam: NAi Publishers, 2000).
12 See Masao Furuyama, Tadao Ando: The Geometry of Human Space (Cologne: 
Taschen, 2022).
13 Ronnie Self, The Architecture of Art Museums: A Decade of Design: 2000–
2010 (London: Routledge, 2014), p. 136.208 Place and Invention
14 Tao Zhu, “Architecture in China in the Reform Era: 1978–2010,” in E.G. 
Haddad and D. Rifkind, eds., A Critical History of Contemporary Architecture, 
1960–2010 (London: Routledge, 2014), p. 401.
15 See Ibid., pp. 402–406.
16 See Ibid., pp. 406–408.
17 Tadao Ando, “Beyond Horizons in Architecture,” in C. Jencks and K. 
Kropf, eds., Theories and Manifestoes of Contemporary Architecture (Chichester: 
Wiley-Academy, 2006), p. 256.
SUGGESTED READING
Bognar, Botond. The New Japanese Architecture. New York: Rizzoli, 1990.
Isozaki, Arata. Japan-ness in Architecture. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006.
Koolhaas, Rem and Hans Ulrich Obrist. Project Japan, Metabolism Talks. Cologne: 
Taschen, 2011.
Tange, Kenzo. Katsura: Tradition and Creation in Japanese Architecture. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1960.
Tanizaki, Jun’ichiro. In Praise of Shadows. New Haven: Leete’s Island Books, 
1977.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-21
Structuralism is generally associated with the work of Ferdinand de 
Saussure (1857–1913), a Swiss linguist and philosopher who developed 
a method that analyzed the internal structures of language. Saussure 
developed semiology as the science of signs. Structuralism “looks for 
the deep and often hidden structures beneath the surface manifesta￾tions of meaning.”1
 Many concepts utilized by later thinkers were 
devised by Saussure, including distinctions between language (langue) 
and speech (parole), signifier and signified, synchrony and diachrony. 
He would also influence a wide range of disciplines. For example, 
the French anthropologist and ethnologist Claude Lévi-Strauss (1908–
2009) used Saussure’s structural methods to study the “mythic, sym￾bolic, and kinship codes”2
 of traditional indigenous societies. Jacques 
Lacan (1901–1981) was a French psychiatrist who united the theories 
of Saussure with a radical interpretation of psychoanalysis, first devel￾oped by Sigmund Freud (1856–1939). The French philosopher and 
cultural critic Roland Barthes (1915–1980) applied structuralism to 
society, often examining the “myths” of popular culture.3
Architectural theorists such as George Baird, Charles Jencks, Diana 
Agrest, Mario Gandelsonas, and Geoffrey Broadbent took up the 
theories of structuralism and applied them to architectural “mean￾ing.”4
 According to structuralism, a building has meaning in how it 
describes its function and how it participates in a “system of signs.” 
Affirming this idea, the Italian semiotician and writer Umberto 
Eco distinguishes between two types of “function” when discussing 
architecture:
THEORY AND PRACTICE
21210 Theory and Practice
This continuous oscillation between primary function (the conventional 
use of an object, or its most direct or elementary meaning) and second￾ary functions (its related meanings, based on cultural conventions, and 
mental and semantic associations) forms the object as a system of signs, 
a message. The history of architecture and design is the history of the 
dialectic between these two functions.5
Structuralism had an impact on the Team 10 movement (see 
Chapter 18) and on the work of the Dutch architects Aldo van Eyck 
(1918–1999) and Herman Hertzberger (1932–), particularly in their 
development of an architectural language based on repeating spatial 
and building units.6
 Peter Eisenman (1932–) is the leading interpreter 
of European philosophy; he applied structuralism and subsequent 
theories to architecture. Eisenman’s early investigations into struc￾turalism and the linguistic theories of Noam Chomsky (1928–) led 
him to design a series of highly theoretical houses in the 1960s and 
1970s that manipulated conventional concepts of function, structure, 
and language.7
 In a short essay published in 1976, entitled “Post￾Functionalism,” Eisenman argues that contemporary architecture has 
moved beyond the dualism of form and function that was the basis 
of modern architecture.8
* * *
Phenomenology is a 20th-century philosophical movement 
that was founded by the Moravian-German philosopher Edmund 
Husserl (1859–1938), who introduced concepts such as “intention￾ality” and “essence” in his writings. Phenomenology evolved into a 
comprehensive philosophy with an emphasis on human experience, 
existence, place, meaning, and authenticity. Phenomenology pre￾sents a radical critique of the work of the French philosopher René 
Descartes (1596–1650) and the tendencies of modernity.
Martin Heidegger (1889–1976) was an important student of Hus￾serl’s. However, their relationship ended in bitterness after Heidegger 
joined the Nazi party in Germany during the 1930s. Heidegger 
remains one of the most influential and controversial figures in 20th￾century thought. In his work, he focussed on a primary under￾standing of “Being-in-the-World,” which is reflected in his major 
text Being and Time (1927). His later work featured an increasing 
emphasis on interpreting language and poetry. The publication of his 
important essay “Building Dwelling Thinking” in 1954 (published in 
English in 1971) outlines his notions of “dwelling,” the “fourfold,” Theory and Practice 211
and “locations” in space. According to Heidegger, the rise of mod￾ern technology has resulted in a loss of authentic “dwelling.”9
 The 
Norwegian architect and theorist Christian Norberg-Schulz (1926–
2000) was a dedicated interpreter of Heidegger, particularly in a 
series of books that include Intentions in Architecture (1965), Meaning in 
Western Architecture (1974), and Genius Loci, Towards a Phenomenology 
of Architecture (1980).
Two phenomenologists who had a particular impact on architec￾ture were Gaston Bachelard (1884–1962) and Maurice Merleau￾Ponty (1908–1961). Bachelard’s book The Poetics of Space (first 
published in French in 1958 and in English in 1964) is an examina￾tion of the human imagination as it pertains to the house and its 
contents. Informed by phenomenology and psychoanalysis, the text 
relies heavily on the work of poets.10 Merleau-Ponty concentrated 
his thinking on the notion of “perception” and the body immersed 
in the world, captured in detail in his major text Phenomenology of 
Perception (first published in French in 1958 and in English in 1962). 
Merleau-Ponty is critical of modern science, especially with regard 
to the human body in the world. According to Richard Kearney:
For Merleau-Ponty phenomenology made possible the recognition that 
the body is not an object among objects, to be measured in purely sci￾entific or geometric terms, but a mysterious and expressive mode of 
belonging to the world through our perceptions, gestures, sexuality and 
speech.11
The Finnish architect and theorist Juhani Pallasmaa (1936–) has 
been a leading advocate for phenomenology and architecture, espe￾cially in books such as The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses
(1996) and Encounters: Architectural Essays (2005). In his writings, 
Pallasmaa has challenged the modern emphasis placed on vision and 
the eye, at the expense of the other bodily senses. He argues that 
architects like Frank Lloyd Wright and Alvar Aalto produced build￾ings that respond to the full range of human experience.
Several contemporary architects have been inspired by phenome￾nology. The Chapel of St. Ignatius (1997) in Seattle by the American 
architect Steven Holl has been described as “seven bottles of light in 
a stone box.”12 The design, among many others, demonstrates Holl’s 
ongoing commitment to phenomenology.13 Peter Zumthor, a Swiss 
architect, has written about his own practice in several thoughtful 
books and has produced many carefully executed buildings, including 
the much-celebrated Therme Vals (1996) in Vals, Switzerland. The 212 Theory and Practice
American architects Billie Tsien and Tod Williams are also linked to 
phenomenology. This allegiance was evident in the American Folk 
Art Museum (2001, demolished in 2014) in New York.
Since the 1960s, several prolific and influential architectural theo￾rists have promoted phenomenology. These include: Joseph Rykwert, 
Dalibor Vesely, Alberto Pérez-Gómez, David Leatherbarrow, and 
Marco Frascari. Pérez-Gómez’s book Architecture and the Crisis of 
Modern Science, originally published in 1983, is a study of architec￾tural history from the 17th to early 19th centuries that employs a 
phenomenological approach.
* * *
Poststructuralism links together several recent philosophers, 
including Michel Foucault (1926–1978), Jacques Derrida (1930–
2004), and Gilles Deleuze (1925–1995), each of whom has sig￾nificantly impacted architecture. Foucault, the French philosopher, 
historian, and advocate, began his career influenced by structural￾ism. As his thinking developed, he moved towards poststructural￾ism. He applied the term “archaeology” to his early approach to 
the “hidden structures of knowledge.”14 In a series of famous books 
he analyzed the institutional history of madness (asylums), medicine 
(hospitals), incarceration (prisons), and sexuality in ways that focused 
on his concept of “power” as a universal force. His book Discipline 
and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (published in French in 1975 and in 
English in 1978) examines the prison and the history of punishment. 
In a well-known discussion, Foucault examines Jeremy Bentham’s 
concept for a circular model prison called a Panopticon, published 
in 1791 with drawings by the architect Willey Reveley (1760–1799). 
According to Foucault, the Panopticon is based on visibility and sur￾veillance and creates a power relationship between the prisoners and 
the guards; it is a “marvellous machine.”15 Foucault recognized that 
institutions, corporations, and governments wield power and that 
“power relations” are rooted in societies, in individuals, and in group 
actions.16 His work in these areas has had a significant influence on 
architectural scholars examining the role of architecture and the his￾tory of institutions.
The French-Algerian philosopher Jacques Derrida developed 
deconstruction as a method for reading texts that results in a plurality 
of interpretations. He devised working concepts such as différance or 
the “universal system of differences,” the reversal of traditional hier￾archies, the exchange of the centre for the margins, the iterability of Theory and Practice 213
meaning, grafts and grafting, erasure, and so on.17 Deconstruction 
was applied as a method across many disciplines, including architec￾ture. The French philosopher Gilles Deleuze is a complex thinker 
who developed many popular concepts including smooth and stri￾ated space, the diagram, the fold, assemblage theory, rhizomes, and 
territoriality. The concepts are found in books such as A Thousand 
Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia (authored with Félix Guattari 
and first published in French in 1980 and in English in 1987) and 
The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque (first published in French in 1988, 
and in English in 1993).18 In the 1990s, Deleuze’s theories affected a 
generation of young architects, particularly those who were experi￾menting with new digital design platforms.
* * *
The Deconstructivist Architecture exhibition held at the Museum 
of Modern Art in New York in 1988 featured the work of seven 
avant-garde architects: Frank O. Gehry (1929–), Daniel Libeskind 
(1946–), Rem Koolhaas (1944–), Peter Eisenman, Zaha M. Hadid 
(1950–2016), Coop Himmelblau (established in 1968), and Bernard 
Tschumi (1944–). The exhibition was curated by Philip Johnson 
and Mark Wigley, who recognized that the seven architects formed 
a loose group connected by their attacks on modernist form. At 
the time of the exhibition, the seven architects were relatively 
unknown; however, shortly afterwards, they became internationally 
renowned “starchitects” recognized for their distinctive approaches 
to architecture. Deconstructivism, as a term, blends both Russian 
Constructivism (see Chapter 14) and deconstruction. Describing 
Coop Himmelblau’s dramatic rooftop remodeling project (1985) in 
Vienna, Austria, Wigley writes:
The form is distorting itself. Yet this internal distortion does not destroy 
the form. In a strange way, the form somehow remains intact. This is an 
architecture of disruption, dislocation, deflection, deviation, and distor￾tion, rather than one of demolition, dismantling, decay, decomposition, 
or disintegration. It displaces structure instead of destroying it.19
This description effectively described all the work in the exhibition.
Frank Gehry was born in Toronto, Canada. He moved with his 
family to Los Angeles when he was 16. His unique architecture 
was not born from theory but from his own experiences and his 
connection to the Los Angeles art community of the 1960s. He 
came to prominence with the design of his own house (1978) in 214 Theory and Practice
Santa Monica, which wraps an existing house in exuberant forms 
made from inexpensive and ordinary plywood, chain link fenc￾ing, corrugated metal, and glass. Through the 1980s, he continued 
to work with this palette of materials; however, as the projects 
got larger and more complex, Gehry began to experiment with 
more complex sculptural forms. This resulted in his firm adopting 
advanced computer software from the French aerospace industry 
and pioneering its use. The extensive use of computers is fully evi￾dent in two major commissions: the Guggenheim Museum (1997) 
in Bilbao, Spain, and the Walt Disney Concert Hall (2003) in Los 
Angeles. The Guggenheim Museum project has become celebrated 
as one of the most important buildings of the late 20th century due 
in part to its impact on the city of Bilbao.20 Employing structurally 
complex forms clad in titanium and novel construction methods, 
the building evokes the forms of ships that used to be built in 
Bilbao.
Daniel Libeskind was born in Poland and emigrated to the United 
States in the late 1950s. His early career was mainly academic, dem￾onstrated by teaching, writing, and the production of “theoreti￾cal” projects. In 1989, he won a competition to design the Jewish 
Museum in Berlin. The completed museum, his first major com￾mission, opened in 2001. It features a zigzagging form that evokes 
the Jewish history of Germany and Berlin, including the cultural 
remembrance of the Holocaust (see Chapter 14). The design is 
intended to invoke feelings of disorientation, claustrophobia, and 
absence as visitors progress from spectators to participants.
Rem Koolhaas is an influential Dutch architect who studied at 
the Architectural Association in London. In 1975, he established 
The Office for Metropolitan Architecture (OMA) with Madelon 
Vriesendorp and Elia and Zoe Zenghelis. Koolhaas has published 
a series of books throughout his career, beginning with Delirious 
New York (1978). A student of the contemporary city, Koolhaas cre￾ated an enormous compendium of his work (with the Canadian 
graphic designer Bruce Mau) entitled S, M, L, XL (1995). In the 
book, he describes his interest in concepts such as “bigness” and 
the “generic city.” Among OMA’s many projects, the Kunsthal 
(1992) in Rotterdam, the Maison à Bordeaux (1998), and the Seattle 
Central Library (2005) stand out. During his career, Koolhaas has 
embraced Surrealism, reexamined the history of modern architec￾ture, employed cheap and generic materials, and played in the world 
of high capitalism.Theory and Practice 215
Peter Eisenman’s work, after his initial phase influenced by 
Chomsky and structuralism, entered a phase from 1978–1988 that 
used a method that can be called “artificial excavation.” This entailed 
interpreting and translating urban sites through the use of fiction, 
layering, shifting grids, and “scaling.”21 The phase demonstrated an 
interest in Foucault’s notion of “archaeology,”22 with projects such as 
the Cannaregio West design (1978) for Venice, Italy, and the Wexner 
Center for the Visual Arts (1989) in Columbus, Ohio. A shift towards 
deconstruction occurred in the 1980s, as Eisenman embraced the 
computer in his practice. In the 1990s, he incorporated the theories 
of Deleuze into his work; this can be seen in the Berlin Memorial to 
the Murdered Jews of Europe (2005) and the City of Culture project 
(2013) in Santiago de Compostela, Spain.23
Zaha Hadid was born in Baghdad, Iraq, and studied at the 
Architectural Association in London. She worked and taught with 
Rem Koolhaas before launching her own firm in 1980. She estab￾lished her early reputation with projects such as the Hong Kong Peak 
Figure 21.1 First Floor Plan, Daniel Libeskind, Jewish Museum, 2001, Berlin, 
Germany. The zigzag form of the building is bisected by a linear void space that 
is crossed by numerous bridges; circulation and service elements are integrated 
into the whole. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.216 Theory and Practice
Competition (1983), which featured her Russian Constructivist￾inspired paintings. Eventually, her firm embraced the use of com￾puters and “parametricism” under the leadership of her partner 
Patrik Schumacher. Hadid gradually took on larger projects, such as 
the Rosenthal Center for Contemporary Art (2003) in Cincinnati, 
Ohio, the first museum in the US designed by a woman. Other nota￾ble projects include the Phaeno Science Center (2005) in Wolfsburg, 
Germany, and MAXXI: National Museum of XXI Century Arts 
(2010) in Rome, Italy. Hadid was the first woman to win the Pritzker 
Architecture Prize (2004) which recognized her distinctive contri￾butions to contemporary architecture.24
Swiss-born Bernard Tschumi has been a notable educator, writer, 
and practitioner. His interest in the “event” and “effect” in the 1970s, 
inspired by the Situationist movement in France, is evident in The 
Manhattan Transcripts project (1981), culminating with his design 
for Parc de la Villette (1998) in Paris.25 The design for the park was 
the result of winning a competition. The scheme occupies a large 
site that formerly housed a slaughterhouse. The design is based on a 
“system of dispersed ‘points’ – the red steel folies that support different 
cultural and leisure activities – is superimposed on a system of lines 
that emphasize movement through the park.”26 The design reflected 
Tschumi’s interest in the event, cinema, Russian Constructivism, 
and poststructuralism. Since, he has executed a small but carefully 
considered body of work.
Other noteworthy architecture firms of the period not included 
in the MoMA exhibition include Morphosis, Herzog & de Meuron, 
Jean Nouvel, MVRDV, UN Studio, Foreign Office Architects, and 
various contemporary practices in Japan (see Chapter 20).
* * *
During the last decades of the 20th century, architects demon￾strated a radical interest in theory as they grappled with the com￾plexities of new technologies, particularly the impact of computers 
and rapidly changing urban realities. Sometimes projects remained 
unbuilt, or “theoretical,” but most architects wanted to translate their 
ideas into built form. Architectural theorist K. Michael Hays pro￾vides a provocative take on theory when he writes:
But if theory’s vocation is to produce the concepts by which architecture is 
related to other spheres of social practice, architecture, too, can be under￾stood as the construction of new concepts of space and its inhabitation; Theory and Practice 217
which is to say that buildings and drawings can be theoretical, seeking 
a congruence between object and analysis, producing concepts as fully 
objective and material as built form itself.27
NOTES
1 Richard Kearney, Modern Movements in European Philosophy (Manchester: 
Manchester University Press, 1986), p. 240.
2 Ibid., p. 252.
3 See Ibid., pp.  319–331. See also See Roland Barthes, Mythologies (New 
York: Hill and Wang, 1972).
4 See Charles Jencks and George Baird, Meaning in Architecture (New York: 
Brazilier, 1970); Diana Agrest and Mario Gandelsonas, “Semiotics and 
Architecture: Ideological Consumption of Theoretical Work,” Oppositions, 
no. 1 (September 1973); and George Baird, “Semiotics and Architecture, 
1998,” in Writings on Architecture and the City (London: Artifice Books on 
Architecture, 2015).
5 Umberto Eco, “How an Exposition Exposes Itself,” in Neil Leach, ed., 
Rethinking Architecture (London: Routledge, 1997), p. 203.
6 See Wim J.A. van den Heuvel, Structuralism in Dutch Architecture (Rotterdam: 
010 Publishers, 1992).
7 See Peter Eisenman, “Cardboard Architecture: House I and House II,” 
in Eisenman Inside Out: Selected Writings 1963–1988 (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2004).
8 See Peter Eisenman, “Post-Functionalism,” Oppositions, no. 6 (Fall 1976).
9 See Martin Heidegger, “Building Dwelling Thinking,” in Poetry, Language, 
Thought (New York: Harper & Row, 1971). Heidegger’s essay “The 
Question Concerning Technology” from 1953 is a sustained attack on mod￾ern technology.
10 See Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space (Boston: Beacon Press, 1969).
11 Kearney, Modern Movements, pp. 73–74.
12 See https://www.stevenholl.com/project/st-ignatius-chapel/. Accessed 
September 15, 2023.
13 See Steven Holl, Juhani Pallasmaa, and Alberto Pérez-Gómez, “Questions 
of Perception: Phenomenology of Architecture,” Architecture and Urbanism
(July 1994).
14 Kearney, Modern Movements, p. 284. Foucault outlined his methods in the 
texts The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (New York: 
Vintage Books, 1994) and The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on 
Language (New York: Pantheon Books, 1972).
15 See Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (New 
York: Vintage Books, 1995), p. 202.218 Theory and Practice
16 See Michel Foucault, “The Subject and Power,” in James B. Faubion, ed., 
Essential Works of Michel Foucault 1954–1984: Power (New York: The New 
Press, 2001), pp. 326–348.
17 See Michael Benedikt, Deconstructing the Kimbell: An Essay on Meaning and 
Architecture (New York: Sites Books, 1991), pp. 9–51.
18 See Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism 
and Schizophrenia (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987); and 
Gilles Deleuze, The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1993).
19 Mark Wigley, “Deconstructivist Architecture,” in Philip Johnson and Mark 
Wigley, eds., Deconstructivist Architecture (New York: Museum of Modern 
Art, 1988), p. 17.
20 See Mildred Friedman, ed., Gehry Talks: Architecture and Process (New York: 
Rizzoli, 1999). See also, Mildred Friedman, ed., The Architecture of Frank 
Gehry (New York: Rizzoli, 1986).
21 See Jean-François Bédard, ed., Cities of Artificial Excavation: The Work of Peter 
Eisenman, 1978–88 (New York: Rizzoli, 1994).
22 See Stefano Corbo, From Formalism to Weak Form: The Architecture and 
Philosophy of Peter Eisenman (London: Routledge, 2016), pp. 39–51.
23 See Ibid., pp. 123–127.
24 See Philip Jodidio, Zaha Hadid: Complete Works, 1979–2013 (Cologne: 
Taschen, 2013).
25 See K. Michael Hays, “The Autonomy Effect,” in Giovanni Damiani, ed., 
Bernard Tschumi (New York: Rizzoli, 2003), pp. 7–16.
26 See Bernard Tschumi Architects. https://www.tschumi.com/projects/3. 
Accessed September 27, 2023.
27 K. Michael Hays, “Introduction,” in K. Michael Hays, ed., Architecture 
Theory Since 1968 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000), p. xii.
SUGGESTED READING
Bachelard, Gaston. The Poetics of Space. Boston: Beacon Press, 1969.
Benedikt, Michael. Deconstructing the Kimbell: An Essay on Meaning and Archi￾tecture. New York: Sites Books, 1991.
Corbo, Stefano. From Formalism to Weak Form: The Architecture and Philosophy of 
Peter Eisenman. London: Routledge, 2016.
Koolhaas, Rem and Bruce Mau. S, M, L, XL. New York: The Monacelli Press, 
1995.
Leach, Neil, ed. Rethinking Architecture: A Reader in Cultural Theory. London: 
Routledge, 1997.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-22
The colonial era involved various European countries (colonizers) 
controlling and exploiting a large portion of the globe, including 
peoples (the colonized), land, and resources. Much of the world, 
except for parts of the Middle East and Asia, was directly colonized by 
European powers.1
 In the Americas, Africa, and Australia, this often 
resulted in genocidal action against indigenous peoples. Modernity 
and colonialism were linked together as colonies provided resources, 
labour, and markets for colonial regimes. At the same time, moder￾nity was also imposed on colonized nations. Nevertheless, as his￾torian C.A. Bayly points out, modernity also developed in the 
non-Western world despite its beginnings in the West.2
The postcolonial era refers to the period when nations, typically 
conquered by or created by the colonizers, gained independence 
from colonial rule. For most colonized countries, this period only 
starts in the 20th century. Postcolonialism is a concept theorized by 
various thinkers, including Edward Said, Gayatri Spivak, Homi K. 
Bhabha, and Stuart Hall, whose writings often employ poststructur￾alist theory (see Chapter 21). As former colonies secured independ￾ence, they usually attempted to reconnect with their own cultural 
traditions and histories. Most postcolonial countries had endured a 
long period of subservience to the colonizer’s culture, often imi￾tating it as a means of economic survival. One of literary theorist 
Bhabha’s concepts is that of “mimicry,” which can be defined as:
Mimicry in colonial and postcolonial literature is most commonly seen 
when members of a colonized society (say, Indians or Africans) imitate 
POSTCOLONIALISM 
AND HYBRIDITY
22220 Postcolonialism and Hybridity
the language, dress, politics, or cultural attitude of their colonizers (say, 
the British or the French). Under colonialism and in the context of immi￾gration, mimicry is seen as an opportunistic pattern of behavior: one 
copies the person in power, because one hopes to have access to that 
same power oneself. Presumably, while copying the master, one has to 
intentionally suppress one’s own cultural identity.3
Mimicry occurred both during colonial rule and for a period 
after independence. Another of Bhabha’s controversial concepts is 
“hybridity.” It is influenced by the thinking of philosopher Jacques 
Derrida and other writers, which suggests the creation of a hybrid 
condition in the space between the culture of the colonizer and that 
of the colonized. In practice, there was some kind of symbiosis: the 
colonizer often borrowed from the colonized culture, and the colo￾nized likewise adapted elements of the imposed culture. Bhabha pro￾poses hybridity as a forward-looking and evolving condition.4
 Like 
the blending of local and global in critical regionalism (see Chapter 
19), hybridity accepts the complex realities of globalization.
In the case of architecture, the colonizing power usually imposes 
its own methods on the colonized. The colonizers also imported 
architects to the colonies, who often employed locals. When the 
colonizing power leaves, the institutions and instruments of the colo￾nizing nation usually remain in place. It takes time to re-establish 
local cultural practices.
* * *
The development of modern architecture in India was compli￾cated by the reality that India is a complex society with a long history 
of architectural tradition. India was subject to colonial rule by the 
British from 1757 (the Raj beginning in 1858) until 1947, when it 
became an independent nation. The establishment of Pakistan and 
Bangladesh occurred at the same time. The architectural legacy of 
British rule can still be seen in surviving examples of railway stations, 
educational centres, governmental buildings, colonial institutions, 
etc., designed primarily by British engineers and architects.5
Architecture supported the control of India by the British. For 
example, in 1911, it was announced that a new imperial capital city 
would be built in New Delhi, south of the old city of Delhi. The 
plan of the monumental city was devised by the British architect 
Edwin Lutyens (1869–1944), who had no prior experience in urban 
design. Derived from Garden City and City Beautiful planning prin￾ciples (see Chapter 7), the plan perpetuated colonial stereotypes.6Postcolonialism and Hybridity 221
Lutyens also designed the Viceroy’s House (1931) as a synthesis of 
European and Indian Moghul traditions for the dominant site in the 
scheme. Herbert Baker (1862–1946), along with the Public Works 
Department, designed many other structures in New Delhi during 
the period.
Beginning in the early 20th century, previously suppressed Indian 
architects began to find a voice as educational and professional oppor￾tunities expanded. An outspoken advocate for Indian-based archi￾tecture was the engineer and architectural educator Sris Chandra 
Chatterjee (1890–1966), a member of the emerging Congress party, 
the political party of Mahatma Gandhi (1869–1948).7
 His interest 
in tradition was contrasted with some of his contemporaries, who 
explored more modern Western architecture, such as Art Deco. 
In the 1930s and 1940s, Indian architecture was also impacted by 
various Western figures working in the country, including Walter 
Burley Griffin (1876–1937), Marion Mahoney Griffin (1871–1961), 
and Antonin Raymond (1888–1976).8
 This continued in the early 
postcolonial era, during which the influence of Le Corbusier and 
Louis I. Kahn on Indian architects was profound.
Jawaharlal Nehru (1889–1964), India’s first prime minister 
(1947–1964), sought to create a modern nation-state by building 
the economy and new infrastructure. This drive for modernization 
was captured in the development of Chandigarh, the new capital 
city of the Punjab region, designed by Le Corbusier, with Maxwell 
Fry, Jane Drew, Pierre Jeanneret, and a team of Indian architects (see 
Chapter 7).9
 As various regions in India vied for authority, the new 
state of Gujarat, centred on Ahmedabad, emerged as an architectural 
centre after Le Corbusier was commissioned to undertake four key 
projects there in the 1950s. Wealthy mill-owning families commis￾sioned him to design a new headquarters building for Ahmedabad 
Textile Mill Owners’ Association (1956). Along with two notewor￾thy houses, these projects are among Le Corbusier’s most accom￾plished works from the 1950s. In the designs, he demonstrated his 
continuing interest in Brutalism (see Chapter 18) and adjusting his 
work to specific locales.10
The cultural challenges facing postcolonial Indian architects were 
captured in the design for the Gandhi Ghat memorial (1949) in 
Bankipore (West Bengal) following the assassination of Gandhi in 
1948. Designed by Western-trained Habib Rahman (1914–1996) 
and the West Bengal Public Works Department, the monu￾ment was an awkward hybrid of historic Indian and modernist 222 Postcolonialism and Hybridity
architectural references.11 Rahman later joined the Central Public 
Works Department in Delhi, where he played a prominent role in 
designing many modernist projects. He continued in his attempt to 
develop a national style in his unbuilt design for the Indian Pavilion 
for the New York World’s Fair in 1964.12 The continuing influence 
of modernism was felt during the 1950s and 1960s as Indian-based 
firms actively designed International Style buildings throughout the 
country; this included work by firms such as Joseph A. Stein (an ex￾patriot American), Chatterjee & Polk, Achyut Kanvinde, Shivnath 
Prasad, and S.L. Chitale.
The American architect Louis I. Kahn (see Chapter 18) designed 
the Indian Institute of Management (1974) in Ahmedabad and the 
Capital of Bangladesh project (1983) in Dhaka. Anant Raje (1929–
2009) collaborated closely with Kahn and carried on his work and 
design approach after Kahn’s death. In the 1960s and 1970s, Indian 
architects began to forge a distinctive interpretation of contemporary 
architecture, no longer solely influenced by Western modernism. 
This was in part because the International Style proved difficult to 
implement in the face of local building, cultural, and climatic condi￾tions. Achyut Kanvinde (1916–2002), who had trained at Harvard 
under Walter Gropius, demonstrated this trend in his Gujarat state 
guesthouse (1969) in New Delhi and the Dudhsagar Dairy complex 
(1974) in Mehsana, Gujarat. Kuldip Singh’s DDA Housing scheme 
(1976) in New Delhi is another example of modernism thoughtfully 
adjusted to a local context. It was part of an ambitious initiative to 
undertake urban planning and construct affordable housing through￾out the country. As architectural historians Peter Scriver and Amit 
Srivastava write, architects in India were “in a conscious struggle to 
build the physical infrastructure of a modern society with limited 
technical means.”13 Despite the constraints, there was also a lot of 
structural experimentation. For example, Raj Rewal’s (1934–) exhi￾bition facility at Pragati Maidan (1972) in New Delhi employed a 
bold space frame system constructed of poured-in-place concrete.14
* * *
A new generation of Indian architects emerged in the 1960s, 
which included Charles Correa (1930–2015) and Balkrishna V. Doshi 
(1927–2023). Correa studied at the University of Bombay, followed 
by stints at the University of Michigan and MIT. Returning to India, 
he started his own practice in 1958 and, beyond his architectural Postcolonialism and Hybridity 223
work, was heavily involved in the replanning of Mumbai (formerly 
Bombay) over the course of many years. Correa, initially inspired by 
the work of Le Corbusier, later integrated traditional Indian archi￾tectural features into his designs. An important early work is the 
Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya (1963) in Ahmedabad, a museum dedi￾cated to Mahatma Gandhi’s life and located adjacent to Gandhi’s ash￾ram. Correa and Pravina Mehta’s Kanchanjunga Apartments (1983) 
in Mumbai is a distinctive interpretation of Le Corbusier’s housing 
ideas organized in a dramatically shaped tower. The Vidham Bhavan 
(1997) in Bhopal houses the legislature for Madhya Pradesh state, 
with a plan based on a nine-square mandala. In his work, Correa 
often integrated carefully designed pathways, courtyards, metaphors, 
climate controls, and references to Indian cosmology.15
The work of Doshi must be considered among the most important 
architecture in the region. He studied at the famous Sir J.J. College 
of Architecture in Mumbai before moving to Britain and France. 
Doshi worked in Le Corbusier’s office in Paris from 1951 to 1955 
and contributed to the design of Chandigarh, among other pro￾jects. In 1956, he established his own practice in Ahmedabad, where 
he began to synthesize his experiences working for Le Corbusier 
with a growing interest in local traditions. His own house (1962) in 
Ahmedabad was a laboratory for testing his ideas on climate issues 
and low-cost housing.16
In the 1960s and 1970s, Doshi and his firm, Vastu-Shilpa Archi￾tects, designed several townships for large companies as part of a 
programme promoted by the Indian government to develop regional 
economies. His design for the Gujarat State Fertilisers (1969) in 
Baroda is an example of this work. Later, he designed innovative 
communities for the resettlement of impoverished populations. 
Doshi’s urban designs resonate with two influences: the organiza￾tion of traditional Indian villages and urban schemes by the Team 
10 group in Europe (see Chapter 18). Countering Doshi’s township 
design were a series of commissions for larger projects, including the 
Institute of Indology (1962) in Ahmedabad, the daring Premabhai 
Hall (1972) in Ahmedabad, and the Indian Institute for Management 
(with Stein, Bhalla, Kanvinde, 1979) in Bangalore.17 Doshi recon￾ciled his essential ideas in the design of his own studio (1981) in 
Ahmedabad, known as Sangath. Located on the edge of the city in a 
garden compound, the site was carefully landscaped to accommodate 
a series of partially subterranean vaulted spaces.224 Postcolonialism and Hybridity
Following the completion of his studio, Doshi continued to 
develop designs for significant buildings. He was recognized with 
the Pritzker Architecture Prize in 2018 and the RIBA Gold Medal 
in 2022. Other noteworthy architects from the period include Laurie 
Baker (1917–2007) and Uttam C. Jain (1934–), both of whom were 
committed to employing local traditions.
Beginning in the 1940s, several important women architects in 
India were role models for the younger generation. Urmila Eulie 
Chowdhury (1923–1995) was a pioneering Indian architect who 
pursued a varied education, including an architecture degree from 
the University of Sydney obtained in 1947. After gaining work expe￾rience in the United States, she returned to India in 1951 to work 
on the Chandigarh project with Le Corbusier’s team. Chowdhury 
would become the senior architect for Chandigarh (1951–1963) and 
then chief architect for Chandigarh (1971–1976). She oversaw the 
second phase of the city’s planning and designed many buildings for 
the city and surroundings, including the Government Polytechnic 
for Women (1961) and the Government Home Science College 
(1961). She also directed the Delhi School of Architecture and 
Planning (1963–1965) and later taught at the Chandigarh College 
of Architecture (1966–1971).18 She was the first Indian woman to 
Figure 22.1 Section, Balkrishna Doshi, Sangath, 1981, Ahmedabad, India. The 
drawing shows a lower-level meeting area to the left and vaulted studio space to 
the right; upper-level vaulted spaces are shown in the background. Drawing by 
Mohammad Moezzi.Postcolonialism and Hybridity 225
qualify as an architect in India and the first to be elected a Fellow of 
the Royal Institute of British Architects and the Indian Institute of 
Architects.
Pravina Mehta (1923–1992) grew up in a well-to-do family in 
Mumbai during a time when Indian nationalism was hotly debated. 
She was one of the first women in India to study architecture at the 
Sir J.J. School of Architecture in Mumbai. She pursued further stud￾ies at the Illinois Institute of Technology in Chicago. Passionately 
attached to exploring the complexities of Indian culture, she estab￾lished her firm, Associated Architects, with an emphasis on socially 
responsible housing, institutional design, and planning. Along with 
Correa and Shirish Patel, she developed The New Bombay Plan 
in 1965, inspired by Garden City planning principles. As architect 
Madhavi Desai writes:
Mehta was familiar with classical architecture traditions and craft herit￾age of India, which influenced her designs. Her main pre-occupation was 
with re-establishing a link between art and architecture and with Indian 
values which she felt was missing from contemporary Indian buildings.19
Representative projects by Mehta include the Advani Oerlikon 
Electrodes factory (1962) in Chinchwad and the Shree Kirtan 
Hendra Housing Project (1989) in Mumbai.20
By the 1980s, the work of prominent Indian architects had gained 
global recognition, beginning to redress the imbalances created by 
European colonialism. Architects were at the forefront of India’s 
efforts to define its nationhood or “Indianness” by merging tradi￾tion and modernity, often in a postmodern way.21 Since the 1990s, 
a return to traditionalism has been evident in the work of various 
Indian architects, defining another phase in the postcolonial history 
of the country.
* * *
Modern architecture arrived in Sri Lanka in the 1930s; by the late 
1950s, the local architectural scene was small, dominated mainly by 
ex-patriots. However, a different modern tradition emerged with 
the work of Minette de Silva (1918–1998), who was the first woman 
architect in Sri Lanka, and Geoffrey Bawa (1919–2003), a much￾celebrated figure. Da Silva came from a family dedicated to the estab￾lishment of a postcolonial state. Following Sri Lanka’s independence 
in 1948, she trained as an architect in Sri Lanka, India, and at the 
Architectural Association in London. Although influenced by figures 226 Postcolonialism and Hybridity
such as Jane Drew and Maxwell Fry, who had worked in Africa and 
India, de Silva evolved her own approach to regionally and culturally 
appropriate architecture, which involved blending modernist influ￾ences with local traditions. Early projects such as the Karunaratne 
House (1951) and the Senanayake Flats (1957) in Colombo demon￾strate her fusion of Western and Asian traditions by using moveable 
screens and verandahs to manage the effects of a tropical climate.22
Geoffrey Bawa was born into a wealthy family of Sri Lankan and 
European heritage. Initially, he studied at Cambridge University. He 
was called to the Bar in London in 1944. He returned to Sri Lanka 
in 1946 to practice law. This was followed by a period of travel and 
the purchase of an important piece of property he called Lunuganga. 
It was here he undertook experimental projects throughout his life. 
A growing interest in architecture and landscape design led him to 
obtain work in a local architectural office, Edwards, Reid, and Begg. 
He also began to secure his own commissions. Realizing he needed 
formal training, he enlisted in the Architectural Association in 
London, graduating in 1957.23 Returning to Sri Lanka, he rejoined 
his former firm. By 1968, he was in charge.
Early on, Bawa collaborated with the Danish architect Ulrik 
Plesner. The two men developed a tropically suitable architecture 
with pitched roofs and overhanging eaves, built of local materials and 
using traditional construction techniques. Early experiments include 
the A.S.H. de Silva House (1960) in Galle and the Ena and Osmund 
de Silva House (1962) in Colombo. Subsequently, Bawa executed 
several projects for the Catholic church in Sri Lanka and began to 
develop expertise in the design of hotels for the tourism industry.24
The Bentota Beach Hotel (1969) is an artfully designed building 
“that offered subtle hints of a lost world of ancient palaces, medie￾val manor houses and colonial villas while still addressing the needs 
of the modern traveler.”25 The design created an enchanting envi￾ronment out of local materials and established an authentic direc￾tion for modern architecture in a tropical situation. In 1979, Bawa 
was awarded the commission to design a new Parliament complex 
at Kotte, inland from the heart of the capital city of Colombo and 
adjacent to the ruins of a historic citadel. Inspired by various tra￾ditional precedents, the design features a group of copper-roofed 
pavilions located in an artificial lake. Completed in 1982, the par￾liamentary complex was intended to express national democracy, 
although this has been challenged by tension and violence between 
Sri Lanka’s various ethnic and religious communities. Important Postcolonialism and Hybridity 227
late works include the Kandalama Hotel (1994) in Dambulla and 
the Pradeep Jayewardene House (1998) in Mirissa, where Bawa 
returned to a more modernist expression. Bawa’s architecture is 
casual and carefully choreographed, responsive to climate and site, 
and engaged in local and global themes.26 Bawa’s knowledge of 
Sri Lanka’s precolonial and colonial history allowed him to estab￾lish himself as one of the most influential Asian architects of his 
generation.
* * *
The postcolonial era has resulted in numerous interpretations of 
modernity throughout the world. In both India and Sri Lanka, archi￾tects have successfully established locally appropriate forms of archi￾tecture while engaging with tradition and modernism. Nevertheless, 
the postcolonial still exists in those countries that were colonized.
The objective of the postcolonial critique, in this sense, is not to overthrow 
or disband modernism but to destabilize and begin to dismantle  – to 
decolonize – the stranglehold of the “West” on it and also its strangle￾hold on the “West.” Decolonizing modern architecture will not make it 
universal; it will make it global. By setting it into a global colonial and 
postcolonial historical field – which is to say by replacing it back into the 
field that was always the site of its production and reproduction – modern 
architecture has the potential to continue to further develop as a vital 
force for change in the world, today and tomorrow.27
NOTES
1 Ania Loomba, Colonialism/Postcolonialism (Abingdon: Routledge, 2005), 
p. 3.
2 See C.A. Bayly, The Birth of the Modern World, 1780–1914 (Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing, 2004).
3 Amardeep Singh, “Mimicry and Hybridity in Plain English,” see: https://
www.lehigh.edu/~amsp/2009/05/mimicry-and-hybridity-in-plain￾english.html. Accessed October 2, 2023.
4 See Homi K. Bhabha, The Location of Culture (London: Routledge, 1994).
5 See Peter Scriver and Amit Srivastava, India: Modern Architectures in History
(London: Reaktion Books, 2015), pp. 23–69.
6 Ibid., p. 84.
7 See Ibid., pp. 103–104. See also Samita Gupta, “Sris Chandra Chatterjee: 
The Quest for a National Architecture,” The Indian Economic and Social History 
Review, vol. 28, no. 2 (June 1991), pp. 187–201.
8 See Ibid., pp. 110–119.228 Postcolonialism and Hybridity
9 See Vikramaditya Prakash, Chandigarh’s Le Corbusier: The Struggle for Modernity 
in Postcolonial India (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2002).
10 See Scriver and Srivastava, India, pp. 171–184.
11 See Ibid., pp. 129–134.
12 See Ibid., pp. 162–166.
13 Ibid., p. 243.
14 See Ibid., pp. 222–229. See also Vikram Bhatt and Peter Scriver, After the 
Masters: Contemporary Indian Architecture (Ahmedabad: Mapin Publishing, 
1990).
15 See Irena Murray, ed., Charles Correa: India’s Greatest Architect (London: 
RIBA Publishing, 2013).
16 William J.R. Curtis, Balkrishna Doshi: An Architecture for India (New York: 
Rizzoli, 1988), p. 18.
17 See Ibid., pp. 29–31.
18 See Madhavi Desai, Women Architects and Modernism in India: Narratives and 
Contemporary Practices (London: Routledge, 2017), pp. 54–57.
19 Ibid., p. 67.
20 See Mary N. Woods, “Pravina Mehta: A Woman in Post-Independence 
India,” in D. Fairchild Ruggles, ed., Woman’s Eye, Woman’s Hand: Making Art 
and Architecture in Modern India (New Delhi: Zubaan, 2014), pp. 184–206.
21 See Scriver and Srivastava, India, pp. 289–305.
22 See Liane Lefaivre, “Critical Regionalism: A Facet of Modern Architecture 
since 1945,” in Liane Lefaivre and Alexander Tzonis, eds., Critical Regionalism: 
Architecture and Identity in a Globalized World (Munich: Prestel, 2003), 
pp. 46–47. See also Minette de Silva, Minette de Silva: The Life and Work of an 
Asian Woman Architect, Volume 1 (Kandy: Minette de Silva Ltd., 1998).
23 See David Robson, Geoffrey Bawa: The Complete Works (London: Thames & 
Hudson, 2002), pp. 12–25.
24 See Ibid., pp. 49–60.
25 Ibid., p. 96.
26 See Ibid., pp.  261–263. See also David Robson, “Genius of the Place: 
The Buildings and Landscapes of Geoffrey Bawa,” in Philippa Baker, ed., 
Modernity and Community: Architecture in the Islamic World (London: Thames 
& Hudson, 2001), pp. 17–48.
27 Vikramaditya Prakash, Maristella Casciato, and Daniel E. Coslett, “Global 
Modernism and the Postcolonial,” in Vikramaditya Prakash et al., eds., 
Rethinking Global Modernism: Architectural Historiography and the Postcolonial
(Abingdon: Routledge, 2022), p. 11.
SUGGESTED READING
Curtis, William J.R. Balkrishna Doshi: An Architecture for India. New York: 
Rizzoli, 1988.Postcolonialism and Hybridity 229
Prakash, Vikramaditya. Chandigarh’s Le Corbusier: The Struggle for Modernity in 
Postcolonial India. Seattle: University of Washington Press, 2002.
Prakash, Vikramaditya, Maristella Casciato, and Daniel E. Coslett, eds. 
Rethinking Global Modernism: Architectural Historiography and the Postcolonial. 
Abingdon: Routledge, 2022.
Robson, David. Geoffrey Bawa: The Complete Works. London: Thames & 
Hudson, 2002.
Scriver, Peter and Amit Srivastava. India: Modern Architectures in History. London: 
Reaktion Books, 2015.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-23
There is no doubt that the evolution of modern architecture since 
the 18th century has mainly been dominated by developments in 
Europe and the Americas, predominantly by white male architects. 
This is evident in racist attitudes towards the architecture of non￾white cultures found in the writings of certain 19th and early 20th￾century architects and theorists.1
 And yet, as shown elsewhere (see 
Chapters 15, 19, and 20), after World War II, architects across the 
world have re-shaped modernism to local conditions as a central 
aspect of the postmodern age. Even as the world of architectural 
practice diversifies, “white supremacy” remains pervasive and inva￾sive.2
 As the African American architect Harry L. Overstreet writes:
When one surveys the landscape of African architecture, it is easy to con￾clude that little has been accomplished in establishing it in the pantheon 
of accepted architectural styles. Africa has always been at the mercy of 
Christian Europe, the leader and keeper of architectural history. Likewise, 
little has been done to establish the African-American architect in the 
American community. African-American architects are now faced with the 
problems of entrepreneurship in a competitive and, unfortunately, largely 
racist social and political environment.3
The history of black architects in America, sub-Saharan Africa, and 
elsewhere, has not yet been studied in enough detail.
* * *
The Atlantic slave trade that transported millions of black Africans, 
mostly from West and West Central Africa, to the Americas began 
RACE AND RESISTANCE
23Race and Resistance 231
in 1526 and lasted well into the 19th century. Slavery in the United 
States of America was not formally abolished until after 1865 when 
the US Civil War ended. Enslaved blacks played a crucial role in 
building infrastructure and many notable works of architecture, par￾ticularly in the American South. Regardless of the many obstacles 
perpetuated by racism, African Americans began to be formally 
involved in architecture in the late 19th century.4
 The emergence 
of African American architects relied to a large extent on the role of 
historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) such as Howard 
University (established in 1867) in Washington, D.C., Hampton 
University (founded as the Hampton Agricultural and Industrial 
School in 1868) in Virginia, and Tuskegee University (founded as 
the Tuskegee Institute in 1881) in Alabama.
At the Tuskegee Institute, under the visionary leadership of the 
black educator Booker T. Washington (1856–1915), an early archi￾tectural programme for African American students was established. A 
key recruit to this programme in 1892 was Robert Robinson Taylor 
(1868–1942), the first black to graduate from architecture at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Taylor, over his long career, 
designed many of the buildings on the Tuskegee campus, includ￾ing The Chapel (1898), Huntington Hall (1899), and the Carnegie 
Library Building (1901).5
 Many of the early buildings on the campus 
were constructed by students. There were several other black archi￾tects associated with Tuskegee. Wallace A. Rayfield (1874–1941), 
who was educated at Howard University and in New York, taught at 
Tuskegee and eventually practiced in Birmingham, Alabama, where 
he designed many churches.6
 W. Sydney Pittman (1875–1958), stud￾ied at Tuskegee and at the Drexel Institute. He returned to teach at 
Tuskegee, where he designed several buildings. Later Pittman prac￾ticed as an architect in Washington, D.C., where he designed the 
Negro Building (1907) in Jamestown, Virginia. He ended his career 
in Texas.7
 Vertner W. Tandy (1885–1949) studied at Tuskegee and 
Cornell University; he was the first licenced black architect in New 
York state.8
Another important early black architect was Julian F. Abele (1881–
1950), who studied at the University of Pennsylvania, where he was 
the first African American graduate (1902). Abele worked for the 
Philadelphia firm Horace Trumbauer & Associates. In 1909, he 
became the chief designer. Abele was responsible for the design of 
Duke University’s west campus; he designed over 30 buildings (1924–
1950) for the institution.9
 A very talented designer, he trained in the 232 Race and Resistance
Beaux-Arts style but was adept in other styles, including Collegiate 
Gothic. Clarence W. Wigington (1883–1967) was the first African 
American municipal architect in the United States. He worked in 
St. Paul, Minnesota, where he oversaw at least 150 buildings during 
a lengthy career. Wigington grew up in Kansas and Nebraska. After 
working as a draughtsman and designer, he moved north to St. Paul, 
where several of his buildings are St. Paul landmarks.10 Other pio￾neering black architects include John Edmonston Brent (1889–1962) 
in Buffalo, New York; John Louis Wilson Jr. (1898–1889) in New 
York City; John W. Moutoussamy (1922–1995) in Chicago; Robert 
P. Madison (1923–) in Cleveland, Ohio; John S. Chase (1925–2012) 
in Houston, Texas; and, Wendell J. Campbell (1927–2008) in 
Chicago. The McKissack & McKissack firm was established by two 
brothers in 1905 in Nashville, Tennessee; it remains the oldest black￾owned architecture and construction company in the United States.
Howard University established a Bachelor of Science in Archi￾tecture  degree in 1911; the institution has educated many impor￾tant African American architects. Albert I. Cassell (1895–1969) was 
an influential architect and educator who grew up in Baltimore, 
Maryland. He was educated at Cornell University, where he gradu￾ated in 1919. A year later, he joined the Architecture Department 
at Howard University, where he was involved in the design of many 
buildings on the campus and was instrumental in consolidating the 
architecture programme, which was accredited in 1951.11 Another 
prominent member of the Howard University faculty was Hilyard 
Robinson (1899–1986), who was an early African American gradu￾ate of Columbia University’s architecture programme. Robinson 
designed various noteworthy projects, including the Langston Terrace 
Dwellings (with Paul Revere Williams, 1938), a publicly funded 
housing project in Washington, D.C.12
Paul Revere Williams (1894–1980) was born in Los Angeles. He 
studied architecture at the University of Southern California and 
at the Beaux Arts Institute of Design. He was licensed as an archi￾tect in California in 1915. After working in various Los Angeles 
firms, Williams established his own practice in 1923, the same year 
he became the first black member of the American Institute of 
Architects (AIA). During his career, he designed over 3,000 build￾ings. From his mastery of a wide range of architectural styles, he 
became an accomplished modernist. Williams had many white cli￾ents and was famous for designing houses for local industrialists and 
Hollywood stars, including Cary Grant, Frank Sinatra, and Barbara Race and Resistance 233
Stanwyck. By the 1930s, he was involved in designing public hous￾ing projects. He also maintained a longstanding relationship with 
Howard University. Of his larger projects, Williams’s designs for 
the Music Corporation of America (1938) in Beverly Hills and the 
Golden State Mutual Life Insurance Company (1949) in Los Angeles 
are noteworthy. Of his modernist projects, the Palm Springs Tennis 
Club (with A. Quincy Jones, 1947) and the Theme Building at Los 
Angeles International Airport (with Pereira & Luckman, 1964) stand 
out. In 1957, he was the first black architect elected a Fellow of the 
AIA. Williams received honourary degrees from three HBCUs. In 
2017, he was posthumously awarded the AIA Gold Medal, the first 
African American architect to receive the award.13
The first African American woman to become an architect was 
Beverly L. Greene (1915–1957), who graduated from the University 
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in the 1930s. She worked on large 
housing projects in Chicago before moving to New York, where 
she completed a Master’s degree from Columbia University in 1945. 
She was employed by various New York architecture firms, includ￾ing Edward Durrell Stone and Marcel Breuer & Associates.14 Other 
early African American women who practiced architecture include 
Georgia L.H. Brown (1918–1999), who designed many projects in 
Brazil; Ethel M.B. Furman (1893–1976), who practiced in Virginia; 
and Amaza Lee Meredith (1895–1984), who was an art educator at 
Virginia State University and designed her house “Azurest South” 
(1938) on the campus. Norma Merrick Sklarek (1926–2012) was a 
pioneering woman in American architecture who graduated from 
Columbia University in 1950. She was the first African American 
woman registered in New York (1954) and California (1962), and 
a member of the AIA (1959). She worked for several large firms, 
including Skidmore, Owings & Merrill, and Gruen Associates. 
There, she became a director and worked on various high-profile 
projects. In 1985, she co-founded the largest women-owned archi￾tecture firm in the United States, Siegel Sklarek Diamond, where 
she remained for four years. In 1980, Sklarek was the first African 
American woman elected to the AIA College of Fellows.15
The New York-based architect J. Max Bond, Jr. (1935–2009) 
was a vital leader in the American architecture community. After 
graduating from Harvard University, he spent several years working 
in Ghana, where he designed the well-known Bolgatanga Library 
(1967). He was a partner in the African-American firm Bond Ryder 
& Associates (1969–1990), which designed projects such as the Martin 234 Race and Resistance
Luther King, Jr. Center for Non-Violent Social Change (1981) in 
Atlanta, Georgia, and the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute (1992) 
in Alabama. In 1990, he joined the firm that became Davis Brody 
Bond. He was also an educator and taught at Columbia University 
and at City College, New York.16
More recently, African American architects Curtis Moody (1950–), 
Jack Travis (1952-), Phil Freelon (1953–2019), and Mario Gooden 
(1965–) have been leading figures in American architecture. In par￾ticular, the Freelon Group, based in Durham, North Carolina, has 
designed several important buildings, including the Reginald F. Lewis 
Museum of Maryland African American History and Culture (2005) 
in Baltimore, Maryland; the Harvey B. Grant Center for African 
American Arts and Culture (2009) in Charlotte, North Carolina; and 
the National Center for Civil and Human Rights (2014) in Atlanta, 
Figure 23.1 Main Floor Plan, Max Bond Jr., 1967, Bolgatanga Library, Ghana. 
The design features four pavilions of varying sizes and shapes housing an adult 
library, a children’s library, an auditorium, and a staff area; these are intercon￾nected under a large overhanging roof. Drawing by Mohammad Moezzi.Race and Resistance 235
Georgia. Together with Sir David Adjaye and J. Max Bond, Jr., Phil 
Freelon created a consortium (with the Smith Group) to design the 
National Museum of African American History and Culture (2016) 
in Washington, D.C. A landmark Smithsonian institution, the design 
is inspired by both African and African American history.
The formation of the National Organization of Minority 
Architects (NOMA) in 1971 was an important event in the history 
of African American architecture in America. Initiated by several 
prominent black architects, the organization remains committed to 
combating racism in the profession and promoting equity, diver￾sity, and inclusion. Several prominent African American academics 
and writers have taught in American schools of architecture outside 
of the HBCU schools; these include Sharon E. Sutton, Mabel O. 
Wilson, Craig Barton, Craig L. Wilkins, and Maurice Cox.
* * *
With the exception of Ethiopia and Liberia, the entire continent 
of Africa was colonized during the 19th and early 20th centuries 
by European countries (Britain, France, Spain, Portugal, Belgium, 
Germany, and Italy). Many modern sub-Saharan African nations 
gained independence between 1957 and 1966. In the aftermath of 
colonialism (see Chapter 21), most new sub-Saharan African coun￾tries embraced European modernism. Autonomy often came with 
two struggles: to establish a national identity free of the influence 
of the colonial power and to secure economic and political stability. 
Often, the former colonizer remained in control of the economic 
base. Most works of architecture relied on the designs of white colo￾nial firms who remained. Modernization and development led to 
the construction of infrastructure and important institutional build￾ings such as schools, hospitals, and universities. However, by the late 
1970s, the promises of modernization for African nations proved to 
be largely empty.17
An example of colonial modernism can be found in the work car￾ried out in West Africa in the 1940s and 1950s, mainly in Ghana and 
Nigeria, by the British architects Edwin Maxwell Fry (1899–1987) 
and Jane Drew (1911–1996). They had experience working on a 
variety of projects in Britain and later worked with Le Corbusier on 
the design of Chandigarh in India (see Chapters 7 and 12).18 In West 
Africa, Fry and Drew designed buildings for 17 educational institu￾tions and were also involved in town planning. Architectural histo￾rian Rhodri Windsor Liscombe argues that they combined “altruism 236 Race and Resistance
and anxiety” in their quest to develop a modernism suitable for 
sub-Saharan Africa.19 Drew and Fry focused on the “climatic, geo￾graphic, social, and cultural conditions”20 in their designs, something 
they also wrote about in their books on “tropical” architecture from 
the period.21 However,
The well-intentioned but residually superior attitude toward African soci￾ety she [Drew] shared with Fry and the reformist colonial officials they 
befriended limited the participation of the native population. . . . Neither 
Fry and Drew nor their colonial and denominational clients fully com￾prehended the paradox that the new educational construction they were 
enabling reinforced the hegemony of British colonial rule.22
Drew and Fry are representative of the many white firms that worked 
in sub-Saharan Africa during and after the colonial era. Other 
European architects in Africa include Ernst May (1886–1970), the 
German modernist who designed buildings in Kenya and Tanzania 
towards the end of his career. Henri Chomette (1921–1995), a 
French-born architect who moved to Africa in 1948, had a prolific 
career across 23 countries, employing modern architecture carefully 
adjusted to local traditions.23
By the 1960s, sub-Saharan African-born architects began to 
open offices across the continent. Anthony Almeida (1921–2019) 
was born in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, and trained as an architect 
in India. Upon returning to Tanzania, he established himself as an 
architect committed to the principles of modernism. John Owusu 
Addo (1928–) was a pioneering modernist in Ghana who initially 
trained as a teacher before studying architecture at the Regent Street 
Polytechnic in London. He returned to Ghana in 1959, shortly after 
the country had gained independence, where he worked on pro￾jects by Kenneth Scott (1918–1982) and at the campus of Kwame 
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology (KNUST) in 
Kumasi. He also focussed on innovative housing projects during this 
period. In 1963, Owusu Addo joined the new school of architec￾ture at KNUST and became the head of the programme. His larg￾est project was a 13-storey office building, Cedi House (1972) in 
Accra.24 Oluwole Olumuyiwa (1929–2000) was a Nigerian architect 
who studied at the University of Manchester and trained in offices 
in London and Rotterdam. After returning to Nigeria in 1960, he 
established a firm in Lagos, where he designed many buildings and 
was active in the profession. His Crusader House project (1958) 
in Lagos and College of Engineering (1964) in Ibadan are early Race and Resistance 237
examples of his approach to fusing African culture with modernism. 
In Senegal, Pierre Goudiaby Atepa (1947–) had a successful practice, 
opened in 1977.
Several architects have produced a distinctive sub-Saharan 
African approach to modern architecture that diverged from the 
European-influenced style of the 1950s and 1960s. These include 
the Mozambique-based architect Amancio d’Alpoim Guedes (1925–
2015), who was born in Portugal and educated in South Africa. He 
developed an eclectic style in the 1950s that drew inspiration from 
many sources, including traditional African practices. Alan Vaughan￾Richards (1925–1989) was a British-Nigerian architect who inter￾preted traditional Nigerian architecture in his designs. The Nigerian 
artist Demas Nwoko (1935–), whose Cultural Centre (1975) in 
Benin, Nigeria demonstrates how he has employed local methods 
and cultural traditions in unique ways.25
The 1960s saw the birth of a new generation of important 
sub-Saharan African architects. Several of them have gone on to 
international stardom. Effectively, these architects have defined a 
contemporary sub-Saharan African architecture that is appropriate 
to the different regions. The oldest of the group is the Lesotho-born 
Mphethi Morojele (1963–), who has operated MMA Architects in 
Johannesburg, South Africa, since 1995. His firm has a diverse port￾folio of projects, including the Maropeng Cradle of Humankind 
World Heritage Site (with GAPP Architects, 2006) in Magaliesberg, 
South Africa. Diébédo Francis Kéré was born in Burkina Faso in 
1965 and studied architecture in Berlin, where he completed his 
studies in 2004. His early project, the Gando Primary School (2001) 
in Burkina Faso, garnered much attention for the way that it deployed 
local materials appropriate to the programme, climate, and culture. 
Since then, he has designed buildings in Africa and elsewhere; he 
won the Pritzker Architecture Prize in 2022. Other notable projects 
by Kéré include the National Park of Mali (2010) in Bamako, the 
Noomdo Orphanage (2016) in Koudougou, Burkina Faso, and the 
Startup Lions Campus (2021) in Turkana County, Kenya.
The Ghanaian-British architect Sir David Adjaye (1966–) is an 
international figure in architecture, with buildings designed by him 
built across the world.26 Educated in London, he established his firm 
Adjaye Associates in 2000. Early projects, including houses and small 
cultural projects, were constructed mainly in England. His first major 
commission was the Museum of Contemporary Art (2007) in Denver, 
Colorado. Other distinctive art projects include Ruby City (2019) 238 Race and Resistance
in San Antonio, Texas. His most significant project is the National 
Museum of African American History and Culture (see previous). 
Adjaye has won numerous prizes; he received a knighthood in 2017 
and the RIBA Gold Medal in 2021. Other African architects born 
in the 1960s includes the Nigerian architect Olajumoke Adenowo 
(1968–) and Issa Diabaté (1969–) from Côte d’Ivoire.
A younger group of sub-Saharan African architects have also devel￾oped reputations across the continent. Kunlé Adeyemi (1976–) is a 
Nigerian who operates his firm NLÉ in the Netherlands. Notable 
projects by Adeyemi include his Makoko Floating School (2011) 
in Lagos. Others include Doreen Adengo (1976–2022), who prac￾ticed in Kampala, Uganda; Mariam Issoufou Kamara (1979–), who 
established her firm Atelier Masomi in Niger; Mamy Tall (1986–) in 
Senegal; and Omar Degan (1990–) who is from Somalia and is the 
principal of the DO Architecture Group. Despite its colonial history, 
a thriving approach to contemporary architecture is being practiced 
across the continent.
* * *
Regardless of the racist practices of US governments and African 
colonial regimes, black architects have found ways to practice and 
theorize about appropriate forms of building. Pioneering architects 
in the US and sub-Saharan Africa have demonstrated new cultural 
approaches to design, often against the universalizing tendencies 
of modernism. As the South African architect Luyanda Mpahlwa 
writes:
When looking at the specific conditions of Africa’s development over the 
last centuries, the various colonial influences, and the evolving cultures 
of the continent, we must acknowledge that specific African approaches 
to living space and the natural environment have existed. We must begin 
by understanding this history as well as the underlying characteristics 
and informants that define the diverse African cultural experiences and 
practices.27
NOTES
1 See Irene Cheng, “Structural Racialism in Modern Architectural Theory,” in 
Irene Cheng, Charles L. Davis, and Mabel O. Wilson, eds., Race and Modern 
Architecture: A Critical History from the Enlightenment to the Present (Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2020), pp.  134–152. See also Charles L. 
Davis II, Building Character: The Racial Politics of Modern Architectural Style
((Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 2021).Race and Resistance 239
2 See bell hooks, “Overcoming White Supremacy: A Comment,” in Talking 
Back: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black (New York: Routledge, 2014).
3 Harry L. Overstreet, “The Bastion of Hope,” in Jack Travis, ed., African 
American Architects in Current Practice (New York: Princeton Architectural 
Press, 1991), p. 12.
4 See Dreck Spurlock Wilson, ed., African American Architects: A Biographical 
Dictionary 1865–1945 (New York: Routledge, 2004), for a comprehensive 
documentation of early African American architects.
5 See Ellen Weiss, Robert R. Taylor and Tuskegee, An African American Architect 
Designs for Booker T. Washington (Montgomery: NewSouth Books, 2011). 
See: https://www.blackhistory.mit.edu/story/robert-r-taylor. Accessed 
November 24, 2023.
6 See Allen R. Durough, The Architectural Legacy of Wallace A. Rayfield: Pioneer 
Black Architect of Birmingham, Alabama (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama 
Press, 2010).
7 See Linda Komes, The Life and Legacy of W. Sydney Pittman (Charlottesville, 
VA: School of Architecture, University of Virginia, 1992).
8 See Richard K. Dozier, “The Black Architectural Experience in America,” 
in Travis, ed., African American Architects, pp. 8–9.
9 See https://www.aia.org/articles/6306869-julian-abele-honoring-a-legacy￾no-longer-i. Accessed November 23, 2023. See Dreck Spurlock Wilson, 
Julian Abele: Architect and the Beaux Arts (London: Routledge, 2019).
10 See https://www.blackpast.org/african-american-history/wigington￾clarence-wesley-1883-1967/. Accessed November 24, 2023.
11 See https://www.blackpast.org/african-american-history/cassell-albert￾i-1895-1969/. Accessed November 24, 2023.
12 See https://www.arch.columbia.edu/news/hilyard-robinson. Accessed 
November 24, 2023.
13 See Wilson, ed. African American Architects, pp. 619–623. See also Karen E. 
Hudson, Paul R. Williams, Architect: A Legacy of Style (New York: Rizzoli, 
1993).
14 See https://pioneeringwomen.bwaf.org/beverly-lorraine-greene/. 
Accessed November 24, 2023.
15 See https://pioneeringwomen.bwaf.org/norma-merrick-sklarek/. 
Accessed November 27, 2023.
16 See https://aadn.gsd.harvard.edu/people/j-max-bond-jr/. Accessed 
November 28, 2023.
17 See Manuel Herz, “The New Domain: Architecture at the Time of 
Liberation,” in Manuel Herz, ed., African Modernism: The Architecture of 
Independence (Zurich: Park Books, 2015), pp. 5–10.
18 See Iain Jackson and Jessica Holland, The Architecture of Edwin Maxwell Fry 
and Jane Drew (London: Routledge, 2014).
19 Rhodri Windsor Liscombe, “Modernism in Late Imperial British West 
Africa: The Work of Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew, 1946–56,” JSAH, vol. 65, 
no. 2 (June 2006), p. 188.240 Race and Resistance
20 Ibid., p. 193.
21 See, for example, Maxwell Fry and Jane Drew, Tropical Architecture in the Dry 
and Humid Zones (London: B.T. Batsford Ltd., 1964).
22 Windsor Liscombe, “Modernism in Late Imperial British West Africa,” 
pp. 193–194.
23 See Léo Noyer-Duplaix, “Henri Chomette: Africa as a Terrain of 
Architectural Freedom,” in Herz, ed., African Modernism, pp. 271–281.
24 See https://www.design233.com/articles/john-owusu-addo. Accessed 
December 4, 2023.
25 See https://www.labiennale.org/en/news/demas-nwoko-golden-lion￾lifetime-achievement-biennale-architettura-2023. Accessed December 4, 
2023.
26 In 2023, Sir David Adjaye was publicly accused of sexual assault and harass￾ment and creating a toxic workplace by three female employees.
27 Luyanda Mpahlwa, “Reclaiming the Past: Our Heritage, Our Cultures, 
Our Future,” in Philipp Meuser et al., eds., Theorising Architecture in Sub￾Saharan Africa: Perspectives, Questions, and Concepts (Berlin: DOM Publishers, 
2021), p. 154.
SUGGESTED READING
Barton, Craig E., ed. Sites of Memory: Perspectives on Architecture and Race. New 
York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2001.
Brown, Adrienne. The Black Skyscraper: Architecture and the Perception of Race. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2017.
Cheng, Irene, Charles L. Davis, and Mabel O. Wilson, eds. Race and Modern 
Architecture: A Critical History from the Enlightenment to the Present. Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2020.
Herz, Manuel, ed. African Modernism: The Architecture of Independence. Zurich: 
Park Books, 2015.
Meuser, Philipp and Adil Dalbai, eds. Architectural Guide: Sub-Saharan Africa, 7 
vols. Berlin: DOM Publishers, 2021.DOI: 10.4324/9781003403975-24
The impact of climate change began to be felt in the 1960s, at the 
same time the environmental movement started. Buildings, which 
consume substantial resources and energy, are a significant contribu￾tor to climate change and environmental degradation.1
 The con￾temporary environmental movement can trace its roots back to the 
writings of the American naturalist and philosopher Henry David 
Thoreau (1817–1862), especially his book Walden; or, Life in the 
Woods (1854). The publication of Rachel Carson’s Silent Spring in 
1962 underscored how humans are negatively impacting the planet; 
the book was vital in launching contemporary environmentalism.
Architecture has always had a relationship to its environment; in 
indigenous and traditional cultures, buildings were carefully adjusted 
to local conditions, methods, and materials. However, during the 
modern era, buildings were often disconnected from their context, 
a distinguishing feature of the International Style (see Chapter 12). 
Early efforts to create environmentally responsive architecture 
occurred in the 20th century with the work of architects such as 
Frank Lloyd Wright and Alvar Aalto (see Chapters 10 and 19), who 
paid particular attention to the relationship between a building and 
its context. This, along with the use of appropriate technologies 
including vernacular technologies and forms advocated by architects 
like Hasan Fathy and Balkrishna Doshi (see Chapters 15 and 22), is 
the basis of what is termed “sustainable” architecture.2
* * *
ENVIRONMENTALISM AND 
INDIGENEITY
24242 Environmentalism and Indigeneity
The first report on the state of the global environment was pub￾lished in 1951. Since then, many studies, conferences, associations, 
standards, and declarations have followed, all aspiring to reduce the 
negative impacts of humankind on the planet. The United Nations 
was a key sponsor of initiatives like the 1972 UN Conference on the 
Environment held in Stockholm, Sweden, the 1987 UN Brundtland 
Commission report, the Earth Summit hosted by Brazil in 1992, and 
the 1994 UN Framework Convention on Climate Change. These 
were catalytic in raising awareness about environmental issues and 
the pending climate crisis.3
 Important in the development of more 
sustainable buildings are performance standards that govern energy 
consumption, use of resources, and the production of waste. The 
United States Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design (LEED) programme was established in 1998 
as one of several green certification programmes. LEED scores pro￾jects on factors such as site design, water management, energy con￾sumption, and material use. Another important document is The 
Hannover Principles (1992), which was authored by the American 
architect William McDonough (1951–), a pioneering figure in sus￾tainable design.
Beginning in the 1960s, projects like Sea Ranch Condominium 
(1965) in Northern California by MLTW signalled an emerging 
“green” architecture, one tailored to lessening the environmental 
impact of buildings. This was complemented by books such as Ian 
McHarg’s Design with Nature (1969), which remains a seminal text 
that outlines his “ecological planning method.”4
 In the 1970s, radical 
experiments in sustainable architecture, often generated by counter￾culture groups, occurred all over the world as designers grappled with 
the emerging energy and environmental crisis. Building upon novel 
housing experiments in the 1950s, architects in the 1970s placed a 
particular emphasis on reducing energy consumption in buildings, 
focused on harvesting solar energy, and sometimes went as far as cre￾ating “off-grid” solutions.5
 Projects such as the Ark (1976), built on 
Prince Edward Island in Canada as a house, greenhouse, and research 
centre, incorporated solar, wind, and biomass for energy production, 
along with water recycling and food production, in an innovative 
design that was based on the “biosphere” concept.6
 The Ark project 
was supported by the US-based New Alchemy Institute, funded by 
various Canadian governments, and designed by Solsearch Architects.
Despite advances made in the 1970s in sustainable building 
design, the 1980s focussed on the aesthetic and theoretical aspects Environmentalism and Indigeneity 243
of architecture (see Chapters 18 and 21). However, the decade also 
saw the rise of conservation and preservation movements, along 
with historicism and “critical regionalism” as approaches to design 
(see Chapters 19 and 20). Further, during this period, German 
architects were particularly invested in developing approaches to 
green architecture; these included Günter Behnisch (1922–2010), 
Thomas Herzog (1941–), and Rolf Disch (1944–). Writers such as 
Christopher Alexander, Amory B. Lovins, and William McDonough 
also contributed significantly to the concept of sustainable design.7
By the 1990s, the use of sophisticated new technologies was the 
focus of sustainable design, aided by the widespread adoption of CAD 
(computer-aided design) and digital fabrication in architectural prac￾tice. The advent of digital technologies allowed for the modelling 
and testing of conceptual designs. The British High Tech architect 
Norman Foster (1935–) has been an important leader in sustain￾able building design, especially with projects like the Commerzbank 
Tower (1997) in Frankfurt, Germany. The Italian architect Renzo 
Piano (1937–), who was a partner with Richard Rogers (1933–
2021) on the Pompidou Centre project (1977) in Paris, has also pio￾neered the use of technology in a search for green architecture (see 
Chapter 13). This is captured in Piano’s projects, such as the Jean￾Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre (1998) in Nouméa, New Caledonia, 
and the California Academy of Sciences project (2008) in San 
Francisco, California. The British architect Michael Hopkins (1935–
2023) has also applied a High Tech approach to sustainable design, 
although in projects such as Portcullis House (2001) in London, he 
introduced traditional materials and forms. The Canadian architect 
Peter Busby (1952–), who worked briefly for Foster, established his 
first practice in Vancouver, BC in 1984. Since, he has become one 
of the leading “green” architects in North America. He joined the 
US-based firm Perkins + Will in 2004. Important projects designed 
under Busby’s leadership include the Computer Sciences Building 
(2001) at York University in Toronto, Ontario, Dockside Green 
(2009) in Victoria, BC, and the VanDusen Botanical Garden Visitor 
Centre (2012) in Vancouver, BC.8
The greening of buildings with vegetation, including green roofs 
and green walls, has been experimented with by various archi￾tects.9
 The Argentinian architect Emilio Ambasz (1943–) fused 
landscape, vegetation, and buildings together in projects such as the 
Lucille Halsell Conservatory (1983) in San Antonio, Texas, and the 
ACROS Building (1995) in Fukuoka, Japan. The Malaysian architect 244 Environmentalism and Indigeneity
Kenneth Yeang (1946–) has been a pioneer in the development of 
“bio-climatic” skyscrapers. Educated in England and influenced by 
the Japanese architect Kisho Kurokawa, Yeang has practised in Kuala 
Lumpur since he established a partnership in 1977. Pioneering pro￾jects include the Menara Mesiniaga office building (1992) for IBM 
in Selangor, Malaysia, which uses various passive energy strategies, 
including façades adjusted to orientation, shading devices, and green￾ery planted in a spiralling set of sky courts. Yeang has also written 
extensively on green architecture. The French architect Jean Nouvel 
(1945–) has employed vegetation in striking ways, particularly at the 
Musée du quai Branly (2006) in Paris, a museum dedicated to indig￾enous cultures.
The development of passive and low-tech strategies is impor￾tant in sustainable design, as is the use of renewable materials and 
sources of energy. For example, the use of natural ventilation has 
been explored in both Egypt, where Hasan Fathy resurrected older 
methods, and in recent High Tech projects such as the School of 
Engineering Building at De Montfort University in Leicester, 
England (1993) by Short and Associates. Traditional materials such 
as brick and wood are also being employed as local solutions to 
contemporary challenges. Recently, wood has been employed in 
buildings as a renewable structural material, especially in Europe 
and North America, where various architectural practices are pio￾neering in this field. The adoption of green building design meth￾ods and technologies has been slow, with some countries showing 
a stronger commitment than others. This commitment to sustain￾ability will become more imperative as the effects of anthropogenic 
climate change take hold.
* * *
Indigenous peoples (First Nations, aboriginals, or natives) are 
descendants of the first or original people in a territory. Typically, 
they have experienced forms of colonization and violence, which 
often resulted in genocide by disease, force, displacement, or cul￾tural deprivation. Indigenous peoples are found on all continents 
(except Antarctica) and comprise more than 5000 groups in over 70 
countries and number over 350 million people.10 Traditionally, they 
practised localized forms of architecture; many traditions have been 
eroded or lost as a result of colonial rule. Despite numerous chal￾lenges, including institutionalized racism, various indigenous archi￾tects have emerged since the 1960s in countries like Canada, the Environmentalism and Indigeneity 245
United States, Australia, and New Zealand. According to the Maori 
scholar Hirini Matunga, indigenous architecture is defined as:
It is architecture from within the people of this place and their relation￾ship with each other, their cultural values, knowledge and principles, their 
land, environment, geography and climate. It is architecture using their 
natural resources, materials and construction methods and introduced 
materials, technologies and approaches adapted, adopted and nuanced 
to their cultural and social needs. It is also architecture embedded in 
an ever-evolving Indigenous people and place-based aesthetic using 
their palette, colours, designs, patterns, geometry, sculptural forms and 
shapes. In other words, an architecture ultimately redolent of their nar￾rative about their relationships with their place – now, back in time and 
into the future.11
Modern indigenous architecture is specifically designed for indig￾enous communities and is normally rooted in the concept of “place.” 
The values inherent in indigenous “ways of knowing” align with 
sustainable design. Historically, most of the buildings designed for 
indigenous communities were designed by “settler” firms, largely 
unfamiliar with the cultural traditions of the people they were 
designing for. However, a growing number of indigenous architects 
are designing for indigenous communities and beyond.
In Canada, a growing number of indigenous architects are practis￾ing across the country, following in the footsteps of Douglas Cardinal 
(1934–), one of Canada’s most distinguished architects. Cardinal, 
who is of mixed Blackfoot, Ojibwe, Métis, and European heritage, 
has been a pioneering figure for indigenous architects since he com￾pleted his distinctive curvilinear and sculptural design for St. Mary’s 
Church (1968) in Red Deer, Alberta. The design of the church was 
inspired by prairie landscapes, along with Baroque and Expressionist 
architecture. He expanded his repertoire with various buildings for 
the Alberta government before embarking on the Canadian Museum 
of History (1989) in Gatineau, Quebec.12 Notably, Cardinal was 
selected, along with a team of indigenous designers, as the archi￾tect for the National Museum of the American Indian (2004) in 
Washington, D.C., which houses thousands of indigenous artefacts.
Several Canadian architects identify as Métis, which means they 
have mixed indigenous and European heritage. Often their indig￾enous heritage was suppressed, which was the case with the noted 
Manitoba architect Étienne Gaboury (1930–2022).13 A younger 
generation of indigenous architects in Canada is being led by Alfred 246 Environmentalism and Indigeneity
Figure 24.1 Main Floor Plan, Douglas Cardinal, St. Mary’s Church, 1968, Red 
Deer, Alberta, Canada. The curvilinear shape of the building is arranged around 
an altar facing the nave; the various religious elements, including the baptistery, 
confessionals, and choir, are carefully integrated into the scheme. Drawing by 
Mohammad Moezzi.Environmentalism and Indigeneity 247
Waugh (Formline Architecture), Brian Porter (Two Row Architect), 
and Wanda Dalla Costa (TAWAW). The Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission of Canada which produced a wide-ranging report in 
2015 on the history of indigenous peoples in Canada since coloni￾zation, has done much to increase the focus on indigenous issues, 
including architecture, in the country.
Despite a long and difficult history with colonialism, various indig￾enous American architects have established practices since Louis L. 
Weller (1935–2010) was the first Native American to graduate 
from a school of architecture (University of New Mexico) in 1959. 
Weller established his practice in 1980 and undertook many projects 
for indigenous communities. Other American indigenous archi￾tects include Denby Deegan (Denby Deegan Associates), Johnpaul 
Jones (Jones & Jones Architects), and Daniel J. Glenn (7 Directions 
Architects/Planners), and younger architects such as Tamara Eagle 
Bull and Chris Cornelius. The Southern Ute Cultural Center and 
Museum (2011) in Ignacio, Colorado, by Jones & Jones Architects 
of Seattle, is an important example of architecture by indigenous 
architects.14 Many sensitive buildings have also been designed for 
American indigenous communities by non-indigenous firms, 
including the First Americans Museum (2021) in Oklahoma City by 
Johnson Fain Architects, which employs circular and mound forms.
In Australia, a small community of indigenous architects has 
emerged in recent years, including Kevin O’Brien, Craig Kerslake 
(Nguluway DesignInc), Jefa Greenaway, and Andrew Lane (Indij 
Design). Many buildings have been carefully designed for indigenous 
communities by non-indigenous firms, often employing a process 
of inter-cultural exchange. Examples include the Brambuk Cultural 
Centre (1990) in Halls Gap, Victoria and the Uluru-Kata Tjuta 
Cultural Centre (1995) by Gregory Burgess Architects; the Birabahn 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Centre (2002) at the University 
of Newcastle by Peter Stutchbury Architecture; and the Nyinkka￾Nyunyu Art and Culture Centre (2004) in Tennant Creek, NT by 
Tangentyerre Design.
Since the 1960s, New Zealand has recognized the vital role of 
the indigenous Maori people in the nation, along with the negative 
aspects of its colonial history. Like all indigenous peoples, the Maori 
have various types of traditional architecture, aspects of which have 
been interpreted and incorporated in modern buildings.15 Several 
architects with Maori heritage have practised since the 1950s. One 
of the first was Wiremu (Bill) Royal (1931–2013), who was the first 248 Environmentalism and Indigeneity
Maori to graduate from a New Zealand architecture school and the 
first to register as an architect (1957). Another pioneer was John 
Colin Scott (1924–1992), who had the ability to combine modernist 
and Maori traditions, as is evident in his Fortuna Chapel (1958–
1961) in Wellington. Rewi Thompson (1953–2016) established his 
practice in 1983; among his many works, his own house (1985) in 
Auckland is particularly well-known for its distinctive use of a stepped 
form. A younger generation of Maori architects includes Nicholas 
Dalton (TOA Architects), Elisapeta Heta (Jasmax), Tere Insley (Kauri 
Architects), and Jade Kake (Matakohe Architecture). An example of 
an important institution that employed a cross-cultural design pro￾cess is the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa (1998) in 
Wellington by Jasmax, which is the national museum and art gallery.
* * *
Learning from indigenous knowledge and traditions can be a vital 
contributor to the design of environmentally responsible buildings, 
landscapes, and cities. With a particular warning to modern societies, 
Douglas Cardinal writes:
The earth is sacred. The destruction of the land has meant our destruc￾tion. We feel a sense of loss. We feel that the dominant society that is now 
in control of the land is not a fit guardian of this life source. Its technology 
is transforming everything, destroying everything, because it is ignorant 
of the subtle balances of nature. They lack reverence.16
NOTES
1 See Barnabas Calder, Architecture, from Prehistory to Climate Emergency
(London: Pelican Books, 2021); and James Wines, Green Architecture (Köln: 
Taschen, 2000).
2 See Dominique Gauzin-Müller, “A Short History of Sustainable 
Architecture,” in Hans Drexler and Sebastian El khouli, eds., Holistic Housing: 
Concept, Design Strategies and Process (Munich: Detail, 2012), pp. 10–12.
3 See James Steele, Ecological Architecture: A Critical History (London: Thames 
& Hudson, 2005), pp. 165–173.
4 See Ian McHarg, Design with Nature (New York: Doubleday, 1969).
5 See Phillip James Tabb and A. Senem Deviren, The Greening of Architecture: 
A Critical History and Survey of Contemporary Sustainable Architecture and Urban 
Design (Abingdon: Routledge, 2014), pp. 49–74.
6 See Steven Mannell, “Living Lightly on the Earth,” in Building an Ark for 
Prince Edward Island, 1974–1976 (Halifax: Dalhousie Architectural Press, 
2018).Environmentalism and Indigeneity 249
7 See Christopher Alexander, A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1977); Paul Hawkens, Amory 
B. Lovins, and L. Hunter Lovins, Natural Capitalism: Creating the Next 
Industrial Revolution (New York: Little, Brown & Co., 1999); and William 
McDonough and Michael Braungart, Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We 
Make Things (New York: North Point Press, 2002).
8 See Perkins + Will, Busby: Architecture’s New Edges (Seattle: Ecotone 
Publishing, 2014).
9 See Tabb and Diveren, The Greening of Architecture, pp. 75–122.
10 Hirini Matunga, “A Discourse on the Nature of Indigenous Architecture,”
in Elizabeth Grant et al., eds., The Handbook of Contemporary Indigenous 
Architecture (Singapore: Springer, 2018), p. 307.
11 Ibid., p. 308.
12 See Trevor Boddy, The Architecture of Douglas Cardinal (Edmonton: NeWest 
Press, 1989). See also Odile Hénault, “First Nations Architecture: A Long 
Journey Forward,” in Elsa Lam and Graham Livesey, eds., Canadian Modern 
Architecture, 1967 to the Present (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 
2019), pp. 121–152.
13 See David Fortin, “Mixing It Up: Métis Design and Material Culture in the 
Canadian Conscious,” in Grant et al., eds., The Handbook of Contemporary 
Indigenous Architecture, pp. 253–281.
14 See Joy Monice Malnar and Frank Vodvarka, “Contemporary Native 
American Projects: Four Studies,” in Grant et al., eds., The Handbook of 
Contemporary Indigenous Architecture, pp. 707–804. See also Carol Hershelle 
Krinsky, Contemporary Native American Architecture: Cultural Regeneration and 
Creativity (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996).
15 See Deidre Brown, “Contemporary Maori Architecture,” in Grant et al., 
eds., The Handbook of Contemporary Indigenous Architecture, pp. 107–125.
16 Douglas Cardinal, “The Great White Manager and the Sacred Earth,” in 
Boddy, ed., The Architecture of Douglas Cardinal, p. 123.
SUGGESTED READING
Calder, Barnabas. Architecture, from Prehistory to Climate Emergency. London: 
Pelican Books, 2021.
Grant, Elizabeth, et al., eds. The Handbook of Contemporary Indigenous Architecture. 
Singapore: Springer, 2018.
McDonough, William and Michael Braungart. Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the 
Way We Make Things. New York: North Point Press, 2002.
Steele, James. Ecological Architecture: A Critical History. London: Thames & 
Hudson, 2005.
Tabb, Phillip James and A. Senem Deviren. The Greening of Architecture: A Critical 
History and Survey of Contemporary Sustainable Architecture and Urban Design. 
Abingdon: Routledge, 2014.INDEX
Note: Page numbers in italics indicate a figure on the corresponding page.
Aalto, Alvar 114, 148, 182, 188–189, 
241
ABC Group 37
Abele, Julian F. 231–232
Abstract Expressionism 109
Abstract Speed + Sound (Balla) 128
Académie Royale d’Architecture 
156–157
Academy of Fine Arts, Vienna 84
ACROS Building, Fukuoka, Japan 
243
Adam, Robert 16, 45
Addison, Joseph 17
Adengo, Doreen 238
Adenowo, Olajumoke 238
Adeyemi, Kunlé 238
Adjaye, David 235, 237–238
Adler, Dankmar 30
Adler & Sullivan architectural firm 
30, 89, 163
Advani Oerlikon Electrodes factory, 
Chinchwad, India 225
AEG (Allgemeine Elektricitäts￾Gesellschaft) 73–74
Africa: African architects 235–238; 
colonization of 235–236
African American architects 
230–235
Aga Khan Award for Architecture 
151, 152
Age of the Hyperreal 3, 4
Agrest, Diana 170, 209
Agricultural City (Kurokawa) 201
Ahmedabad Textile Mill Owners’ 
Association, India 221
Alabyan, Karo 138
Albers, Josef 160
Alexander, Christopher 161, 243
Allegheny County Courthouse, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 45
All That is Solid Melts Into Air
(Berman) 2
Almeida, Anthony 236
Alpine Architektur (Taut) 105
Altes Museum, Berlin 48, 49
Ambasz, Emilio 243
American Folk Art Museum, 
New York City 212
American Institute of Architects 
(AIA) 162, 168, 232; Gold Medal 
172, 233
American Revolution 7–10, 11Index 251
American Woman’s Home, The
(Beecher & Stowe) 126–127
Amsterdam School 104
Analytical Inquiry into the Principles of 
Taste (Knight) 20–21
Ancher, Sydney 193
Ando, Tadao 203–204, 207
Andrews, John 131, 193
Anthroposophy 103
Antonakakis, Dimitris 187
Antonakakis, Suzana 187
Arc et Senans, France 13
Archigram group 130–131
Architectural Association, London 
162, 214, 215, 225, 226
Architectural Institute of Japan 163
Architecture and the Crisis of Modern 
Science (Pérez-Gómez) 212
Architecture for the Poor (Fathy) 149
Architecture of the City, The (Rossi) 40
architecture parlante 13
architettura povera (poor architecture) 
172
Arda, Orhan 150
Ardalan, Nader 152
Arendt, Hannah 188
Ark, Kyoto, Japan 205
Ark project, Prince Edward Island, 
Canada 242
Armour Institute of Technology, 
Chicago 93
art, architecture as 162–163
Art Deco 221; skyscrapers 31
Arthur and Yvonne Body Art 
Centre, West Cambewarra, New 
South Wales, Australia 195
Art Nouveau design 40, 68, 78–85; 
Adolf Loos’s opposition 84–85
Arts and Crafts movement 56, 66–74, 
89, 123, 158; the Firm 69–70; and 
vernacular architecture 147
Ashbee, Charles Robert 71
A.S.H. de Silva House, Galle, Sri 
Lanka 226
Aspund, Erik Gunnar 188
Atatürk, Mustafa Kemal 150
Atelier 5, Siedlung Halen housing 
project, Berne, Switzerland 179
Atelier Masomi, Niger 238
Atepa, Pierre Goudiaby 237
Athens, Greece 61
Athens Charter, The (Le Corbusier) 
61
Atoll Spa Hotel, Helgoland, 
Germany 174
Atomic Memorial Museum, 
Hiroshima, Japan 201
Auditorium Building, Chicago 30
Aulenti, Gae 172
Auschwitz-Birkenau camp 142–143
Australia 193–195; indigenous 
architects 247
authoritarianism and monumentality 
135–144
author’s methodology 4–5
avant-garde style 100–109
Aymonino, Carlo 191
Baba Housing estate, Prague 119
Bachelard, Gaston 211
Badovici, Jean 117
Baird, George 209
Bakema, Jacob B. 178
Baker, Herbert 221
Baker, Laurie 224
Baker, Sir Benjamin 28
Balla, Giacomo 128
Ballantyne, Andrew 22
Ban, Shigeru 205
Banco Popolare di Verona, Italy 192
Bangladesh, Capital project, Dhaka 
222
Banham, Reyner 124, 125, 131, 179, 
181
Barcelona, Spain 56, 79
Barcelona Chair (Mies van der Rohe 
& Reich) 92
Barcelona Pavilion 92–93
Bardi, Lina Bo 172
Barlow, William Henry 28252 Index
Barnes House, Nanaimo, British 
Columbia, Canada 195
Baron Maximilian von Romberg 
Villa and Estate, Montecito, 
California 169
Barr, Alfred 113
Barry, Charles 50, 124
Barthes, Roland 209
Barton, Craig 235
Bata Shoe Store, Prague 113
Bath, England 22; urban design 54, 
55
Battle of the Styles 39, 44, 46
Baudrillard, Jean 4
Bauer, Catherine 161
Bauhaus 37, 70, 73, 92, 114, 
158–160, 159
Bawa, Geoffrey 225, 226
Bayer, Herbert 160
Bayly, C.A. 219
beauty: concept of 17–18
Beaux-Arts architecture 57
Beaux Arts Institute of Design 232
Beckford, William 20
Beecher, Catharine 126–127
Behne, Adolf 38
Behnisch, Günter 243
Beholding Eye, The (Meinig) 5
Behrens, Peter 72–74, 92, 94
Being and Time (Heidegger) 210
Being-in-the-World (Heidegger) 
210
Belgium: Art Nouveau architecture 
78–79
Bélidor, Bernard Forest de 26
Bennett, Edward H. 32, 57
Bentham, Jeremy 212
Bentota Beach Hotel, Sri Lanka 226
Berlin, Prussia 48–49
Berlin Cathedral 48
Berlin Memorial to the Murdered 
Jews of Europe 215
Berman, Marshall 2–3
Bessemer, Henry 29
Bethune, Louise Blanchard 168
Beverly Willis Architecture 
Foundation (BWAF) 169
Bhabha, Homi K. 219–220
Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris 28
Bibliothèque Royale, France 14
Bijvoet, Bernard 129
Bing, Samuel 78
bio-climatic skyscraper 244
Birabahn Aboriginal and Torres Strait 
Islander Centre, Newcastle, New 
South Wales, Australia 247
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute, 
Alabama 234
Bischoff, Karl 143
Black American architects 230–235
Black Mountain College, North 
Carolina 161
Blake, William 78
Blondel, Jacques-François 156–157
Bloomer, Jennifer 170
Bloomsbury Square, London 54
Boccioni, Umberto 128
Bocconi University, Milan 173, 173
Bolgatanga Library, Ghana 233, 234
Bond, J. Max, Jr. 233–234, 235
Bond Ryder & Associates 
architectural firm 233–234
Borromini, Francesco 182
Borsi, Franco 79
Boston City Hall 179
Boullée, Etienne-Louis 12, 18
Bowali Visitor Information Centre, 
Kakadu National Park, Northern 
Territory, Australia 195
Boyarsky, Alvin 162
Brambuk Cultural Centre, Halls Gap, 
Victoria, Australia 247
Brandenburg Gate, Berlin 48, 49
Braque, Georges 101, 102
Brasília, Brazil 61, 62
Brent, John Edmonston 232
Breton, André 107
Breuer, Marcel 160Index 253
Brick Country House (Mies van der 
Rohe) 92
bricolage 148
bridge engineering 27–28
Brion Family Cemetery, San Vito 
d’Altivole, Italy 192
Britannia Bridge, Wales 28
British Museum, London 45
Broadacre City (Wright) 60, 91
Broadbent, Geoffrey 209
Broadleys, Lake Windemere, England 
71
Brooks, Alison 173–174
Brown, Beverley 3
Brown, Georgia L.H. 233
Brown, Lancelot Capability 19–20
Brunel, Isambard Kingdom 25, 28
Brunelleschi, Filippo 100, 156
Brutalism 97, 179, 181, 221
Building Dwelling Thinking 
(Heidegger) 210–211
Bullfinch, Charles 10
Burden, Jane 68
Burke, Edmund 17–18
Burne-Jones, Edward 68
Burnham, Daniel H. 30, 32, 57
Burnham and Root architectural firm 
163
Busby, Peter 243
Butterfield, William 46
Byker housing estate, Newcastle￾upon-Tyne, England 178–179
California Academy of Sciences, San 
Francisco 243
California Crafts style 171
Calthorpe, Peter 63
Calton Hill, Edinburgh 47
Cambridge School of Architecture, 
Massachusetts 162
Campbell, Wendell J. 232
Canada 195–196
Canadian Clay and Glass Museum, 
Waterloo, Ontario, Canada 195
Canadian Museum of History, 
Gatineau, Quebec, Canada 245
Canadian parliament, Ottawa 51
Candela, Félix 116–117
Candilis, Georges 178
Cannaregio West design, Venice 215
Cansever, Turgut 151
Capela de Pampulha, Belo 
Horizonte, Brazil 115
Capitol, Washington D.C. 10–11, 11
Carceri engravings (Piranesi) 100
Cardboard Cathedral, Christchurch, 
New Zealand 206
Cardinal, Douglas 245, 246, 248
Carrier, Willis H. 125
Carson, Richard 241
Carson Pirie Scott Store, Chicago 30
Casa Battló, Barcelona 80–81
Casabella (journal) 172
Casa del Fascio, Como, Italy 139–
140, 140
Casa de Vidro, São Paulo 172
Casa Milà, Barcelona 81
Case Study houses, Los Angeles 194
Cassell, Albert I. 232
Castel Béranger, Paris 79, 80
Castelvecchio Museum, Verona, Italy 
192
Catholic University of Valparaíso, 
Chile 161
Cedi House, Accra, Ghana 236
Central Park, New York City 57
Centre Georges Pompidou, Paris 132
Cerdà grid plan, Barcelona 56, 79
Cézanne, Paul 101, 106
Chamber of Architects of Turkey 163
Chandigarh, India 60, 61–62, 224
Chandigarh College of Architecture, 
India 224
Chang, Yung Ho 206
Chapelle Notre-Dame du Haut, 
Ronchamp, France 97
Chapel Lomas de Cuernavaca, 
Mexico 117254 Index
Chapel of St. Ignatius, Seattle 211
Chareau, Pierre 129
Chase, John S. 232
Chatterjee, Sris Chandra 221
Chatterjee & Polk architectural firm 
222
Chernikov, Iakov 138
Chicago, Illinois: World’s Columbian 
Exhibition 32, 57; redevelopment 
after fire (1871) 29–32
Chicago Frame 29
Chicago Tribune newspaper building 
30–31
Chicago window 30
China 206–207
China Academy of Art 207
Chitale, S.L. 222
Chomette, Henri 236
Chomsky, Noam 210, 215
Chowdhury, Urmila Eulie 224–225
church architecture, U.S. 171
Church of the Three Crosses, 
Vuokkseniska, Imatra, Finland 191
Church on the Water, Hokkaido, 
Japan 204
cinematic approaches to painting 
127–128
Cité de Refuge for the Salvation 
Army, Paris 97
Città Nuova project 128
Città Universitaria, Rome 139
City Beautiful planning principles 32, 
57, 220–221
City in the Air (Isozaki) 202
City of Culture, Santiago de 
Compostela, Spain 215
City Planning According to Artistic 
Principles (Sitte) 56
Classicism 39; contrasted with 
Gothicism 44
Clifton Suspension Bridge, Bristol, 
England 28
Coalbrookdale Bridge, England 27
Cobra desk lamp 119
Cockerall, C.R. 47
Cole, Doris 127
Colegio de Arquitectos de Chile 163
collage 102
College of Engineering, Ibadan, 
Nigeria 236
Collegiate Gothic 232
Collegio del Colle, Urbino, Italy 178
Collins, Peter 20, 46, 51
Colomina, Beatriz 170
colonization: indigenous people in 
Canada 247
Colquhoun, Alan 41, 85
Colter, Mary E.J. 168
Commerzbank Tower, Frankfurt 243
Communism 135–138
Communist Manifesto, The (Marx & 
Engels) 58, 135
Complexity and Contradiction in 
Architecture (Venturi) 182
composition: and planning grid 36
Composition in Line (Mondrian) 106
Composition V (Kandinsky) 103
computer-aided design (CAD) 109, 
243
Conceptual Art 109
Concerning the Spiritual in Art 
(Kandinsky) 103
concrete 32–33; cast-in-place 179
Conder, Josiah 199
Congrès Internationaux d’Architecture 
Moderne (CIAM) 60–61, 178
Constructivism 137–138; 
Deconstructivism 213–216; 
Russian Constructivism 160, 180, 
216
contextualism 177
Contrasts (Pugin) 46
Convent of Sainte-Marie de la 
Tourette, Eveux-sur-l’Arbresle, 
France 97
Cooper Union School of 
Architecture, New York City 162, 
205Index 255
Coop Himmelblau architectural firm 
213
Copernicus, Nicolaus 2
Corinthian order 18
Cornelius, Chris 247
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 
231, 232
Correa, Charles 222–223, 225
Costa, Lúcio 61, 62, 115
Costa, Wanda Dalla 247
Coulomb, Auguste 26
counterconstructions 106–107
counter-relief constructions 136
Covent Garden Piazza, London 54
Cox, Maurice 235
Cox, Philip 193
craftsmanship 72–73; Wiener 
Werkstätte 84
Cranston, Catherine 82
Critical Regionalism 187–188, 220
Crusader House, Lagos, Nigeria 236
Cruz, Alberto 161
Crystal Palace, London 28, 123
Cubism 88, 94, 101–103, 106
Culot, Maurice 62
cultural appropriation 110n12
Cultural Centre, Benin, Nigeria 237
Curtain Wall House, Tokyo 205
Cuypers, Eduard 104
Dadaism 101, 107–109
Daguerre, Louis 100–101
d’Alembert, Jean le Rond 2
Dali, Salvador 107
Dalton, Nicholas 248
Dante Alighieri 140
Darby, Abraham III 27
Darmstadt, Germany, artist’s colony 
70, 73, 83
Darwin, Charles 36
Das englische Haus (Muthesius) 71–72
da Vinci, Leonardo 2, 18
Davis Brody Bond architectural firm 
234
Deane, Thomas Newenham 67
Death and Life of Great American Cities, 
The (Jacobs) 62
de Baudot, Anatole 32
De Carlo, Giancarlo 178
Deconstructivist movement 213–216
Decorative Art of Today, The
(Le Corbusier) 40
Deegan, Denby 247
de Klerk, Michel 104
Deleuze, Gilles 212, 213, 215
Delhi School of Architecture and 
Planning 224
Delirious New York (Koolhaas) 214
de Mandrot house, Toulon, France 
148
DeMars, Vernon 161
De Montfort University, Leicester, 
England 244
Der Blaue Reiter (The Blue Rider) 
103
Derrida, Jacques 212–213, 220
Desai, Madhavi 225
Descartes, René 2, 38, 210
Design with Nature (McHarg) 242
De Stijl (magazine) 106
De Stijl Movement 91, 92, 101, 
105–107
Deutscher Werkbund 70, 72–74, 92, 
113, 158; Werkbund exhibition 
(Cologne 1914) 104–105
Diabaté, Issa 238
Diba, Kamran 152
Diderot, Denis 2
die Brücke (The Bridge) 103
Die Stadtkrone (Taut) 105
Dieste, Eladio 116
Disch, Rolf 243
Discipline and Punish (Foucault) 212
Dockside Green, Victoria, British 
Columbia, Canada 243
domestic science 126–127
Dom-ino drawing 94
Doric order 18, 48, 141256 Index
Doshi, Balkrishna V. 222, 223–224, 
224, 241
Downton Castle, Hertfordshire, 
England 21–22
drawing methods 100–109
Drew, Jane 61, 119–120, 221, 226, 
235–236
Drexel Institute 231
Duany, Andrés 63
Dubrovnik, Yugoslavia 61
Duchamp, Marcel 107
Duchamp-Villon, Raymond 103
Dudhsagar Dairy complex, Mehsana, 
Gujarat, India 222
Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina 231–232
Durand, Jean-Nicholas-Louis 36, 
39, 48
Dymaxion Bathroom 129
Dymaxion car 129
Dymaxion Dwelling Machine 129, 
130
Dymaxion House 129
E-1027 house, Roquebrune-Cap￾Martin, France 117, 118
Eagle Bull, Tamara 247
Earth Summit (Brazil 1992) 242
Eclecticism 46–47
Eco, Umberto 209–210
École des Beaux-Arts, Paris 30, 
157–158, 163, 170
École des Ponts et Chaussées, Paris 
26
École Polytechnique, Paris 26
Economist Building, London 178
Edificio COPAN, São Paulo 116
Edinburgh, Scotland 22, 47; urban 
design 54, 55
Edison, Thomas Alva 25, 125–126
education and professionalism 
156–164; France 156–158; 
Germany 158–161; United States 
161–162
Eiffel, Gustave 29
Eiffel Tower 28–29
Einstein, Albert 88
Einstein Tower, Potsdam, Germany 
105
Eisenman, Peter 184, 210, 213, 215
El Campanil, Mills College, Oakland 
170
Eldem, Sedad Hakki 150, 151
elevators 29, 125
Ena and Osmund de Silva House, 
Colombo, Sri Lanka 226
Encounters: Architectural Essays
(Pallasmaa) 211
Encyclopédie (Diderot & d’Alembert) 2
enfilade arrangements 194–195
Engels, Friedrich 58, 135
engineering 26–27
English Civil War 7
Enlightenment 1–2
environmental design model 161
environmentalism 241–248
Erickson, Arthur 195
Ernst, Max 107
Erskine, Ralph 178–179
Esposizione Universale di Roma 
(EUR) 140–141
Essay on Architecture, An (Laugier) 
39, 45
Essay on Human Understanding
(Locke) 17
Existenzminimum 61, 118
Expiatory Church of the Sagrada 
Familia, Barcelona 81
Exposition des Arts Décoratifs, Paris 
(1925) 137
Expressionism 101, 104, 158
extermination camps, Nazi party 
142–143
Eyes of the Skin, The (Pallasmaa) 211
Fagus Factory, Alfeld an der Leine 
112, 158
Fairbairn, William 28Index 257
Fallingwater, Mill Run, Pennsylvania 
91
familistère arrangements 58
Farnsworth, Edith 167
Farnsworth House, Plano, Illinois 93
Farrell, Yvonne 173
Fascism: Germany 141–143; Italy 
139–141
Fathy, Hassan 149, 241, 244
Fauvism 101, 103, 106
Federal Center, Chicago 93
Feng Jizhong 206
Ferdowsi Mausoleum Teahouse/
Museum, Tus, Iran 152
First Americans Museum, Oklahoma 
City, Oklahoma 247
First Unitarian Church and School, 
Rochester, New York 181
Firth of Forth Bridge, Scotland 28
Fletcher, Jean Bodman 167
Fold, The: Leibniz and the Baroque
(Deleuze) 213
Fonthill Abbey, Wiltshire, England 20
Ford, Henry 127
Foreign Office, London 46
Foreign Office Architects 
architectural firm 216
Form and Figure (Colquhoun) 41
Forster, Kurt W. 192
Fortuna Chapel, Wellington, New 
Zealand 248
Foster, Norman 131, 243
Foucault, Michel 8, 212, 215
Four, The 81–82
four-dimensional (4D) approaches 
100
Fourier, Charles 58
Fowler, Sir John 28
Fragrant Hill Hotel, Beijing 206
Frampton, Kenneth 188, 195, 196
Frankfurt, Germany 61
Frankfurt Kitchen 118
Frank Lloyd Wright: A Life (Huxtable) 
170
Frascari, Marco 212
Frederick, Christine 127
Frederick the Great 48
Freelon, Phil 234, 235
free plan architecture 93, 95, 97
Free University, Berlin 178
French Revolution 7–8, 11–12, 157
Freud, Sigmund 83, 107, 209
Froebel building block system 89
Fromonot, Françoise 194
Fry, Edwin Maxwell 61, 119–120, 
221, 226, 235–236
Fugisawa Municipal Gymnasium, 
Japan 202
Fuller, R. Buckminster 129, 130
functionalism 35–41; functionalist 
cities 61
Furman, Ethel M.B. 233
Furness, Frank 30, 182
furniture design 92, 119
Future City (Isozaki) 202
Futurism 101, 127–128
Gaboury, Étienne 245
Gamble House, Pasadena, California 
71
Gandelsonas, Mario 209
Gandhi, Mahatma 221
Gandhi Ghat memorial, India 
221–222
Gandhi Smarak Sangrahalaya, 
Ahmedabad, India 223
Gando Primary School, Burkina Faso 
237
Garden City Association 58–60
Garden City planning principles 
58–60, 61, 80, 220–221, 225
garden design: Picturesque 18–20
Garnier, Charles 46–47, 56
Garnier, Tony 60
Gaudí I Cornet, Antoni 79–81
Gauguin, Paul 103
Gay, Peter 1
Gehry, Frank O. 213–214258 Index
gender roles: and discrimination 
166–174; women and domesticity 
126–127
Genius Loci (Norberg-Schulz) 211
genius of the place (genius loci)
187
Geodesic domes 129
George I (English king) 54
George IV (English king) 54
Georges Pompidou Centre, Paris 
172
Georgian City, Britain 54, 56
Georgian period 54–55
German Expressionism 92, 103, 
104–105
Gesamtkunstwerk (total work of 
design) 71
Ghirardo, Diane 170
Giedion, Sigfried 60–61, 97, 177
Gilbert, Cass 30
Gilly, Friedrich 48
Ginzburg, Moisei 136, 137
Glasgow School of Art 81–82
glass: glass manufacture 28–29; 
Glass Pavilion (Cologne 1914) 
104–105; Glass Pavilion, Toledo 
Art Museum, Ohio 205; Glass 
Skyscrapers (Mies van der Rohe) 
92
Glenn, Daniel J. 247
global village 25
Godin, J.B. 58
Goichi, Takeda 199
Golden State Mutual Life Insurance 
Company, Los Angeles 233
Golding, John 101, 102
Goldman & Salatasch building, 
Vienna 85
Goldstone, Jack A. 7
Gooden, Mario 234
Goodhue, Bertram Grosvenor 11
Gordon Wu Hall, Princeton 
University, New Jersey 183
Gothic Revivalism 46, 50, 66
Gothic style 20–22, 39, 46; 
contrasted with Classicism 44; 
efficiency of 40
Government Home Science College, 
Chandigarh, India 224
Government Polytechnic for Women, 
Chandigarh, India 224
Gowan, James 179
Grafton Architects architectural firm 
173
Grande Bibliothèque du Québec, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada 195
Grasshopper floor lamp 119
Grassi, Giorgio 191
Graves, Michael 182, 184
Gray, Eileen 117, 118, 166
Greek architecture 44–45
Green, Christopher 95
green architecture 243–244; see also
environmentalism
Greenaway, Jefa 247
Greene, Beverly L. 233
Greene, Charles Sumner 71
Greene, Henry Mather 71
greenhouse design 28–29
greenspaces 58
Gregotti, Vittorio 191
Grid and the Pathway, The 
(Lefaivre & Tzonis) 187
Griffin, Marion Mahony 117, 221
Griffin, Walter Burley 221
Gropius, Walter 30–31, 37, 61, 73, 
112, 113, 158–159, 159, 160; 
influence of 114, 222
Gruen Associates architectural firm 
233
Gruppo (7) 40, 139–140, 141
Guattari, Félix 213
Guedes, Amancio d’Alpoim 237
Guerini, Giovanni 141
Guggenheim Museum, Bilbao, Spain 
214
Guimard, Hector 79, 80
Guise, France 58Index 259
Gujarat State Fertilisers, Baroda, India 
223
Gumma Prefectural Museum of 
Modern Art, Takasaki, Japan 202
Gwathmey, Charles 184
Hadid, Zaha M. 174, 213, 215–216
Hall, Stuart 219
Hallett, Etienne Sulpice 10
Ham Common housing project, 
London 179–180
Hamilton, Thomas 48
Hampton University, Virginia 231
Hannover Principles 242
Hanselman House, Fort Wayne, 
Indiana 184
Harrison, Wallace 188
Harumi Apartments, Tokyo 202
Harvard University, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 161
Harvey, Brian 131
Harvey B. Grant Center, Charlotte, 
North Carolina 234
Hasegawa, Itsuko 203
Haussmann, Baron Georges-Eugène 
56
Hawkshaw, John 28
Hayden, Dolores 126, 170
Hayden, Sophia 168
Hays, K. Michael 216–217
Hearst, William Randolph 170, 171
Hearst estate, San Simeon, California 
170
Heidegger, Martin 188, 210–211
Hejduk, John 162, 184
Hénard, Eugène 60
Hennebique, François 32
Herron, Ron 131
Hertzberger, Herman 179, 210
Herzog, Thomas 243
Herzog & de Meuron architectural 
firm 216
Heta, Elisapeta 248
Highrise City (Hilberseimer) 60
High Roofs (Williams) 116
High Tech approaches 131–132, 243, 
244
Hilberseimer, Ludwig 60
Hill House, Helensburgh, Scotland 
82
Himmler, Heinrich 143
history, influence on architecture 
177–185
History of Architecture from the Earliest 
Times (Tuthill) 169–170
History of the Art of Antiquity
(Winckelmann) 44
Hitchcock, Henry-Russell 22, 38, 
113
Hitler, Adolf 49, 139, 141
Hoare, Henry 19
Hoare, Richard Colt 19
Hoban, James 10
Hobsbawm, Eric 147
Hochschule für Gestaltung, Ulm, 
Germany 161
Hoffmann, Josef 72, 83, 84, 191
Holabird, William 30
Holabird and Roche architectural 
firm 163
Holl, Steven 211
Hong Kong Peak Competition 
215–216
Hopkins, Michael 243
Horace Trumbauer & Associates 
architectural firm 231
Horiguchi, Sutemi 200
Horta, Victor 78–79
Hôtel Guimard, Paris 12–13
Hotel Lafayette, Buffalo, New York 
168
house, evolution of 126–127
Household Engineering (Taylor) 127
House in White (Shinohara) 203
House of German Art, Munich 141
House over the Brook, Mar del Plata, 
Argentina 116
Houses in Space (Williams) 116260 Index
Houses of Parliament, London 
50–51, 66, 124
Howard, Ebenezer 58
Howard University, Washington, 
D.C. 162, 231, 232
Howarth, Thomas 82
Hume, David 47
Hungarian Parliament, Budapest 51
Hunstanton School, Norfolk, 
England 178
Hunt, Richard Morris 158
Husserl, Edmund 210
Huxtable, Ada Louise 170
hybrid design 47; hybridity, 
concept of 219–227; see also
Eclecticism
hyperrealism 4
Iglesia de Cristo Obrero, near 
Atlántida, Uruguay 116
Illinois Institute of Technology, 
Chicago 93, 178, 225
Imperial Hotel, Tokyo 91, 199–200
Imperial Museum, Tokyo 200
Impressionism 101
India: under colonial rule 220–221
Indian Institute of Architects 163
Indian Institute of Management, 
Ahmedabad, India 222
Indian Institute of Management, 
Bangalore, India 223
Indian Pavilion (World’s Fair 1964) 
222
indigenous peoples: and 
environmentalism 244–248; 
indigenous traditions 110n12; 
New Zealand 247–248
industrial architecture: Arc et Senans, 
France 13
Industrial Revolution 2, 25–33, 54, 
57–58
Insley, Tere 248
Instituto Brasileiro de Arquitetos 
(Brazil) 163
Intentions in Architecture (Norberg￾Schulz) 211
internationalism: and universalism 
112–120
International Style 51, 91, 106, 114, 
120, 222
International Style, The: Architecture 
since 1922 (Hitchcock & Johnson) 
114
International Style exhibition (1932) 
22, 38, 112
Investigations in Collective Form (Maki) 
202
Iommi, Godofredo 161
Ionic order 18, 48
Iran 152–153
Iran Center for Management Studies, 
Tehran, Iran 152
Ireland 173
iron, use in building 28
Ishimoto, Kikuji 200
Islamic traditions 148–149
Isozaki, Arata 202–203
Istanbul Hilton Hotel, Turkey 150
Italian Rationalist movements 40
Italian Romanesque 66
Italy: post-World War II 191–193
Ito, Toyo 204
Itten, Johannes 158
Jacobs, Jane 62
Jain, Uttam C. 224
Jansen, Herman 150
Japan 199–206
Japan-ness in Architecture (Isozaki) 203
Jean Désert store, Paris 117
Jean-Marie Tjibaou Cultural Centre, 
Nouméa, New Caledonia 243
Jeanneret, Pierre 61, 95, 97, 
119–120, 221
Jeanneret-Gris, Charles-Édouard 94; 
see also Le Corbusier
Jefferson, Thomas 8–10, 45
Jekyll, Gertrude 71Index 261
Jencks, Charles 112–113, 184–185, 
209
Jenney, William Le Baron 29
Jewish Community Center, Trenton, 
New Jersey 181
Jewish Museum, Berlin 214, 215
Jiakun, Liu 206
Johnson, Philip 22, 38, 93, 113, 213
Jones, A. Quincy 233
Jones, Inigo 54
Jones, Johnpaul 247
Jones & Jones Architects architectural 
firm 247
Jugenstil, Germany 78
Kagawa Prefectural Office, 
Takamatsu, Japan 201
Kahlo, Frida 114
Kahn, Louis I. 124–125, 180–182, 
193; in India 222; influence of 221
Kake, Jade 248
Kamara, Mariam Issoufou 238
Kammler, Hans 143
Kanchanjunga Apartments, Mumbai, 
India 223
Kandalama Hotel, Dambulla, Sri 
Lanka 227
Kandinsky, Wassily 103, 158
Kanes-Weisman, Leslie 170
Kangyo Bank, Tokyo 199
Kanto Gakuin University, Yokohama, 
Japan 203
Kanvinde, Achyut 222
Karlsplatz station, Vienna 83
Karunaratne House, Colombo, Sri 
Lanka 226
Katsura Palace, Kyoto, Japan 203
Kavinde, Achyut 222
Kazuo Shinohara Atelier architectural 
firm 203
Kearney, Richard 211
Kelmscott House, Hammersmith, 
England 70
Kent, William 19
Kéré, Diébédo Francis 237
Kerslake, Craig 247
Kikutake, Kiyonori 201–202, 204
Kimbell Art Museum, Fort Worth, 
Texas 181
Kingo, Tatsuno 199
Klee, Paul 158
Klimt, Gustav 83
Knight, Richard Payne 20–22
Koolhaas, Rem 213, 214, 215
Koshino House, Hyogo, Japan 204
Kostof, Spiro 120
Kramer, Piet 104
Krier, Léon 62
Krier, Rob 62
Kubitschek, Juscelino 62, 115
Kučerová-Záveská, Hana 119
Kunsthal, Rotterdam 214
Kurokawa, Kisho 201, 202, 244
Kwame Knrumah University 
of Science and Technology 
(KNUST), Ghana 236
Kysela, Ludvik 113
Labrouste, Henri 28
Lacan, Jacques 209
Ladies’ Home Journal, The (magazine) 
126
Lake Shore Drive Apartments, 
Chicago 93
Land Art 109
landscape design: desert landscapes 
168; environmentalism and 
architecture 241–248; landscapes, 
views of 5; northern vs. southern 
Europe 189; Picturesque 16–17; 
and urbanization 54–63
Lane, Andrew 247
Lane, Barbara Miller 142
Langhans, Carl Gotthard 48
Langston Terrace Dwellings, 
Washington, D.C. 232
Language of Postmodern Architecture, 
The (Jencks) 184–185262 Index
La Padula, Ernesto 141
Larkin Company Administration 
Building, Buffalo, New York 89, 
124
La Sarraz Declaration 61
Latin America 114–117
Latrobe, Benjamin 10
Laugier, Marc-Antoine 39, 45
Lazovic, Olgivanna 91
Leadership in Energy and 
Environmental Design (LEED) 
242
Leatherbarrow, David 212
Le Cheval (Duchamp-Villon) 103
Le Corbusier 20, 33, 38, 40, 60–61, 
94–97, 96; Brutalism 179; 
Chandigarh, India 61–62; in India 
221; influence of 114, 119, 221, 
223; in Latin America 114–115; 
Machine Age style 128–129; 
Maison Dom-Ino 205; New 
York Five 184; training of 156; 
United Nations Building 188; and 
vernacular architecture 147–148; 
Weissenhofseidlung exhibition 113
Lectures on Architecture
(Viollet-le-Duc) 40
Ledoux, Claude-Nicolas 12–14
Lefaivre, Liane 187
Léger, Fernand 177
Leicester University Engineering 
Building, England 180
l’Enfant, Pierre Charles 10
Lenin, Vladimir 135, 138
Lenin Institute of Librarianship 
(Leonidov) 137–138
Léonce Rosenberg Gallery, Paris 
106
Leonidov, Ivan 137–138
Leplastrier, Richard 193
Lequeu, Jean-Jacques 12, 14
Les Demoiselles d’Avignon (Picasso) 
102
L’Esprit Nouveau (journal) 94
Letchworth Garden City, 
Hertfordshire, England 58–60, 59
Lethaby, William Richard 71
Lévi-Strauss, Claude 209
Lewerentz, Sigurd 188
Libera, Adalberto 141
Libeskind, Daniel 213, 214, 215
Library of Ste. Geneviève, Paris 28
Lichtenstein, Roy 182
lighting systems 125–126; electric 
light, impact of 132
linear schemes 201
Liscombe, Rhodri Windsor 235–236
Lissitzky, El 137
Locke, John 17
Lodoli, Carlo 36
London: Houses of Parliament 
50–51; urban design 54, 55–56
Long House, The, Dublin 173
Longstreth, Richard 171
Loos, Adolf 84–85, 112, 147
Los Angeles International Airport, 
Theme Building 233
Los Manantiales Restaurant, Mexico 
City 117
Lotus International (journal) 172
Louis XIV (French king) 7
Louis XV (French king) 13
Lovell House, Los Angeles 113
Lovins, Amory B. 243
Lucille Halsell Conservatory, San 
Antonio, Texas 243
Lunuganga, Sri Lanka 226
Lutyens, Edwin Landseer 71, 182, 
220
Luyeyuan Stone Sculpture Museum, 
Chengdu, China 207
Lyotard, Jean-François 4, 23
Macdonald, Frances 81
Macdonald, Margaret 81, 166
Machine Age style 128–129
machines and systems 123–132
MacKay-Lyons, Brian 148Index 263
Mackintosh, Charles Rennie 71, 
81–82
Mackmurdo, Arthur Heygate 71
MacNair, James Herbert 81
Madison, Robert P. 232
Maekawa, Kunio 201, 202
Magney House, Bingie Point, New 
South Wales, Australia 194
Magnusson-Grossman, Greta 119
Magnusson-Grossman (Hillside) 
House, Beverly Hills, California 
119
Magritte, René 107
Maillart, Robert 32–33, 116
Maison à Bordeaux, France 214
Maison Carrée (Roman temple), 
Nîmes, France 9
Maison Citrohan 94
Maison Cook, Boulogne-sur-Seine, 
Paris, France 95
Maison Cubiste (Duchamp-Villon) 
103
Maison d’Artiste (Van Doesburg & Van 
Eesteren) 106
Maison de l’Art Nouveau, Paris 78
Maison de Verre, Paris 129, 194
Maison Dom-Ino (Le Corbusier) 
205
Maison du Peuple, Brussels 79
Maison La Roche-Jeanneret, Paris 95
Maison Monol system 94
Maison Particulière (Van Doesburg & 
Van Eesteren) 106
Maisons Jaoul, Paris 148
Majolica Apartment House, Vienna 
83
Maki, Fumihiko 201, 202
Mäkiniemi, Elsa Kaisa 189
Makoko Floating School, Lagos, 
Nigeria 238
Malevich, Kazimir 106, 136
Mallgrave, Harry Francis 84
Manhattan Transcripts project 
(Tschumi) 216
Manifesto of Futurist Architecture 
(Sant-Elia & Marinetti) 128
Marcel Breuer & Associates 
architectural firm 233
Margaret Carnegie Library, Mills 
College, Oakland 170
Marie Short House, Kempsey, New 
South Wales, Australia 194
Marika-Alderton House, Northern 
Territory, Australia 195
Marine City (Kikutake) 201
Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso 127, 128
Maropeng Cradle of Humankind 
World Heritage Site, Magaliesberg, 
South Africa 237
Marsio-Aalto, Aino Maria 117, 166, 
189
Martin House, Buffalo, New York 89
Martin Luther King Jr. Center for 
Non-Violent Social Change, 
Atlanta, Georgia 234
Marx, Karl 135
Marx, Roberto Burle 115
Masonite House (Raymond) 169
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
161, 231
Massachusetts State House, Boston 
10–11
Massey, Geoffrey 195
materials: Viollet-le-Duc’s concepts 
40
Matisse, Henri 103
Matunga, Hirini 245
Mau, Bruce 214
MAXXI: National Museum of XXI 
Century Arts, Rome 216
May, Ernst 61, 118, 236
Maybeck, Bernard 71, 170
Mayne, Thom 63
McCarter, Robert 90
McDonough, William 242, 243
McHarg, Ian 242
McKim, Mead, and White 
architectural firm 163264 Index
McKissack & McKissack architectural 
firm 232
McLeod, Mary 170
McLuhan, Marshall 4, 25, 132
McMaster Health Sciences Centre, 
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada 131
McMillan plan 57
McNamara, Shelley 173
Meaning in Western Architecture
(Norberg-Schulz) 211
megastructure movement 130–131
Mehta, Pravina 223, 225
Meier, Richard 184
Meiji, Emperor 199
Meinig, D. W. 5
Melnikov, Konstantin 137
Menara Mesiniaga building, Selangor, 
Malaysia 244
Mendelsohn, Erich 105, 200
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice 211
Merton Abbey, London 70
Metabolism 130, 201–202
Metabolism in Architecture (Kurokawa) 
202
Meyer, Adolf 112, 158
Meyer, Hannes 37, 37, 160
Michelangelo 156, 182
Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig 73, 
92–93, 97, 113, 160–161; 
Farnsworth house 167; influence 
of 194
Milam Building, San Antonio, Texas 
125
military engineering 26
Millard, Charles W. 88
Mills College, Oakland, California 170
Mimar: Architecture in Development
(journal) 152
mimicry, concept of 219–220
Ming Quong Chinese Girls School, 
Oakland, California 170
Minimalism 109
Ministry of Education and Public 
Health (MESP), Rio de Janeiro 
115
Mirmiran, Hadi 152
Mission Style 170, 184
Mockbee, Samuel 162
modern architecture: death of 
112–113
Modern Architecture: International 
Exhibition (MoMA) 113–114
Moderne Architektur (Wagner) 83–84
Modern Functional Building, The
(Behne) 38
modernism: definitions 1; late stage 
3; three phases of 2–3
Modernista, Catalonia 78
Modernist City 60, 62–63
Moholy-Nagy, László 160
Mondrian, Piet 106, 191
Moneo, Rafael 39
Monumentality (Kahn) 180
Moody, Curtis 234
Moore, Charles 148, 182, 183–184
Moore, Lyndon, Turnbull, and 
Whitaker (MLTW) architectural 
firm 148, 184
Moretti, Luigi 191
Morgan, Julia 166, 170–172
Morojele, Mphethi 237
Morphosis Architects architectural 
firm 216
Morris, William 66, 68–71, 72–73, 
78, 89
Moscow State University complex 
138
Mother Joseph of the Sacred Heart 
167–168
Mpahlwa, Luyanda 238
MR Chair (Mies van der Rohe & 
Reich) 92
Müller house, Prague 85
Mumford, Lewis 61, 161, 187
Municipal Orphanage, Amsterdam 
179
Munstead Wood, Surrey, England 71
Murano, Togo 200
Murcutt, Glenn 193–195
Musée d’Orsay, Paris 172Index 265
Musée du quai Branly, Paris 244
Museum of Anthropology, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada 195
Museum of Art (MASP), São Paulo 
172
Museum of Contemporary Art, 
Denver, Colorado 237
Museum of Modern Art (MoMA), 
New York City 22, 113, 170, 187; 
exhibition (1988) 213
Museum of New Zealand Te papa 
Tongarewa, Wellington 248
Museum of Wood, Hyogo, Japan 204
Music Corporation of America, 
Beverly Hills, California 233
Mussolini, Benito 40, 139
Muthesius, Hermann 69, 71–72
MVRDV architectural firm 216
Nakagin Capsule Building, Tokyo 
202
Naked House, Saitama, Japan 205
Napoleon Bonaparte 8, 12, 56
Nara Hotel, Japan 199
Narkomfin Communal House 
project, Moscow 137
Nash, John 22, 46, 55
National Assembly Building, Dhaka, 
Bangladesh 181
National Center for Civil and 
Human Rights, Atlanta, Georgia 
234–235
National Gallery of Scotland, 
Edinburgh 48
nationalism: and rise of modern 
nation-state 47; and style 44–51
National Mall, Washington, D.C. 57
National Museum of African 
American History and Culture, 
Washington, D.C. 235, 238
National Museum of the American 
Indian, Washington, D.C. 245
National Organization of Minority 
Architects (NOMA) 235
National Palace, France (Boullée) 12
National Park of Mali, Bamako 237
National Pensions Institute, Helsinki, 
Finland 191
National Romanticism 188
nation-states, rise of 47
Natural History Museum, London 45
nature: Arts and Crafts movement 
67; reverence for 36; as source of 
inspiration 78
Naumann, Friedrich 72
Navier, Louis Marie Henri 26
Nazism 92, 105, 141–143
Nebraska State Capitol, Lincoln 11
Negro Building, Jamestown, Virginia 
231
Nehru, Jawaharlal 61, 221
Nelson, Louis P. 9
neo-Gothic style 20
neo-plasticism 106
Neo-Rationalism 40–41
neo-traditionalism 62–63
Nervi, Pier Luigi 191
Nesfield, Eden 71, 147
Neue Staatsgalerie, Stuttgart 180
Neue Wache, Berlin 48
Neutra, Richard J. 32, 60, 113
New Alchemy Institute 242
New Bariz, Egypt 149
New Bombay Plan, India 225
New Brutalist group 178
New Gourna, Egypt 149
Newhall Be Housing project, Harlow 
New Town, England 174
New Harmony, Indiana 58
New Lanark, Scotland 58
Newman, Barnett 23
New Museum of Contemporary Art, 
New York City 205
New National Gallery, Berlin 93
News from Nowhere (Morris) 70
Newton, Sir Isaac 2, 12
New Urbanism 63
New York Five 184
Nichols, Minerva Parker 167266 Index
Niemeyer, Oscar 61, 62, 114, 115, 
188
Nietzsche, Friedrich 103
Nigerian Institute of Architects 
163
Nine Points on Monumentality 
(Sert et al.) 177
Nishizawa, Ryue 205
Nob Hill Court Condominiums, San 
Francisco 169
Noomdo Orphanage, Koudougou, 
Burkina Faso 237
Norberg-Schulz, Christian 188–189, 
211
Nordic Classicism 188
Nouvel, Jean 216, 244
Nude Dexcending a Staircase
(Duchamp) 107–109
Nwoko, Demas 237
Nyinkka-Nyunyu Art and Culture 
Centre, Tennant Creek, Northern 
Territory, Australia 247
O’Brien, Kevin 247
Observations on Modern Gardening
(Whately) 19
Ockman, Joan 170
Office for Metropolitan Architecture 
(OMA) architectural firm 214
O’Gorman, Juan 114
Oita Prefectural Library, Japan 202
Olbrich, Joseph Maria 72, 83
Oliver, Paul 146
Olivetti Showroom, Venice 192
Olmstead, Frederick Law 32, 57
Olumuyiwa, Oluwole 236
Omar Khayyam Mausoleum, 
Nishabur, Iran 152
Onat, Emin 150
Open City, Ritoque, Chile 161–162
open plan architecture 90, 97, 107
Origin I, Kyoto, Japan 205
Ornament 77–85; traditional, 
abandonment of 77
Ornament and Crime (Loos) 85
ornamentation 30–31, 66–67
Orr, David 163–164
Ortega y Gasset, José 4
Osaka Higashi Post Office, Osaka, 
Japan 200
O’Shea, James 67
O’Shea, John 67
Otis, Elisha Graves 29, 125
Otis Elevator Company 125
Oud, J.P.P. 106, 113
Overstreet, Harry L. 230
Owen, Robert 58
Owusu Addo, John 236
Oxford University Museum for 
Physical Sciences, Oxford, England 
67
Ozenfant, Amédée 94, 95
Paimio Sanitorium, Finland 189
Palace of Labour competition (1922) 
136
Palace of Soviets competition 
(1931–1932) 138
Palau Güell, Barcelona 80
Palazzo dei Congressi, Rome 141
Palazzo della Civiltà Italiana, Rome 
140–141
Palladio, Andrea 19
Pallasmaa, Juhani 191, 211
Palm Springs Tennis Club, Palm 
Springs, California 233
Panopticon 212
Paper Church, Kobe, Japan 206
papier collé 102
parametricism 216
Parc de la Villette, Paris 216
Paris: urban design 56
Paris Opéra 46–47
Parker, Barry 60
Park Güell, Barcelona 80
Parliament Mosque Complex, 
Ankara, Turkey 151
Passanti, Francesco 153Index 267
Patel, Shirish 225
Patkau Architects architectural firm 
195
pattern language 161
Pavillon Suisse, Paris 97
Paxton, Joseph 28
Peabody, Amelia 169
Peace Park, Hiroshima, Japan 201
Pei, Ieoh Ming 206
Pérez-Gómez, Alberto 212
Perrault, Claude 36, 156
Perret, Auguste 33, 94
Perriand, Charlotte 97, 117
Perronet, Jean-Rodolphe 26
perspective 100–101
Phaeno Science Center, Wolfsburg, 
Germany 216
Pharoah, Kyoto, Japan 205
phenomenology 210–212
Phenomenology of Perception (Merleau￾Ponty) 211
Phillips Exeter Academy Library, 
Exeter, New Hampshire 181
Philosophical Enquiry into . . . the 
Sublime and Beautiful, A (Burke) 
17–18
Philosophy of Symbiosis, The
(Kurokawa) 202
photography 100–101
Piacentini, Marcello 139
Piano, Renzo 131, 243
Piano + Rogers architectural firm 
132
Piazza d’Italia project, New Orleans 
184
Picasso, Pablo 101–102
Picon, Antoine 77
Picturesque style 187; gardens 18–20; 
urban design 22
Pikionis, Dmitris 187
Piranesi, Giovanni Battista 45, 100
Pittman, W. Sydney 231
Place Bonaventure, Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada 131
Place of Houses, The (Moore) 184
Plan of Chicago (Burnham) 57
Plan Voisin (Le Corbusier) 60
Plater-Zyberk, Elizabeth 63
Playfair, W.H. 47–48
Pleasures of the Imagination, The 
(Addison) 17
Plečnik, Jože 83, 84
Plesner, Ulrik 226
Plug-In City (Archigram) 131
Plywood House (Raymond) 169
Poelzig, Hans 104
Poetics of Space, The (Bachelard) 211
poetry and architecture 161–162
Pompidou Centre project, Paris 243
Ponti, Gio 172, 191
poor architecture (architettura povera)
172
Pop Art 109, 131, 182
Portcullis House, London 243
Porter, Brian 247
Portland Building, Portland, Oregon 
184
Portoghesi, Paolo 177
Postal Savings Bank, Vienna 83
postcolonialism 219–227
postmodernism 177; definitions 1, 
3–4
poststructuralism 212–213
Poundbury, England 62–63
pozzolana 32; see also concrete
Pradeep Jayewardene House, Mirissa, 
Sri Lanka 227
Pragati Maidan exhibition facility, 
New Delhi, India 222
Prague Castle 84
Prairie Architecture (Wright) 
89–90
Prairie Style 88, 89, 124
Prasad, Shivnath 222
Premabhai Hall, Ahmedabad, India 
223
Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood 68, 78
Price, Cedric 131268 Index
Principles of Scientific Management, The
(Taylor) 127
Pritchard, T. F. 27
Pritzker Architecture Prize 173, 195, 
206, 216, 224, 237
Prouvé, Jean 129
Pruitt-Igoe Housing complex, St. 
Louis, Missouri 113
PSFS Building, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 113
Pugin, Augustus Welby Northmore 
39, 44, 46, 50, 66, 77, 124
Pundt, Hermann G. 48–49
Purism 94, 95, 97, 114, 147
Pyrch House, Victoria, British 
Columbia, Canada 195
Quatremère de Quincy, A.C. 39, 
40–41
Queen Anne revival 46
Queen’s Cross Church, Glasgow 82
Querini-Stampalia Foundation, 
Venice 192
Rachel Raymond House, Belmont, 
Massachusetts 169
Rafsanjan Sports Complex, Iran 152
Rahman, Habib 221–222
Raje, Anant 222
Ranalli, George 193
Raphael 156
Rationalism 35–41
Rauch, John 183, 183
Raumplan concept 85
Rayfield, Wallace A. 231
Raymond, Antonin 200, 201, 221
Raymond, Eleanor 168–169
Raymond, Noémi 200, 201
Reader’s Digest Building, Tokyo 201
ready-mades (Duchamp) 109
Red Army Theatre project, Moscow 
138
Red House, Upton, England 68–69, 
69
Regent’s Park, London 55
Reginald F. Lewis Museum of 
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland 234
regionalism 187–196
Reich, Lilly 92, 117, 160
Reichstag, Berlin 49
Reid, David Boswell 50, 124
Reinforced Concrete Office Building 
(Mies van der Rohe) 92
Reitveld, Gerrit 106
Reliance Building, Chicago 30
Renaissance 156
Reveley, Willey 212
revolution: concept of 7–8; 
revolutionary architecture 14
Rewal, Raj 222
Rice, Lilian J. 167
Richards Medical Research Building, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 124, 
181
Richardson, Henry Hobson 30, 45, 
88, 147, 158, 163, 170
Ricoeur, Paul 188
Riddle, Theodate Pope 167
Rietveld, Gerrit 107
Riggs, Lutah Maria 169
Ringstrasse, Vienna 56–57
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil 114–115
Rittel, Horst 161
Rivera, Diego 114
Roberts, Isabel 167
Robie House, Chicago 89
Robin Hood Gardens housing 
complex, London 178
Robinson, Hilyard 232
Robson Square, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada 195
Roche, Martin 30
Roebling, John A. 28
Rogers, Ernesto 191
Rogers, Richard 131, 243
Rolex Centre, Lausanne, Switzerland 
205
Roman architecture 45Index 269
Romanesque architecture 45
Romano, Mario 141
Root, John 30
Rosenthal Center for Contemporary 
Art, Cincinnati, Ohio 216
Rosetti, Dante Gabriel 68, 70
Rossi, Aldo 40–41, 62, 191
Rotterdam, Holland 61
Rousham Garden, Oxfordshire, 
England 19
Rousseau, Jean-Jacques 2
Rowe, Colin 103
Royal, Wiremy Bill 247–248
Royal Crescent, Bath, England 55
Royal High School, Edinburgh 48
Royal Institute for British Architects 
(RIBA) 162, 173; Gold Medal 
224, 238
Royal Mile, Edinburgh 47
Royal Scottish Institution, Edinburgh 
47–48
Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast, 
Northern Ireland 124
Ruby City, San Antonio, Texas 
237–238
Rudnev, Lev 138
Rural Studio, Auburn University, 
Alabama 162
Rusakov Worker’s Club, Moscow 
137
Rush City Reformed (Neutra) 60
Ruskin, John 46, 66–68, 78
Russian architecture 136–138
Russian Constructivism 160, 180, 
216
Ruth, Dennis K. 162
Rykwert, Joseph 212
S, M, L, XL (Koolhaas) 214
Sacred Heart Church, Prague 84
Safdie, Moshe 131
Said, Edward 219
Saint John’s Presbyterian Church, 
Berkeley, California 171
Salk, Jonas 181
Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
La Jolla, California 125, 181
SANAA architectural firm 205
San Francisco Ballet Building 169
Sangath studio, Ahmedabad, India 
223, 224
San Juan Capistrano Public Library, 
California 184
Sant’Elia, Antonio 60, 128
Saucier + Perrotte architectes 
architectural firm 195
Saussure, Ferdinand de 209
Sayin, Nevzat 151
Säynätsalo Town Hall, Finland 190, 
191
Scarborough College, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada 131
Scarpa, Carlo 191–193
Schauspielhaus, Berlin 48
Scheepvaarthuis, Amsterdam 104
Scheerbart, Paul 104–105
Schiedhelm, Manfred 178
Schinkel, Karl Friedrich 48–49, 92, 
141
Schlachter, August 143
Schlossbrücke, Berlin 48
Schmidt, Hans 143–144
Schmidt, Karl 72
Schmutzler, Robert 78
Schröder-Schräder house, Utrecht, 
Netherlands 107, 108
Schumacher, Patrik 216
Schütte-Lihotzky, Margarete 117–118
S.C. Johnson and Son Company 
Buildings, Racine, Wisconsin 91
Scotland: national architecture 47–48
Scotland Street School, Glasgow 82
Scott, John Colin 248
Scott, Kenneth 236
Scott, Mackay Hugh Baillie 71
Scott, Sir George Gilbert 46
Scott Brown, Denise 166, 182, 183
Scriver, Peter 222270 Index
Scully, Vincent 180
Sculptor’s Studio, Dover, 
Massachusetts 169
Seabird Island School, Agassiz, British 
Columbia, Canada 195
Seagram Building, New York City 93
Sea Ranch Condominiums, 
Northern California 148, 184, 242
Seaside, Florida 63
Seattle Central Library 214
Secessionist movement: Adolf Loos’s 
opposition 84–85
Second Empire style 46, 56
Seidler, Harry 193
Seinäjoki town centre, Finland 191
Sejima, Kazuyo 174, 205
Self, Ronnie 205
Semper, Gottfried 36
Senanayake Flats, Colombo, Sri 
Lanka 226
Sendai Mediatheque, Sendai, Japan 
204, 205
Sennett, Richard 74
Sert, Josep Lluís 177
Seven Lamps of Architecture, The
(Ruskin) 46, 66
Seyhoun, Houshang 152
Sezessionstil, Vienna 78
Shaw, Richard Norman 46, 71, 147
Shingle Style 147
Shinohara, Kazuo 203
Shirokiya Department Store, Tokyo 
200
Shizuoka Press and Broadcasting 
Centre, Tokyo 202
Shonandai Cultural Centre, Fujisawa, 
Japan 203
Shree Kirtan Hendra Housing 
Project, Mumbai, India 225
Shustar New Town, Iran 152
Siegel Sklarek Diamond architectural 
firm 233
Silent Spring (Carson) 241
Silsbee, Joseph Lyman 89
Silva, Minette de 225
Simbirtsev, Vasily 138
Simpson-Lee House, Mount Wilson, 
New South Wales, Australia 
194–195
Sir J.J. College of Architecture, 
Mumbai 223, 225
Sitte, Camillo 56–57
Situationist movement 216
Skidmore, Owings, and Merrill 
(SOM) 163, 233
Sklarek, Norma Merrick 233
Sky House, Tokyo 201
skyscrapers 35; Art Deco 31; 
bio-climatic 244; Le Corbusier 60; 
Mies van der Rohe 93; 
Sky-hooks 137
slavery: and architecture 9–10; slave 
trade 230–231
Slutzky, Robert 103
Smirke, Sir Robert 45
Smirke, Sydney 45
Smith, Adam 2, 47
Smith, George Washington 169
Smith College, Northampton, 
Massachusetts 162
Smithson, Alison 178, 179
Smithson, Peter 178
Soane, John 45, 162, 182
Social Realist architects 138
Solà-Morales, Ignasi de 79
Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 
New York City 91
Solsearch Architects 242
Songjiang Square Pagoda Garden, 
Shanghai 206
Soria y Mata, Arturo 60
Soufflot, Jacques-Germain 26–27
Southern Ute Cultural Center and 
Museum, Ignacio, Colorado 247
Soviet Union 135–138
space and form 88–97
space and time 105–107; 
space-time 97Index 271
space design: Existenzminimum 118
Spaeth, David 93
Spain, Daphne 170
Speer, Albert 142
Spencer, Herbert 36
Spiral Building, Tokyo 202
Spivak, Gayatri 219
Sri Lanka 225–227
Srivastava, Amit 222
SSEC Pompeia Leisure Center, São 
Paulo 172
Stalin, Joseph 135–136
Stam, Mart 37
Startup Lions Campus, Turkana 
County, Kenya 237
Ste. Geneviève church, Paris 26–27
Stein, Joseph A. 222
Steindl, Imre 51
Stephenson, George 25, 27
Stephenson, Robert 28
Stern, Robert A.M. 182
St. George’s Hall, Liverpool, England 
124
Stickley, Gustav 71
Still Life with Chair-caning (Picasso) 
102
Stirling, James 179–180
St. Jean de Montmartre church, Paris 
32
St. Mary’s Church, Red Deer, 
Alberta, Canada 245, 246
Stoclet House, Brussels 84
Stölzl, Greta 160
Stone, Edward Durrell 233
Stones of Venice, The (Ruskin) 46, 66, 67
Stoughton House, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts 147
Stourhead garden, Wiltshire, England 
19
Stowe, Harriet Beecher 126
Stowe garden, Buckinghamshire, 
England 19
St. Peter’s Basilica, Rome 26
Straub, Hans 26
Strawberry Hill, Twickenham, 
England 20, 21
Strawberry Vale School, Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada 195
streamlining in design 105
Street, George Edmund 46, 68
structuralism 179, 209–210
Studies in Tectonic Culture (Frampton) 
188
style: Battle of the Styles 39, 44, 46; 
Beaux-Arts 57; California Crafts 
171; Gothic style 20–22, 39, 40, 
44, 46; International Style 51, 91, 
106, 114, 120, 222; Machine Age 
style 128–129; and nationalism 
44–51; Picturesque style 18–20, 
22, 187; Prairie Style 88, 89, 124; 
vernacular style 146–153
Style and Epoch (Ginzburg) 137
sublime, the, concept of 17–18
Sullivan, Louis H. 29, 30, 35, 36, 45, 
88, 89, 158
Summerson, John 22, 54
Sun House (Raymond) 169
Suprematist movement 136
Surrealism 101, 107–109
Suspended Office Building (Williams) 
116
sustainable design 242; see also
environmentalism
Sutton, Sharon E. 235
Swan, Joseph 126
Sweden: urban design 61
Sydney Opera House, Australia 193
Sydney Technical College, Australia 
193
symbiosis 202
Symbolism 106
Syntax, Kyoto, Japan 205
Tacoma Building, Chicago 30
Takamatsu, Shin 205
Taliesin East, Spring Green, 
Wisconsin 91272 Index
Taliesin Fellowship 162
Taliesin West, Scottsdale, Arizona 91
Tall, Mamy 238
tall buildings 31–32; Chicago 30; see 
also skyscrapers
Tall Office Building Artistically 
Considered, The (Sullivan) 36
Tandy, Vertner W. 231
Tange, Kenzo 201, 202
Tanikawa House (Shinohara) 203
Taslik Coffee House, Istanbul, Turkey 
150
Tassel house, Brussels 78
Tatlin, Vladimir 136
Taut, Bruno 73, 104–105
Taylor, Frederick 127
Taylor, Robert Robinson 231
Team 10 group 178–179, 182, 210, 
223
Team 10 Primer 179
tectonics 188, 196
Tehran Museum of Contemporary 
Art, Iran 152
Tehran University, Iran 152
Tel Aviv, Israel 114
Tempe à Pailla house, Castellar, 
France 117
Temple Bar Square, Dublin 173
Temple of Equality (Lequeu) 14
Ten Books of Architecture (Vitruvius) 
35, 156
Tendenza (Italian movement) 40, 62
Terragni, Giuseppe 139–140, 140
Tessenow, Heinrich 142
Theosophy 103
Therme Vals, Switzerland 211
Thompson, Rewi 248
Thoreau, Henry David 241
Thornton, William 10
Thousand Plateaus, A (Deleuze & 
Guattari) 213
three-dimensional (3D) drawings 100
Toksuka Country Clubhouse, Japan 
201
To-Morrow: A Peaceful Path to Real 
Reform (Howard) 58
Torre, Susana 166, 170
Torre Velasca, Milan, Italy 177
Toward an Architecture (Le Corbusier) 
128, 137
Tower of Winds, Yokohama, Japan 
205
Towns and Town-Planning Principles
(Duany & Plater-Zyberk) 63
Transparency: Literal and 
Phenomenal (Rowe & Slutzky) 
103
Travis, Jack 234
Treatise on Domestic Economy (Beecher) 
126
Trinity Church, Boston 45
Troost, Paul Ludwig 141–142
Troy, Nancy J. 106–107
Trubek-Wislocki houses, Nantucket, 
Massachusetts 148
True Principles of Pointed or Christian 
Architecture (Pugin) 39, 46
Truth and Reconciliation 
Commission of Canada 247
Tschumi, Bernard 213, 216
Tsien, Billie 212
Tsukaba Centre Building, Japan 
202
Tugendhat House, Brno, Czechia 
93
Tümertekin, Han 151
Turkey 149–151, 151
Tuskegee Institute University, 
Tuskegee, Alabama 162, 231
Tuthill, Louisa Caroline 169
21st Century Museum of 
Contemporary Art, Kanazawa, 
Japan 205
two-dimensional (2D) drawings 100
Tyng, Anne Griswold 181
type, concept of 39
type-objects and type-needs 40
Tzonis, Alexander 187Index 273
Uluru-Kata Tjuta Cultural Centre, 
Northern Territory, Australia 247
UN Brundtland Commission 242
Uncompleted House (Shinohara) 203
UN Conference on the Environment 
242
UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change 242
Unique Forms of Continuity in Space
(Boccioni) 128
Unité d’Habitation housing project, 
Marseilles 97, 179
United Nations Building, New York 
City 115–116, 188
Unity Temple, Oak Park, Illinois 89
universalism: and internationalism 
112–120
University Campus UTEC, Lima, 
Peru 173
University of California, Berkeley 
161, 169
University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia 161, 180, 231
University of Southern California, 
Los Angeles 232
University of Virginia, Charlottesville 9
University of Waterloo, Ontario, 
Canada 173
UNStudio architectural firm 216
Unwin, Raymond 60
Upton, Dell 51
urban design: Broadacre City 
(Wright) 91; City Beautiful 
movement 32; Garden City 
movement 58–60; Ledoux’s ideal 
city 13–14; neo-traditionalism 
62–63; Picturesque style 22
Urbanisme spatial movement 130
urbanization: and landscape design 
54–63; urban parks 57; urban 
typologies 41
Usonian houses 91
USSR (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics) 135–138
utopian movements 58
Utzon, Jørn 193
van der Mey, Johan 104
Van de Velde, Henry 72, 73
Van Doesburg, Theo 105–107
VanDusen Botanical Garden Visitor 
Centre, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada 243
Van Eesteren, Cornelis 106, 107
Van Eyck, Aldo 178, 179, 210
Van Gogh, Vincent 103
Vanna Venturi residence, Chestnut 
Hill, Pennsylvania 183
Van Nelle Factory, Rotterdam 113
Van Rensselaer, Mariana 170
Van ‘t Hoff, Robert 106
Vastu-Shilpa Architects architectural 
firm 223
Vauban, Sébastien le Prestre de 26
Vaughan-Richards, Alan 237
Vaux, Calvert 57
ventilation 124–125
Venturi, Robert 148, 182–183
vernacular architecture 146–153
Ver Sacrum (magazine) 83
Vers une architecture (Toward an 
Architecture) (Le Corbusier) 
94–95
Vesely, Dalibor 212
Vesnin, Alexandr 136
Vesnin, Leonid 136
Vesnin, Viktor 136
Viceroy’s House, New Delhi, India 
221
Vidham Bhavan, Bhopal 223
Vidler, Anthony 14
Vienna, Austria 56–57, 82–84
Vienna Secession 83–84
Viipuri Public Library, Finland 189
Villa Balling, Prague 119
villa design 20
Villa Mairea, Noormarkku, Finland 
189–190274 Index
Villa Savoye, Poissy, France 95
Villa Stein de Monzie, Garches, 
France 95, 96
Villa Suk, Prague 119
Ville Radieuse (Le Corbusier) 60
Viollet-le-Duc, Eugène-Emmanuel 
36, 39–40, 46, 78, 79
Virginia State Capitol, Richmond, 
Virginia 9
Vitruvius 18, 35, 156
Vkhutemas school, Moscow 161
von Klenze, Leo 49
Voysey, Charles Francis Annesley 71
Vriesendorp, Madelon 214
Wagner, Otto 83–84
Wainwright Building, St. Louis, 
Missouri 30, 31
Walden (Thoreau) 241
Walking City (Archigram) 131
Wallot, Paul 49
Walpole, Horace 20, 21
Walt Disney Concert Hall, Los 
Angeles 214
Walter, Thomas U. 10
Wang Shu 206, 207
Warchavchik, Gregori 114
Ward Willits House, Highland Park, 
Illinois 89, 90
Warhol, Andy 182
Washington, Booker T. 231
Washington, D.C. design 10
Wasmuth portfolio (Wright) 88
Watanable, Jin 200
Waterhouse, Alfred 45
Watt, James 27
Waugh, Alfred 245–247
Webb, Philip 68–70, 71
Weisman, Leslie Kanes 174
Weissenhofseidlung Exhibition 
(Stuttgart 1927) 92, 112, 113
Weller, Louis L. 247
Wexner Center for the Visual Arts, 
Columbus, Ohio 215
Whately, Thomas 19
Whellan, Edward 67
White City, Chicago (1893) 57
White House, Washington, D.C. 10
White U house, Tokyo 204–205
wicked problems 161
Wiener Werkstätte 70, 84
Wigington, Clarence W. 232
Wigley, Mark 213
Wilbraham, Lady 167
Wilkins, Craig L. 235
Wilkinson, John 27
Williams, Amancio 116
Williams, Paul Revere 232
Williams, Tod 212
Willis, Beverly 169
Wilson, John Louis, Jr. 232
Wilson, Mabel O. 9–10, 235
Winckelmann, Johann Joachim 44
Windyhill, Kilmalcolm, Scotland 82
Winslow House, River Forest, Illinois 
89
Woman’s Building (1893 World’s 
Columbian Exposition) 168
women in architecture 166–174; 
African American women 
233; India 224–225; Modern 
Movement 117–120
Wood, Gordon S. 11
Wood, John the Elder 55
Wood, John the Younger 55
Woods, Shadrach 178
Woodward, Benjamin 67
Woolworth Building, New York 
City 30
Wren, Sir Christopher 156
Wright, Frank Lloyd 20, 30, 36, 
40, 60, 74, 88–89, 241; Imperial 
Hotel, Tokyo 199–200; influence/
legacy 112, 124, 191; machines 
and systems 123; Modern 
Architecture: International 
Exhibition at MoMA 113; space, 
definition and fusion 90–91; 
Taliesin Fellowship 162; training 
of 156Index 275
Wright, Gwendolyn 170
Wurster, William W. 161
Wyatt, James 20
Yale Center for British Art, New 
Haven, Connecticut 181
Yale University Art Gallery, New 
Haven, Connecticut 181
Yamanashi Museum of Fruit, Japan 
203
Yamanashi Press and Broadcasting 
Headquarters, Kofu, Japan 201
Yamasaki, Minoru 113
Yeang, Kenneth 244
Yorinaka, Tsumaki 199
York University, Computer Sciences 
Building, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada 243
Yoshida, Tetsuro 200
Young Women’s Christian 
Association (YWCA) 171
Yoyogi National Indoor Stadium, 
Tokyo 201
Zenghelis, Elia 214
Zenghelis, Zoe 214
Zevi, Bruno 172
Zeyrek Social Security Agency, 
Istanbul, Turkey 151, 151
Zumthor, Peter 211
