Modern Materials
 
and Manufacturing
 
Techniques
 
The text provides the reader with an in-depth understanding of the need for next￾generation materials and manufacturing, especially in terms of designing process, 
manufacturing, upscaling, and finally selection for industrial applications. It 
further discusses path-planning strategies for robot-based additive manufacturing. 
•	 Discusses synthesis, modelling, and analysis of green composites and 
functionally graded materials. 
•	 Explains hybrid manufacturing processes to address the challenges faced by 
the manufacturing industries. 
•	 Covers additive manufacturing of advanced materials for smart products. 
•	 Presents applications of lasers for sensing, characterization, and material 
processing. 
•	 Illustrates principles and applications of additive manufacturing and cold 
spray-based additive manufacturing. 
The book focuses on sustainability in material and manufacturing processes. It 
covers important topics such as material recycling, optimal utilization of resources, 
green materials, improving surface inhomogeneity, stable material properties, 
and utilization of renewable energy sources. The text highlights the applications 
of deep learning for diagnosis and analysis in materials and manufacturing 
technologies. It is primarily written for senior undergraduate students, graduate 
students, and academic researchers in the fields of manufacturing engineering, 
industrial and production engineering, materials science and engineering, and 
mechanical engineering. Modern Materials
 
and Manufacturing
 
Techniques
 
Edited by Ravi Kant Front cover image: Andrei Armiagov/Shutterstock 
First edition published 2024 
by CRC Press 
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 
and by CRC Press 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
© 2024 selection and editorial matter, Ravi Kant individual chapters, 
the contributors 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the 
author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or 
the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace 
the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to 
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any 
copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we 
may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be 
reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access 
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not 
available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to 
infringe. 
ISBN: 978-1-032-56633-7 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-032-70303-9 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-032-70304-6 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046 
Typeset in Times New Roman 
by Apex CoVantage, LLC Dedicated to my Parents,Wife and Son  
 
 
 
 
 Contents
 
Preface xv

About the editor xxi
 
List of contributors xxiii
 
Acknowledgements xix
 
1 Green composites for sustainable applications 1 
PA P I YA B H O W M I K , R AV I K A N T A N D H A R P R E E T S I N G H 
1.1 Introduction 1 

1.2 Natural polymers and fibres 2 

1.2.1 Natural polymers 2 

1.2.2 Natural fibres 3 

1.3 Comparison with MMCs, CMCs, synthetic NPMCs 3 

1.4 Bio‑coatings for the composite 8 

1.5 Biodegradability and environmental aspect 12 

1.6 Developments and applications 13 

1.7 Conclusion 16 

References 17
 
2 Metallic functionally graded materials 26 
KRISHAN KUMAR , KHUSHBOO RAKHA , SHAHRIAR REZA 
AND HARPREET SINGH 
2.1 Introduction 26 

2.2 Modeling and optimization of FGMs 30 

2.2.1 Microstructurally graded material 32 

2.2.2 Structurally graded material 32 

2.2.3 Compositionally graded material 33 

vii  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
viii Contents 
2.3 Manufacturing techniques of FGM objects 34
 
2.3.1 Conventional fabrication processes 38
 
2.3.2 Advanced fabrication processes 40
 
2.4 Auxiliary aspects of FGM fabrications 44
 
2.4.1 Toolpath planning and scanning strategies for 

advanced fabrication processes 44
 
2.4.2 Powder feeding system of PBF‑based AM
 
process 47
 
2.4.3 Support structure in AM of FGMs 47
 
2.5 Post‑processing 48
 
2.6 Testing and characterization 49
 
2.7 Challenges and future directions 52
 
2.7.1 Modeling and design 52
 
2.7.2 Alloy incompatibility and insolubility 53
 
2.7.3 Process modeling 53
 
2.7.4 Advanced characterization 53
 
2.8 Summary and concluding remarks 54
 
2.8.1 Statements and declarations 55
 
2.8.2 Competing interest 55
 
2.8.3 Funding 55
 
References 55
 
3 An overview of power factor correction techniques 
JAGDEEP KAUR BRAR AND YADWINDER PAL SHARMA 
3.1 Introduction 65
 
3.2 Drawbacks of low power factor 66
 
3.3 Low power factor causes 67
 
3.4 Importance of increasing power factor 68
 
3.5 Power factor correction calculation 68
 
3.6 Improving the energy factor techniques 69
 
3.7 Static capacitor 69
 
3.8 Power factor correction by passive circuit 70
 
3.9 Power factor enhancement by active circuit 71
 
3.10 Synchronous condensers 71
 
3.11 Phase advancers 71
 
3.12 Power factor improvement by using active filter 72
 
3.13 Power factor improvement by MPPT or DC/DC
 
converter 74
 
3.14 Thyristorized automatic power factor improvement unit 75
 
3.15 Automatic power factor controller 76
 
65  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents ix
 
3.16 Single‑phase power factor correction using PSO‑based 

fixed PWM 79
 
3.17 Power factor improvement with help of SEPIC DC‑DC
 
converter 80
 
3.18 The boost power factor correction converter 81
 
3.19 PLC‑based power factor correction 82
 
3.20 Improve power factor through an on‑demand tap 

changer 83
 
3.21 Power factor improvement by using dynamic voltage 

restorer (DVR) 83
 
3.22 Power factor improvement by LLC resonant converter 84
 
3.23 Latest technology in power factor correction technique is 

static VAR generators 85
 
3.24 Real‑time enhancement of reactive power for an intelligent 

system using a genetic algorithm 85
 
3.25 Polymer‑based thermoelectric materials used for 

improving power factor 86
 
3.26 Power factor correction’s benefits 86
 
3.27 Some energy storage devices 88
 
3.28 Works in connection 89
 
3.29 Conclusion 91
 
References 92
 
4 Parametric approach of magnetorheological external 
finishing tool for its better functionality 
AJAY SINGH RANA, TALWINDER SINGH BEDI AND HEMA GURUNG 
4.1 Introduction and background 96
 
4.2 Magnetostatic simulation 97
 
4.3 Experimental setup and process variables 98
 
4.3.1 Workpiece rotational speed (A) 100
 
4.3.2 Tool linear speed (B) 100
 
4.3.3 Mesh sizes of SiC (C) 100
 
4.3.4 Mesh sizes of electrolyte iron powders (D) 100
 
4.4 Design of experiments 101
 
4.4.1 Regression analysis 102
 
4.5 Results and discussion 109
 
4.5.1 Effect of workpiece rotational speed (A) 109
 
4.5.2 Effect of tool linear speed (B) 109
 
4.5.3 Effect of different mesh sizes of SiC (C) 110
 
4.5.4 Effect of different mesh sizes of EIPs (D) 111
 
96  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x Contents 
4.5.5 Effect of workpiece rotational speed (A) with different 

mesh sizes of SiC (C) 112
 
4.5.6 Effect of workpiece rotational speed (A) with different 

mesh sizes of EIPs (D) 113
 
4.5.7 Effect of tool linear speed (b) with different mesh 

sizes of SiC (C) 113
 
4.5.8 Effect of Tool linear speed (B) with different mesh 

sizes of EIPs (D) 115
 
4.6 Confirmatory experimentation 116
 
4.7 Conclusions 116
 
References 118
 
5 Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding using 
secondary heating sources 120 
ANKIT MANI TRIPATHI, R. C. SINGH, RAJIV CHAUDHARY 
A N D R AV I K A N T 
5.1	 Introduction 120
 
5.2	 Laser‑assisted FSW (LaFSW) 121
 
5.3	 Electrically assisted friction stir welding (EaFSW) 124
 
5.4	 Induction‑assisted friction stir welding (IaFSW) 130
 
5.5	 Ultrasonic vibration enhanced friction stir welding 

(UVeFSW) 135
 
5.6	 Other hybrid assisted friction stir welding processes 140
 
5.7	 Modelling 142
 
5.8	 Defects 147
 
5.9	 Applications 150
 
5.10 Conclusion 150
 
References 151
 
6 An overview of robot assisted additive 
manufacturing 154 
S U M I T K U M A R R AT H O R, AV N E E S H K U M A R, R AV I K A N T 
AND EKTA SINGLA 
6.1 Introduction 154
 
6.1.1 Additive Manufacturing 154
 
6.1.2 Role of robotics in additive manufacturing 155
 
6.2 Robotic additive manufacturing: advance processes 158
 
6.2.1 Directed energy deposition 158
 
6.2.2 Material extrusion 160
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents xi
 
6.2.3 Cold spray additive manufacturing 162
 
6.3 Robotic additive manufacturing: advance materials 165
 
6.3.1 Carbon fiber‑reinforced polymers 166
 
6.3.2 Metal matrix composites 166
 
6.3.3 Functionally graded materials 166
 
6.4 Path‑planning strategies in additive manufacturing 168
 
6.5 Future perspective of advance robotic systems for 

additive manufacturing 170
 
6.5.1 Collaborative robots 170
 
6.5.2 Autonomous robots 171
 
6.5.3 Mobile robots 172
 
6.6 Conclusions 174
 
References 174
 
7 A review on fundamentals of cold spray 
additive manufacturing 
G I D L A V I N AY, R AV I K A N T A N D H A R P R E E T S I N G H 
7.1 Introduction 180
 
7.2 Bonding mechanism 181
 
7.2.1 Adiabatic shear instability 182
 
7.2.2 Hydrodynamic plasticity 184
 
7.2.3 Rebound phenomenon 184
 
7.3 Types of cold spray system 185
 
7.3.1 High‑pressure cold spray system 186
 
7.3.2 Low‑pressure cold spray system 186
 
7.4 Process parameters 187
 
7.4.1 Working gas and process pressure 187
 
7.4.2 Temperature 187
 
7.4.3 Feed rate, scan speed, spray angle and standoff distance 189
 
7.4.4 Powder size and morphology 191
 
7.4.5 Substrate 193
 
7.5 Nozzle Geometry 195
 
7.5.1 Design and mach number 195
 
7.5.2 Divergent section 197
 
7.6 Post‑Processing of CS coatings 197
 
7.6.1 Vacuum/inert heat treatment 198
 
7.6.2 Friction stir processing 199
 
7.6.3 Laser remelting 199
 
7.6.4 Shot peening and in situ hammering 199
 
7.7 Effect of post‑processing on properties of CS coatings 200
 
180  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xii Contents 
7.7.1 Electrical conductivity 200
 
7.7.2 Corrosion resistance 202
 
7.7.3 Hardness 202
 
7.7.4 Elastic modulus 203
 
7.7.5 Fracture 203
 
7.8 Summary and scope 204
 
References 205
 
8 Machine learning and additive manufacturing: a case 
study for quality control and monitoring 211 
AYUSH PRATAP, ATUL PANDEY AND NEHA SARDANA 
8.1 Introduction 211
 
8.2 Machine learning and quality control 212
 
8.3 Additive manufacturing in industry 4.0 214
 
8.4 Case studies with deep learning 215
 
8.4.1 Cold spray 215
 
8.4.2 Powder bed fusion 216
 
8.4.3 Material extrusion 219
 
8.4.4 Binder jetting 220
 
8.4.5 Direct energy deposition 222
 
8.5 Future scope 224
 
8.5.1 Digital twin 224
 
8.5.2 Internet of things 225
 
8.5.3 Automation 225
 
8.6 Conclusion 225
 
References 226
 
9 An insight into applications of laser in modern era 235 
R A H U L N A I R, R AV I K A N T A N D H E M A G U R U N G 
9.1 Introduction 235
 
9.2 Laser in spectroscopy 235
 
9.2.1 Laser induced‑breakdown spectroscopy 236
 
9.2.2 Photoacoustic spectroscopy 239
 
9.2.3 Raman spectroscopy 241
 
9.3 Laser Sensors 243
 
9.3.1 Laser displacement sensor 243
 
9.3.2 Time‑of‑flight sensor 245
 
9.3.3 Photoelectric sensor 247
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Contents xiii
 
9.3.4 Laser light grid sensor 248
 
9.4 Lasers in the biomedical sector 249
 
9.4.1 Laser in dermatology 251
 
9.4.2 Laser in ophthalmology 253
 
9.4.3 Laser in dentistry 254
 
9.5 Lasers in the manufacturing and defence sector 255
 
9.5.1 Laser in welding 256
 
9.5.2 Laser in forming 257
 
9.5.3 Laser in machining 258
 
9.5.4 Laser in the defence sector 258
 
9.6 Summary 259
 
References 260
 
10 Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 
during sustainable machining 267 
N E E R A J D E S WA L A N D R AV I K A N T 
10.1 Introduction 267
 
10.2 Challenges during machining process 267
 
10.3 Need for sustainable machining process 268
 
10.4 Dry machining 269
 
10.5 Minimum quantity lubrication 270
 
10.6 Cryogenic machining 271
 
10.7 Hybrid machining processes 271
 
10.7.1 Thermally assisted machining process 272
 
10.7.2 Laser assisted turning process 274
 
10.7.3 Ultrasonic vibration assisted turning process 276
 
10.7.4 Thermal and ultrasonic vibration assisted turning 

process 279
 
10.8 Summary 279
 
References 280
 
11 Machining performance and optimization of process 
parameters of monel alloy 400 using ECM process 288 
P. SUDHAKAR RAO, AKHILESH SINHA, SHASHWATH G. PATIL, 
R AV I K A N T A N D S R I P H A N I S U S H M A 
11.1 Introduction 288
 
11.2 Current status of research 289
 
11.3 Experimental methodology 292
 xiv Contents 
 
 
 
 
 
11.4 Results and discussions 292
 
11.4.1 Analysis and optimization for MRR, TWR, and SR 294
 
11.4.2 Mathematical modelling and regression analysis 296
 
11.4.3 Multiresponse optimization 300
 
11.5 Conclusions 301
 
References 302
 
Index 307  Preface
 
The manufacturing sector is facing issues of high production cost, harm emis￾sion to the environment, need of customized production and low efficiency. These 
issues arise not only because of limitations of the manufacturing processes but 
also due to less effective design and materials. Advancement in both materials and 
manufacturing processes is important for the development of the manufacturing 
sector. The new, improved and efficient design of a product and its cost-effective 
sustainable manufacturing cannot be imagined without compatible and supportive 
materials and manufacturing processes. Development in these sectors can lead to 
customized and flexible manufacturing of components at competitive price and 
less emission to the environment. It will have positive economic, societal and 
environment impact. The requirement of sustainable materials and manufactur￾ing processes are changing continuously. Therefore, a large number of research￾ers across the globe are working for long in these sectors. This book bridges the 
knowledge gap by providing an overview of recent development in materials and 
manufacturing processes. This book has a total of 11 chapters that cover literature 
review and original research in the field of materials and manufacturing processes. 
Chapter 1discusses the development of sustainable biocomposites with natural 
fibres including plant-based fibres and animal-based fibres, and epoxy or resins. It 
also discusses the naturally available epoxy and resin, which can be a sustainable 
alternative to the commercially available synthetic counterparts. Chapter 2 pres￾ents theoretical understanding of functionally graded materials by summarizing 
the current modelling and optimization methods, fabrication, post-processing tech￾niques and characterization tools. In addition, the potential strategies to overcome 
various technological barriers and future research opportunities are demonstrated. 
Power factor is important when considering the generation, transmission and 
distribution of electric current. Poor power factor causes an increase in current 
flow and hence more power consumption. Chapter 3presents the causes of low 
power factor and the techniques to improve it. The advantages and limitations of 
various power factor improvement techniques and the advantages of improving 
the power factor is discussed in this chapter. 
The next two chapters focus on the non-traditional finishing and joining pro￾cesses. Chapter 4 presents nano-finishing of non-ferromagnetic material using 
xv  
xvi Preface 
magnetorheological (MR) finishing process. This process consists of a flexible tool 
of permanent magnet, electrolytic iron particles (EIPs) and abrasive particles. Various 
parameters during MR finishing, including workpiece rotational speeds (400 rpm, 600 
rpm and 800 rpm), tool linear speed (10 cm/min, 30 cm/min and 50 cm/min), mesh 
sizes of SiC abrasives (600, 800 and 1000) and mesh sizes of EIPs (200, 300 and 400), 
are varied to see the change in surface roughness. The minimum surface roughness 
obtained was 97 nm from initial roughness of 361 nm with 40 minutes of finishing 
time. Chapter 5 explores various hybrid friction stir welding processes for joining of 
hard materials. The application of secondary heat sources like plasma, ultrasonic laser, 
induction, arc and electric current are explored to improve friction stir welding by 
reducing the plunging force, improving material flow and enhancing tool life. 
Chapter 6 to 8 represents additive manufacturing as an important pillar of 
Industry 4.0. Different aspects like application of robotics and machine learning 
in additive manufacturing are explored. These chapters will provide readers with 
a practical understanding of how different pillars of Industry 4.0 operate, empha￾sizing their integration and synchronization with each other. Chapter 6 focuses on 
the use of robotic systems in the manufacturing industry, specifically in the field 
of additive manufacturing. It covers the major additive manufacturing processes 
that can be enhanced with advanced robotic systems and explores the potential of 
using robotic systems with advanced materials. This chapter also explores recent 
advancements in industrial applications and future perspectives, considering the 
integration of robots with additive manufacturing processes. Chapter 7 presents 
the usage of cold spray coating technique for additive manufacturing of compo￾nents without melting of metallic powders. The history of cold spray, bonding 
mechanisms, the effect of process parameters, the post-processing involved in cold 
spray and strategies to turn cold spray additive manufacturing into a smart manu￾facturing system are presented in this chapter. Chapter 8 discusses the integration 
of machine learning algorithms with additive manufacturing systems. Various case 
studies demonstrate the effective utilization of deep learning in the field of addi￾tive manufacturing and quality control which can improve product quality, reduce 
waste and optimize the manufacturing process. It can make the additive manufac￾turing more competitive, effective and efficient in the age of Industry 4.0. 
Modern industries are looking for cost-effective, flexible and sustainable solu￾tions for precision manufacturing. Laser has evolved as a flexible manufactur￾ing tool which can be a promising solution for meeting such demands. Chapter 9 
focuses on the applications of laser technology in the academic, industrial, defence 
and medical sectors. Applications related to material processing, measurements, 
sensing and characterization are explored in this chapter. Chapter 10 discusses var￾ious techniques to improve sustainability in machining processes by reducing the 
running cost and limiting harmful emission and waste. Various kinds of machin￾ing processes including dry machining, minimum quantity lubrication, cryogenic 
machining, and hybrid machining processes are discussed in this chapter. This 
chapter also discusses laser and ultrasonic vibration assisted machining, which can 
improve the machining performance without utilizing cutting fluids. Preface xvii 
The last chapter presents the machining performance and optimization of 
electrochemical machining of difficult-to-cut Monel 400 alloy. Studied are the 
effects of voltage, electrolyte concentration and inter-electrode gap on the material 
removal rate, tool wear rate and surface roughness; the parameters are optimized 
using a Box–Behnken design generated response surface methodology (RSM). 
The chapters in this book highlight research gaps and directions for future 
research. The chapters are a good combination of review articles and original 
research in the domain of advanced materials and manufacturing processes. The 
volume will help readers to gain broader and deeper knowledge in the field of 
materials and manufacturing. The content of this book will be useful for academi￾cians, researchers and practicing engineers who are looking for sustainability in 
materials, design and manufacturing processes. 
Editor: Ravi Kant Acknowledgements
 
I, the editor of this book, had a great experience while working on this book. 
Many people have inspired, motivated and helped me during the entire course of 
the work. It is my heartfelt desire to acknowledge their immense goodwill and 
valuable support. 
I express my indebtedness and gratitude to all of my teachers and friends whose 
support and guidance helped me in editing this book. My students helped me in 
reviewing and formatting the book chapters. Their selfless efforts and services are 
highly appreciated. 
I sincerely acknowledge all the authors for contributing their valuable work 
for this book. The authors submitted the chapters and responded with revisions 
promptly, which made it possible to publish this book on time. 
I express my heartfelt gratitude to my parents, wife and son, who are always 
understanding and supportive. They have made many compromises in their life 
for my professional growth. They give me emotional strength and take care of 
duties that are otherwise to be performed by me. Their patience, goodwill, caring 
nature and encouraging words keep me driving and help me to focus on the work. 
I dedicate this book to all of them. 
Last, but not the least, I express my sincere gratitude to the staff members of 
CRC press, Mr. Gauravjeet Singh Reen, Ms. Isha Ahuja and Mr. Mayank Sharma, 
for their dedicated support during the publication process of this book. 
xix About the editor
 
Dr. Ravi Kant is Assistant Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineer￾ing at Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, India. He received his bachelor’s 
degree in mechanical engineering from Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak 
(Haryana, India). He completed his M. Tech. from the Department of Mechanical 
Engineering at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Guwahati, India, with spe￾cialization in computer-assisted manufacturing. He worked on the “Investigation 
on Formability of Adhesively Bonded Sheets” for his M. Tech. project. He also 
obtained his doctorate from IIT Guwahati in the field of laser forming process. 
His research interests include laser transmission welding; hybrid machining; laser 
forming; cold spray coatings; additive manufacturing, hybrid joining, and sustain￾able materials. He has completed many research projects and consultancy works 
in these research areas. He has contributed around 100 research articles in peer￾reviewed journals, conferences, and edited books. He has edited several books 
in the field of industrial design, materials and manufacturing processes. He has 
also guest edited special issues in reputed journals. He has developed and taught 
advanced courses such as modern manufacturing processes; sustainability science 
and technology; analysis of casting, forming and joining processes; advanced 
welding technology; micromanufacturing; and manufacturing. He has conducted 
various international conferences, workshops, symposiums, colloquiums and fac￾ulty development programs in the field of advanced materials and manufacturing 
technology. 
xxi Contributors
 
Talwinder Singh Bedi, RIMT University , Mandi Gobindgarh 
Papiya Bhowmik, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar , Punjab, India 
Jagdeep Kaur Brar, GZSCCET MRSPTU Bathinda , Punjab, India 
Rajiv Chaudhary, Delhi Technological University , Delhi, India 
Neeraj Deswal, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar , Rupnagar, India 
Hema Gurung, Bara Phool, IIT Ropar , Rupnagar, India 
Ravi Kant, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar , Punjab, India 
Avneesh Kumar, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar , Rupnagar, India 
Krishan Kumar, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar , Punjab, India 
Rahul Nair, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar , Rupnagar, India 
Atul Pandey, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar , Rupnagar, India 
Shashwath G. Patil, National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and 
Research (NITTTR) , Chandigarh, India 
Ayush Pratap, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar , Rupnagar, India 
Khushboo Rakha, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar, Punjab, India 
Ajay Singh Rana, RIMT University , Mandi Gobindgarh, India 
Sumitkumar Rathor, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar , Rupnagar, India 
P. Sudhakar Rao, National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and Research 
(NITTTR) , Chandigarh, India 
Shahriar Reza, Moghbazar, Ramna , Dhaka, Bangladesh 
Neha Sardana, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar , Rupnagar, India 
Yadwinder Pal Sharma, GZSCCET MRSPTU Bathinda , Punjab, India 
xxiii xxiv Contributors 
R. C. Singh, Delhi Technological University, Delhi, India 
Harpreet Singh, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar, Punjab, India 
Akhilesh Sinha, National Institute of Technical Teachers Training and Research 
(NITTTR), Chandigarh, India 
Ekta Singla, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar, India 
Sri Phani Sushma, University College of Engineering Narasaraopet, JNTU 
Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh, India 
Ankit Mani Tripathi, SRM University Delhi-NCR Sonipat, Haryana, India 
Gidla Vinay, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Rupnagar, India 1
 
 
 
Chapter 1
 
Green composites 
for sustainable applications 
Papiya Bhowmik , Ravi Kant 
and Harpreet  Singh 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Contamination of the soil, water and air by plastic pollutants is increasing globally, 
raising severe concerns among environmentalists. The outbreak of SARS-CoV-2 
has elevated the use of one-time plastics due to the sudden adoption of improved 
hygiene practices [1]. As a result, post-Covid pollution control will be a major 
concern for different government bodies worldwide. Scientists are continuously 
working towards developing a biodegradable alternative to plastic that is non￾toxic, renewable and affordable [2]. Over the past decade, green composites have 
replaced many synthetic composites and plastics in various applications [3–5]. 
This is possible because of the specific qualities of the organic polymer and fibres 
used to develop green composites over conventional components of synthetic 
composites [6]. Developing natural fibre-based composites is now well practised 
worldwide because of their easy availability, renewability, outstanding mechanical 
properties, non-toxicity and excellent biodegradability [7–11]. Natural fibres have 
the potential to replace conventional petroleum-based synthetic fibres. They pos￾sess impressive qualities like low cost, higher flexibility, renewability, non-toxicity, 
low density and better mechanical properties [12–15]. The wide availability in the 
market has also triggered their wide application. However, the low degradation 
temperature of the fibres does not allow them to be used in high-temperature appli￾cations or curing processes [16, 17]. Another significant drawback is the super￾hydrophobic property of the natural fibres, which opposes their natural ability to 
adhere to hydrophobic polymer matrices. It leads to poor adhesion between the 
fibre and the composite matrix [18]. To tackle this problem, researchers have taken 
different approaches to modifying the surface texture of the fibres and matrix 
material. The modified fibres and matrix have better adhesion because the changed 
surface texture allows better bonding [9, 19]. Other approaches to enhance the 
physicochemical properties of the developed composites include adding cross￾linkers and plasticisers to them [20–24]. Various researchers have explored the 
extrusion of proteins under different thermal conditions. Generally, protein extru￾sion or moulding occurs at a relatively low-temperature range of 105 to 120 °C 
[25]. To add flexibility to the protein, the glass transition temperature is reduced 
DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-1 1  
 
2 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
from 220 °C to below 100 °C. The plasticiser influences the protein to form a 
clay-like structure, allowing the protein to be thermally extruded or moulded at 
a temperature range of 100 to 120 °C. Various plasticisers are used for different 
natural polymers, considering their plasticising capacity, hydrophilic compatibil￾ity with the polymer, and the capacity to produce many hydrogen bonds. Plasti￾ciser enhances the elasticity of the protein by enabling more fluid melt, flexibility 
and elongation [26, 27]. Besides plasticisers, crosslinkers are also used to modify 
natural polymers’ microstructural rheological features. Crosslinking increases the 
mechanical properties of the polymer by making longer polymeric chains con￾nected with intermolecular bonds or links [28–32]. 
In recent years natural fibre-reinforced polymers have provided lifelong benefits 
over petroleum-based fibre-reinforced composites [33]. The commendable eco￾logical benefits of natural fibres include their suitability for manufacturing a wide 
range of products while being biodegradable [5]. If these fibres can be wisely com￾bined with natural biodegradable polymers, it can significantly reduce the carbon 
footprint. In India’s current plastic management policy, plastic carry bags are the 
most significant contributor to littered waste. Millions of plastic bags end up in the 
environment vis-à-vis soil, water bodies, watercourses and so on. Each bag takes an 
average of one thousand years to decompose completely [34]. In India, the Plastic 
Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011, included plastic waste manage￾ment as its priority to address the issue of scientific plastic waste management. The 
government has announced the Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016, to replace 
the earlier Plastic Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011, focusing on 
developing alternative biodegradable plastic with a faster degradation rate. An eco￾friendly product that serves as a complete substitute for plastic in all uses has not 
been found to date [35]. In the absence of a suitable alternative, it is impractical 
and undesirable to impose a blanket ban on the use of plastic all over the country. 
The real challenge is to improve plastic waste management systems or develop a 
feasible alternative to plastic disposables [2, 36]. So, the dire need of the hour is 
to furnish a viable low-cost alternative to plastic with zero or minimised carbon 
footprint. In this chapter, we will discuss further developments in the field of green 
composites and their application to reduce the carbon footprint on our environment. 
1.2 NATURAL POLYMERS AND FIBRES 
1.2.1 Natural polymers 
The prime goal of a polymer is to hold together the fibres and shield them from 
surrounding chemical changes, uneven mechanical loading and ambient moisture 
[14, 37–39]. Upon loading, it distributes the load uniformly throughout the struc￾ture of the composite, thus reducing the chances of early failure. Apart from the 
polymer, the strength of the composite also depends on the orientation of the 
fibres [40, 41].  
 
Green composites for sustainable applications 3 
There are two types of polymers: synthetic and natural. Synthetic polymers 
are derived from petroleum oil and made by scientists and engineers. Examples 
of synthetic polymers include nylon, polyethylene, polyester, Teflon and epoxy 
[42]. Natural polymers occur in nature and can be extracted. They are often water￾based. Naturally occurring polymers are silk, wool, DNA, cellulose and proteins. 
Natural polymers are of two types: thermosets and thermoplastics. Thermoplastics 
have poor wettability and high viscosity, while thermosetting polymers possess 
low viscosity and better wettability with the fibre surface [42–44]. Adding cou￾pling agents/compatibilisers to the thermoplastic polymers improves interfacial 
adhesion. Thermoplastic polymers like polyvinyl chloride, polyethylene and poly￾propylene become softer at higher temperatures and regain their original proper￾ties when cooled down [6, 45, 46]. Table 1.1 depicts the properties of the most 
common, renewable and widely used natural polymers reported by researchers. 
1.2.2 Natural fibres 
The main constituents of natural fibre-reinforced composites are plants, minerals 
and animals. Of plant fibres, mainly five types are used: seed fibre, leaf fibre, 
bast fibre, fruit fibre and stalk fibre. Of animal fibres, mostly animal hair and silk 
fibres have been used, and of mineral fibres, amosite, crocidolite, tremolite, actin￾olite and anthophyllite fibres are popularly being employed. The performance 
of green composites or natural fibre composites mainly depends on their length, 
shape and interfacial adhesion with the matrix. These fibres have good thermal 
and acoustic insulation, specific mechanical properties and the most desirable 
property – biodegradability. As per renewability concerns, most researchers pre￾fer plant-based fibres for developing biocomposites. The popularly used plant 
fibres and their relevant mechanical properties are shown in Table 1.2. Concern￾ing animal fibres, they are mostly found as waste material from meat factories, 
textile factories or fish markets. Table 1.3 depicts the popularly used animal fibres 
and their mechanical properties reported by different researchers. 
1.3 COMPARISON WITH MMCs, CMCs, SYNTHETIC NPMCs 
Metal matrix composites (MMCs) have a lot of advantages over standard alloy￾based materials. They are lightweight with outstanding specific modulus and 
strength. They also have a lower coefficient of thermal expansion and resist wear￾ing off. Because of all the advantages of MMCs over alloy-based materials, they 
are widely used in aerospace, transportation and many high-end machineries 
[80, 81] MMCs also have the potential to be used in almost any application. Their 
thermal properties, however, confine them to be used around 1000 °C only. Beyond 
this temperature, generally, ceramic matrix composites (CMCs) are used because 
of their favourable electric, thermal and magnetic properties; in general, MMCs 
have superiority over polymer matrix composites (PMCs) or CMCs [82, 83]. 4 
Table 1.1 Properties of different natural polymers 
Properties 
Name Scientific name Tensile strength Modulus Significant property Ref. 
Wheat gluten Triticum aestivum 4.5 MPa 25 MPa Wheat gluten can be used as a natural polymer for developing 
composites.The property of the polymer can be altered using 
different crosslinkers and plasticisers. 
[47] 
Soya protein Glycine max 20 MPa 500 MPa Soya protein is available in abundance and renewable in nature. It 
provides an excellent moisture barrier when used with gelatin. 
[48, 49] 
Tapioca starch Manihot esculenta 45 MPa 2.4 GPa It is superior to other starches due to its amylose content 
compared to other lower amylose-containing starches. It also has 
a higher molecular weight due to amylose and amylopectin. 
[49, 50] 
Potato starch Solanum 
tuberosum 
7 MPa 70 MPa The polysaccharides of potato starch deliver unique edible-film￾forming properties and chemical stability. [52, 53] 
Corn starch Zea mays 40 MPa 2.6 GPa From forming thin films for different applications to making 
composites, starch is an economic candidate as a natural polymer 
due to its biodegradable properties, low cost and renewability. 
[52, 53] 
Gelatine NA 95 MPa 3.5 GPa For packaging and shipping food-grade products, gelatine coatings 
or thin films are used because of their excellent forming capacity. 
It is also blended with other polymers to increase the tensile 
strength and elongation. 
[54, 55] 
Agar-agar Aquilaria 
malaccensis 
36.7 MPa 1.1 GPa Agar-agar is a chemically inert and non-toxic hydrophilic 
polysaccharide. It forms thin films with better and more flexible 
mechanical characteristics. 
[54, 56] 
Arrowroot 
starch 
Maranta 
arundinacea 
16 MPa 1.2 GPa Starch from arrowroot has been used recently, which is a less 
studied starch source.Arrowroot starch is cheaper and readily 
available everywhere. 
[57, 58] 
Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 5 
Table 1.2 Properties of different commercially used plant-based fibres to manufacture composites 
Properties 
Name Scientific name Tensile strength Modulus Significant property Ref 
Hemp Cannabis sativa 1200 MPa 60 MPa Industrial hemp is a source of high cellulose fibres. It possesses superior [59] 
properties such as high specific strength, stiffness and low density. 
Ramie Bohesmeria nivea 615 MPa 20.5 GPa Ramie fibres are widely known for long, silky and strong plant [60] 
fibres, making outstanding textile fibres with impressive mechanical 
properties. 
Kenaf Hibiscus cannabinus 692 MPa 10.94 GPa Kenaf is considered an economically viable natural fibre commercially [61] 
available on a large scale.The impressive properties of kenaf fibre make 
it a suitable replacement for glass fibres in polymer composites as a 
reinforcement. 
Jute Corchorus 399 MPa 24.70 GPa Because of its superior properties, such as high tensile strength, low [62] 
thermal expansion and high strength-to-weight ratio, it is being widely 
used for biocomposite manufacturing. 
White coir Cocos nucifera L. 192 MPa 3.44 GPa White coir fibres possess low strength, low modulus of elasticity and 
high strain to failure due to their low cellulose content and large micro 
fibrillar angle. 
Brown coir Cocos nucifera L. 343 MPa 4.94 GPa On the contrary, brown coir has an advantage over white coir. It 
improves the hybrid composite by improving the impregnation of 
small-diameter fibres. 
Bamboo Bambusa vulgaris 206.2 MPa 20.1 GPa Bamboo fibres are famous primarily for their easy availability, low cost, [63] 
easy and fast renewability, high strength-to-weight ratio, high tensile 
strength, non-toxicity and biodegradability. 
Bagasse Saccharum 70.9 MPa Bagasse fibres have the advantage over other natural fibres and [63] 
officinarum L. traditional reinforcement due to their excellent thermal property, 
energy recovery, good specific strength and low density. 
(Continued) 
Green composites for sustainable applications 6 Table 1.2 (Continued) 
Properties 
Name Scientific name Tensile strength Modulus Significant property Ref 
Rice husk Oryza sativa 135 MPa 1.8 GPa The ultimate tensile strength of rice husk is compared to nylon fibres. [64] 
The micro-arrangements of cellulose and hemicellulose help rice husk 
to attain high strength. 
Napier grass Pennisetum 12.4 MPa 2.2 GPa Napier grass fibres hold the lowest densities compared to other [65] 
fibre purpureum natural fibres.The tensile strength of the napier fibre is greater than 
bamboo and coir but lower than flax, hemp, jute, kenaf and banana. 
Sisal Agave sisalana 68 MPa 3.8 GPa When used as composite reinforcements, sisal fibres showed [66] 
outstanding wear resistance, indicated by lower mass loss, specific wear 
rate and coefficient of friction. 
Abaca Musa textilis 308.7 MPa 6.186 GPa The high cellulose and low water content of abaca fibres have a high [67] 
value of mechanical properties with impressive tensile strength. 
Banana Musa acuminata 550 MPa 3.5 GPa With high strength and high flame resistance, banana fibres are [68, 69] 
preferred for making fire-retardant panels, strong garments and yarns. 
Betelnut Areca catechu 128.79 MPa 2.56 GPa Dried betelnut fibres exhibit good Young’s modulus compared to ripe [70] 
betelnut fibres. Betelnut fibres are preferred for applications with high 
dimensional stability because of their low moisture content and water 
uptake. 
Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 7 
Table 1.3 Properties of different animal-/insect-based fibres 
Properties 
Name Scientific name Tensile strength Modulus Significant property Ref 
Human hair Homo sapiens 280 MPa 4.1 GPa Hair executes high tensile strength, but it varies depending on the [71] 
(trichology) strain rate and humidity.The strain rate of hair is comparable to 
keratinous materials and other common synthetic polymers. 
Human nails corpus unguis 120 MPa 4.5 GPa At low humidity, nails are more brittle and flexible than at high [72] 
moisture.The reason behind this is a reduction in torsional stiffness 
with increasing relative humidity. 
Chicken feathers Gallus gallus 203 MPa 3.59 GPa The study showed chicken feather fibres have high resistivity and [73] 
domesticus low dielectric constant, which helps them to be used as composite 
reinforcements to develop electric insulator panels. 
Silk Bombyx mori 623 MPa 14.96 GPa Natural silkworm silk fibres consist of two core of fibroin filaments [74] 
bonded together by a layer of sericin. Silk fibres are abundantly studied 
because of their several unique properties such as good processability, 
desirable biocompatibility and biodegradability. 
Pig hair Sus scrofa 135 MPa 6.39 GPa Being coarser and thicker than natural silk fibres pig fibres can only be [75, 76] 
used in non-woven applications.As the tensile properties of pig fibres 
are comparable with other natural fibres, they can be used as low-cost 
environment-friendly biocomposites. 
Alpaca Vicugna pacos 190 MPa 2.7 GPa Alpaca fibre is a soft, durable, luxurious and silky natural fibre. It is also [77] 
valued because it is lustrous, extremely strong and very warm. 
Camel hair Camelus 212.15 MPa 3.87 GPa Camel fibre adheres to tremendous breaking stress, higher breaking [78] 
bactrianus strain and significant rupture energy.The outstanding texture and 
mechanical properties make it a viable natural fibre for producing 
composites. 
Spider silk Araneae 1 GPa 10 GPa Spider frame silk can be considered the best fibre in terms of stiffness [79] 
and strength, making it stronger per unit weight than high-tensile steel. 
Green composites for sustainable applications  
8 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
On the other hand, ceramics are generally made of inorganic materials and non￾metallic substances. Ceramic matrix composites usually have high heat, chemi￾cal and abrasion resistance, making them advanced materials for some particular 
applications. They possess high strength, impeccable hardness, resistance to wear, 
chemical inertness and the ability to withstand high temperatures. These prop￾erties make ceramics a good candidate for high-end applications, but they have 
certain disadvantages. Due to the inherent properties of high brittleness and low 
thermal expansion coefficient of ceramic materials, they are tough to process and 
manufacture. Under tensile and impact loading, they tend to undergo brittle frac￾ture, propagating quickly [84]. Thus to increase the toughness of ceramics, various 
reinforcements like carbon fibres, silicon carbides, silicon nitrides, alumina, and 
titanium diboride have been added to them. These reinforcements improve the 
toughness and load-bearing capacity of the CMCs. CMCs can withstand tempera￾tures of nearly 1500 °C under different working conditions. They offer increased 
toughness compared to traditional ceramic materials [85]. 
Due to easy mouldability and easy manufacturing processes, polymer matrix 
composites are more widely manufactured for various applications. Their light 
weight, high strength and high stiffness promote PMCs for lightweight vehicles, 
turbine rotors and blades, aerospace applications and more. But PMCs also come 
with disadvantages [86, 87]. They have high sensitivity to moisture and radiation. 
They work in low temperatures, that is, around 200 °C, which is very low com￾pared to MMCs and CMCs. Regardless of these disadvantages, PMCs are widely 
popular because they don’t require high pressure and heat for processing, saving 
the composite from fibre damage and thermal degradation. PMCs are generally 
made of polymeric resin and fibre reinforcements [3]. The polymeric resins are 
byproducts of petroleum, and the fibre reinforcements are mainly made of glass 
or carbon. The increasing use of PMCs thus increases soil pollution. However, the 
growing popularity of PMCs has sparked great interest among researchers to work 
on sustainable PMCs. The green PMCs consist of biodegradable polymeric resin 
and fibres collected or procured from nature. The easy availability and competi￾tive properties and pricing make green PMCs a sustainable option in the global 
market [88, 89]. 
1.4 BIO-COATINGS FOR THE COMPOSITE 
Coatings are essential to prevent moisture, water or toxic environmental contami￾nants from entering the composite body. They allow for minimal friction and dust 
build-up on the substrate, thereby enhancing the lifespan of various composites 
[90]. With the growing popularity of natural fibre-based polymer composites, the 
need to develop biodegradable natural coatings is increasing too. Natural fibres 
have strong non-polar characteristics, which leads to poor adhesion of fibre with 
the matrix materials because it induces an uneven distribution of fibers within the 
polymer matrix [91]. In addition, they are prone to moisture absorption when Green composites for sustainable applications 9 
exposed to a humid atmosphere, which leads to early failure of the material during 
mechanical loading or thermal stress [90]. Many studies reported improving the 
fibre-matrix adhesion and different processes to coat the composite naturally. 
These coatings make the composite less susceptible to moisture or a toxic atmo￾sphere [92]. One of the most popular methods to form a biobased coating on the 
fibres and the biocomposite is hygroscopic ageing. In a recent study, it has been 
shown that the moisture absorption of a composite reduces to a great extent when 
coated with biobased polyurethane (PU) and polyfurfuryl alcohol (PFA) [93]. The 
study shows that the flex/phenolic laminates coated with PU and PFA showed 
lower water absorption when compared to uncoated laminates. Among PU and 
PFA, PFA displayed better hydrophobic properties as a coating material. It also 
showed that a little moisture absorption has no significant effect on the mechanical 
and thermal stability of the composite with coatings on it [94]. Recent studies have 
shown that biocoatings can also be applied to metallic substrates [90, 95]. Bio￾based materials like hemicellulose are extracted from plants and are also a byprod￾uct of the pulping industry. Hemicellulose is a water-soluble polysaccharide with 
low molecular weight and hydrodynamic radius [96]. However, the material is 
sensitive to moisture under high humidity conditions. Water absorption reduces 
the binding capacity and weakens the hemicellulose-based film’s structural stabil￾ity and respiratory barrier. Alkyl ketene dimer (AKD) is used as a crosslinker and 
a hydrophobic modifier to prepare a novel hemicellulose-based nanocomposite 
coating to improve the moisture barrier [94]. Another polysaccharide biocoating, 
sodium alginate, is generated from brown seaweed. It is constituted of α-D￾mannuronic and α-L-glucuronic acid [97]. Sodium alginate is used as a thickening 
agent in the food industry because it is non-toxic and biodegradable and has a high 
consumption acceptance rate. If applied as a coating, it improves the shelf life of 
food during storage [98]. Another promising candidate in the field of biobased 
coating is propolis. Propolis is a plant-derived resin product collected by bees to 
develop and protect the hive. Studies have shown that green propolis produced by 
Apis mellifera bees from plant-extracted nectar can be used as a coating for its 
excellent antioxidant and antimicrobial properties [98, 99]. In a recent approach, 
commercial epoxidised cardanol from cashew nutshell liquid (CNSL) has proven 
to be an outstanding biocoating when blended with sucrose epoxy derivative, sor￾bitol and isosorbide. Bisphenol A diglycidyl ether (BADGE) is a popular coating 
because of its unique molecular structure. Finding a substitute for BADGE is very 
difficult, but various biobased epoxy reactants can tailor the required properties of 
the biobased coatings for different applications [100]. Preserving fish or fish 
byproducts using green coatings is of tremendous interest to the food industries. 
Sodium alginate bilayer coating combined with green propolis can increase the 
shelf life by up to 11 days [98]. In a similar approach, to enhance the shelf life of 
exotic fruits like green asparagus, they are coated with a dense hemicellulose￾based coating containing hemicellulose, cellulose, nanofibres and montmorillon￾ite. AKD was added as a hydrophobised coating to enhance the respiratory barrier 
property of the asparagus [94]. Natural coatings are also used to protect the indoor 10 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
microbial colonisation of higher places that require a high level of environmental 
hygiene. Melamine formaldehyde as a capsule shell and lavandin-tea tree essential 
oils as core material were reinforced into painting as a biocide agent [101]. A novel 
UV-curable waterborne polyurethane acrylate, comprising polymerisation of 
hydroxyl telechelic natural rubber (HTNR), was developed as a greener approach. 
The material provides enhanced wettability with the surface, thus increasing the 
mechanical and thermal properties of the substrate [102]. Coatings are also used 
to enhance the anti-crease properties of cotton fabric: α-lipoic acid (ALA) has 
improved the fabric’s crease resistance and hydrophilic properties without loss of 
strength or the use of formaldehyde. ALA attaches itself to the cotton fibre through 
esterification between the carboxyl group and disulfide bond of the materials 
[103]. Neem gum is used as an effective biodegradable glue. It has hydrophilic 
polysaccharides obtained from exudates of neem tree and can be used to coat 
nanoparticles of palladium nano particles (PbNPs) using the sonochemical method 
[104]. For locking in the soil’s nitrogen content and reducing nitrogen loss due to 
irrigation, urea is granulated using duel layers of two natural oils and hydrogels, 
namely epoxidised soybean oil, linseed oil and crosslinked co-polymeric hydrogel 
of polyacrylic acid and polyacrylonitrile (PAN/PAAc) hydrogels [105]. Natural 
edible coatings are gaining popularity in the food and packaging industries. Agar￾agar is a plant-derived polymer with promising results when used as a coating. It 
has worked wonderfully to develop effective coatings for different fresh fruits, 
vegetables, fish and meat [106]. Edible coatings, which are thin and easily soluble, 
are used on the surface of the food products. The coatings provide better protection 
to the substrates against oxygen, moisture and other toxic elements from the food 
surface. Composites of edible coatings containing antimicrobial compounds can 
also reduce bacterial proliferation. Adding vegetable oil to edible food coating also 
increases the food’s moisture barrier, which helps the food stay juicy [104]. 
Though the concept of biodegradable coating is gaining interest globally, these 
coatings aren’t practical considering the current solid waste disposal process. As 
we know, in landfills or dump yards where solid waste is disposed of, it does not 
receive a compostable environment to degrade naturally. So it is also a global 
concern to find an appropriate method for managing solid degradable waste. How￾ever, biocoatings are still required for food preservation and creating moisture 
barriers for end products [107]. In an approach to enhancing bananas’ shelf life 
from physical and biological deterioration during transport and storage, an active 
nanocomposite is used. The nanocomposite consists of polyvinyl alcohol (PVOH), 
agar-agar and maltodextrin with silver nanoparticles. This coating protects the 
fruits against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus bacteria. The addition 
of silver nanoparticles enhances the flexibility of the composite films, allowing 
them to coat different surfaces of complicated shapes [108]. Agar-agar is one of 
the most commercially used coating materials. Being a porous and inexpensive 
polymer, agar-agar is used as a promising absorbent material. Being hydrophilic, 
it is often used as the skeleton adsorbent. Agar-agar is used to prepare edible poly￾meric composite sheets in various applications with these many properties [109]. Green composites for sustainable applications 11 
Agar-agar usually produces a thick homogeneous gelled structure, and it takes a 
long time to dry off completely. But when mixed with xanthan gum or locust bean 
gum, it produces a translucent flexible film that is easy to dry and prevents water 
for a long time [110]. In another approach, agar-agar (1%) based coatings with 
0.2% chitosan and 0.2% acetic acid showed promising properties when used as an 
edible coating. The study showed that when applied to raw garlic cloves, the coat￾ing delayed decolouration, fungal and bacterial growth, moisture loss and respira￾tion rate, thus increasing shelf life [111]. The cohesive structural layer of agar and 
ethanol reduces the water vapour permeability of polymeric composites from 75% 
to 95%, depending on the layer thickness. The gelation of agar creates a dense 
network which increases water vapour resistance and mechanical resistance [109]. 
As part of natural and sustainable coatings, gelatine plays a significant role. 
Gelatine is a biopolymer with a multifaceted nature. It is a filmogenic polymer 
with a sound barrier against moisture, oxygen and other atmospheric elements. 
It makes transparent films with antimicrobial properties, which can be used as a 
highly functional biodegradable coating. The adhesive property of gelatine helps 
it to stick firmly to any surface [105, 107, 112–115]. Researchers have combined 
gelatine with other substances to make an effective coating for various applica￾tions. In one of the approaches, gelatine-based coating is used to increase the 
shelf life of strawberries. The coating only consisted of gelatine because starch 
doesn’t offer good antioxidant properties. To overcome this problem, plant￾derived essential oils are used to improve the coating’s mechanical, antimicrobial 
and barrier properties. A study showed that to further enhance the barrier proper￾ties of gelatine-based biopolymer coatings, Mentha pulegium can be used. It fur￾ther enhances the barrier and antioxidant properties of the coating, thus providing 
better resistance to the strawberry’s surface [112, 113]. The adhesion of gelatine 
is different for different surfaces. So, other substrates need a different approach 
to be coated with gelatine-based coatings. In a different approach, gelatine and 
chitosan are used to develop an edible coating to delay meat discolouration in 
retail displays. The chitosan-gelatine edible coatings are incorporated with tar￾ragon essential oil (TEO). Nanoparticles of chitosan gelatine were prepared with 
the gelation method. The nano-encapsulated TEO helps in the controlled release of 
TEO in the system, thus improving the meat’s antioxidant and anti-microbacterial 
properties [116]. Another study showed that glycerol instead of TEO can be used 
with different chitosan and gelatine blends, reducing weight loss due to water 
shrinkage and lipid oxidation of the meat in display storage [116]. To reduce 
microbial infections on the surface of fish fillets and delay their discolouration, 
gelatine-based coatings are used widely [105]. Gelatine and native cassava starch 
(NCS), sorbitol and a different fraction of Tetradenia riparia extract are used to 
develop an advanced edible coating for strawberries. The films produced provide 
better protection against bacterial growth and antioxidant activity losses [112]. 
But with increased thickness, the solubility reduces, directly influencing the water 
vapour transmission between surfaces. Thus, using gelatine-based antimicrobial 
edible coating is gaining popularity in the food industry. To protect rice grain from  
12 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
atmospheric conditions, folic acids or folates are used to fortify the nutrients of the 
rice by coating it. Adding folic acid also increases the amount of folic acid intake 
among the consumers, which is suggested by government bodies. Using any acid 
for rice fortification is not suitable for creating a protective barrier to minimize 
the loss of folic acid from within. To tackle this problem, different materials were 
sprayed or press-coated against the fortified rice, including locust bean gum, agar, 
xanthan gum–coated premix, rice gruel, and rice gruel and salic acid combined. At 
the end of the process, calcium phosphate and starch powder were evenly sprayed 
as a final layer while rolling the rice. The final result showed that locust bean 
gum, xanthan gum, and agar coating showed successful masking of rice, which 
further reduced the loss of folic acid [110]. Different biopolymer-based coatings 
act differently with added oil, fats and acids, improving shelf life, quality, physi￾cal properties and chemical barrier, delaying discolouration of the substrate it has 
been applied on. These edible green coatings help food-grade products last longer, 
thus keeping the system sustainable. 
1.5 BIODEGRADABILITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECT 
Biodegradability tests can be performed using ASTM D6003–96. In popular prac￾tice, the natural soil burial test is considered one of the most effective methods to 
check the rate of biodegradability [117–120]. Apart from that, the simulated solid 
waste aerobic compost test is also used for the same [117]. In the soil burial test, 
the specimens are buried 6 to 7 cm deep inside the soil surface. The soil is kept 
moist by watering it in a regulated manner. The compost soil is kept in a controlled 
environment in the compost test. The temperature is generally controlled at 30 °C
with 50%–60% water content. The pH level of the compost soil is maintained at 
7. As per the design of the experiment, the samples are removed from the soil and 
washed with distilled water until clean. The samples are then air-dried in a hot air 
furnace at a temperature around 65 to75 °C for 24 hours. The weight loss of the 
sample during the soil burial test and composite tests signifies the rate of biode￾gradability of the sample [120]. 
Polymers are divided into two categories, biodegradable and nonbiodegrad￾able. Though nonbiodegradable polymers have better properties, they face chal￾lenges during disposal. Synthetic, nonbiodegradable polymers are a matter of 
concern globally as they do not degrade fast. So, the popularity of degradable 
and recyclable polymers is increasing. Poly(lactic acid) (PLA) is one of the most 
commercialised degradable polymers. PLA is a starch-derived natural polymer 
that reserves the exclusive properties of commercially used plastics [121]. Chito￾san is another feasible option to be used as a biodegradable polymer. It is derived 
from shrimp shells and is completely non-toxic. Being biodegradable and having 
all the necessary qualities, shrimp shells are used mostly for biomedical stud￾ies [121, 122]. Starch is another naturally found biopolymer that is widely used 
to manufacture substitute sustainable counterparts to plastic bags. Starch-based  
Green composites for sustainable applications 13 
resins are biodegradable and have considerable thermomechanical and rheologi￾cal properties. The main advantage of starch is its easy processing properties. It 
has been used for many years in plastic manufacturing as fillers, but adding starch 
reduces the mechanical properties of starch-based composites. This is one of the 
main reasons to keep starch content below 40% in any composite [121, 123]. 
Apart from natural biodegradable polymers, other commercially used synthetic 
resins like polybutylene succinate (PBS), polybutylene succinate adipate (PBSA) 
and poly (butyleneadipate-co-terephthalate) are popularly used as biodegradable 
polymers [124]. Biodegradable polymers do not show a competitive advantage 
over synthetic polymers due to their low mechanical properties. Keeping the 
biodegradability factor in the count, natural cellulose is blended with natural 
polymer instead of integrating these natural polymers and synthetic polymers, 
making it more mechanically advanced yet 100% natural. Microorganisms play 
a significant role in the faster degradation of composites. The degradation study 
includes bacteria and fungi with the highest hydrolytic activity. Studies showed 
soil bacteria degrade the material faster than do isolated bacteria away from soil 
or compost [122]. Different hydrolase enzymes like lysozyme glycosides are 
responsible for faster degradation of materials upon soil burial or composting. 
The degradation of the composite materials depends on which bacteria or fungal 
growth can penetrate into the surface faster [125]. In a case study of chitosan 
and tannic acid–based composite, it has been observed that it is very difficult 
for most of the microorganisms to grow in it due to antimicrobial and antifungal 
properties. The SEM analysis showed bacterial growth occurs on the composites’ 
surface as a thin film. Further study shows that composite has 99% antibacte￾rial shielding against Staphylococcus aureus, but only 28.42% shielding against 
Escherichia coli [108, 126]. Oxidation is the key parameter for all microorgan￾isms and fungi to access the material surface quickly. Oxidation bio-assimilates 
the molecular structure and breaks the hydrophilic oxidants, thus facilitating the 
biodegradation process [108, 126]. Synthetic plastics blended with starch create 
a hydrophilic property that helps to catalyse the surface with amylase enzymes. 
These catalysed surfaces can further be easily attacked and removed by microor￾ganisms. Plenty of microorganisms found in soil are responsible for faster mate￾rial surface degradation, including yeast, Streptomyces strains, Mucor rouxii 
NRRL 1835 fungi, Aspergillus flavus and Penicillium simplicissimum YK, to 
name a few [101, 111, 113, 127]. 
1.6 DEVELOPMENTS AND APPLICATIONS 
All-natural composites are increasingly used to solve many problems in our soci￾ety. The field of application primarily varies according to the end user. In such an 
approach, all-natural composites made of either industrial waste fibres or natural 
fibres are replacing disposable plastics [2, 128]. Disposable plastics are used world￾wide for takeaway-based restaurants, eateries and hotels. Streetside food vendors, 14 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
grocery stores, flea markets, and vegetable and fish markets require disposable 
plastic packets or containers. This generates a massive amount of non-recyclable 
waste worldwide, which has become a prime concern for all environmentalists 
[36]. Microplastic pollution has reached the level where it has been found in the 
body fluids of unborn babies and in unexplored deep trenches in the ocean where 
human interference has not yet occurred. The only solution to avoid this problem 
is to reduce plastic usage and use sustainable practices wherever possible. Many 
researchers and upcoming business startups globally promote and produce sus￾tainable and rapidly biodegradable cutlery and packaging units. The products are 
primarily developed using naturally available biodegradable fibre and polymer 
protein. Several researchers have developed biodegradable counterparts of plas￾tic disposables using bagasse and starch-based composites. Bamboo fibre, textile 
waste, banana fibre, rice or wheat husk and straws have also been used widely to 
develop natural composites. In a similar approach, we have developed all-natural 
composites based on silk fibre waste and wheat gluten. Apart from these, other 
organic constituents are used to develop products. Natural lemon extract is used 
as a crosslinker, and castor oil is used as a natural plasticiser [129]. 
For our research, all the samples were prepared following the same process, 
where the wheat gluten (WG) and chopped filature silk fibre of 20 (∓ 1.5) mm 
length were mixed in a ratio of 50:50 (w/w) for making the composite sheets. The 
process requires hot water at 60 °C, in which the wheat gluten was poured slowly 
and mixed gently by stirring the water at a fixed temperature of 60 °C with 10% 
castor oil as a plasticiser and 5% freshly extracted lemon juice as the crosslinker. 
The fibres were dipped into hot water for 30 minutes until they were soft enough 
to be added to the mixture. After 30 minutes, the water was drained out gently 
from the fibres, the wheat gluten mixture was poured onto it and proper mixing 
was done with the hand. When the mixture became homogeneous, a thin sheet was 
formed using the hand-lay-up method and kept inside a hot-air oven at 70 °C until 
it was dried completely. The dried sample sheets had a thickness of approximately 
1 mm each and were stacked in layers inside a stainless steel mould to achieve a 
sample dimension of 160 mm in length, 105 mm in width and 2.5 mm in depth. 
The mould was then placed in the hot compression mould and compressed under 
a pressure of 120 bar for 10 minutes at 120 °C, followed by a 15-minute compres￾sion cycle without applying any heat. The prepared samples were then cooled 
inside the mould and taken out for in-depth analysis. 
The thermomechanical analysis and biodegradation test further showed the 
viability of the manufactured sheets to be used as biodegradable counterparts of 
plastic. The impressive mechanical strength provides the necessary strength for 
the structure. The enhanced flexibility due to the addition of natural plasticiser, 
and the crosslinker helped the composite deform into different shapes under the 
hot press. The thermogravimetric analysis showed impressive stability of the 
developed composite under high temperatures. A natural crosslinker and plasti￾ciser helped the wheat gluten form disulfide bonds, which enhanced the polymeric 
reaction and formed more extended chains, as shown in Figure 1.1. The better Green composites for sustainable applications 15 
crosslinking helped the composite exhibit more strength under mechanical testing 
and better thermal stability. 
The rapid (two- to three-week) biodegradability of the developed composite 
is also impressive as shown by the soil degradation test. The SEM images also 
showed good adhesion between matrix and fibre in the presence of crosslinker and 
plasticiser, which naturally improves the mechanical properties of the composite. 
The SEM fractography in Figure 1.2 clearly indicated the promising adhesion 
between the fibre and matrix under the influence of plasticiser and crosslinker. 
The tensile test showed that the prepared composites notably improved in ten￾sile strength and percentage elongation compared to the matrix material. Though 
Figure 1.1 Chemical reaction between the wheat gluten and crosslinker to form a longer 
polymeric chain. 
Figure 1.2 SEM fractographs showing the fibre matrix adhesion of the wheat gluten and 
filature silk composite with and without natural plasticiser and crosslinker.  
16 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 1.3	 Comparison of different mechanical properties of filature silk, wheat gluten and 
wheat gluten and filature silk composite. 
the addition of fibres enhances the strength of the composite, it also increases the 
brittleness of the composite. To reduce the overall brittleness, castor oil was incor￾porated into the composite as a plasticiser to make it more flexible. As a result, 
the final composite showed better elongation than the matrix material. The tensile 
test was performed on five samples, and the average outcome was calculated and 
compared, as shown in Figure 1.3. The composites showed an average ultimate 
tensile strength of 28 MPa, Young’s modulus of 282 MPa and elongation of up to 
20%. The strength and elongation of the prepared composite satisfy the conditions 
for low-pressure moulding. Low-pressure moulding ensures shaping the biocom￾posite sheets into different forms as per the requirement, with significantly lower 
applied pressure and no breakage. 
1.7 CONCLUSION 
Sustainable, green composites are needed urgently as they have the potential to 
replace plastic counterparts on a large scale. Natural composites exhibit advanta￾geous thermomechanical properties. In addition, they are renewable, available in 
ample amounts and less expensive. Biocomposites have increasingly been per￾ceived for their unmatchable biodegradability and low toxicity. Plenty of scien￾tific research has already been conducted on the advantages of biocomposites. 
The outcome of our research demonstrated the immense potential for developing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Green composites for sustainable applications 17 
and utilising these composites according to market needs and size. The current 
necessity is to minimize the use of plastic products to the greatest extent possible. 
Developing newer materials and designs for biocomposites to ensure application￾based performance capabilities should also be emphasised for future studies. As 
these biocomposites will be used for different end applications, enhancing the 
overall appearance and the performance of the biocomposites should also be stud￾ied widely for better market acceptance. Ultimately, the market should recognize 
the significance of replacing plastics with biocomposites, and regulations should 
be imposed to mandate using biocomposite-based products. If practised together, 
the problem of plastic waste can easily be countered with the newly developed 
biocomposites. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ramteke S, Sahu BL (2020) Novel coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic: 
Considerations for the biomedical waste sector in India. Case Stud Chem Environ 
Eng 2:100029. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cscee.2020.100029 
[2] Nielsen TD, Hasselbalch J, Holmberg K, Stripple J (2020) Politics and the plastic cri￾sis: A review throughout the plastic life cycle. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Energy Environ 
9:1–18. https://doi.org/10.1002/wene.360 
[3] La Mantia FP, Morreale M (2011) Green composites: A brief review. Compos Part 
A Appl Sci Manuf 42:579–588. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2011.01.017 
[4] Dunmade I (2013) Mechanical properties of renewable materials: A study on alpaca 
fibre. Int J Eng Sci Invent 2:56–62. 
[5] Abdul Khalil HPS, Bhat AH, Ireana Yusra AF (2012) Green composites from sus￾tainable cellulose nanofibrils: A review. Carbohydr Polym 87:963–979. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.08.078 
[6] Mann GS, Singh LP, Kumar P, Singh S (2020) Green composites: A review of pro￾cessing technologies and recent applications. J Thermoplast Compos Mater 33:1145– 
1171. https://doi.org/10.1177/0892705718816354 
[7] Lee MW, Han SO, Seo YB (2008) Red algae fibre/poly(butylene succinate) biocom￾posites: The effect of fibre content on their mechanical and thermal properties. Com￾pos Sci Technol 68:1266–1272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compscitech.2007.12.016 
[8] Manshor MR, Anuar H, Nur Aimi MN, et al. (2014) Mechanical, thermal and mor￾phological properties of durian skin fibre reinforced PLA biocomposites. Mater Des 
59:279–286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2014.02.062 
[9] Zhou M, Yan J, Li Y, et al. (2013) Interfacial strength and mechanical properties 
of biocomposites based on ramie fibers and poly(butylene succinate). RSC Adv 
3:26418–26426. https://doi.org/10.1039/c3ra43713b 
[10] Shibata M, Ozawa K, Teramoto N, et al. (2003) Biocomposites made from short 
abaca fiber and biodegradable polyesters. Macromol Mater Eng 288:35–43. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/mame.200290031 
[11] Kim Y, Kwon OH, Park WH, Cho D (2013) Thermomechanical and flexural properties 
of chopped silk fiber-reinforced poly(butylene succinate) green composites: Effect of 
electron beam treatment of worm silk. Adv Compos Mater 22:437–449. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/09243046.2013.843830 18 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[12] Studies A, District S, District M, et al. (2013) 2013-Ganesh-A comparative study on 
tensile behaviour of plant and animal fiber reinforced composites. Int J Innov Appl 
Stud 2:645–648. 
[13] Koçak D, Tasdemir M, Usta I, et al. (2008) Mechanical, thermal, and micro￾structure analysis of silk- and cotton-waste-fiber-reinforced high-density poly￾ethylene composites. Polym—Plast Technol Eng 47:502–507. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/03602550801977919 
[14] Kim NK, Bruna FG, Das O, et al. (2020) Fire-retardancy and mechanical perfor￾mance of protein-based natural fibre-biopolymer composites. Compos Part C Open 
Access 1:100011. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcomc.2020.100011 
[15] Sharma A, Rao NN, Krupashankara MS (2018) Development of eco-friendly and 
biodegradable bio composites. Mater Today Proc 5:20987–20995. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.matpr.2018.6.490 
[16] Iber BT, Okomoda VT, Rozaimah SA, Kasan NA (2021) Eco-friendly approaches 
to aquaculture wastewater treatment: Assessment of natural coagulants vis-a￾vis chitosan. Bioresour Technol Reports 15:100702. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
biteb.2021.100702 
[17] Shih YF, Cai JX, Kuan CS, Hsieh CF (2012) Plant fibers and wasted fiber/epoxy 
green composites. Compos Part B Eng 43:2817–2821. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compositesb.2012.04.044 
[18] Nine MJ, Kabiri S, Sumona AK, et al. (2020) Superhydrophobic/superoleophilic 
natural fibres for continuous oil-water separation and interfacial dye-adsorption. Sep 
Purif Technol 233:116062. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.seppur.2019.116062 
[19] Sepe R, Bollino F, Boccarusso L, Caputo F (2018) Influence of chemical treatments 
on mechanical properties of hemp fiber reinforced composites. Compos Part B Eng 
133:210–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2017.09.030 
[20] Song Y, Zheng Q (2008) Improved tensile strength of glycerol-plasticised gluten bio￾plastic containing hydrophobic liquids. Bioresour Technol 99:7665–7671. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.biortech.2008.01.075 
[21] Sun S, Song Y, Zheng Q (2007) Morphologies and properties of thermo-molded 
biodegradable plastics based on glycerol-plasticised wheat gluten. Food Hydrocoll 
21:1005–1013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2006.03.004 
[22] Rahman M, Brazel CS (2004) The plasticiser market: An assessment of tradi￾tional plasticisers and research trends to meet new challenges. Prog Polym Sci 
29:1223–1248. 
[23] Reddy N, Reddy R, Jiang Q (2015) Crosslinking biopolymers for biomedical applica￾tions. Trends Biotechnol 33:362–369. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tibtech.2015.03.008 
[24] Hemsri S, Grieco K, Asandei AD, Parnas RS (2012) Wheat gluten composites rein￾forced with coconut fiber. Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 43:1160–1168. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2012.02.011 
[25] Emin MA, Quevedo M, Wilhelm M, Karbstein HP (2017) Analysis of the reaction 
behavior of highly concentrated plant proteins in extrusion-like conditions. Innov 
Food Sci Emerg Technol 44:15–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ifset.2017.09.013 
[26] McGauran T, Harris M, Dunne N, et al. (2021) Development and optimisation of 
extruded bio-based polymers from poultry feathers. Eur Polym J 158:110678. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpolymj.2021.110678 
[27] Jansson H, Swenson J (2010) The protein glass transition as measured by dielectric 
spectroscopy and differential scanning calorimetry. Biochim Biophys Acta—Proteins 
Proteomics 1804:20–26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbapap.2009.06.026  
Green composites for sustainable applications 19 
[28] Liu Y, Cai Z, Sheng L, et al. (2019) Structure-property of crosslinked chitosan/silica 
composite films modified by genipin and glutaraldehyde under alkaline conditions. 
Carbohydr Polym 215:348–357. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2019.04.001 
[29] Liu W, Qiu J, Chen T, et al. (2019) Regulating tannic acid-crosslinked epoxidised 
soybean oil oligomers for strengthening and toughening bamboo fibers-reinforced 
poly(lactic acid) biocomposites. Compos Sci Technol 181:107709. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.compscitech.2019.107709 
[30] Nataraj D, Sakkara S, Meenakshi, HN, Reddy N (2018) Properties and applications of 
citric acid crosslinked banana fibre-wheat gluten films. Ind Crops Prod 124:265–272. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indcrop.2018.07.076 
[31] Reddy N, Tan Y, Li Y, Yang Y (2008) Effect of glutaraldehyde crosslinking condi￾tions on the strength and water stability of wheat gluten fibers. Macromol Mater Eng 
293:614–620. https://doi.org/10.1002/mame.200800031 
[32] Yeng CM, Husseinsyah S, Ting SS (2015) Effect of cross-linking agent on ten￾sile properties of chitosan/corn cob biocomposite films. Polym Plast Technol Eng 
54:270–275. https://doi.org/10.1080/03602559.2014.977090 
[33] Patil NV, Netravali AN (2016) Microfibrillated cellulose-reinforced nonedible starch￾based thermoset biocomposites. J Appl Polym Sci 133. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
app.43803 
[34] Windsor FM, Durance I, Horton AA, et al. (2019) A catchment-scale perspective of 
plastic pollution. Glob Chang Biol 25:1207–1221. https://doi.org/10.1111/gcb.14572 
[35] Singh P, Sharma VP (2016) Integrated plastic waste management: Environmen￾tal and improved health approaches. Procedia Environ Sci 35:692–700. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.proenv.2016.07.068 
[36] Joshi R, Ahmed S (2016) Status and challenges of municipal solid waste management in 
India: A review. Cogent Environ Sci 2. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311843.2016.1139434 
[37] Xue C, Gao H, Hu Y, Hu G (2019) Hyperelastic characteristics of graphene natu￾ral rubber composites and reinforcement and toughening mechanisms at multi-scale. 
Compos Struct 228:111365. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2019.111365 
[38] Krishna V, Kate KH, Satyavolu J, Singh P (2019) Additive manufacturing of natu￾ral fiber reinforced polymer composites: Processing and prospects. Compos Part B 
174:106956. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2019.106956 
[39] Chandramohan D, Presin Kumar AJ (2017) Experimental data on the properties of 
natural fiber particle reinforced polymer composite material. Data Br 13:460–468. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2017.06.020 
[40] Tasdemir M, Akalin M, Kocak D, et al. (2010) Investigation of properties of polymer/ 
textile fiber composites. Int J Polym Mater Polym Biomater 59:200–214. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/00914030903231415 
[41] Chee SS, Jawaid M, Sultan M, et al. (2019) Thermomechanical and dynamic mechan￾ical properties of bamboo/woven kenaf mat reinforced epoxy hybrid composites. 
Compos Part B Eng 163:165–174. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2018.11.039 
[42] Shubhra QTH, Alam AKMM (2011) Effect of gamma radiation on the mechanical 
properties of natural silk fiber and synthetic E-glass fiber reinforced polypropylene 
composites: A comparative study. Radiat Phys Chem 80:1228–1232. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.radphyschem.2011.04.010 
[43] Shubhra QTH, Alam AKMM, Beg MDH, et al. (2011) Mechanical and degradation 
characteristics of natural silk and synthetic phosphate glass fiber reinforced poly￾propylene composites. J Compos Mater 45:1305–1313. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0021998310380290 20 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[44] Kumar S, Manna A, Dang R (2022) A review on applications of natural fiber￾reinforced composites (NFRCs). Mater Today Proc 50:1632–1636. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.MATPR.2021.09.131
[45] Roper H, Koch H (1990) The role of starch in biodegradable thermoplastic materials.
Starch - Stärke 42:123–130. https://doi.org/10.1002/star.19900420402
[46] Ashori A (2008) Wood-plastic composites as promising green-composites for automo￾tive industries! Bioresour Technol 99:4661–4667. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biortech. 
2007.09.043
[47] Rasheed F, Plivelic TS, Kuktaite R, et al. (2018) Unraveling the structural puzzle
of the giant glutenin polymer—An interplay between protein polymerization, nano￾morphology, and functional properties in bioplastic films. ACS Omega 3:5584–5592.
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.7b02081
[48] Cao N, Fu Y, He J (2007) Preparation and physical properties of soy protein isolate
and gelatin composite films. Food Hydrocoll 21:1153–1162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodhyd.2006.09.001
[49] Lodha P, Netravali AN (2002) Characterisation of interfacial and mechanical prop￾erties of “green” composites with soy protein isolate and ramie fiber. J Mater Sci
37:3657–3665. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1016557124372
[50] Chang YP, Abd Karim A, Seow CC (2006) Interactive plasticizing-antiplasticizing
effects of water and glycerol on the tensile properties of tapioca starch films. Food
Hydrocoll 20:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodhyd.2005.02.004
[51] Breuninger WF, Piyachomkwan K, Sriroth K (2009) Tapioca/cassava starch: Produc￾tion and use. In Starch 541–568.https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-746275-2.00012-4 
[52] Van Soest JJG, Hulleman SHD, De Wit D, Vliegenthart JFG (1996) Changes in the
mechanical properties of thermoplastic potato starch in relation with changes in B-type
crystallinity. Carbohydr Polym 29:225–232. https://doi.org/10.1016/0144-8617(96) 
00011-2
[53] Podshivalov A, Zakharova M, Glazacheva E, Uspenskaya M (2017) Gelatin/
potato starch edible biocomposite films: Correlation between morphology and
physical properties. Carbohydr Polym 157:1162–1172. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
CARBPOL.2016.10.079
[54] Rodríguez-Castellanos W, Martínez-Bustos F, Rodrigue D, Trujillo-Barragán M (2015) 
Extrusion blow molding of a starch–gelatin polymer matrix reinforced with cellulose. 
Eur Polym J 73:335–343. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.EURPOLYMJ.2015.10.029
[55] Peña C, de la Caba K, Eceiza A, et al. (2010) Enhancing water repellence and mechan￾ical properties of gelatin films by tannin addition. Bioresour Technol 101:6836–6842. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIORTECH.2010.03.112
[56] Davidović S, Lazić V, Miljković M, et al. (2019) Antibacterial ability of immobilised
silver nanoparticles in agar-agar films co-doped with magnesium ions. Carbohydr
Polym 224:115187. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CARBPOL.2019.115187
[57] Nogueira GF, Soares CT, Cavasini R, et al. (2019) Bioactive films of arrowroot
starch and blackberry pulp: Physical, mechanical and barrier properties and stabil￾ity to pH and sterilisation. Food Chem 275:417–425. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.
FOODCHEM.2018.09.054
[58] Tarique J, Sapuan SM, Khalina A (2021) Effect of glycerol plasticiser loading on
the physical, mechanical, thermal, and barrier properties of arrowroot (Maranta
arundinacea) starch biopolymers. Sci Reports 11:13900. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-021-93094-y 
Green composites for sustainable applications 21 
[59] Grégoire M, Bar M, De Luycker E, et al. (2021) Comparing flax and hemp fibres 
yield and mechanical properties after scutching/hackling processing. Ind Crops Prod 
172:114045. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.INDCROP.2021.114045 
[60] Munawar SS, Umemura K, Kawai S (2007) Characterisation of the morphological, 
physical, and mechanical properties of seven nonwood plant fiber bundles. J Wood 
Sci 53:108–113. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10086-006-0836-X/METRICS 
[61] Saba N, Paridah MT, Jawaid M (2015) Mechanical properties of kenaf fibre rein￾forced polymer composite: A review. Constr Build Mater 76:87–96. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.CONBUILDMAT.2014.11.043 
[62] Defoirdt N, Biswas S, De Vriese L, et al. (2010) Assessment of the tensile properties 
of coir, bamboo and jute fibre. Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 41:588–595. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.COMPOSITESA.2010.01.005 
[63] Yao W, Li Z (2003) Flexural behavior of bamboo–fiber-reinforced mortar laminates. 
Cem Concr Res 33:15–19. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0008-8846(02)00909-2 
[64] Chen Z, Xu Y, Shivkumar S (2018) Microstructure and tensile properties of various vari￾eties of rice husk. J Sci Food Agric 98:1061–1070. https://doi.org/10.1002/JSFA.8556 
[65] Haameem M, Abdul Majid MS, Afendi M, et al. (2016) Mechanical properties of 
Napier grass fibre/polyester composites. Compos Struct 136:1–10. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.COMPSTRUCT.2015.09.051 
[66] Chandrasekar M, Senthilkumar K, Senthil Muthu Kumar T, et al. (2021) Effect 
of adding sisal fiber on the sliding wear behavior of the coconut sheath fiber￾reinforced composite. Tribol Polym Compos 115–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-819767-7.00006-2 
[67] Saragih SW, Lubis R, Wirjosentono B, Eddyanto (2018) Characteristic of abaca 
(Musa textilis) fiber from Aceh Timur as bioplastic. AIP Conf Proc 2049. https://doi. 
org/10.1063/1.5082463 
[68] Senthilkumar K, Siva I, Rajini N, et al. (2018) Mechanical characteristics of tri-layer 
eco-friendly polymer composites for interior parts of aerospace application. Sustain 
Compos Aerosp Appl 35–53. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-102131-6.00003-7 
[69] Kavitha C, Sureshkumar K, Srividhya N, et al. (2022) Experimental investigation 
of tensile properties in banana fibre composites. Mater Today Proc. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.MATPR.2022.01.451 
[70] Yusriah L, Sapuan SM, Zainudin ES, Mariatti M (2012) Exploring the potential of 
betel nut husk fiber as reinforcement in polymer composites: Effect of fiber maturity. 
Procedia Chem 4:87–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PROCHE.2012.06.013 
[71] Yu Y, Yang W, Wang B, Meyers MA (2017) Structure and mechanical behavior of 
human hair. Mater Sci Eng C 73:152–163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2016.12.008 
[72] Farran L, Ennos AR, Starkie M, Eichhorn SJ (2009) Tensile and shear properties of 
fingernails as a function of a changing humidity environment. J Biomech 42:1230– 
1235. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2009.03.020 
[73] Zhan M, Wool RP (2011) Mechanical properties of chicken feather fibers. Polym 
Compos 32:937–944. https://doi.org/10.1002/PC.21112 
[74] Chen S, Liu M, Huang H, et al. (2019) Mechanical properties of Bombyx mori silk￾worm silk fibre and its corresponding silk fibroin filament: A comparative study. 
Mater Des 181:108077. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MATDES.2019.108077 
[75] Araya-Letelier G, Antico FC, Carrasco M, et al. (2017) Effectiveness of new natural 
fibers on damage-mechanical performance of mortar. Constr Build Mater 152:672– 
682. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CONBUILDMAT.2017.07.072  
 
22 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[76] Mohan NH, Debnath S, Mahapatra RK, et al. (2014) Tensile properties of hair 
fibres obtained from different breeds of pigs. Biosyst Eng 119:35–43. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.BIOSYSTEMSENG.2014.01.003 
[77] McGregor BA (2018) Physical, chemical, and tensile properties of cashmere, mohair, 
alpaca, and other rare animal fibers. Handb Prop Text Tech Fibres 105–136. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-08-101272-7.00004-3 
[78] Harizi T, Msahli S, Sakli F, Khorchani T (2010) Evaluation of physical and mechani￾cal properties of Tunisian camel hair. http://dx.doi.org/101533/joti20050165 98:15– 
21. https://doi.org/10.1533/JOTI.2005.0165 
[79] Gosline JM, DeMont ME, Denny MW (1986) The structure and properties of spider 
silk. Endeavour 10:37–43. https://doi.org/10.1016/0160-9327(86)90049-9 
[80] Sharma AK, Bhandari R, Aherwar A, et al. (2020) A study of advancement in applica￾tion opportunities of aluminum metal matrix composites. Mater Today Proc 26:2419– 
2424. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MATPR.2020.02.516 
[81] Vijaya Ramnath B, Elanchezhian C, Jaivignesh M, et al. (2014) Evaluation of 
mechanical properties of aluminium alloy–alumina–boron carbide metal matrix com￾posites. Mater Des 58:332–338. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MATDES.2014.01.068 
[82] Ralph B, Yuen HC, Lee WB (1997) The processing of metal matrix composites— 
an overview. J Mater Process Technol 63:339–353. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924­
0136(96)02645-3 
[83] Ellis MBD (2013) Joining of aluminium based metal matrix composites. Int Mater 
Rev 41:41–58. https://doi.org/10.1179/IMR.1996.41.2.41 
[84] Lukkassen D, Meidell A (2007) Advanced materials and structures and their fabrica￾tion processes. B manuscript, Narvik Univ Coll HiN 2:1–14. 
[85] Du J, Zhang H, Geng Y, et al. (2019) A review on machining of carbon fiber reinforced 
ceramic matrix composites. Ceram Int 45:18155–18166. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
CERAMINT.2019.06.112 
[86] Chaiwong W, Samoh N, Eksomtramage T, Kaewtatip K (2019) Surface-treated 
oil palm empty fruit bunch fiber improved tensile strength and water resistance of 
wheat gluten-based bioplastic. Compos Part B 176:107331. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compositesb.2019.107331 
[87] Chen T, Wu Y, Qiu J, et al. (2020) Interfacial compatibilisation via in-situ polymeri￾sation of epoxidised soybean oil for bamboo fibers reinforced poly(lactic acid) bio￾composites. Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 138:106066. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compositesa.2020.106066 
[88] Ramesh M, Palanikumar K, Reddy KH (2013) Mechanical property evaluation of 
sisal-jute-glass fiber reinforced polyester composites. Compos Part B Eng 48:1–9. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2012.12.004 
[89] Ku H, Wang H, Pattarachaiyakoop N, Trada M (2011) A review on the tensile proper￾ties of natural fiber reinforced polymer composites. Comp B Eng 42:856–873. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.compositesb.2011.01.010 
[90] Haddadi SA, Ghaderi S, Sadeghi M, et al. (2021) Enhanced active/barrier corrosion 
protective properties of epoxy coatings containing eco-friendly green inorganic/ 
organic hybrid pigments based on zinc cations/Ferula Asafoetida leaves. J Mol Liq 
323:114584. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2020.114584 
[91] Gassan J, Gutowski VS, Bledzki AK. About the surface characteristics of natural fibres. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/1439-2054(20001101)283:1<132::AID-MAME132>3.0.CO;2-B 
[92] Lacroix M, Vu KD (2013) Edible Coating and Film Materials: Proteins. Elsevier Ltd.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Green composites for sustainable applications 23 
[93] Mokhothu TH, John MJ (2017) Bio-based coatings for reducing water sorption 
in natural fibre reinforced composites. Sci Rep 7:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/ 
s41598-017-13859-2 
[94] Tian Z, Zhang R, Liu Y, et al. (2021) Hemicellulose-based nanocomposites coating 
delays lignification of green asparagus by introducing AKD as a hydrophobic modi￾fier. Renew Energy 178:1097–1105. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2021.06.096 
[95] Ghaderi S, Ramazani SAA, Haddadi SA (2019) Applications of highly salt and 
highly temperature resistance terpolymer of acrylamide/styrene/maleic anhydride 
monomers as a rheological modifier: Rheological and corrosion protection proper￾ties studies. J Mol Liq 294:111635. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.molliq.2019.111635 
[96] Van Nieuwenhove I, Salamon A, Peters K, et al. (2016) Gelatin- and starch-based 
hydrogels. Part A: Hydrogel development, characterisation and coating. Carbohydr 
Polym 152:129–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2016.06.098 
[97] Pérez-Gago MB, Rhim JW (2013) Edible coating and film materials: Lipid bilayers 
and lipid emulsions. In Innovations in Food Packaging. 2nd ed. 325–350. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-394601-0.00013-8 
[98] Cruz AIC, Costa M da C, Mafra JF, et al. (2021) A sodium alginate bilayer coat￾ing incorporated with green propolis extract as a powerful tool to extend Colos￾soma macropomum fillet shelf-life. Food Chem 355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
foodchem.2021.129610 
[99] Gabriela da Silva Pires P, Bavaresco C, Daniela da Silva Pires P, et al. (2021) Devel￾opment of an innovative green coating to reduce egg losses. Clean Eng Technol 
2:100065. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clet.2021.100065 
[100] Darroman E, Durand N, Boutevin B, Caillol S (2015) New cardanol/sucrose epoxy 
blends for biobased coatings. Prog Org Coatings 83:47–54. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
porgcoat.2015.02.002 
[101] Revuelta MV., Bogdan S, Gámez-Espinosa E, et al. (2021) Green antifungal water￾borne coating based on essential oil microcapsules. Prog Org Coatings 151. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.porgcoat.2020.106101 
[102] Tsupphayakorn-aek P, Suwan A, Tulyapitak T, et al. (2022) A novel UV-curable 
waterborne polyurethane-acrylate coating based on green polyol from hydroxyl 
telechelic natural rubber. Prog Org Coatings 163:106585. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
porgcoat.2021.106585 
[103] Huang C, Zhang N, Wang Q, et al. (2021) Development of hydrophilic anti-crease 
finishing method for cotton fabric using alpha-lipoic acid without causing strength 
loss and formaldehyde release problem. Prog Org Coatings 151:106042. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.porgcoat.2020.106042 
[104] Prakashkumar N, Vignesh M, Brindhadevi K, et al. (2021) Enhanced antimicrobial, 
antibiofilm and anticancer activities of biocompatible neem gum coated palladium 
nanoparticles. Prog Org Coat 151:106098. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.porgcoat.2020. 
106098 
[105] Bortoletto-Santos R, Guimarães GGF, Roncato Junior V, Cruz DFD, Polito WL, 
Ribeiro C (2019) Biodegradable oil-based polymeric coatings on urea fertilizer: N 
release kinetic transformations of urea in soil. Sci Agric 77:e20180033. 
[106] Asgari S, Jahanshahi M, Rahimpour A (2014) Cost-effective nanoporous agar￾agar polymer/nickel powder composite particle for effective bio-products adsorp￾tion by expanded bed chromatography. J Chromatogr A 1361:191–202. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.chroma.2014.08.016 24 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[107] Wang X, Liu Y, Liu X, et al. (2021) Degradable gelatin-based supramolecular coat￾ing for green paper sizing. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 13:1367–1376. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/acsami.0c16758 
[108] Nguyen TT, Huynh Nguyen TT, Tran Pham BT, et al. (2021) Development of poly 
(vinyl alcohol)/agar/maltodextrin coating containing silver nanoparticles for banana 
(Musa acuminate) preservation. Food Packag Shelf Life 29:100740. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2021.100740 
[109] Sousa AMM, Sereno AM, Hilliou L, Gonçalves MP (2010) Biodegradable agar 
extracted from Gracilaria vermiculophylla: Film properties and application to edible 
coating. Mater Sci Forum 636–637:739–744. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scien￾tific.net/MSF.636-637.739 
[110] Shrestha AK, Arcot J, Paterson JL (2003) Edible coating materials—their properties 
and use in the fortification of rice with folic acid. Food Res Int 36:921–928. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S0963-9969(03)00101-7 
[111] Geraldine RM, Soares NFF, Botrel DA, de Almeida Gonçalves L (2008) Characteri￾sation and effect of edible coatings on minimally processed garlic quality. Carbo￾hydr Polym 72:403–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2007.09.012 
[112] Friedrich JCC, Silva OA, Faria MGI, et al. (2020) Improved antioxidant activity of a 
starch and gelatin-based biodegradable coating containing Tetradenia riparia extract. 
Int J Biol Macromol 165:1038–1046. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2020.09.143 
[113] Aitboulahsen M, Zantar S, Laglaoui A, et al. (2018) Gelatin-based edible coating 
combined with mentha pulegium essential oil as bioactive packaging for strawber￾ries. J Food Qual 2018. https://doi.org/10.1155/2018/8408915 
[114] Cardoso GP, Dutra MP, Fontes PR, et al. (2016) Selection of a chitosan gelatin-based 
edible coating for color preservation of beef in retail display. Meat Sci 114:85–94. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2015.12.012 
[115] Kingwascharapong P, Arisa K, Karnjanapratum S, et al. (2020) Effect of gelatin-based 
coating containing frog skin oil on the quality of persimmon and its characteristics. 
Sci Hortic (Amsterdam) 260:108864. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scienta.2019.108864 
[116] Zhang H, Liang Y, Li X, Kang H (2020) Effect of chitosan-gelatin coating contain￾ing nano-encapsulated tarragon essential oil on the preservation of pork slices. Meat 
Sci 166:108137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2020.108137 
[117] Kim HS, Kim HJ, Lee JW, Choi IG (2006) Biodegradability of bio-flour filled biode￾gradable poly(butylene succinate) bio-composites in natural and compost soil. Polym 
Degrad Stab 91:1117–1127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2005.07.002 
[118] Liu L, Yu J, Cheng L, Yang X (2009) Biodegradability of poly(butylene succinate) 
(PBS) composite reinforced with jute fibre. Polym Degrad Stab 94:90–94. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.polymdegradstab.2008.10.013 
[119] Kalka S, Huber T, Steinberg J, et al. (2014) Biodegradability of all-cellulose compos￾ite laminates. Compos Part A Appl Sci Manuf 59:37–44. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
compositesa.2013.12.012 
[120] Muniyasamy S, Anstey A, Reddy MM, et al. (2013) Biodegradability and com￾postability of lignocellulosic based composite materials. J Renew Mater 1:253–272. 
https://doi.org/10.7569/JRM.2013.634117 
[121] Olaiya NG, Surya I, Oke PK, et al. (2019) Properties and characterisation of a PLA￾chitin-starch biodegradable polymer composite. Polymers (Basel) 11. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/polym11101656 Green composites for sustainable applications 25 
[122] Kaczmarek-Szczepańska B, Sionkowska MM, Mazur O, et al. (2021) The role of 
microorganisms in biodegradation of chitosan/tannic acid materials. Int J Biol Mac￾romol 184:584–592. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2021.06.133 
[123] Wu CS (2003) Physical properties and biodegradability of maleated-polycaprolactone/ 
starch composite. Polym Degrad Stab 80:127–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0141­
3910(02)00393-2 
[124] Hamad K, Kaseem M, Ko YG, Deri F (2014) Biodegradable polymer blends and 
composites: An overview. Polym Sci—Ser A 56:812–829. https://doi.org/10.1134/ 
S0965545X14060054 
[125] Kim IH, Yang HJ, Noh BS, et al. (2012) Development of a defatted mustard meal￾based composite film and its application to smoked salmon to retard lipid oxidation. 
Food Chem 133:1501–1509. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.02.040 
[126] Hasheminya SM, Mokarram RR, Ghanbarzadeh B, et al. (2019) Development and 
characterisation of biocomposite films made from kefiran, carboxymethyl cellu￾lose and Satureja Khuzestanica essential oil. Food Chem 289:443–452. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2019.03.076 
[127] Nissa RC, Fikriyyah AK, Abdullah AHD, Pudjiraharti S (2019) Preliminary study of 
biodegradability of starch-based bioplastics using ASTM G21–70, dip-hanging, and 
soil burial test methods. IOP Conf Ser Earth Environ Sci 277:012007. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/1755-1315/277/1/012007 
[128] Tokiwa Y, Calabia BP, Ugwu CU, Aiba S (2009) Biodegradability of plastics. Int J 
Mol Sci 10:3722–3742. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms10093722 
[129] Bhowmik P, Kant R, Nair R, Singh H (2021) Influence of natural crosslinker and 
fibre weightage on waste kibisu fibre reinforced wheatgluten biocomposite. J Polym 
Res 28:106. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10965-021-02470-9 2
 
 
Chapter 2
 
Metallic functionally graded 
materials 
Krishan Kumar , Khushboo Rakha ,
 Shahriar  Reza and Harpreet Singh 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
Materials development originates from monolithic materials and progresses into 
alloys, composites, and advanced composites such as functionally graded materials 
through various techniques. It is impossible to have conflicting properties in a sin￾gle object with monolithic materials, while alloying is limited by thermodynamic 
behavior and degree of miscibility of their constituents. The traditional composites 
fail under a harsh working environment as the sharp interface (i.e., mismatch in 
thermal and mechanical properties of adjoining materials) acts as a debilitating 
stress concentration site causing crack initiation and propagation to eventual fail￾ure of the object by delamination [1]. This sharp interface of conventional com￾posites is systematically eliminated in novel composites (i.e., functionally graded 
materials) through a gradually changing interface; consequently, stress concentra￾tion reduces [2]. FGMs are advanced engineering materials with spatial gradients 
in either elastic, plastic, or both elastic and plastic properties, used to fabricate 
multi-functional parts by achieving conflicting performance goals in the same part. 
These property gradients are achieved through a seamless transition in porosity, 
material composition, and/or microstructure in their spatial dimensions. Engineer￾ing continuously turns to nature to find solutions to distinct engineering problems. 
FGMs are biologically inspired materials that mimic the ubiquitous FGMs in the 
palm tree, bamboo, and spongy trabecular structure of animal bones, teeth, and tis￾sue variation in muscle and wood [3]. Nature has designed these products to meet 
various performance requirements. For example, the outer part of a human tooth 
is made of wear-resistant enamel with a ductile inner structure that absorbs impact 
load to optimize the fatigue life of teeth. High surface hardness and ductile cores 
achieve similar performance requirements of resisting the surface wear and fatigue 
failure in bearing applications [4]. In a true sense, for the multi-functional status of 
a component, there should be both intralayer and interlayer variation in properties 
[5]. FGM promotes artifact design by customizing various regions of a part with 
different material properties. Artificial FGMs have been investigated for decades 
after their first use by Japan in 1984 in space shuttle bodies as a thermal barrier 
material to withstand temperature differences of 1000°C [6]. The leverage of spatial 
26 DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-2 Metallic functionally graded materials 27 
property gradient is a swiftly advancing research area, especially given the evolu￾tion of additive manufacturing (AM). Figure 2.1 demonstrates diverse application 
streams of FGMs to fabricate products with heterogeneous properties like tough￾ness and wear resistance in engine nozzles, automotive valve stems and turbine 
blades under thermo-mechanical stresses, gears under impact and abrasion wear, 
and compliant hydrostatic bearing and cutting tools in distinct engineering appli￾cations. Graded implants and dental restorations with better biocompatibility and 
mechanical functionality have been ubiquitous in biomedical applications [1, 7–9]. 
Based on heterogeneity, materials with strategically controlled porosity/ 
composition/microstructure or a combination of them across their volume are 
referred to as FGMs. A potential classification of FGMs is exemplified in 
Figure 2.2: (a) heterogeneous structure materials comprising variable densification 
or porosity within a homogeneous composition; (b) heterogeneous composition 
materials having multiple materials combined with smooth and a seamless transi￾tion in composition; and (c) heterogeneous microstructure in any of (a) and (b) 
using heat treatment processes [10]. 
The fabricated FGMs are often post-processed to enhance tribological behavior 
through microstructural gradients [11]. The heterogeneous structure is also known 
as density cellular structure, porous structure, and functionally graded cellular 
microstructure. It comprises a lattice structure instead of solid material for higher 
strength-to-weight ratio to fabricate lighter yet stronger components. The geo￾metrical characteristics of pores, lattice cells, and interconnectivity are linked to 
the properties of this kind of FGMs. The ratio of the void to the solid volume of a 
material (i.e., porosity) is engineered for superior acoustic, optical, thermal, and 
mechanical behavior and reduced weight per unit volume. 
Figure 2.1 Potential applications of FGMs. 28 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 2.2 Classification of functionally graded materials. 
Graded porosity or material density gradient can be obtained through variation 
in porosity density or pore size and shape. This kind of FGM has been ubiquitously 
used for surgical implants as porosity helps integrate the implant with surround￾ing tissues and blood circulation [12]. Chemical composition graded FGMs have 
multi-materiality aspects with dynamically composed gradients in the volume of 
bulk material. The materials may have single-phase or complex morphology with 
multiple phases. The distribution of materials may follow uniformity, steps, or 
other particular patterns in objects [3, 12]. In microstructure gradient FGMs, dis￾tinct microstructures are strategically modulated through various methods such as 
composition variation, post-processing like case hardening, quenching, and other 
heat treatment processes to obtain the desired property variation in material [13]. 
FGMs are fabricated using a combination of ceramic-polymer, ceramic-metal, 
ceramic-ceramic, and metal-metal. Along with the heterogeneity-based classifica￾tion, FGMs are classified according to the combination of constituents, structure, 
nature of gradient (i.e., stepped, continuous, or specific pattern) and the applica￾tion [14]. Fabrication approaches have evolved from conventional processes like 
gas-based thermal spray, liquid-based centrifugal casting, and solid-based pow￾der metallurgy to advanced manufacturing methods like additive manufacturing 
(AM). AM technology empowers the direct fabrication of bespoke components 
by accurately placing the material at predefined positions in a design space [3]. 
Tungsten, nickel, titanium, aluminum, copper, and magnesium are reported as the 
most frequently used metals for FGM fabrication [15]. 
Several advantageous aspects of AM techniques include innovation through 
rapid mass customization and unprecedented design freedom, the ability to create 
high geometric complexity with short lead time and part count reduction (PCR), 
producing lightweight components by using lattice structures in place of solid 
material, minimizing waste generation or even eliminating it, embedding different  
Metallic functionally graded materials 29 
functional component like motors, bearings, or electronic components into a single 
part through part consolidation, and enabling multiple materials additive manufac￾turing (MMAM) [7, 16]. These factors bring AM to the forefront of FGM fabrica￾tion techniques. However, there are also a few restrictive aspects of AM, such as 
a limited ability to build overhanging features, warpage and cracking due to ther￾mal stresses, infill densities, stair-stepping, surface roughness, and microstructural 
anisotropy in the Z-direction [17]. Integrating the restrictive and opportunistic 
aspects of design for additive manufacturing (DfAM) allows for the production of 
complex geometries using multiple build materials while minimizing time, cost, 
material waste, and the risk of build failures [17, 18]. The AM processing variables 
such as beam current, beam focus, and beam speed enable the fabrication of multi￾material parts with embedded components like multi-material airless tires, robot 
fingers, articulated camera probe, and articulated mechanisms [19]. Prabhu et al. 
[20, 21] explored the commensurate need for skilled workers and the importance 
of introducing AM educational intervention by institutions, academics, and profes￾sionals to improve the technical excellence of students’ design outcomes. Recent 
innovations have evolved additive manufacturing from rapid prototyping (RPT) 
to direct digital manufacturing (DDM) of customized geometry with functional 
material properties. Researchers have developed several discretization mathemati￾cal models for composition control at every voxel using function-based models 
through piecewise blending or global function in MMAM. Then, techniques like 
topology optimization and material composition optimization are used to enhance 
fabricated parts’ performance [22]. Metal-based FGMs have garnered much atten￾tion from both academia and industrial communities. Several review papers have 
been published, each addressing various aspects of FGMs. However, none of them 
comprehensively covers all facets of FGMs, including their origination, types, 
design techniques and tools, fabrication methods, post-processing requirements, 
frequently used techniques, and applications. This review is a compilation of all 
developments including materials, modeling, simulation, optimization, fabrica￾tion techniques, scanning patterns, delivery mechanism of multiple materials, and 
applications of FGMs, together with future scope of research. Being a state-of-the￾art and comprehensive review, it can be useful for both researchers and industry. 
For example, designers could retrieve information about available resources and 
their limitations to improve their decisional process. Software developers could 
get insights to improve the constraints while modeling and optimizing the FGMs. 
Finally, researchers can obtain a comprehensive overview of the topic as a guide 
for future research. 
The remaining article is organized as follows: Section 2.2 surveys the literature 
on modeling and optimization of FGMs. Section 2.3 highlights different devel￾opments in FGM fabrication processes. Various auxiliary aspects like toolpath 
planning and scanning strategy, powder feed mechanisms, and support structure 
are elaborated in Section 2.4. Post-processing requirements and techniques are 
reviewed in Section 2.5. Section 2.6 covers various testing and characterization 
tools used in FGM part fabrication. Section 2.7 discusses various fabrication  
30 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
challenges and future directions of FGMs research. Finally, this chapter is sum￾marized in Section 2.8. 
2.2 MODELING AND OPTIMIZATION OF FGMs 
Even though the merits of FGMs have already been unveiled, the modeling and 
optimization of these materials is an effortful task. The increased number of vari￾ables at the design and fabrication stages makes the optimization process overly 
complicated, especially in the case of multiple materials. Numerous simulation￾based analyses on additive manufacturing of composites have been conducted. 
However, as FGM fabrication is a newer application of AM processes, only a 
limited number of computational models have been investigated [12]. Computer￾aided design technologies have helped researchers generate a multitude of 3D 
CAD representations with boundary representations (B-rep), spatial decompo￾sition, constructive solid geometry (CSG), and function representation (F-rep) 
as commonly used geometric representation techniques. B-rep and F-rep tech￾niques represent 3D geometry only while CSG and spatial decomposition along 
with hierarchy-based parallel representation describe both geometry and mate￾rial [3]. Before developing special modules for FGMs in commercial software 
like ANSYS, ABAQUS, and COMSOL Multiphysics, manufacturing simulation 
used to be done through NC programming using G-code [23]. Optimal process 
parameters for minimizing the undesirable residual stress and part distortion can 
be determined using experimental trial and engineering judgment. However, 
the experimental trial becomes exorbitantly expensive for multi-material parts 
of complex geometries. The computational model can provide an accurate rela￾tion between process parameters and the magnitude of induced residual stress 
and part distortion. Furthermore, incorporating a feedback loop and real-time 
process parameter modification can prompt optimization. Computational tools 
enable optimization of the structure, composition, topology, or a combination of 
multiple variables using algorithms. Computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and 
fast Fourier transform (FFT) combined with finite element (FE), finite volume 
(FV), and finite difference (FD) models have been used for thermal-mechanical 
and thermo-fluid modeling [24, 25]. The modeling of the heterogeneous objects, 
that is, FGMs, enfold geometric modeling with varying material composition and 
heterogeneous lattice structure. Topology optimization (TO) has arisen as a pow￾erful design tool and has been exploited to optimize the material or weight of an 
object, which further reduces fabrication time and material cost. The prominent 
TO methods for FGM fabrication include homogenization, solid isotropic mate￾rial with penalization (SIMP), geometry projection method, level set, Heaviside 
projection method, phase-field method, moving morphable component (MMC) 
method, and evolutionary approach which were first developed for single mate￾rial (SIMO) and then extended to multi-materials (MMTO) [26]. The modeling 
and optimization techniques used for microstructurally, structurally, and com￾positionally graded materials are outlined in Sections 2.2.1, 2.2.2, and 2.2.3, Metallic functionally graded materials 31 
respectively. Various software programs and their application and salient features 
are presented in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1 Summary of design and optimization tools of FGMs 
Compositionally graded material 
Software/Tool Salient features Application/ Reference 
Material 
COMSOL FEA results show good compatibility Compliant [9] 
Multiphysics with that of the analytical method hydrostatic 
bearing 
To understand the relation between Nickel alloy [25] 
operating parameters in coating process coated 
Topologically optimized, porous Photopolymer [27] 
structure with weight saving liquid resin 
Thermo-Calc and Undesirable phase formation in FGMs, For any multiple [28–32] 
Pandant software their identification, and avoidance materials FGM 
Optimum property gradients using the 
map-based planner 
Computationally predicting phase Ti-6Al-4V/Inconel [31] 
transformations	 718 FGM 
ABAQUS	 CFD simulation with variable operating FGM ofTi-6Al-4V [24] 
parameters user-defined functions 
Design elastic FEM model Any Material [33] 
MATLAB, and A mathematical model for multi- Inconel 718 and [8] 
modeFRONTIER® objective optimization in DED Ti-6Al-4V 
MATLAB Optimization of macro periodic Any material [34] 
structure using substructures 
Autodesk, and Voxel-based modeling software for Any material [3] 
GrabCAD Voxel multi-material 3D printing to simulate combination 
Print the design 
Rpdata, and Slicing of the support structure and Any material [35] 
Netfabb design structure combination 
SolidWorks 3D geometric modeling and FEA TB+, VW+ [36] 
simulations 
Structurally Graded Material 
3D Multigrid A mathematical model for numerical Any substrate/ [37] 
Solver analysis of substrate/coating with coating 
varying elastic properties combination 
MATLAB, and MATLAB coding, gradient cellular Elastic [38] 
OptiStruct structures design and optimization, properties-based 
software mechanical and thermal performance optimization 
analysis 
MATLAB topology optimization Messerschmitt- [39] 
to accommodate the orientation Bolkow-Blohm 
dependence of material properties Beam 
(Continued)  
 
 
32 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 2.1 (Continued) 
Compositionally graded material 
Software/Tool Salient features Application/ 
Material 
Reference 
ANSYS, 
Rhinoceros 
Unigraphics NX 
10.0 and 3-Matic 
software 
3-Matic and 
Magics 
Magics and Slicer 
FEA for mechanical properties in 
ANSYS and 3D lattice distribution in 
Rhinoceros software 
Design the graded porous scaffolds and 
optimization of same 
Design of functionally graded lattice 
structures with cubic and honeycomb 
unit cell 
Fix the meshed STL files and generate 
the toolpath 
Hip implant [40] 
Mimic gradient [41] 
structure of bone 
for implant 
Modeling [42] 
the energy 
absorption 
structure 
Any material [43] 
combination 
2.2.1 Microstructurally graded material 
The graded microstructure can be induced in both homogeneous and heterogeneous 
composition materials through predetermined process parameters. The concept and 
fabrication technique of microstructurally graded FGMs using fine- and coarse￾grained microstructure is demonstrated in reference [13]. In the case of homoge￾neous composition materials, gradation in microstructure is obtained by varying heat 
input to fabricate fine-grained and coarse-grained regions in a part. In the case of 
heterogeneous composition material, gradation in microstructure can be a function 
of composition or heat input during fabrication or a combination of both. Such types 
of FGMs are frequently fabricated using powder bed fusion-based AM techniques. 
No unique modeling and optimization are needed as simple parameter variation can 
fabricate such gradation. A graded microstructure can be obtained by selectively 
adding thermal energy to allow grain growth, and multiple scanning can result in 
tailored microstructural morphology comparable to wrought microstructure [17]. 
2.2.2 Structurally graded material 
Geometric modeling with heterogeneous lattice structures is concerned with the 
geometric features of the objects. These FGMs came into existence earlier than 
compositionally graded materials and have been extensively researched. They 
involve lattice structures and have been a popular design application for fabri￾cating lightweight and advanced energy-absorption structures. Each lattice struc￾ture comprises unit cells with solid and void regions [42]. The main challenge 
in lattice structure–based FGM design is bridging the designed computational 
models and complex material properties realized in fabrication. The orientation￾dependent properties of metallic parts, such as horizontal features which have a  
Metallic functionally graded materials 33 
rougher surface than do vertical ones, make the task even more complex [39]. 
These materials are further classified as strut-based lattice structures and triply 
periodic level surface (TPLS)-based cellular structures. Functionally graded cel￾lular structures (FGCS) have objectively controlled lattice structures in different 
volume regions using software or the Voronoi algorithm [38]. Porous scaffold 
designs are optimized for mechanical and biological properties and for osseointe￾gration [41]. Zhang et al. [44] fabricated various functionally graded triply periodic 
minimal surface structures (TPMS) using stereolithography and compared them 
for mechanical properties and deformation mechanisms. These structures offer 
smooth surface and pore interconnectivity to meet the biological and mechanical 
requirements of dental and other orthopedic tissues. Cetin and Baykasoğlu [45] 
developed graded lattice structure filled tubes (GLSFTs) for energy absorption 
under high-speed in-plane crushing. 
Finite element methods (FEM) combined with fast Fourier transform have been 
widely used for numerical analysis, but they require massive CPU and memory. 
Boffy et al. [37] demonstrated an efficient numerical model using multigrid tech￾niques within a finite-difference framework that offers accelerated convergence 
through a local refinement strategy such that large-scale problems can be solved 
with moderate memory and CPU capacity. Li et al. [38] developed a generative 
design and optimization technique for TPLS-based FGMs, and the results show 
better density distribution control that enhances structural and thermal properties. 
Wang et al. [40] demonstrated an evolutionary algorithm for graded cellular mate￾rial by combining structural optimization with multi-scale analysis. Recently, Fu 
et al. [34] put forth an efficacious topology optimization method that substructures 
the global periodic structure into a series of the condensed linear system before 
optimizing the same. Smith and Norato [46] extended the geometry projection 
method of topology optimization to optimize multi-material structures. 
2.2.3 Compositionally graded material 
Applications involving extreme environments, such as nuclear power generation 
and aerospace engineering, require components capable of functioning at high￾temperature gradients within the same part. Consequently, multiple properties 
like toughness, wear resistance, corrosion and oxidation resistance, lightweight, 
strength, and reasonable cost become essential in distinct regions. Nevertheless, 
because contrasting properties are rare in a single material, multi-material FGMs 
with tailored composition gradients and stable interfacial bonds between dissimi￾lar materials are used [3]. The varying material modeling produces composition 
distribution for greater diversity in properties than structurally graded FGMs. 
This class of FGMs has become more prevalent with the development of the AM 
technique. However, these materials often face secondary phases with deleteri￾ous properties and cracks [28]. Kaufman and Ågren [29] came out with a novel 
technique of predicting the formation of such phases with the help of calculation 
of phase diagram (CALPHAD) software to manipulate composition accordingly.  
34 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
The biggest drawback, however, was that the software could not visualize more 
than three elements at once. Hofmann et al. and Kirk et al. [30, 47] computation￾ally predicted brittle intermetallic phases’ free gradient paths and proposed that 
these undesirable phases could be avoided by adding an alloying element, or a 
discontinuous jump in composition. The methodology successfully produced del￾eterious phase–free FGMs, but it lacks an optimum gradient for properties. 
Authors achieved the same in their other work to produce a composition 
path with monotonic property gradients [28, 31, 48]. Yan et al. [8] designed a 
multi-objective optimization algorithm with injection nozzle diameters, injection 
velocities, nozzle angles, laser power, and scanning speed variables for the FGM 
fabrication. Xu et al. [49] proposed the SIMP method for multi-material ther￾moelectric generators (TEG) to achieve high efficiency. Another innovation in 
CAD modeling of multi-material FGMs is algorithmically generated voxel models 
where the material deposition is controlled in each voxel [50]. 
2.3 MANUFACTURING TECHNIQUES OF FGM OBJECTS 
FGMs can be a thin coating applied over a substrate or a bulk volume material for 
harsh operating conditions. A thin coating of the target material is used for applica￾tions demanding surface properties different from that of the bulk volume of material 
[51]. Bulk FGMs have varying properties across their volume. Fabrication methods 
of both types of FGMs are conventional and advanced (Figure 2.3), based on their 
ability to process complex shapes. Each technique possesses unique features for a 
type of material, complexity of shapes, dimension control, and volume of the part. 
For example, centrifugal casting holds the edge over other methods for fabrication 
of bulky parts, powder metallurgy-based methods suit the moderately complex part, 
and AM techniques excel in fabricating small complex parts [52]. Distinct types of 
fabricating methods falling under conventional and advanced techniques are out￾lined in Sections 2.3.1 and 2.3.2, respectively. An overview of various fabrication 
techniques, their features, and materials processed are summarized in Table 2.2. 
Figure 2.3 Classification of FGM fabrication methods. Table 2.2 Overview of FGM fabrication methods and their salient features 
Conventional fabrication processes 
Processing technique Material Features of product/fabrication Application Reference 
method 
Vacuum plasma spray 
Magnetron sputtering process 
Powder metallurgy 
Centrifugal casting method 
Tape casting method 
Directed energy deposition 
(DED), laser engineered net 
shaping (LENS), or direct laser 
metal deposition (LMD) 
Ferritic martensitic high 
chromium steel EUROFER97 
and Tungsten 
Ferritic martensitic high 
chromium steel EUROFER97 
and Tungsten 
Fine Mg-Zn particles 
Al2024/SiC FGMs 
Rubber-like polymer for 
support, titanium for slipper 
Functionally graded Al/B4C, Al/ 
SiC, Al/Al2O3, and Al/TiB2 
Lanthanum strontium cobalt 
ferrite (LSCF) 
Acicular hydrogen processed 
using freeze tape casting 
Magnetocaloric materials 
Functionally graded coating	 [53] 
Aerospace, transportation, [16] 
biocompatible, and electronic 
Pump, motor, machine tool, civil [9] 
engineering applications 
Wear resistance behavior study [54] 
of FGMs 
Solid oxide fuel cells	 [55] 
Fuel cell	 [56] 
Magnetic refrigeration (MR) [57] 
technology 
Automobile engine valve stems, [75] 
and corrosion-resistant coatings 
Excellent quality and crack-free 
microstructure 
Poor interfacial strength as 
bonding between particles is only 
formed by mechanical clamping 
Specimen for microstructural 
and mechanical characterization, 
density measurement 
Compliant hydrostatic bearing 
for non-constant curvature of 
counter surface 
Hollow cylindrical shell 
Functionally graded cathode 
using LSCF 
Functionally graded acicular 
hydrogen electrode 
Specific magnetocaloric 
properties 
Metallic functionally graded materials 35 Advanced fabrication processes 304L stainless steel (SS304L) 	 IN625 provides strength and and Inconel 625 (IN625)	 corrosion resistance at elevated temperatures, and SS304L 
reduces the cost 
(Continued) IN738LC Correlated scanning strategy 
with obtained microstructure
FGM development with tailored 
mechanical properties
[59]
Soda-lime glass, Al2O3, Cu, 
polymer
Ultrasonic vibration-assisted 
feeding mechanism
Shoe sole, turbine blade,
bearing
[7]
Ti47Al2Cr2Nb Compositionally graded FGM 
using raw powder
Demonstration of complex 
FGM
[60]
Stereolithography or vat 
photopolymerization
Photopolymer liquid resin The topologically optimized 
porous structure
Structurally graded FGM 
fabrication
[27]
Al2O3-Si3N4 mixed with 
photocurable resin to form 
a paste
Printed using optimized 
parameters like layer thickness 
and paste viscosity
Complicated FGM fabrication [61]
3DSR ultra-high resolution 
(UHR) resin, isobornyl acrylate,
and iron oxide (Fe3O4)
Variation in the magnetic 
field can fetch different 
gradients of magnetic particles 
concentration
Compositionally graded 
polymer composites
[62]
Binder jetting (BJT) Polyvinyl alcohol powder,
graphene oxide ink
Compositionally graded FGM 
fabrication
High-porosity FGM for 
supercapacitor
[35]
Vero cyan (VC) and tango 
black+ (TB+)
Voxel-based design of fatigue 
test sample
Analyzing stepwise and 
continuous grade
[63]
Sheet lamination (SHL) Stainless steel,Al, and Cu foils Optimum welding parameter 
selection
FGM fabrication using SHL [64]
Material extrusion (MEX) Al, and carbon nanotubes 
(CNT)
FGM with superior mechanical 
and thermal properties and a 
high weight-to-strength ratio
Transportation equipment parts 
and air-hydro cylinder tube 
body
[65]
Hybrid AM technology 
(SLM + cold spray)
Ti6Al4V, Al, and Al2O3 Thick, dense, and machinable 
FGMs free from intermetallic 
phases, improved hardness is 
achieved
Ti6Al4V part is manufactured 
using SLM and cold sprayed 
with Al and Al+Al2O3
[56]
Table 2.2 (Continued) 
Conventional fabrication processes 
Processing technique Material Features of product/fabrication 
method 
Application Reference 
Stainless steel (SS410),Ti6Al4V 
(Ti64) alloy, and Ni-Cr bond 
layer 
Intermediate Ni-Cr bond layer 
in bimetallic structure reduces 
thermal and residual stresses 
Cheaper bimetallic component 
with hot hardness & corrosion 
resistance 
[77] 
Ti-6Al-4V/Inconel 718 Increasing microhardness with 
IN718 content 
FGMs coating [42] 
Inconel 718 (IN718)/SS 316L Selective compositional range 
exclusion to produce a defect￾free FGM 
FGM fabrication and 
characterization 
[44], [74] 
SS316L, IN718, Pure Cu Intermediate layers fetch 
defect-free coating 
Coating of pure Cu on SS316L 
substrate 
[77] 
Copper-nickel (Cu-Ni) Defect-free and high-density FGM High energy storage capacity [76] 
Ti6Al4V to Invar 36 Intermetallic phases FeTi, Fe2Ti, 
Ni3Ti, NiTi2 
Improve the understanding, 
design 
[95] 
Laser powder bed fusion 316L stainless steel and Cu10Sn 6-channel ultrasonic selective Turbine disk, ring and blade [5] 
(L-PBF), electron beam powder powder delivery 
bed fusion (E-PBF), selective 
laser melting (SLM), selective 
laser sintering (SLS) 
Ti6Al4V Rationally designed porous 
scaffolds for high strength and 
toughness 
Load-bearing orthopedic 
applications like cortical bone 
[41] 
Structurally graded FGMs Advanced energy absorption 
device 
[42] 
Inconel 718 Microstructurally graded FGMs Aircraft engine and nuclear 
applications 
[14] 
Characterization for defects 
and compared with computed 
tomography 
The mock leading-edge 
segment of the turbine blade 
[33, 58] 
36 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques Conventional fabrication processes
Processing technique Material Features of product/fabrication 
method
Application Reference
Stainless steel (SS410),Ti6Al4V 
(Ti64) alloy, and Ni-Cr bond 
layer
Intermediate Ni-Cr bond layer 
in bimetallic structure reduces 
thermal and residual stresses
Cheaper bimetallic component 
with hot hardness & corrosion 
resistance
[77]
Ti-6Al-4V/Inconel 718 Increasing microhardness with 
IN718 content
FGMs coating [42]
Inconel 718 (IN718)/SS 316L Selective compositional range 
exclusion to produce a defect￾free FGM
FGM fabrication and 
characterization
[44], [74]
SS316L, IN718, Pure Cu Intermediate layers fetch 
defect-free coating
Coating of pure Cu on SS316L 
substrate
[77]
Copper-nickel (Cu-Ni) Defect-free and high-density FGM High energy storage capacity [76]
Ti6Al4V to Invar 36 Intermetallic phases FeTi, Fe2Ti,
Ni3Ti, NiTi2
Improve the understanding,
design
[95]
Laser powder bed fusion 
(L-PBF), electron beam powder 
bed fusion (E-PBF), selective 
laser melting (SLM), selective 
laser sintering (SLS)
316L stainless steel and Cu10Sn 6-channel ultrasonic selective 
powder delivery
Turbine disk, ring and blade [5]
Ti6Al4V Rationally designed porous 
scaffolds for high strength and 
toughness
Load-bearing orthopedic 
applications like cortical bone
[41]
Structurally graded FGMs Advanced energy absorption 
device
[42]
Inconel 718 Microstructurally graded FGMs Aircraft engine and nuclear 
applications
[14]
Characterization for defects 
and compared with computed 
tomography
The mock leading-edge 
segment of the turbine blade
[33, 58]
IN738LC Correlated scanning strategy 
with obtained microstructure 
FGM development with tailored 
mechanical properties 
[59] 
Soda-lime glass, Al2O3, Cu, 
polymer 
Ultrasonic vibration-assisted 
feeding mechanism 
Shoe sole, turbine blade, 
bearing 
[7] 
Ti47Al2Cr2Nb Compositionally graded FGM 
using raw powder 
Demonstration of complex 
FGM 
[60] 
Stereolithography or vat 
photopolymerization 
Photopolymer liquid resin The topologically optimized 
porous structure 
Structurally graded FGM 
fabrication 
[27] 
Al2O3-Si3N4 mixed with 
photocurable resin to form 
a paste 
Printed using optimized 
parameters like layer thickness 
and paste viscosity 
Complicated FGM fabrication [61] 
3DSR ultra-high resolution 
(UHR) resin, isobornyl acrylate, 
and iron oxide (Fe3O4) 
Variation in the magnetic 
field can fetch different 
gradients of magnetic particles 
concentration 
Compositionally graded 
polymer composites 
[62] 
Binder jetting (BJT) Polyvinyl alcohol powder, 
graphene oxide ink 
Compositionally graded FGM 
fabrication 
High-porosity FGM for 
supercapacitor 
[35] 
Vero cyan (VC) and tango 
black+ (TB+) 
Voxel-based design of fatigue 
test sample 
Analyzing stepwise and 
continuous grade 
[63] 
Sheet lamination (SHL) Stainless steel,Al, and Cu foils Optimum welding parameter 
selection 
FGM fabrication using SHL [64] 
Material extrusion (MEX) Al, and carbon nanotubes 
(CNT) 
FGM with superior mechanical 
and thermal properties and a 
high weight-to-strength ratio 
Transportation equipment parts 
and air-hydro cylinder tube 
body 
[65] 
Hybrid AM technology 
(SLM + cold spray) 
Ti6Al4V, Al, and Al2O3 Thick, dense, and machinable 
FGMs free from intermetallic 
phases, improved hardness is 
achieved 
Ti6Al4V part is manufactured 
using SLM and cold sprayed 
with Al and Al+Al2O3 
[56] 
Metallic functionally graded materials 37  
 
 
38 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
2.3.1 Conventional fabrication processes 
These methods are limited by their capabilities to fabricate only simpler shape objects. 
Therefore, these processes are further subclassed based on their application for fabri￾cating thin coating and bulk volume-based FGMs, as elucidated in Figure 2.3. 
2.3.1.1 Thin film/coating-based FGM fabrication processes 
Thin coating-based FGMs are fabricated using physical and chemical vapor 
deposition methods. The physical vapor deposition (PVD) processes share their 
root with the electroplating process but have better process control with improved 
outcomes. In PVD processes, coating material (target material) is vaporized or 
atomized before being deposited over the substrate to be coated. Based on atom￾izing techniques, PVD processes are further categorized as evaporation based, 
sputtering based, and plasma spray based. Various kinds of heat sources like 
electrical resistance, laser, electron beam, ion beam, and several others are used 
for melting and evaporating the target material in a vacuum chamber. Thermal 
evaporation and electron beam-based PVDs are depicted in Figure 2.4 (a) and 
(b). The sputtering-based PVD process involves the collision of high-velocity 
Figure 2.4 Conventional methods of fabricating FGMs.  
 
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 39 
plasma with atoms of target material and sputters them before depositing them 
on the substrate surface. Plasma spray-based PVD is a hybrid deposition process 
comprising traditional low-pressure plasma spraying (LPPS) for atomizing the 
target material and the PVD technique for depositing the same. In contrast to 
PVD processes, chemical vapor deposition (CVD) uses heat sources to atomize 
the atoms from the target material in a lesser vacuum chamber. The deposi￾tion of vaporized atoms at the substrate surface is achieved through a chemical 
reaction with precursor gases in the chamber, as shown in Figure 2.4 (c) [2]. 
CVD has the advantage over PVD in terms of lower power consumption, higher 
deposition rate, and coating of the underside of the substrate, but the chemical 
reaction’s by-product can be toxic, explosive, and corrosive [52]. Tang et al. 
[66] synthesized W-Cu based FGM using spark plasma sintering after homoge￾neously mixing the powders of distinct compositions in a high-energy planetary 
ball milling system. 
2.3.1.2 Bulk FGM fabrication processes 
The conventional methods for fabricating the bulk FGMs include powder met￾allurgy, tape casting, and centrifugal casting [52]. Powder metallurgy involves 
depositing the predefined powder composition layer by layer followed by com￾paction and sintering, as illustrated in Figure 2.4 (d) [10]. Centrifugal casting 
involves pouring the molten material comprising multiple constituents into a 
rotating mold, as depicted in Figure 2.4 (e). The centrifugal force causes the 
constituents to segregate into layers, with the denser material at the outermost 
side and the next most dense coated inside it, rendering a high-density product 
[67]. Saleh et al. [54] reviewed the literature on the fabrication of function￾ally graded metal matrix composites (FGMMCs) using centrifugal casting and 
synthesized process parameters for distinct materials. Tape casting is a popular 
method of fabricating large-scale multilayer ceramic substrates by casting the 
amalgamation of ceramic powder into a solvent, with dispersants, plasticizers, 
and binders followed by drying and sintering. The process involves spreading 
the slurry of materials over a moving belt by a blade edge and stacking tapes 
of varying compositions, as demonstrated in Figure 2.4(f) [68, 69]. Another 
approach for FGM fabrication is adjacent co-flow of slurries (side-by-side tape 
casting) [70]. Metal-ceramic reinforced FGMs combine the best properties of 
both materials, like the mechanical properties of metals and the hot hardness of 
ceramic [1]. For instance, TiB/Ti-based FGMs for fabricating armor are ductile 
and tough with excellent anti-penetration properties. The acoustic impedance 
matching principle can optimize the anti-penetration performance and second￾ary strike ability of such FGMs. Their high strength-to-weight ratio with high 
ballistic resistance makes them the leading candidate for defense applications to 
improve maneuver capacity and battlefield survivability [57]. Another applica￾tion of tape casting is fabricating graded electrodes [55]. Recent advancements 
have demonstrated the use of hybrid AM processes to reinforce hard particles  
40 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
using cold spray into a selectively laser-sintered soft substrate; decreasing the 
concentration from the surface into the matrix gives graded surface hardness 
with a tough core [56]. 
2.3.2 Advanced fabrication processes 
Advanced fabrication methods hold an edge over conventional methods in terms 
of their capability to fabricate complex shape parts easily and without any spe￾cial jigs or fixtures [68]. Functionally graded additive manufacturing (FGAM) 
techniques provide a time-efficient and economical way to produce complicated 
geometries, especially low-volume, customized, personalized products with 
advanced material directly from the 3D CAD model with a drastically com￾pressed supply chain [71]. The manufacturing procedures for FGAM begin with 
a 3D CAD model, slicing, converting CAD file into an appropriate data exchange 
file format, optimal orientation determination, toolpath definition, support gener￾ation, fabrication, and post-processing (if needed) in the same sequence. Potential 
data exchange formats are STL file and OBJ file (describing geometric features 
only), AMF file, FAV file, SVX file, and 3MF file (describes both geometric and 
material-related features). CAD software such as SolidWorks, CATIA, AutoCAD 
2022, Inventor, Rhino, and Mesh Mixer can generate these file formats [72]. After 
its inception in the mid-1980s, AM has blossomed and unfolded into a plethora 
of processes, including several techniques to fabricate FGMs. The fabrication 
of FGMs using AM techniques involves one extra step of material description 
within the object before fabrication. Furthermore, growing competition among 
AM machine manufacturers has reduced the entry threshold for investment. By 
gradually varying the spatial distribution of various constituents, objects with 
graded magnetic, hysteresis, and mechanical properties can be fabricated [3]. 
All commercially available AM techniques (classification according to ASTM 
F2792 standards) – stereolithography (SLA), material jetting (MJT), fused fila￾ment fabrication (FFF), binder jetting (BJT), powder bed fusion (PBF), and sheet 
lamination and directed energy deposition (DED) – are being used to fabricate 
multiple material parts with tailored properties [15, 72]. The electron beam and 
laser-based AM processes – DED and PBF – offer far more design freedom and 
structure customization at the microscale. Moreover, open-source firmware, slic￾ers, printer setup, control software, and hardware design have reduced the cost 
of 3D printers significantly [40]. Selective laser sintering (SLS) for fabricating 
polymer-based products and direct metal laser sintering (DMLS) or selective 
laser melting (SLM) for metallic parts are subsumed under the classification of 
L-PBF technologies [73]. SLM shows enormous potential to fabricate geometri￾cally complex parts of multiple materials with fully dense structures and material 
saving using topology optimization. One crucial drawback of AM parts is a rough 
surface, which needs post-processing such as abrasive flow machining (AFM) 
and magnetic abrasive finishing [74]. A generic overview of the FGAM process 
is illustrated in Figure 2.5.  
Metallic functionally graded materials 41 
Figure 2.5 Generic functionally graded additive manufacturing process flow [3]. 
2.3.2.1 Powder bed fusion (PBF) AM process 
Laser powder bed fusion (L-PBF) and electron beam powder bed fusion (E-PBF) 
are superior techniques to fabricate fully dense complex 3D components with 
functionally graded properties, high resolution, and surface finish [33]. The selec￾tion of heat sources depends on multiple factors – type of material, desired func￾tional properties, and other user-defined functions. A few researchers have also 
conducted a comparative analysis to provide an essential guide for selecting the 
appropriate heat source. The E-PBF process is conducted in a vacuum, and L-PBF 
uses inert gas to avoid oxidation of the melt pool. The electron beam has higher 
absorptivity and lower heat dissipation due to reduced convection in a vacuum 
[75]. Mechanical properties of additively manufactured objects depend on fea￾ture orientation relative to the build plane [39]. As an advancement from the con￾ventional E-PBF process, Zhou et al. [60] demonstrated an E-PBF based novel 
process, called selective evaporation, for fabricating FGMs from a homogeneous 
composition powder by varying irradiating energy density onto distinct regions in 
a powder bed; for instance, by varying the quantity of aluminum being evaporated 
from Ti47Al2Cr2Nb powder. Ghorbanpour et al. [58] systematically examine the 
effect of manufacturing parameters on grain size, crystallographic textures, pre￾cipitate and lave phases, unmelted particles, and porosity in L-PBF fabricated 
parts. In similar studies, Tan et al. [76] and Mao et al. [77] examined the effect 
of the power of heat source, hatching pattern, and scanning speed on interfacial 
characterization and mechanical properties of build part. Material characteristics 
of the substrate such as thermal conductivity, melting point, and solubility with 
coating material play a vital role, as significant differences in thermal conductiv￾ity and coefficient of thermal expansion cause misfit strain in the interface, and 
thermal gradient affects residual stress. 
Pure titanium (Ti) and its alloys, especially Ti6Al4V, also abbreviated as Ti64, 
have the highest strength-to-weight ratio, making it the most versatile alloy. Ti64’s 
excellent mechanical properties, good corrosion tolerance, and favorable osteo￾integration make it the most used alloy for orthopedics [72]. El-Sayed et al. [78] 
and Caiazzo et al. [79] fabricated porosity-graded implants in cancellous bone and  
 
 
42 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
trabecular bone of the human body. However, its poor wear resistance, low thermal 
conductivity, high coefficient of friction, great affinity toward other materials, and 
reaction with cutting tool material make it difficult to machine material. Conse￾quently, AM provided a fantastic opportunity for exploiting the properties of Ti 
alloys for various applications. Popovich et al. [13] fabricated a microstructurally 
graded cylindrical rod of nickel-based superalloy, using the SLM process with 
coarse grains at the center and fine grains at the outer shell, allowing a trade-off 
between creep and fatigue performance. For iron, nickel, and titanium-based mate￾rials, a high -power source renders columnar coarse-grained, and more refined 
equiaxed grained microstructure is obtained by using a low power source [80–82]. 
Similarly, continuous-wave (CW) laser results in coarser grain, and pulsed-wave 
laser fabricates fine grain microstructure [83]. The reason in both cases is that 
high power, and continuous-wave laser, result in a larger heat affected zone (HAZ) 
or bigger melt pool such that grains have more extended time for growth before 
solidification completes, and the opposite is the case with low power and pulsed￾wave laser. Coarse-grain microstructure has better creep resistance, and fine 
grains have longer fatigue life. So, distinct properties can be achieved in different 
regions of the same part [80–83]. Recent works by Zhang et al. [59] and Wei et al. 
[5, 61] demonstrate the fabrication of compositionally graded FGMs using the 
SLM through point-by-point selective powder deposition using a dual ultrasonic 
vibrational powder feeding system. 
2.3.2.2 Directed energy deposition AM process 
This class of AM process uses multi-coaxial nozzles to deliver materials in vary￾ing proportions to fabricate FGMs. The supplied materials are melted by using a 
directed laser at the intersection region of exiting materials [72]. Ji et al. [31] fabri￾cated Ti-6Al-4V/Inconel 718 based FGM with graded microstructure and increased 
microhardness with Inconel 718 content as a secondary phase precipitate. Kim et al. 
[48] and Su et al. [84] fabricated compositionally graded 316L stainless steel and 
Inconel 718 material and performed characterization for variation in microstruc￾tural, chemical composition, and mechanical properties. Zhang et al. [85] fabri￾cated compositionally graded FGMs of 316L stainless steel and Inconel 625 using 
DED and evaluated them for elemental composition, phases, microstructure, and 
mechanical properties. DED has also been used for fabricating defect-free Cu-Ni￾based FGMs for energy storage applications [86]. Thermal and residual stresses 
induced when coating the stainless steel substrate with Ti6Al4V (Ti64) alloy can 
be reduced by depositing intermediate Ni-Cr bond layers [87] or Cu layers [88]. 
2.3.2.3 Stereolithography AM process 
Stereolithography can fabricate components of photocurable polymers with 
high accuracy and fewer defects, but it has been comparatively less exploited 
for FGM fabrication. Topologically optimized porous structures with  
 
 
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 43 
contrasting mechanical properties using UV light curable photopolymer liquid 
resin (SPR6000 epoxy) have been fabricated using stereolithography [75]. In 
another study, compositionally graded Al2O3-Si3N4 mixed with photocurable 
resin was fabricated [27]. Recent work used novel magnetic-field-assisted digi￾tal light processing (DLP) stereolithography (M-SL) AM technique for printing 
compositionally graded polymer composites with embedded magnetic particles 
with the help of ultrasonic homogenizer [89, 90]. Valizadeh et al. [62] used 
grayscale-masked stereolithography (MSLA) to tailor orange tough resin-based 
hyperelastic FGMs such that the degree of photopolymerization is controlled by 
changing grayscale pixels. 
2.3.2.4 Binder jetting (BJT) AM process 
The BJT AM technique is frequently used for fabricating ceramic parts, but it 
has also been used for fabricating FGMs [91]. Shen et al. [92] reported a novel 
binder jetting approach for fabricating the multi-material FGMs using a switching 
nanoparticle binding ink. Although a sizeable number of articles demonstrate the 
application of BJT in fabricating FGMs, most of these are ceramic-based. 
2.3.2.5 Material jetting (MJT) AM process 
Another infrequently used FGAM technique is material jetting. It uses raster-based 
toolpaths to provide on and off the respective jets to obtain desired geometry and 
material composition. Salcedo et al. [36] developed a physical model of polymer￾based FGM. Kaweesa and Meisel [35] presented a voxel-based design and com￾pared stepwise gradients against continuous gradients. It was observed that FGM 
fabrication applications of MJT are restricted to polymer-based materials only. 
The hybrid AM process can fabricate significantly good-quality FGMs [63]. 
2.3.2.6 Sheet lamination (SHL) AM process 
The sheet lamination technique is also infrequently used to fabricate metallic 
FGMs. It involves ultrasonically welding the thin sheets of dissimilar materials to 
replicate the CAD model [64]. 
2.3.2.7 Material extrusion (MEX) AM process 
In this fabrication process, the fused filament is extruded through a moving nozzle 
along a predefined toolpath to fabricate components by adding layer upon layer. 
High melting temperature and oxidation issues restrict MEX in metallic FGM 
fabrication. Stoner et al. [43] demonstrated the TPMS method for structural gra￾dation using Magic and Slic3r software to fix the meshed STL files and generate 
the toolpath. Kim et al. [65] fabricated tubular shape aluminum (Al) and carbon 
nanotubes (CNT)-based FGM by a hot extrusion process.  
 
44 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
2.4 AUXILIARY ASPECTS OF FGM FABRICATIONS 
2.4.1 Toolpath planning and scanning strategies 
for advanced fabrication processes 
Directed material delivery-based AM processes (DED, MJT, and MEX) use tool￾path planning to supply materials. In contrast, powder bed or liquid pool-based 
AM processes like PBF, BJT, and stereolithography use term-scanning strategies 
as a heat source to scan the bedded material for melting or curing. Research has 
proved that toolpath planning and scanning strategy play a vital role in obtain￾ing texture and microstructure in the fabricated part. Different toolpath planning 
for single-composition structurally graded and compositionally graded FGMs are 
used [12]. Specific region-filling toolpaths for single material deposition are uni￾directional linear, zigzag, and continuous contours. For multi-material FGMs, the 
toolpath for material deposition is described by functions that correlate the mate￾rial composition with the position inside the part. Xiao and Joshi [93] proposed a 
global automatic toolpath planning strategy for the DED AM process using a slice 
file containing geometry and material boundary information. The FGM part can be 
represented as an assembly of sliced and pixelated STL files. The material function 
provides a material description for each voxel, and the algorithm prioritizes the 
scanning of different pixels. No experimental work is reported yet, but in principle, 
proper implementation toolpath planning or scanning strategy fetch quicker fab￾rication of superior quality products at less cost. In recent work, Chandrasekaran 
et al. [94] used a bidirectional (zigzag) scanning strategy to depose multiple layers 
while fabricating FGM using ER70S-6 and ER2209 coating on duplex stainless 
steel substructure using wire arc additive manufacturing (WAAM). 
In the case of powder bed or liquid pool-based FGAM processes, striking a 
balance between heat source power and scanning speed plays a vital role in the 
producing high-quality parts. During additive manufacturing, local stresses (resid￾ual stresses) develop in the already built region. It is continuously subjected to 
non-uniform thermal contraction under different cooling rates at distinct locations 
and intermittent expansions caused by reheating as the heat source moves [95]. 
This emphasizes the importance of selecting the appropriate scanning strategy 
and post-processing techniques to minimize residual stresses, as these are criti￾cal parameters. Control of thermal energy supplied during the fabrication process 
allows spatial control of microstructural architecture [17]. Jhabvala et al. [96] pro￾posed four different scanning strategies leading to homogeneous heating of parts 
and concluded that low scanning speed with a thermal gradient can lead to local 
solidification with cracks. High scanning speed needs higher power and may cause 
delamination and balling defects. Bobbio et al. [97] used a hatch angle of 90º 
to reduce thermal stresses during the fabrication of Ti6Al4V to Invar 36 FGMs. 
Geiger et al. [98] fabricated microstructurally graded IN738LC using three differ￾ent scanning patterns in the SLM process and performed a comparative study. An 
overview of prominent scanning strategies is summarized in Table 2.3. Table 2.3 Overview of scanning strategies for FGM fabrication and their outcomes 
Strategy Schematic diagram Key features	 Reference 
Parallel scanning 
Spiral scanning 
Paintbrush 
scanning 
•	 Easiest to generate from CAD file [96] 
•	 Large temperature gradient orthogonal to scan direction for a 
single scan 
•	 Overheating causes thermal stress, consequently balling and cracks 
•	 Multiple pass scanning fetches better results 
•	 No overheating near sides but severe overheating at the center of 
part, causing cracks and balling effect at center 
•	 Multiple pass scanning fetches high-quality product provided that 
deposited energy in each cycle is more prominent than heat loss in 
between 
•	 Similar to parallel scanning but has smaller scan width with reduced 
overheating and temperature gradient for both high and low 
conductivity powders 
•	 Dense part with reasonable accuracy but delamination for the tall 
part due to weak interlayer bonding 
Metallic functionally graded materials 45(Continued) Table 2.3 (Continued) 
Strategy Schematic diagram Key features	 Reference 
Chessboard 
scanning 
Scanning at 
45° to layer 
deposition plane 
Hatch angle 90º 
or scan vector 
rotate 90º 
•	 The consolidation area divided into smaller cells 
•	 Parallel scanning in alternate directions can be seen as scaling down 
of standard parallel scanning 
•	 Modified thermodynamics renders reduced temperature 
inhomogeneity 
Z-axis is taken as building direction, and each deposited layer [13, 99]
 
is scanned at 45° between X and Y with chessboard scanning.
 
Anisotropic microstructure using two heat sources of distinct 

capacity
 
Compositionally graded FGM fabrication using DED to improve the [97]
 
understanding of FGMs
 
46 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques  
 
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 47 
2.4.2 Powder feeding system of PBF-based AM process 
The DED process has outpaced the PBF-based processes for fabricating multi￾material FGM components, as the latter have been limited to single-component 
microstructurally graded FGMs. Nevertheless, the development of an ultrasonic 
vibrational powder feeding system has paved the way for multi-material compo￾nents fabrication using the SLM for high-end applications [59]. This novel approach 
combines point-by-point selective powder delivery with a conventional PBF-based 
AM process for printing multi-material components [5, 61]. Wei et al. [5] developed 
another multiple selective powder delivery array device that can be incorporated 
into a conventional SLM system and can deposit up to six dissimilar materials with 
point-by-point control. Most of the researchers have fabricated the FGMs with inter￾layer composition gradient with constant composition within a layer. This limits the 
application of FGMs, as industries would need both horizontal and vertical property 
gradients for high-end applications. The efficiency of the powder-based AM fabri￾cation process depends on powder flow characteristics such as powder deposition, 
which further affect the track geometry, molten pool volume, and capture efficiency. 
Katinas et al. present a computational fluid dynamics (CFD) model using ANSYS 
Fluent software for predicting powder capture efficiency and other process charac￾teristics in four-nozzle injection systems in an LMD AM process [32]. 
2.4.3 Support structure in AM of FGMs 
The support structure is vital in AM fabrication as it can act as (i) heat diffuser 
and rigidity enhancer in fabrication processes involving high thermal gradient caus￾ing shape distortion and residual stress; (ii) substrate for local deposition in MJT 
and DED AM processes; and (iii) support structure for overhanging parts [100]. 
Research has been conducted to optimize the support structures to reduce support 
material waste and print time. Optimization includes part orientation to eliminate or 
minimize the need for support [101–103], using cellular structures in place of solid 
[104–106] and use of sacrificial or soluble material (rare in the case of metallic fab￾rications) [107]. Critical thermal contraction and expansion coefficient, sufficient 
rigidness, high oxidation resistance at elevated temperatures, and suitable brittleness 
allow for easy removal through induced vibration or some mechanical means. This 
makes ceramic and cermet potential candidates for the support structure. Wei et al. 
[108] developed an easy to remove SiC-316L composite as a support structure mate￾rial for the L-PBF process. Embedding the support structures into cellular structures 
improves mechanical performances [41]. Removing these structures is a tedious 
task and debilitates additive manufacturing as it needs post-processing such as cut￾ting, breaking, and machining. Tailored brittleness can alleviate the removal process 
using mechanical vibration or machining. It is common to use the support structure 
material similar to the build material [109]. Nevertheless, removing the metallic 
support structure is difficult and time-consuming; so, using easy-to-remove com￾posite materials is becoming popular. Support material dispenser is used to create  
 
48 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
a brittle composite that can be easily removed [110]. Self-terminating dissolvable 
support materials with chemical solutions can alleviate the tiresome removal pro￾cess 109]. Weakening the support structure by adjusting its geometries and process￾ing parameters can minimize post-processing. However, weak support structures 
can result in severe deformation in overhanging features of components [85]. 
2.5 POST-PROCESSING 
AM technologies showed enormous potential to fabricate end-use products with 
tailored spatially varying properties and several other features, as detailed in pre￾vious sections. Despite the promising potential, AM fabricated parts are prone to 
defects like rough surfaces due to the stair-stepping/stair-casing effect, delamina￾tion, insufficient fusion, cracks, and pores, among many other defects that compro￾mise quality [18]. Numerous research efforts have addressed these issues through 
part orientation, layer thickness, and build direction. However, post-processing 
is identified as a robust solution to improve these restrictive aspects of AM and 
impart the desired properties to the fabricated part. Surface finishing operations 
include conventional machining operations like CNC, chemical machining, turn￾ing and milling, abrasive flow machining, electroplating, laser operations for sur￾face finishing, shot peening, abrasive blast (ceramic and grit), and optical polish 
[111]. The additively manufactured metallic parts have benchmarked amalgama￾tion of heat-assisted post-processing steps – (a) stress relief to relieve residual 
stress, (b) hot isostatic pressing (HIP) for demoting porosity, and (c) aging for 
distribution of precipitate in the microstructure – before putting the part in ser￾vice [112]. Weber et al. [53] normalized EUROFER97 and tungsten-based FGMs 
to obtain residual stress-free and martensitic microstructure. Popovich et al. [13] 
fabricated a microstructurally graded tensile test bar Inconel 718 using electro￾discharge machining (EDM). Grinding and polishing are used to remove residue 
from the EDM before post-processing including HIP and HIP + homogenization + 
ageing (HIP + H/T) to get needle-like Ni3Nb-δ precipitate from existing brittle 
laves phase and reduce porosity [99]. Geiger et al. [98] used full heat treatment 
(full HT) comprising recrystallization above γ̍ solvus temperature, HIP, post￾HIP solution, and precipitation hardening, in this order, only to reduce the elastic 
anisotropy by reducing the degree of crystallographic texture through annealing 
twinning. Vibro-polishing following conventional polishing has also been used 
for sample preparation for characterization. Shen et al. [113] performed thermal￾induced phase evolution (homogenization) to obtain FCC structure from residu￾als of BCC lattice. Elevated temperature annealing has also been used to change 
the microstructure for property enhancement through grain growth or martensitic 
decomposition [114, 115]. Ituarte et al. (2020) used ultrasonic vibration-assisted 
ball burnishing to improve surface finish and microhardness and reduce residual 
stress in additively manufactured tool steel. Various post-processing methods and 
their outcomes are summarized in Table 2.4.  
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 49 
Table 2.4 Overview of post-processing techniques and their effects 
Post-processing Objectives Reference 
Hot isostatic pressing 
(HIP) 
Annealing heat 
treatment (H/T) 
Aging (often combined 
with H/T) 
Homogenization 
Machining operations 
Grinding and polishing 
Enhanced mechanical properties (ductility, strength, 
and fatigue behavior) by undesirable δ-phase and 
laves-phase dissolution and reduced porosity by 
plastic flow to close flaws 
Alleviates residual stresses induced during 
fabrication, precipitation hardening (depends on 
alloying elements) 
For desired precipitation distribution, dissolve 
impairing intermetallic compounds and carbides 
Elevated temperature annealing to dissolve 
undesired phases 
Remove part from support or baseplate and obtain 
the desired geometry with a good surface finish 
Surface finishing, dimensional control, and sample 
preparation 
[99] 
[99, 112, 
114] 
[99, 116] 
[111] 
[13, 116] 
2.6 TESTING AND CHARACTERIZATION 
The growing research trend and ever-increasing application of AM processes for 
end-use products have intrigued post-processing, testing, and characterization 
researchers. The varied objectives determine serviceable properties before putting 
the product into application and anomaly detection for process control. Recent 
research shows the evolution from ex situ testing to decipher the ongoing process, 
and the efforts are to develop real-time process monitoring and control. Thermal 
imaging by placing a photodiode and a near-IR CMOS camera around melt pools 
has been used for generating process signatures, which are further used to form 
a basis for process monitoring and control. The deviation from benchmark ref￾erence conditions is being monitored. A feedback control method has also been 
proposed in different studies where the experimental process variables control 
the laser power input [115]. Clijsters et al. [114] developed a high-speed, real￾time melt pool monitoring system using optical sensors and a field-programmable 
gate array (FPGA) for in situ quality control in SLM process. The microstructure 
and electrochemical properties of tape-casted porosity-graded cathodes have been 
characterized using SEM and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Crystal￾lographic preferred orientations (texture) can be measured by SEM-based electron 
backscatter diffraction (EBSD) for evaluating the correlation between anisotropy 
of Young’s modulus and texture [98]. Popovich et al. [13] fabricated microstruc￾turally graded FGMs of nickel-based superalloy, Inconel 718, using SLM-based 
AM process, and they post-processed the same [99] followed by fatigue and creep 
test analysis at operating conditions analogous to actual operational conditions 
of turbine blades [117]. In recent work, Hussain et al. [118] presented a propor￾tional–integral–derivative (PID) and classical feedback controller to circumvent 50 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
the intertrack disturbance in the melt pool region. Grasso et al. [119] proposed a 
principal component analysis (PCA) using a fast image capturing camera with 
high-resolution integrated with data analyses and a machine vision system for 
detecting local overheating in L-PBF. Mahmoudi et al. [73] adopted a dual￾wavelength imaging pyrometer for in situ anomaly detection. 
Even in recent literature, in situ monitoring methods are confined to a particu￾lar defect [120]. However, advancements in sensors and hardware systems have 
made original equipment manufacturers (OEMs) integrate the multi-component in 
situ sensing modules in the AM system itself (like EOSTATE melt pool monitor￾ing system) for evaluating process variables like melt pool characteristics, pow￾der integrity, and chamber temperature [121]. Zhang and Coddet [122] observed 
the melting mechanism and densification behavior of iron in SLM under various 
physical descriptors. Ghorbanpour et al. [58] investigated the fatigue crack growth 
behavior under microstructural anisotropy-graded Inconel 718 structure. Various 
characterization techniques/tools and corresponding characterized features are 
summarized in Table 2.5. 
Table 2.5	 Overview of characterized features, tools used in different characterizations, and 
observations 
Characterized 
feature 
Tools/process used Observation Reference 
Microstructure 
and interfacial 
defects 
Optical microscopy 
and SEM 
Transmission 
electron microscopy 
(TEM) 
Micron-sized particles/precipitates, 
carbide and secondary phase, grain 
morphology and size, microscale 
morphology, porosity, fractured 
section, composition 
Presence of ceramics, segregants, 
and precipitates, elemental 
composition using TEM 
[13, 27, 
31, 41, 42, 
48, 57, 58, 
63, 65, 66, 
70, 76, 77, 
84, 90, 
97] 
X-ray diffraction XRD plot of a compositionally 
graded sample, and phase 
identification 
Electron 
backscattered 
Crystallographic maps to study 
texture and microstructure at 
diffraction (EBSD) 
technique in SEM 
fatigue crack using EBSD 
Accurate physical 
properties 
Micro-CT system 3D morphology is evaluated for 
optimization 
[41] 
Chemical 
composition 
EDX spectroscopy 
in SEM 
Auger electron 
spectroscopy (AES) 
Graded composition 
Present phase identification 
[31, 58, 
66, 90, 65, 
97, 113] 
X-ray diffraction Qualitative distribution of 
constituent materials Metallic functionally graded materials 51 
Characterized Tools/process used Observation Reference 
feature 
Local mechanical Nano indenter XP Varying properties with graded [3, 13, 48, 
properties device, triboindenter, chemical composition 53, 58, 63, 
Microhardness contact clip gauge 65, 90] 
and hardness (extensometer) 
Vickers indenter, 
pin-on-disk wear 
machine, durometer 
Transmissivity of Calorimeter Transmissivity varies with particle [122] 
laser size and layer thickness 
Surface 3D profilometer The smoothest surface obtained 
roughness with a scanning velocity of 
0.05m/s and 110W laser 
Surface Age hardening, ball Enhanced average surface [86, 92, 
modification burnishing, Taguchi roughness (Ra), microhardness, 118] 
method, ANOVA beneficial residual stress, and 
test, and XRD ANOVA of process parameter 
analysis optimization 
Tensile strength Tensile testing Variation in wear resistance, [77, 90] 
machine tensile strength, and elongation 
Strain map Video extensometer, Evaluate strain evolution with [13] 
Istra 4D software crosshead displacement through 
digital image 
Compression Universal mechanical Compression strength, strain rate, [42] 
strength testing machine and deformation measurement 
Interface analysis Vibrating sample Isothermal entropy change was [70] 
magnetometer measured 
Porosity Mercury intrusion The theoretical pore diameter [41, 42] 
porosimetry (MIP), is evaluated, and geometric 
optical microscope properties like strut size and pore 
(OM) size of the scaffolds by OM images 
Particle Nano-computed Grayscale analysis using OM 
distribution tomography and OM 
Three-point Universal materials Bending strength variation is [92] 
bending test testing machine measured with composition 
gradation 
Measure fatigue crack growth rate [58] 
and critical stress intensity factor 
Inverse pole TSL-OIM analysis Maps for microstructural analyses [58] 
figure (IPF) software 
Fatigue testing Servo hydraulic MTS Fatigue behavior also depends on 
machine scanning direction 
Energy storage Single-cycle 2.25 times increase in energy [86] 
capacity automated ball storage capacity with the increase 
indentation in Cu percentage 
(Continued)  
 
 
 
52 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 2.5 (Continued) 
Characterized Tools/process used Observation Reference 
feature 
Viscosity 	 Rotational 
characteristics	 rheometer 
Thermal analysis 	 Fourier-transform 
of resin	 infrared spectroscopy 
(FTIR), differential 
scanning 
calorimetry (DSC), 
thermogravimetric 
analysis (TG) 
Creep and TMF Servo hydraulic MTS 
testing 858 tabletop system 
Viscosity measurement of [27, 63] 
formed paste 
Thermal analysis of formed paste 
Analyze the creep and [13] 
thermomechanical fatigue 
behavior of the FGM part 
2.7 CHALLENGES AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
This study put forth a conceptual understanding of design, modeling and optimi￾zation, fabrication techniques, post-processing, and applications of FGMs. It is 
observed in the literature that even after various technological advancements, a few 
technical challenges impede the tapping of the full potential of FGMs as advanced 
materials for novel design with tailored properties. Design and optimizing soft￾ware developments are underway for process parameters, but various physical and 
technical factors can introduce potential deviations between predicted and manu￾factured objects. This section discusses the challenges mentioned in previously 
published papers, identifying research gaps and future directions in metallic FGMs. 
2.7.1 Modeling and design 
i. Defining the optimal material distribution function for a multi-material 
FGM requires extensive knowledge of chemical composition, material 
properties, and the limitations of manufacturing processes. The lack of 
design guidelines on material compatibility and thermophysical properties 
has circumscribed material selection. Furthermore, a framework for opti￾mal distribution of property by tailoring the gradient and transition phase 
distribution in design space is lacking [3]. Consequently, accurate predic￾tive process controls like scanning strategies and heat source power are 
complicated. Recent research has shown the importance of thermodynamic 
modeling to model phase transformations and thermophysical properties, 
but more work for computational development is currently needed. 
ii. The CAD software lacks in-built computer representation for automatically 
controlling the toolpath for FGM fabrication. Voxel-based modeling allows 
assigning material by transferring mesh data into voxels.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 53 
2.7.2 Alloy incompatibility and insolubility 
i. Databases of material performance information provide some insight into 
the “processing-structure-property” relationship [123, 124]. Nevertheless, 
for multi-material FGMs, cracks and delamination defects are common. 
ii. Alloy incompatibility can lead to the formation of insoluble brittle phases, 
resulting in residual stresses that may initiate and propagate cracks. 
iii. Mixing dissimilar materials with different melting temperatures may result 
in preferential vaporization of constituents with lower melting temperatures 
while elements with high melting temperatures may remain intact. More￾over, mixing the constituents with significant differences in liquid surface 
tension and density may render dimensional inaccuracy, segregation, and a 
porous structure. 
2.7.3 Process modeling 
i. Real-time melt pool monitoring and in situ quality control of FGM fabrica￾tion is in the earliest stage, and more research for monitoring and feedback 
mechanism is needed for higher-quality fabrication. 
ii. At present, fabrication machines lack in-built in situ monitoring of the pro￾cess, and published research demonstrates monitoring of only one process 
parameter such as temperature, the morphology of melt pool, heat affected 
zone, and porosity. Simultaneous monitoring and control of multiple pro￾cess parameters are needed. 
2.7.4 Advanced characterization 
Material characterization has evolved significantly over the past few decades with 
methods to differentiate features at the nanoscale or even near-atomic scale. Two 
of these techniques, 3D atom probe tomography (APT) and transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM), are employed in characterizing and designing advanced mate￾rials like semiconductors, aerospace materials, and composites. These techniques 
would prove to be an excellent tool for narrowing the gap between the properties 
of predicted and manufactured objects. Especially in metallic FGMs, both APT 
and TEM can resolve the compositional gradation and interlayer interaction for 
equipping researchers to design and optimize frontier FGMs. In addition, these 
techniques provide 3D nanoscale characterization along with sub-nanometer scale 
spatial resolution [125]. 
Based on the literature survey, the future directions for inclusive growth of 
FGMs are (Figure 2.6): (i) material, (ii) process, (iii) modeling and optimization, 
(iv) mass production and development of new manufacturing techniques, and 
(v) post-processing and testing. These trends aspire to develop and improve FGMs 
by using one or more new materials, new manufacturing methods, numerical sim￾ulation, or mathematical models for fabricating a graded layer or region. Based on  
54 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 2.6 Potential future research trends in FGMs. 
published research, mathematical modeling is a paramount research direction for 
crucial future developments like producing FGMs with high performance and at 
a lower cost [2, 126]. Based on the summaries of different modeling, simulation, 
and optimization methods, it becomes evident that further research with more 
university-industry collaboration and technology transfer is needed. The forums 
for sharing ideas and disseminating information about the frontiers of FGM 
research, including the current state-of-the-art, educational aspects, identifying 
future potential and gaps in the present scenario, and promoting technology trans￾fer through university-industry collaboration should be developed and advertised. 
2.8 SUMMARY AND CONCLUDING REMARKS 
FGMs fundamentally change the paradigm of part fabrication as material prop￾erties become a parameter in process design. Parts are fabricated with tailored 
regions utilizing varied materials or structures for imparting required proper￾ties. Several engineering operations require components with different proper￾ties at different spatial positions. Although varying properties can be achieved 
through traditional composites, their limitation under extreme environments 
makes FGMs a potential solution to meet these operational requirements. This 
review objectively assessed the diverse aspects of FGMs, beginning with mate￾rial developments and followed by the evolution in fabrication methods, mod￾eling, simulation, and optimization techniques. Substantial progress in each of 
these aspects has been observed in the domain of FGMs. Additive manufactur￾ing has been developed from rapid prototyping to rapid manufacturing, enabling  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 55 
on-demand manufacturing of high-end products, especially in the biomedical and 
aerospace industries, with tremendous potential for future applications in many 
more domains. Multiple prominent features of FGMs have made them one of the 
key materials for a future role in sustainable development. Therefore, researchers 
strive for inclusive development of FGMs to expand their scope of utilization to 
befit the fourth industrial revolution. 
This chapter provides academicians, researchers, and professional experts with 
a dependable platform to understand the fundamental concepts plus complexities 
of FGM fabrication processes, the sequence of their development, and several 
crucial parameters to obtain the required gradation of properties. Furthermore, it 
delivers extensive work exploration and research directions for new researchers in 
this domain. Therefore, researchers and practitioners will benefit from the present 
study’s highlights and save effort and time to grasp critical aspects of functionally 
graded materials. 
2.8.1 Statements and declarations 
2.8.1.1 Acknowledgement 
The authors would like to thank Indian Institute of Technology Ropar for the 
research facilities. 
2.8.2 Competing interest 
The authors have no relevant financial or non-financial interests to disclose. 
2.8.3 Funding 
The authors declare that no funds, grants, or other support were received during 
the preparation of this manuscript. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Zhang, P. Jaiswal, R. Rai, and S. Nelaturi, “Additive Manufacturing of Function￾ally Graded Material Objects: A Review,” J. Comput. Inf. Sci. Eng., vol. 18, no. 4, 
2018, doi: 10.1115/1.4039683. 
[2] B. Saleh et al., “30 Years of Functionally Graded Materials: An Overview of Manu￾facturing Methods, Applications and Future Challenges,” Compos. Part B Eng., vol. 
201, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.compositesb.2020.108376. 
[3] G. H. Loh, E. Pei, D. Harrison, and M. D. Monzón, “An Overview of Function￾ally Graded Additive Manufacturing,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 23, pp. 34–44, 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.addma.2018.06.023. 
[4] M. A. Klecka, G. Subhash, and N. K. Arakere, “Determination of Subsurface Hard￾ness Gradients in Plastically Graded Materials via Surface Indentation,” J. Tribol., 
vol. 133, no. 3, 2011, doi: 10.1115/1.4003859.  
 
 
 
 
56 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[5] C. Wei, Z. Sun, Q. Chen, Z. Liu, and L. Li, “Additive Manufacturing of Horizontal 
and 3D Functionally Graded 316L/Cu10Sn Components via Multiple Material Selec￾tive Laser Melting,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 141, no. 8, 2019, doi: 
10.1115/1.4043983. 
[6] M. Naebe and K. Shirvanimoghaddam, “Functionally Graded Materials: A Review 
of Fabrication and Properties,” Appl. Mater. Today, vol. 5, pp. 223–245, 2016, doi: 
10.1016/j.apmt.2016.10.001. 
[7] Y. H. Chueh, X. Zhang, C. Wei, Z. Sun, and L. Li, “Additive Manufacturing of 
Polymer-Metal/Ceramic Functionally Graded Composite Components via Multiple 
Material Laser Powder Bed Fusion,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 142, no. 
5, 2020, doi: 10.1115/1.4046594. 
[8] J. Yan, I. Battiato, and G. M. Fadel, “A Mathematical Model-Based Optimization 
Method for Direct Metal Deposition of Multimaterials,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. 
ASME, vol. 139, no. 8, 2017, doi: 10.1115/1.4036424. 
[9] J. P. A. Nijssen and R. A. J. Van Ostayen, “Compliant Hydrostatic Bearings Uti￾lizing Functionally Graded Materials,” J. Tribol., vol. 142, no. 11, 2020, doi: 
10.1115/1.4047299. 
[10] R. M. Mahamood and E. T. Akinlabi, “Types of Functionally Graded Materials and 
Their Areas of Application,” Top. Mining, Metall. Mater. Eng., pp. 9–21, 2017, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-53756-6_2. 
[11] Y. Watanabe, Y. Hattori, and H. Sato, “Distribution of Microstructure and Cool￾ing Rate in Al-Al2Cu Functionally Graded Materials Fabricated by a Centrifugal 
Method,” J. Mater. Process. Technol., vol. 221, pp. 197–204, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jmatprotec.2015.01.028. 
[12] Y. Liu, G. Zheng, N. Letov, and Y. F. Zhao, “A Survey of Modeling and Optimization 
Methods for Multi-Scale Heterogeneous Lattice Structures,” J. Mech. Des. Trans. 
ASME, vol. 143, no. 4, 2021, doi: 10.1115/1.4047917. 
[13] V. A. Popovich, E. V. Borisov, A. A. Popovich, V. S. Sufiiarov, D. V. Masaylo, and 
L. Alzina, “Functionally Graded Inconel 718 Processed by Additive Manufacturing: 
Crystallographic Texture, Anisotropy of Microstructure and Mechanical Properties,” 
Mater. Des., vol. 114, pp. 441–449, 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2016.10.075. 
[14] I. M. El-Galy, B. I. Saleh, and M. H. Ahmed, “Functionally Graded Materials Clas￾sifications and Development Trends from Industrial Point of View,” SN Appl. Sci., 
vol. 1, no. 11, Nov. 2019, doi: 10.1007/s42452-019-1413-4. 
[15] S. F. Hassan, O. Siddiqui, M. F. Ahmed, and A. I. Al Nawwah, “Development of Gra￾dient Concentrated Single-Phase Fine Mg-Zn Particles and Effect on Structure and 
Mechanical Properties,” J. Eng. Mater. Technol. Trans. ASME, vol. 141, no. 2, 2019, 
doi: 10.1115/1.4041865. 
[16] I. Gibson, D. Rosen, B. Stucker, and M. Khorasani, “Additive Manufacturing Tech￾nologies,” Addit. Manuf. Technol., 2021, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-56127-7. 
[17] P. A. Morton, J. Mireles, H. Mendoza, P. M. Cordero, M. Benedict, and R. B. Wicker, 
“Enhancement of Low-Cycle Fatigue Performance from Tailored Microstructures 
Enabled by Electron Beam Melting Additive Manufacturing Technology,” J. Mech. 
Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 137, no. 11, 2015, doi: 10.1115/1.4031057. 
[18] M. Ansari, E. Jabari, and E. Toyserkani, “Opportunities and Challenges in Additive 
Manufacturing of Functionally Graded Metallic Materials via Powder-Fed Laser 
Directed Energy Deposition: A Review,” J. Mater. Process. Technol., vol. 294, 2021, 
doi: 10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2021.117117. Metallic functionally graded materials 57 
[19] R. R. Ma, J. T. Belter, and A. M. Dollar, “Hybrid Deposition Manufacturing: 
Design Strategies for Multimaterial Mechanisms via Three- Dimensional Print￾ing and Material Deposition,” J. Mech. Robot., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 1–10, 2015, doi: 
10.1115/1.4029400. 
[20] R. Prabhu, S. R. Miller, T. W. Simpson, and N. A. Meisel, “Complex Solutions for 
Complex Problems? Exploring the Role of Design Task Choice on Learning, Design 
for Additive Manufacturing Use, and Creativity,” J. Mech. Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 
142, no. 3, 2020, doi: 10.1115/1.4045127. 
[21] R. Prabhu, S. R. Miller, T. W. Simpson, and N. A. Meisel, “Exploring the Effects 
of Additive Manufacturing Education on Students’ Engineering Design Pro￾cess and its Outcomes,” J. Mech. Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 142, no. 4, 2020, doi: 
10.1115/1.4044324. 
[22] I. T. Ozbolat and A. K. M. B. Khoda, “Design of a New Parametric Path Plan for 
Additive Manufacturing of Hollow Porous Structures With Functionally Graded 
Materials,” J. Comput. Inf. Sci. Eng., vol. 14, no. 4, 2014, doi: 10.1115/1.4028418. 
[23] P. Muller, P. Mognol, and J. Y. Hascoet, “Functionally Graded Material (FGM) Parts: 
From Design to the Manufacturing Simulation,” ASME 2012 11th Bienn. Conf. Eng. 
Syst. Des. Anal. ESDA 2012, vol. 4, pp. 123–131, 2012, doi: 10.1115/ESDA2012-82586. 
[24] B. Cheng, S. Price, J. Lydon, K. Cooper, and K. Chou, “On Process Temperature 
in Powder-Bed Electron Beam Additive Manufacturing: Model Development and 
Validation,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 136, no. 6, 2014, doi: 10.1115/ 
1.4028484. 
[25] F. Wirth and K. Wegener, “A Physical Modeling and Predictive Simulation of the 
Laser Cladding Process,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 22, pp. 307–319, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j. 
addma.2018.05.017. 
[26] A. M. Mirzendehdel and K. Suresh, “A Pareto-Optimal Approach to Multimaterial 
Topology Optimization,” J. Mech. Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 137, no. 10, 2015, doi: 
10.1115/1.4031088. 
[27] H. Xing, B. Zou, X. Liu, X. Wang, C. Huang, and Y. Hu, “Fabrication Strategy of 
Complicated Al2O3-Si3N4 Functionally Graded Materials by Stereolithography 3D 
Printing,” J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., vol. 40, no. 15, pp. 5797–5809, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jeurceramsoc.2020.05.022. 
[28] T. Kirk, R. Malak, and R. Arroyave, “Computational Design of Compositionally 
Graded Alloys for Property Monotonicity,” J. Mech. Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 143, no. 
3, 2021, doi: 10.1115/1.4048627.
[29] L. Kaufman and J. Ågren, “CALPHAD, First and Second Generation—Birth of 
the Materials Genome,” Scr. Mater., vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 3–6, 2014, doi: 10.1016/j. 
scriptamat.2012.12.003. 
[30] T. Kirk, E. Galvan, R. Malak, and R. Arroyave, “Computational Design of Gradi￾ent Paths in Additively Manufactured Functionally Graded Materials,” J. Mech. Des. 
Trans. ASME, vol. 140, no. 11, 2018, doi: 10.1115/1.4040816. 
[31] S. Ji, Z. Sun, W. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Xie, and H. Chang, “Microstructural Evolu￾tion and High Temperature Resistance of Functionally Graded Material Ti-6Al-4V/ 
Inconel 718 Coated by Directed Energy Deposition-Laser,” J. Alloys Compd., vol. 
848, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.156255. 
[32] C. Katinas, W. Shang, Y. C. Shin, and J. Chen, “Modeling Particle Spray and Capture 
Efficiency for Direct Laser Deposition Using a Four Nozzle Powder Injection Sys￾tem,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 140, no. 4, 2018, doi: 10.1115/1.4038997.  
58 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[33] B. Ealy et al., “Characterization of Laser Additive Manufacturing-Fabricated Porous 
Superalloys for Turbine Components,” J. Eng. Gas Turbines Power, vol. 139, no. 10, 
2017, doi: 10.1115/1.4035560. 
[34] J. Fu, L. Xia, L. Gao, M. Xiao, and H. Li, “Topology Optimization of Periodic Struc￾tures With Substructuring,” J. Mech. Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 141, no. 7, 2019, doi: 
10.1115/1.4042616. 
[35] D. V. Kaweesa and N. A. Meisel, “Quantifying Fatigue Property Changes in Material 
Jetted Parts Due to Functionally Graded Material Interface Design,” Addit. Manuf., 
vol. 21, pp. 141–149, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2018.03.011. 
[36] E. Salcedo, D. Baek, A. Berndt, and J. E. Ryu, “Simulation and Validation of Three 
Dimension Functionally Graded Materials by Material Jetting,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 
22, pp. 351–359, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2018.05.027. 
[37] H. Boffy, M. C. Baietto, P. Sainsot, and A. A. Lubrecht, “An Efficient 3d Model of 
Heterogeneous Materials for Elastic Contact Applications Using Multigrid Methods,” 
J. Tribol., vol. 134, no. 2, 2012, doi: 10.1115/1.4006296. 
[38] D. Li, N. Dai, Y. Tang, G. Dong, and Y. F. Zhao, “Design and Optimization of Graded 
Cellular Structures With Triply Periodic Level Surface-Based Topological Shapes,” 
J. Mech. Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 141, no. 7, 2019, doi: 10.1115/1.4042617. 
[39] C. Sharpe and C. C. Seepersad, “Lattice Structure Optimization With Orientation￾Dependent Material Properties,” J. Mech. Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 143, no. 9, 2021, 
doi: 10.1115/1.4050299. 
[40] Y. Wang, S. Arabnejad, M. Tanzer, and D. Pasini, “Hip Implant Design With Three￾Dimensional Porous Architecture of Optimized Graded Density,” J. Mech. Des. 
Trans. ASME, vol. 140, no. 11, 2018, doi: 10.1115/1.4041208. 
[41] Y. Z. Xiong, R. N. Gao, H. Zhang, L. L. Dong, J. T. Li, and X. Li, “Rationally 
Designed Functionally Graded Porous Ti6Al4V Scaffolds With High Strength 
and Toughness Built via Selective Laser Melting for Load-Bearing Orthopedic 
Applications,” J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater., vol. 104, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jmbbm.2020.103673. 
[42] S. Y. Choy, C. N. Sun, K. F. Leong, and J. Wei, “Compressive Properties of Func￾tionally Graded Lattice Structures Manufactured by Selective Laser Melting,” Mater. 
Des., vol. 131, pp. 112–120, 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2017.06.006. 
[43] B. Stoner, J. Bartolai, D. V. Kaweesa, N. A. Meisel, and T. W. Simpson, “Achiev￾ing Functionally Graded Material Composition Through Bicontinuous Mesostruc￾tural Geometry in Material Extrusion Additive Manufacturing,” JOM, vol. 70, no. 3, 
pp. 413–418, Mar. 2018, doi: 10.1007/s11837-017-2669-z. 
[44] C. Zhang et al., “Mechanical Characteristics and Deformation Mechanism of 
Functionally Graded Triply Periodic Minimal Surface Structures Fabricated 
Using Stereolithography,” Int. J. Mech. Sci., vol. 208, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j. 
ijmecsci.2021.106679. 
[45] E. Cetin and C. Baykasoğlu, “Crashworthiness of Graded Lattice Structure Filled 
Thin-Walled Tubes Under Multiple Impact Loadings,” Thin-Walled Struct., vol. 154, 
2020, doi: 10.1016/j.tws.2020.106849. 
[46] H. Smith and J. A. Norato, “Topology Optimization With Discrete Geometric Com￾ponents Made of Composite Materials,” Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng., vol. 
376, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.cma.2020.113582. 
[47] D. C. Hofmann et al., “Developing Gradient Metal Alloys Through Radial Deposition 
Additive Manufacturing,” Sci. Rep., vol. 4, 2014, doi: 10.1038/srep05357.  
 
 
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 59 
[48] S. H. Kim et al., “Selective Compositional Range Exclusion via Directed Energy 
Deposition to Produce a Defect-Free Inconel 718/SS 316L Functionally Graded 
Material,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 47, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2021.102288. 
[49] X. Xu, Y. Wu, L. Zuo, and S. Chen, “Topology Optimization of Multimaterial Ther￾moelectric Structures,” J. Mech. Des. Trans. ASME, vol. 143, no. 1, 2021, doi: 
10.1115/1.4047435. 
[50] I. F. Ituarte, N. Boddeti, V. Hassani, M. L. Dunn, and D. W. Rosen, “Design and 
Additive Manufacture of Functionally Graded Structures Based on Digital Materi￾als,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 30, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2019.100839. 
[51] R. Fathi et al., “Past and present of functionally graded coatings: Advancements and 
future challenges,” Elsevier, Accessed: Apr. 23, 2022. [Online]. Available: www. 
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2352940722000129 
[52] R. M. Mahamood and E. T. Akinlabi, “Processing Methods of Functionally Graded 
Materials,” Top. Mining, Metall. Mater. Eng., pp. 23–45, 2017, doi: 10.1007/ 
978-3-319-53756-6_3. 
[53] T. Weber et al., “Functionally Graded Vacuum Plasma Sprayed and Magnetron Sputtered 
Tungsten/EUROFER97 Interlayers for Joints in Helium-Cooled Divertor Components,” 
J. Nucl. Mater., vol. 436, no. 1–3, pp. 29–39, 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.jnucmat.2013.01.286. 
[54] B. Saleh, J. Jiang, A. Ma, D. Song, and D. Yang, “Effect of Main Parameters on the 
Mechanical and Wear Behaviour of Functionally Graded Materials by Centrifugal 
Casting: A Review,” Met. Mater. Int., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1395–1409, Nov. 2019, doi: 
10.1007/s12540-019-00273-8. 
[55] Y. Chen, J. Bunch, T. Li, Z. Mao, and F. Chen, “Novel Functionally Graded Acicular 
Electrode for Solid Oxide Cells Fabricated by the Freeze-Tape-Casting Process,” J. 
Power Sources, vol. 213, pp. 93–99, 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.03.109. 
[56] S. Yin, X. Yan, C. Chen, R. Jenkins, M. Liu, and R. Lupoi, “Hybrid Additive Manu￾facturing of Al-Ti6Al4V Functionally Graded Materials with Selective Laser Melting 
and Cold Spraying,” J. Mater. Process. Technol., vol. 255, pp. 650–655, 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2018.01.015. 
[57] Z. Zhong et al., “Design and Anti-Penetration Performance of TiB/Ti System Function￾ally Graded Material Armor Fabricated by SPS Combined With Tape Casting,” Ceram. 
Int., vol. 46, no. 18, pp. 28244–28249, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.ceramint.2020.07.325. 
[58] S. Ghorbanpour et al., “Effect of Microstructure Induced Anisotropy on Fatigue 
Behaviour of Functionally Graded Inconel 718 Fabricated by Additive Manufactur￾ing,” Mater. Charact., vol. 179, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.matchar.2021.111350. 
[59] X. Zhang, C. Wei, Y. H. Chueh, and L. Li, “An Integrated Dual Ultrasonic Selective 
Powder Dispensing Platform for Three-Dimensional Printing of Multiple Material 
Metal/Glass Objects in Selective Laser Melting,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, 
vol. 141, no. 1, 2019, doi: 10.1115/1.4041427. 
[60] J. Zhou et al., “Fabrication of Functionally Graded Materials From a Single Material 
by Selective Evaporation in Electron Beam Powder Bed Fusion,” Mater. Sci. Eng. A, 
vol. 793, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2020.139827. 
[61] C. Wei, L. Li, X. Zhang, and Y. H. Chueh, “3D Printing of Multiple Metallic Materials 
via Modified Selective Laser Melting,” CIRP Ann., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 245–248, 2018, 
doi: 10.1016/j.cirp.2018.04.096. 
[62] I. Valizadeh, A. Al Aboud, E. Dörsam, and O. Weeger, “Tailoring of Functionally 
Graded Hyperelastic Materials via Grayscale Mask Stereolithography 3D Printing,” 
Addit. Manuf., vol. 47, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2021.102108.  
 
 
60 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[63] F. Liravi and M. Vlasea, “Powder Bed Binder Jetting Additive Manufacturing of 
Silicone Structures,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 21, pp. 112–124, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j. 
addma.2018.02.017. 
[64] S. Kumar, “Development of Functionally Graded Materials by Ultrasonic Consolida￾tion,” CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 85–87, 2010, doi: 10.1016/j. 
cirpj.2010.07.006. 
[65] D. Kim et al., “Carbon Nanotubes-Reinforced Aluminum Alloy Functionally Graded 
Materials Fabricated by Powder Extrusion Process,” Mater. Sci. Eng. A, vol. 745, 
pp. 379–389, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2018.12.128. 
[66] X. Tang et al., “Fabrication of W-Cu Functionally Graded Material by Spark Plasma 
Sintering Method,” Int. J. Refract. Met. Hard Mater., vol. 42, pp. 193–199, 2014, doi: 
10.1016/j.ijrmhm.2013.09.005. 
[67] P. Jaiswal et al., “Build Orientation Optimization for Additive Manufacturing of 
Functionally Graded Material Objects,” Springer, vol. 96, no. 1–4, pp. 223–235, Apr. 
2018, doi: 10.1007/s00170-018-1586-9. 
[68] J. C. Wang, H. Dommati, and S. J. Hsieh, “Review of Additive Manufacturing Meth￾ods for High-Performance Ceramic Materials,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 103, 
no. 5–8, pp. 2627–2647, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1007/S00170-019-03669-3. 
[69] R. S. Parihar, S. G. Setti, and R. K. Sahu, “Recent Advances in the Manufacturing 
Processes of Functionally Graded Materials: A Review,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum 
Electron., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 309–336, Mar. 2018, doi: 10.1515/secm-2015-0395. 
[70] R. Bulatova, C. Bahl, K. Andersen, L. T. Kuhn, and N. Pryds, “Functionally Graded 
Ceramics Fabricated with Side-by-Side Tape Casting for Use in Magnetic Refrig￾eration,” Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 891–898, Jul. 2015, doi: 
10.1111/ijac.12298. 
[71] D. Ding, Z. Pan, D. Cuiuri, and H. Li, “Wire-Feed Additive Manufacturing of Metal 
Components: Technologies, Developments and Future Interests,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. 
Technol., vol. 81, no. 1–4, pp. 465–481, Oct. 2015, doi: 10.1007/S00170-015-7077-3. 
[72] I. Gibson, D. Rosen, and B. Stucker, “Additive manufacturing technologies: 3D print￾ing, rapid prototyping, and direct digital manufacturing,” 2nd ed., pp. 1–498, Jan. 
2015, doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2113-3. 
[73] M. Mahmoudi, A. A. Ezzat, and A. Elwany, “Layerwise Anomaly Detection in Laser 
Powder-Bed Fusion Metal Additive Manufacturing,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. 
ASME, vol. 141, no. 3, 2019, doi: 10.1115/1.4042108. 
[74] J. Guo et al., “Internal Surface Quality Enhancement of Selective Laser Melted Inco￾nel 718 by Abrasive Flow Machining,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 142, 
no. 10, 2020, doi: 10.1115/1.4047141. 
[75] H. Bikas, P. Stavropoulos, and G. Chryssolouris, “Additive Manufacturing Methods 
and Modeling Approaches: A Critical Review,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 83, 
no. 1–4, pp. 389–405, Mar. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s00170-015-7576-2. 
[76] C. Tan, K. Zhou, and T. Kuang, “Selective Laser Melting of Tungsten-Copper Func￾tionally Graded Material,” Mater. Lett., vol. 237, pp. 328–331, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j. 
matlet.2018.11.127. 
[77] S. Mao, D. Z. Zhang, Z. Ren, G. Fu, and X. Ma, “Effects of Process Parameters on 
Interfacial Characterization and Mechanical Properties of 316L/CuCrZr Functionally 
Graded Material by Selective Laser Melting,” J. Alloys Compd., vol. 899, 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.jallcom.2021.163256.  
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 61 
[78] M. A. El-Sayed, K. Essa, M. Ghazy, and H. Hassanin, “Design Optimization of Addi￾tively Manufactured Titanium Lattice Structures for Biomedical Implants,” Int. J. 
Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 110, no. 9–10, pp. 2257–2268, Oct. 2020, doi: 10.1007/ 
S00170-020-05982-8. 
[79] F. Caiazzo, V. Alfieri, and B. D. Bujazha, “Additive Manufacturing of Biomorphic 
Scaffolds for Bone Tissue Engineering,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 113, no. 
9–10, pp. 2909–2923, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.1007/S00170-021-06773-5. 
[80] H. Choo et al., “Effect of Laser Power on Defect, Texture, and Microstructure of a 
Laser Powder Bed Fusion Processed 316L Stainless Steel,” Mater. Des., vol. 164, 
2019, doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2018.12.006. 
[81] R. Shi, S. A. Khairallah, T. T. Roehling, T. W. Heo, J. T. McKeown, and M. J. Mat￾thews, “Microstructural Control in Metal Laser Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manu￾facturing Using Laser Beam Shaping Strategy,” Acta Mater., vol. 184, pp. 284–305, 
2020, doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2019.11.053. 
[82] B. Attard, S. Cruchley, C. Beetz, M. Megahed, Y. L. Chiu, and M. M. Attallah, 
“Microstructural Control During Laser Powder Fusion to Create Graded Micro￾structure Ni-Superalloy Components,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 36, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j. 
addma.2020.101432. 
[83] C. Guo et al., “A Comparing Study of Defect Generation in IN738LC Superalloy 
Fabricated by Laser Powder Bed Fusion: Continuous-Wave Mode Versus Pulsed￾Wave Mode,” J. Mater. Sci. Technol., vol. 90, pp. 45–57, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jmst.2021.03.006. 
[84] Y. Su, B. Chen, C. Tan, X. Song, and J. Feng, “Influence of Composition Gradi￾ent Variation on the Microstructure and Mechanical Properties of 316L/Inconel718 
Functionally Graded Material Fabricated by Laser Additive Manufacturing,” J. Mater. 
Process. Technol., vol. 283, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2020.116702. 
[85] X. Zhang, Y. Chen, and F. Liou, “Fabrication of SS316L-IN625 Functionally Graded 
Materials by Powder-Fed Directed Energy Deposition,” Sci. Technol. Weld. Join., 
vol. 24, no. 5, pp. 504–516, Jul. 2019, doi: 10.1080/13621718.2019.1589086. 
[86] S. Yadav, A. N. Jinoop, N. Sinha, C. P. Paul, and K. S. Bindra, “Parametric Investiga￾tion and Characterization of Laser Directed Energy Deposited Copper-Nickel Graded 
Layers,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 108, no. 11–12, pp. 3779–3791, Jun. 2020, 
doi: 10.1007/s00170-020-05644-9. 
[87] H. Sahasrabudhe, R. Harrison, C. Carpenter, and A. Bandyopadhyay, “Stainless Steel 
to Titanium Bimetallic Structure Using LENSTM,” Addit. Manuf., vol. 5, pp. 1–8, 
2015, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2014.10.002. 
[88] L. Li, X. Zhang, W. Cui, F. Liou, W. Deng, and W. Li, “Temperature and Residual 
Stress Distribution of FGM Parts by DED Process: Modeling and Experimental Vali￾dation,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 109, no. 1–2, pp. 451–462, Jul. 2020, doi: 
10.1007/s00170-020-05673-4. 
[89] E. B. Joyee and Y. Pan, “Investigation of a Magnetic-Field-Assisted Stereolithogra￾phy Process for Printing Functional Part With Graded Materials,” 2020 Int. Symp. 
Flex. Autom. ISFA 2020, 2020, doi: 10.1115/ISFA2020-9650. 
[90] S. Safaee and R. K. Chen, “Development of a Design and Characterization Frame￾work for Fabrication of Functionally Graded Materials Using Magnetic Field￾Assisted Digital Light Processing Stereolithography,” J. Manuf. Process., vol. 67, 
pp. 314–324, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.jmapro.2021.04.058.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[91] P. Badoniya, A. Yadav, M. Srivastava, P. K. Jain, and S. Rathee, “Fabrication of 
Functionally Graded Materials (FGMs) via Additive Manufacturing Route,” 
pp. 191–213, 2022, doi: 10.1007/978-981-16-7377-1_9. 
[92] X. Shen, M. Chu, F. Hariri, G. Vedula, and H. E. Naguib, “Binder Jetting Fabrica￾tion of Highly Flexible and Electrically Conductive Graphene/PVOH Composites,” 
Addit. Manuf., vol. 36, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2020.101565. 
[93] X. Xiao and S. Joshi, “Automatic Toolpath Generation for Heterogeneous Objects 
Manufactured by Directed Energy Deposition Additive Manufacturing Process,” J. 
Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 140, no. 7, 2018, doi: 10.1115/1.4039491. 
[94] S. Chandrasekaran, S. Hari, and M. Amirthalingam, “Wire Arc Additive Manufac￾turing of Functionally Graded Material for Marine Risers,” Mater. Sci. Eng. A, vol. 
792, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2020.139530. 
[95] S. Jayanath and A. Achuthan, “A Computationally Efficient Finite Element Frame￾work to Simulate Additive Manufacturing Processes,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. 
ASME, vol. 140, no. 4, 2018, doi: 10.1115/1.4039092. 
[96] J. Jhabvala, E. Boillat, T. Antignac, and R. Glardon, “On the Effect of Scanning 
Strategies in the Selective Laser Melting Process,” Virtual Phys. Prototyp., vol. 5, 
no. 2, pp. 99–109, Jun. 2010, doi: 10.1080/17452751003688368. 
[97] L. D. Bobbio et al., “Additive Manufacturing of a Functionally Graded Material From 
Ti-6Al-4V to Invar: Experimental Characterization and Thermodynamic Calcula￾tions,” Acta Mater., vol. 127, pp. 133–142, 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.actamat.2016.12.070. 
[98] F. Geiger, K. Kunze, and T. Etter, “Tailoring the Texture of IN738LC Processed by 
Selective Laser Melting (SLM) by Specific Scanning Strategies,” Mater. Sci. Eng. 
A, vol. 661, pp. 240–246, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.msea.2016.03.036. 
[99] V. A. Popovich, E. V. Borisov, A. A. Popovich, V. S. Sufiiarov, D. V. Masaylo, and 
L. Alzina, “Impact of Heat Treatment on Mechanical Behaviour of Inconel 718 Pro￾cessed With Tailored Microstructure by Selective Laser Melting,” Mater. Des., vol. 
131, pp. 12–22, 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.matdes.2017.05.065. 
[100] J. Jiang, X. Xu, and J. Stringer, “Support Structures for Additive Manufactur￾ing: A Review,” J. Manuf. Mater. Process., vol. 2, no. 4, 2018, doi: 10.3390/ 
jmmp2040064. 
[101] P. Das, K. Mhapsekar, S. Chowdhury, R. Samant, and S. Anand, “Selection of Build 
Orientation for Optimal Support Structures and Minimum Part Errors in Additive 
Manufacturing,” Comput. Aided. Des. Appl., vol. 14, pp. 1–13, Nov. 2017, doi: 
10.1080/16864360.2017.1308074. 
[102] R. Paul and S. Anand, “Optimization of Layered Manufacturing Process for Reduc￾ing Form Errors With Minimal Support Structures,” J. Manuf. Syst., vol. 36, 
pp. 231–243, 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.jmsy.2014.06.014. 
[103] Z. Hai-ming, H. Yong, F. Jian-zhong, and Q. Jing-jiang, “Inclined Layer Printing for 
Fused Deposition Modeling Without Assisted Supporting Structure,” Robot. Com￾put. Integr. Manuf., vol. 51, pp. 1–13, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.rcim.2017.11.011. 
[104] G. Strano, L. Hao, R. M. Everson, and K. E. Evans, “A New Approach to the 
Design and Optimisation of Support Structures in Additive Manufacturing,” Int. J. 
Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 66, no. 9–12, pp. 1247–1254, Jun. 2013, doi: 10.1007/ 
s00170-012-4403-x. 
[105] J. Vanek, J. A. G. Galicia, and B. Benes, “Clever Support: Efficient Support Struc￾ture Generation for Digital Fabrication,” Eurographics Symp. Geom. Process., vol. 
33, no. 5, pp. 117–125, 2014, doi: 10.1111/cgf.12437.  
 
Metallic functionally graded materials 63 
[106] G. Zhao, C. Zhou, and S. Das, “Solid Mechanics Based Design and Optimization for 
Support Structure Generation in Stereolithography Based Additive Manufacturing,” 
Proceedings of the ASME 2015 International Design Engineering Technical Confer￾ences and Computers and Information in Engineering Conference. Volume 1A: 35th 
Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, V01AT02A035, 2015, doi: 
10.1115/DETC2015-47902. 
[107] C. S. Lefky, B. Zucker, D. Wright, A. R. Nassar, T. W. Simpson, and O. J. Hildreth, 
“Dissolvable Supports in Powder Bed Fusion-Printed Stainless Steel,” 3D Print. 
Addit. Manuf., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 3–11, Mar. 2017, doi: 10.1089/3dp.2016.0043. 
[108] C. Wei, Y. H. Chueh, X. Zhang, Y. Huang, Q. Chen, and L. Li, “Easy-to-Remove 
Composite Support Material and Procedure in Additive Manufacturing of Metallic 
Components Using Multiple Material Laser-Based Powder Bed Fusion,” J. Manuf. 
Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 141, no. 7, 2019, doi: 10.1115/1.4043536. 
[109] I. Gibson, D. Rosen, B. Stucker, and M. Khorasani, “Materials for Additive 
Manufacturing,” Addit. Manuf. Technol., pp. 379–428, 2021, doi: 10.1007/ 
978-3-030-56127-7_14. 
[110] T. D. Ngo, A. Kashani, G. Imbalzano, K. T. Q. Nguyen, and D. Hui, “Additive 
Manufacturing (3D Printing): A Review of Materials, Methods, Applications and 
Challenges,” Compos. Part B Eng., vol. 143, pp. 172–196, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j. 
compositesb.2018.02.012. 
[111] N. N. Kumbhar and A. V. Mulay, “Post Processing Methods Used to Improve Sur￾face Finish of Products Which Are Manufactured by Additive Manufacturing Tech￾nologies: A Review,” J. Inst. Eng. Ser. C, vol. 99, no. 4, pp. 481–487, Aug. 2018, doi: 
10.1007/s40032-016-0340-z. 
[112] W. Sames, “Additive manufacturing of Inconel 718 using electron beam melting: 
processing, post-processing, & mechanical properties,” 2015, Accessed: Apr. 03, 
2022. [Online]. Available: https://oaktrust.library.tamu.edu/handle/1969.1/155230. 
[113] C. Shen et al., “Thermal Induced Phase Evolution of Fe–Fe3Ni Functionally Graded 
Material Fabricated Using the Wire-Arc Additive Manufacturing Process: An 
In-Situ Neutron Diffraction Study,” J. Alloys Compd., vol. 826, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jallcom.2020.154097. 
[114] S. Clijsters, T. Craeghs, S. Buls, K. Kempen, and J. P. Kruth, “In Situ Quality Control 
of the Selective Laser Melting Process Using a High-Speed, Real-Time Melt Pool 
Monitoring System,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 75, no. 5–8, pp. 1089–1101, 
Oct. 2014, doi: 10.1007/s00170-014-6214-8. 
[115] P. Charalampous, I. Kostavelis, and D. Tzovaras, “Non-Destructive Quality Control 
Methods in Additive Manufacturing: A Survey,” Rapid Prototyp. J., vol. 26, no. 4, 
pp. 777–790, May 2020, doi: 10.1108/RPJ-08-2019-0224. 
[116] I. F. Ituarte et al., “Surface Modification of Additively Manufactured 18% Nickel 
Maraging Steel by Ultrasonic Vibration-Assisted Ball Burnishing,” J. Manuf. Sci. 
Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 142, no. 7, 2020, doi: 10.1115/1.4046903. 
[117] V. A. Popovich, E. V. Borisov, V. Heurtebise, T. Riemslag, A. A. Popovich, and 
V. S. Sufiiarov, “Creep and Thermomechanical Fatigue of Functionally Graded Inconel 
718 Produced by Additive Manufacturing,” Miner. Met. Mater. Ser., vol. Part F12, 
pp. 85–97, 2018, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-72526-0_9. 
[118] S. Z. Hussain et al., “Feedback Control of Melt Pool Area in Selective Laser Melt￾ing Additive Manufacturing Process,” Processes, vol. 9, no. 9, 2021, doi: 10.3390/ 
pr9091547. 64 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[119] M. Grasso, A. G. Demir, B. Previtali, and B. M. Colosimo, “In Situ Monitoring 
of Selective Laser Melting of Zinc Powder via Infrared Imaging of the Process 
Plume,” Robot. Comput. Integr. Manuf., vol. 49, pp. 229–239, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j. 
rcim.2017.07.001. 
[120] M. Grasso, V. Laguzza, Q. Semeraro, and B. M. Colosimo, “In-Process Monitoring 
of Selective Laser Melting: Spatial Detection of Defects via Image Data Analysis,” 
J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 139, no. 5, 2017, doi: 10.1115/1.4034715. 
[121] Q. Y. Lu and C. H. Wong, “Additive Manufacturing Process Monitoring and 
Control by Non-Destructive Testing Techniques: Challenges and In-Process 
Monitoring,” Virtual Phys. Prototyp., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 39–48, Apr. 2018, doi: 
10.1080/17452759.2017.1351201. 
[122] B. Zhang and C. Coddet, “Selective Laser Melting of Iron Powder: Observation 
of Melting Mechanism and Densification Behavior via Point-Track-Surface￾Part Research,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 138, no. 5, 2016, doi: 
10.1115/1.4031366. 
[123] E. L. Doubrovski, E. Y. Tsai, D. Dikovsky, J. M. P. Geraedts, H. Herr, and N. Oxman, 
“Voxel-Based Fabrication Through Material Property Mapping: A Design Method 
for Bitmap Printing,” CAD Comput. Aided Des., vol. 60, pp. 3–13, 2015, doi: 
10.1016/j.cad.2014.05.010. 
[124] E. Mahamood, R. M. Akinlabi, “Functionally Graded Materials, Topics in Mining,” 
Metallurgy and materials engineering. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
2017. https://scholar.google.co.in/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C5&q=Functionally+ 
graded+materials%2C+Topics+in+Mining&btnG= (accessed Mar. 31, 2022). 
[125] A. Devaraj et al., “Three-Dimensional Nanoscale Characterisation of Materials by 
Atom Probe Tomography,” Int. Mater. Rev., vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 68–101, Feb. 2018, 
doi: 10.1080/09506608.2016.1270728. 
[126] M. Sireesha, J. Lee, A. S. Kranthi Kiran, V. J. Babu, B. B. T. Kee, and S. Ramakrishna, 
“A Review on Additive Manufacturing and Its Way Into the Oil and Gas Industry,” 
RSC Adv., vol. 8, no. 40, pp. 22460–22468, 2018, doi: 10.1039/c8ra03194k. 3
 
 
 
Chapter 3
 
An overview of power factor 
correction techniques 
Jagdeep Kaur Brar and Yadwinder Pal Sharma 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Electric machines, transformers, and fluorescent lamps, all inductive appliances, 
require a magnetic field to perform tasks. The magnetic field is required, but it 
does not produce any productive work. The utility must supply the energy required 
to complete the task. The charge usually needed by motor drives, lamps, and com￾puter systems has been derived from a combination of instantaneous active and 
reactive elements. 
Appliances such as a furnace only necessitate that actual value of current. Sev￾eral applications, including an induction machine, require simultaneous real and 
reactive currents. The actual current is the proportion of the electrical current that 
is converted into useful work by the equipment, including heat generation by a 
heating chamber. The ampere (A) is a current measurement unit, while the watt 
(voltage real current) is a power standard unit (W). The component necessary to 
generate the flux required for induction device operation is reactive current. The 
current is measured in amperes (A) and the reactive power is measured in volt 
ampere reactive (VARs). The three categories of utility grid are resistive con￾sumer load, inductive consumer load, and capacitive consumer loads. To work 
effectively, all inductive loads require two types of power. The work is done by 
active power (P), but the magnetic field is maintained by reactive power (Q). 
Figure 3.1depicts the relationship between apparent power, useful power, and 
wasteful power. 
2 + 2 Apparent Power (S) = P Q (3.1) 
Power factor: The electric power factor is the ratio between usable and 
perceived power (S). Energy factor values vary from 0 to 1.00. Low wattage 
factor can be defined as less than 0.80. The power factor is denoted by PF or 
cosθ. The power factor is written as follows: 
Active Power ( ) P
PF (Power Factor) = (3.2) Apparent Power S() 
DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-3 65  
 
 
 
66 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 3.1 Triangle of electricity. 
In AC circuits, the power factor is critical since it determines how much power is 
consumed. 
P = VI cosq (for single-phase supply) 
P
So, the value of current is given as: I (current) = V cosq Also, P = 3 VIcosθ (for three-phase supply): 
P 
I = 
3 c V osq 
For constant power voltage, the utility current is generally inversely propor￾tional to cos q, as mentioned earlier. As the power factor declines, the demand 
current rises, and vice versa. 
3.2 DRAWBACKS OF LOW POWER FACTOR 
Low power factor merely suggests inefficient use. Because cosθ ranges from 0 
to 1, a value of 0.9 to 1.0 is considered an excellent power factor, implying used 
power is almost equal. In view of the consumer’s standpoint, it basically implies  
 
 
 
 
An overview of power factor correction techniques 67 
getting the most out of what they paid for. When the power factor is low, the utility 
must provide both productive active and non-productive reactive power. Larger 
generators, transformers, cables, and other system components generate higher 
capital and operating expenses for the utility, which they mainly permit to indus￾trial users in the form of power factor penalties. As a result, a higher power factor 
aids in avoiding those penalties. The following drawbacks occur when the power 
factor is less than unity [1]. 
I. Required large kVA rating of equipment: To illustrate, kVA is often used 
to evaluate electric machines like transformers and switches. Considering 
kW
kVA= , it is evident that the kVA value of such an apparatus is inversely 
cos q 
related to the power factor. A stronger transformer rating is achieved with 
a lower power factor. Whenever the power factor is insufficient, the trans￾former rating must be increased, resulting in a larger and more powerful 
apparatus. 
II. Requires larger size of conductor: At a low power factor, the conductor 
must carry more current to transmit a set quantity of power at constant volt￾age. This requires the use of big conductors. 
III. High copper losses: There are enhanced copper losses in all of the supplied 
system parts only when current is large at a lagging power factor. As a result, 
efficiency suffers. 
IV. Decrease in voltage regulation: The electric charge at a poor trailing power 
factor causes severe power loss in electric machines, transformers, and 
transmission system and distribution companies. As a consequence, overall 
voltage supplied at the generator terminals is diminished, affecting system 
performance. To keep the terminal voltage energy within reasonable param￾eters, extra equipment is required. 
V. System handling capacity is reduced: The trailing power factor affects 
the system’s overall handling capacity. Because the current’s reactive com￾ponent limits maximum implementation of installed capacity, the system 
handling capacity is reduced. 
3.3 LOW POWER FACTOR CAUSES 
A poor power factor is troublesome from an economic perspective. The distribu￾tion system is a function load power factor that is usually below 0.8. A lagging 
power factor can occur for a number of reasons. 
1.	 The bulk of electric drives include inductive motors with a reduced lag 
power factor under minimal load. The power factor of such machines  
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
is comparatively low (0.2 to 0.3), but it improves to 0.8 or 0.9 during 
peak load. 
2. Flash bulbs, electrical discharge machining light bulbs, and industrial heat￾ing burners each have a low trailing power factor. 
3. The power system’s demand fluctuates during the day, with peak load in 
the dawn and dusk and lesser demands at the other intervals. During down 
times, the source voltage rises, which boosts the magnetization flow of cur￾rent. The power factor is weakened as a consequence [2]. 
3.4 IMPORTANCE OF INCREASING POWER FACTOR 
As the following describes, power factor enhancement is crucial for both house￾holds and producers. 
a.	 Consumers: Users pay for their total demand in kVA as well as the units 
used. When their power factor improves, their maximal kVA prices decrease, 
leading to yearly cost reductions according to required power expenditures. 
Despite the fact that power factor correction equipment requires an esti￾mated annual outlay, achieving an ideal power factor results in total yearly 
savings for such customers. 
b. Generating stations: Power factor improvements are just as important to a 
generating station as they are to the user. The generators of power plants are 
rated in kVA, while the result is evaluated in kW. As a result of the station’s 
kW production kVA= , like a function, the power factor measures the 
cosq 
number of units it can supply. The higher the power factor of a generating 
station, the more kWh it provides to the structure. As just an outcome, 
a greater power factor boosts the generating potential of the generating 
station. 
3.5 POWER FACTOR CORRECTION CALCULATION 
In the power factor analysis, a voltmeter and an ammeter are used to measure the 
source voltage level or current drawn. A wattmeter is often used to measure real 
P power. As active power (P) = VIcosθ watt. Whereas, power factor (cosθ) = VI 
So, reactive power is calculated by Q = VIsinθ. A shunt capacitor or capacitor 
bank is connected in the circuit to compensate the reactive power. A following 
2 V
formula is used to compute the value of a capacitor: Q = Xc 
Q Whereas, C = farad. 2pfV2  
 
 
An overview of power factor correction techniques 69 
3.6 IMPROVING THE ENERGY FACTOR TECHNIQUES 
The overall energy factor of a large producing station is usually between 0.8 and 
0.9. It is sometimes smaller; in such circumstances, it is usually advisable to take 
additional measures to boost the output power. Static capacitors, synchronous con￾densers, and phase advancers can all help with this. 
3.7 STATIC CAPACITOR 
Power factor can be enhanced by installing capacitor banks alongside equipment 
that has a trailing power factor. A capacitor draws a leading current to neutralize 
the trailing reactive component of the demand current, which boosts the power 
factor of the demand. A capacitor can be linked in a delta or star configuration for 
three-phase loads, as shown in Figure 3.2. In factories, static capacitors are almost 
always employed to enhance the power factor. 
How capacitors handle a lower power factor: Reduced power factor 
seems to be a concern that can be remedied by incorporating a PFI capacitor 
element into the industrial power grid. Capacitors work primarily as reactive 
current producers, providing the circuit’s overall power flow (kVAR). By 
creating their own voltage level, industrial applications save money for the 
utilities. As a result, the utility’s extent of power (kVA) will be dropped, cul￾minating in proportionately lower expenses. Capacitors reduce the amount 
of current taken from the power grid, allowing it to run at full capacity. 
Capacitors for PFI come in three primary varieties: 
A. Single capacitor units are required for each inductive apparatus. Individual 
capacitors have several benefits: 
i. Enhanced system capacity: Real power adjustment attached to the 
demand enhances system capacity while lowering power dissipation. 
Figure 3.2 Static capacitor placed with the demand  
 
70 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
ii. Relatively cool functionality: As voltages decline, flow rises, providing 
excessive heat problems due to the marginally higher flow of current. 
Whenever voltage dips are rectified nearer to the demand, these heating 
concerns are prevented at the outset. 
iii. The control logic is streamlined, and there are fewer control parts, 
because the capacitor and motor can be switched on and off simultane￾ously. There is minor risk of overcompensating because the particular 
capacitor is sized to the exact load and switches concurrently with that 
load. Individual capacitor selection is simple and straightforward, and 
no complex computations are required. 
B. Units of capacitor banks: A bank of capacitor units consists of multiple 
capacitors housed within a container and joined at a centralized spot in the 
power grid [3]. Fully automated capacitors include a capacitor in an identi￾cal container with a circuit or thyristor or silicon-controlled rectifier (SCR) 
controlled by a processor, whereas static capacitors contain a capacitor 
mounted in the identical yard with no switching. On larger inductive loads, 
a single capacitor is placed, and the bank is usually assembled at primary 
lines or switchgear, among many other places. Fixed or automatic bank sys￾tems have a number of advantages. Banks are much more cost-effective than 
standalone capacitor devices when the main purpose is to minimize utility 
power prices and/or reduce current in primary feeds from a significant gen￾erating station or substation. The ease of power factor adjustment is aided 
by the fact that just one installation is required. Instead of a number of sepa￾rate capacitors next to every inductive load, a single fixed or programmable 
shunt capacitor device can save money. 
C. A mixture of the aforementioned: A single capacitor is generally mounted 
on significant induction machines, and groups are mounted on significant 
feeders or switchboards, among other things. One of most effective banks 
are generally individualized and regulated. Single capacitors are employed 
on powerful motors, whereas banks are mounted on distribution systems. 
To determine the required overall power factor correction, it is necessary to 
review both the total kVAR requirement and the desired power factor [4]. 
3.8 POWER FACTOR CORRECTION BY PASSIVE CIRCUIT 
Although a larger inductor is required for passive PFC than for active PFC, it is 
indeed cheaper. Although using a capacitor bank to address non-linearity in a load 
is a straightforward solution, it’s not quite as successful as active PFC. Motor con￾trol centers, utility energy meters, substation transformers, and other sectors with 
numerous inductive loads use these power factor correction procedures. This filter 
suppresses the harmonic components, helping the non-linear instrument appear 
to be a linear demand. By adding capacitors or inductors as necessary, the power 
factor can now be brought approximately to unity. On the other hand, it requires  
 
 
An overview of power factor correction techniques 71 
high-current inductors that are complex and costly. In contrast to the converter, 
mainly passive components can be used in passive PFC to improve the shape of 
the line current. This kind of power factor technique can raise the power factor to 
a value of 0.7 to 0.8. 
3.9 POWER FACTOR ENHANCEMENT BY ACTIVE CIRCUIT 
A power electronic system that enhances the power factor by modifying the wave 
shape of current generated by a demand is known as an active power factor com￾pensator (active PFC). The strategy is to create demand circuits with power qual￾ity that appears completely resistive (apparent power equal to real power). In this 
case, voltage and current are in phase, and energy is zero. This enables one of the 
most efficient deliveries of electricity from the utility to that same end user. An 
active PFC is an electronic power system that manages the amount of energy con￾sumed by an application in return for a power factor as close to unity as possible. 
Every active filter design regulates the load’s incoming current to produce a supply 
current that closely resembles the mains’ output voltages (i.e. a sinusoidal wave). 
A mix of reactive components and active switches is used to improve the efficacy 
of source current shaping and generate an adjustable voltage output [5]. 
3.10 SYNCHRONOUS CONDENSERS 
When a synchronous motor is over-excited, it absorbs a leading current and func￾tions like the capacitors. An over-excited synchronous motor running at no loads 
is referred to as a synchronous condenser. When this machine is connected to the 
supply simultaneously, it generates a higher current that partially compensates for 
the load’s lagging reactive component. As a result, the bad factor has improved. 
Figure 3.3 depicts the enhancement of the synchronous condenser method’s power 
factor. A well-known way is to employ a synchronous motor as reactive power 
compensation. In comparison to a set of capacitors, if a synchronous motor is 
simply utilized for reactive power adjustment, the system will be inefficient and 
expensive [1]. Synchronous motors can have a power factor of unity, trailing, or 
going to lead, but there are significant drawbacks, such as the need for human 
control under varying loads. 
3.11 PHASE ADVANCERS 
Induction motors employ a phase advancer to rectify their power factor. Because 
the excitation windings of the stator have lagging current, the power factor of the 
machine is reduced; however, if this current is supplied from an external source, 
the power factor of the machine is improved and the phase advancer is reduced to  
72 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 3.3 Power factor improvements by synchronous condenser. 
a simple AC exciter. This approach can be employed in situations when using a 
synchronous condenser is not cost effective [6], providing a means to improve the 
power factor of induction motors. An inductive motor’s stator winding draws an 
excited current that would be 90° behind voltage supply. For this reason, electric 
motors will have a poor power factor. If the excitation comes from somewhere 
else, the stator winding would be liberated or continued. As a result, the induc￾tion motor’s power factor could be enhanced. Phase advancers provide this addi￾tional excitation. It’s simply referred to as an AC exciter. It is positioned along 
the same axis as the primary motor and is connected to the rotor winding of the 
machine. It provides stimulating ampere turns at intermediate frequencies to the 
rotor winding. To provide more ampere turns as required, the induction motor 
could be structured to function under leading power factor, similar to an over￾excited synchronous machine. 
3.12 POWER FACTOR IMPROVEMENT BY USING 
ACTIVE FILTER 
Active power filters minimize harmonic pollution in transmission lines. Over the 
last two decades, the proliferation of transmission losses, including stable convert￾ers, heaters, and other load variations, has resulted in a variation of unwanted phe￾nomena in the functioning of energy systems, some of which are intractable with An overview of power factor correction techniques 73 
passive LC filtering. An LC circuit is a particular electrical circuit configuration 
that consists of an inductor, typically denoted by the symbol “L,” and a capaci￾tor, typically represented by the symbol “C.” Active filters can adapt to randomly 
changing currents, which is the main difference between LC filters and active 
filters. Active filters have the capability to enhance power factor and simultane￾ously alleviate harmonic distortions, providing a more comprehensive approach 
to addressing power quality concerns. Managing a current source parallel con￾nected to the power converter produces the required harmonic currents [7]. In this 
arrangement, the mains need to deliver the essential current that avoids pollution 
problems through the transmission line. In extreme cases, the load also requires 
reactive power, which can be created by the same source of current. This kind 
of filter can then pay for both harmonics and power factor concerns. In three￾phase unbalanced loads, individual mains phase currents can also be redistrib￾uted and equalized as long as the overall extent of active power stays constant. In 
this design, the filter can address three issues instantly: (a) harmonic reduction, 
(b) modification of power factor, and (c) power reassignment that keeps systems 
stable. In the practical employment of this type of processing, force converter, 
current ampere controller, and voltage source converters are typically used. The 
superiority and performance of an active power filter are primarily determined by 
three factors: (a) the design of the power inverter; (b) the instrumentation tech￾nique often used to continue the current framework (leakage currents, triangular 
carriage, regular intervals representative sample); and (c) the active filter control 
strategy permits power factor correction to unity, harmonic elimination, and com￾pensation for load unbalance. To build the reference template, a “Reference Cur￾rent Calculator” schematic diagram has been created in Figure 3.4. IS is the source 
current, IF is the filter current, and IL is the load current. 
Figure 3.4 Parallel active power filter’s working principle.  
74 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
For determining the active component of the demand current, “Sample and 
Hold” circuits are used as passive components. Harmonic components, power fac￾tor, and non-linear load compensation patterns are created by the network. Most of 
the ways for developing the guide and help for power systems use the concept of 
instantaneous reactive power. This theory offers an extremely precise method for 
acquiring the reference template and allows for a clear difference between active 
and reactive power in the present. This technique has a few distinguishing features. 
First, separating the averaging active power over a certain duration is much more 
comfortable in many instances and from a mains perspective than separating the 
instantaneous active power, because the first method prevents flashes and low￾ers temporal issues from mains. Another challenge seems to be the difficulty of 
creating and modifying the electronic circuit necessary to acquire the reference, 
which comprises d-q conversions, splits, and a significant number of multiplica￾tions. This effort has produced a substantially simpler solution by incorporating 
sample and hold circuits (S&H), which avoids expensive conversions as well as 
mathematical operations such as multiplication and division [8]. 
3.13 POWER FACTOR IMPROVEMENT BY MPPT OR 
DC/DC CONVERTER 
Due to the instability of solar energy, the large penetration of photovoltaic (PV) 
systems in the power grid now poses numerous issues. To address this issue, this 
chapter examines the power factor correction (PFC) management technique for 
supporting converters that are integrated with the maximum power point track￾ing (MPPT) algorithm using the existing power grid. After that, an experimental 
circuit model incorporating two control approaches will be built and tested under 
real-world settings. When PFC assistance is used, the output voltage response is 
more stable than when the simple MPPT algorithm is used [9]. Power distribu￾tion stability and system reliability are becoming key problems for all sorts of 
electronic power systems, including solar energy. Figure 3.5 depicts the proposed 
Figure 3.5 Power factor improvements in a photovoltaic scheme.  
An overview of power factor correction techniques 75 
utility-connected PV system’s power circuit. When linking a solar system to the 
utility, the PV system will meet both the harmonic and active power supply require￾ments. An inverter provides reactive current adjustment, harmonic removal, and 
active power supply, while a DC/DC converter handles maximum power tracking. 
In addition, the suggested system is connected to a utility line through a series 
inductor that provides for reactive power regulation. 
An inductor-capacitor (L-C) filter is used to connect the load to the reactor 
and inverter at the common coupling point. When production of the solar system 
is inadequate, the power source delivers real energy to the system, and the PV 
control scheme introduces compensatory current to remove the harmonic content 
created by the power converter. As a result, the PV system solely supplies power 
flow to the utility in this mode, eliminating the harmonic content caused by the 
load. The photovoltaic system’s primary function in normal operating conditions 
is to provide active power to the load or utility as well as performing necessary 
uninterruptible power supply (UPS) services for the load [9]. 
As a result, the suggested system offers the following benefits: 
1. A power factor close to one. 
2. Demand protection with a UPS service. 
3. Capacity to balance the load. 
3.14 THYRISTORIZED AUTOMATIC POWER FACTOR 
IMPROVEMENT UNIT 
The following discusses using a thyristor in an autonomous power factor adjust￾ment unit. For these types of designs, SCR or triode for alternating current 
(TRIAC) are commonly employed. Thyristors act as a switch/valve between the 
load circuit and capacitor bank. Assume a power factor enhancement system has 
10 capacitor banks, because when the power factor goes below a specific thresh￾old, additional capacitors must be connected to the load circuit; as the power fac￾tor approaches unity, only a few capacitors must be attached to the circuit [10]. As 
shown in Figure 3.6, reactive current is sensed by embedded systems, instrument 
transformer and relay systems that continuously evaluate the power factor of the 
entire power system. The embedded systems trigger the thyristors by sending 
signals to their gate connections depending on the power factor value or com￾parative power demand. Once the thyristor has been activated to adjust for power 
flow or preserve the power factor, the capacitor bank is attached to the load. The 
thyristor gate initiating pulses are generated by zero crossing across conductive 
firing procedures. The use of AC power at zero points (between the positive and 
negative half cycle) where the voltage is almost zero is referred to as “zero cross 
over”. Gate pulses will only engage devices when the power across the thyristor 
is low. This approach is used to avoid nonlinearities, overvoltage, and distor￾tions from generating during switching. Significant enhancements in energy at  
76 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 3.6 Automatic power factor adjustment device single line schematic diagram. 
home and industrial loads are recommended in this technique. The properties of 
a thyristor toggling mechanism are that the rate of variation is immediate and the 
leakage current is protected. When switching operations, there seems to be no 
disturbance. The activation of thyristors through gate pulses occurs only when 
the voltage across them reaches zero. This method is employed during switch￾ing to prevent the occurrence of transients, voltage spikes, and harmonics. This 
approach yields notable improvements in power quality for both industrial and 
residential loads. The characteristics of the thyristor switching module include 
inrush current protection, instantaneous change, noise-free operation during 
switching, precise automatic zero recognition for zero voltage switching “ON” 
and zero active flipping “OFF,” extended operational lifespan, over-temperature 
protection above 70 °C, dv/dt protection through an resistor capacitor (RC) snub￾ber circuit, user-friendly operation, and the elimination of transients through zero 
flipping technology. 
3.15 AUTOMATIC POWER FACTOR CONTROLLER 
With relay/microprocessor logic, several forms of automatic power factor con￾trollers (APFCs) are accessible [11]. The automatic power factor regulator 
enhances the power factor when it declines. The processor sends the signal to 
the control circuit, which triggers the switches when the power factor falls below 
a specified level. By turning on relays, the capacitor bank rapidly links to the An overview of power factor correction techniques 77 
Figure 3.7 Schematic representation of automatic power factor regulator. 
load and boosts power factor. An overview of the proposed method is illustrated 
in Figure 3.7. 
Technical requirements: An electricity supply, the potential transformer, 
the current transformers (CTs), the zero crossing detector, a processor, a 
switch controller, a switch, a liquid crystal display (LCD) screen, and 
switching capacitors are the key components of this APFC system. 
A. Power supply: The AC supply is acquired by the main of a step-down power 
transformer. The output of the transformer is sent to a rectifier. Controllers 
are supplied by a 5-volt DC power supply. A microcontroller intended to 
operate at a voltage greater than 5 volts will burn out and be ruined quickly. 
B. Potential transformer and current transformer: The potential trans￾former (PT) decreases the supply voltage to the appropriate value for the 
circuit to operate. Microcontrollers rarely execute above 5 volts. If a micro￾controller is designed to function at a voltage higher than 5 V, it will imme￾diately burn out and be damaged. For measurement, control, and protection, 
the PT is used to step down voltage. A CT, on the other hand, is a device 
that converts large current into lesser current that can be used in electrical 
circuits. The current transformer can also be used to detect, monitor, and 
secure the network [12]. 78 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
C. Zero crossing sensor and microprocessor: The outputs of the current and 
voltage transformers are sent into a zero crossing detector that transforms 
the sinusoidal waveform into a square waveform. The voltage level is zero 
in this situation. The output voltage waveform indicates when and in which 
direction and input signal crosses zero volts. The power output will travel 
more slowly through one saturation level to another if the voltage level is a 
reduced frequency signal. When there is disturbance between the two input 
terminals, the output may swing between positive and negative saturating 
potential Vsat. An output wave is produced and transmitted to the micro￾controller whenever the zero crossing happens. The phase of the current 
and voltage signals is used to calculate the power factor. A microcontroller 
drives the APFC. The microcontroller performs calculations, takes action, 
and generates additional income. The phase difference between two outputs 
and, eventually, maximum power is calculated in a microcontroller by com￾paring the current and voltage from set reference detectors. The microcon￾troller will decide whether to switch the capacitor based on the current value 
of the power factor, which will be conveyed to the LCD display. 
D. Liquid crystal display (LCD) and relay driver: A relay driver permits a 
reduced device to control signals, while an LCD seems to be a basic mod￾ule that can be used in numerous systems for visual reasons. The switch 
driver is used in the circuit because the switches require a greater amount 
of current. The relays cannot be controlled directly by the microcontroller. 
A relay is a switch that is controlled by electricity when a relay is inter￾faced with a microcontroller, it can contribute to the enhancement of power 
factor within an electrical system. This collaborative process involves the 
microcontroller’s continuous monitoring of power factor and the relay’s 
pivotal role in controlling the connection and disconnection of power fac￾tor correction capacitors. The microcontroller diligently observes the power 
factor of the electrical system, utilizing appropriate sensors or meters for 
measurement. Upon detecting the necessity for power factor correction, the 
microcontroller transmits a control signal to the relay, directing it to close 
and thereby establish the connection between the power factor correction 
capacitors and the electrical system. The relay is commonly employed to 
govern the switching of these capacitors. With the relay in the closed posi￾tion, the power factor correction capacitors are effectively linked in paral￾lel with the system. These capacitors introduce leading reactive power to 
offset the lagging reactive power generated by inductive loads, leading to 
an improvement in the power factor. As a result, the power factor is brought 
closer to unity (1.0). 
E. Capacitor: Capacitors boost the factor of energy enhancement devices by 
adding a reactive load to the circuit. The power factor of the circuit dic￾tates the number of capacitors employed. The relay operates and provides 
a capacitor to the circuit whenever the power factor drops below a speci￾fied level [13]. If the power factor is much lower than the standard range,  
An overview of power factor correction techniques 79 
however, one capacitance is inserted. An additional capacitor is supplied if 
the power factor dips significantly below the predetermined value, and the 
system will continue in this fashion. The circuit will continue to add capaci￾tors in parallel to the load until an acceptable power factor is attained [14]. 
3.16 SINGLE-PHASE POWER FACTOR CORRECTION USING 
PSO-BASED FIXED PWM 
In the circuit shown in Figure 3.8, power factor adjustment was achieved using 
two loops: The inner loop, also known as the current loop, is used to control cur￾rent, whereas the outer loop is used to control output voltage. The outer loop 
is connected to an outside proportional integral (PI) controller that uses particle 
swarm optimization (PSO) to keep the power output coordinated with the refer￾ence signal. The fixed pulse width modulated (PWM) current converter based on 
bang-bang/PSO is coupled to and controls the internal current loop. The current 
traveling through the inductor is then compared to the reference current (Iref). 
A constant frequency current converter based on bang-bang and PSO receives 
this prediction error signal. The constant current control converter, depending on 
bang-bang/PSO, also regulates the internal current loop. But after, the current trav￾eling through the inductor is compared to the reference current (Iref) (IL1). A fixed 
frequency current converter based on bang-bang and PSO receives the current 
error signal. The metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET) 
is triggered by the PWM pulses. A DC-DC converter with a larger output value 
than the voltage is the single-ended primary-inductor converter (SEPIC) DC-DC 
Figure 3.8 Power factor enhancements by use of a DC-DC SEPIC converter.  
80 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
converters. In essence, although SEPIC DC-DC converters are not inherently 
engineered for the sole purpose of PFC, they can be integrated into power supply 
designs in conjunction with PFC techniques. This integration works to bolster 
power quality and efficiency within the system. The adaptability of SEPIC con￾verters in managing fluctuating input voltages, preserving output voltage stability, 
and operating efficiently renders them suitable for scenarios where PFC is a con￾sideration, particularly in settings characterized by variable input conditions and 
dynamic loads. Their utilization as part of power supply design should form part of 
a comprehensive approach to address power factor correction and voltage regula￾tion concerns [15]. SEPIC DC-DC converters provide the following advantages: 
1. They have a high-power density. 
2. In comparison to other switching converters, they have a fast transient 
response. 
3. They can execute both buck and boost operations, which is a major benefit. 
3.17 POWER FACTOR IMPROVEMENT WITH HELP OF SEPIC 
DC-DC CONVERTER 
Brushless direct current motors, PFC, and variable speed through a SEPIC are all 
explored. Proposed is an appropriate solution for driving applications, as well as 
a new approach for controlling the speed of the motor and PFC using SEPIC and 
regulating DC link values. The SEPIC conversion could be used in discontinu￾ous conduction mode to perform reactive power compensation for variable speed 
across a wide range in power conversion circuits. The conventional converter pro￾posed only examined DC-DC conversion because that was created to deliver a 
non-pulsating input current despite operating in continuous current mode between 
both inductors. The modified SEPIC converter is an AC-DC conversion technique 
that comprises a cascade of updated buck–boost converter and improved convert￾ers [16]. Figure 3.9 depicts the proposed system’s outline. 
The buck-boost converter employs continuous current while the boosted con￾verter works with intermittent current. Because this method provides a significant 
Figure 3.9 Block diagram of power factor correction by a SEPIC converter.  
 
An overview of power factor correction techniques 81 
power factor, the output voltage must be adjusted using a simple feedback control 
mechanism. This proposed method aims to accomplish reactive power compensa￾tion without brushed motor drives using SEPIC converter configurations. Cor￾rected power factor converters are essential for improving power quality (PQ). The 
voltage-source inverter (VSI) is predominantly employed for the conversion of a 
consistent DC voltage into an AC voltage characterized by adjustable magnitude 
and frequency. The diode bridge rectifier is removed to reduce conduction loss and 
component count. The approach of perturbation and observation can be used to 
obtain the highest power. The low pass filter can help to reduce ripples. A unique 
bidirectional bridgeless standalone SEPIC converter is employed to achieve a 
power factor close to unity. 
3.18 THE BOOST POWER FACTOR CORRECTION 
CONVERTER 
All connected equipment in an electricity distribution network frequently requires 
rectification. To eliminate ripples in the DC output, single-phase diode rectifiers 
with a high capacitor are employed, although this generates a nonlinear wave￾form of current. As a result, several power factor correction solutions are receiv￾ing a lot of attention. Among the different PFC topologies, boost topology is the 
most widely employed [17]. A boost converter could also help to both enhance 
the power factor and lower harmonic distortion. The rectifier circuit, depicted in 
Figure 3.10, receives the AC power supply and converts it to DC. The boost con￾verter has two modes of operation: one in which it performs the function and the 
other in which it does not [18]. 
1. When the switch S1 is open, the inductor (L) de-energizes and the energy is 
transmitted to the capacitor (C) and load (RL). 
2. In the reverse biased state, in which the inductor is powered by the AC sup￾ply via the rectifier, switch S2 is closed. 
Figure 3.10 Boost power factor correction converters.  
 
82 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Because the inductor current falls in state 1 and rises in state 2, the inductor cur￾rent falls in state 1 and rises in state 2. The duty cycle defines how often an induc￾tor current decreases in comparison to how often it increases. The average inductor 
current is modified by adjusting the duty cycle, which results in an increase in 
power factor as well as reduction in total harmonic distortion (THD). A closed 
loop control maintains the output voltage while keeping the current in phase with 
it. The switch is connected to the boost PFC block, which generates a pulse width 
modulated signal that modulates the voltage. 
3.19 PLC-BASED POWER FACTOR CORRECTION 
A programmable logic controller (PLC) is an established manufacturing proces￾sor that controls the state of output devices by continuously monitoring the status 
of inputs and making decisions based on a programming [19]. After reading the 
power factor with the measuring unit, compare the present readings of the power 
factor displayed by the measuring unit to the planned power factor. The desired 
power factor is high enough to suit the needs of the user. There are then two sce￾narios to consider. The current reading and the target power factor are both the 
same in the first case. There is no need to make any changes to the system’s current 
configuration. The two variables in the second scenario differ from one another. In 
this circumstance, power factor correction via system configuration modification 
is required. The next better pattern of inputs demands a change in setup, which 
adds more capacitance to the system circuit. If the next pattern meets the needed 
criteria, the circuit is configured using that pattern; otherwise, continue to the next 
better configuration pattern until the required criteria are met or the circuit has 
the maximum allowed capacitance. The status (ON or OFF) of the PLC’s inputs, 
as well as the logic of the programming downloaded into it, determine the output 
signals [20]. 
When the motor is powered by a single-phase 230 V 50 Hz power supply, the 
total current drawn by an induction motor (IM) from the power supply results 
from the combination of two main components: the magnetizing current and the 
torque-producing component, therefore a current transformer is placed across one 
phase. This circuit uses a 1A/1mA current transformer, with the output going to 
a bridge rectifier, which converts the AC power to DC. The comparator receives 
DC values. The value of current recorded by the current transformer is converted 
to DC value. One of these input pairs is provided with 24 V and is decreased to 
specific values. The other input is provided through the output of the bridge recti￾fier, that is, the current value determined by using the current transformer. When 
the two values are the same, the respective output is turned on. The PLC’s output 
is sent to relays, which then switch the capacitor bank on and off. The current 
transformer monitors the current of the load, and manual switching push buttons 
provide another input to the PLC. There are a total of eight inputs to the PLC, 
including four for manual operation and four for the CT. The output is then given  
 
An overview of power factor correction techniques 83 
to relays, which in turn switch the capacitors, according to the programming done 
in the PLC. The switched mode power supply (SMPS) is a device that supplies 
power to the PLC and relays. The PLC output is relay switching, which turns the 
condenser. If the power factor goes below a predetermined level, the motor will 
be turned off [21]. The AC supply is fed to the transformer, which is made up of 
three distinct rating transformers that act on the lagging power factor. Different 
rated transformers connected to the PLC’s input port vary the power factor [22]. 
The relay coil becomes energized when the lever S is turned on, and SMPS sends 
24 volts DC to the PLC. PLC also activates the capacitor bank, which provides 
leading current while compensating for reactive power. As a result, the power 
factor has improved. 
3.20 IMPROVE POWER FACTOR THROUGH AN 
ON-DEMAND TAP CHANGER 
Although vital for voltage regulation, the on-demand tap changer’s voltage con￾trol philosophy is only suited for unidirectional load flow power systems. The 
traditional operation of the on-demand tap changer will be greatly impacted 
when distributed generators begin absorbing/injecting reactive power, resulting 
in high voltage values that exceed allowable standards, regular voltage magnitude 
variations, and an overall increased reactive power source [23]. The on-load tap 
changer (OLTC) is the most frequent and successful device for voltage regula￾tion in power distribution networks. The OLTC’s efficiency lies in its capability 
to manage the voltage of multiple feeds by keeping the secondary voltage of the 
power transformer constant as the load changes. As a result, the OLTC adjusts the 
transformer winding ratio to maintain a consistent transformer secondary voltage/ 
bus-bar voltage as the network load changes. 
After analyzing the voltage magnitude, the OLTC will modify its tap position 
to ensure that the voltage is comparable to the defined and fixed voltage reference 
value. Evaluating the voltage at a remote site is dependent on demand current and 
power factor. Because the technique still relies on a set OLTC reference voltage, it 
is unable to adjust to voltage problems posed by distributed generators. 
3.21 POWER FACTOR IMPROVEMENT BY USING DYNAMIC 
VOLTAGE RESTORER (DVR) 
Quality assurance is a pressing problem in present-day energy systems, with 
implications for both customers and producers. As a result of the amalgamation 
of renewable energy sources, micro-grid systems, and widespread use of power 
electronic devices, the present electric power system has encountered several 
challenges. Current-voltage harmonics, voltage sag, and swell can all damage 
sensitive electronics. Input voltage fluctuations in these devices can be caused by  
84 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
interference from other parts of the system. As a result, power quality is crucial 
for the power system’s dependable and safe functioning in today’s environment, 
where sensitive and expensive electronic equipment is becoming increasingly 
widespread [24]. A dynamic voltage restorer, the power quality device that injects 
both voltage and power into the system, can ameliorate voltage disturbances. 
DVRs commonly incorporate energy storage elements such as capacitors or bat￾teries. When the DVR identifies a voltage sag, it taps into the stored energy within 
these components to rectify the situation. The DVR introduces supplementary 
voltage in series with the impaired load. It produces a compensatory voltage to 
counter the sag, guaranteeing that the load maintains the necessary voltage, even 
in the presence of a sag event. The precise quantity of voltage injection required 
for a DVR is contingent on various factors, encompassing the attributes of the 
voltage sag, the specifications of the load, and the governing algorithm of the 
DVR. The ability to correct the power factor at the source side’s point of com￾mon coupling (PCC) uses a dynamic voltage restorer (DVR). Using the phase 
angle control (PAC) approach, the DVR compensating voltage will be injected 
in series with the transmission line with a specific phase angle and magnitude, 
resulting in a power factor angle shift of the resultant load voltage. As a conse￾quence, the source voltage is always in phase with the source current under varied 
load situations, meaning that power factor correction is performed at the source 
side PCC. A laboratory prototype of the DVR is used to evaluate the suggested 
control algorithm. On the source side, a power factor of approximately unity may 
be maintained [25]. 
3.22 POWER FACTOR IMPROVEMENT BY LLC RESONANT 
CONVERTER 
An AC and DC power converter assembly consists of a power factor correction 
module and an LLC resonant DC-DC converter module. This converter employs 
just two switches, three fewer diodes, and one fewer switch than the popular 
LLC resonant converter. The rectifier of interest offers a greater energy effi￾ciency while being smaller than its traditional counterpart due to soft-switching 
in the LLC resonant converter. The single-stage double-switched (DS)-LLC rec￾tifier has a wide output range and may attain unity power factor, indicating its 
efficacy and utility [26]. The following are the advantages of this topology over 
the typical architecture, which includes a pre-stage boost topology and an LLC 
resonant converter: 
•	 A high-PF construction enables easier boost PFC. 
•	 Because the PFC circuit stage shares a pair of switches with the LLC reso￾nant converter stage, fewer power valves are required. 
•	 High energy efficiency is obtained by using soft-switching in the LLC reso￾nant stage.  
 
An overview of power factor correction techniques 85 
3.23 LATEST TECHNOLOGY IN POWER FACTOR 
CORRECTION TECHNIQUE IS STATIC 
VAR GENERATORS 
The sinexcel static VAR generator (SVG) is the most recent wall-mounted gen￾eration technology for power factor correction, and it offers more benefits than a 
capacitor bank solution. The SVG detects the load current, evaluates the reactance 
of the load, and injects the precise inverse reactive compensating current in real 
time. It can also maintain a power factor of 0.99 lagging or unity, and it can work at 
low voltages. The current transformer decreases the magnitude of current provided 
to the digital signal processing (DSP) and central processing unit (CPU), and the 
reactive power algorithm is used to distinguish between active and reactive power. 
It is delivered to the insulated-gate bipolar transistor (IGBT) control, which gener￾ates a 20 kHz frequency signal using pulse width modulation. Both an inductive 
(lagging) and capacitive (leading) load can be used with static VAR generators. 
SVG’s advantages are listed as follows. 
•	 Lowers a customer’s electricity bill. 
•	 Customers obtain a return on their investment (ROI). 
•	 The SVG minimizes line load by lowering the electrical system’s heat effect, 
resulting in longer life and lower maintenance costs. 
•	 SVG is a wall-mounting solution that frees up space on the floor. 
•	 The SVG minimizes maximum current by balancing the load across all 
three phases, lowering the maximum demand tariff (electricity costs) and 
the load on the circuit. 
•	 It reduces harmonic distortion. 
3.24 REAL-TIME ENHANCEMENT OF REACTIVE 
POWER FOR AN INTELLIGENT SYSTEM USING 
A GENETIC ALGORITHM 
This method of regulating the power factor in real time using multi-step capacitors 
is a novel process. Consequently, no optimization strategies were originally advo￾cated for controlling this problem. The genetic algorithm (GA) is a meta-heuristic 
optimization approach for solving real-time optimization issues like the PF cor￾rective problem. For real-time optimization of numerous power structure chal￾lenges, GA has shown promising outcomes. It’s also suitable for issues involving 
binary choice variables. The power factor optimal solution uses the genetic method 
[27]. Genetic algorithms are built on the principles of natural selection and natural 
genetics. The natural genetics principles of replication, crossovers, and mutations 
are all used in the genetic search approach. The GA creates a randomly generated 
population of chromosomals, the size of which can be specified, before starting the  
 
86 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
process. After evaluating the fitness function for all created solutions as well as the 
model’s constraints, the algorithm terminates and transmits the achieved solution to 
the controller by turning on/off the multi-step capacitors at appropriate stages. Oth￾erwise, the preceding generation’s parents are employed to generate a new popula￾tion. Reproduction characterizes the selection of some of the chromosomes with the 
best fitness values. The crossover technique is determined by the encoding method, 
which takes a subset of chromosomes that are combined to generate a new pair of 
chromosomes. To avoid slipping below the local optimum, mutation is conducted 
after reproduction and crossover. This genetic algorithm provides a complete itera￾tion in search of the optimum solution. The algorithm repeats these steps until it 
finds a solution that fulfills the stopping requirement. Ultimately, the controller 
turns on and off the capacitor bank and the detuned filter. The correction process is 
repeated after an interval to continuously evaluate and right the power factor [28]. 
3.25 POLYMER-BASED THERMOELECTRIC MATERIALS USED 
FOR IMPROVING POWER FACTOR 
Because of their potential, thermoelectric (TE) materials are gaining prominence 
due to their ability to convert heat to electricity immediately. In order to increase 
global energy efficiency, they are utilized to capture electrical energy from waste 
heat. Polymer-based TE materials are mainly suitable for wearable and moveable 
devices because of their low density, great flexibility, and lower toxicity [28]. 
3.26 POWER FACTOR CORRECTION’S BENEFITS 
Implementing power factor correction has a number of advantages. Among the 
benefits are lesser demand charges on the power system, which increase load￾carrying capacity in existing circuits and lower overall power system losses. The 
advantages of power factor modification are not just financial; they also have 
substantial environmental advantages, which are described as follows. 
1. Decreased consumption charges: Maximum electric utility suppliers 
charge for the highest metered demand dependent on the higher registered 
demand in kilowatts (KW meter) or a percentage of the higher registered 
demand in kilovolts (KVA) (KVA meter). The extent of the measured KVA 
will be significantly greater than the KW required if the power factor is 
inadequate. As a result, power factor correction reduces the demand charge, 
thereby lowering electricity costs. 
2. Existing circuits’ harnessing capabilities: Reactive current is required 
in case of loads that consume reactive power. When power factor correc￾tion capacitors are fixed near inductive loads at the end of existing circuits, 
current carried by each circuit is reduced. The upgraded power factor may An overview of power factor correction techniques 87 
permit the circuit to carry new loads, saving dollars in unneeded upgrade 
expenses. Additionally, the decreased current flow lowers the circuit’s resis￾tive losses. Furthermore, power factor correction capacitors reduce line cur￾rent while providing reactive current locally. When line current is lowered, 
transformers and feeder circuits utilize fewer kVA. Thermal overloads on 
transformers, transmission lines, generators, and cables are minimized as a 
result of the shunt capacitor correction. 
3. Improved voltage: At a given load, larger current flow is due to a lower 
power factor. The voltage decreases when the line current increases in the 
wire, resulting in low voltage display on the device. a higher power factor 
reduces the voltage drop in the conductor, which advances the voltage at 
the equipment. Shunt capacitors minimize inductive current in an electric 
circuit, resulting in a better voltage profile. As the line current is lowered, 
the IR and IX voltage drops decrease and increase the voltage level of the 
system from the capacitor site to the source. Voltage of 0.95–1.05 PU must 
be maintained in the distribution supply system and transmission systems. 
Induction motors will run at a greater voltage. If the system voltage is lower, 
the nominal current will be lower. The recovery voltage after fault clearing 
will be sluggish at the low voltages. As a result, maintaining safe voltage 
stages in the power supply is a significant objective. 
4. Reduced power system losses: The economic benefit of lower conduc￾tor losses is adequate to guarantee the fitting of capacitors in older plants 
or in field pumping processes. The conductor losses are directly related to 
induced current and are inversely proportional to the square of the power 
factor, as the current is reduced in proportion to the enhancement in power 
factor. When shunt capacitors are used for power factor correction, the line 
current is lowered. Both I2
R and I2
X losses are reduced as a consequence. 
Depending on the number of hours of full load operation, conductor size, 
feeder circuit length, and transformer impedance, I2
R losses in industrial 
power systems range from 3% to 8% of the nominal load current. The high￾est loads on current circuits vary with respect to time of the day. 
5.	 Lower carbon footprint: By lowering the demand charge on the power 
system by power factor correction, the utility reduces the pressure on the 
electrical grid, lowering its carbon footprint. Hundreds of tons of carbon 
emissions can be saved over time by lowering demand on the energy grid, 
thanks to improvements in power system electrical efficiency via power fac￾tor adjustment. 
6.	 Reactive power support: Due to a lack of reactive power in distribution 
systems, the voltage at the load end tends to drop. In such instances, shunt 
capacitors are used to provide local VAR support. During peak load condi￾tions, long transmission lines have limited available reactive power at the 
end of the line, necessitating the use of shunt capacitors. The reactive power 
consumed from the supply is significantly reduced, as are the kVA and cur￾rent flows. At the load, the power factor has improved.  
88 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
7. Generator capacity release: The capacity of a synchronous generator is 
limited in both kW and kVA. The kVA limit of the generator may refer to 
operating with a unity power factor. The generator must produce a kW with 
a lower power factor when the load is a low power factor device. The output 
of the generator cannot cross the rated kVA. Adjusting the power factor at 
the utility side might unleash kVA capabilities [29]. 
3.27 SOME ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES 
Thermostatically regulated home appliances may be leveraged to power system 
operators and consumers. Reiman et al. [30] used residential AC and electric heat￾ers to increase the power factor in a distribution system, where solar installations 
due to the feeder power factor drop daily, resulting in higher losses. Transmission 
and bulk generating systems become more efficient as the distributed feeder power 
factor enhances. The daily minimum feeder power factor is maximized with a 
daily optimum dispatch plan. Electric heaters cool down at this period to prepare 
for a low feeder power factor incident, then restart and rectify the situation. A vir￾tual batteries (VB) model utilizes the thermodynamic energy storage of thermo￾static regulated equipment for varying power system demand. A VB charges by 
switching equipment on and off. The power and energy restrictions, as well as the 
self-discharging rate, are measured by the properties of the appliances. The energy 
restrictions are symmetrical about zero and directly relate to the number and volt￾age of units in use at any specified time. The range of the power constraints is 
measured by the quantity and heating capacity of the appliances at a moment, 
and the amount of power necessary to keep the VB energy at its neutral position 
defines the location of that span relative to zero. The capacity of a specific appli￾ance to participate at a given moment is determined by the thermostat set point in 
comparison to the ambient or outside temperature. When it is chilly outdoors, for 
example, an air conditioner is not on or available to switch on. A heater is a device 
that warms and stores water for immediate consumption and is regulated by a ther￾mostat. To heat water, a resistive element is usually utilized. The temperature set 
points and dead band of electric heaters are utilized to establish VB characteristics. 
The environmental temperature should never be higher than the device’s thermo￾stat set point. The water heater may not be able to participate in the VB if the water 
draw is too high. Electric heaters generally employ resistive heating elements with 
a power factor of one. Another energy-saving strategy is explained later. 
To optimize voltage and energy savings in an alternating current induction 
motor operating under fixed torque and variable load conditions, T and L circuits 
were selected. The stator losses, which included copper and iron losses, were con￾stant losses associated only with the stator voltage. Meanwhile, the rotor’s copper 
losses were considered variable losses that varied with the load torque. The total 
electrical-loss formula and the optimum voltage regulation formula were evalu￾ated for the motor. The calculations showed that the stator voltage and rotor load  
An overview of power factor correction techniques 89 
torque had an effect on the motor’s overall electrical loss, and that the optimal volt￾age control changed with the load torque [31]. The overall electrical loss revealed 
almost no calculation error when the motor’s operational voltage was more than 
230 V. As the motor load torque increased, the ideal voltage regulation and its error 
climbed, but the optimum voltage regulation error did not exceed 6 V within the 
motor’s operating voltage range. The overall electrical loss was lower with the 
optimum voltage regulation mode and a variable load torque compared with a 380 
or 220 V constant drive mode. As the load rate increased, the overall electrical loss 
increased. When the motor’s load did not exceed the medium load and the voltage 
control was excellent, the energy savings were considerable. While the motor was 
operating without any load, the overall electrical loss was negligible. In order to 
take advantage of solar energy’s low cost, a number of process difficulties must 
be addressed. Triple intercell bar technology and current-source topology are two 
further options. To combat damaged or open contacts, the bar employs sidebars, 
as well as metallurgical short circuits to create short circuit resistance. Further￾more, because of the decreased dispersion of current densities in the technology, 
a 10% increase in sunlight energy is possible. The factory’s energy usage, which 
produces 300,000 tons of copper cathodes per year, might be regulated as a result 
of the enhanced dispersion [32]. A targeted parameter model based on industry 
data is utilized to project the findings. Thanks to this technique, all broken con￾nections are bypassed, and short circuits are avoided or eliminated. The lifetime of 
the electrodes is also increased, and energy efficiency is improved. A conservative 
estimate is of US $2.4 million in power savings and US $0.8 million in electrode 
costs each year. An additional $12.9 million is saved by installing photovoltaic 
modulated electricity. 
3.28 WORKS IN CONNECTION 
Though power factor correction is an old technique, several of the following 
authors have recommended and prescribed a variety of approaches. An adaptive 
compensation strategy is another way to control switching devices under fluctuat￾ing power requirements and uncertain power production, even while dealing with 
practical voltage settings. To illustrate such a technique, a major power aspect 
concept is first proposed and established under power transfer conditions, as well 
as imbalanced and damaged polarities. Second, a common method for generating 
amplification coefficients for compensation purposes is created, enabling standard 
commands to be immediately weighed in order to follow a desired grid electricity 
coefficient value. As a consequence, the technology can be simply implemented 
to energy converter regulators that will minimize distribution losses and enhance 
power quality [33]. 
Iturriaga et al. suggested a model for and control of a power factor corrected dual 
charge controller. This technique is connected to an electrical network through a 
conversion stage generated by a comprehensive rectifier, and the constant current 90 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
demand is provided with a constant operating voltage via a higher efficiency. The 
key advantage of this design is that it provides good conversion ratios for the 
voltage level. The control scheme is defined as the average system model and pri￾marily comprises two control loops: current monitoring and voltage profile [34]. 
Sayed and Massoud provide a review of recent articles on how PFC converters 
are proposed in electrical vehicles for extended distances. Electric vehicle (EV) 
charging points are categorized into three parts: main recharging terminals, such 
as Level 1 (gradual charger), Level 2 (quick charger), and Level 3 (super duper 
charger), fully electric system, and supplemental charging points. It highlights the 
latest development in on-power quality adjustment (PFC) converters. The global 
demand for upgrading green-based refueling infrastructure has sprung from the 
electrification of the transportation sector. Narrow EVs and long-distance EVs 
and attempts to promote optimal board charging systems have been the subject 
of worldwide study. Depending on the EV, the battery voltage ranges from 36 to 
900 volts [35]. The battery charger is made of a single conversion or a two-level 
converter. This study is about only one unidirectional non-isolated converter for 
the on-power packs. The core PFC topologies and modified PFC topologies are 
divided into two categories. 
Minh and Minh provided an experimental method that reveals that when PFC 
assistance is used, the output voltage response is more stable than when the simple 
MPPT algorithm is used. Due to the instability of solar energy (PV), the large pen￾etration of PV in the power grid now poses numerous issues. To address this issue, 
this research examines the PFC management technique for supporting converters 
that are integrated with the MPPT algorithm using the existing power grid. After 
that, an experimental circuit model incorporating two control approaches will be 
built and tested under real-world settings [36]. 
Ali et al. presented a solution three-phase boosted compensator (PFC) rectifica￾tion device that was modeled and controlled, as well as a down-for-maintenance 
parameterization approach for successfully improving the control performance. 
While analyzing the shortcomings of the traditional control scheme with compli￾cated control nonlinear systems from smaller scales and conducting an investiga￾tion of the constraints of control scheme on harmonic elimination from the model 
predictive concept, a simplification type of control-governing equations based on 
a small prototype has been suggested with a fragmented control method. As an 
outcome, the methodology takes advantage of both simpler control methods and 
fragmented calculator control to achieve a high power factor and decrease overall 
harmonic distortion in a variety of categories [37]. 
Ricardo et al. developed a unique and efficient method of action that allows 
the utility to modify the system load factor in live time and with preventing finan￾cial damage. Decentralized energy PV networks (DGCPSs) have proven to be 
an effective replacement for traditional energy production by minimizing leak￾age currents, simplifying transmission networks, and offering extra services to 
energy systems [38]. Considering these positives, there has been a different sort 
of DGCPS challenge documented in the literature. From the utility’s standpoint,  
An overview of power factor correction techniques 91 
the implementation of a DGCPS may appear to exacerbate the system load fac￾tor. This impact is not caused by physical factors such as equipment failure or 
the load’s excessive usage of reactive power, yet it may result in reactive power 
overcharging (RPEC). Because these fees may increase the time it takes for PV 
installations to pay for themselves, this study examines three options for dealing 
with the problem. A revised regulatory structure for power system regulation in 
DGCPS consumption devices is the first methodology, which has shown to be the 
most beneficial to users. Traditional solutions that use photovoltaic converters or 
capacitors to mitigate for reactive power are the other two alternatives. 
Ali and Khan, using a unit pattern methodology or a proportional–integral con￾trolled system approach, proposed power factor expansion, zero voltage regulation, 
and overall transmission loss reduction in power transmission network for load 
variations. Regulation and compensation are becoming increasingly significant 
components in maintaining power quality. It is preferable to suggest a compensa￾tor to link with power control center (PCC) by employing a shunt compensation 
through an interface. A DC bus capacitor based on IGBT is used in the suggested 
compensator with voltage source converters (VSC). In terms of DSTATCOM’s 
performance, it is recommended for load variation with a voltage supply at the 
point of common coupling and an identity DC connector [39]. 
Ananda provided a method for increasing the power factor in electrical substa￾tions. The substantial inductive load leads to a power factor below 1, causing a 
significant increase in electrical current. Consequently, the installed power cannot 
be utilized to its full potential efficiency. The interface is designed to use human 
machine interface display and a cloud services logger to screen the power factor 
value in real time [40]. 
3.29 CONCLUSION 
When all components of the power aspects are considered, it is observed that the 
most essential component for both the energy supplier and the user is the power 
factor. The utility company is no longer liable for power losses, and the consumer 
is no longer liable for reduced power factor penalty payments. Inserting correctly 
sized power capacitors into a plant’s circuit can enhance its output power. Because 
most electrical demands are inductive and require trailing currents, the power fac￾tor is weak. Connecting certain devices that consume significant power in paral￾lel to the load enhances power quality. The capacitor is an example of such a 
device. The capacitor pulls a higher current that partially or totally neutralizes the 
load current’s subsequent reactive part. As a consequence, the load’s power factor 
changes and the power factor of the load improves. Finally, the following things 
will be discussed. 
•	 To overcome today’s low power factor, a less expensive and more efficient 
method or technology is necessary.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
•	 By connecting capacitors in parallel, some of the solutions in this study 
affect the power factor. However, SVG is the current generation of power 
factor correction technology, and it provides a number of advantages over 
the classic switched capacitor bank style system. 
•	 A microcontroller and a programmable logic controller (PLC) are also 
devices that are used to control the power factor automatically. 
•	 Power factor adjustment procedures can presumably be used in the power 
system, yielding stability and reliability of the system. 
•	 Using a microcontroller cuts costs and eliminates the need for additional 
hardware. As the usage of power electronics grows in popularity; the prob￾lem of harmonics arises. Harmonic distortion lowers both power quality and 
power factor, necessitating the use of power factor methods. As a result, the 
ideal solution for power factor correction is automatic power factor. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Bayindir, S. Sagiroglu, and I. Colak, “An Intelligent Power Factor Corrector for 
Power System Using Artificial Neural Networks,” vol. 79, pp. 152–160, 2009, doi: 
10.1016/j.epsr.2008.05.009. 
[2] H. K. Channi, “Overview of Power Factor Improvement Techniques,” Int. J. Res. Eng. 
Appl. Sci., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 27–36, 2017, [Online]. Available: http://euroasiapub.org/. 
[3] S. Kuchibhatla, V. V. Mani, S. Likhitha, S. Vinay, and A. Narendar, “Compensation of 
Reactive Power and Energy Saving Using Capacitor Banks,” Int. Res. J. Eng. Tech￾nol., vol. 09, no. 01, pp. 630–633, 2022. 
[4] H. Shah, N. Trivedi, and M. Rahish, “Design and Control of Reduction of Harmon￾ics in Power Factor Correction (PFC) Technique,” GIT‑J. Eng. Technol., vol. 13, 
pp. 38–44, 2021. 
[5] R. Chavhan and D. Champa, “Power Factor Correction (PFC) Preregulator Using 
Boost Converter for 2 kVA Power Supply,” Int. J. Eng. Appl. Sci. Technol., vol. 5, no. 
3, pp. 439–445, 2020, doi: 10.33564/ijeast.2020.v05i03.070. 
[6] M. Haroon Nadeem, Sohaib Tahir, Mazhar H. Baloch, Ghulam S. Kaloi, Waqas A. 
Wattoo , M. Yousif and Mehr Gul, “Power Factor Improvements and its Effective 
Strategy to Optimize the kWh,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Secur., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 
188–192, 2017. 
[7] M. V. Aware, A. G. Kothari, and S. S. Bhat, “Power Factor Improvement Using Active 
Filter for Unbalanced Three-Phase Non-Linear Loads,” Int. J. Energ. Technol. Policy, 
vol. 4, no. 1–2, pp. 103–117, 2006, doi: 10.1504/ijetp.2006.008551. 
[8] R. da Silva Benedito, R. Zilles, and J. T. Pinho, “Overcoming the Power Factor 
Apparent Degradation of Loads Fed by Photovoltaic Distributed Generators,” Renew. 
Energ., vol. 164, pp. 1364–1375, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2020.10.146. 
[9] S. Kim, G. Yoo, and J. Song, “A bifunctional utility connected photovoltaic system 
with power factor correction and UPS facility.” Conference Record of the Twenty 
Fifth IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference‑1996. IEEE, 1996. doi: 10.1109/ 
PVSC.1996.564386. An overview of power factor correction techniques 93 
[10] Amit G. Shende, S. W. Khubalkar, and P. Vaidya, “Hardware Implementation of 
Automatic Power Factor Correction Unit for Industry,” J. Phys. Conf. Ser., vol, 2089, 
no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2021. 
[11] E. Engineering, and A. Pradesh, “A Review on Improvement of Energy Efficiency in 
Residential Buildings,” Int. J. Rec. Dev. Sci. Technol., vol. 6, no. 1, pp.127–139, 2022. 
[12] K. Yasin, Y. Mohammad Mohsin, and M. Monirujjaman Khan, “Automated power 
factor correction and energy monitoring system.” Second International Conference 
on Electrical, Computer and Communication Technologies (ICECCT). IEEE, 2017, 
doi: 10.1109/ICECCT.2017.8117969. 
[13] M. Raju Ahmed, M. Humayan Kabir Khan, and A. Kumar Karmaker, “Microcon￾troller Based Power Factor Improvement by Using Switched Single Capacitor Micro￾controller-Based Power Factor Improvement Using Switched Single Capacitor,” 
DUET J., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 2018. 
[14] T. W. Ngwe, S. Winn, and S. M. Myint, “Design and Control of Automatic Power Factor 
Correction APFC for Power Factor Improvement in Oakshippin Primary Substation,” 
Int. J. Trend Sci. Res. Dev., vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 2368–2372, 2018, doi: 10.31142/ijtsrd18320. 
[15] S. Durgadevi and M. G. Umamaheswari, “Analysis and Design of Single Phase 
Power Factor Correction using DC-DC SEPIC Converter with Bang-Bang and PSO 
Based Fixed PWM Techniques,” Energy Procedia, vol. 117, pp. 79–86, 2017, doi: 
10.1016/j.egypro.2017.05.109. 
[16] K. Balamurugan, M. Gowsika, T. Monika, and N. Naveen, “Power Factor Correction 
Using Sepic Dc-Dc Converter in Industrial Motor Drives,” Int. J. Res. Eng. Sci., vol. 
9, no. 5, pp. 21–28, 2021. 
[17] P. Kulshreshtha, S. Gairola, and A. Verma, “Power Factor Correction by Interleaved 
Boost Converter Using PI Controller,” Int. J. Innov. Res. Creat. Techn., vol. 1, no. 5, 
pp. 481–485, 2016. 
[18] S. Busquets-Monge et al., “Design Optimization of a Boost Power Factor Correc￾tion Converter Using Genetic Algorithms,” Conf. Proc.—IEEE Appl. Power Electron. 
Conf. Expo.—APEC, vol. 2, pp. 1177–1182, 2002, doi: 10.1109/apec.2002.989393. 
[19] Rishabh Jain, Shashank Sharma, Mini Sreejeth, Madhusudan Singh, “PLC based 
power factor correction of 3-phase Induction Motor.” IEEE 1st International Con￾ference on Power Electronics, Intelligent Control and Energy Systems (ICPEICES). 
IEEE, 2016, doi: 10.1109/ICPEICES.2016.7853637. 
[20] C. Gaurav, P. R. Patil, and A. R. Singh, “Power Factor Correction of Three Phase 
Induction Motor Using Switched Capacitor Banks with PLC,” Int. J. Res. Electri. 
Electron. Eng., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 45–58, 2014. 
[21] A. Usama, D. Maksimović, and K. K. Afridi, “A simple control architecture for four￾switch buck-boost converter based power factor correction rectifier.” IEEE 18th 
Workshop on Control and Modeling for Power Electronics (COMPEL). IEEE, 2017, 
doi: 10.1109/COMPEL.2017.8013343. 
[22] “PLC Based Power Factor Correction and,” pp. 3714–3721, 2016, doi: 10.15680/ 
IJIRSET.2016.0503077. 
[23] N. Tshivhase, A. N. Hasan, and T. Shongwe, “A Fault Level-Based System to Con￾trol Voltage and Enhance Power Factor through an On-Load Tap Changer and Dis￾tributed Generators,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 34023–34039, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ 
ACCESS.2021.3061622.  
 
94 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[24] N. Abas, S. Dilshad, A. Khalid, M. S. Saleem, and N. Khan, “Power Quality Improve￾ment Using Dynamic Voltage Restorer,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 164325–164339, 
2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3022477. 
[25] J. Ye and H. B. Gooi, “Phase Angle Control Based Three-phase DVR with Power 
Factor Correction at Point of Common Coupling,” J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy, 
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 179–186, 2020, doi: 10.35833/MPCE.2018.000428. 
[26] G. Zhang et al., “Control Design and Performance Analysis of a Double-Switched 
LLC Resonant Rectifier for Unity Power Factor and Soft-Switching,” IEEE Access, 
vol. 8, pp. 44511–44521, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2978030. 
[27] S. Abdelhady, A. Osama, A. Shaban, and M. Elbayoumi, “A Real-Time Optimiza￾tion of Reactive Power for An Intelligent System Using Genetic Algorithm,” IEEE 
Access, vol. 8, pp. 11991–12000, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2965321. 
[28] W. Khamsen, A. Aurasopon, and W. Sa-Ngiamvibool, “Power Factor Improvement 
and Voltage Harmonics Reduction in Pulse Width Modulation AC Chopper Using 
Bee Colony Optimization,” IETE Tech. Rev. (Institution Electron. Telecommun. Eng. 
India), vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 173–182, 2013, doi: 10.4103/0256-4602.113478. 
[29] A. A. Mon and S. W. Naing, “Power Factor Improvement for Industrial Load by 
Using Shunt Capacitor Bank,” Int. J. Sci. Eng. Technol. Res., vol. 3, no. 15, pp. 3191– 
3195, 2014. 
[30] A. P. Reiman, A. Somani, M. J. E. Alam, P. Wang, D. Wu, and K. Kalsi, “Power Factor 
Correction in Feeders With Distributed Photovoltaics Using Residential Appliances 
as Virtual Batteries,” IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 99115–99122, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ 
ACCESS.2019.2928568. 
[31] Z. Bin, M. Lili, and D. Hao, “Principle of Optimal Voltage Regulation and Energy-Sav￾ing for Induction Motor With Unknown Constant-Torque Working Condition,” IEEE 
Access, vol. 8, pp. 187307–187316, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3030936. 
[32] E. P. 	Wiechmann, J. E. Díaz, A. S. Morales, and P. E. Aqueveque, “Advanced 
Technology to Increase the Use of Photovoltaic Energy in Copper Electrowin￾ning,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., vol. 56, no. 2, pp. 2117–2121, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ 
TIA.2020.2966984. 
[33] J. P. Bonaldo, V. A. De Souza, A. M. D. S. Alonso, L. D. O. Arenas, F. P. Marafao, 
and H. K. M. Paredes, “Adaptive Power Factor Regulation Under Asymmetrical and 
Non-Sinusoidal Grid Condition With Distributed Energy Resource,” IEEE Access, 
vol. 9, pp. 140487–140503, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3119335. 
[34] S. Iturriaga, et al. “A Control Strategy for a Power Factor Compensator Based on 
Double-Inductor Boost Converter,” IEEE Int. Autumn Meet Power. Electron. Com‑
put., vol. 5, 2021. 
[35] S. Sawsan, and A. M. Massoud, “Review on State-Of-The-Art Unidirectional Non￾Isolated Power Factor Correction Converters for Short-/Long-Distance Electric Vehi￾cles,” IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 11308–11340, 2022. 
[36] Q. D. Minh. “Enhancing Voltage Stability of Photovoltaic Energy Converter Using 
Power Factor Correction Technique,” J. Mil. Sci. Technol., vol. 74, pp. 3–9, 2021. 
[37] M. S. Ali, L. Wang, and G. Chen. “Design and Control Aspect of Segmented Pro￾portional Integral-Repetitive Controller Parameter Optimization of the Three-Phase 
Boost Power Factor Correction Rectifier,” Int. J. Circuit Theory Appl., vol. 49, no. 3, 
pp. 554–575, 2021. An overview of power factor correction techniques 95 
[38] R. da Silva Benedito, R. Zilles, and J. T. Pinho. “Overcoming the Power Factor 
Apparent Degradation of Loads Fed by Photovoltaic Distributed Generators,” Renew 
Energ., vol. 164, pp. 1364–1375, 2021. 
[39] S. Ali, M. Jamil, and M. A. Khan. “Power Quality Analysis and Enhancement Using 
DSTATCOM for Three-Phase Variable Load.” Advances in Energy Technology. 
Springer, Singapore, 2022, 583–596. 
[40] G. F. Ananda. “Automatic Capacitor Switching Method for Power Factor Improve￾ment With HMI Interface and Cloud Data Logger.” Proceedings of the International 
e‑Conference on Intelligent Systems and Signal Processing. Springer, Singapore, 
2022. 4
 
 
Chapter 4
 
Parametric approach of 
magnetorheological external 
finishing tool for its better 
functionality 
Ajay Singh Rana , Talwinder Singh Bedi and Hema Gurung 
4.1 INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND 
The ability to alter properties in an organized way of magnetization, current, force 
and deformation has developed such smart materials as magnetorheological (MR) 
fluids (Rana et al., 2023). It was initially discovered by Rabinow (Rabinow, 1948). 
MR materials can be classified in three categories, namely fluids, foams and elas￾tomers ( Carlson and Jolly, 2000 ). Magnetorheological fluids are mostly used in 
various types of industries, such as automotive, aerospace and machine tooling 
( Jolly et al., 1998 ). Their advantages include noiseless operation and ease of con￾trol. In present-day manufacturing, magnetorheological fluid is helpful for obtain￾ing better surface finishing on various engineering components, which improves 
their operative functionality ( Bedi and Singh, 2016 ; Bedi and Rana, 2021). During 
magnetorheological finishing (MRF), magnetic field–dependent properties such 
as viscosity, shear rate and yield stress of MR fluid can be controlled by chang￾ing the magnetizing current in the electromagnet coils ( Jha and Jain, 2004 ). The 
MR polishing fluid consists of carbonyl iron particles (CIPs), abrasive particles 
dispersed in the visco-elastic base medium (mixer of mineral oil and grease), 
which shows alteration in its rheological properties ( Khurana et al., 2017 ). The 
behaviour of MR polishing fluid without/with the help of magnetic gradient is 
shown in Figure 4.1 . When no magnetic gradient is applied to the MR polishing 
fluid, the particles within the fluid are randomly distributed, as shown in Fig￾ure 4.1a. Under the magnetic gradient, the CIPs attain a magnetic-dipole moment 
relative to magnetic field strength and form a chain-like structure in accordance 
with the magnetic lines of fluxes (Paswan et al., 2017). These chain-like structures 
of CIPs embed the non-magnetic abrasive particles within or between the fluid’s 
structure, as shown in Figure 4.1 b. 
Hence, these embedded abrasive particles become active in nature, further roll￾ing over the surface to be finished. Also, this activity helps to control sedimenta￾tion of particles with the influence of magnetic field ( Bica, 2002 ). Under the effect 
of shearing, the indentation force induced by the abrasive particles is very low 
during magnetorheological finishing ( Kordonski and Jacobs, 1996 ; Shorey et al., 
2001 ). With the change in magnetizing current, the viscosity of this smart fluid 
96 DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-4  
Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 97 
Figure 4.1	 Behaviour of MR polishing fluid (a) under no magnetic gradient and (b) with 
magnetic gradient. 
also changes (Sidpara and Jain, 2013). Rana et al. (2020) worked on the magneto￾rheological finishing process using a three set of permanent magnets. The results 
concluded that the maximum decrease in Ra value was 62 nm within 40 minutes 
during finishing of the aluminium workpiece. Bedi and Kant (2021) developed 
a magnetorheological finishing setup with different magnetic structures. The 
authors concluded that 62.74% roughness change was found with curved magnets, 
whereas 53.81% roughness change was observed with flat magnets during the fin￾ishing of a stainless steel workpiece. Rana et al. (2021) performed a fine finishing 
on a copper cylindrical workpiece using a permanent magnet-based magnetorheo￾logical finishing. The results revealed that the final Ra value was achieved as 67 
nm from 224 nm after 45 minutes of finishing. 
In this chapter, a parametric study with a statistical design of experimentation was 
conducted for the nanofinishing of the external cylindrical surface of a brass work￾piece. With the help of Design Expert 11 Software, response surface methodology 
was performed to evaluate the effect of different process variables, i.e. workpiece 
rotational speed, tool linear speed, mesh sizes of SiC and mesh sizes of electrolytic 
iron particles (EIPs) against the percent change in surface roughness (Ra) value. 
4.2 MAGNETOSTATIC SIMULATION 
To determine the magnetic flux distribution within the finishing operation, it was 
important to simulate its results before the experimentation (using Ansoft V13 
software). Figure 4.2a represents the simulation results for the brass workpiece 
when it was in contact with the magnetized magnetorheological polishing fluid. 
The gap between magnet and workpiece surface was taken as 1 mm. From the  
98 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 4.2	 (a) Magnetostatic simulation and (b) 2D field report for analysing the allocation 
of magnetic flux. 
simulation results, it was revealed that the higher magnetic flux was found on the 
magnet surface and decreased to the workpiece surface as shown in Figure 4.2b. 
This concluded that magnetorheological polishing would remain attached to the 
magnet surface instead of the workpiece surface, which is beneficial for obtaining 
better finishing results. 
4.3 EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND PROCESS VARIABLES 
The magnetorheological finishing process, as depicted in Figure 4.3a (Rana et al., 
2020), has already demonstrated its ability to finish non-ferromagnetic work￾pieces, contributing to their improved durability. This setup was installed on the Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 99 
horizontal slides of the lathe machine where the tool post was mounted. The tool 
post assembly of the lathe machine was replaced by the magnetorheological fin￾ishing tool assembly. The three-dimensional (3D) view of a setup along with brass 
cylindrical workpiece is shown in Figure 4.3b. 
During finishing, the magnetorheological polishing is magnetized within the 
working gap, which further encounters the workpiece surface during the finishing 
process. For the present experimentations, the different process variables used in 
this study are workpiece rotational speed (A), tool linear speed (B), mesh size of 
silicon carbide particles (C) and mesh size of electrolyte iron powders (D). The 
symbolic representation of A, B, C and D was given to each variable for easy iden￾tification. The aforementioned variables were independent controlled variables, 
whereas the ambient temperature was taken as a dependent controlled variable in 
Figure 4.3 (a) Actual photograph of tool and (b) 3D drawing of tool along with brass cylin￾drical workpiece.  
 
 
 
 
 
100 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
the present research. The following are brief descriptions of each of the process 
variables used in the research. 
4.3.1 Workpiece rotational speed (A) 
Workpiece rotational speed plays a vital role in the magnetorheological finishing 
process for achieving a fine surface finishing. When the magnetorheological pol￾ishing is magnetized and sticks to the tool surface, then due to the workpiece rota￾tion, the polishing fluid moves as per the rotation of the workpiece. This causes a 
material removal from the workpiece surface in the form of tiny chips or micro￾chips. At present, the different workpiece rotations, i.e. 400 rpm, 600 rpm and 800 
rpm, were used for the experimentation as per the preliminary results. 
4.3.2 Tool linear speed (B) 
Tool linear speed represents the horizontal movement of the tool with respect to the 
workpiece surface. The shearing of roughness peaks was only possible when the work￾piece rotates and reciprocates. The reciprocation movement of the tool was also known 
as tool linear motion. This movement was given with the help of the x-axis slide of a 
lathe machine. At present, the different tool linear speeds, i.e. 10 cm/min, 30 cm/min 
and 50 cm/min, were used for the experimentation as per the preliminary results. 
4.3.3 Mesh sizes of SiC (C) 
Abrasive particles used in the present research were silicon carbide of different 
mesh sizes, i.e. 600, 800 and 1000. The coarser mesh size was 600 whereas finer 
mesh size was 1000 and are easily available. Scanning electron microscopy images 
of different mesh sizes of SiC are shown in Figure 4.4a. A coarse range of mesh 
size (i.e. 600) was suitable for cutting the higher roughness peaks, whereas a finer 
range of mesh size (i.e. 1000) was suitable for eliminating the waviness roughness 
peaks. Depending upon the height of roughness peaks on the workpiece surfaces, 
the abrasive particles perform their function of achieving a smooth surface quality. 
4.3.4 Mesh sizes of electrolyte iron powders (D) 
In this research, different mesh sizes of electrolyte iron powder, i.e. 200, 300 and 
400, were utilizedfor experimentation. The scanning electron microscopy images 
of different mesh sizes of electrolyte iron powders are shown in Figure 4.4b. When 
the magnetorheological polishing fluid is magnetized, the iron particles form a 
rigid structure by holding the abrasive particles on its outer circumference. If there 
are no iron particles within the MR polishing fluid, then abrasive particles will 
be randomly circulated inside the base fluid, and no finishing will be performed. 
The indentation capacity of abrasive particles onto the workpiece surface wholly 
depends upon the rigid structure of iron particles.  
Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 101 
Figure 4.4	 Scanning electron microscopy images of different mesh sizes of (a) SiC and (b) 
EIPs at 500X. 
4.4 DESIGN OF EXPERIMENTS 
An optimum variable plays an important task in increasing the operative func￾tionality of machined components, which can only be possible by performing a 
number of experiments according to their sequence. In this chapter, the effect of 
different process variables such as workpiece rotational speed (A), tool linear speed 
(B), mesh size of silicon carbide particles (C) and mesh size of EIPs (D) with respect 
to change in surface roughness Ra value for brass cylindrical workpiece were anal￾ysed. The workpiece used in this research found its wide applications in the utensil 
making and ornament making industries. The nanofinishing of such products was 
required for their better appearance and performance. The initial surface roughness 
Ra value of a brass workpiece was found to be between 325 nm and 390 nm, which 
was measured with Surftest SJ-210 (Mitutoyo) with 0.25 mm as the cut-off length. 
The difference in Ra value was because of initial grinding of the cylindrical brass 
workpiece by a surface grinder. In order to counteract the huge difference in Ra 
value, the percentage change in Ra value was taken as per Equation 4.1. 
% change in Ra value = (Ra ­ Ra ) / Ra	 (4.1) 1 2 1 
Where: 
Ra1 was the initial Ra value of the cylindrical workpiece 
Ra2 was the initial Ra value of the final finished cylindrical workpiece  
102 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
With the help of Design Expert 11 Software, the response surface methodol￾ogy (RSM) technique was used, which represents the addition of statistical and 
numerical data values. This further helps to analyse the engineering models. For 
creating a model, four variables along with three levels of six axial and central 
runs were employed for the experimentation. The central composite design in this 
model was used, and further analysis of variance (ANOVA) with F-test was done 
to evaluate the regression solution. From this solution, the regression equation 
was evaluated, which helps to correlate the relation between controlled variables 
and final surface roughness values. The actual process variables along with their 
respective levels are depicted in Table 4.1. 
For experimentation, the magnetorheological polishing fluid was prepared with 
the following volumes: 
23% of SiC abrasive particles, 17% of carbonyl iron particles and 60% of base 
fluid, out of which 80% paraffin oil + 20% grease by weight were taken. Other 
variables such as the working gap were taken as 1 mm, whereas total time for 
finishing each workpiece was 40 min. Before starting the experimentation, the 
different sets of experimentation were performed as per given in Table 4.2, which 
further represents its standard as well as run order. 
4.4.1 Regression analysis 
Each set of experimentation was conducted, and its corresponding output was 
calculated in terms of percentage change in Ra value as per Equation 4.1. The 
response summary for each set of experimentation is shown in Table 4.3. 
The consecutive sum of squares was analysed to evaluate the higher polynomial 
order, shown in Table 4.4. 
In this model, the extra values were regarded as significant and the model was 
considered to be aliased. The consecutive sum of squares determined the increase 
in complications contributing to the entire model. With this quadratic model, the 
analysis of variance was evaluated where the value of α was taken as 0.05 for the 
shown hypothesis. In this p-value, less than or equal to 0.05 is taken as a signifi￾cant value, whereas if the value is higher than 0.05 it can be eliminated. The full￾length ANOVA analysis for the given set of experimentation is shown in Table 4.5. 
Table 4.1 Different process variables along with their coded levels 
Coded levels 
Process variables Units -1 0 1 
Workpiece rotational speeds (A) rpm 400 600 800 
Tool linear speeds (B) cm/min 10 30 50 
SiC abrasives (C) mesh size 600 800 1000 
EIPs (D) mesh size 200 300 400 5
10
15
20
25
30
Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 103 
Table 4.2 Different sets of experimentation 
Std Run A:Workpiece B:Tool linear C:SiC D:EIPs 
rotational speed speed (mesh size) (mesh size) 
(rpm) (cm/min) 
20 1 600 50 800 300 
25 2 600 30 800 300 
1 3 400 10 600 200 
28 4 600 30 800 300 
5 400 10 1000 200 
7 6 400 50 1000 200 
8 7 800 50 1000 200 
9 8 400 10 600 400 
4 9 800 50 600 200 
19 600 10 800 300 
18 11 800 30 800 300 
21 12 600 30 600 300 
16 13 800 50 1000 400 
24 14 600 30 800 400 
15 400 50 1000 400 
23 16 600 30 800 200 
11 17 400 50 600 400 
13 18 400 10 1000 400 
2 19 800 10 600 200 
30 600 30 800 300 
10 21 800 10 600 400 
26 22 600 30 800 300 
12 23 800 50 600 400 
27 24 600 30 800 300 
17 400 30 800 300 
3 26 400 50 600 200 
6 27 800 10 1000 200 
22 28 600 30 1000 300 
29 29 600 30 800 300 
14 800 10 1000 400 
The F-value was calculated as 28.04, which clearly showed that the model was 
significant in nature, i.e. p-value is far less than α value. From Table 4.5, terms 
such as A, B, C, D, BC, BD, A2
, B2
, C2
 and D2
 were considered significant because 
their p-values were less than 0.05 (α value). Terms such as AB, AC, AD and CD 
were considered non-significant because their p-values were greater than 0.05 
(α value). In case of lack of fit, the F-value was found to be 4.23, which clearly 104 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 4.3 Response summary 
Std Run A:Workpiece B:Tool lin- C:SiC D:EIPs Ra1 Ra2 Final 
rotational 
speed 
ear speed 
(cm/min) 
(mesh size) (mesh size) (nm) (nm) output 
(%) 
(rpm) 
20 1 600 50 800 300 367 121 67 
25 2 600 30 800 300 371 186 50 
1 3 400 10 600 200 330 145 56 
28 4 600 30 800 300 341 177 48 
5 5 400 10 1000 200 354 191 46 
7 6 400 50 1000 200 370 155 58 
8 7 800 50 1000 200 387 185 52 
9 8 400 10 600 400 332 169 49 
4 9 800 50 600 200 330 191 42 
19 10 600 10 800 300 361 97 73 
18 11 800 30 800 300 325 230 31 
21 12 600 30 600 300 368 236 36 
16 13 800 50 1000 400 337 192 43 
24 14 600 30 800 400 356 221 38 
15 15 400 50 1000 400 361 173 52 
23 16 600 30 800 200 326 166 49 
11 17 400 50 600 400 390 293 25 
13 18 400 10 1000 400 379 243 36 
2 19 800 10 600 200 380 190 50 
30 20 600 30 800 300 387 201 48 
10 21 800 10 600 400 343 185 46 
26 22 600 30 800 300 351 179 49 
12 23 800 50 600 400 365 280 24 
27 24 600 30 800 300 340 177 48 
17 25 400 30 800 300 359 208 42 
3 26 400 50 600 200 341 208 39 
6 27 800 10 1000 200 389 253 35 
22 28 600 30 1000 300 377 211 44 
29 29 600 30 800 300 350 168 52 
14 30 800 10 1000 400 367 231 37 
revealed that there was a 6.26% chance that F-value in case of lack of fit occurs 
because of environmental effects such as noise, vibration and so on. Other than 
ANOVA, the other calculated values are shown in Table 4.6. 
From this, the value of R2
 was found to be 0.9632, which clearly determined 
the intimacy of experimental data with regression analysis. Hence, the model was Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 105 
Table 4.4 Consecutive sum of squares 
Source Sum of df Mean F-value p-value 
squares square 
Mean vs Total 62,107.50 1 62,107.50 
Linear vs Mean 541.67 4 135.42 1.23 0.3237 
2FI vs Linear 1030.75 6 171.79 1.89 0.1342 
Quadratic vs 2FI 1601.81 4 400.45 49.53 < 0.0001 Suggested 
Cubic vs Quadratic 104.33 8 13.04 5.39 0.0194 Aliased 
Residual 16.94 7 2.42 
Total 65,403.00 30 2180.10 
Table 4.5 ANOVA for final response 
Source Sum of df Mean F-value p-value 
squares square 
Model 3174.22 14 226.73 28.04 < 0.0001 significant 
A-Workpiece 102.72 1 102.72 12.71 0.0028 
rotational speed 
B-Tool linear 37.56 1 37.56 4.65 0.0478 
speed 
C-SiC 72.00 1 72.00 8.91 0.0093 
D-EIPs 329.39 1 329.39 40.74 < 0.0001 
AB 2.25 1 2.25 0.2783 0.6055 
AC 20.25 1 20.25 2.50 0.1344 
AD 4.00 1 4.00 0.4947 0.4926 
BC 930.25 1 930.25 115.06 < 0.0001 
BD 49.00 1 49.00 6.06 0.0264 
CD 25.00 1 25.00 3.09 0.0991 
A² 404.26 1 404.26 50.00 < 0.0001 
B² 1143.55 1 1143.55 141.44 < 0.0001 
C² 209.45 1 209.45 25.91 0.0001 
D² 78.13 1 78.13 9.66 0.0072 
Residual 121.28 15 8.09 
Lack of fit 108.44 10 10.84 4.23 0.0626 not significant 
Pure error 12.83 5 2.57 
Cor Total 3295.50 29 
represented as good with adequate response values. The predicted R2
 of 0.7644 
was in good agreement with the adjusted R2
 of 0.9289; i.e. the difference was less 
than 0.2. The adequate precision of 23.453 was far greater than 4, so the model 
was regarded as adequate in nature. 106 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
The confidence interval (CI), i.e. 95% CI low and 95% CI high, were the lower 
and higher limits that elaborated the approximate coefficient of all the factors 
(Singh et al., 2012). Table 4.7 represents the coefficient values in coded form. In 
this analysis, the variance inflation factor (VIF) was important for measuring the 
magnification of variance by using orthogonal design. 
The value of VIF was found to be 1.00 in the cases of A, B, C, D, AB, AC, AD, 
BC, BD and CD, therefore these factors were orthogonal to each other within the 
model itself. On the other hand, the value of VIF was found to be 2.78 in the case 
of A2
, B2
, C2
 and D2
, which clearly represents that the factors were not dependent 
on each other. If the p-values are non-significant, i.e. p-value is greater than 0.05 
(α value), then the model is not considered to be significant. In ANOVA (Table 4.5), 
there were a total of four non-significant terms, i.e. AB, AC, AD and CD. To fur￾ther improve the model, these non-significant terms can be eliminated, as shown 
in Table 4.8. 
Table 4.6 Other values which were not included in ANOVA 
Std. Dev. 2.84 R² 0.9632 
Mean 45.50 Adjusted R² 0.9289 
C.V. % 6.25 Predicted R² 0.7644 
Adeq. Precision 23.4527 
Table 4.7 Other values which were not included in ANOVA 
Factor Coefficient df Standard 95% CI low 95% CI high VIF 
estimate error 
Intercept 49.08 1 0.8833 47.20 50.96 
A-Workpiece −2.39 1 0.6702 −3.82 −0.9604 1.0000 
rotational speed 
B-Tool linear speed −1.44 1 0.6702 −2.87 −0.0159 1.0000 
C-SiC 2.00 1 0.6702 0.5715 3.43 1.0000 
D-EIPs −4.28 1 0.6702 −5.71 −2.85 1.0000 
AB 0.3750 1 0.7109 −1.14 1.89 1.0000 
AC −1.12 1 0.7109 −2.64 0.3902 1.0000 
AD 0.5000 1 0.7109 −1.02 2.02 1.0000 
BC 7.62 1 0.7109 6.11 9.14 1.0000 
BD −1.75 1 0.7109 −3.27 −0.2348 1.0000 
CD 1.25 1 0.7109 −0.2652 2.77 1.0000 
A² −12.49 1 1.77 −16.26 −8.73 2.78 
B² 21.01 1 1.77 17.24 24.77 2.78 
C² −8.99 1 1.77 −12.76 −5.23 2.78 
D² −5.49 1 1.77 −9.26 −1.73 2.78  
Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 107 
From this table, it has been concluded that the F-value for the model was 34.34 
(significant in nature), i.e. the Prob > F value, i.e. < 0.0001, was far less than 0.05 
(α value). Hence, the model was significant. The R2
 value after eliminating the 
non-significant terms was 0.9476, as given in Table 4.9. 
The predicted R2
 of 0.8467 was in good agreement with the adjusted R2
 of 
0.9200. The adequate precision of 26.2345 was far greater than 4, so the model 
was regarded as adequate in nature. Table 4.10 represents the coefficient values 
in coded form after eliminating the non-significant terms. The value of VIF was 
found to be1.00 in the cases of A, B, C, D, BC and BD, therefore these factors were 
orthogonal to each other within the model itself. On the other hand, the value of 
Table 4.8 ANOVA for final response after removing the insignificant terms 
Source Sum of df Mean F-value p-value 
squares square 
Model 3122.72 10 312.27 34.34 < 0.0001 significant 
A-Workpiece 102.72 1 102.72 11.30 0.0033 
rotational speed 
B-Tool linear 37.56 1 37.56 4.13 0.0564 
speed 
C-SiC 72.00 1 72.00 7.92 0.0111 
D-EIPs 329.39 1 329.39 36.22 < 0.0001 
BC 930.25 1 930.25 102.30 < 0.0001 
BD 49.00 1 49.00 5.39 0.0315 
A² 404.26 1 404.26 44.46 < 0.0001 
B² 1143.55 1 1143.55 125.75 < 0.0001 
C² 209.45 1 209.45 23.03 0.0001 
D² 78.13 1 78.13 8.59 0.0086 
Residual 172.78 19 9.09 
Lack of fit 159.94 14 11.42 4.45 0.0543 not significant 
Pure error 12.83 5 2.57 
Cor Total 3295.50 29 
Table 4.9 Other values which were not included in ANOVA (after 
eliminating non-significant terms) 
Std. Dev. 3.02 R² 0.9476 
Mean 45.50 Adjusted R² 0.9200 
C.V. % 6.63 Predicted R² 0.8467 
Adeq Precision 26.2345 108 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 4.10 Other values which were not included in ANOVA (after eliminating non￾significant terms) 
Factor Coefficient df Standard 95% CI low 95% CI high VIF 
estimate error 
Intercept 49.08 1 0.9367 47.12 51.04 
A-Workpiece −2.39 1 0.7108 −3.88 −0.9012 1.0000 
rotational speed 
B-Tool linear speed −1.44 1 0.7108 −2.93 0.0432 1.0000 
C-SiC 2.00 1 0.7108 0.5123 3.49 1.0000 
D-EIPs −4.28 1 0.7108 −5.77 −2.79 1.0000 
BC 7.63 1 0.7539 6.05 9.20 1.0000 
BD −1.75 1 0.7539 −3.33 −0.1721 1.0000 
A² −12.49 1 1.87 −16.41 −8.57 2.78 
B² 21.01 1 1.87 17.09 24.93 2.78 
C² −8.99 1 1.87 −12.91 −5.07 2.78 
D² −5.49 1 1.87 −9.41 −1.57 2.78 
VIF was found to be2.78 in the cases of A2
, B2
, C2
 and D2
, which clearly represents 
that the factors were not dependent on each other. 
The quadratic equations (4.2 and 4.3) represented the correlation between each 
process variable. Equation 4.2 in its coded form is given as follows: 
% change in Ra =
 
+49.08 ­ 2.39*A ­1.44*B + 2.00*C ­ 4.28*D (4.2)
 
2 2 2 2 +7.63*BC ­1.75*BD ­12.49*A + 21.01*B ­8.99*C ­ 5.49*D 
Equation 4.3 in its actual form is given as follows: 
% change in Ra =
 
­157.31140 + 0.362792* Workpiece rotational speed
 ­ 4.48604

*Tool linear speed + 0.312462*SiC + 0.312946
 
*EIPs+ 0 .001906* Tool linear speed * SiC ­ 0.000875
 (4.3) 
*Tool linear speed * ­ 0.000312* Workpiece rotational speed 2 *EIPs 
2 2 2 +0.052522*Tool linear speed ­ 0.000225*SiC ­ 0.000549*EIPs 
After analysing each process variable, its contribution against percentage change 
in Ra value is depicted in Table 4.11.  
 
 
Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 109 
Table 4.11 Percent contribution of process variable 
Process variable Sum of squares % contribution 
A 102.72 3.28 
B 37.56 1.2 
C 72.00 2.3 
D 329.39 10.54 
BC 930.25 29.78 
BD 49.00 1.56 
A2 404.26 12.94 
B2 1143.55 36.62 
C2 209.45 6.70 
D2 78.13 2.5 
4.5 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The actual equation (as per Equation 4.3) evaluated from the regression analysis 
was directly or indirectly dependent on the experimentation results. The effect of 
different process variables such as workpiece rotational speed, tool linear speed, 
mesh sizes of SiC and mesh sizes of EIPs against the percentage change in Ra 
values was observed. For analysing the results, the effect of each process variable 
upon the percentage change in Ra value is discussed as follows. 
4.5.1 Effect of workpiece rotational speed (A) 
Figure 4.5 represents the effect of workpiece rotational speed against percentage 
change in Ra value. In this plot, the values of workpiece rotational speed (A) are 
varied, i.e. 400 rpm, 600 rpm and 800 rpm, whereas the other process variables 
remain constant, i.e. tool linear speed (B) as 30 cm/min, SiC mesh size (C) as 800 
and EIPs mesh size (D) as 300. 
From this plot, it is clear that with lower speed, i.e. 400 rpm, lesser tangential 
forces are induced by the abrasive particles, which results in less material removal 
from the work surface. For higher speed, i.e. 800 rpm, the tangential forces with 
high impact allow the abrasive particles to move over the surface; rather than 
removing the material it even produces grooves on the work surface. At 600 rpm 
speed, the abrasive particles allow a sufficient tangential force on the work by 
removing the unwanted chips from it. 
4.5.2 Effect of tool linear speed (B) 
Figure 4.6 represents the effect of tool linear speed against percentage change in 
Ra value. In this plot, the values of tool linear speed (B) are varied, i.e. 10 cm/min, 
30 cm/min and 50 cm/min, whereas the other process variables remain constant,  
110 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 4.5 Effect of workpiece rotational speed (A) with percentage change in Ra value. 
i.e. workpiece rotational speed (A) as 600 rpm, SiC mesh size (C) as 800 and EIPs 
mesh size (D) as 300. This tool moves in the horizontal direction, which results in 
producing shearing forces simultaneously with the workpiece rotation. 
From this plot, it is clear that with lower speed, i.e. 10 cm/min, the shearing 
forces induced by the abrasive particles are sufficient to cut the peaks more effi￾ciently from the work material. This is because the travelling speed of the tool in 
linear direction is very slow, which results in higher material removal. At 30 cm/ 
min speed, the abrasive particles show a lesser material rate because there may be 
a lesser shearing effect of the abrasive particles finishing cycle. At 50 cm/min, the 
cutting efficiency of abrasive particle gain increases due to higher shearing action 
against the tangential forces. 
4.5.3 Effect of different mesh sizes of SiC (C) 
Figure 4.7 represents the different mesh sizes of SiC against percentage change 
in Ra value. In this plot, the values of different mesh sizes of SiC (C) are varied, 
i.e. 600, 800 and 1000, whereas the other process variables remain constant, 
i.e. workpiece rotational speed (A) as 600 rpm, tool linear speed (C) as 30 cm/min 
and EIPs mesh size (D) as 300.  
Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 111 
Figure 4.6 Effect of tool linear speed (B) with percentage change in Ra value. 
In practicality, it was already proved that the mesh size of abrasive particles 
would be selected as per the initial surface roughness of any material. However, in 
this plot, the results are found to be similar in nature, i.e. the 800 mesh size abra￾sives finish the surface more accurately than do the 600 and 1000 mesh sizes. The 
sharper corners of abrasive particles cut the peaks more efficiently in the form of 
tiny chips. These results show that the initial surface roughness is quite important 
for choosing the mesh size of abrasive particles. 
4.5.4 Effect of different mesh sizes of EIPs (D) 
Figure 4.8 represents the different mesh sizes of EIPs against percentage change 
in Ra value. In this plot, the values of different mesh sizes of EIPs (D) are varied, 
i.e. 200, 300 and 400, whereas the other process variables remain constant, 
i.e. workpiece rotational speed (A) as 600 rpm, tool linear speed (B) as 30 cm/min 
and SiC mesh size (C) as 600. 
The main role of EIPs is to hold the abrasive particles under the effect of mag￾netic fields. Due to the magnetic field, the EIPs remain attached to the magnet 
surface, whereas the abrasive particles are entrapped by the EIPs. The size of EIPs  
112 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 4.7 Effect of different mesh sizes of SiC (C) with percentage change in Ra value. 
will be selected as per the size of abrasive particles. The EIPs of 300 mesh size 
are found efficient in holding the abrasive particles, and it further approaches 
the work surface under sufficient indentation forces. Less material removal is 
achieved with 400 mesh size EIPs, because the size of EIPs is large compared to 
abrasives size. 
4.5.5 Effect of workpiece rotational speed (A) with 
different mesh sizes of SiC (C) 
The 3D contour plots for the effect of workpiece rotational speed with different 
mesh sizes of SiC abrasives against the percentage change in Ra value is shown 
in Figure 4.9. In this plot, the values of workpiece rotational speed (A), i.e. from 
400 rpm to 800 rpm, and SiC mesh size (C), i.e. from 600 to 1000, are varied, 
whereas the other process variables remain constant, i.e. tool linear speed (B) as 
30 cm/min and EIPs mesh size (D) as 300. From this plot, it is clear that with SiC 
of 800 mesh size and workpiece rotational speed of 600, the maximum material 
removal is achieved. This is because of the maximum tangential forces induced by 
the SiC abrasives, which further help to remove the peaks more efficiently from 
the work surface.  
 
Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 113 
Figure 4.8 Effect of different mesh sizes of EIPs (D) with percentage change in Ra value. 
4.5.6 Effect of workpiece rotational speed (A) with 
different mesh sizes of EIPs (D) 
The 3D contour plots for the effect of workpiece rotational speed with different 
mesh sizes of EIPs against the percentage change in Ra value is shown in Fig￾ure 4.10. In this plot, the values of workpiece rotational speed (A), i.e. from 400 
rpm to 800 rpm, and EIPs mesh size (D), i.e. from 200 to 400, are varied, whereas 
the other process variables remain constant, i.e. tool linear speed (B) as 30 cm/ 
min and SiC mesh size (C) as 800. From this plot, it is clear that with EIPs of 300 
mesh size and workpiece rotational speed of 600, the maximum material removal 
is achieved. This is because EIPs forma strong chain under the magnetic field, 
which further helps the abrasive particles to cut the peaks under the sufficient 
tangential forces. 
4.5.7 Effect of tool linear speed (B) with different mesh 
sizes of SiC (C) 
The 3D contour plots for the effect of tool linear speed with different mesh sizes of 
SiC abrasives against the percentage change in Ra value is shown in Figure 4.11. 
In this plot, the values of tool linear speed (B), i.e. from 10 cm/min to 50 cm/ 114 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 4.9 Effect of workpiece rotational speed with different mesh sizes of SiC abrasives 
against the percentage change in Ra value. 
Figure 4.10 Effect of workpiece rotational speed with different mesh sizes of EIPs against 
the percentage change in Ra value.  
Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 115 
Figure 4.11	 Effect of tool linear speed with different mesh sizes of SiC abrasives against the 
percentage change in Ra value. 
min, and SiC mesh size (C), i.e. from 600 to 1000, are varied, whereas the other 
process variables remain constant, i.e. workpiece rotational speed (A) as 600 rpm 
and EIPs mesh size (C) as 300. From this plot, it is clear that with SiC of 800 mesh 
size and tool linear speed of 10 cm/min, maximum material removal is achieved. 
This is because of the shearing action of the abrasives when the tool moves in the 
horizontal direction. Hence, the combined effect of workpiece rotation along with 
tool linear movement provides better finishing results. 
4.5.8 Effect of tool linear speed (B) with different mesh 
sizes of EIPs (D) 
The 3D contour plots for the effect of tool linear speed with different mesh sizes 
of EIPs against the percentage change in Ra value is shown in Figure 4.12. In this 
plot, the values of tool linear speed (B), i.e. from 10 cm/min to 50 cm/min, and 
EIPs mesh size (D), i.e. from 200 to 400, are varied, whereas the other process 
variables remain constant, i.e. workpiece rotational speed (A) as 600 cm/min and 
SiC mesh size (C) as 800. From this plot, it is clear that with EIPs of 300 mesh size 
and tool linear speed of 10 cm/min, maximum material removal is achieved. This 
is because the EIPs provide a sufficient gripping strength to SiC abrasives, which 
further remove the peaks at low linear tool speed.  
 
116 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 4.12	 Effect of tool linear speed with different mesh sizes of EIPs against the percent￾age change in Ra value. 
4.6 CONFIRMATORY EXPERIMENTATION 
For confirming the experimental data, the total four experimental runs (from 
Table 4.3) were taken randomly, and again the experiments were performed with 
a finishing time of 40 minutes each and a working gap of 1 mm. After perform￾ing the experiments, their results were matched by the putting the optimum vari￾ables value of each run in the regression equation (i.e. Equation 4.3). The results 
of experimentation data and regression equation data (theoretical) were close to 
each other (maximum 4% error) as depicted in Table 4.12. The optimum process 
variables, i.e. workpiece rotational speed (A) as 600 rpm, tool linear speed as 
10 cm/min, SiC mesh size as 800 and EIPs mesh size as 300, were found where 
the change in Ra value was 70%. The roughness profiles for initial ground and 
finished surface are depicted in Figure 4.13a and Figure 4.13b. 
4.7 CONCLUSIONS 
In this chapter, magnetorheological finishing was found efficient to finish the 
brass cylindrical workpiece. Some of the brief conclusions from this study are 
given as follows: 
1. From this study, the effect of workpiece rotational speed, tool linear speed, 
mesh sizes of SiC and mesh sizes of EIPs against percentage change in Ra 
value was analysed using response surface methodology. Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 117 
Table 4.12 Confirmatory experimentations analysis 
Process variables % change % change % 
in Ra value in Ra value Error 
Sr No. A B C D (Experimentation) (Theoretical) 
1 600 50 800 300 65% 69% 3%
 
2 600 10 800 300 70% 72% 2%
 
3 800 10 600 400 43% 45% 2%
 
4 600 30 800 300 53% 49% 4%
 
Figure 4.13	 Roughness profiles for (a) initial ground and (b) finished surface (experimen￾tation done with optimum process variables, i.e. A= 600 rpm, B= 10 cm/min, 
C= 800 mesh size and D= 300 mesh size). 
2.	 The optimum process variables, i.e. workpiece rotational speed as 600
 
rpm, tool linear speed as 10 cm/min, SiC mesh size as 800 and EIPs mesh
 
size as 300, were found to accurately finish the cylindrical components
 
made of brass.
 118 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
3. The lowest percentage change in surface roughness Ra value was found to 
be 73%, i.e. 97 nm from 361 nm after 40 minutes of finishing time and 1 mm 
of working gap. 
4. The roughness profiles of the initial and final finished surface clearly 
showed the difference in surface quality after the present magnetorheologi￾cal finishing. 
REFERENCES 
Bedi, T.S. and Kant, R. (2021) Comparative performance of magnetorheological external 
finishing tools using different magnetic structures. Materials Today Proceeding, 41(4), 
908–914. 
Bedi, T.S. and Rana, A.S. (2021) Surface finishing requirements on various internal cylin￾drical components: A review. Journal of Micromanufacturing. Vol 4(2), 216–228. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/25165984211035504. 
Bedi, T.S. and Singh, A.K. (2016) Magnetorheological methods for nanofinishing-a review. 
Particulate Science and Technology, 34, 412–422. 
Bica, I. (2002) Damper with magnetorheological suspension. Journal of Magnetism and 
Magnetic Materials, 241, 196–200. 
Carlson, J.D. and Jolly, M.R. (2000) Magnetorheological fluids, foam and elastomers 
devices. Mechatronics A, 10, 555–569. 
Jha, S. and Jain, V.K. (2004) Design and development of the magnetorheological abrasive 
flow finishing (MRAFF) process. International Journal of Machine Tools and Manu￾facture, 44, 1019–1029. 
Jolly, M.R., Bender, J.W. and Carlson, J.D. (1998) Properties and application of commer￾cial magnetorheological fluids. Journal of Intelligent Material Systems and Structures, 
3327, 262–275. 
Khurana, A., Singh, A.K. and Bedi, T.S. (2017) Spot nanofinishing using base nose magne￾torheological solid rotating core tool. International Journal of Advanced Manufactur￾ing Technology, 92(1–4), 1173–1183. 
Kordonski, W.I. and Jacobs, S.D. (1996) Magnetorheological finishing. International Jour￾nal of Modern Physics, 10, 2837–2848. 
Paswan, S., Bedi, T.S. and Singh, A.K. (2017) Modeling and simulation of surface 
roughness in magnetorheological fluid based finishing process. Wear, 376–377, 
1207–1221. 
Rabinow, J. (1948). The magnetic fluid clutch. AIEE Transactions, 67, 1308. 
Rana, A.S., Bedi, T.S. and Grover, V. (2020) A new permanent magnet type magnetorheo￾logical finishing tool for external cylindrical surfaces having different outer diameter. 
Advances in Production and Industrial Engineering, 209–217. 
Rana, A.S., Bedi, T.S. and Grover, V. (2021) Fine-finishing of stepped cylindrical work￾piece using magnetorheological finishing process. Materials Today Proceeding, 41(4), 
886–892. 
Rana, A.S., Rafiq, I. and Bedi, T.S. (2023) Parametric optimization of curved-rectangular 
shaped magnetorheological finishing tool for external cylindrical surfaces. E3S Web of 
Conferences, 430, 01263. Parametric approach of magnetorheological external finishing 119 
Shorey, A.B., Jacobs, S.D., Kordonski, W.I. and Gans, R.F. (2001) Experiments and 
observations regarding mechanism of glass removal in magnetorheological finishing. 
Applied Opicst, 40, 20–33. 
Sidpara, A. and Jain, V.K. (2013) Analysis of forces on the freeform surface in magneto￾rheological fluid based finishing process. International Journal of Machine Tools and 
Manufacture, 69, 1–10. 
Singh, A.K., Jha, S. and Pandey, P.M. (2012) Parametric analysis of an improved ball end 
magnetorheological finishing process. Proceeding of the Institution of Mechanical 
Engineers Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture, 226(9), 1550–1563. 5
 
 
 
Chapter 5
 
Hybrid energy assisted friction 
stir welding using secondary 
heating sources 
Ankit Mani Tripathi , R. C. Singh , Rajiv  Chaudhary 
and Ravi Kant 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
The friction stir welding process is clean, energy-efficient, eco-friendly and ver￾satile. It is a solid-state joining process that was first invented and patented by the 
Welding Institute in the UK in 1991 and used for the first time to weld alloy, which 
was difficult to join through the conventional fusion welding process due to poor 
solidification microstructure liquefaction cracking and porosity in the fusion zone 
[1, 2]. In addition, the researchers redirected their attention to welding dissimilar 
materials, aiming to investigate the mechanical and metallurgical properties of the 
joints and to repeatedly optimize the process parameters. In this regard, Kwon et al. 
welded Al and Mg plates, maintaining a constant traverse speed while varying the 
tool’s rotational speed. They observed that increasing the rotational speed resulted 
in a defect-free weld. They have not observed any significant impact of tool rota￾tional speed on strength and ductility of the welded part, which were independent 
of tool rotational speed [3]. Their paper did not provide a clear explanation for 
why this occurred. Moreover, Shanmuga et al. have optimized welding parameters 
such as tool rotational speed, different tool pin profile, plunging force and traverse 
speed and outlined the effects of these parameters on the dissimilar Al alloy welded 
joints. They discovered that using tapered hexagonal tool pin profiles offered a 
smooth flow of the materials to weld centerline, resulting in maximum tensile 
strength and elongation of the welded joint. In contrast, straight cylindrical tools 
offered the lowest tensile strength and elongation. Furthermore, they found that 
the tensile strength increases first, reaches its maximum value, and then decreases 
when the tool rotational speed and plunging force are increased [4]. Moreover, 
as previously discussed, friction stir welding (FSW) has many advantages over 
fusion welding, including good results in welding Al and its alloys. It still faces 
a lot of challenges, however, in welding intermediate and high melting materials. 
Welding harder materials places the tool under constant stress and high tempera￾tures, leading to rapid tool deterioration, reduced tool lifespan and increased tool 
costs [5]. Following this, welding that occurred in the case of dissimilar FSW was 
the nominal difference in their melting points. Researchers and industrialists have 
always sought to extend the scope of conventional friction stir welding for welding 
120 DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-5  
Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 121 
harder or higher melting point materials. Considering the causes of tool wear, vari￾ous perspectives are available in the literature for welding hard or high-melting￾point materials. As discussed earlier, if a material is supplied heat by some external 
means, then its yield strength value decreases, and the materials easily deform 
plastically with the rotation of the tool. However, if an additional source of heating 
is introduced in a controlled manner to the workpiece so that the peak temperature 
remains below its melting temperature, the heat input required from the FSW tool 
is reduced. This scientific principle is followed by several researchers, and the 
development of the process is called “hybrid” or “assisted” FSW [6]. Moreover, 
laser, plasma, gas arc, induction and so forth come under the category of “ther￾mally assisted hybrid” FSW, whereas ultrasonic welding comes under mechani￾cally assisted hybrid FSW. Consequently, as the researchers’ primary concern was 
to extend tool life, they found that using a secondary heat source reduces stresses 
on the tool and improves material flow. In conclusion, this chapter will provide 
insights into recent developments in the domain of various hybrid or secondary 
heating assisted welding processes in terms of their distinct process parameters, 
experimental methodology, and mechanical and metallurgical characteristics. 
5.2 LASER-ASSISTED FSW (LAFSW) 
In laser-assisted friction stir welding (LaFSW), the base metal laser spot is used 
ahead of the tool. Neodymium-doped Yttrium Aluminum Garnet (Nd: YAG) fiber￾optic laser, diode laser and CO2 laser are the most commonly used secondary heat￾ing sources. Experimental setup of the laser-assisted preheating system is shown in 
Figure 5.1. As previously discussed, by using secondary heat sources, the material 
loses its yield strength. A similar result was obtained by Sun et al. They welded 
S45C steel with laser-assisted friction stir welding and positioned the laser spot 
ahead of 10 mm from the tool. In that case, LaFSW increased the welding speed 
up to 800 mm/min, which was only possible by conventional FSW up to 400 mm/ 
min. Again, they changed the position of the laser spot and found that when base 
metal was preheated by placing the laser spot on the advancing side, the friction 
heat generation between tool and material is significantly reduced, and the high￾est total heat input was found by positioning the laser spot on the retreating side. 
They observed that preheating on the advancing side had the lowest total heat 
input, and focusing the laser beam on the retreating side gave the maximum total 
heat input [7]. Furthermore, Fei et al. investigated the effect of laser power on 
steel and Al alloy. In measuring the welding strength and thickness of the inter￾metallic compounds, they found that 950 W laser power is a critical point, where 
weld strength decreases due to an increase in the size of intermetallic compounds 
(IMCs). The inevitably larger size of the intermetallic compounds reduces the weld 
strength at the given weld power, which is shown in Figure 5.2 and Figure 5.3 [8]. 
Laser-assisted friction stir welding introduces additional non-contact local heat￾ing immediately ahead of the weld zone, reducing the mechanical energy exerted 122 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 5.1 Experimental setup of LaFSW used to weld S45C steel, with the laser spot 
positioned 10 mm ahead of the tool [43]. 
Figure 5.2 Variations of laser power vs tensile strength [8]. Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 123 
Figure 5.3 Variations of laser power vs thickness of intermetallic phase [8]. 
on the tool. In addition, Sundqvist et al.’s transient thermal model demonstrated 
through their mathematical modelling at dissimilar type welding in butt joint con￾figuration that a laser beam reduces the forces on the tool probe and shoulder [9]. 
Laser power, heat source diameter, and the distance between the heat source and 
the tool are the three common parameters that significantly influence the process. 
Ahmad et al., using Abaqus software, optimized the process parameters of LaFSW 
by considering structural steel as workpiece material. They showed that LaFSW 
increased the welding speed up to 1500 mm per min, which was higher than the 
conventional FSW welding process. In addition, when the laser spot was posi￾tioned 20 mm ahead of the tool probe, stresses on the tool were reduced by 55% 
compared to conventional FSW. It was found that reducing the distance between 
laser spot and tool develops higher peak temperature and reduces the temperature 
difference between the workpieces to be welded. But it also has some restrictions; 
locating the heating source nearer to the tool or increasing the laser power will 
melt the parent metal [5]. Hence, proper optimization of the distance between the 
tool and the preheating source is necessary to get the maximum joint strength. 
Moreover, Fei et al. have investigated the metallurgical characteristics of Q235 
steel with LaFSW and traditional FSW and found that the strength of the weld nug￾get was favored LaFSW, which enhances the flow of materials. Thus, a defect-free 
weld can be obtained, which was one major limitation of using traditional FSW 
for harder materials. They indented laser spots for 5 s before the plunging stage 
causes the material to become relatively soft; as a result, the resistance offered by 
the materials on the tool was reduced and the material flowed easily. The process  
 
 
 
 
124 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 5.1 Materials, FSW tools and process parameters to use in LAFSW 
References Sample FSW tool Tool Traverse Distance of Type of laser 
materials to rotational speed/mm laser spot from and operating 
be welded speed/RPM min−1 the rotating power/kW 
tool, mm 
[8] Q235 steel W and 950 23.5 20 Fiber laser, 
and 6061­ Mo alloy 0.55, 0.75, 
T6 Al alloy 0.95, 1.15 
(3mm) 
[7] S45C steel WC-based 600 100–800 5, 10, 15 YAG laser 
alloy generator, 
2 kW 
parameters of different reference papers that have been considered in this review 
of LaFSW are shown in Table 5.1. 
5.3 ELECTRICALLY ASSISTED FRICTION STIR 
WELDING (EAFSW) 
In EaFSW, the electric current is directly supplied either to the workpiece or to the 
tool, which causes the material to be heated due to resistance heating or joule heat￾ing. Additionally, the material becomes soft due to the electroplastic effect without 
any preheating. In the electroplastic phenomenon, the material becomes soft due 
to moving electrons, and no significant increase in temperature was found during 
this process [11–13]. The processes of heat generation and material softening are 
given next in the form of mathematical equations [13]. 
QFSW = Qfriction + Qdeformation (5.1) 
QEAFSW = QFSW + QElectric (5.2) 
QElectric = QJoule + electroplastic softening (5.3) 
In the equations, Q represents heat and the subscripts represent the type of the 
process. 
There are two ways by which an electrical current can flow inside the work￾piece. The electric current goes either through the tool inside the workpiece where 
the tool is an integral part of the circuit, as shown in Figure 5.4a, or the electric 
current is directly supplied to the workpiece. The tool does not contribute to the 
passage of electric current through the workpiece and is also not a part of the elec￾trical circuit [13], as shown in Figure 5.4b. 
Moreover, Ni et al. [11] provided a different experimental setup to bypass the 
tool for the flow of current. This was achieved by using a single electrode. They 
attached two Cu brushes in pressed conditions with the help of springs on the top 
surface on either side relative to the weld centerline, in which both Cu brushes Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 125 
Figure 5.4	 (a) Includes electrically assisted FSW system, insulation system, cooling system 
and gas protection system.The electrically assisted system was attached to the 
FSW-TS-S08 bench-type friction stir welding equipment. [12]. (b) Current passed 
directly to the workpiece [15]. (c) Instead of using the tool as one electrode, 
two additional copper brushes were spring preloaded to address the concerns 
of spark generation as they slide on the top surface of the workpiece, serving as 
the anode and cathode respectively.The copper brushes were mounted to the 
spindle holder and travel together with the FSW tool in close proximity [11].  
126 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 5.4 (Continued) 
were acting as anode and cathode. Both Cu brushes were mounted on the spindle 
holder, and these were also moving along with the tool as shown in Figure 5.4c. 
Furthermore, the researchers investigated the effect of elastoplastic and resistance 
heating on the material welded by EAFSW and found that the plunging force 
reduced significantly after the flow of current. It gave noticeable results when 
the tool rotational speed was kept low and the tool was offset towards aluminum. 
They also investigated the metallurgical characterization and observed that due to 
the passing of electrical current, the thin intermetallic layer is being formed near 
the plunge section of the welded joint, as shown in Figure 5.5. This is only pos￾sible because of the effect of accelerated atom diffusion and reduced activation 
energy for a chemical reaction. In their investigation, they also noticed the micro 
interlock feature in the Al-Fe interface welded joint, which greatly improved the 
crack initiation and propagation caused by the brittle IMCs. In addition, Chen 
et al. investigated the mechanical properties of AA2219 and found that just at the 
time of introduction of electric current, advancing side (AS) and retreating side 
(RS) had a very high temperature difference. Compared to conventional friction 
stir welding, due to the current introduction in the weld zone, they observed much 
improvement in overall hardness, especially in AS. Again, they measured the 
tensile strength of the welded joint by varying the current supply. When the cur￾rent range was between 100–400 A, the authors found a 2.74%–7.38% increase in 
the tensile strength of the welded joint. A significant improvement in the tensile 
strength of the welded joint 17.11% was observed when the current range was 
increased to 500–600 A. Furthermore, in the analysis of fractured surfaces, they 
found that failure in friction stir welded material was occurring in the weld zone 
(WZ)/thermomechanical affected zone (TMAZ) boundary from the advancing 
side. The same EAFSW welded material was showing V-shaped ductile fracture Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 127 
Figure 5.5 Optical images of EAFSW welded joints with a current of (a) 0 A, (b) 100 A, 
(c) 200 A [14]. 
behavior and failure starts in the nugget zone from the retreating side, where 
hardness value was at a minimum. The cross-section of the dimple size of the 
welded material in the range 500–400 A was found to be relatively large and deep, 
as shown in Figure 5.6. It was also observed that EAFSW had refined the Al2Cu 
precipitate and also distributed this precipitate uniformly, which is the favorable 
condition in the case of the weld joint strength [12]. Han et al. investigating the 
mechanical and metallurgical properties of the AZ31B Mg alloy at different cur￾rent ranges, from 0 to 200 A, welded by EaFSW, found the same results in their 
investigation as has been previously discussed. They showed that by increasing 
the temperature, the size of the stir zone increased gradually. In addition to that, 
the microstructure in the stir zone (SZ) was significantly uniform ahead of the 
thickness line. The difference in grain size at the advancing side between SZ 
and TMAZ was also improved due to an increase in temperature, as shown in 
Figure 5.7. According to their findings, fracture generally initiates in all the welded 
joints, starting from the area with the lowest hardness value. Further, they showed 
that as the current increased, the tensile strength of the material had also increased 128 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 5.6 Hardness value of the welded joint with different current [14]. 
and reached the maximum when the current was at 200 A. Due to the increase in 
current, many effects on the hardness of the welded joint was not found, as shown 
in Figure 5.8 [14]. Moreover, Jiang et al. examined the microstructural texture 
and mechanical properties of Ti6Al4V alloy welded with EaFSW and compared Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 129 
Figure 5.7	 Comparison of Al-Fe interface at the weld centerline using EAFSW with tradi￾tional FSW [11]. 
their properties with conventional FSW. It was found in their investigation that 
in both welding processes, the microstructure of the heat-affected zone (HAZ) 
and the base metal exhibited a coarse equiaxed structure, while the stir zone 
displayed a relatively fine structure. In SZ, the grain size in the advancing side 
was slightly bigger relative to the retreating side. Although the material welded 
by EaFSW, base metal (BM) and HAZ have strong prismatic texture, the texture 
of SZ was randomly distributed. Also, in terms of degrees of dynamic recovery 
in HAZ and dynamic recrystallization in SZ, they found in conventional FSW 
appeared slightly stronger than in EaFSW [15]. Sengupta et al. showed weld 
joint strength and weld efficiency by varying the process parameters of EAFSW. 
They also optimized the process parameters by Taguchi methods to get better 
weld efficiency, ultimate tensile strength and hardness value. As a result, they 
found that the weld efficiency and hardness value of the EaFSW welded material 
was much better than the traditionally FSW welded material [16]. The process 
parameters of different reference papers included in the review of EaFSW are 
shown in Table 5.2.  
130 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 5.8	 Fractured surfaces of EAFSW Al 2219 alloy (a) 0  A, (b) 200  A, (c) 400  A, 
(d) 600 A [12]. 
Table 5.2 Materials, FSW tools and process parameters to use in EAFSW 
References Sample materials to FSW tool Tool offset Tool Traverse Operating 
be welded (offset: rotational speed/mm electrical 
mm) speed/RPM min−1 current/A 
[15]	 Ti6Al4 V (3 mm) . . . . . . 200 40 100, 200 
[11]	 Al 6061 to TRIP 780 WC-10% 1.03, 1.63 1200, 1800 60 560 
steel (1.4 mm) CO 
[12]	 AA2219 Al alloy . . . . . . 800 160 0–600 
(6 mm) 
[14]	 AZ31B Mg alloy . . . . . . 1300 50 0, 100, 200 
(5 mm) 
[16]	 2062 Grade B plates WC . . . 500–1000 10–25 50–150 
5.4 INDUCTION-ASSISTED FRICTION STIR 
WELDING (IAFSW) 
A high-power electromagnetic field is produced that induces huge eddy currents in 
conductive metal, and metal becomes heated because of resistance heating. Thus, 
it offers less resistance to the tool surface during stirring of the material than con￾ventional FSW, and finally the workpiece welds easily. Induction-assisted friction 
stir welding is a non-contact type of welding process. 
Furthermore, concerning the weld centerline, if there is no loss of induction 
current, during that time, it heats the metal with its maximum efficiency. For this,  
Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 131 
the induction coil is placed in such a way that the same current direction is ensured 
on each side of the workpiece [13]. Moreover, in the context of the experimental 
process, Sun et al. completed this welding in four stages. In the first stage, both 
the tool and the heating coil (HC), which were to be welded, were 5 mm above 
the metal; the heating coil was ahead of the tool and supplying heat where the 
metal was to be welded. In the second stage, the HC heated the metal for a certain 
duration, and then it was removed from that place after which the rotating tool 
was brought there. In the third stage, a particular load was applied to plunge the 
tool into the sample, initiating a stirring action within the sample. After stirring for 
some time, the tool was taken out of the sample. Finally, the welding process was 
completed [17], as shown in Figure 5.9a. Furthermore, Sharma et al. investigated 
Figure 5.9	 (a) The welding work is completed in four stages by IaFSW: first, the surface to 
be welded is preheated by induction coil; second, the induction coil is retracted; 
third, the tool is penetrated; and finally, the tool is retracted. (b) Schematic dia￾gram. (c, d, e) Experimental setups for IaFSW. (f) Interfacial and plug failure mode 
in IaFSW spot weld [17, 18]. 132 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 5.9 (Continued) Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 133 
Figure 5.9 (Continued) 
the mechanical and metallurgical properties of high-density polyethylene plates by 
varying the tool rotational speed and tool pin temperature. They found a narrow 
transition zone between the weld and base metal that exhibited no defects, and the 
strength was identical to that of the base metal. At almost all process parameters, 
however, there is a drop in the hardness of the weld zone, and the conversion from 
brittle to ductile in the joint was observed when the tool pin temperature increased 
[18], as shown in Figure 5.10. Moreover, Sun et al. investigated the mechanical 
and microstructural properties of S12C low carbon steel that was welded by high￾frequency induction-assisted spot friction stir welding. Keeping the same process 
parameters, they found that the average grain size of the FSW welded material was 
smaller. In the same induction-assisted friction stir welding, metals were heated up 
to 10 s that showed a slight increase in average grain size in the stir zone. Addition￾ally, in induction-assisted friction stir welded joints in which prior heat was given, 
a larger joint interface was formed, resulting in a significant increase in bonding 
strength of the welded joint and a considerable increase in the shear tensile load 
of the welded joint. A fracture in the joint was observed due to plug failure mode 
rather than interfacial failure mode [17], as shown in Figure 5.9f. IaFSW has some 134 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 5.10 Hardness value and stress-strain curve at different tool temperatures [18].  
Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 135 
Figure 5.10 (Continued)
 
Table 5.3 Materials, FSW tools and process parameters to use in IaFSW.
 
References Sample materials FSW tool Tool rotational Traverse Operating 
to be welded speed/RPM speed/mm power/kW 
min−1 
[17] S12C low carbon WC 800 . . . . . . 
steel (1.6 mm) 
[18] Thermoplastic H13 tool steel 1000, 2000, 3000 50, 100 . . . 
(high-density 
polyethylene 
plates) (5mm) 
limitations, however, as only electrically conductive material can be welded by 
this process. The process parameters of different reference papers included in the 
review of IaFSW are shown in Table 5.3. 
5.5 ULTRASONIC VIBRATION ENHANCED FRICTION STIR 
WELDING (UVEFSW) 
In ultrasonic welding, a high-frequency ultrasonic vibratory energy superimposed 
on static load exceptionally softens the material and much less heat is generated, 
around 35% to 50% of the melting point temperature, causing the joint to be made 136 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
through localized plastic deformation at the interface. Furthermore, different 
components used in UVeFSW are shown by schematic diagrams in Figure 5.11a 
and b. In UVeFSW, many researchers, using ultrasonic vibration assistance to dif￾ferent materials, studied the changes in their mechanical and metallurgical char￾acteristics, and compared them to the conventional FSW with the same process 
parameters. In that order, Baradarani et al. observed the effect of UVeFSW on 
AZ91−C magnesium alloy and compared the change in mechanical and metal￾lurgical properties of the material with conventional FSW on the same param￾eters, and they observed that both tensile strength and hardness were significantly 
greater in UVeFSW welded material than in conventional FSW welding welded 
material, as shown in Figure 5.12a and b. Also, in their microstructural analysis 
of the workpiece and in this analysis, they found that β-Mg17Al12 coarse dendrites 
are segregated to very fine and partly spherical particles that homogeneously dis￾tribute in an α-Mg matrix. Therefore, they concluded that ultrasonic vibrations 
play a very important role in UVeFSW for this kind of remarkable modification in 
the microstructure [19]. In addition, Zhong et al. investigated the effect of weld￾ing load, temperature and material flow, with or without ultrasonic vibrations, 
in friction stir welding and found that due to ultrasonic vibration traverse force, 
tool torque and axial force of welding reduce significantly. At a higher speed, the 
effect of ultrasonic vibrations on the tool torque was more noticeable than traverse 
force and axial force. In the microstructural investigation, they observed that ultra￾sonic vibration improved the material flow as well, and material refilling increased 
from the RS to the AS. The inner defect was either reduced or eliminated and the 
strength of the weld joint was also significantly enhanced [20]. In addition, Kumar 
et al. applied ultrasonic vibrations in the stir zone with a specially designed weld￾ing tool, as shown in Figure 5.11b. They showed its effect on plunging force, tool 
Figure 5.11 Schematic view of the UVeFSW setup [20]. Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 137 
torque and tool input power by varying the welding and rotational speeds, and they 
found that due to ultrasonic vibrations, the values of these three parameters were 
reduced by approximately 38%. Consequently, in conventional FSW, IMC phases 
were found in the stir zone that reduced the weld strength of the welded sample. 
Figure 5.12 (a) Hardness profiles of UVeFSW and FSW joints. (b) Comparison of yield 
stress (YS) and ultimate tensile strength (UTS) [19]. 138 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
By using ultrasonic vibration assistance, these unfavorable IMC phases are uni￾formly fragmented and mixed due to acoustic action, resulting in unprecedented 
improvements in weld strength, interfacial bonding, and the weld surface quality 
of the welded sample [21]. Following this, Lu and Wu examined in detail for tun￾nel defects when aluminum alloy 2024Al-T4 was welded by FSW and UVeFSW. 
They also explored the elimination of these defects using the marker insert tech￾nique based on the “tool sudden stop action” technique and metallographic obser￾vation. It was found that due to the time delay of material flow, this particular 
defect was happening in the welded sample. Furthermore, for a detailed analysis, 
they divided the weld nugget zone into three different sub-zones, shoulder affected 
zone (SAZ), pin affected zone (PAZ), and weld bottom zone (WBZ), and observed 
in their investigation that in PAZ, there was a delay in the flow of material due to 
which this defect was generated. Two factors were responsible for this defect. The 
first factor was the insufficient material flow from RS to AS, and the second was 
due to the shortage of material transfer in the downward direction in SAZ. Ultra￾sonic vibrations reduced the time delay in material flow by broadening the PAZ; 
in broader PAZ, the demand for filled material from SAZ was also reduced due to 
which no tunnel defect was found in the welded joint even at higher welding speed 
and with less plunging force [22]. Moreover, Tian et al. [23] and Shi et al. [24] 
showed the mechanical and metallurgical properties of the Al/Cu welded joint that 
was welded by UVeFSW, and in this case, the results of the welding loads and mix￾ing of materials in the stirring zone were almost the same as previously discussed. 
Besides, they optimized the process parameters and found when the rotation speed 
was 500 rpm, the value of weld tensile strength improved approximately by 60.7% 
compared to the joint welded by conventional FSW [23]. Furthermore, Padhy et al. 
compared the local microstructure evolution and macrotexture of the Al6061-T6 
weld nuggets, welded by UVeFSW with the same material welded by conven￾tional FSW. They observed that the sample in the weld nugget zone was deformed 
easily welded by UVeFSW than by conventional FSW due to the prior supply of 
ultrasonic assistance. Electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) analysis showed 
ultrasonic vibration had improved the recrystallization process because the grain 
was refined and there was a variation in the grain orientation along the vicin￾ity of the weld centerline. EBSD showed that application of ultrasonic vibration 
improves the recrystallization process, causes better grain refinement and brings 
about variations in grain orientation along the weld center axis [25]. Following 
this, Alinaghian et al. investigated the longitudinal residual stress as well as weld 
quality and weld joint strength and found that supplying high frequency and 200­
watt power in ultrasonic-assisted welding caused a reduction in tensile residual 
stress up to 45% with an increase in weld tensile strength. Also, due to weld peen￾ing effects, voids and tunnel defects were not seen in weldment [26]. Finally, 
Wu et al. welded 2024-T3 aluminum alloys using conventional FSW as well as 
UVeFSW and examined the fatigue strength and life of the joints welded by them. 
They showed that for 50% survival probability, there was an increase in fatigue 
strength of the joint welded by UVeFSW; the strength was up to 96.13% of base Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 139 
metal strength. In the microstructural analysis, they observed that in the advancing 
side, due to material flow near the part above the transverse cross-section of the 
weld, a weak bond was being formed where the stress concentration reaches its 
maximum value, and finally, the fatigue crack was initiated at that point. Also, they 
showed that by using UVeFSW, which narrowed down the weak bonding region 
and also reduced the stress concentration there in the crack propagation zone, they 
found fatigue striations in UVeFSW joint fracture where they were parallel to each 
other and spaced apart. Contrastingly, in conventional FSW, fatigue striations were 
found to have inappropriate parallelism and enormous spacing between them, as 
shown in Figure 5.13. By using ultrasonic vibrations, the secondary-phase par￾ticles were fragmented into a smaller size, increased in quantity and distributed 
homogeneously. In conclusion, all these factors enhanced the fatigue performance 
of the welded joint [27]. The process parameters of different reference papers 
included in the review of UVeFSW are shown in Table 5.4. 
Figure 5.13 Fatigue striation in crack propagation region [27].
 
Table 5.4 Materials, FSW tools and process parameters to use in UVeFSW
 
References Sample materials FSW tool Tool Traverse Ultrasonic specifications 
to be welded rotational speed/mm 
speed/RPM min−1 
[19]	 AZ91−C Mg 
alloy (6 mm) 
[20]	 AA6061-T6 to 
AA2024-T3 
plates (6 mm) 
[21]	 AA6061-T6 to 
AZ31B Mg alloy 
(3 mm) 
[22]	 Aluminum alloy 
2024Al-T4 
(3 mm) 
H13 tool 	 1400 40 Amplitude 15 µm 
steel, heat 
treated 
. . . 200–800 65–330	 Frequency 20 kHz, 
amplitude 40 µm, 
output power 500 W 
H13 tool 	 400–1200 50–250 Frequency 20 kHz, 
steel	 power 3000 W, 
amplitude 25 µm 
. . . 600 80–150	 Frequency 20 kHz, 
output power 300 W, 
amplitude 40 µm 
(Continued)  
140 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 5.4 (Continued) 
References Sample materials FSW tool Tool Traverse Ultrasonic specifications 
to be welded rotational speed/mm 
speed/RPM min−1 
[23]	 6061-T6 H13 tool 500–800 60 Frequency 20 kHz, 
Al alloy and steel amplitude 25 µm 
C11000 copper 
(2 mm) 
[25]	 Al 6061-T6 Tool steel 800 320 Frequency 20 kHz, 
plates (6 mm)	 output power 300 W, 
amplitude 40 µm 
[26]	 AA 6061-T6 AISI H13 700 50 Frequency 20,347 Hz 
(3 mm) 
[27]	 2024-T3 Al . . . 800 75 Frequency 20 kHz, 
alloys (6 mm)	 output power 500 W, 
amplitude 40 µm 
5.6 OTHER HYBRID ASSISTED FRICTION STIR 
WELDING PROCESSES 
In addition to the hybrid friction stir welding discussed previously, some other 
types of thermally assisted welding processes compiled in this section, such as 
arc assisted welding, exothermic heat-assisted friction stir welding (EHaFSW) 
and plasma-assisted friction stir welding. It was observed in this review that the 
experimental setups were common in all of these welding processes except in 
EHaFSW, where the preheat source was kept 10–20 mm ahead of the FSW tools, 
and to weld the dissimilar type workpiece, the higher strength material was kept in 
the AS concerning the weld centerline. The relatively softer material was kept on 
the RS. Apart from this, to weld the dissimilar material, the tool was offset towards 
relatively softer material. This was because their thermophysical properties had 
huge differences due to heat generation; resistance to mechanical load and flow 
stress values were different in both plates. Therefore, to reduce the formation of 
IMCs in the dissimilar type of welding, the tool is generally placed towards the 
relatively softer material. 
We will discuss the major findings of various researchers in this particular field, 
especially in arc assisted welding, EHaFSW and plasma-assisted welding. 
Bang et al. welded Ti and Al alloy samples through gas tungsten arc assisted 
FSW, where Ti alloy was positioned in the AS and Al alloy in the RS, and the 
GTAW torch was ahead of 20 mm with the FSW tool. Furthermore, Ti alloy had 
been preheated by the gas tungsten arc torch so that the melting point temperature 
difference of the two would be reduced. They compared the mechanical and met￾allurgical properties of the welded joint by the gas tungsten arc preheat assisted 
FSW with the traditional FSW welded joint, and found the ultimate tensile strength 
(UTS) of arc assisted FSW welded joint was 91% of that of base material and  
Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 141 
elongation of the joint welded by arc assisted FSW was 24% more than the con￾ventional FSW welded joint, whereas fracture of the arc assisted FSW welded joint 
was ductile in nature [28]. 
Following this, Bang et al. investigated the mechanical and metallurgical prop￾erties of Al6061-T6 and SS400 steel, welded by TIG assisted FSW. They showed 
that the strength of the welded joints from TIG assisted FSW was about 104% of 
the strength of Al alloy base metal, and the grain size of welded joints, by TIG 
assisted FSW in HAZ and TMAZ of aluminum alloy, was fine compared to welded 
joints with conventional FSW [29]. Subsequently, Bang et al. welded Al5052 Al 
alloy and DP 590 steel through TIG arc assisted friction stir welding (AAFSW) 
that had thicknesses of 2.5 mm and 1.4 mm respectively. They observed similar 
results as were found in other thermally assisted welding processes discussed pre￾viously. AAFSW enhanced the plastic flow behavior and also reduced the stresses 
on the tool. Apart from this, they analyzed Al-Fe IMCs at different TIG currents 
and found that at 20 A the average maximum tensile strength value was 184 MPa 
and the size of the IMCs at that current was 2.39 µm. The reason for this behavior 
was heat generation per unit length of the time was affecting the growth of maxi￾mum temperature and IMCs layer thickness [30]. Furthermore, Siva.et al. used 
exothermic heat-assisted friction stir welding (EHaFSW) to weld the Ni-Al bronze 
alloy by preheating the exothermic reaction of Al/CuO thermites and comparing 
the changes in mechanical and metallurgical behavior of the welded joint with 
conventional FSW joint. It was found that due to EHaFSW, top to center α-phases 
in the stir zone were seen at an enormous amount; also, transverse tensile strength 
was increased by 27% and 14% in the joint welded by EHaFSW and traditional 
FSW respectively compared to the tensile strength of the base metal. They consid￾ered the temperature rise to be an important factor behind it. Apart from this, they 
observed that due to the increase in temperature, the tunnel defects in the welded 
parts were eliminated, whereas, in the stir zone, the hardness value was the highest 
in the bottom part of the material welded by EHaFSW, while the material welded 
by traditional FSW was higher in top and center. For this, the grains of joints 
welded from EHaFSW were finer than those of traditional FSW. The presence of 
β-phases in a larger amount was also a major reason for this [31]. 
Finally, Yaduwanshi et al., by taking the plasma as a preheat source, welded Cu 
and Al alloy samples through plasma-assisted friction stir welding, in which only 
harder material was preheated by the plasma heat source. They observed that if Al 
and Cu were welded by conventional FSW, there would be a greater difference in 
their temperature and yield strength value, and the difference between these two 
values was reduced due to preheating by the plasma torch that caused an easier 
material flow and reduced stresses on the tools. Finally, plasma heating showed 
satisfactory improvement in the bond strength due to preheating at the interface 
of the welded joint [6]. 
The process parameters of different reference papers that have been discussed 
in this review of arc assisted, exothermic heat-assisted friction stir welding and 
plasma-assisted FSW heating assisted FSW are shown in Table 5.5.  
 
142 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 5.5 Materials, FSW tools and process parameters to use in arc assisted, thermite 
heating assisted and plasma-assisted FSW 
References	 Sample materi- Tool material Tool Tool tra- Specifications/pre￾als to be welded	 rotational verse speed heat source type 
speed (mm/min) 
(RPM) 
[28]	 Al6061-T6 Al WC-12% CO 300–450 60–84 Gas tungsten arc 
alloy, titanium assisted welding 
alloy (3.5 mm) (GTAAW) 
[30]	 Al5052 WC-12% CO 400 60 (GTAAW), arc 
(2.5 mm), length 2 mm, 
DP590 distance to tool 
(1.4 mm)	 20 mm, interface 
offset 5 mm, torch 
inclination 60°, 
Ar shielding gas 
(99.99%) 
[29]	 Al6061-T6, WC-12% CO 400 48 TIG current 60 A 
SS400 (3 mm) (WF20) 
[31]	 Ni-Al Bronze WC-based 1600 100 Exothermic/ 
Alloy (6 mm)	 alloy tool thermite heat￾assisted FSW 
using Al/Cuo 
thermites 
[6]	 Pure copper, . . . 440–815 63–200 Plasma assisted, 
AA1100 preheating 
(6 mm) current 0–65 A 
5.7 MODELLING 
Generally, the FSW modelling process is categorized into either the area of 
application that includes flow models or residual stress models or the continuum 
mechanics approach which includes computational solid mechanics (Lagrangian) 
based models and computational fluid dynamics (Eulerian) based models. The 
main objective of any residual model is to calculate the temperatures by applying 
the given boundary conditions, energy equations, heat sources or other given con￾ditions in Lagrangian (fixed coordinate system) or Eulerian (moving coordinate 
system) frame to determine how the heat is generated by the rotating tools. Two 
types of thermomechanical coupled models are mentioned in the literature. The 
first modeling approach is a fully coupled thermomechanical model that makes 
realistic predictions about the material flow as well as the formation of the shear 
layer, heat generation and temperature field during welding. The second approach 
is semi-coupled thermomechanical models, in which material flow is generally 
not considered during welding and surface heat flux usually represents complete 
heat generation, as well as avoiding source terms in energy equations. In addition, Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 143 
it is normally modeled in a Lagrangian frame and the thermal field is calculated 
before the mechanical field. In this order, residual stresses are easily predicted 
by this modeling approach, while the fully coupled thermomechanical model￾ing approach is more suitable to predict the temperature fields and mechanical 
properties during welding. As previously discussed, fully coupled flow models in 
FSW are based on either computational fluid dynamics (CFD) or computational 
solid mechanics (CSM), in which the CSM-based model is capable of predicting 
the residual stresses on its own. In contrast, the CFD-based model cannot predict 
residual stress by itself unless it is coupled to any CSM-based model. The CSM￾based model is analyzed by arbitrary Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) formulation in 
which dynamic equilibrium equations are solved in an explicit manner [32]. 
Long and Khanna welded high strength and high melting point materials like 
steel and titanium alloys through electrically enhanced friction stir welding pro￾cess (EHFSW) rather than via conventional friction stir welding, a drawback of 
which was high tool wear and low welding speed. By using finite element model￾ing, they analyzed the weld characteristics of the welded joint. Modeling hybrid 
friction stir welding is a very labyrinthine task, so they modeled EHFSW finite 
element modelling by modifying the thermal–electrical–mechanical finite element 
(FE) code which was modeled by previous researchers for analyzing the electrical 
resistance spot welding process. 
In addition, they used Fourier’s second law as a governing equation for heat 
flow analysis in FSW for finite element modeling of the process, which is shown 
mathematically as follows. 
2 2 2 ¶T é¶ T ¶ T ¶ T ù ( ) r = k + + + q C ê 2 2 ú 0 (5.4) ¶t ë ¶x
2 ¶y ¶z û 
Where ρ, c, k, t, T, q0 and x, y, z are the density of the materials, specific heat, 
thermal conductivity, time, temperature, inner heat source and coordinate systems, 
respectively. Material properties c and k both depend on the temperature. At the 
same time, the inner heat source contained three heat sources: 
q0 = q0F + q0P + q0R (5.5) 
Where, q0F is the friction heat, generated due to friction between tool faces and the 
workpiece material. q0P is plastic work heat that typically arises from material flow 
due to stirring by tool pins at the bottom of the workpiece during FSW and q0R is 
electrical resistance or joule heating. q0F is the main heating source in the upper part 
of the workpiece. Furthermore, they assume that if all the shearing energy on the tool￾workpiece interface is converted into friction heat, then the average friction heat per 
unit area per unit time can be written in the mathematical form is given in Equation 5.6. 
2 3 4p mPNR 
q0F = (5.6) 3 144 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
m, P, N, and R are friction coefficient, pressure subjected to the tool, tool rotation 
speed and tool shoulder surface radius, respectively. The researchers also found 
that the heat generated from friction is proportional to m, where m depends on 
temperature, which is approximately found to be 1 at the time of welding start. The 
value of m decreases as the temperature increases. Also, heat generation q0P for 
time (t) and space (x, y, z) generated in the material due to plastic flow is shown 
mathematically through the following equation: 
. p q0P (t x y z, ) = sij ij ,, h e (5.7) 
Where sij ,e
.
i 
p
j , and h are the deviatoric stress, incremental plastic strain rate ten￾sors and energy input coefficient, respectively. 
Furthermore, they found in their analysis that plastic work heat depends on 
strain rate. Also, the lower part of the workpiece was found to be relatively 
colder than the upper part. Because of this temperature difference, the lower 
cooler surface of the workpiece is responsible for the tool wear and low weld￾ing speed. In addition, by preheating using a hybrid heat source, the tempera￾ture difference at the bottom surface is minimized and the material is softened 
enough, which significantly reduces tool wear during stirring and also increases 
the welding speed. In this case, they used EHFSW, and this joule or electric 
resistance heat produced by electric current is mathematically shown in the 
following equation: 
q0R = I 2 Rt (5.8) 
Where I, R and t are the electric currents, the resistance of the tool-workpiece 
interface and the time for which current is passed, respectively. 
Furthermore, the researchers analyzed it in two friction stir welding steps 
numerically in EHFSW, the first being the tool pin plunge stage and the second 
the welding speed stage. Through the finite element model given earlier, they mea￾sured temperature distribution in these two stages and observed that the significant 
increase in temperature on both the surface and the lower part of the material was 
due to both electric current heat and friction heat in the EHFSW process during 
the plunge stage. Based on this, they expected EHFSW to have less tool wear in 
welded joints than conventional friction stir welding, but at the same time during 
the welding stage both conventional FSW and EHFSW had the same temperature 
distribution, but the EHFSW process was accomplishing the temperature profiles 
in half the time compared to conventional welding. Finally, they concluded that 
the welding speed in the EHFSW welding process should be at least double that of 
the conventional welding process [33]. 
In addition, the previously discussed modeling approach can be used to model 
similar materials, but that approach cannot be used to model for dissimilar  
Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 145 
materials because the thermomechanical properties such as density, specific heat 
and thermal conductivity will be different in both samples. Yaduwanshi et al. 
modelled and experimentally validated this approach to weld Al and Cu sheets, 
two different materials, by friction stir welding. They found that welding Al 
and Cu through a conventional FSW is a complex process as it contributes to 
asymmetry in material flow and heat generation due to the different physical 
and mechanical properties of both materials. Furthermore, they preheated the 
Cu sample from 500 to 600 K by placing the plasma heating source at the opti￾mal offset distance relative to the weld centerline on the Cu side. In addition, 
they found a significant reduction in asymmetry in material flow as well as an 
adequate amount of material flowing around the tool. For modeling, they devel￾oped a 3D heat transfer P-FSW model as well as calculated the transient tempera￾ture field through this model in which they considered the interaction between 
tool-workpiece and backing plate within the geometry. In addition, they used the 
3D nonlinear heat conduction equation as a governing equation to measure the 
temperature field, in which the tool was moving along the weld centerline. The 
governing equations in which the coordinate system is moving are shown next in 
the form of the mathematical equation: 
¶T ö 
¶y 
T ÷ (5.9) ø 
æ ¶T
rc ç ­V
è
p ¶t 
. 
¶T ö Q
. + =
¶z ÷
ø Z 
¶ æ + k
¶z è
ç ¶T ö ÷ ø y ¶y 
¶ æ
+ k
¶y
ç
è 
¶T ö 
¶x ÷
ø x 
¶ æ
k 
¶x è
ç 
(
where k specifies the thermal conductivity and r, , cV p T ,Q specify the density, 
¶
¶ 
specific heat of the material, transverse speed of the tool and rate of heat genera￾tion, respectively. 
As has been mentioned, the heat generation in the conventional FSW process is 
due to tool-workpiece friction and the plastic deformation of the stirred material. 
In addition, the heat generated by the tool-workpiece was treated as surface heat 
flux and the heat generated by plastic deformation was treated as volumetric heat. 
They consider this surface heat in the solution domain as the boundary conditions 
in the FSW process. 
In the governing equations, the applied initial boundary condition and the convec￾tion and radiation heat loss from the surface are shown mathematically as follows: 
T hT 
n ( ) 4 4 k = ­T0 ) + es T0 ­T
 ­ q ­ q (5.10)
 s pre 
Where, qpre is the heat energy provided by the external heat source, which is con￾sidered the surface heat flux. They found that plasma heating and friction heating 
were responsible for generating heat in the P-FSW, where plasma preheats the 
samples to be welded (qpre). In addition, the actual total heat produced in the FSW 
process (QFSW ) is due to friction between the tool-workpiece interface (Qf ) and 
the plastic deformation of the samples ( Qp ). 146 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Mathematically, it is represented by the following equations: 
QFSW = Qf + Qp (5.11) 
QP FSW = QFSW + Q e (5.12) ­ pr 
In addition, they used the flat shoulder and straight cylindrical tools for P-FSW 
welding and assumed total heat generated from friction is a linear unification of 
sliding and sticking conditions. This is mathematically shown by the following 
equations: 
2 QFSW = d *QSticking + (1­d )*QSliding = 3 
pw 
(5.13) 3 3 3 2 é
ë
¶t yield + (1­d ) m pù
û *{(Rsholder ­ Rprobe ) + Rprobe + 3RprobeH probe} 
Where w is the angular speed of the tool, m is the coefficient of friction, H speci￾fies tool probe height, and R specifies the radius of the tool pin and tool shoulder 
surface, respectively. Included are contact stress variables that establish a relation￾ship between the velocity of the sample contact surface and the velocity of the 
tool surface. In practice, the value is less than 1, because some friction work in the 
sample is converted into heat energy. In the same full sliding condition, its value 
is 0 and in the full sticking condition, it is 1. Contact state variable (d ) is shown 
mathematically by the following relation: 
Vmatrix d = . 
(5.14) Vtool 
Also, heat input by preheating source, in this case plasma heating, can be calcu￾lated by the following equation: 
Qpre =hVI (5.15) 
Where h, V and I are the thermal welding current and voltage, respectively. 
Despite this, both materials were forming intermetallic compounds after plasti￾cization and mixing. Moreover, these IMC crystal structures were different from 
either component (in this case Al and Cu). At the same time, IMC crystal structures 
also affects joint efficiency in the weld nugget zone. Therefore, it is important to 
include the effect of IMCs in thermal analysis for the design of material properties. 
Many researchers in their study found that the formation of IMCs in the nugget 
zone and their flow pattern were similar to a functionally graded material in the 
weld zone. In addition, the researchers introduced the concept of time-varying 
functionally graded material (FGM) to define the weld zone size. In their analysis,  
Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 147 
they found that when the tool was a plunge to a fixed position along with the 
thickness in the sample; the weld zone size was increasing but when the tool was 
moving along the weld centerline there was no significant change in the weld zone 
size. Furthermore, they analyzed the workpiece by dividing it into three distinct 
regions – the advancing side (Cu), the retreating side (Al) and the middle region 
(i.e. FGM). They treated all three regions as three different materials and consid￾ered the individual properties of the material in the no-weld zone. Furthermore, 
the material properties in the weld zone varied according to the mixture rule of the 
FGM, which depends on various parameters like flow pattern of material. They 
calculated FGM properties such as specific heat, thermal conductivity, and density 
from the mathematic relations given as follows: 
é (1 3 + (k k ) v 1 ­ 2 2 ) ù 
k k1 = ê (5.16) kv + + k 2k )( ) )ú
ú ê(3 ( 1­ v ë 1 2 1 2 2 û 
(c v 1 1 r 1 + c v 2r2 2 ) c = (5.17) 
r v r2 2 ( 11 + v )
r r = v r v (5.18) 11 + 22 
where k, c, and r represent thermal conductivity, specific heat and density in the 
context of FGM. In Equation 5.18, subscript 1 and subscript 2 denote the thermal 
conductivity, specific heat and mass density of Cu and Al, respectively. v1
 and v2 
are the volume fraction of copper and aluminum, respectively. 
They validated this numerical model based on the results of the time-tempera￾ture history and the computed isotherm of nugget zones obtained by the P-FSW 
experiment, and they found that the heat transfer model used to specify the heat 
input in the P-FSW process gave relatively precise results in predicting the peak 
temperature during the process; also, the overall error in peak temperature was 
around 5%–12% with a maximum reliability of 0.84 [6]. 
5.8 DEFECTS 
The welded material from FSW consists of tunneling, kissing bonds, void, joint 
line remnant, incomplete root penetrations and hooking defects. Generally, insuf￾ficient heat generation around the pin, an inappropriate amount of material move￾ment around the pin and an inappropriate amount of material consolidation behind 
the pin are the main reasons for these defects. Heat generation and stirring of the 
material depends somewhere on the process parameters. If they are not properly 
selected or optimized, this generates defects in the welded joint. In this order Deh￾ghani et al. welded Al and steel by FSW, keeping the tool rotation speed constant  
148 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
and varying the welding speed, tool tilt angle, tool pin geometry and plunge depth. 
They observed the influence on the formation of IMCs, tunnel defects and weld 
tensile strength. They found that at low traverse speeds, thicker IMCs were pres￾ent in the weld zone, resulting in reduced weld tensile strength. Additionally, they 
observed the formation of tunnels at lower welding speeds. When they increased 
the traverse speed, the amount of IMCs was found to be significantly lower and 
found only in the upper part of the weld. Because of fewer IMCs, a remarkable 
increase in weld tensile strength was found, but too high of a traverse speed and a 
low plunge depth weaken the bond strength, so the traverse speed can be increased 
to an optimal value only. Furthermore, they observed by varying the diameter of 
the cylindrical pin from 4 mm to 3 mm, in both cases, tunnel defects were being 
formed, which means they did not see any significant improvement in the tunnel 
defects by varying the size of the pin. Again, by tilting the tool to 5 degrees as well 
as varying the plunge depth, due to the high heat generation and forging force, the 
tunnel defects were not found in the welded material but the weld strength was 
very low due to larger IMC thickness. Finally, using a special M3 pin tool, they 
showed that the welded joint on the 56 mm/min was forming a bell shape nugget. 
Also, because of the extreme thinness of IMCs at that particular speed, the weld 
strength was at a maximum due to the tool being a threaded pin. This increased the 
forging forces as well as helped to send the plasticized material in the downward 
direction. Moreover, they found weld strength very susceptible to variation of 
the plunge depth; when the plunge depth decreased, the weld strength decreased 
significantly [34]. 
Kim et al. looked at the optimal conditions by varying the plunging force and 
found that the range of optimal conditions was getting wider as the plunging force 
increased. Generally, they observed three types of defects. First, when the tool 
rotational speed was very high, excess heat generation caused a very large amount 
of flash formation. Second, due to high traverse speed, a cavity or groove-like 
defect was found, due to insufficient heat generation. Third, cavity defects were 
generally due to abnormal stirring, which looked distinctly different on the top 
surface of the AS, which was arising due to less heat generation and decreasing as 
the plunging force increased [35]. 
Furthermore, Chen et al. investigated the Al 5456 alloys in which they mainly 
observed the defects and weld properties generated at different tool tilt angles. As 
previously discussed, the tilt angle turns the plastically deformed material flow 
pattern in the stir zone and controls the weld properties accordingly. In addition, 
they observed that the oxide layer available on the butt surface before welding is 
dispersed on the grain boundary during FSW, and the failure of the welded joint 
was induced by this oxide layer [36]. 
Song et al. welded AA2024-T3 and AA7075-T6 aluminum alloy sheets through 
FSW by placing them in two lap joint combinations. In the first combination, 
AA2024 was placed on top and AA7075 placed on the bottom (2024/7075). In the 
second combination, the position of the plates were reversed (7075/2024). Again, 
they observed the effect of process parameters (weld speed, lap joint combinations) Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 149 
on the defect features produced in a welded joint (hook, voids), weld joint strength 
and mechanical properties, and found that hook in both lap weld positions at low 
welding speed were deflecting upward significantly in the stir zone. In 2024/7075, 
due to the lap shear test, the weld joint fracture was occurring from the tip of the 
hook from the AS at the SZ/TMAZ interface where voids were also appearing. At 
the same time, when the welding speed was high in 7075/2024 joints, the hook 
geometry was extending horizontally at a long distance in the bottom stir zone on 
the RS. In addition, the welded joint was showing fracture in three modes – the 
first shear fracture was happening at the lap joint interface, the second one was 
a tensile fracture and the last was a mixture of both. They found, in both welded 
lap joint combinations, the lap shear strength was increasing as the traverse speed 
increased. Also, at lower traverse speeds in the 7075/2024 joint, there was a higher 
failure load relative to the 2024/7075 joints, while at higher speeds the failure load 
result was opposite [37]. 
Morisada et al. visualized the material flow through X-ray radiographs and 
investigated the defect formation mechanism in the joint welded by FSW. They 
observed that the tilt of the material flow around the tool and the sedentary of the 
material flow in the RS of the tool were correlated with the defect formation. In 
addition, they also calculated the material flow velocity during FSW based on 3D 
visualization and found that in the AS where the defects were forming, the material 
flow velocity was noticeably lower [38]. 
Chauhan et al. used the coupled Eulerian and Lagrangian method to model 
the FSW process as well as the volume of fluid principle they used to predict 
the defects formed during the process. In addition, they validated experimentally 
observed spindle torque and plunging force with the model. At three different 
probe heights, they welded the plates by simulation and got optimal results at 
2.5 mm heights. Following this, they successfully predicted the defects on differ￾ent process parameters from the model and also obtained a defect-free welded joint 
on the 2-degree tilt angle [39]. 
Huang et al. used a novel multi-functional tool probe with circumferential 
notches to eliminate hook and cold lap defects from dissimilar lap joints, welded 
by FSW. They showed, due to the use of noble pins, that turbulent flow regions 
were relatively larger and that at the bottom of the tool pin plasticized material 
was converging. They observed that the tensile shear load of the welded joint 
6082-T6/2A12-T4 reached 85% of the base alloy 6082-T6 strength. In addition, 
they obtained a sound weld, as well as a large bonding area and a limited diffusion 
bonding layer of 2 mm [40]. 
Moreover, the kissing bond defects appeared at the interface of the stir zone. 
The main reason for this defect is the inappropriate removal of the oxide layer 
from the weld interface, the insufficient amount of material movement and very 
high welding speed. 
Generally, phased array ultrasonic NDT is used to detect kissing bond defects. 
Also, solid-state filling/fusion filling plus FSW, fusion welding and friction plug 
welding are the major methods to repair commonly welded joints by FSW in  
 
150 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
engineering applications. Incomplete root penetration defects appear normally 
below the weld centerline in the stir zone. The main reasons this defect forms is 
the difference in plate thickness, poorly designed tools and reduced pin length. 
5.9 APPLICATIONS 
Miles et al. found in the starting phase of FSW that this welding process has more 
potential than conventional welding to weld sheets made of aluminum, Cu, Cu 
alloy, Ti and Mg alloy. They suggested the future researcher use it in the trans￾portation industry because Al is three times lighter than steel, and its use in the 
transportation sector will result in high speed, high payload, low emissions and 
low fuel consumption [41]. 
Wahid et al. analyzed aluminum alloys (AAS), mainly the 5xxx and 6xxx series, 
because of their high strength-to-weight ratio and high corrosion resistance prop￾erties. They are primarily used for marine applications and shipbuilding, usually 
for constructing hulls, superstructures, deck panels, bulkheads, stack enclosure, 
keen, gunwales, monohull vessels and superstructures. The researchers found 
that it was difficult to weld these materials through conventional fusion welding 
because of the enormous difference in their chemical and mechanical properties. 
In addition, corrosion of Al alloys was also a serious concern. They also found in 
their analysis that welding Al alloy by FSW compared to fusion welding showed 
unprecedented increases in weld joint strength and ductility. Additionally, consid￾ering the advantages of FSW in the field of shipbuilding, they suggested hybrid 
friction stir welding has immense potential [42]. 
Wang et al. studied aluminum alloy, which is used extensively in the aero￾space industry, and found that FSW is widely accepted for fabricating aluminum 
alloys, including the joining of large-volume fuel tanks and rocket tanks. This is 
because the FSW welded joint exhibits notable properties such as low distortion, 
fewer defects compared to fusion welding and fine equiaxed grain due to dynamic 
recrystallization in the stir zone [43]. 
In conclusion, the application of FSW has been reported in previously published 
literature, summarized in the next section. 
Engine and chassis cradles, wheel rims, track bodies, cryogenic tanks for space 
shuttles, helicopter landing platform goods wagon, container bodies and refrigerator 
panels are some of the applications in which this welding can be used extensively. 
5.10 CONCLUSION 
In the literature review of hybrid assisted friction stir welding, it was observed 
that welding dissimilar materials through assisted welding compared to conven￾tional FSW welding, whether it was thermally assisted or mechanically assisted. 
Both improved the mechanical and metallurgical properties of the welded joint.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 151 
Furthermore, the material flowed smoothly and applied less resistance to the tool 
compared to conventional FSW, significantly enhancing tool life. Apart from this, 
in most of the cases of FSW, the plate was either in the butt joint configuration or 
in the lap joint configuration. There is huge scope for future researchers to weld 
circular pipe or any other hollow shape joint configurations and to investigate their 
mechanical and metallurgical properties and optimize their process parameters. 
In conclusion, much progress has been made in the field of friction stir welding 
process so far. Still, welding high melting point materials while also achieving 
lower cost and good quality is a challenging task. There is still a lot of work to 
be done in this area, such as reducing tool costs by the development of new tools, 
minimizing stresses caused by the welding and optimizing process parameters, 
particularly to weld the advanced high strength materials. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. S. Mishra and Z. Y. Ma, “Friction stir welding and processing,” Mater. Sci. Eng. R, 
50, 2005, 1–78. 
[2] W. M. Thomas, K. I. Johnson, and C. S. Wiesner, “Friction stir welding—recent 
developments in tool and process,” Materials, 5(7), 2003, 485–490. 
[3] Y. J. Kwon, I. Shigematsu, and N. Saito, “Dissimilar friction stir welding between 
magnesium and aluminum alloys,” Mater. Lett., 62(23), 2008, 3827–3829. 
[4] N. Shanmuga Sundaram and N. Murugan, “Tensile behavior of dissimilar friction stir 
welded joints of aluminum alloys,” Mater. Des., 31(9), 2010, 4184–4193. 
[5] B. Ahmad, A. Galloway, and A. Toumpis, “Numerical optimization of laser-assisted 
friction stir welding of structural steel,” Sci. Technol. Weld. Join., 24(6), 2019, 548–558. 
[6] D. K. Yaduwanshi, S. Bag, and S. Pal, “Numerical modeling and experimental inves￾tigation on plasma-assisted hybrid friction stir welding of dissimilar materials,” 
Mater. Des., 92, 2016, 166–183. 
[7] Y. F. Sun, Y. Konishi, M. Kamai, and H. Fujii, “Microstructure and mechanical prop￾erties of S45C steel prepared by laser-assisted friction stir welding,” Mater. Des., 47, 
2013, 842–849. 
[8] X. Fei, J. Li, W. Yao, and L. Jin, “Study of temperature on microstructure and 
mechanical properties on Fe/Al joint in laser-assisted friction stir welding,” AIP 
Adv., 8(7), 2018. 
[9] J. Sundqvist, K. H. Kim, H. S. Bang, H. S. Bang, and A. F. H. Kaplan, “Numerical 
simulation of laser preheating of friction stir welding of dissimilar metals,” Sci. Tech￾nol. Weld. Join., 23(4), 2018, 351–356. 
[10] S. L. Campanelli, G. Casalino, C. Casavola, and V. Moramarco, “Analysis and com￾parison of friction stir welding and laser assisted friction stir welding of aluminum 
alloy,” Materials (Basel), 6, 2013, 5923–5941. 
[11] X. Liu, S. Lan, and J. Ni, “Electrically assisted friction stir welding for joining Al 
6061 to TRIP 780 steel,” J. Mater. Process. Technol., 219, 2015, 112–123. 
[12] S. Chen, H. Zhang, X. Jiang, T. Yuan, Y. Han, and X. Li, “Mechanical properties of 
electric-assisted friction stir welded 2219 aluminum alloy,” J. Manuf. Process., 44, 
2019, 197–206. 152 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[13] G. K. Padhy, C. S. Wu, and S. Gao, “Auxiliary energy-assisted friction stir welding— 
status review,” Sci. Technol. Weld. Join., 20 (8), 2015, 631–649. 
[14] Y. Han, X. Jiang, S. Chen, T. Yuan, H. Zhang, Y. Bai, Y. Xiang, and X. Li, “Micro￾structure and mechanical properties of electrically assisted friction stir welded AZ31B 
alloy joints,” J. Manuf. Process., 43, 2019, 26–34. 
[15] X. Jiang, Y. Han, S. Chen, Y. Bai, T. Yuan, and X. Wang, “Microstructure and texture 
investigation on electrically assisted friction stir welded titanium alloy,” Mater. Sci. 
Technol. (United Kingdom), 2020, 1–11. 
[16] K. Sengupta, D. K. Singh, A. K. Mondal, D. Bose, and B. Ghosh, “Analysis of 
mechanical property of electrically assisted friction stir welding to enhance the effi￾ciency of joints,” Mater. Today Proc., 2020, no. XXXX. 
[17] Y. F. Sun, J. M. Shen, Y. Morisada, and H. Fujii, “Spot friction stir welding of low carbon 
steel plates preheated by high-frequency induction,” Mater. Des., 54, 2014, 450–457. 
[18] B. Vijendra and A. Sharma, “Induction heated tool-assisted friction-stir welding 
(i-FSW): A novel hybrid process for joining of thermoplastics,” J. Manuf. Process., 
20, 2015, 234–244. 
[19] F. Baradarani, A. Mostafapour, and M. Shalvandi, “Effect of ultrasonic-assisted fric￾tion stir welding on microstructure and mechanical properties of AZ91−C magnesium 
alloy,” Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China (English Ed.), 29(12), 2019, 2514–2522. 
[20] Y. B. Zhong, C. S. Wu, and G. K. Padhy, “Effect of ultrasonic vibration on welding 
load, temperature, and material flow in friction stir welding,” J. Mater. Process. Tech￾nol., 239, 2017, 273–283. 
[21] S. Kumar, C. Wu, and S. Gao, “Process parametric dependency of axial downward 
force and macro- and microstructural morphologies in ultrasonically assisted fric￾tion stir welding of Al/Mg alloys,” Metall. Mater. Trans. A Phys. Metall. Mater. Sci., 
51(6), 2020, 2863–2881. 
[22] X. C. Liu and C. S. Wu, “Elimination of tunnel defect in ultrasonic vibration enhanced 
friction stir welding,” Mater. Des., 90, 2016, 350–358. 
[23] W. Tian, H. Su, and C. Wu, “Effect of ultrasonic vibration on thermal and material 
flow behavior, microstructure and mechanical properties of friction stir welded Al/Cu 
joints,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 107(1–2), 2020, 59–71. 
[24] L. Shi, C. S. Wu, and Z. Sun, “An integrated model for analyzing the effects of ultra￾sonic vibration on tool torque and thermal processes in friction stir welding,” Sci. 
Technol. Weld. Join., 23(5), 2018, 365–379. 
[25] G. K. Padhy, C. S. Wu, S. Gao, and L. Shi, “Local microstructure evolution in Al 
6061-T6 friction stir weld nugget enhanced by ultrasonic vibration,” Mater. Des., 92, 
2016, 710–723. 
[26] I. Alinaghian, S. Amini, and M. Honarpisheh, “Residual stress, tensile strength, and 
macrostructure investigations on ultrasonic-assisted friction stir welding of AA 6061­
T6,” J. Strain Anal. Eng. Des., 53(7), 2018, 494–503. 
[27] M. Wu, C. S. Wu, and S. Gao, “Effect of ultrasonic vibration on fatigue performance 
of AA 2024-T3 friction stir weld joints,” J. Manuf. Process., 29, 2017, 85–95. 
[28] H. S. Bang, H. J. Song, and S. M. Joo, “Joint properties of dissimilar Al6061-T6 
aluminum alloy/Ti-6%Al-4%V titanium alloy by gas tungsten arc welding assisted 
hybrid friction stir welding,” Mater. Des., 51, 2013, 544–551. 
[29] H. S. Bang, “Effect of tungsten-inert-gas preheating on mechanical and microstruc￾tural properties of friction stir welded dissimilar al alloy and mild steel,” 48(1), 2016, 
152–159. Hybrid energy assisted friction stir welding 153 
[30] H. S. Bang, S. M. Hong, A. Das, and H. S. Bang, “A prediction of Fe-Al IMC layer 
thickness in TIG-assisted hybrid friction stir welded Al/steel dissimilar joints by 
numerical analysis,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 106(1–2), 2020, 765–778. 
[31] S. Siva, S. Sampathkumar, and J. Sudha, “Microstructure and mechanical properties 
of exothermic-reaction-assisted friction-stir-welded nickel-aluminum bronze alloy,” 
J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 28(4), 2019, 2256–2270. 
[32] J. H. Hattel, M. R. Sonne, and C. C. Tutum, “Modelling residual stresses in friction 
stir welding of Al alloys—a review of possibilities and future trends,” Int. J. Adv. 
Manuf. Technol., 76(9–12), 2015, 1793–1805. 
[33] X. Long and S. K. Khanna, “Modelling of electrically enhanced friction stir weld￾ing process using finite element method,” Sci. Technol. Weld. Join., 10(4), 2005, 
482–487. 
[34] M. Dehghani, A. Amadeh, and S. A. A. Akbari Mousavi, “Investigations on the effects 
of friction stir welding parameters on intermetallic and defect formation in joining 
aluminum alloy to mild steel”, Mater. Des., 49, 433–441, 2013. 
[35] Y. G. Kim, H. Fujii, T. Tsumura, T. Komazaki, and K. Nakata, “Three defect types 
in friction stir welding of aluminum die casting alloy,” Mater. Sci. Eng. A 415(1–2), 
2006, 250–254. 
[36] H. Bin Chen, K. Yan, T. Lin, S. Ben Chen, C. Y. Jiang, and Y. Zhao, “The investiga￾tion of typical welding defects for 5456 aluminum alloy friction stir welds,” Mater. 
Sci. Eng. A 433(1–2), 2006, 64–69. 
[37] Y. Song, X. Yang, L. Cui, X. Hou, Z. Shen, and Y. Xu, “Defect features and mechani￾cal properties of friction stir lap welded dissimilar AA2024-AA7075 aluminum alloy 
sheets,” Mater. Des., 55, 2014, 9–18. 
[38] Y. Morisada, T. Imaizumi, and H. Fujii, “Clarification of material flow and defect for￾mation during friction stir welding,” Sci. Technol. Weld. Join., 20(2), 2015, 130–137. 
[39] P. Chauhan, R. Jain, S. K. Pal, and S. B. Singh, “Modeling of defects in friction stir 
welding using coupled Eulerian and Lagrangian method,” J. Manuf. Process., 34, 
2018, 158–166. 
[40] Y. Huang, L. Wan, X. Meng, Y. Xie, Z. Lv, and L. Zhou, “Probe shape design for 
eliminating the defects of friction stir lap welded dissimilar materials,” J. Manuf. 
Process., 35, 2018, 420–427. 
[41] M. P. Miles, J. Pew, T. W. Nelson, and M. Li, “Formability of friction stir welded 
dual-phase steel sheets,” Frict. Stir Weld. Process. III—Proc. a Symp. Spons. by 
Shap. Form. Comm. Miner. Met. Mater. Soc. TMS, 18, 2005, 91–96. 
[42] M. A. Wahid, A. N. Siddiquee, and Z. A. Khan, “Aluminum alloys in marine con￾struction: characteristics, application, and problems from a fabrication viewpoint,” 
Mar. Syst. Ocean Technol., 15(1), 2020, 70–80. 
[43] G. Wang, Y. Zhao, and Y. Hao, “Friction stir welding of high-strength aerospace alu￾minum alloy and application in rocket tank manufacturing,” J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 
34(1), 2018, 73–91. 6
 
 
 
Chapter 6
 
An overview of robot assisted 
additive manufacturing 
Sumitkumar Rathor , Avneesh Kumar , Ravi Kant 
and Ekta Singla 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
6.1.1 Additive manufacturing 
Additive manufacturing (AM), also referred to as 3D printing, is a process that 
builds a three-dimensional object by adding layers of material until the desired 
shape is achieved. The manufacturing industry is shifting towards AM, either as 
a replacement for subtractive manufacturing processes or as a hybrid technol￾ogy that combines both [1]. This evolution is mainly because of advancements in 
digitalization and material innovation. The advantages of AM over conventional 
manufacturing processes have made it a preferred choice for industries such as 
aerospace, automotive, energy, and biomedical. These industries often require 
parts that are difficult, expensive, or even impossible to produce with traditional 
methods. AM technologies, inspired by the principles of Industry 4.0, offer intrin￾sic advantages like design flexibility, sustainable production practices, and faster 
time to market [2]. 
AM provides significant advantages over traditional manufacturing methods 
by minimizing the amount of equipment and tooling required. This results in 
reduced inventory costs, improved material utilization, decreased manufacturing 
time, and lower production waste. As a result, AM technologies have become 
increasingly popular across various industries and applications. In the biomedi￾cal industry, AM has revolutionized different areas of the healthcare system by 
enhancing product quality and reducing manufacturing costs [3]. AM technolo￾gies are particularly useful for producing patient-specific implants, improving 
cardiology and orthopaedic procedures, and advancing dental care. AM technolo￾gies are already being used in the automotive and aerospace industries for full￾scale production processes. 
There is enormous potential for improving processes in defence through the use 
of AM technologies. AM has proven to be particularly advantageous in operational 
fields like mobility, sustainability, reduced logistics, field repair, and maintenance 
[4, 5]. Additionally, with the standardization of advanced machinery, incorporating 
AM into various industries has become more profitable. As a result, an increasing 
154 DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-6  
An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 155 
number of industrial facilities have begun to integrate advanced AM systems into 
their production processes. The process flow of AM can be divided into several 
stages, which are briefly discussed next. 
1. Design 
The first step in the AM process is to design the object using computer￾aided design (CAD) software. This step involves creating a 3D model of the 
object, which is typically saved in a file format such as STL. 
2. Preparation 
After the design is finalized, the subsequent step involves preparing the file 
for printing. This process typically involves converting the file into a format 
that is compatible with the 3D printer. Often, the model must be sliced into 
layers to enable the printer to produce one layer at a time. 
3. Printing 
The actual printing process begins once the file is prepared. The printer 
reads the file and begins printing the object layer by layer. The printer can 
use a variety of materials, including plastics, metals, and ceramics. 
4. Post-Processing 
Once the printing is complete, the object may require post-processing. This 
can include removing support structures, sanding, or polishing the surface, 
and painting or coating the object. 
5. Inspection and Testing 
In order to verify that the object produced through the AM process meets 
the necessary standards, the last stage involves conducting an inspection 
and testing procedure. This may involve evaluating the dimensions of the 
object, assessing its strength and durability, and performing other quality 
control checks. 
6.1.2 Role of robotics in additive manufacturing 
The use of robots to automate additive manufacturing processes has become 
increasingly popular due to the numerous advantages they offer, including 
enhanced speed, precision, and consistency [6]. Although robots have been 
employed in manufacturing for a significant period, their significance has grown 
with the advent of 3D printing technologies like directed energy deposition, mate￾rial extrusion, and cold spray. Robots can handle a broader range of materials than 
traditional manufacturing methods can. Robot helps to create parts using materials 
such as metals, plastics, and composites, which would be difficult or impossible 
to produce using traditional methods [7]. Robots can produce parts with complex 
geometries, internal structures, and other features that would also be difficult or 
impossible to produce using traditional methods. The use of robots is more cost￾effective than traditional manufacturing methods. Robots can be reprogrammed 
quickly and efficiently to produce a complex part, which means they can be used  
156 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
for multiple production runs with minimal setup costs [8]. Robots are used in a 
variety of ways in additive manufacturing systems, including the following: 
•	 Material handling 
One of the essential roles of robotics in additive manufacturing is material 
handling. The 3D printing process requires raw materials, such as plastic 
and metal powders, which must be carefully handled and stored. Robots 
can be programmed to handle and transport these materials safely and effi￾ciently, reducing the risk of contamination or damage to the materials. 
•	 Part handling 
Robots are also used for part handling in additive manufacturing. After a 
part has been printed, it needs to be removed from the printer and inspected. 
Robots can be programmed to remove the parts from the printer and trans￾port them to a designated location for inspection or post-processing. 
•	 Precision and accuracy 
Robots are known for their precision and accuracy, which is why they are 
useful for additive manufacturing systems. The 3D printing process requires 
precise and accurate movements to ensure that each layer is added correctly. 
Robots can be programmed to make these movements with high accuracy, 
ensuring that each layer is added precisely where it needs to be. 
•	 Quality control 
Robots are also used for quality control in additive manufacturing. After a 
part has been printed, it must be inspected to ensure it meets the required 
standards. Robots can be programmed to inspect the parts using cameras or 
sensors and identify defects or inconsistencies. 
•	 Post-processing 
After a part has been printed, it often requires post-processing, such as sand￾ing, polishing, and painting. Robots can be programmed to carry out these 
post-processing tasks, ensuring that they are carried out consistently and to 
a high standard. 
6.1.2.1 Robot Configurations Used for Additive Manufacturing 
Several types of robot configurations used in manufacturing applications are dis￾cussed next, and some popular robot configurations can be seen in Figure 6.1. 
•	 Cartesian robot 
These robots have three linear axes (X, Y, and Z) and can move in a straight 
line along each axis. Cartesian robots are commonly used in additive manufac￾turing because of their precise and accurate movement in three-dimensional 
space. It can move the extruder or printing head with great accuracy, which 
is necessary for producing high-quality prints. Cartesian robots are also able 
to operate at high speeds, which allows for faster production times. An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 157 
•	 SCARA robot 
These robots have four axes (X, Y, Z, and rotational) and often are used for 
tasks such as picking and placing objects, positioning the printing bed, and 
removing finished parts from the printer. They can also be used to perform 
secondary operations on printed parts, such as sanding, painting, and pol￾ishing. The rotational motion of the SCARA robot arm allows it to cover 
a larger workspace than a Cartesian robot with a similar range of motion. 
This can be beneficial in certain additive manufacturing applications where 
a larger workspace is required. Additionally, SCARA robots are known for 
their speed and precision, making them suitable for high-speed, high-accu￾racy applications such as additive manufacturing. 
•	 Delta robot 
Delta robots have a unique parallel link structure that allows them to move 
very quickly and precisely. They can move in three dimensions, making 
them well suited for additive manufacturing applications that require intri￾cate, three-dimensional printing. The parallel link structure of delta robots 
allows them to maintain a constant orientation while moving, which can be 
important for applications that require precise positioning of the printing 
head. Another advantage of delta robots is their relatively small size, which 
makes them ideal for use in applications where space is limited. This can be 
particularly important in additive manufacturing, where printers are often 
designed to fit on a desktop or in a small workshop. 
•	 Collaborative robot 
Collaborative robot, or Cobot, is a type of robot that is designed to work 
alongside human workers in a shared workspace. Cobots are used for tasks 
that require human-robot collaboration, such as loading and unloading 
materials, removing finished parts from the printer, and performing quality 
control checks on printed parts. Cobots are designed to be safe for human 
workers to interact with and are equipped with sensors and safety features 
that allow them to detect when a human worker is in their workspace. This 
makes them ideal for additive manufacturing applications where human 
workers are involved in the production process. 
•	 Dual-arm robot 
Dual-arm robots are a type of robot that has two arms, each of which can move 
independently of the other. In additive manufacturing, dual-arm robots are used 
for tasks that require more complex manipulation of the materials or objects 
being printed. For example, dual-arm robots can be used to hold and manipulate 
objects in a way that allows for more precise printing, such as holding an object 
steady while the printing head moves around it. They can also be used for tasks 
such as material mixing and handling, which can be important in certain addi￾tive manufacturing applications. Dual-arm robots are also capable of performing 
more intricate tasks than single arm robots can, such as assembly or disassembly 
of complex parts. This can be important in additive manufacturing applications 
where printed parts need to be assembled or to create the final product.  
 
158 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 6.1 Common types of robots: (A) Cartesian robot, (B) SCARA robot (Courtesy of 
Yamaha Motor Co., Ltd.), (C) dual-arm robot, and (D) delta robot (Courtesy 
of ABB). 
6.2 ROBOTIC ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING: 
ADVANCE PROCESSES 
Recently, directed energy deposition (DED), material extrusion AM, and cold 
spray AM processes have been developed using robotic configurations. 
6.2.1 Directed energy deposition 
The melting of metal powder or wire using a laser or electron beam and depositing 
the molten material onto a substrate is involved in this process [9]. This process is 
known for repairing or adding material to existing parts and creating large, com￾plex parts with high material utilization rates. Robots can automate the material 
deposition process and precisely move the laser or electron beam as the power 
source, ensuring consistent part quality. The process parameters in DED play a 
critical role in determining the quality of the deposited material and the overall 
efficiency of the process. Each process parameter must be considered for DED’s 
path-planning strategy in this response. The discussion on the process parameters 
for laser-based DED using powder materials gives an idea of the complexity of 
path generation. The robotic DED systems can be seen in Figure 6.2. The follow￾ing paragraphs highlight the importance and details of various process parameters. An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 159 
Figure 6.2	 Robotic systems used for DED process: (A) arc-DED [10], (B) laser wire [11], 
and (C) wire arc [12]. 
•	 Laser power 
The laser power used in DED is an important process parameter that affects 
the deposition rate, quality of the deposited material, and energy input to the 
substrate. High laser power leads to a faster deposition rate but can also cause 
thermal distortion and stress in the material. Low laser power can lead to poor 
bonding between the deposited layers. Therefore, a careful balance between 
laser power and the deposition rate is crucial in achieving optimal results. 
•	 Travel speed 
The travel speed of the deposition nozzle in DED determines the rate of 
material deposition and affects the quality of the deposited material. A higher 
travel speed leads to faster deposition, poor bonding, and reduced accuracy. 
A lower travel speed results in higher accuracy and better bonding, leading 
to longer processing times. 
•	 Powder flow rate 
The powder flow rate is an important parameter determining the amount 
of material deposited. It affects the deposition rate, surface roughness, and 
quality of the deposited material. A higher powder flow rate results in faster  
 
160 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
deposition but can also lead to poor surface finish and porosity. A lower 
powder flow rate yields a better surface finish and reduced porosity. How￾ever, it can also result in slower deposition. 
•	 Layer thickness 
Layer thickness is an important parameter that determines the deposited 
material’s accuracy, surface finish, and overall quality. A thinner layer leads 
to higher accuracy and better surface finish but can result in the slower 
deposition. A thicker layer results in faster deposition, leading to reduced 
accuracy and poorer surface finish. 
•	 Laser spot size 
Laser spot size is an important parameter affecting the deposited material’s 
accuracy and quality. A smaller laser spot size leads to higher accuracy and 
better surface finish that cause slower deposition rates. A larger laser spot 
size results in faster deposition rates but can reduce accuracy and lead to a 
poorer surface finish. 
6.2.2 Material extrusion 
Material extrusion AM involves melting a plastic filament and depositing the molten 
material layer by layer to create a three-dimensional object. This process is ideal for 
creating low-cost, large, and complex parts [13]. Robots can automate the material 
extrusion process and precisely control the extruder, ensuring consistent part quality. 
Path planning is an essential aspect of this process that involves determining the opti￾mal path for the extruder nozzle to follow to create a high-quality part. Several process 
parameters must be considered when developing the path-planning strategy in this 
context. Some robotic AM systems for material extrusion can be seen in Figure 6.3. 
The important process parameters for material extrusion AM are discussed further. 
•	 Extrusion temperature 
The temperature of the extrusion material is a critical parameter that affects 
the flow characteristics and deposition behaviour. A higher temperature gen￾erally leads to better adhesion between layers and increases the risk of warp￾ing and distortion. A lower temperature can result in poor bonding between 
layers, reducing the risk of defects such as stringing or oozing. Therefore, 
the path-planning strategy should be optimized based on the specific extru￾sion temperature used in the process. 
•	 Layer height 
The layer height is the thickness of each deposited layer, affecting the final 
part’s overall resolution and surface finish. A smaller layer height can result 
in a smoother surface finish and higher resolution, increase the printing time, 
and require more support structures. A larger layer height can reduce the 
printing time and support material usage resulting in a rougher surface finish 
and lower resolution. The path-planning strategy should be optimized based 
on the desired layer height and the limitations of the printing equipment. An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 161 
•	 Extrusion speed 
The extrusion speed is the rate at which the material is deposited, which 
affects the overall print time and the quality of the part. A slower extru￾sion speed can improve surface quality and accuracy and increase printing 
time. A faster extrusion speed can reduce the printing time and lower surface 
quality and accuracy. The path-planning strategy should be optimized based 
on the desired extrusion speed and the limitations of the printing equipment. 
•	 Nozzle diameter 
The diameter of the extrusion nozzle affects the resolution and surface finish 
of the final part. A smaller nozzle diameter can result in a higher resolu￾tion and smoother surface finish and increase printing time. A larger nozzle 
diameter can reduce the printing time but can result in a rougher surface 
finish and lower resolution. The path-planning strategy should be optimized 
based on the specific nozzle diameter used in the process. 
Figure 6.3 Robotic systems used for material extrusion process: (A) UR5 robot [14], 
(B) Elfin5 series manipulator [15], and (C) Mitsubishi robot [16].  
162 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
6.2.3 Cold spray additive manufacturing 
Cold spray (CS) is a solid-state material deposition process developed in the 
1980s primarily for coating purposes. CS uses high-pressure gas (nitrogen, air, 
or helium) to propel feedstock powders at supersonic velocities (330–1600 m/s), 
resulting in deposition when the particles collide with a substrate (typically metal). 
The kinetic energy of the particles is the dominant factor in the deposition dur￾ing CS, rather than thermal energy, which makes it a unique and highly efficient 
process. The feedstock powders remain solid throughout the deposition process. 
The bonding mechanism is governed due to mechanical interlocking and/or met￾allurgical bonding through localized plastic deformation at the particle-substrate 
and inter-particle interfaces. CS technology offers advantages over conventional 
high-temperature deposition techniques, including avoiding oxidation and phase 
transformation [17–19]. Cold spray additive manufacturing (CSAM) is an innova￾tive process that utilizes CS technology to build parts completely by cold-sprayed 
material or add features to existing parts. Compared to other AM techniques, 
CSAM typically employs larger nozzle exit diameters ranging from 0.5 to 5 mm, 
resulting in smoother Gaussian-shaped deposition profiles [20]. However, CSAM 
may not be ideal for creating parts with features smaller than 0.5 mm in scale. 
However, the layer thickness can still be precisely controlled for large geometric 
features. Despite the lower spatial resolution, CSAM offers significantly higher 
deposition rates than other AM techniques. The technology has already been suc￾cessfully utilized to manufacture complex parts with sophisticated surfaces, such 
as turbine blades and aerofoil-shaped leading edges [21]. 
CSAM is a relatively new technology that involves depositing metal powders 
onto a substrate using high-pressure gas. The CSAM has many potential applica￾tions, including repairing damaged parts, creating complex geometries, and pro￾ducing lightweight materials [22, 23]. Robotic systems are increasingly used in 
CSAM to automate the process and increase efficiency. These systems typically 
consist of a robot arm with a spray nozzle attached, which moves along a pro￾grammed path while depositing metal powder. The robot arm also has sensors and 
cameras to ensure accurate deposition and quality control. 
The successful implementation of CSAM requires precise coordination and 
control of spray parameters and robot path planning to ensure the production of 
high-quality deposits. This involves carefully selecting processing gas pressure, 
gas type, gas temperature, and powder feed rate for the spray parameters and con￾sidering the traverse speed of the nozzle, spray angle, standoff distance, scanning 
step, and trajectory of nozzle for robot path planning. The quality of the deposit 
heavily relies on these factors, making it imperative to have a comprehensive 
understanding of them. By regulating these parameters, one can create an effective 
CSAM manufacturing strategy and produce high-quality products. 
The processing gas parameters are critical in CSAM as they directly dictate the 
velocity of particle impact, ultimately affecting the deposit properties. Helium, nitro￾gen, and air typically process gases in CSAM, with gas pressure and temperature An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 163 
ranging from 0.5 to 7.0 MPa and 25 to 1100 °C, respectively. Literature reports that 
higher gas temperature, gas pressure, or lower gas molecular weight results increase 
in particle impact velocity [24–27]. Although helium is the most effective gas for 
achieving significantly higher particle velocity than air or nitrogen, its higher cost 
is a drawback. Additionally, increasing gas temperature is a more effective method 
for achieving higher particle impact velocity than increasing gas pressure [28, 29]. 
The rate at which powder is introduced per unit of time into the nozzle is known 
as the powder feed rate. It has three significant effects on the properties of CSAM 
deposits. Firstly, it influences the particle velocity and flow stream. The particle 
velocity decreases as the powder feed rate increases due to gas-particle interaction 
at high powder loads. This leads to an increase in deposit porosity and a reduction 
in deposition efficiency, tensile strength, and hardness. The powder feed rate affects 
the thickness and profile of the single-track deposit, resulting in sharper track pro￾files and thicker deposits at higher powder feed rates. The high feed rates cause high 
localized residual stresses between deposits and the substrate, causing delamination 
of the deposit from the substrate during spraying [30–33]. These three effects sug￾gest that the powder feed rate should be optimized for the CSAM process. 
The current state of AM poses challenges in achieving high geometrical accu￾racy for parts produced using CSAM. These challenges are primarily due to the 
size limitations of features and the influence of nozzle process parameters on the 
final deposit geometry. Several methods have been explored, including Gaussian 
function fitting, artificial neural networks, and partial differential equations, to 
model the shape of a single-track profile. However, these models lack validation 
data for full-size 3D structures, indicating a need for further research. To fully 
realize the potential of CSAM, it is essential to investigate the impact of robot path 
planning on 3D geometry and materials microstructure. Furthermore, to meet the 
expectations of design freedom associated with CSAM, research efforts should be 
directed toward developing robotic path-planning strategies that incorporate mul￾tiple robotic arms and kinematics. Current state of robotic systems used for CSAM 
can be seen in Figure 6.4. The following process parameters must be considered 
during robot path planning in CSAM. 
•	 Traverse speed 
The speed of the nozzle affects the amount and duration of feedstock powder 
hitting the target surface per unit of time. As a result, it directly impacts the 
cross-sectional profile and thickness of a single-track deposit. The slow noz￾zle movement creates a thicker deposit and a thinner cross-sectional profile. 
At the same time, a higher powder feed rate can achieve the same results. 
The flow characteristics of the processing gas passing through a De-Laval 
nozzle cause a radial variation in particle velocity and deposition efficiency. 
It results in a Gaussian-shaped cross-sectional profile. The speed at which 
the nozzle moves also significantly impacts the microstructure and proper￾ties of the deposit. When the nozzle traverse speed decreases, the deposit 
density increases, but the mechanical properties, such as deposit strength 164 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 6.4 Robotic systems used for cold spray additive manufacturing [42]. 
and elastic modulus, decrease the adhesion strength [34, 35]. The deposit 
and/or substrate heating by the high-temperature impinging jet affect the 
nozzle traverse speed. Reducing the traverse speed results in higher deposit 
and substrate temperatures, which contributes to the deposition process but 
causes thermal stresses at the interface [36]. 
•	 Scanning steps 
In CSAM, the deposit is formed by stacking many single-track deposits in 
an overlapping strategy. The interval between the centrelines of two single￾track deposits is defined as the scanning step, which significantly impacts 
uniformity and surface morphology of deposits. An adequately chosen scan￾ning step leads to a homogeneous deposit and smooth surface. The scanning 
step is typically half the width of a single-track deposit to ensure flatness. 
The effect of the scanning step on deposit properties is not well understood, 
and more investigations on this topic are urgently needed. It is important to 
note that the properties of deposits are influenced by the stacking of single￾track deposits and not just the scanning step. Therefore, the investigators 
should consider the effects of both factors. 
•	 Spray angle 
The spray angle refers to the angle between the central axis of the nozzle 
and the target surface. The normal velocity component contributes to par￾ticle deposition when spraying at an angle. In contrast, the tangential  
An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 165 
velocity component can detach the deposited particles. Decreasing spray 
angle reduces the normal velocity component and increases the tangen￾tial velocity component. This deteriorates the reducing deposition effi￾ciency, deposit strength, deposit quality, and adhesion strength. It also 
increases porosity in the deposit, resulting in deposit inhomogeneity 
[37, 38]. Therefore, spraying at other angles than normal to the substrate 
surface must be avoided. However, it is possible to achieve vertical walls 
and sharp 90° corners in CSAM by adjusting the spray angle during the 
edge pass and optimizing the traverse speed and corner radius using two 
robots [39]. 
•	 Standoff distance 
The distance between the nozzle outlet and the target surface is called the 
standoff distance. The intensity of the jet core in a supersonic-free jet gradu￾ally decreases along the central axis of jet due to momentum exchange with 
atmosphere. Inside the jet core, particles rapidly accelerate due to positive 
drag forces and then decelerate as the gas exits the diverging section of the 
nozzle due to negative drag forces [40]. The impact velocity of particles 
and deposition efficiency increase as the standoff distance increases until an 
optimal operating point is reached, after which they decrease. This phenom￾enon has been experimentally confirmed for materials such as aluminium, 
copper, and titanium deposits [41]. More investigation is still required for 
detailed understanding of the effect of standoff distance on CSAM deposit 
properties, including deposition efficiency, for which there is no consistent 
conclusion to date. Most existing work has been done at 10–40 mm as the 
standoff distance. 
•	 Nozzle trajectory 
The purpose is to ensure that the deposited material has a homogeneous den￾sity and properties. When spraying on a flat surface, a simple zigzag pattern 
is used as it can yield a homogeneous deposit and is easy to define. For com￾plex curved surfaces, the trajectory must ensure that the nozzle speed, spray 
angle, standoff distance, and other processing parameters are kept constant 
to avoid any inhomogeneity. Nozzle trajectory development and novel tra￾jectory strategies are strongly encouraged to be investigated, as research in 
this area has been very limited to date. 
6.3 ROBOTIC ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING: 
ADVANCE MATERIALS 
Robotic systems are used to print various materials, including metals, poly￾mers, ceramics, and composites. Advanced materials, such as carbon fiber￾reinforced polymers and metal matrix composites, are enabled for robotic 
additive manufacturing due to facilitating the need for complex geometry 
structures or parts.  
 
 
166 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
6.3.1 Carbon fiber-reinforced polymers 
Carbon fiber-reinforced polymers (CFRPs) are composite materials from carbon 
fibers and a polymer matrix. CFRPs have high strength-to-weight ratios and are used 
in the aerospace, automotive, and sporting goods industries. Robots can lay down 
carbon fiber tapes or print with carbon fiber-reinforced filaments to create high￾strength, lightweight parts. The study was conducted using a robotic system equipped 
with a composite extrusion 3D printing head capable of printing continuous carbon 
fiber strands along with thermoplastic matrix material. The robotic system was also 
equipped with a vision system for feature recognition, which allowed the system to 
identify the features and adjust the printing process accordingly, as can be seen in Fig￾ure 6.5(A). The system was tested on several specimens, including rectangular plates, 
T-joints, and L-shaped brackets. The study results showed that the proposed feature￾based approach effectively produced high-quality CFRP structures with improved 
mechanical properties. The system could accurately place the carbon fibers along the 
features, significantly improving inter-layer adhesion and reducing warping. A three￾step feature-based 3D printing strategy considers volume, patch, and wrap features. 
6.3.2 Metal matrix composites 
Metal matrix composites (MMCs) are composite materials made from a metal 
matrix and reinforcing materials, such as ceramics, carbon fibers, and metallic 
whiskers. MMCs have high strength, stiffness, and wear resistance and are used in 
the aerospace, automotive, and defence industries [43]. Robotic systems are used 
to print MMCs using AM processes like DED. 
The investigation was carried out to study the influence of TiB2 content on 
the microstructural features and hardness of TiB2/AA7075 composites manufac￾tured by the robotic laser metal deposition (LMD) process [44]. This study was 
important because TiB2/AA7075 composites are widely used in various industries 
such as aerospace, automotive, and sports equipment due to their high strength-to￾weight ratio, excellent corrosion resistance, and good mechanical properties. The 
findings of the study were significant because they provided important insights 
into the effects of TiB2 content on the microstructural features and hardness of 
TiB2/AA7075 composites. The study showed that increasing the TiB2 content in 
the composite leads to a more refined microstructure, with TiB2 particles being 
uniformly distributed in the AA7075 matrix. The TiB2 particles acted as reinforce￾ment, leading to an increase in the hardness of the composite. The prior discussion 
can enlighten the need for robotic systems to achieve the required properties of 
MMC. The robotic system used for AM of MMC can be seen Figure 6.5 (B). 
6.3.3 Functionally graded materials 
Functionally graded materials (FGMs) are advanced engineering materials with unique 
properties that vary gradually and continuously throughout the material’s volume [45]. 
The properties of FGMs are graded so that they can perform optimally under different An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 167 
Figure 6.5 An experimental setup for (A) CFRP [Courtesy of Thermwood Corporation], 
(B) MMC [46], and (C) FGM [47]. 
environmental and loading conditions. FGMs can be made by combining two or more 
materials with different chemical, physical, or mechanical properties in varying pro￾portions. The main advantage of FGMs is that they can withstand high stresses and 
extreme temperatures, making them useful in various applications, including aero￾space, automotive, biomedical, and structural engineering. For example, FGMs can 
be used to make heat-resistant components for gas turbine engines, lightweight and 
strong parts for aircraft, or dental implants that mimic the properties of natural teeth. 
FGMs can be classified into two main types, functionally graded composites 
(FGCs) and functionally graded coatings (FGCOs). The FGCs are made by com￾bining two or more materials, such as ceramics and metals, in varying proportions. 
The resulting composite material exhibits a gradual change in properties, such 
as thermal expansion, modulus of elasticity, and thermal conductivity, along a 
certain direction. They can be used to make structural components with different 
properties on the inside and outside or to make coatings that protect against wear, 
corrosion, or high temperatures. The FGCOs, on the other hand, are thin layers of 
material that are applied to a substrate, such as a metal, ceramic, or polymer. The  
168 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
properties of the coating vary gradually from one end to the other, resulting in a 
gradient of properties that can improve the performance of the substrate. These 
coatings can be used to improve the wear resistance, corrosion resistance, or ther￾mal stability of materials, such as cutting tools, bearings, and engine parts. 
The development of FGMs is still ongoing, and researchers are investigating 
new ways to tailor the properties of these materials for specific applications. One 
of the challenges in making FGMs is to control the gradients in properties and 
ensure that the materials are homogeneous and defect-free. Advanced manufac￾turing techniques, such as robotic additive manufacturing, can help to overcome 
these challenges and produce complex FGMs with precise control over their prop￾erties; the system can be seen in Figure 6.5 (C). 
6.4 PATH-PLANNING STRATEGIES IN ADDITIVE 
MANUFACTURING 
Path-planning strategies are important in additive manufacturing because they 
help to optimize the process of building a part layer by layer [48]. Additive manu￾facturing processes like 3D printing involve depositing material precisely to create 
a three-dimensional object. The path that the printing nozzle takes to deposit the 
material is crucial, as it determines the final shape and properties of the object. 
Path-planning strategies aim to optimize the path that the printer takes to deposit 
the material. They consider the part’s geometry, the material used, printing speed, 
and the required surface finish [49]. By optimizing the path, these strategies can 
reduce the time and material required to build a part while also improving its accu￾racy and surface finish. Additionally, path-planning strategies can help to overcome 
some of the limitations of additive manufacturing processes, such as the tendency 
for parts to warp or distort during printing. By carefully planning the printer’s path, 
these strategies can help minimize these issues and improve the overall quality of 
the printed part. Different path planning strategies are summarized in Table 6.1. 
Trajectory planning and path planning are related but distinct concepts in robot￾ics and control systems. Path planning refers to determining a feasible path from 
a starting point to a goal point in a given environment while avoiding obstacles 
or other constraints. Path planning typically involves generating a geometric rep￾resentation of the environment and then using algorithms to search for a path that 
satisfies the given constraints. Trajectory planning, conversely, refers to determin￾ing the specific trajectory or motion that a robot or other system should follow to 
execute a given task. Trajectory planning considers the system’s dynamics, such as 
its velocity, acceleration, and jerk. It generates a smooth, continuous motion that 
satisfies any constraints on the nozzle motion. 
Also, trajectory planning is a crucial aspect of wire-arc additive manufacturing 
(WAAM). It determines the path the welding torch follows to deposit material and 
creates the desired shape. The software tool described by Zhang et al. uses geo￾metric and optimization algorithms to generate optimal welding trajectories. The An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 169 
Table 6.1 Path-planning strategies introduced in additive manufacturing 
Strategy	 Goals and considerations Authors 
Layer-based path planning	 Layer-by-layer printing, considers [50, 51] 
path geometry 
Infill path planning	 Considers infill structures within [52–54] 
the part, such as honeycomb and 
lattice structures 
Zigzag path planning To reduce warping and improve [55–57] 
surface finish 
Spiral path planning To reduce printing time and [58, 59] 
improve part accuracy 
Hilbert curve path planning Printing along the Hilbert curve to [60, 61] 
reduce printing time 
Adaptive slicing path planning	 It dynamically adjusts the thickness [62, 63] 
of each layer based on the 
geometry of the part, which can 
help to improve the surface finish 
and reduce printing time 
Support structure path planning	 To print overhang or complex [64–66] 
geometries 
Continuous deposition path Printing the part in a continuous [67, 68] 
planning path without stopping or retracting 
the printing head, which can help 
to improve printing speed and 
reduce material waste 
implementation of the trajectory-planning algorithm was discussed, including the 
mathematical models and optimization techniques used to generate optimal weld￾ing trajectories [69]. The authors have provided several examples of the software 
tool, demonstrating how it can generate trajectories for complex geometries and 
produce high-quality parts. 
The algorithms consider the robotic arm’s kinematics and the material’s physical 
properties to generate optimal paths for the robot to follow. In the case of WAAM, 
the paths generated by the algorithm determine the trajectory of the welding torch 
as it deposits material onto the workpiece. In the case of pure object manipulation, 
the paths determine the trajectory of the end-effector of the robotic arm as it moves 
the object to a desired location. One of the key features of the algorithm presented 
by Ferreira et al. is its ability to generate multi-directional paths for WAAM pro￾cesses [70]. This means the robot can deposit material in multiple directions rather 
than being constrained to one direction. This allows for more complex geometries 
to be produced more accurately and efficiently. The mathematical models used in 
the algorithm include the use of B-spline curves to represent the paths. The authors 
also discuss the implementation of the algorithm on a robotic arm and provide 
examples of its use in both WAAM and pure object manipulation.  
 
 
170 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
A path-planning algorithm for semi-constrained Cartesian paths incorporat￾ing multiple tool centre points (TCPs) was discussed by Schmitz et al. [71]. 
The robot’s configuration space is the set of all possible configurations that it 
can reach, considering the constraints on its movement. The trajectory-planning 
algorithm presented in the paper uses configuration space to generate optimal 
paths for the robot. The algorithm works by first generating a set of waypoints 
along the semi-constrained Cartesian path. These waypoints are then used to 
generate a series of configurations that the robot can reach. The algorithm then 
uses an optimization technique to generate the optimal path for the robot to fol￾low, considering the constraints on its movement and the need to avoid obsta￾cles. Schmitz et al. provide a detailed description of the mathematical models 
used in the algorithm, including the use of quaternions to represent rotations 
and the use of the inverse kinematics of the robot to generate configurations. 
The authors also provide examples of the algorithm, demonstrating its ability to 
generate trajectories over semi-constrained Cartesian paths for various robotic 
manipulators. 
In Malhan et al., a trajectory-planning approach was introduced for mobile 
robots in large-scale assembly and additive manufacturing applications in con￾struction [72]. The trajectory-planning method is based on a contour tracking 
control approach, allowing the robot to follow a desired path while maintaining 
a desired orientation. This paper describes the trajectory-planning approach use 
of a geometric path representation, which allows for the creation of smooth and 
continuous paths that the robot can follow. The path representation is created 
using a series of connected Bezier curves, which are used to define the contour 
of the object being assembled or manufactured. The robot then follows the path 
by controlling its position and orientation using sensor feedback. This work also 
discusses using a proportional-integral-derivative (PID) controller to regulate the 
robot’s position and orientation along the path. The PID controller allows precise 
control of the robot’s movements, which is necessary for large-scale assembly and 
additive manufacturing applications. 
6.5 FUTURE PERSPECTIVE OF ADVANCE ROBOTIC SYSTEMS 
FOR ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING 
The future of robots in additive manufacturing is exciting. With technological 
advances, robots are set to play an even bigger role in this industry. In this section, 
we discuss how robots are shaping the future of additive manufacturing. 
6.5.1 Collaborative robots 
The future of collaborative robots in the industry, particularly additive manufac￾turing, is promising. Cobots are designed to work alongside human operators, 
providing several advantages such as improved efficiency, reduced costs, and  
An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 171 
increased safety. They can also be easily reprogrammed to perform different tasks, 
making them ideal for small-batch production or prototyping. However, several 
challenges need to be addressed to realize the potential of collaborative robots in 
additive manufacturing. 
•	 Work safety 
Cobots are designed to work safely alongside humans, but ensuring their 
safety requires advanced sensing and control systems. Cobots must be able 
to detect and avoid obstacles in their workspace, and they must be able to 
shut down or slow down their operations when they detect a human operator 
in their vicinity. Developing reliable and robust safety protocols is essential 
for the widespread adoption of cobots in additive manufacturing. 
•	 Compatibility 
Cobots must be compatible with existing additive manufacturing equipment. 
New cobot-compatible equipment must be developed for complex paths for 
3D printing. Ensuring compatibility requires close collaboration between 
cobot manufacturers and equipment manufacturers to develop standards and 
protocols for seamless integration. 
•	 Artificial intelligence 
Cobots must be able to learn from their interactions with human operators 
and improve their performance over time. This requires advanced artificial 
intelligence and machine learning algorithms to analyse data from sensors 
and other sources to optimize cobot performance. Developing these algo￾rithms requires a significant investment in research and development. 
•	 Communication 
Cobots must communicate seamlessly with other systems in the additive 
manufacturing process. This requires robust and reliable communication 
protocols to handle large amounts of data and enable real-time monitoring 
and control of cobot operations. Developing these protocols requires close 
collaboration between cobot manufacturers, equipment manufacturers, and 
software developers. 
•	 Cost 
Cobots are still relatively expensive compared to traditional robots, which 
can limit their adoption in small and medium-sized businesses. Reducing 
the cost of cobots requires economies of scale and advances in manufactur￾ing processes that can reduce the cost of components and assembly. 
6.5.2 Autonomous robots 
The future of the manufacturing industry is expected to be heavily influenced by 
the rise of autonomous robots. These robots can perform tasks such as printing, 
assembly, inspection, and maintenance without the need for human intervention. 
However, several challenges still need to be addressed before autonomous robots 
can become more widely used in additive manufacturing.  
172 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
•	 Accuracy and precision 
One of the key challenges of autonomous robots in additive manufacturing 
is ensuring they can achieve the necessary levels of accuracy and precision. 
3D printing requires precise movements, and errors or deviations can lead to 
defects in the final product. Autonomous robots need to be able to perform 
these movements with the same level of precision as human operators while 
also adapting to changes in the printing environment. 
•	 Material handling 
Another challenge is material handling. Additive manufacturing requires 
various materials, such as powders, filaments, and resins, which must be 
stored, transported, and loaded into the printing equipment. Autonomous 
robots need to handle these materials safely and efficiently while also ensur￾ing that they are used in the correct quantities and locations. 
•	 System integration 
Autonomous robots integrate with the broader additive manufacturing sys￾tem, including CAD software, printers, and other equipment. This requires 
high compatibility and coordination between different components, which 
can be challenging to achieve in practice. 
•	 Quality control 
Autonomous robots need to be able to monitor the printing process and 
detect any defects or errors in real time. This requires advanced sensors and 
software, which can analyse the data and make adjustments as necessary. 
Ensuring consistent quality control is critical in additive manufacturing, as 
defects can lead to product failures or safety issues. 
•	 Cost and scalability 
Autonomous robots are often expensive to develop and implement, 
requiring significant investment in hardware and software. Additionally, 
they may not be suitable for all types of additive manufacturing applica￾tions, particularly those that require a high degree of customization or 
flexibility. 
6.5.3 Mobile robots 
Mobile robots will play a crucial role in increasing productivity, efficiency, and 
safety in different industries. With technological advancements, mobile robots will 
become more intelligent, autonomous, and adaptable to different environments, 
leading to increased use in various industries. Additionally, the adoption of mobile 
robotics will lead to new job opportunities in areas such as robotics programming 
and maintenance. 
•	 Safety 
Safety is a significant concern when it comes to mobile robotics. With 
robots working alongside human workers, accidents occur, and it is essen￾tial to ensure that robots are safe to work with. An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 173 
•	 Navigation 
Navigation is a crucial challenge for mobile robots, particularly in envi￾ronments with changing layouts. Robots need to be able to navigate 
through different environments, avoiding obstacles and reaching their 
destination safely. 
•	 Power supply 
Mobile robots require a reliable power supply to operate efficiently. As the 
use of mobile robots increases, it is essential to find more efficient ways of 
powering robots, particularly in environments with limited power sources. 
Industries are keen to use robots as they have necessary potential to scale and 
improve the productivity of AM processes. NASA has developed a spider-like 
robot called the “In-Space Manufacturing (ISM) Robotic System.” The robot is 
designed to 3D print structures in space. The ISM Robotic System has six legs, 
each with a 3D printer nozzle at the end. This can be seen in Figure 6.6 (A). The 
robot is capable of printing structures up to 14 feet in diameter and 8 feet tall. The 
spider-like design allows the robot to move easily in zero gravity environments 
and access hard-to-reach areas. The use of additive manufacturing in the develop￾ment of the ISM Robotic System offers several advantages, including increased 
efficiency and greater flexibility in design. The ability to print structures in space 
also eliminates the need to transport large and bulky parts from Earth, which can 
be expensive and time-consuming. 
Adidas FUTURECRAFT.STRUNG is a 3D-printed shoe that utilizes a new 
technology called Strung using a robotic manipulator, as can be seen in Figure 6.6 
(B). The Strung is a process where strands of material are individually woven 
together to create customized textiles for each shoe. The process allows for pre￾cise control over the shoe’s fit, comfort, and performance. The FUTURECRAFT. 
Figure 6.6 Use of robots in (A) space (Courtesy of NASA) and (B) Strung robot in the shoe 
industry (Courtesy of Adidas).  
 
 
 
 
174 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
STRUNG shoe is created using a 3D-printed midsole and outsole, with the Strung 
textile upper. The midsole and outsole are printed using Adidas’ 4D technology, 
which uses digital light projection to create a lattice structure that provides sup￾port and cushioning. The Strung textile is then woven onto the 3D-printed base 
to create a seamless upper. The shoe is designed to fit the unique shape of each 
individual foot, providing personalized comfort and support. The Strung textile 
also allows for greater breathability and flexibility, while the 3D-printed midsole 
and outsole provide durability and stability. 
6.6 CONCLUSIONS 
This chapter has highlighted the various additive manufacturing processes such 
as DED, material extrusion, and cold spray, which have revolutionized the way 
advanced materials are produced. These techniques have led to the development of 
innovative materials such as MMC, FGM, and CFRP, which have unique proper￾ties and applications in various industries, including aerospace, automotive, and 
sports. The recent advancements in additive manufacturing have also seen the 
integration of robots in the manufacturing process, as demonstrated by NASA and 
Adidas. The use of robots has increased production efficiency and reduced human 
error, resulting in high-quality products. 
Overall, the future of additive manufacturing looks promising, with more 
advancements expected in the coming years. The use of advanced materials and 
robotic systems in additive manufacturing will undoubtedly revolutionize vari￾ous industries, leading to increased efficiency and reduced costs. The integration 
of machine learning and artificial intelligence in additive manufacturing also 
holds great potential to improve the overall production process. Therefore, further 
research and development are necessary to explore the full potential of robots for 
additive manufacturing in various industries. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Butt, J.; Shirvani, H. Additive, Subtractive, and Hybrid Manufacturing Processes. 
Advances in Manufacturing and Processing of Materials and Structures, 2018, 18 (4), 
187–218. https://doi.org/10.1201/b22020-9. 
[2] Lemu, H. G. On Opportunities and Limitations of Additive Manufacturing Technol￾ogy for Industry 4.0 Era. Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering, 2019, 484, 106– 
113. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-2375-1_15/COVER. 
[3] Kumar, R.; Kumar, M.; Chohan, J. S. The Role of Additive Manufacturing for Bio￾medical Applications: A Critical Review. Journal of Manufacturing Processes, 2021, 
64, 828–850. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JMAPRO.2021.02.022. 
[4] Segonds, F. Design by Additive Manufacturing: An Application in Aeronautics and 
Defence. Virtual and Physical Prototyping, 2018, 13 (4), 237–245. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/17452759.2018.1498660.  
 
 
 
 
An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 175 
[5] Busachi, A.; Erkoyuncu, J.; Colegrove, P.; Martina, F.; Watts, C.; Drake, R. A. 
Review of Additive Manufacturing Technology and Cost Estimation Techniques for 
the Defence Sector. CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology, 2017, 
19, 117–128. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CIRPJ.2017.07.001. 
[6] Urhal, P.; Weightman, A.; Diver, C.; Bartolo, P. Robot Assisted Additive Manufactur￾ing: A Review. Robotics and Computer‑Integrated Manufacturing, 2019, 59, 335– 
345. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RCIM.2019.05.005. 
[7] Esmaeilian, B.; Behdad, S.; Wang, B. The Evolution and Future of Manufactur￾ing: A Review. Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 2016, 39, 79–100. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.JMSY.2016.03.001. 
[8] Kortenkamp, D.; Simmons, R.; Brugali, D. Robotic Systems Architectures and 
Programming. Springer Handbooks, 2016, 283–306. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
978-3-319-32552-1_12/COVER. 
[9] Ahn, D. G. Directed Energy Deposition (DED) Process: State of the Art. International 
Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing‑Green Technology, 2021, 8 (2), 
703–742. https://doi.org/10.1007/S40684-020-00302-7. 
[10] Müller, C.; Müller, J.; Kloft, H.; Hensel, J. Design of Structural Steel Components 
According to Manufacturing Possibilities of the Robot-Guided DED-Arc Process. 
Buildings, 2022, 12 (12). https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings12122154. 
[11] Abuabiah, M.; Mbodj, N. G.; Shaqour, B.; Herzallah, L.; Juaidi, A.; Abdallah, R.; 
Plapper, P. Advancements in Laser Wire-Feed Metal Additive Manufacturing: A Brief 
Review. Materials, 2023, 16 (5), 1–23. https://doi.org/10.3390/ma16052030. 
[12] Kim, J.; Kim, J.; Pyo, C. Comparison of Mechanical Properties of Ni-Al-Bronze 
Alloy Fabricated through Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing with Ni-Al-Bronze Alloy 
Fabricated through Casting. Metals, 2020, 10 (9), 1164. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
MET10091164. 
[13] Zhuo, P.; Li, S.; Ashcroft, I. A.; Jones, A. I. Material Extrusion Additive Manufactur￾ing of Continuous Fibre Reinforced Polymer Matrix Composites: A Review and Out￾look. Composites Part B: Engineering, 2021, 224, 109143. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
COMPOSITESB.2021.109143. 
[14] Mitropoulou, I.; Bernhard, M.; Dillenburger, B. Print Paths Key-Framing: Design for 
Non-Planar Layered Robotic FDM Printing. Proceedings—SCF 2020: ACM Sympo￾sium on Computational Fabrication, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1145/3424630.3425408. 
[15] Jing, X.; Lv, D.; Xie, F.; Zhang, C.; Chen, S.; Mou, B. A Robotic 3D Printing System 
for Supporting-Free Manufacturing of Complex Model Based on FDM Technology. 
Industrial Robot, 2023, 50 (2), 314–325. https://doi.org/10.1108/IR-05-2022-0136. 
[16] Shen, H.; Sun, W.; Fu, J. Multi-View Online Vision Detection Based on Robot Fused 
Deposit Modeling 3D Printing Technology. Rapid Prototyping Journal, 2019, 25 (2), 
343–355. https://doi.org/10.1108/RPJ-03-2018-0052. 
[17] Alkhimov, A. P.; Kosarev, V. F.; Papyrin, A. N. A Method of “Cold” Gas-Dynamic 
Deposition. SPhD, 1990, 35, 1047. 
[18] Papyrin, A.; Kosarev, V.; Klinkov, S.; Alkhimov, A.; Fomin, V. M. Cold Spray Tech￾nology; Elsevier, 2006. 
[19] Kumar, A.; Singh, H.; Kant, R.; Rasool, N. Development of Cold Sprayed Tita￾nium/Baghdadite Composite Coating for Bio-Implant Applications. Journal of 
Thermal Spray Technology, 2021, 30 (8), 2099–2116. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
S11666-021-01269-W/FIGURES/19. 176 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[20] Nault, I. M.; Ferguson, G. D.; Nardi, A. T. Multi-Axis Tool Path Optimization and 
Deposition Modeling for Cold Spray Additive Manufacturing. Additive Manufacturing, 
2021, 38 (November 2020), 101779. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2020.101779. 
[21] Nault, I. M.; Ferguson, G. D.; Champagne, V.; Nardi, A. Design of Residual-Stress￾Compensating Molds for Cold Spray Additive Manufacturing Applications. Journal 
of Thermal Spray Technology, 2020, 29 (6), 1466–1476. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11666-020-00984-0. 
[22] Fan, N.; Cizek, J.; Huang, C.; Xie, X.; Chlup, Z.; Jenkins, R.; Lupoi, R.; Yin, S. 
A New Strategy for Strengthening Additively Manufactured Cold Spray Deposits 
through in-Process Densification. Additive Manufacturing, 2020, 36, 101626. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/J.ADDMA.2020.101626. 
[23] Yin, S.; Cizek, J.; Yan, X.; Lupoi, R. Annealing Strategies for Enhancing Mechanical 
Properties of Additively Manufactured 316L Stainless Steel Deposited by Cold Spray. 
Surface and Coatings Technology, 2019, 370, 353–361. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
SURFCOAT.2019.04.012. 
[24] Kumar, A.; Kant, R.; Singh, H. Tribological Behavior of Cold-Sprayed Titanium/ 
Baghdadite Composite Coatings in Dry and Simulated Body Fluid Environments. 
Surface and Coatings Technology, 2021, 425, 127727. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
SURFCOAT.2021.127727. 
[25] Lee, H.; Shin, H.; Lee, S.; Ko, K. Effect of Gas Pressure on Al Coatings by Cold 
Gas Dynamic Spray. Materials Letters, 2008, 62 (10–11), 1579–1581. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.matlet.2007.09.026. 
[26] Yin, S.; Suo, X.; Liao, H.; Guo, Z.; Wang, X. Significant Influence of Carrier Gas 
Temperature During the Cold Spray Process. Surface Engineering, 2014, 30 (6), 443– 
450. https://doi.org/10.1179/1743294414Y.0000000276. 
[27] Cao, C.; Han, T.; Xu, Y.; Li, W.; Yang, X.; Hu, K. The Associated Effect of Powder 
Carrier Gas and Powder Characteristics on the Optimal Design of the Cold Spray 
Nozzle. Surface Engineering, 2020, 36 (10), 1081–1089. https://doi.org/10.1080/026 
70844.2020.1744297. 
[28] Zahiri, S. H.; Fraser, D.; Gulizia, S.; Jahedi, M. Effect of Processing Conditions on 
Porosity Formation in Cold Gas Dynamic Spraying of Copper. Journal of Thermal Spray 
Technology, 2006, 15 (3), 422–430. https://doi.org/10.1361/105996306X124437. 
[29] Assadi, H.; Kreye, H.; Gärtner, F.; Klassen, T. Cold Spraying—A Materials Perspective. 
Acta Materialia, 2016, 116, 382–407. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actamat.2016.06.034. 
[30] Meyer, M.; Yin, S.; Lupoi, R. Particle in-Flight Velocity and Dispersion Measure￾ments at Increasing Particle Feed Rates in Cold Spray. Journal of Thermal Spray 
Technology, 2017, 26 (1–2), 60–70. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11666-016-0496-3. 
[31] Grujicic, M.; Saylor, J. R.; Beasley, D. E.; DeRosset, W. S.; Helfritch, D. Compu￾tational Analysis of the Interfacial Bonding between Feed-Powder Particles and the 
Substrate in the Cold-Gas Dynamic-Spray Process. Applied Surface Science, 2003, 
219 (3–4), 211–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0169-4332(03)00643-3. 
[32] Ozdemir, O. C.; Widener, C. A.; Carter, M. J.; Johnson, K. W. Predicting the Effects 
of Powder Feeding Rates on Particle Impact Conditions and Cold Spray Deposited 
Coatings. Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 2017, 26 (7), 1598–1615. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s11666-017-0611-0. 
[33] Taylor, K.; Jodoin, B.; Karov, J. Particle Loading Effect in Cold Spray. 	Jour￾nal of Thermal Spray Technology, 2006, 15 (2), 273–279. https://doi.org/10.1361/ 
105996306X108237. An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 177 
[34] Meyer, M. C.; Yin, S.; McDonnell, K. A.; Stier, O.; Lupoi, R. Feed Rate Effect on 
Particulate Acceleration in Cold Spray under Low Stagnation Pressure Conditions. 
Surface and Coatings Technology, 2016, 304, 237–245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
surfcoat.2016.07.017. 
[35] Tan, A. W. Y.; Sun, W.; Phang, Y. P.; Dai, M.; Marinescu, I.; Dong, Z.; Liu, E. Effects 
of Traverse Scanning Speed of Spray Nozzle on the Microstructure and Mechanical 
Properties of Cold-Sprayed Ti6Al4V Coatings. Journal of Thermal Spray Technol￾ogy, 2017, 26 (7), 1484–1497. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11666-017-0619-5. 
[36] Moridi, A.; Hassani Gangaraj, S. M.; Vezzu, S.; Guagliano, M. Number of Passes 
and Thickness Effect on Mechanical Characteristics of Cold Spray Coating. Procedia 
Engineering, 2014, 74, 449–459. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2014.06.296. 
[37] Candel, A.; Gadow, R. Trajectory Generation and Coupled Numerical Simula￾tion for Thermal Spraying Applications on Complex Geometries. Journal of 
Thermal Spray Technology, 2009, 18 (5–6), 981–987. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s11666-009-9338-x. 
[38] Singh, R.; Rauwald, K. H.; Wessel, E.; Mauer, G.; Schruefer, S.; Barth, A.; Wilson, S.; 
Vassen, R. Effects of Substrate Roughness and Spray-Angle on Deposition Behavior 
of Cold-Sprayed Inconel 718. Surface and Coatings Technology, 2017, 319, 249–259. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2017.03.072. 
[39] Li, W. Y.; Yin, S.; Wang, X. F. Numerical Investigations of the Effect of Oblique 
Impact on Particle Deformation in Cold Spraying by the SPH Method. Applied Surface 
Science, 2010, 256 (12), 3725–3734. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apsusc.2010.01.014. 
[40] Vargas-Uscategui, A.; King, P. C.; Yang, S.; Chu, C.; Li, J. Toolpath Planning for Cold 
Spray Additively Manufactured Titanium Walls and Corners: Effect on Geometry 
and Porosity. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 2021, 298 (December), 
117272. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2021.117272. 
[41] Pattison, J.; Celotto, S.; Khan, A.; O’Neill, W. Standoff Distance and Bow Shock 
Phenomena in the Cold Spray Process. Surface and Coatings Technology, 2008, 202 
(8), 1443–1454. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.surfcoat.2007.06.065. 
[42] Rech, S.; Trentin, A.; Vezzù, S.; Vedelago, E.; Legoux, J. G.; Irissou, E. Different 
Cold Spray Deposition Strategies: Single- and Multi-Layers to Repair Aluminium 
Alloy Components. Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 2014, 23 (8), 1237–1250. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11666-014-0141-y. 
[43] Kállai, Z.; Schüppstuhl, T. Robot-Guided, Feature-Based 3D Printing Strategies for Car￾bon Fiber Reinforced Plastic. Tagungsband des 4. Kongresses Montage Handhabung 
Industrieroboter, 2019, 178–186. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-59317-2_18. 
[44] Singh, L.; Singh, B.; Saxena, K. K. Manufacturing Techniques for Metal Matrix 
Composites (MMC): An Overview. Advances in Materials and Processing Technolo￾gies, 2020, 6 (2), 224–240. https://doi.org/10.1080/2374068X.2020.1729603. 
[45] Lei, Z.; Bi, J.; Chen, Y.; Chen, X.; Tian, Z.; Qin, X. Effect of TiB2 Content on 
Microstructural Features and Hardness of TiB2/AA7075 Composites Manufac￾tured by LMD. Journal of Manufacturing Processes, 2020, 53, 283–292. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.JMAPRO.2020.02.036. 
[46] Ahsan, M. R. U.; Tanvir, A. N. M.; Ross, T.; Elsawy, A.; Oh, M. S.; Kim, D. B. 
Fabrication of Bimetallic Additively Manufactured Structure (BAMS) of Low Car￾bon Steel and 316L Austenitic Stainless Steel with Wire + Arc Additive Manufac￾turing. Rapid Prototyping Journal, 2020, 26 (3), 519–530. https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
RPJ-09-2018-0235. 178 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[47] Naebe, M.; Shirvanimoghaddam, K. Functionally Graded Materials: A Review of 
Fabrication and Properties. Applied Materials Today, 2016, 5, 223–245. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.APMT.2016.10.001. 
[48] Ma, S.; Chen, X.; Jiang, M.; Li, B.; Wang, Z.; Lei, Z.; Chen, Y. Surface Morphology, 
Microstructure and Mechanical Properties of Al–Mg–Sc Alloy Thin Wall Produced 
by Laser-Arc Hybrid Additive Manufacturing. Thin‑Walled Structures, 2023, 186 
(January), 110674. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tws.2023.110674. 
[49] Zhao, D.; Guo, W. Shape and Performance Controlled Advanced Design for Addi￾tive Manufacturing: A Review of Slicing and Path Planning. Journal of Manufactur￾ing Science and Engineering, Transactions of the ASME, 2020, 142 (1). https://doi. 
org/10.1115/1.4045055/1046939. 
[50] Jiang, J.; Ma, Y. Path Planning Strategies to Optimize Accuracy, Quality, Build Time 
and Material Use in Additive Manufacturing: A Review. Micromachines, 2020, 11 
(7), 633. https://doi.org/10.3390/MI11070633. 
[51] Li, Y.; He, D.; Yuan, S.; Tang, K.; Zhu, J. Vector Field-Based Curved Layer Slicing 
and Path Planning for Multi-Axis Printing. Robotics and Computer‑Integrated Manu￾facturing, 2022, 77, 102362. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RCIM.2022.102362. 
[52] Jin, Y.; He, Y.; Fu, G.; Zhang, A.; Du, J. A Non-Retraction Path Planning Approach 
for Extrusion-Based Additive Manufacturing. Robotics and Computer‑Integrated 
Manufacturing, 2017, 48, 132–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.RCIM.2017.03.008. 
[53] Li, Y.; Yuan, S.; Zhang, W.; Zhu, J. A New Continuous Printing Path Planning Method 
for Gradient Honeycomb Infill Structures. International Journal of Advanced Manu￾facturing Technology, 2023, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00170-023-11065-1/ 
FIGURES/C. 
[54] Liu, T.; Yuan, S.; Wang, Y.; Xiong, Y.; Zhu, J.; Lu, L.; Tang, Y. Stress-Driven Infill 
Mapping for 3D-Printed Continuous Fiber Composite with Tunable Infill Density and 
Morphology. Additive Manufacturing, 2023, 62, 103374. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ADDMA.2022.103374. 
[55] Zhao, G.; Zhou, C.; Lin, D. Tool Path Planning for Directional Freezing-Based Three￾Dimensional Printing of Nanomaterials. Journal of Micro and Nano‑Manufacturing, 
2018, 6 (1). https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4038452/368797. 
[56] Biegler, M.; Wang, J.; Kaiser, L.; Rethmeier, M. Automated Tool-Path Generation for 
Rapid Manufacturing of Additive Manufacturing Directed Energy Deposition Geom￾etries. Steel Research International, 2020, 91 (11), 2000017. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
SRIN.202000017. 
[57] Dwivedi, R.; Kovacevic, R. Automated Torch Path Planning Using Polygon Subdivi￾sion for Solid Freeform Fabrication Based on Welding. Journal of Manufacturing 
Systems, 2004, 23 (4), 278–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0278-6125(04)80040-2. 
[58] Amal, M. S.; Justus Panicker, C. T.; Senthilkumar, V. Simulation of Wire Arc Addi￾tive Manufacturing to Find out the Optimal Path Planning Strategy. Materials Today: 
Proceedings, 2022, 66, 2405–2410. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MATPR.2022.06.338. 
[59] Zhai, X.; Chen, F. Path Planning of a Type of Porous Structures for Additive Manu￾facturing. Computer‑Aided Design, 2019, 115, 218–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
CAD.2019.06.002. 
[60] Zhou, B.; Tian, T. A Path Planning Method of Lattice Structural Components for 
Additive Manufacturing. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Tech￾nology, 2021, 116 (5–6), 1467–1490. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00170-021-07092-5/ 
TABLES/4. An overview of robot assisted additive manufacturing 179 
[61] Manoharan, M.; Kumaraguru, S. Path Planning for Direct	 Energy Deposi￾tion with Collaborative Robots: A Review. 2018 Conference on Information 
and Communication Technology, CICT 2018, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
INFOCOMTECH.2018.8722362. 
[62] Papacharalampopoulos, A.; Bikas, H.; Stavropoulos, P. Path Planning for the Infill of 
3D Printed Parts Utilizing Hilbert Curves. Procedia Manufacturing, 2018, 21, 757– 
764. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.PROMFG.2018.02.181. 
[63] Ding, D.; Pan, Z.; Cuiuri, D.; Li, H.; Larkin, N. Adaptive Path Planning for Wire￾Feed Additive Manufacturing Using Medial Axis Transformation. Journal of Cleaner 
Production, 2016, 133, 942–952. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JCLEPRO.2016.06.036. 
[64] Ding, D.; Pan, Z.; Cuiuri, D.; Li, H.; van Duin, S. Advanced Design for Additive 
Manufacturing: 3D Slicing and 2D Path Planning. New Trends in 3D Printing, 2016. 
https://doi.org/10.5772/63042. 
[65] Jiang, J.; Stringer, J.; Xu, X. Support Optimization 	for Flat Features via 
Path Planning in Additive Manufacturing. 2019, 6 (3), 171–179. https://doi. 
org/10.1089/3DP.2017.0124; https://home.liebertpub.com/3dp. 
[66] Liu, J.; To, A. C. Deposition Path Planning-Integrated Structural Topology Optimiza￾tion for 3D Additive Manufacturing Subject to Self-Support Constraint. Computer‑
Aided Design, 2017, 91, 27–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CAD.2017.05.003. 
[67] Wang, X.; Wang, A.; Li, Y. A Sequential Path-Planning Methodology for Wire and 
Arc Additive Manufacturing Based on a Water-Pouring Rule. International Journal 
of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2019, 103 (9–12), 3813–3830. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/S00170-019-03706-1/TABLES/3. 
[68] Diourté, A.; Bugarin, F.; Bordreuil, C.; Segonds, S. Continuous Three-Dimensional 
Path Planning (CTPP) for Complex Thin Parts with Wire Arc Additive Manu￾facturing. Additive Manufacturing, 2021, 37, 101622. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. 
ADDMA.2020.101622. 
[69] Zhang, C.; Shen, C.; Hua, X.; Li, F.; Zhang, Y.; Zhu, Y. Influence of Wire-Arc Addi￾tive Manufacturing Path Planning Strategy on the Residual Stress Status in One Single 
Buildup Layer. International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 2020, 
111 (3–4), 797–806. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00170-020-06178-W/FIGURES/8. 
[70] Ferreira, R. P.; Vilarinho, L. O.; Scotti, A. Development and Implementation of a 
Software for Wire Arc Additive Manufacturing Preprocessing Planning: Trajectory 
Planning and Machine Code Generation. Welding in the World, 2022, 66 (3), 455– 
470. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40194-021-01233-w. 
[71] Schmitz, M.; Wiartalla, J.; Gelfgren, M.; Mann, S.; Corves, B.; Hüsing, M. A Robot￾Centered Path-Planning Algorithm for Multidirectional Additive Manufacturing for 
WAAM Processes and Pure Object Manipulation. Applied Sciences (Switzerland), 
2021, 11 (13). https://doi.org/10.3390/app11135759. 
[72] Malhan, R. K.; Thakar, S.; Kabir, A. M.; Rajendran, P.; Bhatt, P. M.; Gupta, S. K. 
Generation of Configuration Space Trajectories Over Semi-Constrained Cartesian 
Paths for Robotic Manipulators. IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engi￾neering, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1109/TASE.2022.3144673. 7
 
 
Chapter 7
 
A review on fundamentals 
of cold spray additive 
manufacturing 
Gidla Vinay , Ravi Kant and Harpreet Singh 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Cold gas dynamic spray, also known as cold spray (CS), is a versatile technique 
for the deposition of a few hundred microns to mm layer coatings. It belongs 
to the family of thermal spray processes, a relatively new technique developed 
and patented in late 1990s by the Institute of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, 
Russian Academies of Sciences (ITAM, RAS) [1]. In CS, coatings are generated 
by the plastic deformation of feedstock particles onto a substrate thereby gen￾erating layer-by-layer build-up of deforming particles bonded with each other. 
The feedstock is of typically micron-size particles, where they flew at supersonic 
velocities with the help of a convergent divergent nozzle ( Figure 7.1 ), and the 
driving force to generate these speeds is a carrier gas of typically compressed 
helium, nitrogen or air [2]. Since it is a solid-state deposition process there is no 
melting of feedstock during the entire process, which makes it the most suitable 
technique to generate coatings of materials that are thermally sensitive, expensive 
materials, refractory materials and the like, and the generated coating properties 
are close to their bulk counterpart. Almost all plastically deformable materials 
can be coated using CS and materials like ceramics, and polymers can be coated 
using some special approaches. Nozzle design and carrier gas are typical system 
parameters, while particle size, process pressure, process temperature, and feed 
rate are some of the process parameters which determine the properties of the 
coatings developed. 
The layer-by-layer deposition feature of the CS process not only restricts it to 
being a coating deposition method but also establishes it as an additive manufac￾turing (AM) technique with a primary emphasis on both repairing and manufactur￾ing parts. [2]. This feature marks the entry of cold spray additive manufacturing 
(CSAM) into one of the additive manufacturing processes. Advantages like rapid 
build time, no melting, no need of controlled atmosphere and precision (using 
robots) makes CS a promising AM technique for repairing as well as making com￾plete parts. Recent developments are going in a way to make CS as “manufacturing 
at need” kind of AM technology where any part can be repaired or made immedi￾ately with an onsite installed CSAM, thereby reducing the operation/production 
180 DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-7  
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 181 
Figure 7.1 Schematic diagram of a CSAM system. 
halt time. Significant developments have been made in understanding the bonding 
mechanism behind CS, and researchers from all over the globe contributed in 
expanding the window of deposition of materials, thickness achievable and 3D 
part-making strategies [2–6]. 
In the initial days due to the usage of low process pressures, coatings were 
generated with a hand-held coating gun. However, with the increase in process 
knowledge, the use of higher pressures for achieving higher velocities and the 
need for better accuracy paved the way for attaching a robot arm to the coating 
gun. The gun is fixed to a robot arm, and the movement of the arm helps in generat￾ing coating along the workpiece (Figure 7.1). Since the non-deposited/rebounded 
feedstock powder can be recycled or reused because they are collected in powder 
collectors and no flaming is involved in the process, in a way CS is a sustainable 
as well as green technology. Throughout this chapter, readers will be introduced 
to CS process fundamentals like bonding mechanism, process parameters, nozzle 
design, post-processing techniques and their effect on coating properties. 
7.2 BONDING MECHANISM 
In the initial spraying of feedstock using cold spray, it was widely understood 
that particles are not melting, as the operating temperatures are quite below melt￾ing temperature; however, the bonding mechanism behind the cold spray was not 
understood. It is believed that the pure kinetic energy of particles helps in bond￾ing. So, the early trials were more focused on expanding the number of materials 
deposited and modifying the nozzle geometry to achieve higher kinetic energies 
[1, 2]. It is difficult to understand the bonding mechanism in cold spray due to the 
micron-size feedstock particle bombards with the substrate at very high speeds,  
 
182 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 7.2 (a) Initial condition of simulation and impact of particle at 500m/s, 600m/s; 
(b) temporal development of stress, temp and PEEQ with different velocities 
for Cu particle [7]; (c) schematic of jetting in hydrodynamic viscosity theory [8]. 
where typical impact time would be in nanoseconds, and it is believed that strain 
rate would be between 106
 to 109
 [7]. Later in 2003, Assadi et al. [7] proposed a 
hypothesis for bonding mechanism with the help of finite element–based impact 
simulations, naming it adiabatic shear instability (ASI). Later work was done on 
expanding the knowledge based on this theory, and it was widely accepted among 
the cold spray community as the bonding mechanism. Recently Hassani et al. 
[8] have challenged this bonding mechanism by saying that ASI is not necessary to 
fulfil bonding criteria. It has attracted comments from various groups. Other bond￾ing theories like mechanical interlocking [9], diffusion [10], oxide layer breakup 
[11] and interface amorphization [12] have been proposed; however, these mecha￾nisms were not as popular as ASI and hydrodynamic plasticity. 
7.2.1 Adiabatic shear instability 
This theory was first proposed by Assadi et al. [7] followed by Grujicic et al. 
[13] as the bonding mechanism behind cold spray. In this, with the help of finite 
element modelling, the authors created a single particle and impacted it onto a A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 183 
substrate at different velocities while keeping the substrate and the particle at 
room temperature. Upon impact, they have observed some abnormal changes 
in some of the elements in the particle/substrate interface where jetting occurs. 
They named these elements critical elements (Figure 7.2a), and this abnormal 
phenomenon was observed only after crossing a certain velocity. If the particle 
is impacted above this velocity, then in these elements, a sudden rise in tempera￾ture and plastic strain with a drop in flow stress is observed (Figure 7.2b), which 
indicates a localized melting at these critical elements, which can be identified by 
jetting. This localized melting helps in bonding these particles onto the substrate, 
and the velocity at which ASI occurs is termed critical velocity (Vcr). It is an indi￾cation that above this velocity coating deposition occurs. The main assumption 
in these simulations is that due to low impact time (typically in nanoseconds), 
high speed and small particle size, it is assumed that the heating is adiabatic. 
It has been observed from the SEM images that morphologies of the deformed 
particles also supported the data where jetting in deformed splat morphology 
of simulation and experiment are identical. It is observed that above the critical 
velocity deposition occurs; however, typically only a certain percentage of splat 
undergoes ASI during deposition in real time. These simulations rely strongly on 
the Lagrangian method, where plastic strain of the element deforms excessively 
above certain velocities for soft metals, which ultimately aborts the program. 
Later studies involving the Eulerian method, however, have overcome this draw￾back and confirmed the ASI as well [14, 15]. 
Subsequent studies have been performed to understand this bonding mechanism 
in a closer way, and an empirical equation derived from the experiments was pro￾posed to estimate the critical velocity of the particle (Eq. 7.1) based on the tensile 
strength, specific heat and operating temperature [16–20]. As mentioned, critical 
velocity is dependent on the operating temperature as well. With increase in the 
process temperature, the temperature gain to the inflight particle increases, which 
further decreases the critical velocity. In real-time deposition, these coatings are 
generated at a certain process temperature. However, for the critical velocity cal￾culations it is to be noted that particle and substrate temperatures are given as 
room temperature. For these impact simulations, the Johnson-Cook (JC) plasticity 
model, which has contributions from strain hardening, strain rate hardening and 
thermal softening, is used (shown in Eq. 7.2). Even though the JC equation is 
applicable well up to 104
 and strain rate in CS is more than 106
, it is still a widely 
used model because of its easy availability in the software and because it is an 
established model and computationally easy. Some scholars have used the modi￾fied JC model [21, 22] and other in-house developed models [23, 24] to under￾stand the effect of deviation from JC. Other popular simulation approaches include 
molecular dynamic simulations [25]. 
as 
vcr = + bCP (Tm ­Tp) (7.1)
r  
 
184 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Where σ is the temperature-dependent flow stress, Cp is heat capacity, Tm and Tp 
are melting and particle temperature of the feedstock, ρ is the density of feedstock, 
a and b are graph fitting constants. 
. m é ù n é æ e p öù æ T T­ ö é ù i s = AB + e 1 Cln ê1­ ú ( ) p úê + ç . ÷ú ç ÷ (7.2) êë ûê e ê T ­T ú ë è 0 øú û è m i ø ë û 
Where σ is the flow stress, Tm and Tref are the melting and reference temperature. 
A and B are uniaxial yield stress and strain hardening coefficient while m, n and 
c represent thermal softening exponent, strain hardening exponent and strain rate 
hardening exponent, respectively. 
7.2.2 Hydrodynamic plasticity 
Recently, Hassani et al. [8] proposed an alternate theory for the bonding mecha￾nism in cold spray, which is known as hydrodynamic plasticity mechanism. In 
this the authors have proposed that jetting which causes the bonding in CS occurs 
due to the hydrodynamic plasticity rather than the ASI. They further claimed that 
ASI is not needed to cause jetting. In order to prove this, single particle impact 
simulations were run with and without the thermal softening exponent from the 
JC equation, which is primarily responsible for the melting. It was observed that 
even without the thermal softening exponent, jetting happens. They also claimed 
that jetting is attributed more to the pressure release than to ASI. When the particle 
impacts the substrate, pressure waves emanate from the substrate and the particle. 
The claim is that this contact edge velocity (Ve) and shock velocity (Vs) are the 
primary driving factors for causing the jetting. Initially, this edge velocity will be 
lower than shock velocity, but there is a transition point above which shock veloc￾ity will be greater than edge velocity. At this point, the hydrodynamic stresses 
generated are greater than the flow strength of the material which facilitates the 
jetting (Figure 7.2c). This theory has received comments [26] and responses [26] 
from both sides - further proof is needed before disregarding any of the theories. 
It is to be noted that in both theories, it is given that jetting is the main reason for 
the particle bonding; however, the theories differ in explaining what constitutes 
this jetting. 
7.2.3 Rebound phenomenon 
Rebound phenomenon is not a bonding mechanism like ASI or hydrodynamic 
plasticity, but it is a deposition behavior, which explains the window of velocity 
limit of an inflight particle impacting the substrate for successful deposition. As 
discussed in the ASI, that critical velocity is the minimum required for initial depo￾sition, it is clearly understood that below critical velocity bonding does not occur, 
which results in no deposition. One may misunderstand that increasing the velocity  
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 185 
Figure 7.3	 SEM micrographs of Al-Si splats attached on substrate sprayed at different veloc￾ities (a) 500 m/s, (b) 700 m/s, and (c) 1000 m/s [27]. 
beyond the critical velocity will further increase the deposition. However, a study 
done by J. Wu et al. [27] reported that just as there is critical velocity for mini￾mum deposition, there also exists a maximum velocity above which the impacted 
particle deforms to a maximum limit and rebounds from the substrate, thus also 
resulting in no deposition (craters in Figure 7.3a, 7.3b, 7.3c). This is known as the 
rebound phenomenon. It was shown that the bonding of a particle onto a substrate 
is based on the competition between the adhesion energy and rebound energy 
[27]. With change in velocity this adhesion energy and rebound energy changes. 
The initial point of intersection of these energies is termed critical velocity, and 
the second intersection point is termed rebound velocity. Between these points 
the adhesion energy will be greater than the rebound energy, which facilitates 
bonding. Within the parameters of study, it is observed that critical velocity is not 
much affected with a change in particle size. For a higher particle size, however, 
the rebound velocity is comparatively lower than the smaller particle size due to 
higher energies associated with higher mass. 
7.3 TYPES OF COLD SPRAY SYSTEM 
Even though the principal setup and working mechanisms are the same, cold spray 
systems are mainly categorized into two types based on the working pressure – 
low-pressure cold spray system and high-pressure cold spray system. The main 
difference between the two systems is the working gas; in a low-pressure cold 
spray the main working gas is compressed air, whereas in a high-pressure cold 
spray system it is compressed helium (He) or/and nitrogen (N2).  
 
186 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
7.3.1 High-pressure cold spray system 
From the name itself it can be understood that these cold spray systems can reach/ 
use high pressures which are typically up to 50 bar. This high pressure translates 
into higher gas and particle velocities at the nozzle exit. Typically, helium or nitro￾gen is used as process gas and powder feeder carrier gas. Due to the higher costs 
associated with the usage of helium, the cost per product is high for helium-based 
systems, followed by nitrogen-based systems. To reduce the cost associated, some 
researchers have tried using nitrogen as the powder feeder carrier gas and helium 
as the process gas. To further reduce the cost associated with helium usage, helium 
from the coating chamber has been recycled [28], where the used helium from the 
process chamber is collected and processed to use again. It reduced the overall 
cost of the product, but heavy investment is still needed to set up the helium reuse 
facility. On the other hand, nitrogen is cheaper than helium but costlier than air, 
and it has the ability to achieve higher pressures up to 50 bar. Velocities achieved 
and the amount of heat transfer to the particle will differ from the He-based sys￾tem [29]. Typically, for a given set of process parameters involving pressure and 
temperature, the velocity attained by the particle is lower in the N2-based system 
than in the He-based system, while heat transfer to the particles will be higher in 
the N2-based system than in the He-based system. This is due to the low density 
of helium gas, specific heat ratio and gas constant [30, 31]. Because of this, coat￾ings prepared using He-based systems always exhibit better mechanical proper￾ties like hardness and yield strength for the same process parameters of N2-based 
systems [29, 31]. One more advantage of high-pressure CS systems is that reaction 
with oxygen is extremely low in helium and minimal in N2-based systems, which 
makes them highly useful in aerospace and medical applications [29, 32, 33]. 
7.3.2 Low-pressure cold spray system 
The cost associated with the usage of gasses like helium and nitrogen led research￾ers to explore the use of air as the process gas and powder feeder carrier in the CS 
system. Due to the high density, specific heat ratio and gas constant, the velocities 
achieved by air-based systems are lower than those of He- and N2-based sys￾tems [20, 29]. Due to the low achievable velocities and use of relatively lower 
pressures, typically less than 20 bar, these systems are termed low-pressure cold 
spray systems. As discussed, bonding occurs after reaching the critical velocity, 
and the critical velocity is different for different material. Sometimes it does not 
require much velocity to deposit soft materials like aluminum (Vcr= 481 m/s), zinc 
(Vcr = 339 m/s), copper (Vcr = 452 m/s) and silver (Vcr = 375 m/s) [20]. For depo￾sition of these kinds of materials, use of air-based systems are an economically 
better choice. Some of the researchers have successfully deposited even high-end 
materials like titanium, Ti6Al4V and super alloys [2, 20, 32]. These materials are 
very hard and have higher critical velocities. However, due to the extra thermal 
energy provided in the form of heat transfer from process gas to inflight powder  
 
 
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 187 
particles, deposition of these materials has become possible [33, 34]. As discussed 
earlier regarding the bonding mechanism, that critical velocity decreases with 
increasing particle temperature, higher particle temperatures associated with air￾based systems helped in the deposition of these materials. An in-depth explanation 
of this phenomenon will be provided in subsequent sections. 
7.4 PROCESS PARAMETERS 
7.4.1 Working gas and process pressure 
As discussed in the previous section, compressed gas of air/helium/nitrogen is used 
in the CS system. In this system, compressed gas has two purposes: first is that the 
process gas is heated for further expansion and is directed towards the nozzle inlet 
from the heater assembly, and the second is that the carrier gas acts as a powder feeder 
which is used to carry the powder from the feeder to the nozzle inlet. At the nozzle, 
these two gasses mix with each other, so the pressure difference between these two 
flows need to be adjusted based on the powder flow. Increasing the pressure of pro￾cess gas increases the velocity of the gas at the nozzle outlet, thereby increasing par￾ticle velocities. Helium creates the highest velocities, followed by nitrogen and then 
air (Table 7.1) [30, 31, 33]. Higher velocities result in higher deposition efficiencies 
(Figure 7.4a, 7.4b) [19] and therefore better mechanical properties like hardness and 
yield strength and functional properties, provided that velocities are below the rebound 
velocity [33]. Gas density, specific heat ratio and gas constant play an important role in 
achieving higher velocities, which will be discussed later in the nozzle section. 
7.4.2 Temperature 
A heater is placed inside the cold spray gun assembly, where a typical heating 
element is made of nichrome. Heaters in high-pressure CS systems are capable of 
heating up to 1000 °C as process temperature, whereas it is around 600 °C for a 
low-pressure CS system. This temperature is responsible for the expansion of the 
gas, which further increases the pressure before entering the nozzle inlet as well as 
for the heat transfer to the inflight feedstock particle [1, 33]. As discussed earlier 
regarding the bonding mechanism, temperature also plays an important role in 
causing ASI along with the particle velocity. Critical velocity, the main parameter 
which defines the initialization of bonding, is dependent on the temperature of the 
inflight impacting particle as well. The so-called adiabatic shear instability occurs 
at lower velocities with an increase in the particle temperature [34], as material 
can be deformed easily when temperature is applied. This has been tremendously 
helpful in achieving the coatings intended for inter-splat dependent functional 
properties like electrical conductivity, corrosion resistance and elastic modulus. 
Deposition efficiency, electrical conductivity and ductility increases with a rise 
in process temperature due to thermal softening of particles. However, properties 188 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 7.4	 Deposition efficiency plotted against (a) particle velocity, (b) Vp/Vcr [19]; bonding 
fraction calculated from peripheral elements in simulation (c) considering par￾ticle temperature as room temperature, (d) considering particle temperature 
and (e) bonding fraction difference for different metals [35]. 
Table 7.1	 Particle velocity table of titanium feedstock for different process param￾eters [33] 
Pressure (MPa) Temperature (°C) Gas type Nozzle type Velocity (m/s) 
3 300 N2 MOC24 608 
3 600 N2 MOC24 688 
0.5 100 He MOC24 604  
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 189 
such as hardness will be decreased if excessive process temperature is supplied 
[33, 34, 36]. A proper combination of pressure and temperature needs to be chosen 
based on the feedstock material and the intended application. 
Thermally sensitive materials like titanium and molybdenum tend to form small 
oxide layers during the travel of the inflight feedstock through the nozzle. The 
aging of aluminum alloys during inflight travel and nozzle clogging (generally 
soft/low melting materials) during deposition are some of the problems associated 
with using a high process temperature [2, 20, 32]. The influence of inflight powder 
on the deposition was studied using finite element analysis (FEA) by considering 
powder particle with and without temperature (Figure 7.4c, 7.4d). Correlating the 
influence temperature with the elastic modulus of the experiment, the researchers 
concluded that the inflight powder particle temperature effect is significant and 
contributes to nearly 40% to 60% of bonding (Figure 7.4e) [35]. 
7.4.3 Feed rate, scan speed, spray angle and 
standoff distance 
Feed rate of the powder feeder in CS is adjusted based on the density and size 
of the feedstock material as well as desired thickness. Usually for materials with 
lower density, low feed rate is generally preferred and vice versa for higher den￾sity material. Higher feed rates result in more interactions between the inflight 
particles during the travel in the nozzle, which translates to more velocity loss and 
ultimately affects the deposition efficiency [38]. 
Scan speed represents the speed of the robot arm/nozzle transverse movement. 
Increasing the scan speed results in a lower number of particles accumulating at a 
particular place on the target substrate during coating deposition, which ultimately 
decreases the thickness of the coatings achieved per raster. High scan speeds are 
most useful in generating thin coatings. For repairing/refurbishment of parts and 
thick coating applications, a slow scan speed is advisable, as a greater number of 
particles are available to deform and form coating per raster [2, 20]. 
Spray angle represents the angle between the nozzle and the target substrate 
and is important for achieving maximum deposition in cold spray coating. A study 
on the effect of spray angle on deposition efficiency indicated that maximum 
deposition is achieved when the spray angle is at 90° with the substrate and that 
deposition efficiency decreases with decreasing the spray angles. No deposition is 
achieved at angles lower than 30° [39]. 
Standoff distance is the distance between the nozzle exit and substrate during 
the spraying of the feedstock. It is observed from the experimental works that the 
deposition efficiency drastically decreases with an increase in the standoff distance 
[37]. The microstructure of the coatings revealed that there is increase in porosity 
with increase in standoff distance, especially for lighter materials like Al and Ti. 
However, even with lower deposition efficiency and high standoff distance, Cu 
has obtained dense microstructure due to the tamping effect caused by the higher 
density of the material (Figure 7.5a, 7.5b). Upon characterization, it is understood  
190 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 7.5	 Optical microscopic images of coatings deposited at varying standoff distances. 
Top to bottom (10, 70, 100 mm): (a) Cu coatings; (b) Al coatings; (c) change of 
gas velocity and particle velocity for different materials with varying standoff 
distances [37]. 
that there is no change in hardness for these coatings. This is because there is no 
change in velocity of the particle within this standoff distance range, and the strain 
hardening effect due to the impact would be same [37, 40]. Computational fluid 
dynamics (CFD) analysis of the same has revealed that there is no change in the 
inflight particle velocity (Vp) and temperature with varying standoff distance, but a 
drastic decrease in the gas velocity (Vg) has been observed (Figure 7.5c). A reason 
for low deposition even with no change in particle velocity is the shock wave/ 
bow shock [37, 41]. Bow shock effect is high for low standoff distances and it 
slowly disappears by increasing the standoff distance. For larger standoff distance, 
however, gas velocity drastically decreases, and this can affect the inflight particle 
movement adversely if Vg < Vp [41]. Most articles have suggested that standoff 
distance between 20 and 30 mm is the best choice in terms of deposition efficiency.  
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 191 
7.4.4 Powder size and morphology 
Powder size along with the morphology and density of the feedstock material 
plays an important role in the successful deposition of feedstock in cold spray. The 
velocity achieved for larger particle size is less when compared with the smaller 
particle size for a given process parameter (Figure 7.5c) [37, 41], which ultimately 
results in lower kinetic energy [36]. Similarly, a material with high density like 
tantalum and copper always yields lower velocities due to the higher mass when 
compared with lower density material like aluminum and magnesium for similar 
process parameters and feedstock size. On the other hand, King et al. [43] observed 
that extremely small particles of less than 10 µm have yielded lower deformation 
(less flattening ratio) due to the decrease in velocity caused by the bow shock effect 
of the nozzle [43]. Usage of extremely small particles also results in flowability 
issues of powder in the powder feeder. The flowability issue of smaller particles is 
due to the cohesion of powders caused by forces like Van der Waals, electrostatic 
and surface tension. Recently Polycontrols, a Canada-based company, developed a 
vibration-assisted powder feeder which has capability to supply feedstock of very 
fine size (less than 10 µm) to the cold spray systems without any flowability issue 
[44]; significant research has yet to be done on these generated coatings. However, 
it needs to be understood that depositing very fine particles are difficult, as critical 
velocity increases with decrease in particle size [20]. 
From the literature reported it is understood that ideal feedstock size for cold 
spray coatings is anywhere between 15 µm and 50 µm [2, 20]. Particle size highly 
Figure 7.6	 Hardness plotted against powder energy (KE + TE) for Cu coatings with aver￾age particle size: (a) 22 µm, (b) 33 µm, (c) 42 µm. Electrical conductivity plotted 
against powder energy (KE + TE) for Cu coatings with average particle size: 
(d) 22 µm, (e) 33 µm, (f) 42 µm [42]. 192 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
influences the properties of the coatings, where for a small particle size veloci￾ties achieved are higher [45] and the travel time for the feedstock in nozzle is 
less, therefore lower temperature gains. These particles with higher kinetic energy 
result in higher strain hardening during particle deformation, and the obtained 
coatings possess good mechanical properties like high hardness and yield strength. 
However, there will be a decrease in the overall ductility of the coating due to the 
high strain hardening. Other functional properties like corrosion resistance and 
electrical conductivity obtained for these coatings are inferior owing to the losses 
occurring due to a higher number of splat interfaces. 
Kumar et al. [42] have studied the particle size effect on CS copper coatings and 
from their works it can be concluded that coatings deposited with feedstock of 18 
µm average particle size (lower particle size) achieved high hardness of 160 HV, 
while electrical conductivity achieved is only 36 MS/m (62% of bulk). However, 
coatings deposited with feedstock of 42 µm average particle size (higher particle 
sizes) achieved better electrical conductivity, as high as 45 MS/m (77% of bulk), 
while hardness achieved was only 120 HV (Figure 7.6a, 7.6b, 7.6c, 7.6d, 7.6e, 
7.6f) [42]. This increase in the hardness in lower particle size coatings was attrib￾uted to the higher grain refinement occurring in smaller size particles compared 
to the larger size particles (smaller size—higher kinetic energy; more interfaces— 
more grain refinement places). As already discussed in the temperature section, a 
larger particle usually achieves lower particle velocities due to the higher mass, 
which increases the travel time inside the nozzle. This increased travel time helps 
in gaining more heat from the process gas, and the overall thermal energy of a par￾ticle is directly proportional to the mass of the particle and ΔT. This extra thermal 
energy given helps in achieving better deformation, thereby better bonding and 
improvement in functional properties like electrical conductivity, corrosion resis￾tance, elastic modulus and ductility [42]. However, due to more thermal softening, 
hardness achieved is low. 
Spherical powder is often chosen for deposition as spherical particles have 
better flowability; however, non-spherical morphology like tear drop, irregular 
shaped powders and the like achieves higher velocities due to the low drag force 
caused inside the nozzle. A study done by Wong et al. [46] revealed the same, 
where irregular particles achieved better velocities for the same process param￾eters when compared with the spherical particles due to the low drag coefficient. 
Hardness achieved for the irregular particle coatings is inferior when compared 
with the spherical particle coatings because irregular particles impinge on the tar￾get/substrate with the sharp corner. So, instead of undergoing plastic deformation, 
the impacted particle impinges/penetrates (in the previous layer), which results in 
poor mechanical properties, poor adhesion (jetting phenomenon occurrence sites 
are fewer) and lower deposition efficiency. The top surfaces of the coating have 
attracted more porosity, which confirmed the same [46]. An FEA-based impact 
study of conical and spherical particle simulations revealed the same, in that coni￾cal shaped particles stress concentrations are high and jetting was missing, which 
can result in poor deposition [47].  
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 193 
7.4.5 Substrate 
Every metal inherently possesses a small “nm” thickness of oxide layer on top 
of the surface. Since the bonding mechanism is due to the plastic deformation of 
impacting particles on the substrate, the state of the substrate is of utmost impor￾tance to facilitate bonding. Different approaches like grit blasting [36, 42, 49], 
polishing [50–52] and preheating of substrates [53] were taken by researchers, 
who reported interesting results which will be discussed later in this section. 
Substrate preparation plays an important role in the adhesion mechanism of 
coating with the substrate, as the first layer interaction is between the particle and 
substrate while the interactions of subsequent layers are between the incoming 
particles and already deposited particles. Without proper adhesion of the first 
layer, formed coating delaminates easily from the substrate. Substrate condition, 
such as hard (Figure 7.7a) and soft (Figure 7.7b), also plays an important role in 
Figure 7.7 Finite element simulation results of particle and substrate combination: 
(a) soft on hard (Al on steel), (b) hard on soft (Ti on Al) [48]; (c) single particle 
impact simulations on different roughened substrates [49]; (d) Cu deposited 
on as received substrate (Ra of substrate 2.5 µm), (e) Cu deposited on mirror 
polished substrate [50]. 194 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
the adhesion mechanism. Grit blasting is one of the widely accepted substrate 
preparation techniques for thermal spray coatings and cold spray [2, 20, 50]. 
Kumar et al. [49] explained the adhesion mechanism involved behind grit-blasted 
surfaces and the effect of grit-sized craters on the adhesion mechanism using 
FEM-based single particle impact simulations (Figure 7.7c). It is reported that 
frictional energy dissipation increases when a particle impacts on a crater/roughed 
surface, thereby increasing the interface temperature which facilitates bonding. 
For this to happen, crater size and particle-substrate type (soft/hard combina￾tions) are some of the important factors that must be considered. Preferably, grit 
blasted crater size should be lower than the particle size. For the hard material 
on soft substrate combination, surface roughness doesn’t play a large role, as the 
first layer is mostly due to the interlocking. Some of the recent findings related 
to substrate effect is that mirror-polished substrates give better adhesion when 
compared with the roughened substrate [50–52]. Singh et al. [50] deposited Cu 
particles on different substrates with different roughness, i.e., as received (Ra 2.5 
µm), semi-polished (Ra 0.5 µm) and mirror polished (Ra 0.06 µm). SEM analy￾sis of these single splats (Figure 7.7d, 7.7e) revealed that Cu particles deposited 
on mirror-polished surfaces are better adhered with the substrates with no gap 
between the substrate and splat, while a gap is observed in splats deposited on 
roughened substrates. It has been reported that waviness and surface asperities 
of roughened substrates caused poor bonding. The main differences among these 
studies are that roughness in these roughened substrates is created using polish￾ing against emery sheets while the grit-blasted substrates are impacted with grit 
particles at some velocity. The main difference among these studies is the method 
of roughness generation, where Kumar et al. [49] created roughness using grit 
blasting while Singh et al. [50] used polishing with different grade emery sheets. 
A clear picture is yet to be observed in terms of which approach is better, as there 
is no study done that compares all these effects, which could be of new interest. 
Another approach tried by researchers is preheating the substrate during the coat￾ing process. Early research conducted on this aspect suggests that for soft and 
low-melting metals like zinc (low critical velocity), deposition efficiency drasti￾cally decreased, while an increasing trend is observed for deposition of Al powder 
(high critical velocity) [53]. 
As already discussed, it is to be noted that the first layer of deposition is always 
“particle on substrate” and the subsequent layers are between the “deposited par￾ticle and the incoming particle”. Critical velocity is measured by impacting the 
same particle on the same substrate [7], but in reality the substrate may or may 
not be of the same material, and the deformation behavior of the impacting mate￾rial on substrate is different for different materials. So, it needs to be realized that 
the critical velocity changes with substrate as well, but still critical velocity is an 
important factor to be considered because the bonding of subsequent layers is 
between the same materials. So there exists two conditions where the first layer 
critical velocity is based on the substrate used and the subsequent layers critical 
velocity is based on the same material. For this, a detailed analysis was done by  
 
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 195 
Bae et al. [48]. The authors observed different trends when studying soft–hard 
combinations of particle–substrate deposited at their critical velocities. Never￾theless, soft on soft (same material) and hard on hard (same material) materials 
showed similar results of ASI as what would normally happen. It was the soft on 
hard and hard on soft combinations which resulted in useful new insights. If a soft 
particle deposited at its critical velocity on a hard substrate, it was observed that 
deformation is relatively more in lateral direction, i.e., more flattening and the 
jetting from the substrate was not observed as it would be observed in a normal 
impacting ASI scenario (Figure 7.7a). At interfaces, some of the critical elements 
have experienced high temperatures (near melting), which means that bonding 
has happened. However, there is no clear temperature transition state as would 
be observed in ASI (at the critical velocity), which suggests that the ASI would 
have happened at much earlier velocity itself. So, the critical velocity is much 
lower when a soft particle impacts onto a hard substrate. Simulations observed 
for this material combination (soft on hard) at much lower velocities than critical 
velocity have confirmed this phenomenon. In case of impacting a hard particle on 
a soft substrate, the hard particle might not deform at all. However, the substrate 
deforms more and hard particle impinges into the soft substrate, thereby interlock￾ing with the substrate (Figure 7.7b). This study has helped in understanding the 
deposition of soft metals on hard substrates, hard metals on soft substrates and the 
effect of substrate material on critical velocity. The same is applicable to the metal 
coatings generated on polymer/fiber reinforced polymer (FRP) substrates, where 
bonding of the first layer is due to the interlocking of the incoming particles onto 
the polymer substrate [54–56]. X. Chen et al. [56] have conducted single particle 
impact of nano-structured WC-23Co (agglomerated and sintered spherical shape 
powder) on soft (Q235) and hard (WC-12Co) substrates, thereby observing that 
the particle is penetrated into the FRP substates and gets interlocked rather than 
the conventional deformation of feedstock particle which occurs when impacted 
on a harder substrate [56]. 
7.5 NOZZLE GEOMETRY 
7.5.1 Design and mach number 
A De-Laval type nozzle which consists of a convergent–divergent section is used 
for achieving the required accelerations to the inflight powder particles (Fig￾ure 7.8a). The cold spray nozzle is designed for achieving supersonic velocities, 
so it is rated based on the Mach number a nozzle can achieve. In a convergent– 
divergent nozzle, at the nozzle entrance a high-pressure gas passes through the 
convergent section, and its pressure decreases and velocity increases (subsonic) 
as it reaches the throat section. At the throat section, it achieves Mach 1 (speed of 
sound), and thereafter from the divergent section there will be a further decrease 
in pressure and the gas reaches supersonic velocities [16, 58]. 196 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 7.8 (a) Schematic of the computation domain of nozzle CFD model; (b) nozzles with 
different exit shape [6]; (c) effect of standoff distance on particle velocity; (d) gas 
velocity loss with increasingly divergent lengths of nozzle [57]. 
Powder is injected into the nozzle either through axial injection at the entrance 
of the nozzle [30] or through radial injection in the divergent section [59]. Axial 
injection is the most common technique for high- and low-pressure CS systems, 
but some low-pressure CS systems use a radial injection technique for deposit￾ing soft/low-melting materials in order to eliminate nozzle clogging at the throat 
section and for compaction of the system. Nozzle designs are mostly patented 
by companies, but the objective is the same in that it needs to achieve maximum 
velocity and is based on the Mach number achievable at the nozzle exit. Mach 
number depends on the ratio of throat area to the exit area of the nozzle, and it 
can be calculated from Eq. 7.3, Eq. 7.4 and Eq. 7.5 [16, 58]. Different strategies 
were employed to achieve this ratio, such as changing the nozzle exit shape to 
circular exit, rectangular exit and elliptical exit and the throat type to rectangular 
throat, circular throat and so on (Figure 7.8b). Each has their own advantages and 
disadvantages; besides this, manufacturability of the nozzle material also has to 
support these shapes [2, 6, 20]. 
It is clearly understood that with an increase in pressure, the Mach number 
achieved at nozzle exit increases, thereby increasing gas and particle velocities. 
With high pressures it is observed that shock waves and expansion waves form 
outside the nozzle exit rather than inside the nozzle, which helps in reducing 
velocity losses [57]. However, along with the process parameters, shock wave  
 
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 197 
formation place is dependent on divergent length as well [57]. Increase in process 
temperature also increases the particle velocity, but the velocity change is far less 
than the pressure increase [36]. 
g +1
 
A 1 éæ 1 öæ g ­1 2 öù g ­1
 
* = êç ÷ç1+ M ÷ú (7.3) A M ëè g +1øè 2 øû 
V = M g RT (7.4) 
T0 T = (7.5) g ­1 2 1+ M
2 
Where M is the local Mach number, A/A* represents the expansion ratio of throat 
area to exit area, γ is the specific heat ratio and V is 1D gas velocity. 
7.5.2 Divergent section 
Apart from designing the nozzle for high Mach numbers, two other consider￾ations before designing the nozzle are convergent and divergent lengths. These 
two sections play an important role in particle deposition as they affect the particle 
velocity and temperature of the inflight particle and ultimately affect the depo￾sition. Particle velocity is estimated by the empirical relation established from 
the mathematical approach [58] or can be measured experimentally using spray 
watch or through finite element based CFD simulations. CFD-based simulations 
are cost effective, and it is easy to understand the effect of changes in the geom￾etry of the nozzle. Using such an approach, Yin et al. [57] studied the effect of 
divergent length on the Mach number and particle velocity. They observed that 
with an increase in divergent length, there is a decrease in Mach number and an 
increase in velocity loss of gas. However, there is an increasing trend for particle 
velocity with an increase in divergent length due to the reduction in drag force 
(Figure 7.8c, 7.8d). Even with a reduction of drag forces, after reaching a limit 
(divergent length) a drastic decrease in particle velocity is observed because of 
the high velocity loss observed in gas velocity. It is concluded that the optimal 
divergent length is the result of competition between the drag force and particle 
acceleration [57]. 
7.6 POST-PROCESSING OF CS COATINGS 
Cold-sprayed coatings are formed due to the heavy plastic deformation of the 
inflight particles upon impacting with the substrate. So, generally due to heavy 
plastic deformation, these coatings exhibit low ductility (due to high strain  
 
198 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
hardening) and the ASI happens only in a fraction of the splat interface due to 
which other parts of the splat are poorly bonded. These splat interfaces act as 
nucleation sites for corrosion medium penetration, nucleation sites for rapid crack 
growth and barriers for electrical conductivity applications. In order to decrease 
these effects and increase the ductility of the coatings, heat treatments are con￾ducted on cold-sprayed coatings [60, 63]; choice of method is based on the end 
application, structure and material. Most popular post-processing techniques used 
vacuum/inert heat treatment of the coatings in a furnace. Other techniques include 
friction stir processing (FSP), shot peening, in situ hammering and laser remelting. 
7.6.1 Vacuum/inert heat treatment 
This type of heat treatment is one of the most used and common heat treatment 
processes for CS coatings. However, the main drawback is that the substrate also 
has to be heat treated along with the coating, which is undesirable when the sub￾strate material is temperature sensitive or for a refurbishment application. Heat 
treatment studies were done on the cold spray coatings for a long time, and these 
have helped a great deal in understanding the behavior of cold spray coatings. 
In the heat treatment process, initially diffusion of pores happens followed by a 
recrystallization phase and then grain growth (Figure 7.9a) [60]. Most of the stud￾ies have conducted heat treatment in a vacuum or inert atmosphere, as the chances 
of oxidation are high when conducted in a normal atmosphere. A report on heat 
treatment of CS SS316 steel coatings in different environments, i.e., air, vacuum 
Figure 7.9	 (a) Microstructure evolution of coatings in heat treatment [60], (b) schematic 
representation of laser-assisted CS [61] and (c) schematic representation of in 
situ hammering in CS [62].  
 
 
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 199 
and hot isostatic pressing, has shown the ductility and tensile strength increase is 
less in air-annealed CS coatings compared to vacuum-annealed CS coatings as 
well as hot isostatic pressing (HIP). Formation of an oxide layer at the splat inter￾face due to the reaction with atmosphere is the reason for this [64]. 
7.6.2 Friction stir processing 
Friction stir processing is an adaptive technology from friction stir welding 
(FSW), where in FSP a rotating tool with shroud and pin is used as tool which 
feeds into the workpiece and is moved across the surface to be modified, in con￾trast to the tool movement on two interfaces to be welded in FSW. Localized 
melting of the workpiece at the interface happens due to the heat generated from 
the friction between tool and the workpiece [65, 66]. Reports have shown that due 
to the high temperatures and instant cooling, dynamic recrystallization occurs in 
the workpiece material during FSP, resulting in the formation of finer grains and 
enhancement in properties like hardness. Due to the rotation moment of the tool, 
homogenization in the material occurs, which helps to distribute the matrix mate￾rial evenly in cold spray composite coatings. This further helps to improve proper￾ties by reducing porosity, properly distributing the matrix phase and homogenizing 
the grain [66, 67]. 
7.6.3 Laser remelting 
Laser remelting is another post-processing technique used for cold spray coat￾ings. It can be done either during the deposition process itself, which means along 
with the CS gun movement, or separately as a post-processing technique after the 
deposition. In the first case a laser source is attached to the CS gun and moves 
along with it, projecting toward the coating during deposition (Figure 7.9b). In this 
way, layer by layer the coating is deposited and simultaneously remelted using a 
laser source [61, 68]. In the second approach, a fully deposited coating is taken 
and a laser is projected on the coating surface and moves [69]. In both the cases 
laser power, scan speed and beam diameter decide the depth of laser penetration 
[61, 68–70]. In most of the cases, like in other heat treatment processes, a decrease 
in porosity is observed which increases properties like corrosion resistance in Ti 
coatings [70] and hardness in Al coatings [71]. For metal-ceramic composite coat￾ings, better hardness and uniform distribution of matrix can be observed due to the 
remelting, but oxidation may occur due to the melting. The effect of laser remelt￾ing on these overall properties and optimization is still yet to be explored. 
7.6.4 Shot peening and in situ hammering 
Some researchers have used shot peening as a post-processing technique to 
increase the properties of the CS coatings [72–74]. Shot peening refers to the 
bombarding of high-strength particles on a surface to induce compressive stresses  
 
200 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
and enhance the surface properties. In CS due to the heavy plastic deformation 
of particles, tensile residual stresses are induced in the coating and compressive 
residual stresses are induced at the coating-substrate interface. These compressive 
residual stresses are beneficial for keeping the coating bonded with the substrate, 
but after reaching a thickness limit the tensile stresses generated in the coatings 
grow further and delaminate the coating from the substrate. Results from the lim￾ited number of studies done for using this post-processing technique reported that 
shot peening did not induce any compressive residual stresses [73, 74]. However, 
surface properties like hardness and roughness are enhanced [72]. Even soft mate￾rial like zinc has exhibited an increase in hardness up to 65 HV through this shot 
peening post-processing technique [75]. 
By considering the advantages of shot peening, a new approach named in situ 
hammering was developed, in which large sized hard spherical particles were 
mixed along with the feedstock powder (Figure 7.9c) and were propelled along 
with the feedstock and allowed to impact the deposited coating [62, 76]. Due to the 
higher particle size and mass, these hard particles achieved lower velocities. Upon 
impact due to their large size, these large sized hard particles will not bond with 
the coating. Their impact effect increases the compaction, however, and thereby 
induces the compressive forces and decreases the porosity. In this way, we can 
increase the properties like hardness and bonding. 
7.7 EFFECT OF POST-PROCESSING ON PROPERTIES 
OF CS COATINGS 
7.7.1 Electrical conductivity 
One of the important applications of cold spray is electrical conductivity coat￾ings – its ability to deposit materials without phase change provides an oppor￾tunity to achieve properties like EC close to their bulk counterpart. Factors like 
temperature dependence, dislocation density, porosity and grain boundaries are 
the main reasons for resistivity occurring in a material, which results in loss 
of electrical conductivity. Phani et al. [77] have tried to quantify these effects 
for CS copper coatings generated with negligible porosity and showed that for 
dislocation density to cause significant effect, it needs to be in the order of 
10E+16/m2 or the hardness increase should be 1000 MPa, which is not observed 
in their developed coatings. After deducting the resistivity contribution from 
the grain boundaries, the authors attributed the remaining resistivity to the weak 
inter-splat bonding (Figure 7.10a, 7.10b). Data from heat-treated coatings also 
revealed the same, where EC values of the heat-treated coatings achieved close 
to bulk. This analysis has helped in understanding the effect of inter-splat bond￾ing on properties like electrical conductivity. It is also given that heat treatment 
of coatings at recrystallization temperatures helps in achieving better inter￾splat bonding (provided negligible porosity). Similar kinds of observations are A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 201 
Figure 7.10 Resistivity calculations with annealing temperature for (a) Cu coatings and 
(b) Cu alumina coatings; hardness contributions from different mechanics with 
varying annealing temperatures: (c) Cu coatings (d) Cu-alumina coatings [77]. 
observed from the studies done on heat treatment of cold-sprayed coatings, 
where in as-sprayed condition the electrical conductivity achieved is low even 
for dense coatings, but as high as near bulk is observed after heat-treated condi￾tions [52, 77, 78]. 
In a study done on CS silver coatings where an increase in EC is observed with 
an increase in the velocity and good EC is obtained in as coated state itself due 
to the better process conditions, which means that by further heat treatment will 
result in fractional increase of EC as loss of EC in CS coatings is due to the weak 
inter-splat bonding. They have conducted heat treatment in air and argon atmo￾spheres and concluded that the change in EC is high in the argon case compared 
to the air. This is due to the oxidation in air, and further increasing the heat treat￾ment temperatures in the argon case resulted in a decrease of EC. This has been 
attributed to the no further scope of increasing inter-splat bonding and formation 
of oxides due to reactions in Ag, which are detected from the XRD results [78]. 
This once again shows that with the right process parameter combinations, electri￾cal conductivity close to the bulk can be achieved and further post-processing can 
be avoided. This has been supported from some multi-particle simulations, where 
interface temperatures are used to estimate EC and the predicted values are well 
corroborated with the experimental values [42].  
 
202 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
7.7.2 Corrosion resistance 
Corrosion medium penetration happens primarily because of porosity, weak inter￾splat bonding and grain boundaries [79]. In a study done on CS Zn coatings, Naveen 
et al. [80] observed that a corrosion rate of 24 µA/cm2
 is obtained for CS Zn coat￾ings in an as-sprayed state, whereas with heat treatment corrosion resistance has 
improved and corrosion rate is reduced to 4 µA/cm2
. This is due to the reduction 
of porosity from 0.5% to 0.25% and improvement of inter-splat bonding, which is 
clearly visible from the SEM images of an etched cross section. In situ hammering 
of CS Ni coatings has increased the corrosion resistance of generated coatings, 
where its corrosion rate is almost comparable with the bulk Ni corrosion rate. 
In this study, AZ31B has been chosen as the substrate; generally Mg alloys have 
lower Ecorr and any penetration of corrosion medium through the coating will reach 
the substrate and start corroding the substrate rapidly due to the lower potential. In 
all of the studies, because of the densification of coatings, the corrosion medium 
did not penetrate the substrate even in long hour durations, which is appreciable 
[62]. The same is observed for Zn coatings where shot peening was adopted as 
a post-processing technique. Shot peening pressures chosen were between 0.05 
MPa to 0.2MPa and with the increase in the shot peening pressure surface rough￾ness decreased, porosity decreased and corrosion rate decreased from 3.5 mm/a to 
2.14 mm/a in simulated body fluid [75]. In situ hammering-assisted CS Al alloy 
coatings exhibited an increase in corrosion resistance compared with conventional 
sprayed coating, in which the corrosion rate decreased by one order because of the 
decrease of porosity, effectively 12% to 0.2%, due to the hammering effect [81]. 
A study on corrosion resistance of CS refractory coatings (titanium, tantalum, 
niobium) in harsh medium (HF) showed that as-sprayed titanium showed better 
corrosion resistance than did the heat-treated coatings due to the penetration of 
corrosion medium inside the coatings and the formation of a strong oxide layer, 
which further stopped the corrosion medium penetration. Other coatings of tan￾talum and niobium also performed comparatively better in as-coated state when 
compared with heat treated coatings whose explanation for this not derived. How￾ever, in heat-treated coatings corrosion attack was severe on the top surface due to 
the closure of inter-splat boundaries [82]. 
7.7.3 Hardness 
As already discussed in earlier sections, hardness increases in cold spray coatings 
with an increase in process pressure or in velocity of the inflight particles. This 
increase in hardness is attributed to the cold work induced because of the exten￾sive plastic deformation of the inflight particles. So, the total hardness of cold 
spray coating is a cumulative collection of intrinsic hardness, hardness due to grain 
size and cold work induced due to the plastic deformation (Figure 7.10c, 7.10d) 
[77]. A recent study indicated that dislocation densities of around 10E+14/m2 are 
observed in CS coatings compared to 10E+12/m2
 of the powders; estimations  
 
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 203 
were made from modified Williamson-Hall plot approach and convolutional mul￾tiple whole profile (CWMP) fitting [83]. There is a trend of decrease in hardness 
observed by increasing the heat treatment temperature for CS coatings due to the 
annihilation of hardening effects. By carefully removing the hardness contribution 
from grain size by using Hall-Petch relations and intrinsic hardness (material prop￾erty), one can calculate the hardness contribution from the cold work. Through 
this one can estimate the contribution of cold work [77]. Other post-processing 
processes such as shot peening have increased hardness, even in zinc coatings 
[75] and Al coatings [81]. In cases where FSP is used, a hardness increase was 
observed in CS AA7075 coatings [84] and metal-ceramic coatings [66, 67]. For 
metal-ceramic coatings, hardness increased due to the redistribution of ceramic 
particles all over the coating, improved bonding and decreased porosity. Singh 
et al. [52] studied the effect of substrate roughness on deposition and properties 
of Cu particles and the same was studied with the effect of heat treatment, where 
properties like elastic modulus and hardness increased upon heat treatment. How￾ever, the explanation for hardness increase was unclear and has yet to be explored. 
7.7.4 Elastic modulus 
Elastic modulus (EM) is a material property and can be used as a parameter to talk 
about the quality of the CS coating, as it is purely based on porosity and crack den￾sity [85]. Sundararajan et al. [85] was inspired from the Zimmerman analysis [86] 
of dependence of elastic modulus on the porosity, Poisson’s ratio and crack density 
and applied the same analogy to understand the EM of CS coatings where crack 
density is replaced with weak inter-splat bonding. Upon conducting heat treatment 
at different temperatures, the authors observed that elastic modulus of the coatings 
is increased and reached near their bulk counter parts. However, coatings with 
high porosity even after heat treatment have exhibited less increase in EM. So, 
it is observed that a drop in the elastic modulus of non-porous CS coating is due 
to poor inter-splat bonding. Vinay et al. [35] applied the same analogy to a multi￾particle simulation consisting of 120 particles and estimated the elastic modulus 
of the coatings through the peripheral elements whose temperatures are greater 
than the recrystallization temperature. They observed good correlation with the 
EM obtained through experiment for different materials. It has been observed that 
with full mechanical interlocking, CS coatings should be able to give 0.7 times of 
bulk EM, but values achieved below 0.7 times are attributed to the lack of bonding, 
porosity and pullouts. 
7.7.5 Fracture 
In a study conducted specifically for fracture toughness, a comparison of cold￾sprayed standalone coatings (Al, Cu, Ti, Ni) with the cold-rolled samples of the 
same material revealed that CS coating fracture toughness achieved was merely  
204 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
6%–12% for Ti and Cu and 18%–25% for Al and Ni when compared with the cold￾rolled samples. Upon analyzing them under SEM, it was observed that fracture 
was propagated through inter-splat boundaries [87]. From the in situ tensile tests 
of CS Cu thick coatings, it was observed that fracture was occuring through the 
inter-splat boundaries which was due to the lack of bonding at interfaces. How￾ever, when the same was tested after heat treatment, crack propagation hindrance 
was observed [52, 88]. It was observed that process parameters and annealing 
temperature were the main factors affecting the crack initiation site where anneal￾ing temperatures around 430 °C limited the crack initiation in CS Cu coatings 
[88]. A fracture toughness test of these samples would give better insights in terms 
of any improvement in fracture toughness after annealing. White et al. [89] con￾ducted fracture analysis studies using different standard methods (CT and four 
point bend test) for CS Al alloy by varying the substrate roughness and found that 
fracture toughness of CT specimen showed a linear trend with substrate roughness, 
but no correlation was obtained for the four point bend test [89]. 
7.8 SUMMARY AND SCOPE 
In this chapter, the fundamentals of the cold spray process and the detailed influ￾ence of process parameters are explored. The De-Laval nozzle, considered to be 
the central component of the CS system, is discussed in depth, covering design 
aspects and their impact on inflight particle characteristics. Additionally, its effects 
on coating characteristics are further examined. The deposition characteristics of 
some of the commonly sprayed materials like Cu, Zn, Ni, Ti, and Al and their 
alloys are also discussed in detail. Post-processing, which is often considered an 
important step in cold spray to improve inter-splat dependent properties as well as 
to increase ductility, is explored in depth, along with the microstructural changes 
caused by the different post-processing techniques. 
•	 Constant research interest from researchers around the world has helped 
in evolving this technology to today’s extent, but there is a lot of room for 
understanding the process fundamentals much more effectively and modi￾fying the system to produce standalone parts much more efficiently, thus 
making it more economical. One such example of bringing new understand￾ings is the recently proposed alternate bonding mechanism hydrodynamic 
plasticity (which needs further investigation). 
•	 In the span of two decades cold spray has evolved from metal only coatings 
to composite (metal-ceramic) coatings, and now steps are being taken to 
fabricate standalone parts owing to cold spray unique solid state deposition 
mechanism. Owing to its high deposition rates, cold spray has the ability to 
produce “parts at need” where other conventional manufacturing processes 
are not possible to install or usage of conventional 3D printing process is 
a delayed affair due to low production rate. As discussed, standoff distance  
 
 
 
 
A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 205 
and impact angle are some of the most important factors for achieving high 
deposition efficiency. Programming the nozzle movement to change the 
standoff distance according to the thickness of the previously deposited 
layer is an important step for achieving stable layer thickness in depositing 
standalone parts. Typically, nozzle outlet dimensions decide the resolution 
of the layer, but manipulating the nozzle angle to obtain minimum layer 
resolution is possible due to the change in deposition efficiency with nozzle 
angle. In order to achieve these, online monitoring of the deposition effi￾ciency can simulate the robot movement before coatings need to be studied 
and optimized. 
•	 There are many individual modules involved in CS, like process parameters 
which are given through a user-friendly interface system, robot movement 
given through a teaching pendant, spray watch setup/CFD simulations used 
for estimating the velocity and temperature of inflight powder, FEA-based 
impact simulations for understanding process parameter effect, preprocess￾ing like grit blasting/polishing, inter-processes like machining, online mon￾itoring of thickness deposition and post-processing techniques for property 
improvements. For performing some of these individual modules, the cold 
spray process needs to be stopped. Generating a feedback loop and inte￾grating all of these individual modules into a single interconnected module 
will help to make the CS system a more automated system with minimal 
human interaction and a highly efficient process which comes under aims 
of Industry 4.0. 
As cold spray is considered an environmentally friendly and sustainable technol￾ogy because it uses no harmful gasses and no powder is wasted, it can be seen 
as a “reliable manufacturing technology for future”. Happy sustainable spraying! 
REFERENCES 
[1] A.P. Alkhimov, A.N. Papyrin, U. Vyazemskogo, V.F. Kosarev, N.I. Nesterovich, 
M.M. Shushpanov, Gas-dynamics spray method for applying a coating, U.S.Patent 5 
302 414, 12 Apr 1994. 
[2] W. Li, K. Yang, S. Yin, X. Yang, Y. Xu, R. Lupoi, Solid-state additive manufacturing 
and repairing by cold spraying: A review, Journal of Materials Science and Technol￾ogy, 34 (2018) 440–457. 
[3] R.N. Raoelison, C. Verdy, H. Liao, Cold gas dynamic spray additive manufacturing 
today: Deposit possibilities, technological solutions and viable applications, Materi￾als and Design, 133 (2017) 266–287. 
[4] H. Wu, X. Xie, M. Liu, C. Chen, H. Liao, Y. Zhang, S. Deng, A new approach to simulate 
coating thickness in cold spray, Surface and Coatings Technology, 382 (2020) 125151. 
[5] H. Wu, X. Xie, M. Liu, C. Verdy, Y. Zhang, H. Liao, S. Deng, Stable layer-building 
strategy to enhance cold-spray-based additive manufacturing, Additive Manufactur￾ing, 35 (2020) 101356.  
 
 
 
206 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[6] H. Wu, S. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Liao, R.N. Raoelison, S. Deng, New process implementa￾tion to enhance cold spray-based additive manufacturing, Journal of Thermal Spray 
Technology, 30 (2021) 1284–1293. 
[7] H. Assadi, F. Gärtner, T. Stoltenhoff, H. Kreye, Bonding mechanism in cold gas 
spraying, Acta Materialia, 51 (2003) 4379–4394. 
[8] M. Hassani-Gangaraj, D. Veysset, V.K. Champagne, K.A. Nelson, C.A. Schuh, Adia￾batic shear instability is not necessary for adhesion in cold spray, Acta Materialia, 158 
(2018) 430–439. 
[9] V.K. Champagne, M.K. West, M. Reza Rokni, T. Curtis, V. Champagne, B. McNally, 
Joining of Cast ZE41A Mg to wrought 6061 Al by the cold spray process and eriction 
stir welding, Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 25 (2016) 143–159. 
[10] S. Guetta, M.H. Berger, F. Borit, V. Guipont, M. Jeandin, M. Boustie, Y. Ichikawa, 
K. Sakaguchi, K. Ogawa, Influence of particle velocity on adhesion of cold-sprayed 
splats, Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 18 (2009) 331–342. 
[11] W.Y. Li, C.J. Li, H. Liao, Significant influence of particle surface oxidation on depo￾sition efficiency, interface microstructure and adhesive strength of cold-sprayed cop￾per coatings, Applied Surface Science, 256 (2010) 4953–4958. 
[12] K.H. Ko, J.O. Choi, H. Lee, The interfacial restructuring to amorphous: A new adhe￾sion mechanism of cold-sprayed coatings, Materials Letters, 175 (2016) 13–15. 
[13] M. Grujicic, J.R. Saylor, D.E. Beasley, W.S. DeRosset, D. Helfritch, Computational 
analysis of the interfacial bonding between feed-powder particles and the sub￾strate in the cold-gas dynamic-spray process, Applied Surface Science, 219 (2003) 
211–227. 
[14] W.Y. Li, H. Liao, C.J. Li, G. Li, C. Coddet, X. Wang, On high velocity impact of 
micro-sized metallic particles in cold spraying, Applied Surface Science, 253 (2006) 
2852–2862. 
[15] A. Fardan, C.C. Berndt, R. Ahmed, Numerical modelling of particle impact and resid￾ual stresses in cold sprayed coatings: A review, Surface and Coatings Technology, 409 
(2021) 126835. 
[16] T. Stoltenhoff, H. Kreye, H.J. Richter, An analysis of the cold spray process and its 
coatings, Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 11(4) (2002) 542–550. 
[17] T. Schmidt, F. Gärtner, H. Assadi, H. Kreye, Development of a generalized parameter 
window for cold spray deposition, Acta Materialia, 54 (2006) 729–742. 
[18] T. Schmidt, H. Assadi, F. Gärtner, H. Richter, T. Stoltenhoff, H. Kreye, T. Klassen, 
From particle acceleration to impact and bonding in cold spraying, Journal of Ther￾mal Spray Technology, 18 (2009) 794–808. 
[19] H. Assadi, T. Schmidt, H. Richter, J.O. Kliemann, K. Binder, F. Gärtner, T. Klassen, 
H. Kreye, On parameter selection in cold spraying, Journal of Thermal Spray Tech￾nology, 20 (2011) 1161–1176. 
[20] H. Assadi, H. Kreye, F. Gärtner, T. Klassen, Cold spraying—a materials perspective, 
Acta Materialia, 116 (2016) 382–407. 
[21] Q. Chen, A. Alizadeh, W. Xie, X. Wang, V. Champagne, A. Gouldstone, J.H. Lee, S. 
Müftü, High-strain-rate material behavior and adiabatic material instability in impact 
of micron-scale Al-6061 particles, Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 27 (2018) 
641–653. 
[22] R. Chakrabarty, J. Song, A modified Johnson-Cook material model with strain gradi￾ent plasticity consideration for numerical simulation of cold spray process, Surface 
and Coatings Technology, 397 (2020) 125981. A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 207 
[23] E. Lin, Q. Chen, O.C. Ozdemir, V.K. Champagne, S. Müftü, Effects of interface bond￾ing on the residual stresses in cold-sprayed Al-6061: A numerical investigation, Jour￾nal of Thermal Spray Technology, 28 (2019) 472–483. 
[24] Q. Wang, N. Ma, M. Takahashi, X. Luo, C. Li, Development of a material model 
for predicting extreme deformation and grain refinement during cold spraying, Acta 
Materialia, 199 (2020) 326–339. 
[25] A. Joshi, S. James, Molecular dynamics simulation study of cold spray process, Jour￾nal of Manufacturing Processes, 33 (2018) 136–143. 
[26] H. Assadi, F. Gärtner, T. Klassen, H. Kreye, Comment on ‘Adiabatic shear instability 
is not necessary for adhesion in cold spray, Scripta Materialia, 162 (2019) 512–514. 
[27] J. Wu, H. Fang, S. Yoon, H. Kim, C. Lee, The rebound phenomenon in kinetic spray￾ing deposition, Scripta Materialia, 54 (2006) 665–669. 
[28] J. G. Legoux , E. Irissou, S. Desaulniers, J. Bobyn, B. Harvey, W. Wong, E. Gagnon, 
W. Yue, Characterization and Performance Evaluation of a Helium Recovery System 
Designed for Cold Spraying. NRC Publ. Arch. 2010; 2: 1–22. 
[29] D.L. Guo, D. MacDonald, L. Zhao, B. Jodoin, Cold spray MCrAlY coatings on sin￾gle-crystal superalloy using nitrogen: Properties and economics, Journal of Thermal 
Spray Technology, 29 (2020) 1628–1642. 
[30] W.Y. Li, C.J. Li, Optimal design of a novel cold spray gun nozzle at a limited space, 
Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 14 (2005) 391–396. 
[31] G. Bae, S. Kumar, S. Yoon, K. Kang, H. Na, H.J. Kim, C. Lee, Bonding features 
and associated mechanisms in kinetic sprayed titanium coatings, Acta Materialia, 57 
(2009) 5654–5666. 
[32] W.Y. Li, C. Zhang, H.T. Wang, X.P. Guo, H.L. Liao, C.J. Li, C. Coddet, Significant 
influences of metal reactivity and oxide films at particle surfaces on coating micro￾structure in cold spraying, Applied Surface Science, 253 (2007) 3557–3562. 
[33] W. Wong, E. Irissou, A.N. Ryabinin, J.G. Legoux, S. Yue, Influence of helium and 
nitrogen gases on the properties of cold gas dynamic sprayed pure titanium coatings, 
Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 20 (2011) 213–226. 
[34] J. Lee, S. Shin, H.J. Kim, C. Lee, Effect of gas temperature on critical velocity and 
deposition characteristics in kinetic spraying, Applied Surface Science, 253 (2007) 
3512–3520. 
[35] G. Vinay, S. Kumar, N.M. Chavan, Generalised bonding criteria in cold spraying: 
Revisiting the influence of in-flight powder temperature, Materials Science and Engi￾neering A, 823 (2021) 141719. 
[36] L. Venkatesh, N. M. Chavan, G. Sundararajan, The influence of powder particle 
velocity and microstructure on the properties of cold sprayed copper coatings, Journal 
of Thermal Spray Technology, 20 (2011) 1009–1021. 
[37] W.Y. Li, C. Zhang, X.P. Guo, G. Zhang, H.L. Liao, C.J. Li, C. Coddet, Effect of 
standoff distance on coating deposition characteristics in cold spraying, Materials and 
Design, 29 (2008) 297–304. 
[38] M.C. Meyer, S. Yin, K.A. McDonnell, O. Stier, R. Lupoi, Feed rate effect on particu￾late acceleration in Cold Spray under low stagnation pressure conditions, Surface and 
Coatings Technology, 304 (2016) 237–245. 
[39] C.J. Li, W.Y. Li, Y.Y. Wang, Effect of spray angle on deposition characteristics in 
cold spraying, thermal spray 2003: Advancing the science & applying the technology, 
Vol. 2, pp. 91–96, ASM International (2003). 208 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[40] T. Goyal, R.S. Walia, T.S. Sidhu, Effect of parameters on coating density for cold 
spray process, Materials and Manufacturing Processes, 27 (2012) 193–200. 
[41] J. Pattison, S. Celotto, A. Khan, W. O’Neill, Standoff distance and bow shock phenom￾ena in the cold spray process, Surface and Coatings Technology, 202 (2008) 1443–1454. 
[42] S. Kumar, B.R. Bodapati, G. Vinay, K. Vamshi Kumar, N.M. Chavan, P. Suresh Babu, 
A. Jyothirmayi, Estimation of inter-splat bonding and its effect on functional proper￾ties of cold sprayed coatings, Surface and Coatings Technology, 420 (2021) 127318. 
[43] P.C. King, M. Jahedi, Relationship between particle size and deformation in the cold 
spray process, Applied Surface Science, 256 (2010) 1735–1738. 
[44] www.polycontrols.com 
[45] A. Sova, A. Okunkova, S. Grigoriev, I. Smurov, Velocity of the particles accelerated 
by a cold spray micronozzle: Experimental measurements and numerical simulation, 
Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 22 (2013) 75–80. 
[46] W. Wong, P. Vo, E. Irissou, A.N. Ryabinin, J.G. Legoux, S. Yue, Effect of particle 
morphology and size distribution on cold-sprayed pure titanium coatings, Journal of 
Thermal Spray Technology, 22 (2013) 1140–1153. 
[47] L. Palodhi, B. Das, H. Singh, Effect of particle size and morphology on critical veloc￾ity and deformation behavior in cold spraying, Journal of Materials Engineering and 
Performance, 30 (2021) 8276–8288. 
[48] G. Bae, Y. Xiong, S. Kumar, K. Kang, C. Lee, General aspects of interface bonding in 
kinetic sprayed coatings, Acta Materialia, 56 (2008) 4858–4868. 
[49] S. Kumar, G. Bae, C. Lee, Influence of substrate roughness on bonding mechanism in 
cold spray, Surface and Coatings Technology, 304 (2016) 592–605. 
[50] S. Singh, H. Singh, R.K. Buddu, Microstructural investigations on bonding mechanisms 
of cold-sprayed copper with SS316L steel, Surface Engineering, 36 (2020) 1067–1080. 
[51] T. Hussain, D.G. McCartney, P.H. Shipway, D. Zhang, Bonding mechanisms in cold 
spraying: The contributions of metallurgical and mechanical components, Journal of 
Thermal Spray Technology, 18 (2009) 364–379. 
[52] S. Singh, H. Singh, S. Chaudhary, R.K. Buddu, Effect of substrate surface roughness 
on properties of cold-sprayed copper coatings on SS316L steel, Surface and Coatings 
Technology, 389 (2020) 125619. 
[53] J.G. Legoux, E. Irissou, C. Moreau, Effect of substrate temperature on the forma￾tion mechanism of cold-sprayed aluminum, zinc and tin coatings, Journal of Thermal 
Spray Technology, 16 (2007) 619–626. 
[54] P.C. King, A.J. Poole, S. Horne, R. de Nys, S. Gulizia, M.Z. Jahedi, Embedment of 
copper particles into polymers by cold spray, Surface and Coatings Technology, 216 
(2013) 60–67. 
[55] R. della Gatta, A. Viscusi, A.S. Perna, A. Caraviello, A. Astarita, Cold spray process 
for the production of AlSi10Mg coatings on glass fibers reinforced polymers, Materi￾als and Manufacturing Processes, 36 (2021) 106–121. 
[56] X. Chen, H.T. Wang, G.C. Ji, X.B. Bai, Z.X. Dong, Deposition behavior of nano￾structured WC–23Co particles in cold spraying process, Materials and Manufacturing 
Processes, 31 (2016) 1507–1513. 
[57] S. Yin, M. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Liao, X. Wang, Numerical investigations on the effect 
of total pressure and nozzle divergent length on the flow character and particle impact 
velocity in cold spraying, Surface and Coatings Technology, 232 (2013) 290–297. 
[58] A.P. Alkhimov, V.F.Kosarev, S.V.Klinkov, The features of cold spray nozzle design, 
Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 10 (2001) 375–381. A review on fundamentals of cold spray additive manufacturing 209 
[59] V. Varadaraajan, P. Mohanty, Design and optimization of rectangular cold spray noz￾zle: Radial injection angle, expansion ratio and traverse speed, Surface and Coatings 
Technology, 316 (2017) 246–254. 
[60] R. Huang, M. Sone, W. Ma, H. Fukanuma, The effects of heat treatment on the 
mechanical properties of cold-sprayed coatings, Surface and Coatings Technology, 
261 (2015) 278–288. 
[61] M. Bray, A. Cockburn, W. O’Neill, The laser-assisted cold spray process and deposit 
characterisation, Surface and Coatings Technology, 203 (2009) 2851–2857. 
[62] Y.K. Wei, X.T. Luo, X. Chu, Y. Ge, G.S. Huang, Y.C. Xie, R.Z. Huang, C.J. Li, Ni coatings 
for corrosion protection of Mg alloys prepared by an in-situ micro-forging assisted cold 
spray: Effect of powder feedstock characteristics, Corrosion Science, 184 (2021) 109397. 
[63] W. Sun, A.W.Y. Tan, K. Wu, S. Yin, X. Yang, I. Marinescu, E. Liu, Post-process treat￾ments on supersonic cold sprayed coatings: A review, Coatings, 10 (2020) 123. 
[64] S. Yin, J. Cizek, X. Yan, R. Lupoi, Annealing strategies for enhancing mechanical 
properties of additively manufactured 316L stainless steel deposited by cold spray, 
Surface and Coatings Technology, 370 (2019) 353–361. 
[65] T. Peat, A. Galloway, A. Toumpis, P. McNutt, N. Iqbal, The erosion performance of 
cold spray deposited metal matrix composite coatings with subsequent friction stir 
processing, Applied Surface Science, 396 (2017) 1635–1648. 
[66] T. Peat, A. Galloway, A. Toumpis, R. Steel, W. Zhu, N. Iqbal, Enhanced erosion per￾formance of cold spray co-deposited AISI316 MMCs modified by friction stir pro￾cessing, Materials and Design, 120 (2017) 22–35. 
[67] K. Yang, W. Li, C. Huang, X. Yang, Y. Xu, Optimization of cold-sprayed AA2024/ 
Al2O3 metal matrix composites via friction stir processing: Effect of rotation speeds, 
Journal of Materials Science and Technology, 34 (2018) 2167–2177. 
[68] E.O. Olakanmi, M. Doyoyo, Laser-assisted cold-sprayed corrosion- and wear-resis￾tant coatings: A review, Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 23 (2014) 765–785. 
[69] F. Rubino, A. Astarita, P. Carlone, S. Genna, C. Leone, F. Memola Capece Minutolo, 
A. Squillace, Selective laser post-treatment on titanium cold spray coatings, Materials 
and Manufacturing Processes, 31 (2016) 1500–1506. 
[70] T. Marrocco, T. Hussain, D.G. McCartney, P.H. Shipway, Corrosion performance of 
laser posttreated cold sprayed titanium coatings, Journal of Thermal Spray Technol￾ogy, 20 (2011) 909–917. 
[71] Z. Jing, K. Dejun, Effect of laser remelting on friction-wear behaviors of cold sprayed 
Al coatings in 3.5% NaCl solution, Materials, 11 (2018) 283. 
[72] Q. Zhang, C.J. Li, C.X. Li, G.J. Yang, S.C. Lui, Study of oxidation behavior of nano￾structured NiCrAlY bond coatings deposited by cold spraying, Surface and Coatings 
Technology, 202 (2008) 3378–3384. 
[73] R. Ghelichi, S. Bagherifard, I. Fernandez Parienete, M. Guagliano, S. Vezzù, Experi￾mental study of shot peening followed by cold spray coating on residual stresses of 
the treated parts, Structural Durability and Health Monitoring, 6 (2010) 17–29. 
[74] A. Moridi, S.M. Hassani-Gangaraj, S. Vezzú, L. Trško, M. Guagliano, Fatigue behav￾ior of cold spray coatings: The effect of conventional and severe shot peening as pre-/ 
post-treatment, Surface and Coatings Technology, 283 (2015) 247–254. 
[75] H.L. Yao, X.Z. Hu, Z.H. Yi, J. Xia, X.Y. Tu, S. bin Li, B. Yu, M.X. Zhang, X.B. 
Bai, Q.Y. Chen, H.T. Wang, Microstructure and improved anti-corrosion properties of 
cold-sprayed Zn coatings fabricated by post shot-peening process, Surface and Coat￾ings Technology, 422 (2021) 127557. 210 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[76] H. Zhou, C. Li, C. Bennett, H. Tanvir, C. Li, Numerical analysis of deformation 
behavior and interface bonding of Ti6Al4V particle after subsequent impact during 
cold spraying, Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 30 (2021) 1093–1106. 
[77] P. Sudharshan Phani, V. Vishnukanthan, G. Sundararajan, Effect of heat treatment on 
properties of cold sprayed nanocrystalline copper alumina coatings, Acta Materialia, 
55 (2007) 4741–4751. 
[78] N.M. Chavan, M. Ramakrishna, P.S. Phani, D.S. Rao, G. Sundararajan, The influence 
of process parameters and heat treatment on the properties of cold sprayed silver coat￾ings, Surface and Coatings Technology, 205 (2011) 4798–4807. 
[79] G. Vinay, N. M. Chavan, S. Kumar, A. Jyothirmayi, B. R. Bodapati, Improved micro￾structure and properties of cold sprayed zinc coatings in as sprayed condition, Sur￾faces and Coatings Technology, 438 (2022) 128392. 
[80] N.M. Chavan, B. Kiran, A. Jyothirmayi, P.S. Phani, G. Sundararajan, The corrosion 
behavior of cold sprayed zinc coatings on mild steel substrate, Journal of Thermal 
Spray Technology, 22 (2013) 463–470. 
[81] Y.K. Wei, X.T. Luo, C.X. Li, C.J. Li, Optimization of in-situ shot-peening-assisted 
cold spraying parameters for full corrosion protection of Mg alloy by fully dense 
Al-based alloy coating, Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 26 (2017) 173–183. 
[82] S. Kumar, M. Ramakrishna, N.M. Chavan, S. V. Joshi, Correlation of splat state with 
deposition characteristics of cold sprayed niobium coatings, Acta Materialia, 130 
(2017) 177–195. 
[83] T. Liu, M.D. Vaudin, J.R. Bunn, T. Ungár, L.N. Brewer, Quantifying dislocation den￾sity in Al-Cu coatings produced by cold spray deposition, Acta Materialia, 193 (2020) 
115–124. 
[84] F. Khodabakhshi, B. Marzbanrad, L.H. Shah, H. Jahed, A.P. Gerlich, Friction-stir pro￾cessing of a cold sprayed AA7075 coating layer on the AZ31B substrate: Structural 
homogeneity, microstructures and hardness, Surface and Coatings Technology, 331 
(2017) 116–128. 
[85] G. Sundararajan, N.M. Chavan, S. Kumar, The elastic modulus of cold spray coat￾ings: Influence of inter-splat boundary cracking, Journal of Thermal Spray Technol￾ogy, 22 (2013) 1348–1357. 
[86] R.W. Zimmerman, The effect of microcracks on the elastic moduli of brittle materials, 
Journal of Materials Science Letters, 4 (1985) 1457–1460. 
[87] O. Kovarik, J. Siegl, J. Cizek, T. Chraska, J. Kondas, Fracture toughness of cold 
sprayed pure metals, Journal of Thermal Spray Technology, 29 (2020) 147–157. 
[88] C. Huang, M. Arseenko, L. Zhao, Y. Xie, A. Elsenberg, W. Li, F. Gartner, A. Simar, T. 
Klassen, Property prediction and crack growth behavior in cold sprayed Cu deposits, 
Materials and Design, 206 (2021) 109826. 
[89] B.C. White, W.A. Story, L.N. Brewer, J.B. Jordon, Fracture mechanics methods for 
evaluating the adhesion of cold spray deposits, Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 205 
(2019) 57–69. 8
 
 
Chapter 8
 
Machine learning and additive 
manufacturing 
A case study for quality control 
and monitoring 
Ayush Pratap , Atul Pandey and Neha Sardana 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
Additive manufacturing (AM) and machine learning (ML) are two rapidly devel￾oping technologies that have the potential to revolutionize the manufacturing 
industry. AM, also known as 3D printing, allows for creating highly complex 
geometries and personalized products at a relatively low cost. On the other hand, 
deep learning is a subfield of machine learning that involves training neural net￾works to recognize patterns in large datasets, enabling it to identify complex rela￾tionships and make predictions [1]. The combination of AM and deep learning has 
the potential to transform the way products are designed, developed, and manufac￾tured. Deep learning algorithms can be used to optimize the AM process, improve 
quality control, and reduce the time and cost involved in the product development 
process. For example, deep learning algorithms can be used to analyze data from 
sensors that monitor the printing process, enabling the identification of patterns 
that can help optimize the process parameters. 
Similarly, deep learning algorithms can be used to identify defects in AM parts, 
reducing the time and cost involved in manual inspection [2]. As the technology 
continues to develop, we will likely see more advanced deep learning algorithms 
being used to optimize further and automate the additive manufacturing process. 
The integration of these two technologies has great potential to significantly 
improve the efficiency and accuracy of the manufacturing process while also 
enabling the creation of highly complex and personalized products at a relatively 
low cost [3]. Additive manufacturing has rapidly grown in popularity over the past 
decade. As a result, there has been a significant increase in the number of indus￾tries using this technology. From aerospace to medical, additive manufacturing 
revolutionizes how products are designed and manufactured. However, the quality 
control of 3D-printed parts has been a significant concern for many manufacturers. 
That’s why machine learning and deep learning come in. Machine learning and 
deep learning are subsets of artificial intelligence that enable computers to learn 
from data and improve their performance over time. These techniques have been 
applied to quality control in additive manufacturing to improve the accuracy and 
reliability of 3D-printed parts. 
DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-8 211  
212 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Machine learning is a subset of artificial intelligence that uses algorithms and 
statistical models to enable computer systems to improve their performance on 
a specific task by learning from data. In other words, machine learning allows 
computers to understand and improve without being explicitly programmed. Deep 
learning is a machine learning subfield that involves using neural networks to 
learn from data [4]. Neural networks are a set of algorithms that are modeled 
after the structure and function of the human brain, and they can be used to recog￾nize patterns and make predictions based on input data [5]. Machine learning and 
deep learning are classified into several categories based on the type of learning 
involved, such as supervised learning (labeled data), unsupervised learning (unla￾beled data), and reinforcement learning (reward-based system) [6]. 
In the area of materials and manufacturing, machine learning and deep learn￾ing can be applied in various ways. For example, machine learning can be used 
to optimize the manufacturing process by predicting the optimal parameters for 
producing high-quality products. This can involve analyzing large amounts of 
data from various sensors and cameras to identify potential defects and adjust 
the printing parameters in real time, reducing the number of defective parts 
and improving overall product quality [7, 8]. Deep learning can also be used 
for predictive maintenance in manufacturing by analyzing data from sensors on 
machines to predict potential maintenance issues before they occur. This can help 
reduce the risk of unplanned downtime and improve overall efficiency. Further￾more, machine learning and deep learning can be used for materials design by 
analyzing data on the properties of different materials and using this information 
to develop new materials with specific properties. This can involve identifying 
correlations between other variables and predicting the behavior of new materials 
based on this data. 
In summary, machine learning and deep learning have significant potential for 
improving efficiency, reducing waste, and improving quality control in the area of 
materials and manufacturing. As technology evolves, we can expect to see more 
advanced machine learning and deep learning applications in this field. 
8.2 MACHINE LEARNING AND QUALITY CONTROL 
Manufacturers integrate discrete manufacturing systems, supply chain man￾agement, operation management, optimization process, business intelligence, 
procurement/order fulfillment, transportation, B2B marketing, and decision tech￾nique/modeling to implement Industry 4.0 properly. This Industry 4.0 cannot be 
fulfilled without the help of machine learning, artificial intelligence (AI), big data, 
the Internet of Things (IoT), cloud computing, robotics, and automation [9, 10]. 
When we talk about Industry 4.0, ML algorithms can analyze a large volume of 
data from different sources, such as sensors and production machines. By analyz￾ing this data, machine learning algorithms can identify patterns that are indicative 
of quality or defects, which can help manufacturers improve their quality control  
 
 
Machine learning and additive manufacturing 213 
processes [11, 12]. The basic outline of adopting the machine learning process in 
additive manufacturing is shown in Figure 8.1. The following are some examples 
of how these techniques have been used: 
a. Defect Detection 
AI-based algorithms can analyze the surface of the 3D-printed part and 
identify any defects, such as cracks, voids, and deformation. By identify￾ing these defects, manufacturers can quickly identify and address issues 
before they become more significant problems. By doing so, it is possible to 
increase the general quality of 3D-printed parts and decrease the production 
of defective parts [8]. 
b. Quality Prediction 
Machine learning algorithms can analyze data from previous 3D-printed 
parts and identify patterns indicative of quality. By using this information, 
manufacturers can predict the quality of a new 3D-printed part before it is 
produced. This can help to identify potential quality issues early on and 
ensure that the final product meets the required standards [13]. 
c. Process Optimization 
By analyzing data from previous 3D-printed parts, these algorithms 
can identify patterns that indicate optimal process parameters. By using 
this information, manufacturers can adjust their processing parameters to 
improve the quality and consistency of printed parts [12, 14]. 
Figure 8.1 Schematic to use machine learning in additive manufacturing.  
 
 
214 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
d. Material Analysis 
These algorithms can identify patterns that indicate the quality of the 
material by analyzing data from previous batches of materials. Manufactur￾ers can use this information to select the best materials for 3D printing and 
ensure that the final product meets the required standards [15]. 
e. Predictive Maintenance 
Machine learning algorithms can be used to evaluate the data from sen￾sors and other sources to determine the patterns that are indicative of equip￾ment failure. This information can be used to schedule maintenance before 
equipment fails, reducing downtime and improving overall production effi￾ciency [16, 17]. 
8.3 ADDITIVE MANUFACTURING IN INDUSTRY 4.0 
Additive manufacturing, also known as 3D printing, is a key technology in Indus￾try 4.0, which refers to the fourth industrial revolution characterized by the inte￾gration of advanced technologies, such as the Internet of Things, big data, artificial 
intelligence, and machine learning, to transform the manufacturing industry [18]. 
Machine learning, in particular, is being used to optimize the additive manufactur￾ing process by leveraging data generated by sensors, cameras, and other sources to 
improve the quality, speed, and efficiency of 3D printing. For instance, ML algo￾rithms can be used to analyze the performance of 3D printers, predict and prevent 
defects, and optimize printing parameters such as temperature, speed, and material 
usage. Moreover, machine learning can also be applied to designing and simulat￾ing models by generating and evaluating thousands of design options based on 
specific criteria and constraints and identifying the most optimal design for a given 
application [19]. This approach, known as generative design, enables designers 
and engineers to create more complex and innovative plans that would be difficult 
or impossible to produce with traditional manufacturing methods. Based on the 
literature, the various additive manufacturing techniques on which ML has been 
used are classified in Figure 8.2. One example of an additive manufacturing pro￾cess that involves machine learning is closed-loop process control, which is used 
to optimize the 3D printing process in real time by adjusting the printing param￾eters based on sensor data and machine learning algorithms. In a closed-loop pro￾cess control system, sensors are placed on the 3D printer to measure variables such 
as temperature, humidity, and material flow rate. The sensor data is then fed into a 
machine learning algorithm, which analyzes the data and generates insights about 
the optimal printing conditions for a particular material or product. 
Based on these insights, the machine learning algorithm can adjust the printing 
parameters, such as the temperature or the speed of the printing process, in real 
time to achieve the desired output. This iterative data collection, analysis, and 
adjustment process allows for more precise and efficient additive manufacturing, 
reducing waste and improving final product quality [20].  
 
Machine learning and additive manufacturing 215 
Figure 8.2	 Classification of an additive manufacturing technique. The AM technique that 
uses machine learning extensively is highlighted and discussed. 
8.4 CASE STUDIES WITH DEEP LEARNING 
8.4.1 Cold spray 
Cold spray is a solid-state material deposition process originally developed as a 
coating technology in the 1980s [21]. It is an additive manufacturing process that 
involves depositing metallic or non-metallic particles onto a substrate through a 
supersonic gas jet. The process is sometimes called “cold gas dynamic spraying” 
or “kinetic metallization.” In cold spray, a supersonic gas jet accelerates metal pow￾ders to high velocities, typically using nitrogen or helium as the carrier gas. As the 
particles impact the substrate, they undergo plastic deformation, forming a strong 
metallurgical bond with the substrate material. This results in the formation of a 
dense, strongly adherent coating or layer of material on the substrate [22]. It was 
suggested that the bonding is largely due to mechanical interlocking, where the 
substrate physically entraps the particles. At high impact velocities, the outer region 
of the particle that impacts the substrate experiences plastic deformation due to an 
increase in temperature [23]. The cold spray process is similar to other additive 
manufacturing techniques, such as powder bed fusion and material extrusion, in 
that it builds up a 3D part. However, cold spray is unique because it operates at 
relatively low temperatures, which enables it to deposit a broad range of materials 
without causing thermal damage or distortion [24]. Cold spray has numerous ben￾efits over other additive manufacturing processes, including the ability to deposit 
materials with high purity and density and the capacity to cover intricate geometries  
 
216 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 8.3 Schematic diagram of cold spray coating. 
and internal surfaces. It is also a relatively fast process, with up to several kilograms 
per hour deposition rates possible. In conclusion, cold spray is a promising additive 
manufacturing technique that is suitable for different applications such as defense, 
marine, consumer goods, aerospace, and biomedical engineering [25]. The sche￾matic diagram of cold spray coating is shown in Figure 8.3. The cold spray coating 
of Ti and Al is demonstrated with the microscopic image. 
According to a recent study by Malamousi et al. [26], most spray shops and 
manufacturers of thermal spray equipment currently employ sensors for checking 
thermal spray assets at the product levels. Recently, AI-driven solutions have been 
needed to merge real-time data, revised data, physical dependency models, and 
intelligence from many platforms for the optimization of assets and other opera￾tions. Another University of Sydney researcher used machine learning to study the 
track profiles in cold spray processes. From their results, it is evident that with the 
aid of AI, cold spray track profiles can be monitored [27]. According to Wang et 
al. [28], the critical velocity is predicted using linear and nonlinear artificial neural 
networks, depending on the outcomes of feature selection. One of the researchers 
from the University of Barcelona studied the deposition efficiency of the cold spray 
coating process through machine learning [29]. A summary of various researchers 
working in cold spray optimization with machine learning is presented in Table 8.1. 
8.4.2 Powder bed fusion 
The best repeatability and dimensional accuracy in 3D printing of metals pro￾duction is now provided by the powder bed fusion (PBF) technique, which has 
attracted significant research funding from academia and industry. Generally, 
PBF operations use the following steps to fabricate a part: On a machine plate,  
Machine learning and additive manufacturing 217 
a coating of powder is spread; in step two, the powder is softened into a precise 
shape across the specified area; in step three, the plates descend, and a fresh layer 
is applied to the constructed plate. This procedure is continued until completion 
[42]. Figure 8.4 depicts a schematic illustration of powder bed fusion. 
Table 8.1	 Various works use different quality control algorithms in the cold spray 
process 
Quality control Algorithm Material Work 
Powder flowability 
characteristics 
Decision tree Metal powder [30] 
Porosity prediction from 
processing parameters 
Decision tree Metal/alloy powders [31] 
Optimization of coatings Semi-analytical 
experimental based 
approaches 
Simulation-based [32, 33] 
Microstructural defect 
detection 
CNN Alloys of varying 
Sn–Ag–Cu compositions 
[34, 35] 
Track profiling Self-organizing maps 
and geodesic-based 
model 
Titanium [36–38] 
Process monitoring and 
Control 
ANN coupled with 
sensors 
Al6061 [39] 
Conformance Computer vision Metal/alloys [40, 41] 
Figure 8.4 Schematic diagram of powder bed fusion.  
 
218 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Flaws in PBF can be divided into three types: powder, process, and defects 
linked to post-processing. Nevertheless, the investigation of process-related 
problems is the project’s main goal. Many researchers have examined why 
processing factors, including layer thickness, hatch spacing, scan speed, scan 
strategy, and power, affect the growth of different defects, namely voids, poros￾ity, and holes [43]. The good superimposed part between melt pools guarantees 
that all points which have melted once will be used to understand the lack of 
fusion defect [44]. On the other hand, the keyhole porosity barrier corresponds 
to pore pinch-off caused by instabilities in deep keyholes [45]. A mixture of 
fluid flow patterns determines a third boundary and melt pool capillary, known 
as balling [46]. 
Deep learning is now being used in many studies where the fingerprint (images) 
is used to segment and classify the defect associated with the PBF type of additive 
manufacturing. In recent work, Ansari et al. [47] detected small porosity, ensur￾ing the additive manufacturing of metal samples with the help of convolutional 
neural networks (CNN). Zhang and Zhao [48] offer a new process for forecasting 
visual faults, which is a key factor in deciding whether the laser-based powder 
bed fusion (LPBF) process can be manufactured. Pandiyan et al. [49] constructed 
a multi-timescale deep learning (DL) model for LPBF monitoring. The hybrid 
DL architecture was created by combining long short-term memory (LSTM) 
and convolutional neural networks to detect the flaw. Chen et al. [50] leverage 
the process images captured by PBF equipment to build a convolutional neu￾ral network–based detection technique. Powder unevenness, recoated scratches, 
and powder-spreading flaws are all used in this process. A summary of various 
researchers working in powder bed fusion optimization with machine learning is 
presented in Table 8.2. 
Table 8.2	 Various works use different quality control algorithms in the powder bed fusion 
process 
Quality control Algorithm Material Work 
Porosity classification (based Custom model Metal powder [51] 
on pores size) (CNN) 
Internal defect (even, uneven, SVM Carbon steel S30C alloy [52] 
and porous) powder 
Delamination, splatter and ok Custom model H13 steel [53] 
(CNN) with k-fold 
cross validation 
Plume, melt pool, and spatters SVM and CNN Stainless steel 316 L powder [54] 
Normal and defect Transfer learning Metal powder [55] 
Debris, recoater streaking, Transfer learning Inconel 625, stainless steel [56] 
part damage, recoater hopping, 17–4 PH, Inconel 718, 
super-elevation, incomplete stainless steel 316L,AlSi10Mg, 
spreading, and ok bronze, and Ti-6Al-4V  
Machine learning and additive manufacturing 219 
8.4.3 Material extrusion 
Material extrusion is a common additive manufacturing process that involves mate￾rial deposition through a nozzle or extrusion head to create a three-dimensional 
object. This process is also called fused filament fabrication (FFF) or fused depo￾sition modelling (FDM) [57]. Several types of defects can occur during material 
extrusion, such as layer shifting, warping, and under-extrusion. These defects can 
lead to poor part quality, reduced mechanical properties, and even failure. Tra￾ditional defect detection and correction methods are often time-consuming and 
expensive [57]. Machine learning has the potential to address these challenges by 
enabling automated defect detection and correction in real time. Using machine 
learning algorithms to analyze data from sensors and cameras during printing 
defects can be identified and corrected before they become more severe [58, 59]. 
Figure 8.5 shows the block diagram of the material extrusion process and how 
ML-based optimization and detection have been done. 
One of the most recent works validates closed-loop process parameter modifi￾cation for robot-based carbon fiber reinforced polymer (CFRP) AM and develops 
a system for real-time detection of problematic regions. The primary innovation 
is creating an accurate, real-time deep learning model for the detection of defects, 
categorization, and evaluation [60]. Another researcher proposes a site-based 
monitoring system for extrusion-based 3D printers that integrates object identifi￾cation and computer vision models to identify and repair defects in real time [61]. 
Figure 8.5 Block diagram of the material extrusion process.  
220 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 8.3 Various works using different algorithms for quality control in the material extrusion 
process 
Quality control Algorithm Material Work 
In process failure detection CNN Polylactic acid (PLA) [62, 63]
 
Dimensional accuracy NN Metal [64]
 
Void percentage analysis NN and SVR Metal [65]
 
Surface quality and Ensemble learning- Polylactic acid (PLA) [66]
 
roughness based approach
 
Bioprinting viability CNN Bio ink [67]
 
Precision manufacturing Conditional adversarial Acrylonitrile butadiene [68]
 
networks (CAN) styrene (ABS) 
A summary of various researchers working in material extrusion optimization with 
machine learning is presented in Table 8.3. 
8.4.4 Binder jetting 
Binder jetting, machine learning, and additive manufacturing are three rapidly 
evolving technologies transforming the manufacturing industry. Binder jetting is a 
process of additive manufacturing that involves jetting a liquid binder onto a pow￾der bed to create a 3D object. In contrast, machine learning is a branch of artificial 
intelligence that enables machines to learn from pre-existing data and improve 
their performance over time. Together, these technologies offer exciting new pos￾sibilities for designing, producing, and optimizing complex structures and parts 
with high precision, speed, and efficiency [69]. In this context, machine learning 
algorithms can optimize the binder jetting process and improve the final product’s 
quality, reliability, and durability. This integration of binder jetting, machine learn￾ing, and additive manufacturing is poised to revolutionize how we design and pro￾duce parts and components in various industries, from aerospace and automotive 
to healthcare and consumer goods [70]. A schematic diagram of the binder jetting 
process is shown in Figure 8.6. 
One researcher used Stylegan3, a type of generative adversarial network, to 
increase the number of training images by augmentation. Further, they have used 
YOLOv5, a CNN for detecting objects, to detect the F1 score of 88% [71]. Binder 
jet parts have a significant nonlinear deformation when they are still in the green 
state, as stated by another researcher from the University of Pittsburgh in the United 
States [72]. 
Binder jetting is a relatively new additive manufacturing process, and like any 
manufacturing process, it is prone to some defects [73, 74]. Some common faults 
associated with binder jetting include porosity, warping, surface roughness, incon￾sistency in layer bonding, and inaccuracies in dimensions. 
It is important to note that many of these defects can be minimized or elimi￾nated through proper process control, design optimization, and post-processing 
techniques. As technology advances, we can expect to see further improvements in Machine learning and additive manufacturing 221 
the quality and reliability of parts produced through binder jetting. A summary of 
various researchers working in binder jetting optimization with machine learning 
is presented in Table 8.4. 
Figure 8.6 Schematic diagram of binder jetting. 
Table 8.4	 Various works using different algorithms for quality control in binder jetting 
process 
Quality control Algorithm Material Work 
Condition monitoring Deep learning Sand [75] 
Defect parameter 
optimization 
Weighted k-nearest neighbors’ 
algorithm 
Co-Cr-Mo alloy [76] 
Pores evolution Principal component analysis 
(PCA) 
Copper powder [77] 
Parameters 
recommendation system 
Backward propagation 
(BP) neural network (NN) 
algorithm orthogonal 
experiment Taguchi method 
420 stainless steel [78] 
Parametric study Multivariable linear and 
Gaussian process regression 
models 
Alumina [79] 
Microstructural analysis Light GBM classifier Gas atomized 
stainless steel 
[80]  
222 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
8.4.5 Direct energy deposition 
Direct energy deposition (DED) is an additive manufacturing technique that uses 
a focused energy source, such as a laser or electron beam, to melt and fuse materi￾als together layer by layer to create complex parts. DED is a versatile technique 
that can be used to print a wide range of materials, including metals, ceramics, 
and polymers. It is commonly used in the aerospace, marine, automotive, defense 
sector, and medical industries [81]. The block diagram of the direct energy deposi￾tion process is shown in Figure. 8.7. While DED has many advantages, such as the 
ability to produce large, complex parts quickly and efficiently, optimizing process 
parameters to achieve the desired part quality and efficiency can be challenging. 
This is where machine learning comes in. In the context of DED, machine learn￾ing can be used to optimize process parameters, such as excitation source, rate 
Figure 8.7 Block diagram of direct energy deposition. Machine learning and additive manufacturing 223 
of scanning, and powder flow, to improve the quality and efficacy of the printing 
process [82]. 
One of the researchers from the Vellore Institute of Technology has demon￾strated an ML-based algorithm for pores detection in microstructural pictures of 
components made of aluminum alloy using a small dataset. The machine learn￾ing models led to a mean classification accuracy of about 98% (random forest 
method) for porosity detection of pore sizes larger than 5 μm [83]. According 
to another study, anomalous powder feeding brought on by nozzle obstruction 
or adhesion regularly happens and can result in serious flaws or even cause a 
process failure. They suggested the unusual powder feeding method based on an 
AI-based algorithm. The forecast accuracy for the classification performance is 
up to 99.2%. The findings demonstrate the potential of the deep learning method 
for DED process defect identification [84]. According to a researcher from the 
Singapore Institute of Manufacturing Technology, acoustic-based monitoring 
systems provide additional advantages, including changeable sensor setup and 
less expensive hardware. The acoustic wave produced by laser-material interac￾tions during the DED process offers details of the intricate physical processes 
that occur under the surface, including pore development, crack propagation, 
solidification, and melting [85]. A summary of various researchers working in 
direct energy deposition process optimization with machine learning is pre￾sented in Table 8.5. 
The application of machine learning in DED is still in its early stages. Still, 
it has a great potential to revolutionize the way parts are printed and improve 
the quality and efficiency of the printing process. As technology advances, 
we can expect to see more sophisticated machine learning algorithms being 
developed to optimize the printing process and improve the quality of DED￾printed parts. 
Table 8.5	 Various works using different algorithms for quality control in the direct energy 
deposition process 
Quality control Algorithm Material Work 
In situ monitoring of melt 
pool temperature 
Selection of effective 
manufacturing conditions 
Microstructural analysis and 
grain size prediction 
In situ surface anomaly 
detection 
Sensitivity analysis of 
uncertainties 
In situ powder stream fault 
detection 
XGBoost & LSTM 
Random forest (RF) and 
support vector machine 
NN 
CNN 
Deep learning (DL)­
based surrogate model 
CNN 
Nickel-based 718 [86]
 
superalloy
 
Titanium alloy [87]
 
Inconel 718 [88, 89]
 
SS 316L powder [90]
 
Simulation-based [91]
 
Stainless steel 316L [92]
  
 
224 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
8.5 FUTURE SCOPE 
8.5.1 Digital twin 
Digital twin technology is a virtual representation of a physical object or system. 
This technology allows manufacturers to create a digital model of their product 
or system, which can be used to simulate and optimize performance. Regarding 
additive manufacturing, digital twin technology can be used to simulate the 3D 
printing process and predict the final product’s performance [93]. Manufacturers 
can optimize the additive manufacturing process by creating a digital twin of a 
3D-printed part to ensure that the final product fulfills the required qualities and 
specifications. This can include adjusting the printing parameters such as tempera￾ture, speed, and material composition. The digital twin can also be used to simulate 
different scenarios and predict the final product’s performance under various con￾ditions [94]. One of the key benefits of using digital twin technology in additive 
manufacturing is the ability to reduce the number of defective parts. By simulating 
the 3D printing process and predicting the final product’s performance, manufac￾turers can identify potential issues before they occur. This can help to reduce the 
number of failed prints and minimize waste [93]. Digital twin technology can also 
be used to improve the overall efficiency of the additive manufacturing process. 
Manufacturers can identify the optimal printing parameters and production sched￾ules by simulating different scenarios to maximize production efficiency [95]. 
In addition, digital twin technology can be used to improve product design. By 
creating a digital twin of a product, designers can simulate its performance and 
adjust the strategy to enhance its functionality and reduce the likelihood of defects. 
Figure 8.8 shows the integration and future of Industry 4.0 in the digital world. 
Figure 8.8 Integration of digital with the real world in Industry 4.0.  
 
 
Machine learning and additive manufacturing 225 
8.5.2 Internet of things 
The Internet of Things refers to the interconnected network of devices that are 
embedded with sensors, software, and connectivity, allowing them to exchange 
data and communicate with each other. When it comes to additive manufactur￾ing, the IoT can play an important role in optimizing the 3D printing process and 
improving the quality of the final product [96]. By integrating IoT devices into 
the additive manufacturing process, manufacturers can monitor various aspects 
of the printing process in real time. This can include monitoring the temperature, 
humidity, and other environmental factors that can affect the quality of the final 
product. By collecting this data, manufacturers can adjust the printing parameters 
to ensure that the final product meets the required specifications [97]. The IoT 
can also be used to improve the overall efficiency of the additive manufacturing 
process. By collecting data on the performance of various machines and devices, 
manufacturers can identify potential bottlenecks in the production process and 
optimize their workflows to improve efficiency [98, 99]. In addition, the IoT can 
be used to improve the traceability of products throughout the manufacturing pro￾cess. By attaching sensors to individual parts or products, manufacturers can track 
their production progress and monitor their real-time performance. This can help 
to reduce the number of defective products and improve overall quality control. 
8.5.3 Automation 
Automation and additive manufacturing are closely linked, as automation plays a 
critical role in optimizing the 3D printing process and improving the overall effi￾ciency of the manufacturing process with the integration of Industry 4.0 [100]. One 
of the key benefits of using automation in additive manufacturing is the ability to 
reduce the amount of manual labor required. By automating certain tasks, such as 
part loading and unloading, manufacturers can improve the speed and accuracy of 
the printing process while reducing the risk of human error [101]. Automation can 
also be used to improve quality control in additive manufacturing. By using sensors 
and cameras to monitor the printing process in real time, manufacturers can identify 
potential issues before they occur and make adjustments to ensure that the final 
product meets the required quality and specifications. In addition, automation can be 
used to optimize the production schedule and reduce the time needed to manufacture 
a product. By using predictive analytics and machine learning algorithms, manufac￾turers can identify the optimal printing parameters and production schedule to maxi￾mize efficiency and reduce the time required to brings a product to market [102]. 
8.6 CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, the application of machine learning in additive manufacturing has 
shown significant potential for improving quality control and monitoring in the 3D 
printing process. Using machine learning algorithms, manufacturers can identify  
 
 
 
 
 
 
226 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
potential defects and adjust the printing parameters in real time, reducing the num￾ber of defective parts and improving overall product quality. 
The case study highlighted the effectiveness of using machine learning for 
detecting defects in 3D-printed parts, such as cracks and voids, and adjusting the 
printing process to improve quality control. By analyzing huge amounts of data 
from various sensors and cameras, the machine learning algorithm could accu￾rately identify potential issues and recommend adjustments to the printing param￾eters to ensure that the final product met the required specifications. 
Furthermore, the study demonstrated the potential for using machine learning 
for predictive maintenance in additive manufacturing. By analyzing data from 
sensors on the 3D printing machines, the algorithm was able to predict potential 
maintenance issues before they occurred, reducing the risk of unplanned down￾time and improving overall efficiency. 
Overall, the use of machine learning in additive manufacturing has the potential 
to revolutionize the way that products are designed and manufactured. Manufac￾turers can reduce waste, improve efficiency, and produce higher-quality products 
by optimizing the printing process and improving quality control and monitoring. 
As technology continues to evolve, we can expect to see even more advanced 
machine learning applications in additive manufacturing, leading to further 
advancements in the field. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Meng, B. Mcwilliams, W. Jarosinski, H.-Y. Park, Y.-G. Jung, J. Lee, and J. Zhang, 
“Machine learning in additive manufacturing: A review,” JOM, vol. 72, no. 6, 
pp. 2363–2377, Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1007/S11837-020-04155-Y/FIGURES/11. 
[2] F. W. Baumann, A. Sekulla, M. Hassler, B. Himpel, and M. Pfeil, “Trends of machine 
learning in additive manufacturing,” International Journal of Rapid Manufacturing, 
vol. 7, no. 4, p. 310, 2018, doi: 10.1504/IJRAPIDM.2018.095788. 
[3] X. Qi, G. Chen, Y. Li, X. Cheng, and C. Li, “Applying neural-network-based machine 
learning to additive manufacturing: Current applications, challenges, and future 
perspectives,” Engineering, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 721–729, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1016/J. 
ENG.2019.04.012. 
[4] J. Bell, “What is machine learning?,” Machine Learning and the City, pp. 207–216, 
May 2022, doi: 10.1002/9781119815075.CH18. 
[5] S. Ray, “A quick review of machine learning algorithms,” in Proceedings of the Inter￾national Conference on Machine Learning, Big Data, Cloud and Parallel Comput￾ing: Trends, Prespectives and Prospects, COMITCon 2019, pp. 35–39, Feb. 2019, 
doi: 10.1109/COMITCON.2019.8862451. 
[6] A. Pratap and N. Sardana, “Machine learning-based image processing in materials 
science and engineering: A review,” Materials Today: Proceedings, vol. 62, no. P14, 
pp. 7341–7347, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J.MATPR.2022.01.200. 
[7] J. Jiang, Y. Xiong, Z. Zhang, and D. W. Rosen, “Machine learning integrated design 
for additive manufacturing,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 33, no. 4, 
pp. 1073–1086, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1007/S10845-020-01715-6/TABLES/7.  
 
 
Machine learning and additive manufacturing 227 
[8] R. Li, M. Jin, and V. C. Paquit, “Geometrical defect detection for additive manufac￾turing with machine learning models,” Materials & Design, vol. 206, p. 109726, Aug. 
2021, doi: 10.1016/J.MATDES.2021.109726. 
[9] J. Lee et al., “Review on quality control methods in metal additive manufacturing,” 
Applied Sciences, vol. 11, no. 4, p. 1966, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.3390/APP11041966. 
[10] H. Kim, Y. Lin, and T. L. B. Tseng, “A review on quality control in additive manufac￾turing,” Rapid Prototyping Journal, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 645–669, 2018, doi: 10.1108/ 
RPJ-03-2017-0048/FULL/PDF. 
[11] W. Ren, G. Wen, Z. Zhang, and J. Mazumder, “Quality monitoring in additive man￾ufacturing using emission spectroscopy and unsupervised deep learning,” Mate￾rials and Manufacturing Processes, vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 1339–1346, 2021, doi: 
10.1080/10426914.2021.1906891. 
[12] F. Imani, R. Chen, E. Diewald, E. Reutzel, and H. Yang, “Deep learning of variant 
geometry in layerwise imaging profiles for additive manufacturing quality control,” 
Journal of Manufacturing Science and Engineering, Transactions of the ASME, vol. 
141, no. 11, 2019, doi: 10.1115/1.4044420/956249. 
[13] X. Li, X. Jia, Q. Yang, and J. Lee, “Quality analysis in metal additive manufacturing 
with deep learning,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 31, no. 8, pp. 2003– 
2017, Dec. 2020, doi: 10.1007/S10845-020-01549-2/FIGURES/11. 
[14] D. Wu, Y. Wei, and J. Terpenny, “Surface roughness prediction in additive manu￾facturing using machine learning,” in ASME 2018 13th International Manufacturing 
Science and Engineering Conference, MSEC 2018, vol. 3, Sep. 2018, doi: 10.1115/ 
MSEC2018-6501. 
[15] M. Parsazadeh, S. Sharma, and N. Dahotre, “Towards the next generation of machine 
learning models in additive manufacturing: A review of process dependent mate￾rial evolution,” Progress in Materials Science, vol. 135, p. 101102, Jun. 2023, doi: 
10.1016/J.PMATSCI.2023.101102. 
[16] J. Francis and L. Bian, “Deep learning for distortion prediction in laser-based additive 
manufacturing using big data,” Manufacturing Letters, vol. 20, pp. 10–14, Apr. 2019, 
doi: 10.1016/J.MFGLET.2019.02.001. 
[17] A. Caggiano, J. Zhang, V. Alfieri, F. Caiazzo, R. Gao, and R. Teti, “Machine learning￾based image processing for on-line defect recognition in additive manufacturing,” 
CIRP Annals, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 451–454, Jan. 2019, doi: 10.1016/J.CIRP.2019.03.021. 
[18] A. Haleem and M. Javaid, “Additive manufacturing applications in Industry 4.0: 
A review,” vol. 4, no. 4, p. 1930001, Oct. 2019, doi: 10.1142/S2424862219300011. 
[19] M. E. H. Korner, M. P. Lambán, J. A. Albajez, J. Santolaria, L. D. C. N. Corrales, 
and J. Royo, “Systematic literature review: Integration of additive manufacturing and 
Industry 4.0,” Metals, vol. 10, no. 8, p. 1061, Aug. 2020, doi: 10.3390/MET10081061. 
[20] M. Mehrpouya, A. Dehghanghadikolaei, B. Fotovvati, A. Vosooghnia, S. S. Emamian, 
and A. Gisario, “The potential of additive manufacturing in the smart factory Indus￾trial 4.0: A review,” Applied Sciences, vol. 9, no. 18, p. 3865, Sep. 2019, doi: 10.3390/ 
APP9183865. 
[21] S. Yin et al., “Cold spray additive manufacturing and repair: Fundamentals and appli￾cations,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 21, pp. 628–650, May 2018, doi: 10.1016/J. 
ADDMA.2018.04.017. 
[22] W. Li, K. Yang, S. Yin, X. Yang, Y. Xu, and R. Lupoi, “Solid-state additive manufactur￾ing and repairing by cold spraying: A review,” Journal of Materials Science and Tech￾nology, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 440–457, Mar. 2018, doi: 10.1016/J.JMST.2017.09.015.  
228 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[23] H. Assadi, H. Kreye, F. Gärtner, and T. Klassen, “Cold spraying—a materials per￾spective,” Acta Materialia, vol. 116, pp. 382–407, Sep. 2016, doi: 10.1016/J. 
ACTAMAT.2016.06.034. 
[24] R. Melentiev, N. Yu, and G. Lubineau, “Polymer metallization via cold spray addi￾tive manufacturing: A review of process control, coating qualities, and prospective 
applications,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 48, p. 102459, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1016/J. 
ADDMA.2021.102459. 
[25] S. Yin et al., “Cold spray additive manufacturing and repair: Fundamentals and appli￾cations,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 21, pp. 628–650, May 2018, doi: 10.1016/J. 
ADDMA.2018.04.017. 
[26] K. Malamousi, K. Delibasis, B. Allcock, and S. Kamnis, “Digital transformation 
of thermal and cold spray processes with emphasis on machine learning,” Sur￾face and Coatings Technology, vol. 433, p. 128138, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J. 
SURFCOAT.2022.128138. 
[27] D. Ikeuchi, A. Vargas-Uscategui, X. Wu, and P. C. King, “Neural network modelling 
of track profile in cold spray additive manufacturing,” Materials, vol. 12, no. 17, 
p. 2827, Sep. 2019, doi: 10.3390/MA12172827. 
[28] Z. Wang, S. Cai, W. Chen, R. A. Ali, and K. Jin, “Analysis of critical velocity of 
cold spray based on machine learning method with feature selection,” Journal of 
Thermal Spray Technology, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1213–1225, Jun. 2021, doi: 10.1007/ 
S11666-021-01198-8/FIGURES/10. 
[29] H. Canales, I. G. Cano, and S. Dosta, “Window of deposition description and pre￾diction of deposition efficiency via machine learning techniques in cold spraying,” 
Surface and Coatings Technology, vol. 401, p. 126143, Nov. 2020, doi: 10.1016/J. 
SURFCOAT.2020.126143. 
[30] R. Valente et al., “Classifying powder flowability for cold spray additive manufac￾turing using machine learning,” in Proceedings—2020 IEEE International Con￾ference on Big Data, Big Data 2020, pp. 2919–2928, Dec. 2020, doi: 10.1109/ 
BIGDATA50022.2020.9377948. 
[31] S. Roy and K. Ravi, “A machine learning based approach for cold spray deposition 
porosity prediction from processing parameters,” in Thermal Spray 2022: Proceed￾ings from the International Thermal Spray Conference, vol. 84369, pp. 961–976, 
May 2022, doi: 10.31399/ASM.CP.ITSC2022P0961. 
[32] K. Malamousi, K. Delibasis, B. Allcock, and S. Kamnis, “Digital transformation 
of thermal and cold spray processes with emphasis on machine learning,” Sur￾face and Coatings Technology, vol. 433, p. 128138, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J. 
SURFCOAT.2022.128138. 
[33] M. Tzinava, K. Delibasis, B. Allcock, and S. Kamnis, “A general-purpose spray 
coating deposition software simulator,” Surface and Coatings Technology, vol. 399, 
p. 126148, Oct. 2020, doi: 10.1016/J.SURFCOAT.2020.126148. 
[34] A. Chowdhury, E. Kautz, B. Yener, and D. Lewis, “Image driven machine learning 
methods for microstructure recognition,” Computational Materials Science, vol. 123, 
pp. 176–187, Oct. 2016, doi: 10.1016/J.COMMATSCI.2016.05.034. 
[35] V. H. C. De Albuquerque, P. C. Cortez, A. R. De Alexandria, and J. M. R. S. Tavares, 
“A new solution for automatic microstructures analysis from images based on a back￾propagation artificial neural network,” Nondestructive Testing and Evaluation, vol. 
23, no. 4, pp. 273–283, Dec. 2008, doi: 10.1080/10589750802258986. Machine learning and additive manufacturing 229 
[36] D. Ikeuchi, A. Vargas-Uscategui, X. Wu, and P. C. King, “Data-efficient neural net￾work for track profile modelling in cold spray additive manufacturing,” Applied Sci￾ences (Switzerland), vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 1–12, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.3390/app11041654. 
[37] M. Tzinava, K. Delibasis, and S. Kamnis, “Self-organizing maps for optimized 
robotic trajectory planning applied to surface coating,” IFIP Advances in Infor￾mation and Communication Technology, vol. 627, pp. 196–206, 2021, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-79150-6_16/COVER. 
[38] Z. Cai, X. Liang, B. Chen, C. Zeng, C. Chen, Z. Mu, and T. Chen, “A geodesic￾based robot trajectory planning approach for cold spray applications,” Journal of 
Thermal Spray Technology, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 939–945, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.1007/ 
S11666-019-00871-3/FIGURES/5. 
[39] H. Koivuluoto, J. Larjo, D. Marini, G. Pulci, and F. Marra, “Cold-sprayed Al6061 coat￾ings: Online spray monitoring and influence of process parameters on coating proper￾ties,” Coatings, vol. 10, no. 4, p. 348, Apr. 2020, doi: 10.3390/COATINGS10040348. 
[40] A. N. Avanaki, “Exact global histogram specification optimized for structural 
similarity,” Optical Review, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 613–621, Dec. 2009, doi: 10.1007/ 
S10043-009-0119-Z/METRICS. 
[41] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: 
From error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Transactions on Image Process￾ing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, Apr. 2004, doi: 10.1109/TIP.2003.819861. 
[42] N. Tepylo, X. Huang, and P. C. Patnaik, “Laser-based additive manufacturing tech￾nologies for aerospace applications,” Advanced Engineering Materials, vol. 21, no. 
11, p. 1900617, Nov. 2019, doi: 10.1002/adem.201900617. 
[43] A. Pratap, N. Sardana, S. Utomo, A. John, P. Karthikeyan, and P.-A. Hsiung, “Analy￾sis of defect associated with powder bed fusion with deep learning and explainable 
AI,” in 2023 15th International Conference on Knowledge and Smart Technology 
(KST), IEEE, pp. 1–6, Feb. 2023. doi: 10.1109/KST57286.2023.10086905. 
[44] M. Tang, P. C. Pistorius, and J. L. Beuth, “Prediction of lack-of-fusion porosity for 
powder bed fusion,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 14, pp. 39–48, Mar. 2017, doi: 
10.1016/J.ADDMA.2016.12.001. 
[45] R. Cunningham, C. Zhao, N. Parab, C. Kantzos, J. Pauza, K. Fezzaa, T. Sun, and A. D. 
Rollett, “Keyhole threshold and morphology in laser melting revealed by ultrahigh￾speed x-ray imaging,” Science (1979), vol. 363, no. 6429, pp. 849–852, Feb. 2019, 
doi: 10.1126/SCIENCE.AAV4687/SUPPL_FILE/AAV4687S9.MOV. 
[46] D. Gu and Y. Shen, “Balling phenomena during direct laser sintering of multi￾component Cu-based metal powder,” Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 432, no. 
1–2, pp. 163–166, Apr. 2007, doi: 10.1016/J.JALLCOM.2006.06.011. 
[47] M. A. Ansari, A. Crampton, R. Garrard, B. Cai, and M. Attallah, “A convolutional 
neural network (CNN) classification to identify the presence of pores in powder bed 
fusion images,” The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 
vol. 120, no. 7–8, pp. 5133–5150, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1007/s00170-022-08995-7. 
[48] Y. Zhang and Y. F. Zhao, “Hybrid sparse convolutional neural networks for pre￾dicting manufacturability of visual defects of laser powder bed fusion processes,” 
Journal of Manufacturing Systems, vol. 62, pp. 835–845, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jmsy.2021.07.002. 
[49] V. Pandiyan, G. Masinelli, N. Claire, T. Le-Quang, M. Hamidi-Nasab, C. de For￾manoir, R. Esmaeilzadeh, S. Goel, F. Marone, R. Logé, S. Van Petegem, and K.  
230 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Wasmer, “Deep learning-based monitoring of laser powder bed fusion process on 
variable time-scales using heterogeneous sensing and operando X-ray radiography 
guidance,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 58, p. 103007, Oct. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j. 
addma.2022.103007. 
[50] H.-Y. Chen, C.-C. Lin, M.-H. Horng, L.-K. Chang, J.-H. Hsu, T.-W. Chang, J.-C. 
Hung, R.-M. Lee, and M.-C. Tsai, “Deep learning applied to defect detection in pow￾der spreading process of magnetic material additive manufacturing,” Materials, vol. 
15, no. 16, p. 5662, Aug. 2022, doi: 10.3390/ma15165662. 
[51] M. A. Ansari, A. Crampton, R. Garrard, B. Cai, and M. Attallah, “A Convolutional 
Neural Network (CNN) classification to identify the presence of pores in powder 
bed fusion images,” The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Tech￾nology, vol. 120, no. 7–8, pp. 5133–5150, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1007/s00170-022­
08995-7. 
[52] Y. Gui, K. Aoyagi, H. Bian, and A. Chiba, “Detection, classification and prediction 
of internal defects from surface morphology data of metal parts fabricated by powder 
bed fusion type additive manufacturing using an electron beam,” Additive Manufac￾turing, vol. 54, p. 102736, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.addma.2022.102736. 
[53] H. Baumgartl, J. Tomas, R. Buettner, and M. Merkel, “A deep learning-based model 
for defect detection in laser-powder bed fusion using in-situ thermographic monitor￾ing,” Progress in Additive Manufacturing, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 277–285, Sep. 2020, doi: 
10.1007/s40964-019-00108-3. 
[54] Y. Zhang, G. S. Hong, D. Ye, K. Zhu, and J. Y. H. Fuh, “Extraction and evalua￾tion of melt pool, plume and spatter information for powder-bed fusion AM process 
monitoring,” Materials & Design, vol. 156, pp. 458–469, Oct. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j. 
matdes.2018.07.002. 
[55] B. Duman and K. Özsoy, “Toz yatak füzyon birleştirme eklemeli imalatta kusur 
tespiti için öğrenme aktarımı kullanan derin öğrenme tabanlı bir yaklaşım,” Gazi 
Üniversitesi Mühendislik‑Mimarlık Fakültesi Dergisi, Jun. 2021, doi: 10.17341/ 
gazimmfd.870436. 
[56] L. Scime and J. Beuth, “A multi-scale convolutional neural network for autonomous 
anomaly detection and classification in a laser powder bed fusion additive manu￾facturing process,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 24, pp. 273–286, Dec. 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.addma.2018.09.034. 
[57] C. Suwanpreecha and A. Manonukul, “A review on material extrusion additive manu￾facturing of metal and how it compares with metal injection moulding,” Metals, vol. 
12, no. 3, p. 429, Feb. 2022, doi: 10.3390/MET12030429. 
[58] J. Qin et al., “Research and application of machine learning for additive manufac￾turing,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 52, p. 102691, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J. 
ADDMA.2022.102691. 
[59] G. Papazetis and G. C. Vosniakos, “Mapping of deposition-stable and defect-free 
additive manufacturing via material extrusion from minimal experiments,” Interna￾tional Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 100, no. 9–12, pp. 2207– 
2219, Feb. 2019, doi: 10.1007/S00170-018-2820-1/METRICS. 
[60] L. Lu, J. Hou, S. Yuan, X. Yao, Y. Li, and J. Zhu, “Deep learning-assisted real-time 
defect detection and closed-loop adjustment for additive manufacturing of continuous 
fiber-reinforced polymer composites,” Robotics and Computer‑Integrated Manufac￾turing, vol. 79, p. 102431, Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1016/J.RCIM.2022.102431. Machine learning and additive manufacturing 231 
[61] G. D. Goh, N. M. Bin Hamzah, and W. Y. Yeong, “Anomaly detection in fused fila￾ment fabrication using machine learning,” https://home.liebertpub.com/3dp, Jan. 
2022, doi: 10.1089/3DP.2021.0231. 
[62] Z. Zhang, I. Fidan, and M. Allen, “Detection of material extrusion in-process fail￾ures via deep learning,” Inventions, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 25, Jul. 2020, doi: 10.3390/ 
INVENTIONS5030025. 
[63] H. Kim, H. Lee, J. S. Kim, and S. H. Ahn, “Image-based failure detection for material 
extrusion process using a convolutional neural network,” International Journal of 
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 111, no. 5–6, pp. 1291–1302, Nov. 2020, 
doi: 10.1007/S00170-020-06201-0/FIGURES/11. 
[64] Z. Zhang, J. Femi-Oyetoro, I. Fidan, M. Ismail, and M. Allen, “Prediction of dimen￾sional changes of low-cost metal material extrusion fabricated parts using machine 
learning techniques,” Metals, vol. 11, no. 5, p. 690, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.3390/ 
MET11050690. 
[65] Z. Zhang and I. Fidan, “Machine learning-based void percentage analysis of compo￾nents fabricated with the low-cost metal material extrusion process,” Materials, vol. 
15, no. 12, p. 4292, Jun. 2022, doi: 10.3390/MA15124292. 
[66] Z. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Shi, and D. Wu, “Prediction of surface roughness in extrusion￾based additive manufacturing with machine learning,” Robotics and Computer‑Inte￾grated Manufacturing, vol. 57, pp. 488–495, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.1016/J.RCIM.2019. 
01.004. 
[67] A. Malekpour and X. Chen, “Printability and cell viability in extrusion-based bio￾printing from experimental, computational, and machine learning views,” Jour￾nal of Functional Biomaterials, vol. 13, no. 2, p. 40, Apr. 2022, doi: 10.3390/ 
JFB13020040. 
[68] L. Li, R. McGuan, R. Isaac, P. Kavehpour, and R. Candler, “Improving precision 
of material extrusion 3D printing by in-situ monitoring & predicting 3D geometric 
deviation using conditional adversarial networks,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 38, 
p. 101695, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1016/J.ADDMA.2020.101695. 
[69] M. Ziaee and N. B. Crane, “Binder jetting: A review of process, materials, and meth￾ods,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 28, pp. 781–801, Aug. 2019, doi: 10.1016/J. 
ADDMA.2019.05.031. 
[70] A. Mostafaei, A. M. Elliott, J. E. Barnes, F. Li, W. Tan, C. L. Cramer, P. Nandwana, 
and M. Chmielus, “Binder jet 3D printing—Process parameters, materials, properties, 
modeling, and challenges,” Progress in Materials Science, vol. 119, p. 100707, Jun. 
2021, doi: 10.1016/J.PMATSCI.2020.100707. 
[71] N. Satterlee, E. Torresani, E. Olevsky, and J. S. Kang, “Automatic detection and 
characterization of porosities in cross-section images of metal parts produced by 
binder jetting using machine learning and image augmentation,” Journal of Intel￾ligent Manufacturing, pp. 1–23, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1007/S10845-023-02100-9/ 
FIGURES/21. 
[72] B. J. Paudel, H. Deng, and A. C. To, “A physics-based data-driven distortion compen￾sation model for sintered binder jet parts considering size effects,” Additive Manufac￾turing, vol. 68, p. 103517, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1016/J.ADDMA.2023.103517. 
[73] F. Dini, S. A. Ghaffari, J. Jafar, R. Hamidreza, and S. Marjan, “A review of binder jet 
process parameters; powder, binder, printing and sintering condition,” Metal Powder 
Report, vol. 75, no. 2, pp. 95–100, Nov. 2021, doi: 10.1016/J.MPRP.2019.05.001.  
 
 
232 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[74] M. Jamalkhani, M. Asherloo, O. Gurlekce, T. Ho, M. Heim, D. Nelson, and A. Mosta￾faei, “Deciphering microstructure-defect-property relationships of vacuum-sintered 
binder jetted fine 316 L austenitic stainless steel powder,” Additive Manufacturing, 
vol. 59, p. 103133, Nov. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J.ADDMA.2022.103133. 
[75] D. Gunther, M. F. Pirehgalin, I. Weis, and B. Vogel-Heuser, “Condition monitoring for 
the Binder Jetting AM-process with machine learning approaches,” in Proceedings— 
2020 IEEE Conference on Industrial Cyberphysical Systems, ICPS 2020, pp. 417–420, 
Jun. 2020, doi: 10.1109/ICPS48405.2020.9274716. 
[76] R. Onler, A. S. Koca, B. Kirim, and E. Soylemez, “Multi-objective optimization of 
binder jet additive manufacturing of Co-Cr-Mo using machine learning,” Interna￾tional Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 119, no. 1–2, pp. 1091– 
1108, Mar. 2022, doi: 10.1007/S00170-021-08183-Z/FIGURES/12. 
[77] Y. Zhu, Z. Wu, W. D. Hartley, J. M. Sietins, C. B. Williams, and H. Z. Yu, “Unravel￾ing pore evolution in post-processing of binder jetting materials: X-ray computed 
tomography, computer vision, and machine learning,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 
34, p. 101183, Aug. 2020, doi: 10.1016/J.ADDMA.2020.101183. 
[78] H. Chen and Y. F. Zhao, “Learning algorithm based modeling and process parameters 
recommendation system for binder jetting additive manufacturing process,” Proceed￾ings of the ASME Design Engineering Technical Conference, vol. 1A-2015, Jan. 
2016, doi: 10.1115/DETC2015-47627. 
[79] E. Mendoza Jimenez et al., “Parametric analysis to quantify process input influence 
on the printed densities of binder jetted alumina ceramics,” Additive Manufacturing, 
vol. 30, p. 100864, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1016/J.ADDMA.2019.100864. 
[80] S. Bafaluy Ojea, J. Torrents-Barrena, M. T. Pérez-Prado, R. Muñoz Moreno, and F. 
Sket, “Binder jet green parts microstructure: Advanced quantitative analysis,” Jour￾nal of Materials Research and Technology, vol. 23, pp. 3974–3986, Mar. 2023, doi: 
10.1016/J.JMRT.2023.02.051. 
[81] I. Gibson, D. Rosen, and B. Stucker, “Directed energy deposition processes,” Addi￾tive Manufacturing Technologies, pp. 245–268, 2015, doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939­
2113-3_10. 
[82] D. G. Ahn, “Directed Energy Deposition (DED) Process: State of the art,” Interna￾tional Journal of Precision Engineering and Manufacturing‑Green Technology, vol. 
8, no. 2, pp. 703–742, Feb. 2021, doi: 10.1007/S40684-020-00302-7. 
[83] P. K. Nalajam and R. V, “Microstructural porosity segmentation using machine learn￾ing techniques in wire-based direct energy deposition of AA6061,” Micron, vol. 151, 
p. 103161, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1016/J.MICRON.2021.103161. 
[84] H. Lee, W. Heogh, J. Yang, J. Yoon, J. Park, S. Ji, and H. Lee, “Deep learning for 
in-situ powder stream fault detection in directed energy deposition process,” Jour￾nal of Manufacturing Systems, vol. 62, pp. 575–587, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J. 
JMSY.2022.01.013. 
[85] L. Chen, X. Yao, and S. K. Moon, “In-situ acoustic monitoring of direct energy depo￾sition process with deep learning-assisted signal denoising,” Materials Today: Pro￾ceedings, vol. 70, pp. 136–142, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J.MATPR.2022.09.008. 
[86] Z. Zhang, Z. Liu, and D. Wu, “Prediction of melt pool temperature in directed energy 
deposition using machine learning,” Additive Manufacturing, vol. 37, p. 101692, Jan. 
2021, doi: 10.1016/J.ADDMA.2020.101692.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Machine learning and additive manufacturing 233 
[87] J. S. Lim, W. J. Oh, C. M. Lee, and D. H. Kim, “Selection of effective manufac￾turing conditions for directed energy deposition process using machine learning 
methods,” Scientific Reports, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–13, Dec. 2021, doi: 10.1038/ 
s41598-021-03622-z. 
[88] D. Kats, Z. Wang, Z. Gan, W. K. Liu, G. J. Wagner, and Y. Lian, “A physics-informed 
machine learning method for predicting grain structure characteristics in directed 
energy deposition,” Computational Materials Science, vol. 202, p. 110958, Feb. 
2022, doi: 10.1016/J.COMMATSCI.2021.110958. 
[89] J. Li, M. Sage, X. Guan, M. Brochu, and Y. F. Zhao, “Machine learning-enabled com￾petitive grain growth behavior study in directed energy deposition fabricated Ti6Al4V,” 
JOM, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 458–464, Jan. 2020, doi: 10.1007/S11837-019-03917-7/ 
FIGURES/6. 
[90] F. Kaji, H. Nguyen-Huu, A. Budhwani, J. A. Narayanan, M. Zimny, and E. Toy￾serkani, “A deep-learning-based in-situ surface anomaly detection methodology for 
laser directed energy deposition via powder feeding,” Journal of Manufacturing 
Processes, vol. 81, pp. 624–637, Sep. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J.JMAPRO.2022.06.046. 
[91] T. Q. D. Pham, T. V. Hoang, X. V. Tran, S. Fetni, L. Duchêne, H. S. Tran, and A. 
M. Habraken, “Characterization, propagation, and sensitivity analysis of uncertain￾ties in the directed energy deposition process using a deep learning-based surrogate 
model,” Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics, vol. 69, p. 103297, Jul. 2022, doi: 
10.1016/J.PROBENGMECH.2022.103297. 
[92] H. Lee, W. Heogh, J. Yang, J. Yoon, J. Park, S. Ji, and H. Lee, “Deep learning for in-situ 
powder stream fault detection in directed energy deposition process,” Journal of Manu￾facturing Systems, vol. 62, pp. 575–587, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J.JMSY.2022.01.013. 
[93] D. Guo, S. Ling, and H. Li, “A framework for personalized production based on digi￾tal twin, blockchain and additive manufacturing in the context of Industry 4.0,” in 
IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 2020, 
pp. 1181–1186, Aug. 2020, doi: 10.1109/CASE48305.2020.9216732. 
[94] C. Liu, L. Le Roux, C. Körner, O. Tabaste, F. Lacan, and S. Bigot, “Digital twin￾enabled collaborative data management for metal additive manufacturing systems,” 
Journal of Manufacturing Systems, vol. 62, pp. 857–874, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.1016/J. 
JMSY.2020.05.010. 
[95] Y. Cai, Y. Wang, and M. Burnett, “Using augmented reality to build digital twin for 
reconfigurable additive manufacturing system,” Journal of Manufacturing Systems, 
vol. 56, pp. 598–604, Jul. 2020, doi: 10.1016/J.JMSY.2020.04.005. 
[96] A. Suresh, R. Udendhran, and G. Yamini, “Internet of Things and additive 
manufacturing: Toward intelligent production systems in industry 4.0,” EAI/ 
Springer Innovations in Communication and Computing, pp. 73–89, 2020, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-32530-5_5/COVER. 
[97] C. Yang, W. Shen, and X. Wang, “The Internet of Things in manufacturing: Key 
issues and potential applications,” IEEE Systems, Man, and Cybernetics Magazine, 
vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 6–15, Jan. 2018, doi: 10.1109/MSMC.2017.2702391. 
[98] R. Y. Zhong and W. Ge, “Internet of Things enabled manufacturing: A review,” 
International Journal of Agile Systems and Management, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 126– 
154, 2018, doi: 10.1504/IJASM.2018.092545.  
 
234 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[99] Z. Bi, G. Wang, and L. Da Xu, “A visualization platform for Internet of Things in 
manufacturing applications,” Internet Research, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 377–401, Apr. 
2016, doi: 10.1108/INTR-02-2014-0043/FULL/PDF. 
[100] R. Ashima, A. Haleem, S. Bahl, M. Javaid, S. K. Mahla, and S. Singh, “Automation 
and manufacturing of smart materials in additive manufacturing technologies using 
Internet of Things towards the adoption of industry 4.0,” Materials Today: Proceed￾ings, vol. 45, pp. 5081–5088, Jan. 2021, doi: 10.1016/J.MATPR.2021.01.583. 
[101] C. Xia, Z. Pan, J. Polden, H. Li, Y. Xu, S. Chen, and Y. Zhang, “A review on wire 
arc additive manufacturing: Monitoring, control and a framework of automated 
system,” Journal of Manufacturing Systems, vol. 57, pp. 31–45, Oct. 2020, doi: 
10.1016/J.JMSY.2020.08.008. 
[102] P. Becker, C. Eichmann, A. Roennau, and R. Dillmann, “Automation of post￾processing in additive manufacturing with industrial robots,” in IEEE International 
Conference on Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 2020, pp. 1578–1583, 
Aug. 2020, doi: 10.1109/CASE48305.2020.9216955. 9
 
 
Chapter 9
 
An insight into applications 
of laser in modern era 
Rahul Nair , Ravi Kant and Hema Gurung 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
A laser is a source of a very intense, monochromatic and unidirectional beam of 
light. Monochromatic means that the beam is of a single wavelength, and coher￾ence means the beam is in the same phase. The transition of electrons from higher 
to lower energy states is random in ordinary light with respect to time. This is the 
cause of getting different wavelength, frequency, energy and phase in the emitted 
photons. But due to the stimulated emission in a laser, a chain reaction is started in 
which one atom’s radiation energizes another atom in succession until all stimu￾lated atoms come to their original state. This provides a coherent monochromatic￾ity and directionality to the laser beam. Because of these properties, the laser beam 
appears intensely focused and can concentrate a large amount of energy in a small 
area. Modern-day manufacturing, especially Industry 4.0, relies heavily on laser 
and sensor technology. Implementing lasers in the manufacturing sector has laid a 
path for improved, rapid and hassle-free product manufacturing. Nowadays, pro￾ducing solar cells, batteries and fuel cells needs laser technology to execute them. 
Even microchips or semiconductors that are made today are manufactured with the 
help of optical lithography, which is a type of laser technology. 
Laser, being flexible and able to adjust to changes in a material like thickness, 
shape, orientation and reflectivity, makes it a perfect tool for Industry 4.0. Pro￾cesses like laser-based additive manufacturing are becoming crucial components 
of Industry 4.0 as they employ several sensors for continuous workflow monitor￾ing and control. This chapter focuses on the application of lasers in three major 
domains: academics, industry and the medical sector. The following sections also 
discuss the implementation of lasers in modern-day sectors. 
9.2 LASER IN SPECTROSCOPY 
The study of emission and absorption of light by matter is termed spectroscopy. 
Spectroscopy is the analysis and measuring of a specific wavelength, and it is 
generally utilized for the spectroscopic examination of materials. At a glance, the 
DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-9 235  
236 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
working principle of spectroscopy is akin to that of a prism, which disperses light 
into the colours of the rainbow. Indeed, earlier spectroscopy was carried out using 
photographic plates and prisms [1]. Due to the high sensitivity of spectrographic 
techniques, their usage is very prominent in the detection of a single atom and its 
isotopes. Spectroscopy exploits the basic fundamentals of physics for determining 
the absorption, emission or scattering of light and its optical phase changes. In the 
mid-infrared region, atoms have a strong and narrow absorption line compared to 
their rotational and vibrational mode [2]. This property helps to determine a wide 
variety of elements with high accuracy and sensitivity. The basic application of this 
can be seen in finding tiny elements in air pollution [3]. Even the change in optical 
phase concept has been used for spectroscopy analysis. The intended interaction 
occurs at one side of the interferometer, and the phase change can be detected at the 
output of the interferometer. These phase changes resulting from absorption or dis￾persion associated with narrow spectral features are used in frequency modulation 
spectroscopy. When a matter is exposed to heating or simple exposure to sunlight, 
it has the tendency to emit or scatter light with some specific characteristic features. 
This technique of scattering of light is widely used in satellites, where a spectrom￾eter records the scattered light from the earth’s surface to differentiate between 
sea, flora, fauna and rocky surfaces. This scattering phenomenon is also utilized in 
astronomy, where optical spectra of light from galaxies and stars have been used to 
determine movements, speed, temperature and chemical compositions. 
The modern-day spectral analysis uses lasers as a tool for the illumination of 
specimens. Absorbed light will heat the atoms and excite them, resulting in the 
emission of fluorescent light. The utilization of laser beams as the light source in 
spectroscopy is termed laser spectroscopy. The divergent properties of lasers, such 
as exhibition of temporal and spatial coherence, wavelength tunability, high opti￾cal powers and the generation of ultrashort pulses, have opened many new doors 
for spectroscopy. The incorporation of lasers into spectroscopy has revitalized tra￾ditional spectroscopic analysis. This is primarily because lasers offer brightness, 
directionality and spectral purity compared to other light sources. The utilization 
of laser in traditional spectroscopy processes like Raman spectroscopy, absorp￾tion spectroscopy and fluorescence spectroscopy has helped to increase the accu￾racy and sensitivity of spectroscopy analysis. The recent developments helped in 
analyzing new techniques for the measurement of wavelength with exceptional 
precision, and these are mainly based on informetric devices. Laser spectroscopy 
has become an important technique in medicine, science and industry where high 
sensitivity and accuracy are required. 
9.2.1 Laser induced-breakdown spectroscopy 
Laser-induced-breakdown spectroscopy (LIBS), commonly termed laser￾induced plasma spectroscopy (LIPS) or laser spark spectroscopy (LSS), is a 
type of atomic emission spectroscopy. LIBS generates a plasma that is produced 
with the help of a low-level pulsed laser on the surface of the sample, which  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 237 
vaporizes a small amount of material. This spectroscopy exploits the phenom￾enon of emission of spectra when the excited atom returns to its ground state 
for the analysis of the specimen’s elements. The generated laser focuses on the 
targeted specimen via a focusing lens, and the plasma emits a white light which 
is then collected by a second lens. The secondary lens sends the captured light 
to a spectrometer through an optical fiber to detect elements. The spectrometer 
then disseminates the emitted light from the electrons into signals that a detec￾tor will further record. These recorded signals are then digitized and displayed 
through an electronic medium [4]. The process seems simple in an overview, but 
the physical and chemical processes involved in LIBS are not that straightfor￾ward. The lifespan of the plasma beam is itself a complicated process. Inverse 
bremsstrahlung is a mechanism that predominates in the absorption of incident 
lasers, and this is accompanied by a collision between electron, ion and mol￾ecule. Inverse bremsstrahlung is a process in which electrons in the electric field 
of the atom will absorb the photon, resulting in a gain in energy of electrons 
and an increase in temperature through an ionized collision [5]. As soon as the 
plasma is generated, the continuum and ionic spectra become visible. The “white 
light”, known as a continuum, contains all the spectral information and the ions 
ejected from electrons. Assessment of LIBS uncovers quick subjective data 
about a specimen’s structure. The data provided by LIBS gives an insight into 
the chemical fingerprint of material in solid, air or liquid samples. A detailed 
working diagram of LIBS is demonstrated in Figure 9.1. The mechanism of 
excitation of a particular energy level in discrete atoms is a highly complex 
process and depends on the interaction between atoms, molecules and thermo￾dynamic equilibrium. As soon as the laser pulse is ceased, plasma decay starts at 
Figure 9.1 Detailed working diagram of LIBS. 238 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
a very fast rate, about one to several microseconds. This rate will depend on the 
deposition of laser energy. Most LIBS investigations use a frequency of 10 Hz 
or greater for repetitive plasmas. 
LIBS has shown its compatibility with various matter, such as solids, liquids, 
gases, aerosols and slurries, which are difficult to investigate with the convention￾ally used spectroscopy processes like inductively coupled plasma (ICP). While 
ICP is mainly confined to research centre use, LIBS is particularly valuable in field 
applications. Over the years, LIBS has garnered attention in various sectors for 
its ability to detect impurities in metals, analyze the deterioration of metals used 
in nuclear reactors and identify soil contamination. Nowadays, its usage is very 
significant in detecting elemental components of rocks and soils on Mars; it was 
also able to analyze toxic compounds like anthrax. 
Studies in diverse fields have been undertaken to improve the accuracy of the 
machine and overcome the limitations that restrict its use. Fu et al. [6] studied 
the plasma evolution of the laser on titanium alloy. Three high-speed cameras 
were used to capture plasma evolution, and it was found that the plasma and sur￾rounding gases interact drastically during the earlier stage of the development. 
Earlier stage plasma experiences morphological fluctuation with an increased time 
in delay, resulting in the transformation of stable plasma to a fluctuating plasma 
and therefore inaccurate results. Liu et al. [7] provided a review work in which 
the analysis of the plastics was presented using LIBS. The specific advantages 
such as discrimination and quantitative and qualitative analysis of plastics helped 
in the fast detection of toxic particles in food containers and toys. Yuan et al. [8] 
provided a single-sample calibration method (SSC-LIBS) based on the Lomakin￾Scherbe formula. The experimental results showed that SSC-LIBS had enhanced 
the accuracy of element determination as compared to the multi-point calibration 
LIBS. Wang et al. [9] reported the effects of preheating samples in femtosecond 
LIBS. Results indicated that the assistance of preheating improved the diagnosing 
accuracy of femtosecond LIBS. Zang et al. [10] developed a new LIBS spectrum 
data treatment method for identifying the concentration of the minor element in 
steel with the help of machine learning. This approach resulted in identifying the 
non-metal elements in the steel. 
Advantages of LIBS 
1. It is a rapid, portable and real-time analysis technique. 
2. Being a non-destructive analysis technique, a very small amount of sample 
is used for analysis. 
3. The necessity of sample preparation is almost negligible; contamination is 
much less. 
4. Sample analysis is versatile, i.e. liquid, aerosols, solids, gases, slurry. 
5. Multi-elemental analysis can be done. 
6. Analysis of hard materials which are difficult to dissolve, like semiconduc￾tors and ceramics, can be done easily.  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 239 
Disadvantages of LIBS 
1. Generally, detection limits are not as accurate as conventional solution 
techniques. 
2. The input cost is fairly high and the system is quite complex to use. 
3. The interference effect is quite large. 
4. Damage to human vision is a big risk when working with high-intensity 
pulsed laser. 
5. Precision obtained by LIBS is low. 
9.2.2 Photoacoustic spectroscopy 
The term photoacoustic defines the generation of acoustic waves in a sample 
through the absorption of photons. Measuring the change in optical power in the 
light beam is the method for determining wavelength-dependent absorption in the 
sample. The way photoacoustic spectroscopy (PAS) works is quite simple. A high￾intensity beam collides with the targeted specimen, which excites the ground state 
electron population to the higher state. The excited electrons will return to their 
ground state in radiative and nonradiative pathways. The nonradiative part will 
eventually produce heat in the restricted district of the excitation light and create 
a pressure wave that proliferates away from the source. The cyclic excitation is 
transformed into a cyclic variation of temperature in the targeted specimen by a 
radiationless mitigation process. Properties like refractive index and pressure are 
altered during this process, which gives rise to acoustic disturbances that can be 
monitored by appropriate detectors. These detectors will then emit signals which 
can further be altered, amplified and averaged to produce significant data regard￾ing the specimen’s energy transfer, composition and other valuable information 
[11]. PAS consists of some critical components: (a) source of the emission of light, 
(b) specimen chamber, (c) detector for acoustic signals and (d) signal processing 
apparatus [12]. 
The generation of a high-intensity beam in photoacoustic spectroscopy is 
currently executed with the help of a monochromator/lamp or a laser beam. 
Laser, a monochromatic high intensity beam, has a huge advantage over the 
traditional monochromator/lamp, the use of which dominates in photoacoustic 
spectroscopy. The laser has an accurately parallel and cylindrical beam which 
is suitable for the current resonators used in the photoacoustic cell [13]. Instead 
of a continuous wave, a pulsed laser source is used because of its potential 
to generate a high-intensity beam. This high-intensity beam can be utilized in 
various ways, such as the detection of thermal diffusivity, investigation of phase 
transitions, and the non-destructive analysis of materials by thermal wave imag￾ing [14]. PAS is utilized when the surface of the solid material is not reflective 
and can provide optical information of the mass material itself. PAS can also 
study opaque materials for their optical properties. This proficient PAS method 
can be utilized to examine materials like semiconductors, metallic frameworks  
240 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
and insulators that cannot be understood promptly by traditional reflection or 
absorption procedures. Freidlin et al. [15] demonstrated dual-comb spectros￾copy for PA measurements. This approach helped to overcome the limitation of 
a separate image at each wavelength of interest, which causes errors during the 
sample change between the image acquired at different wavelengths. Krivoshein 
et al. [16] showed an FTIR-PAS-based approach for identifying and assessing 
soil components. The new approach showed higher sensitivity in the mid-wave 
range of the mid-IR range as compared to the traditional one. Lv et al. [17] 
proposed a radial cavity quartz-enhanced technique for photoacoustic spectros￾copy. The experiment results showed that the new optimized radial cavity helped 
improve photoacoustic spectroscopy’s detection sensitivity by greater than one 
order of magnitude. 
Advantages of PAS 
1. Pulsed laser beams can detect even a minute portion of the targeted gas, on 
the order of parts per trillion. 
2. Compared to the photothermal process, the photoacoustic signal has the 
ability to measure the absorption spectrum, which is very useful for trans￾parent samples in which the absorption of light is significantly less. 
3. Absorption spectrum can be calculated by dividing signal spectrum by light 
intensity spectrum; this plays a significant role in the detection of a micro￾scopic particle of any targeted specimens. 
Figure 9.2 Working diagram of Raman spectroscopy.  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 241 
Disadvantages of PAS 
1. Limited tuning range of the laser source. 
2. The initial setup and equipment cost is quite high. 
3. The bandwidth of the laser is not very broad; the targeted molecule must 
absorb some light from the source for the analysis. 
9.2.3 Raman spectroscopy 
Raman spectroscopy is a non-destructive characterization technique that utilizes 
the inelastic scattering phenomenon to identify the vibrational fingerprint of the 
sample through which physical properties, molecular interaction, phase, chemical 
structure and crystallinity can be determined. A wide range of materials can be 
examined through this process, varying from physical state samples like vapours, 
liquids and solids to surface layer or microscale samples. In this, the sample will 
interact with a monochromatic laser source, and the interaction of the photons 
with the molecules of the sample leads to the rise of scattered light. During the 
interaction, if the frequency of the scattered light is different from that of incident 
light, then it will give rise to the Raman spectrum. Most scattered light will have 
the same frequency as monochromatic light, which does not provide any useful 
information, and this is termed as Rayleigh scattering [18]. Only a small amount of 
scattered light will differ (roughly around 0.0000001%) from the source’s original 
frequency, which will make up Raman scatter. When the frequency of scattered 
light is lower than that of incident radiation, a Stokes line will appear, indicating 
that the electrons have absorbed energy. But if the frequency is higher than that 
of incident light, then the anti-Stokes line will appear in the Raman spectrum, 
indicating that the electron has released energy [19]. In conventional Raman spec￾troscopy, Stokes bands are measured. This is because the Stokes bands involve 
the transition of electrons from low to high energy levels, resulting in a stronger 
band than the anti-Stokes band. Usually, anti-Stokes bands are measured for the 
fluorescent sample, where the Stokes band experiences disturbance due to fluores￾cence [20]. A Raman spectrometer includes three essential components: detector, 
excitation source and sampling apparatus. A typical working diagram of Raman 
spectroscopy is shown in Figure 9.2. 
The identification of appropriate laser wavelength is a critical task depending on 
the usage. Three categories of laser sources are available for Raman spectroscopy. 
1. Diode-pumped single-longitudinal mode laser: The wavelength range in 
these lasers varies from 300 nm to 1064 nm. The single-longitudinal-mode 
(SLM) laser contains narrow linewidths and low noise, making it ideal for 
usage in Raman spectroscopy. The spectral purity provided by these lasers 
is very high, normally greater than 60 dB side-mode suppression ratio. 
2. Single-mode diode laser: The power output from the single-mode laser 
is less than that of the multimode diode laser, but it provides high power  
 
242 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
intensity because of the narrow active area, making it very suitable for high￾speed applications like Raman spectroscopy. Generally, the wavelength of 
these lasers ranges from 785 nm to 1064 nm. The single-mode suppression 
ratio is limited by the sideband emission to nearly 50 dB, generally obtained 
some picometers away from the main peak. 
3.	 Volume Bragg-grating (VBG) frequency-stabilized diode lasers: A VBG 
is a grating element in which the reflective index receives a periodic 
modulation throughout the photosensitive material. It permits the mul￾tiple multimode laser diodes to lock simultaneously, making it useful at 
any wavelength or power level. This element helps the laser to achieve 
narrow-linewidth emission at a wavelength that is generally not possible 
at distributed Bragg reflection or distributed feedback. Compared to the 
other diode lasers, the side-mode suppression ratio is limited to about 
40–50 dB to the main peak, but with the help of VBG it can be improved 
to 60–70 dB. 
Due to its predominant advantages over the other spectroscopy processes, Raman 
spectroscopy is widely used for various characterization techniques. Technologi￾cal advancement is also helping Raman spectroscopy to overcome its limitations 
and widen its field area. Berghian-Grosan and Magdas [21] developed a new 
method by combining Raman spectroscopy and machine learning for the authen￾tication of edible oils. The proposed approach detected the adulteration as well 
as the magnitude of it in the oils. Lu et al. [22] proposed a method that incorpo￾rates artificial intelligence into Raman spectroscopy to analyze the microbes at a 
single cell level. The combination of convolution neural network (ConvNet) and 
Raman spectroscopy helped to categorize the cells according to their spectral 
features. Lu et al. [23] developed a novel method by combining serum Raman 
spectroscopy and multiscale convolution independent circulation neural network 
along with multiscale fusion convolution independent circulation neural network 
for the diagnosis of hepatitis B virus (HBV). The experimental results demon￾strated that the prediction sensitivity, specificity and accuracy were increased by 
incorporating the developed method, resulting in effective diagnosis of healthy 
and HBV patients. 
Advantages of Raman spectroscopy 
1. The major advantage of Raman spectroscopy is that no specific type of sam￾ple preparation is needed. 
2. It is non-destructive testing, and it cannot be interfered with by water. 
3. Raman spectra can be quickly acquired in a matter of seconds. 
4. A wide variety of organic and inorganic samples can be detected by Raman 
analysis, and samples can be analyzed even through glass or polymer 
packing. 
5. A large region (50 cm−1 to 400 cm−1) can be covered in a single recording.  
 
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 243 
Disadvantages of Raman spectroscopy 
1. It cannot be used for metal or alloys. 
2. The intense heat produced by the laser could destroy the sample or cover the 
Raman spectrum. 
3. As the Raman effect is very weak, a sophisticated instrument is required. 
9.3 LASER SENSORS 
A laser sensor records the measurement value with the help of laser technology. It 
converts the physically measured value to an analogue electrical signal. The dif￾ference in material properties and variation in environmental conditions make it 
difficult for certain technology to work. Certain equipment encounters challenges 
when it comes to accurately analyzing moving particles in a dusty environment, 
while others struggle with precisely measuring the liquid levels. The laser provides 
a contactless measurement, which finds its way into various modern applications 
[24]. Most of the laser sensors are based on the triangulation principle; the term 
triangulation is defined as the calculation of distance measurement with the help 
of angular estimation [25]. A laser spot is projected from the sensor to the targeted 
object, and when this reflected light falls on the receiving element at an angle 
(depending on the distance between the sensor and targeted object), the sensor cal￾culates the distance at which the measured object is placed. These sensors can be 
joined with either point or line lasers. A point laser produces a focused small circle 
of light on the surface of the specimen, which is intended to transfer the point from 
one surface to another. In contrast, a line laser produces vertical and horizontal 
lines with the help of LED diodes. The sensors integrated with line lasers are com￾monly used for indoor applications and have the plumb down and up potential. 
The modern-day models use a pulsing light technology that operates with a light 
detector, which aids to expand their application in outdoor environments. 
According to the laser sensor type, there are four types available: complemen￾tary metal-oxide semiconductors (CMOS), photoelectric sensors, charge-coupled 
devices (CCD) and position-sensitive detectors (PSD). The laser sensors used in 
industries help to determine or analyze the dimensions of various materials travel￾ling at high speed or to monitor the distances of the material irrespective of the 
range of colours and the ambient background light. Some common laser sensors 
used in industries include laser displacement, time of flight, laser photoelectric 
and laser grid sensors. A detailed explanation of the aforementioned sensors is 
provided in the following sections. 
9.3.1 Laser displacement sensor 
The laser displacement sensor (LDS) calculates the distance between the sensor 
and the targeted object by using different elements and then converting it into 
a mathematical value of distance. Some of the most common sensor types are 244 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
ultrasonic displacement, optical displacement and linear proximity. The lens col￾lects the laser beams and makes them parallel, which is then emitted to the targeted 
specimen. The receiver detects the reflected light from the targeted object, which 
is then detected by the image sensor through the lens. The distance D can be cal￾culated by the following formula: 
L S ´ D = I 
where D is the distance between the laser and the targeted object. The distance 
between the lenses is denoted by L, and S is the distance between lens and the 
image sensor. The term I is the current from the image sensor. A detailed diagram 
is depicted in Figure 9.3. The head of the sensor is mounted in such a way that 
the angle of the emitted light and the angle of the received light are the same [26]. 
Figure 9.3 Schematic of laser displacement sensing.  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 245 
Laser displacement sensing is applied extensively in modern industries. Laser 
distance sensors are commonly used in the automobile industry to detect the com￾plex geometrical shapes of a single component. Contacting sensors could not 
accurately detect these complex shapes, whereas non-contacting sensors like laser 
sensors provide high accuracy. A laser displacement transducer is a commonly 
used tool in automobile industries to control the dimensions of the headlight com￾ponent. It helps to eliminate the inconsistencies in the earlier stage so that a smooth 
production could be acquired and delays could be avoided in the production line. 
Displacement sensors like laser displacement-level measurement sensors are use￾ful in the chemical, food and plastics industries. 
Smith and Zheng [27] developed a multi-laser displacement sensor for the digi￾tizing of unknown sculpture surfaces. This newly developed technique was used to 
measure the curvatures, tangents and changes in surface displacement. The results 
showed that it was very useful in detecting the arc length of the sample, with 
minimal error. Sun and Li [28] demonstrated a novel error-compensation model 
which can reduce the error in the incident angle of the laser displacement sensor. 
The designed model helped to increase the efficiency of the surface detection of an 
aero-engine blade. Giri and Kharkovsky [29] reported a measurement technique 
with the help of the laser displacement sensor to detect the crack propagation that 
occurred in the concrete specimens. Sandak and Tanaka [30] compared the rough￾ness of a wood specimen obtained from the laser displacement sensor with the 
contact type stylus. The experimental results showed that the profile obtained by 
the LDS is much more accurate than that of the contact type stylus. 
9.3.2 Time-of-flight sensor 
Time-of-flight (ToF) sensors are used to measure the distance travelled between 
two points by the photons in terms of time. Time-of-flight sensors use various 
types of carriers; light and sound are the most commonly used carriers. Light￾based ToF sensors are better than ultrasound-based sensors. They provide faster 
readings, greater accuracy and extended range with low power consumption, com￾pact size and less weight. Infrared light proves to be much more beneficial than 
other light mediums because of its ability to distinguish from the ambient light 
and maintain fewer signal disturbances. These abilities make them cost-effective 
sensors considering their size and weight. The working diagram of a ToF sensor 
is shown in Figure 9.4. 
A tiny laser is fitted inside the ToF sensors, emitting IR light at the targeted 
specimen. The light is then reflected from the targeted objects and returned to the 
ToF sensor [31]. There are two ways in which the ToF determines the distance and 
the depth – by time pulses and phase shift of an amplitude-modulated wave. The 
timed pulse illuminates the specimen with a laser and then measures the reflected 
light with a scanner. The speed of light is used to calculate the distance of the 
object accurately. A digital 3D representation is created with the help of the time 
taken by the laser to return and its wavelength. This technology is now widely used 246 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 9.4 Working diagram of time-of-flight sensor. 
in phone cameras [32]. The distance (D) between the sensor and the specimen can 
be calculated by the given formula: 
S T´ D = 2 
where S is the speed of the light and T is the time of flight. A timer is activated 
when the laser beam exits the sensor. It records the time the laser beam returns to 
the receiver sensor after the interaction with the object. As the speed of light is 
constant, subtracting these two times will help to calculate the time of flight. 
Modern-day technology uses a continuous wave in ToF to determine the phase 
shift in the reflected light to identify the distance travelled and the depth. The 
amplitude modulation will create a sinusoidal form of the light source. The fre￾quency will be pre-known, allowing the detector to analyze the phase shift of 
the reflected light. Kumar et al. [33] proposed a ToF sensor ring device for colli￾sion avoidance in the industrial robotic workspace. The simulation results showed 
that the ToF sensor ring device was better than conventionally available collision 
avoidance setups in terms of productivity, performance and safety. Langmann 
et al. [34] experimentally compared the depth measurements of several commer￾cially available setups with the ToF sensor. Experimental results indicated that the 
ToF sensor more accurately predicted the depth than did the commercial sensors. 
Moreover, a monocular and fully registered 2D/3D camera was also proposed to 
benefit machine vision applications. Tsuji and Kohama [35] suggested a proximity  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 247 
skin sensor that uses a ToF sensor, which can be connected to the surface of human 
cooperative robots for safety. The proposed prototype was installed at the head of 
the robot arm and can identify the position and distance of an object without mak￾ing any physical contact. 
9.3.3 Photoelectric sensor 
Photoelectric sensors are one of the most commonly found sensors in our everyday 
life. They are helpful in controlling elevators, managing the opening and closing 
of grocery store gates, opening sink faucets with a wave of a hand and much more. 
A photoelectric sensor identifies the change in light intensity to detect the differ￾ence in surface conditions and objects through the optical property. The emitted 
light and the target detection method depend on the sensor type that has been 
used. These sensors consist of an amplifier, a receiver, a light source and a signal 
converter. The emitted light is either interrupted or reflected by the target object, 
thereby altering the intensity of the light that reaches the receiver. The receiver 
identifies this change and converts it into an electrical output [36]. These sensors 
have more advantages than previously available sensors had. The sensing range 
of these photoelectric sensors can surpass the ultrasonic, inductive, magnetic and 
capacitive technologies. Their small size ratio to sensing range makes them an 
ideal sensor for almost any application. 
Photoelectric sensors provide three types of target detection: retro-reflective, 
diffused and thru-beam. The diffused mode sensing, also known as proximity 
mode, contains the transmitter and receiver in the same housing. The transmitter 
emits the laser beam, which strikes the specimen; after striking, the beam will be 
reflected at different angles. At the same time, a portion of the reflected beam is 
captured at the receiver end, which helps to detect the specimen. Since a signifi￾cant amount energy is lost due to the specimen’s ability to reflect light, the use 
of diffused mode in shorter ranges is limited. The major advantage of using such 
a type of mode is that it limits the requirement of any secondary device like a 
separate receiver or a reflector. The retro-reflective mode of photoelectric sens￾ing is typically used for longer sensing ranges due to the increased efficiency of 
the reflector. These types of sensors may or may not contain polarization filters. 
A polarization filter will permit only a certain phase angle of light to the receiver. 
This helps the sensor in detecting shiny objects as the targeted specimen. The 
thru-beam mode, also known as the opposed mode, is the final type of detection of 
the photoelectric sensor in this list. Thru-beam uses two housings separately, one 
for the receiver and the other for a transmitter. The light emitted from the transis￾tor will be aimed at the receiver end and when a target interrupts this beam, the 
receiver’s output is activated. Thru-beam mode is the most efficient compared to 
the other two modes and provides the longest sensing range for the photoelectric 
sensors. The commonly available mode includes receiver housing and transmit￾ter housing. The laser beam will be placed between these two housings. Another  
248 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
widely used type is a slot and fork type sensor that contains both receiver and 
transmitter in one housing, therefore no alignment is required. 
Zhang and Zhang [37] proposed a design method for a laser-based photoelectric 
detection sensor that showed better detection stability and higher detection ability 
than the conventionally used photoelectric detectors. Xin et al. [38] demonstrated 
an intelligent transplanting system for the potter pepper seedling. This system 
contained a laser-based photoelectric sensor for the detection of the seedlings. Lv 
and Luo [39] showed an intelligent vehicle system design which was based on the 
infrared photoelectric sensor. The data showed that the proposed vehicle could 
move at high speed and stability on a straight road. 
9.3.4 Laser light grid sensor 
A laser light sensor uses an emitter that sends parallel beams from a laser light bar￾rier, and then these beams will radiate on a line sensor at the receiver’s end. When 
the object comes in contact with these beams, it will obstruct the laser light bar￾rier, due to which the laser beam from the emitter will not reach the receiver. This 
obstructed portion of beam is then used to measure the desired details about the 
specimen. These laser curtains help the obstructing specimen to create a shadow 
on the receiver side. Both receiver and transmitter can be used in a complete form 
like a U-shape mounting or may be used as separate components [40]. A line sen￾sor inside the laser grid contains hundreds of light-sensitive cells known as pixels. 
A high-intensity signal is generated when the laser light falls on the pixels. There 
is also a chance that a pixel is partially exposed; in these cases, a half intensity 
signal will be emitted. A sensor processes this signal and then converts it into a 
video signal used to set a threshold value. Whenever this video signal intersects the 
threshold value, it demonstrates an edge of the specimen in the laser curtain. One 
edge will help to identify the position and two edges help to measure the diameter; 
with three or four edges, we can identify the distance between two objects. The 
schematic of a laser grid sensor is presented in Figure 9.5. 
Figure 9.5 Schematic of laser grid sensor.  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 249 
Laser light grid sensors are very useful for measuring distances or positions 
between objects. This sensor can commonly be seen in the automotive indus￾try to detect the diameter of the moulds used to produce turbo. The turbo will 
pass between the receiver and transmitter to control the diameter. The interrup￾tion caused by this between the laser curtains aids the sensor in determining the 
diameter, helping to maintain the quality of the product. Jia et al. [41] proposed 
a 3D reconstruction method using fusion analysis of an image taken from an 
object using orthogonal structure grid laser illumination. The grid laser system 
enables the full view of the specimen in a single shot. This newly developed 
model was executed on industrial welds, and it was found that an error less than 
± 0.09 was yielded for the weld areas. Zang et al. [42] provided a vision sensing 
method for multi-layer and multi-pass welding using a laser light grid sensor. 
An algorithm based on grid intersection extraction was designed to determine 
the earlier weld beads to foresee the next weld path position of the coming layer. 
The experimental results demonstrated that this method effectively measured a 
multi-layer multi-scan weld seam. Ma et al. [43] proposed a novel method to 
determine the obstacles and the parking spaces by utilizing laser device reorgani￾zation and visual sensor technology. The laser transmitter produced a laser grid, 
which changes accordingly to the conditions encountered on the ground. A cam￾era detects this structure and uses it as the area of interest for image processing. 
The results showed that the proposed method was able to identify the size of the 
obstacles and parking spaces even in the surroundings where the obstacle and 
background had the same colour. 
9.4 LASERS IN THE BIOMEDICAL SECTOR 
Laser technology is being rapidly adopted in modern industries. The ability 
of lasers to work in a controlled atmosphere and with a wide variety of mate￾rials makes them useful for automobile, clothing, aerospace and biomedical 
industries. Their distinct characteristics like excellent hemostatic effect, low 
postoperative complications and less pain during the procedure make them an 
essential tool in the care and intervention sector. The ability of lasers to concen￾trate energy in a tiny area makes them an optimized tool for cutting through tis￾sues and for precise surgeries. Laser-based diagnostic devices are also quickly 
making their way into biomedical imaging and research. Medical procedures 
like dentistry, corneal decrement, wound healing, cosmetic surgeries and nerve 
stimulation are using lasers for precise and painless procedures [44]. Nowa￾days, diode lasers have been combined with nanoparticles for use in drug deliv￾ery, cancer therapy, diagnostics of cancer cells and biosensing. Lasers in the 
visible region (430–630 nm), that have absorption in colour-dyes and blood, are 
currently being used in tattoo removal, phototherapy of oral cancer and retina 
decrement. The IR region lasers that have a wavelength of 750–1200 nm can 
penetrate tissue deeper than the visible laser, making them ideal candidates for 250 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 9.6 Penetration depth of different wavelength lasers in skin. 
nano-gold mediated cancer therapy and hair removal [45]. On the other hand, 
mid-IR lasers with wavelengths of 1.9–3 μm and 9.3–10.6 μm with powerful 
absorption in tissue and water make them useful for soft and hard ablation type 
procedures. 
The interaction between the laser and tissue involves the transfer of photon 
energy to the tissues through the process of absorption. The heating of the tissues 
by the medium of the laser energy should be between 50 °C and 100 °C; other￾wise, there will be a disordering of bio-molecules and proteins, which is called 
photocoagulation. In the region where the laser has operated, a colour change in 
tissue happens with a loss in the mechanical integrity of that area. This leads to 
the dying of the tissue in the photocoagulation area, which can be removed or 
pulled off later. Laser-assisted photocoagulation helps to treat tumours and reti￾nal disorders [46]. There are techniques in which high power density lasers are 
used, in which the laser heats the tissue above 100 °C, leading to the boiling and 
evaporation of the water inside it. The change of the tissue into a gaseous state 
during boiling is called photo-vaporization. This process completely removes 
the tissue from the surface, which is a suitable option for bloodless incision, skin 
rejuvenation or resurfacing. Many high-power lasers such as excimer are in the 
ultraviolet range and can split the chemical bonds without locally heating the tis￾sues. This type of interaction gives rise to photochemical ablation. This process 
results in a clean incision with a minimal heat-affected zone near the incision 
wall. The interaction of different wavelength-based lasers with skin levels is 
shown in Figure 9.6.  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 251 
9.4.1 Laser in dermatology 
Leon Goldman, known as the “father of laser in medicine”, introduced the use of 
laser technology in dermatology in 1963, laying the foundation for unimaginable 
technological development and innovative clinical potential. Goldman reported 
the effect of using Maiman’s laser for selective destruction of cutaneous pig￾ment structures such as black hairs [47]. He also explained the usage of the 
ruby laser and Q switched-based devices for pigment lesions and tattoo removal. 
Mester et al. [48] identified the beneficial aspects of low-energy laser on the hair 
growth of rats in 1966 and further decided to use the same process to heal pres￾sure ulcers. Finlay et al. [49] used a laser to activate photosensitive substances, 
resulting in blinding and destroying selective cancer cells. This process is further 
termed photodynamic therapy. The 1980s and 1990s showed a rapid increase in 
the use of lasers in dermatology such as laser rejuvenation, laser resurfacing and 
laser hair removal. The effect of the laser beam on the skin tissue is presented 
in Figure 9.7. 
The laser-tissue interaction is divided into three categories: photodisruption, 
photothermal and photochemical. Among these, the common type of interaction is 
photothermal. In this, the tissue absorbs the light which increases the temperature 
of the region. Depending on the heat generated, different stages of tissue damage 
occur. Hyperthermia occurs when the laser heat denatures the cellular proteins, 
Figure 9.7 Various effects of laser beam interaction with skin tissues. 252 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 9.1 Effect of laser-tissue interaction at 
different temperatures 
Temperature (°C) Thermal effect 
37 
> 42 Hyperthermia 
> 60 Coagulation 
100 Vaporization 
> 100 Carbonization 
> 300 Melting 
which may result in permanent tissue damage. Adding additional heat will result 
in tissue vaporization, and most surgeons aim to acquire this process. Diffusion 
allows the cells to absorb energy from the vaporized tissue during the interaction 
of laser and tissue. Further heating will lead to the carbonization of the tissue 
which changes the optical properties of the laser-interacted tissue, resulting in 
an increase in reflectivity, energy absorption and scattering of light. During this 
phase, the surgeon is doing detrimental tissue damage, and at this point the surgeon 
should avoid further lasing. Further laser interaction will result in incandescence 
in which the temperature of the tissue will rise to 350 °C and a visualization of 
a spark may occur [50]. As the laser-tissue interaction area rises to this tempera￾ture, the chances of thermal injury increase, resulting in worse cracking of wound, 
infection and delay in wound healing. Table 9.1 demonstrates the effect of laser￾tissue interaction at different temperatures. 
Surgical lasers are the most commonly used lasers among doctors, especially 
the CO2 (carbon dioxide) laser. The use of these lasers is common, mainly due to 
their wavelength (1060 nm), making them beneficial for skin and mucosal dis￾eases. Modern dermatology uses a wide range of laser equipment that can treat 
cutaneous diseases with safety and efficiency compared to the time of Goldman. 
Fernández et al. [51] used a combination of laser (405 nm and 639 nm) and ozone 
(40 ppm or 60 ppm) based treatment for rapid therapy for onychomycosis vitro. 
This combination of laser and ozone showed a synergistic effect as compared to 
the ozone-only treatment, and experiments showed that it was effective for seven 
out of eight studied fungal pathogens. Kislevitz et al. [52] conducted experiments 
for skin rejuvenation on 12 patients who received single 1470/2940 nm laser treat￾ment. The study reported that the facial skin treatment with this laser treatment 
improved the skin by increasing vascular activity over three weeks. Silvestri et al. 
[53] used a Q-switched laser based on a picosecond pulse to treat hypomelanosis. 
The experimental investigation reported that the superficial melanosis and lighter 
phototypes responded better to the laser treatment. Wollina and Goldman [54] 
showed the usage of dual lasers in dermatology. The investigation used two diode 
lasers with wavelengths of 980 nm and 1470 nm for skin vascular lesions; this 
resulted in better treatment results and higher patient satisfaction.  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 253 
9.4.2 Laser in ophthalmology 
The development of a functioning ruby laser in 1960 with a wavelength of 694 
nm has helped the field of ophthalmic lasers to evolve rapidly. The research in 
retinal light photocoagulation was started in 1940 by Meyer-Schwickerath with 
the solar coagulation technique, and soon he developed xenon arc photocoagula￾tion in 1950. Even though the selectivity and precision were good, the method 
had many limitations. Retinal light photocoagulation was widely recognized but 
not incorporated into clinical practice because of the difficulty of the technique. 
Soon after this invention, it was clear that lasers would be better for creating light 
than xenon-based flash lamps. Rapid research was started on the use of lasers in 
the ophthalmology field, and many positive outcomes have been observed over 
the years. 
Normally, retinal photocoagulation involves the use of a laser pulse with a vary￾ing duration between 10 and 200 ms. The most common laser used in photocoagu￾lation is yellow semiconductor laser (577 nm) and Nd:YAG (532 nm). Laser beam 
interaction with the cornea helps to reshape its focus and generate a channel inside 
the eye to release the intraocular pressure of glaucoma [55]. Haemoglobin, retinal 
pigment epithelium (RPE) and choroid are the primary elements that absorb the 
laser energy. In the RPE, heat is absorbed by the irradiation of a laser, resulting in 
the diffusion of choroid into the retina and causing coagulation of photoreceptors 
and inner retina. Applying a 100 ms pulse laser causes the heat to diffuse up to 
200 mm, thus smoothening the edge and expanding the coagulated zone above the 
laser spot, known as “thermal blooming”. Utilizing a shorter pulse for heat diffu￾sion and lesser spot can avoid or minimize retinal damage [56]. The acute retinal 
lesion diameter increases logarithmically with the increase in pulse duration and 
increases linearly with the increase in laser power. 
In contrast, threshold power needs to be increased with a decrease in the pulse 
duration to create a retinal lesion. A duration of 2 ms or less is not feasible to create 
a visible lesion of moderate grade without damaging the retina; therefore, a pulse 
duration in this range should be avoided to generate visible lesions. The prolifera￾tion and RPE migration help reinstate the continuity of retinal pigment epithelium 
monolayer within one week compared to the damage caused by full thickness with 
100 ms laser pulses. Initially, the damaged zone was filled up with glia (a con￾necting tissue of the nervous system) in the photoreceptor layer. After some time, 
photoreceptors move to the damaged zone from the adjacent retina, decreasing the 
size of the damaged zone. Small lesions with no damage in the retinal area can be 
refilled by photoreceptors and help to rewire the bipolar cells with time. This will 
help to restore the retinal structure and avoid the neuronal loss which is accompa￾nied by long-duration retinal burns. 
In modern-day eye treatments, lasers are increasingly being used due to their 
precision and ability to perform the required treatment quickly. Modern surgeries 
such as laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis are very beneficial for patients who 
require a correction in their vision. The vision is corrected either immediately or  
254 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
the day after surgery with almost no pain. The major benefit of using this type 
of surgery is that no badges or stitches are required and as the patient ages, more 
adjustments could be made to correct the vision. During the past decade, a rapid 
increase in research has been observed on the utilization of lasers in ophthal￾mology. De Cillà et al. [57] demonstrated a proper mechanism of subthreshold 
micro-pulse laser (SMPL) and used this mechanism for the retina, restoring the 
oxidant/antioxidant balance and counteracting the programmed form of cell in 
the eyes of mice. Subramaniam et al. [58] reported that micro-pulse transscleral 
cyclophotocoagulation was a better alternative to the traditional glaucoma filtra￾tion surgery for intraocular pressure reduction in keratoplasty eyes. A series of 
experiments were conducted on patients. The results showed that the patients who 
received subthreshold micro-pulse laser surgery showed better results than those 
who received glaucoma filtration surgery. 
9.4.3 Laser in dentistry 
Theodore Maiman was the first to introduce lasers in dentistry in 1960, and since 
then, there has been extensive research in the field of dental practice. There are 
two types of lasers, based on the source: hard lasers and soft lasers. In hard lasers, 
Er:YAG, CO2 and Nd: YAG are commonly used as a source for the generation 
of the laser beam. Semiconductor-based diode devices are used for soft tissue 
treatments because they are cheap and compact. This makes them widely used in 
low-level laser therapies and biostimulation applications. The laser being efficient, 
specific, low cost and comfortable to use makes it superior to the traditional tech￾niques used in dental practices. 
An argon laser with a wavelength of 488 nm and 514 nm is common in den￾tistry because it is poorly absorbed by the dentin and enamel [59]. Due to this poor 
absorption during sculpting and cutting, there will be minimal interaction between 
the laser and the hard tissue, resulting in minimal damage to the tooth surface. 
During the interaction between the argon laser and the decayed tooth, the decayed 
area changes its colour to dark orange-red, which helps to discriminate it from the 
healthy surrounding area. Er: YAG laser proved efficient and safe to execute the 
treatment without patient discomfort and tooth structure damage. Laser irradiation 
over the tissue enables the operator (clinician) to collect a signal from bacteria 
present in the infected dentin. The control over the pulse laser helps to obtain an 
automated-based decay removal. The diode and Nd:YAG are suitable for soft tissue 
operations. Photodynamic therapy, which is a photochemical reaction based on the 
laser, is suitable for treating the malignancies of the oral mucosa. Photodynamic 
therapy helps to kill the tumour cells and encourages the generation of anti-tumour 
immunity by activating T lymphocytes and macrophages. Photodynamic therapy 
is useful in carcinoma in situ and squamous cell carcinoma treatments in dentistry. 
Recently, the use of lasers in dentistry has increased drastically, mainly because 
of the easy-to-control parameters and patient-specific treatments. Researchers are 
continuing to make laser-assisted dentistry treatments more feasible for a wide  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 255 
range of problems in the oral areas. Garrocho-Rangel et al. [60] conducted a 
literature survey for better treatment of ankyloglossia. The survey reported that 
laser-based surgery treatments for lingual frenectomy showed much efficiency 
and comfortability with the pediatric dentist and child as compared to the conven￾tional blade-based methods. Dobrzański and Dobrzański [61] conducted a review 
of the current trends and technical advancements in dental prosthetics. The authors 
reported a digital approach in clinical procedures and technological development 
in implant preparation with the help of additive manufacturing, computer-aided 
design, selective laser sintering and other manufacturing procedures. 
9.5 LASERS IN THE MANUFACTURING AND 
DEFENCE SECTOR 
Over the years, humans have witnessed the role of technology in the evolution of 
the manufacturing industry. We have seen rapid growth in this industry from the 
Stone Age to the Electric Age. The Electric Age marked the latest stage of matu￾rity, and now it’s the Optical Age that is poised to bloom. The last few decades 
have shown that optical technology has become a vital tool in manufacturing. 
Laser, being the frontline in this optics technology, showed that due to its con￾centrated heat source, it could join, form and build various products irrespective 
of the material type used. Industries are adopting laser technology to perform 
various tasks such as the modification of surface roughness, cutting metals, mea￾suring part dimensions and welding metals with polymers [62]. They have been 
prevalent in metals and EV industries for over two decades. Laser machining can 
design exquisite features in a product that would be impossible or difficult to 
produce using conventional equipment. The laser cutting machine is becoming 
a go-to cutting tool for the metal and plastic industrial sectors as it produces a 
clean cut without producing any burs, therefore eliminating the need for addi￾tional finishing steps. Lasers are one of the key technologies of Industry 4.0, and 
research is ongoing to use them more efficiently in manufacturing processes [63]. 
In 2018, the National Institute of Standards and Technology constructed a laser in 
which the pulse lasted a quadrillionth of a second, which is 100 times faster than 
traditional ultrafast lasers. A group of scientists in Germany are working on the 
integration of tiny lasers with silicon chips to improve processing speed. Artificial 
intelligence (AI) is also being used to develop smart lasers that can understand 
the material and calculate the processing time accordingly. Strumpf, a German 
manufacturer, is working on the development of a laser that utilizes AI technol￾ogy to understand the best welding points for manufacturing copper coils for the 
automobile industry. In the current manufacturing sector, many companies are 
accepting additive manufacturing, AI technology, Industry 4.0 and sensor technol￾ogy, and laser technologies will be playing an ever-expanding part in the modern 
era of manufacturing. The utilization of lasers in modern industries is discussed 
in the following sections.  
 
 
256 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
9.5.1 Laser in welding 
In the welding industry, lasers provide deep and narrow weld lengths at high speed, 
making them an optimal tool for high-volume productions. In sectors such as auto￾motive, aeronautics and marine where rapid production rates are required, lasers 
are being integrated with robotic systems for smoother and higher-quality produc￾tions [64]. A laser generates two types of beams depending on the application – 
continuous and pulsed beams. In laser welding, a high-power intensity beam is 
generated, providing a small heat-affected area with high heating and cooling rates. 
Generally, the penetration depth is directly dependent on the power supplied by the 
generator, but there are instances where it depends on the location of focal length; 
that is, more penetration will be achieved when the focal length is below the mate￾rial surface. Laser welding can produce deep weld beads in a vacuum environment, 
giving it the advantage over traditional arc and plasma welding technology [65]. 
There are two types of welding available in the current industry: direct laser 
welding and laser transmission welding. Direct laser welding joins the material 
through heat generated by the laser at the outer surface of the specimen. This 
type of laser technique is compatible with various materials, including metals, 
alloys, ceramics and plastics. Direct laser welding has proved to be an efficient 
tool for joining metal and polymer joints (metal-polymer). Wang et al. [66] stud￾ied the effect of laser power and velocity on the weld strength of 5182 Al alloy 
and glass fiber reinforced PA66 plate. The tensile strength showed that the weld 
strength increases at first but then decreases with an increase in velocity and laser 
power. Zou et al. [67] analyzed the joining mechanism of Ti-6Al-4V alloy and 
PEEK-CFRTP by direct laser welding. The results showed that the shear strength 
could reach near 56.3 kN/mm. Characterization showed that “anchor-shaped” 
structures provided the mechanical bonding effect. Zhou et al. [68] developed a 
novel ultrasonic vibration assisted laser welding process to eliminate the defects 
that occur in the laser welding of dissimilar metals for nuclear reactor pump end 
sealing. The assistance of ultrasonic vibration has decreased the width of the 
unmixed zone with the homogenized distribution of macro elements because of 
the enhanced molten convention. Laser transmission welding is an innovative, 
non-contact, highly flexible, fast and automated joining process that provides 
consistently high-quality products [69]. In the current thermoplastics industry, 
laser transmission welding has established its dominance over conventional 
welding methods [70]. 
Kumar et al. [71] investigated the parameter optimization and mathematical 
modelling of wobble laser transmission welding of acrylic and polycarbonate 
sheets using a low-power laser system. Goyal et al. [72] provided a novel inte￾grated approach to predict the temperature at the interface of the laser transmis￾sion welding joint and the absorptivity of the absorber. The developed numerical 
model was in good agreement with the experimental results with an average 
error of less than 6%. The selection of optimized process parameters is essen￾tial to obtain a high-quality joint in laser transmission welding. Goyal et al.  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 257 
optimized the process parameters up to 36.32% by applying a genetic algorithm 
for laser transmission welding of polycarbonate sheet by using iron powder 
absorber [73]. 
9.5.2 Laser in forming 
Laser forming has become a contemporary tool used to mould metal sheets into 
the desired shape without heavy die or external force. Laser forming is a ther￾momechanical process where a controlled defocused beam is used to change 
the shape of the workpiece [74]. The advantage of using laser forming is that it 
does not provide any spring back effect, thus can be used to generate complex 
shapes with optimized irradiation strategies [75–78]. The mechanism utilizes a 
high-intensity laser to irradiate the workpiece, thus increasing the temperature 
in the irradiated and surrounding areas. The temperature increase generates ther￾mal stresses in the irradiated region, giving rise to the bending of the sheet [79]. 
In the current world, where customized products, prototyping and low-volume 
production-centric industries exist, laser forming is a sustainable tool for these 
industries. In industries like aerospace and semiconductor, where a small error or 
change in shape could force the manufacturer to replace the whole working setup, 
laser-based forming can be used as a correction tool and can save a substantial 
amount of money [80]. As the laser consumes a high amount of energy to com￾plete a task, it becomes necessary to optimize process parameters before the actual 
process. This opened a wide area of scope for research in the laser forming field. 
Researchers have witnessed various numerical and analytical models over decades 
to predict the bend angle [81–83]. Nair et al. [84] developed an analytical model 
to predict the bending of mild steel. The experimental results showed good agree￾ment with the analytical results, with an absolute error of 9.51%. Kant and Joshi 
[85, 86] reported the effect of scan speed on difficult-to-form magnesium M1A 
alloy material used commonly for tool steel. The experiments provided an insight 
into process conditions and mechanisms to obtain maximum bend angle with min￾imum edge effect. Yadav et al. [87] investigated the effect of line energy on edge 
effect, microstructure, bend angle and mechanical properties of duplex stainless 
steel used for shipbuilding. Results showed that with constant line energy, the bend 
angle increased with laser power and scanning speed. Furthermore, Yadav et al. 
[88–90] explored the effect of different cooling conditions along with line energy 
and reported that at low line energy, the forced cooling did not affect the bend 
angle but significantly reduced the cooling time and heat affected zone, whereas it 
significantly improved the bend angle for both single and multiscan laser bending 
[91, 92]. Kant and Joshi [93] explored laser bending with the assistance of moving 
mechanical load and reported that the bend angle could be notably enhanced with 
the assistance of mechanical load. Pal et al. [94] attempted to enhance the bend￾ing angle with the application of electro-magnetic force and reported significant 
improvement in the bend angle.  
 
258 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
9.5.3 Laser in machining 
Machining processes such as lathe machining, milling and drilling are some of the 
most common processes used in manufacturing industries. Hybrid machining is 
one such operation that has been developed to overcome the flaws of conventional 
machining operations such as the usage of cutting fluids, poor machinability and 
high cost. A combination of energy sources such as magnetic power, heat, vibra￾tion and pressure fluids can be integrated into a single machine to operate various 
machining operations simultaneously [95–98]. This integration provides superior 
machining performance compared to conventional machining. Deswal and Kant 
[99] investigated the effect of laser and ultrasonic vibration on chips, machining 
temperature, microstructure and surface roughness during the turning operation of 
magnesium alloy. The results showed that low tool wear, fine microstructure, low 
machining forces, low surface roughness, high microhardness and machining tem￾perature were obtained during ultrasonic vibration-laser assisted turning compared 
to laser-assisted, ultrasonic-vibration assisted and conventional turning. Besides, 
ultrasonic vibration-laser assisted turning was also utilized to machine aluminium 
alloys by varying ultrasonic vibration directions [100–102]. Przestacki [103] investi￾gated the influence of laser assisted machining on difficult-to-machine A359/20SiCp 
composite material used for aerospace. The results demonstrated that the tool wear 
was significantly lower in laser-assisted turning than in conventional operation. 
9.5.4 Laser in the defence sector 
Lasers have rapidly made their way into the defence sector in recent years. Security 
and military operations often require the transfer of timely and secure information 
from one place to another. In earlier days, effective communication in the mili￾tary heavily relied on the radio spectrum, which is susceptible to electromagnetic 
interference and security threats. Another flaw with this spectrum is that it needs 
to be hard pressed to be synchronized with the bandwidth required for current 
real-time transfer, high-resolution images and on-air video conferencing [104]. 
Due to these reasons, research has shifted to the infrared and visible spectrums. 
Laser is one such technology which is immune to electromagnetic interference. 
The broad classification of lasers and their increasing maturity have opened many 
gates for their usage for military purposes. Modern-day laser technologies are 
changing the warfare model by being utilized in data relays, weather regulators, 
sensing devices, active lighting, directed energy weapons and target designators. 
The defence sector is accepting laser weapons due to their various advantages over 
conventional weapon systems. Firstly, laser weapons can transmit at the speed of 
light, allowing them to destroy distant targets just after their detection. Secondly, 
laser deployments can flexibly tune the gradient effect to customize the range of 
results to disruptive, fatal and non-fatal outcomes. 
Finally, laser energy maintains a low profile, offers precise point target selec￾tions and provides low collateral damage, making it a valuable tool for covert  
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 259 
operations. Although the initial setup cost is high for laser-based systems, they 
provide cost-effective engagement after deployment [105]. 
While this field is gaining traction in defence applications, it has not yet reached 
its full maturity, leaving opportunities for research to address its limitations. Laser, 
being a high-energy system, requires an effective cooling system which could 
maintain the temperature during repetitive transmission cycles. Furthermore, 
improving the accuracy of laser transmission under jamming or during naturally 
occurring unfavourable situations such as hail storms, sand storms, humidity and 
heavy smoke are some important areas for research. 
9.6 SUMMARY 
This chapter provides insight into the utilization of laser technology in the aca￾demic, medical, manufacturing and defence sectors. The chapter describes the chal￾lenges, advantages, disadvantages and current innovations of each field. Literature 
showed that lasers have become an essential tool irrespective of field in the mod￾ern era. Its monochromatic, coherent, minimum HAZ and flexibility in operation 
make it a versatile tool for almost every industry. Laser has opened many gates for 
academicians and researchers to understand material behaviour and its structure. 
In the current scenario, many material characterizations have been dependent on 
laser technology, providing a better path of understanding. The medical field has 
rapidly grown in the last few decades, aiding in the treatment of various diseases 
and making medical procedures less painful for patients. Laser is one such tech￾nology that allowed the medical industry to grow at this speed. Modern-day laser 
equipment and treatments are providing many patients with a speedy recovery and 
a permanent solution for their suffering. The manufacturing sector has evolved over 
the years, providing the foundation for any industry to grow. A strong manufactur￾ing sector represents a country’s economic growth and urbanization. Laser have 
extended their applications to nearly every aspect of production, including cutting, 
welding, surface finishing, machining and cleaning. The beauty of this technol￾ogy is that almost no post-processing is required after laser operations, providing 
cost-effectiveness and high-quality efficiency to industries. The defence sector is 
also adapting lasers for more secure and covert operations. Many countries have 
recently developed laser weapons that could destroy distant targets with minimal 
collateral damage. High-intensity laser weapons are now one of the most prominent 
weapons in the defence sector. Laser has contributed to the growth of the defence 
sector by enhancing communication, transmission and tracking. 
Still, laser technology is not a fully matured process due to its low suitability 
for mass production, high energy consumption and cost of operations. Industry 4.0 
and cloud storage systems are the next big step in manufacturing, and laser tech￾nology has a bright future in the evolving manufacturing sector with these smart 
technologies. Smart lasers will redefine the roles of factories, customers, surgeons 
and designers in future manufacturing sectors.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
260 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Radziemski and D. Cremers, “A brief history of laser-induced breakdown spec￾troscopy: From the concept of atoms to LIBS 2012,” Spectrochim. Acta B At. Spec￾trosc., vol. 87, pp. 3–10, 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.sab.2013.05.013. 
[2] S. D. Jackson, “Towards high-power mid-infrared emission from a fibre laser,” Nat. 
Photonics, vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 423–431, 2012, doi: 10.1038/nphoton.2012.149. 
[3] P. L. Hanst, “Infrared spectroscopy and infrared lasers in air pollution research 
and monitoring,” Appl. Spectrosc., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 161–174, 1970, doi: 10.1366/ 
000370270774371930. 
[4] K. Yu, J. Ren, and Y. Zhao, “Principles, developments and applications of laser￾induced breakdown spectroscopy in agriculture: A review,” Artif. Intell. Agric., vol. 
4, pp. 127–139, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.aiia.2020.07.001. 
[5] M. Moll, M. Schlanges, T. Bornath, and V. P. Krainov, “Inverse bremsstrahlung heat￾ing beyond the first born approximation for dense plasmas in laser fields,” New J. 
Phys., vol. 14, no. 6, p. 065010, 2012. doi:10.1088/1367-2630/14/6/065010. 
[6] Y. T. Fu, W. L. Gu, Z. Y. Hou, S. A. Muhammed, T. Q. Li, Y. Wang, and Z. Wang, 
“Mechanism of signal uncertainty generation for laser-induced breakdown spectros￾copy,” Front. Phys., vol. 16, no. 2, 2021, doi: 10.1007/s11467-020-1006-0. 
[7] K. Liu, D. Tian, C. Li, Y. Li, G. Yang, and Y. Ding, “A review of laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy for plastic analysis,” TrAC—Trends Anal. Chem., vol. 110, 
pp. 327–334, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.trac.2018.11.025. 
[8] R. Yuan, Y. Tang, Z. Zhu, Z. Hao, J. Li, H. Yu, Y. Yu, L. Guo, X. Zeng, and Y. Lu, 
“Accuracy improvement of quantitative analysis for major elements in laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy using single-sample calibration,” Anal. Chim. Acta, vol. 
1064, pp. 11–16, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.aca.2019.02.056. 
[9] Q. Wang, A. Chen, H. Qi, S. Li, Y. Jiang, and M. Jin, “Femtosecond laser-induced 
breakdown spectroscopy of a preheated Cu target,” Opt. Laser Technol., vol. 121, 
no. August 2019, p. 105773, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.optlastec.2019.105773. 
[10] Y. Zhang, C. Sun, L. Gao, Z. Yue, S. Shabbir, W. Xu, M. Wu, and J. Yu, “Deter￾mination of minor metal elements in steel using laser-induced breakdown spec￾troscopy combined with machine learning algorithms,” Spectrochim. Acta Part 
B At. Spectrosc., vol. 166, no. November 2019, p. 105802, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j. 
sab.2020.105802. 
[11] J. F. 	McClelland, “Photoacoustic spectroscopy,” Anal. Chem., vol. 55, no. 1, 
pp. 89–105, 1983, doi: 10.1021/ac00252a003. 
[12] G. A. West, J. J. Barrett, D. R. Siebert, and K. V. Reddy, “Photoacoustic spectros￾copy,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 797–817, 1983, doi: 10.1063/1.1137483. 
[13] A. Miklós, P. Hess, and Z. Bozóki, “Application of acoustic resonators in pho￾toacoustic trace gas analysis and metrology,” Rev. Sci. Instrum., vol. 72, no. 4, 
pp. 1937–1955, 2001, doi: 10.1063/1.1353198. 
[14] W. Markus, “Electronic spectroscopy vibrational, rotational & raman properties,” 
Photoacoust. Spectrosc., Appl., pp. 1800–1809, 1997. 
[15] J. T. Friedlein, E. Baumann, K. A. Briggman, G. M. Colacion, F. R. Giorgetta, A. M. 
Goldfain, D. I. Herman, E. V. Hoenig, J. Hwang, N. R. Newbury, E. F. Perez, C. S.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 261 
Yung, I. Coddington, and K. C. Cossel, “Dual-comb photoacoustic spectroscopy,” 
Nat. Commun., vol. 11, no. 1, 2020, doi: 10.1038/s41467-020-16917-y. 
[16] P. K. Krivoshein, D. S. Volkov, O. B. Rogova, and M. A. Proskurnin, “FTIR pho￾toacoustic spectroscopy for identification and assessment of soil components: 
Chernozems and their size fractions,” Photoacoustics, vol. 18, no. December 2019, 
p. 100162, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.pacs.2020.100162. 
[17] H. Lv, H. Zheng, Y. Liu, Z. Yang, Q. Wu, H. Lin, B. A. Z Montano, W. Zhu, J. Yu, 
R. Kan, Z. Chen, and F. K. Tittel, “Radial-cavity quartz-enhanced photoacoustic 
spectroscopy,” Optics Letters, vol. 46, no. 16, pp. 3917–3920, 2021. 
[18] G. S. Bumbrah and R. M. Sharma, “Raman spectroscopy—basic principle, instru￾mentation and selected applications for the characterization of drugs of abuse,” Egypt. 
J. Forensic Sci., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 209–215, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j.ejfs.2015.06.001. 
[19] M. D. Duncan, J. Reintjes, and T. J. Manuccia, “Scanning coherent anti-Stokes 
Raman microscope,” Opt. Lett., vol. 7, no. 8, p. 350, 1982, doi: 10.1364/ol.7.000350. 
[20] R. R. Jones, D. C. Hooper, L. Zhang, D. Wolverson, and V. K. Valev, “Raman tech￾niques: Fundamentals and frontiers,” Nanoscale Research Letters, vol. 14, no. 1, 
2019. doi:10.1186/s11671-019-3039-2. 
[21] C. Berghian-Grosan and D. A. Magdas, “Raman spectroscopy and machine-learn￾ing for edible oils evaluation,” Talanta, vol. 218, no. April, p. 121176, 2020, doi: 
10.1016/j.talanta.2020.121176. 
[22] W. Lu, X. Chen, L. Wang, H. Li, and Y. V. Fu, “Combination of an artificial intel￾ligence approach and laser tweezers Raman spectroscopy for microbial identi￾fication,” Anal. Chem., vol. 92, no. 9, pp. 6288–6296, 2020, doi: 10.1021/acs. 
analchem.9b04946. 
[23] H. Lu, S. Tian, L. Yu, X. Lv, and S. Chen, “Diagnosis of hepatitis B based on 
Raman spectroscopy combined with a multiscale convolutional neural network,” 
Vib. Spectrosc., vol. 107, no. November 2019, p. 103038, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j. 
vibspec.2020.103038. 
[24] H. Schwenke, W. Knapp, H. Haitjema, A. Weckenmann, R. Schmitt, and F. Delbres￾sine, “Geometric error measurement and compensation of machines-an update,” 
CIRP Ann. Manuf. Technol., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 660–675, 2008, doi: 10.1016/j. 
cirp.2008.09.008. 
[25] R. G. Dorsch, G. Häusler, and J. M. Herrmann, “Laser triangulation: fundamental 
uncertainty in distance measurement,” Appl. Opt., vol. 33, no. 7, p. 1306, 1994, doi: 
10.1364/ao.33.001306. 
[26] J. Sun, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, and G. Zhang, “A vision measurement model of laser dis￾placement sensor and its calibration method,” Opt. Lasers Eng., vol. 51, no. 12, 
pp. 1344–1352, 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.optlaseng.2013.05.009. 
[27] K. B. Smith and Y. F. Zheng, “Multi-laser displacement sensor used in accurate digi￾tizing technique,” J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 116, no. 4, pp. 482–490, 
1994, doi: 10.1115/1.2902132. 
[28] B. Sun and B. Li, “Laser displacement sensor in the application of aero-engine blade 
measurement,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1377–1384, 2016, doi: 10.1109/ 
JSEN.2015.2497363. 
[29] P. Giri and S. Kharkovsky, “Detection of surface crack in concrete using measure￾ment technique with laser displacement sensor,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 
65, no. 8, pp. 1951–1953, 2016, doi: 10.1109/TIM.2016.2541358.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
262 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[30] J. Sandak and C. Tanaka, “Evaluation of surface smoothness by laser displacement 
sensor 1: Effect of wood species,” J. Wood Sci., vol. 49, no. 4, pp. 305–311, 2003, 
doi: 10.1007/s10086-002-0486-6. 
[31] L. Li, “Time-of-flight camera–an introduction,” 	Texas Instruments—Tech. White 
Pap., no. January, p. 10, 2014. 
[32] T. M. A. Zulcaffle, F. Kurugollu, D. Crookes, A. Bouridane, and M. Farid, “Frontal 
view gait recognition with fusion of depth features from a time of flight camera,” 
IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1067–1082, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ 
TIFS.2018.2870594. 
[33] S. Kumar, C. Savur, and F. Sahin, “Dynamic awareness of an industrial robotic arm 
using time-of-flight laser-ranging sensors,” Proc. 2018 IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man, 
Cybern. SMC 2018, pp. 2850–2857, 2019, doi: 10.1109/SMC.2018.00485. 
[34] B. Langmann, K. Hartmann, and O. Loffeld, “Increasing the accuracy of time￾of-flight cameras for machine vision applications,” Comput. Ind., vol. 64, no. 9, 
pp. 1090–1098, 2013, doi: 10.1016/j.compind.2013.06.006. 
[35] S. Tsuji and T. Kohama, “Proximity skin sensor using time-of-flight sensor for 
human collaborative robot,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 19, no. 14, pp. 5859–5864, 2019, 
doi: 10.1109/JSEN.2019.2905848. 
[36] Z. Ruirui and G. Xiao, “The application and development of photoelectric sensor,” 
Energ. Procedia, vol. 17, pp. 1304–1308, 2012, doi: 10.1016/j.egypro.2012.02.243. 
[37] X. Zhang, H. Li, and S. Zhang, “Design and analysis of laser photoelectric detec￾tion sensor,” Microw. Opt. Technol. Lett., vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 3092–3099, 2021, doi: 
10.1002/mop.33011. 
[38] J. Xin, Z. Kaixuan, J. Jiangtao, D. Xinwu, M. Hao, and Q. Zhaomei, “Design and 
implementation of Intelligent transplanting system based on photoelectric sensor 
and PLC,” Futur. Gener. Comput. Syst., vol. 88, pp. 127–139, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j. 
future.2018.05.034. 
[39] X. Lv and P. Luo, “A design of autonomous tracing in intelligent vehicle based on 
photoelectric sensor,” Yadian Yu Shengguang/Piezoelectrics Acoustooptics, vol. 33, 
no. 6, pp. 939–942, 2011. 
[40] R. Singh and K. S. Nagla, “Development of an efficient laser grid mapping tech￾nique: P-SLAM,” Int. J. Image Data Fusion, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 177–198, 2019, doi: 
10.1080/19479832.2019.1625449. 
[41] N. Jia, Z. Li, J. Ren, Y. Wang, and L. Yang, “A 3D reconstruction method based on 
grid laser and gray scale photo for visual inspection of welds,” Opt. Laser Technol., 
vol. 119, no. August 2018, p. 105648, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.optlastec.2019.105648. 
[42] C. Zhang, H. Li, Z. Jin, and H. Gao, “Seam sensing of multi-layer and multi-pass 
welding based on grid structured laser,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., vol. 91, no. 
1–4, pp. 1103–1110, 2017, doi: 10.1007/s00170-016-9733-7. 
[43] S. Ma, Z. Jiang, H. Jiang, M. Han, and C. Li, “Parking space and obstacle detection 
based on a vision sensor and checkerboard grid laser,” Appl. Sci., vol. 10, no. 7, 
2020, doi: 10.3390/app10072582. 
[44] E. Mester, A. F. Mester, and A. Mester, “The biomedical effects of laser application,” 
Lasers Surg. Med., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 31–39, 1985, doi: 10.1002/lsm.1900050105. 
[45] J.-T. Lin, “Progress of medical lasers: Fundamentals and applications,” Med. Devices 
Diagnostic Eng., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 36–41, 2016, doi: 10.15761/mdde.1000111. 
[46] L. A. Everett and Y. M. Paulus, “Laser therapy in the treatment of diabetic reti￾nopathy and diabetic macular edema,” Curr. Diab. Rep., vol. 21, no. 9, 2021, doi: 
10.1007/s11892-021-01403-6.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 263 
[47] S. Gianfaldoni, G. Tchernev, U. Wollina, M. Fioranelli, M. G. Roccia, R. Gianfal￾doni, and T. Lotti, “An overview of laser in dermatology: The past, the present and 
. . . the future (?),” Open Access Maced. J. Med. Sci., vol. 5, no. 4 Special Issue 
Global Dermatology, pp. 526–530, 2017, doi: 10.3889/oamjms.2017.130. 
[48] E. Mester, A. F. Mester, and A. Mester, “The biomedical effects of laser application,” 
Lasers Surg. Med., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 31–39, 1985, doi: 10.1002/lsm.1900050105. 
[49] J. C. Finlay, K. Cengel, T. M. Busch, and T. C. Zhu, “Photodynamic therapy,” 
Handb. Biomed. Opt., vol. 90, no. 12, pp. 733–750, 2016. 
[50] M. Boord, “Laser in dermatology,” Clin. Tech. Small Anim. Pract., vol. 21, no. 3, 
pp. 145–149, 2006, doi: 10.1053/j.ctsap.2006.05.007. 
[51] J. Fernández, I. del Valle Fernández, C. J. Villar, and F. Lombó, “Combined laser and 
ozone therapy for onychomycosis in an in vitro and ex vivo model,” PLoS One, vol. 
16, no. 6, pp. 1–13, 2021, doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0253979. 
[52] M. Kislevitz, K. B. Lu, C. Wamsley, J. Hoopman, J. Kenkel, and Y. Akgul, “Novel 
use of non-invasive devices and microbiopsies to assess facial skin rejuvenation fol￾lowing laser treatment,” Lasers Surg. Med., vol. 52, no. 9, pp. 822–830, 2020, doi: 
10.1002/lsm.23233. 
[53] M. Silvestri, L. Bennardo, E. Zappia, F. Tamburi, N. Cameli, G. Cannarozzo, and 
S. P Nistico, “Q-switched 1064/532 nm laser with picosecond pulse to treat benign 
hyperpigmentations: A single-center retrospective study,” Appl. Sci., vol. 11, no. 16, 
2021, doi: 10.3390/app11167478. 
[54] U. Wollina and A. Goldman, “The dual 980-nm and 1470-nm diode laser for vascu￾lar lesions,” Dermatol. Ther., vol. 33, no. 4, 2020, doi: 10.1111/dth.13558. 
[55] K. P. 	Thompson and Q. S. Ren, “Therapeutic and diagnostic application of 
lasers in ophthalmology,” Lasers Med., vol. 80, no. 6, pp. 211–245, 2001, doi: 
10.1201/9781420040746.ch8. 
[56] G. Dorin, “Evolution of retinal laser therapy: Minimum intensity photocoagulation 
(MIP). Can the laser heal the retina without harming it?,” Semin. Ophthalmol., vol. 
19, no. 1–2, pp. 62–68, 2004, doi: 10.1080/08820530490884173. 
[57] S. De Cillà, D. Vezzola, S. Farruggio, S. Vujosevic, N. Clemente, G. Raina, 
D. Mary, G. Casini, L. Rossetti, L. Avagliano, C. Martinelli, G. Bulfamante, and 
E. Grossini, “The subthreshold micropulse laser treatment of the retina restores 
the oxidant/antioxidant balance and counteracts programmed forms of cell death 
in the mice eyes,” Acta Ophthalmol., vol. 97, no. 4, pp. e559–e567, 2019, doi: 
10.1111/aos.13995. 
[58] K. Subramaniam, M. O. Price, M. T. Feng, and F. W. Price, “Micropulse transscleral 
cyclophotocoagulation in keratoplasty eyes,” Cornea, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 542–545, 
2019, doi: 10.1097/ICO.0000000000001897. 
[59] C. Mercer, “Lasers in dentistry: A review. Part 1,” Dent. Update, vol. 23, no. 2, 
pp. 74–80, 1996. 
[60] A. Garrocho-Rangel, D. Herrera-Badillo, I. Pérez-Alfaro, V. Fierro-Serna, and A. 
Pozos-Guillén, “Treatment of ankyloglossia with dental laser in paediatric patients: 
Scoping review and a case report,” Eur. J. Paediatr. Dent., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 155– 
163, 2019, doi: 10.23804/ejpd.2019.20.02.15. 
[61] L. A. Dobrzański and L. B. Dobrzański, “Dentistry 4.0 concept in the design and 
manufacturing of prosthetic dental restorations,” Processes, vol. 8, no. 5, 2020, doi: 
10.3390/PR8050525. 
[62] S. C. Dass, Interaction of Lasers with Plastics and Other Materials. Plastics Design 
Library, 1999.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
264 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[63] Y. C. Shin, B. Wu, S. Lei, G. J. Cheng, and Y. Lawrence Yao, “Overview of laser 
applications in manufacturing and materials processing in recent years,” J. Manuf. 
Sci. Eng. Trans. ASME, vol. 142, no. 11, 2020, doi: 10.1115/1.4048397. 
[64] L. S. Bass and M. R. Treat, “Laser tissue welding: A comprehensive review of cur￾rent and future,” Lasers Surg. Med., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 315–349, 1995, doi: 10.1002/ 
lsm.1900170402. 
[65] A. Mahrle and E. Beyer, “Hybrid laser beam welding—classification, character￾istics, and applications,” J. Laser Appl., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 169–180, 2006, doi: 
10.2351/1.2227012. 
[66] C. Wang, G. Zhang, Q. Zhu, H. Yang, C. Yang, and Y. Liu, “Mechanism and 
numerical simulation analysis of laser welding 5182 aluminum alloy/PA66 based 
on surface texture treatment,” Opt. Laser Technol., vol. 153, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j. 
optlastec.2022.108273. 
[67] P. Zou, H. Zhang, M. Lei, and D. Cheng, “Formation mechanism of direct laser 
welding joint between CFRTP and Ti-6Al-4V,” Mater. Lett., vol. 325, no. April, 
p. 132707, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.matlet.2022.132707. 
[68] S. Zhou, B. Wang, D. Wu, G. Ma, G. Yang, and W. Wei, “Follow-up ultrasonic 
vibration assisted laser welding dissimilar metals for nuclear reactor pump can end 
sealing,” Nucl. Mater. Energy, vol. 27, no. March, p. 100975, 2021, doi: 10.1016/j. 
nme.2021.100975. 
[69] D.K. Goyal, R. Yadav, and R. Kant, “Study of temperature field considering gradient 
volumetric heat absorption in transparent sheet during laser transmission welding 
(LTW),” Lasers Eng., vol. 53, pp. 215–229, 2022. 
[70] D.K. Goyal and R. Kant, “Mechanism of bonding during laser transmission welding 
using EIP absorber,” Mater. Manuf. Process., vol. 38, pp. 485–493, 2023. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/10426914.2023.2165676. 
[71] D. Kumar, S. Paitandi, A. S. Kuar, and D. Bose, “Experimental investigation on 
laser transmission welding of polycarbonate and acrylic,” Mach. Learn. Appl. Non‑
Conventional Mach. Process., no. January, pp. 160–180, 2021, doi: 10.4018/978-1­
7998-3624-7.ch010. 
[72] D. K. Goyal, R. Yadav, and R. Kant, “An integrated hybrid methodology for estima￾tion of absorptivity and interface temperature in laser transmission welding,” Int. J. 
Adv. Manuf. Technol., pp. 3771–3786, 2022, doi: 10.1007/s00170-022-09536-y. 
[73] D. K. Goyal, R. Yadav, R. Kant, “Laser transmission welding of polycarbonate sheets 
using electrolytic iron powder absorber,” Opt. Laser Technol., vol. 161, p. 109165, 
2023. doi: 10.1016/j.optlastec.2023.109165. 
[74] Y. Shi, Z. Yao, H. Shen, and J. Hu, “Research on the mechanisms of laser forming 
for the metal plate,” Int. J. Mach. Tools Manuf., vol. 46, no. 12–13, pp. 1689–1697, 
2006, doi: 10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2005.09.016. 
[75] A. Gisario, M. Barletta, C. Conti, and S. Guarino, “Springback control in sheet 
metal bending by laser-assisted bending: Experimental analysis, empirical and neu￾ral network modelling,” Opt. Lasers Eng., vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 1372–1383, 2011, doi: 
10.1016/j.optlaseng.2011.07.010. 
[76] R. Kant, P. M. Bhuyan, and S. N. Joshi, “Experimental studies on TGM and BM 
dominated curvilinear laser bending of aluminum alloy sheets,” Lasers Based 
Manuf, no. June 2016, pp. 69–91, 2015. 
[77] R. Kant and S. N. Joshi, “Numerical modeling and experimental validation of cur￾vilinear laser bending of magnesium alloy sheets,” Proc. Inst. Mech. Eng. Part B J. 
Eng. Manuf., vol. 228, no. 9, pp. 1036–1047, 2014, doi: 10.1177/0954405413506419.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An insight into applications of laser in modern era 265 
[78] R. Kant and S. N. Joshi, “Numerical investigations into influence of scan￾ning path curvature on deformation behavior during curvilinear laser bending 
of magnesium sheets,” J. Therm. Stress., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 313–330, 2018, doi: 
10.1080/01495739.2017.1403298. 
[79] U. S. Dixit, S. N. Joshi, and R. Kant, “Laser forming systems: A review,” Int. J. 
Mechatronics Manuf. Syst., vol. 8, pp. 160–205, 2015. 
[80] J. Magee, K. G. Watkins, and W. M. Steen, “Advances in laser forming,” J. Laser 
Appl., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 235–246, 1998, doi: 10.2351/1.521859. 
[81] R. Kant, S. N. Joshi, and U. S. Dixit, “An integrated FEM-ANN model for laser 
bending process with inverse estimation of absorptivity,” Mech. Adv. Mater. Mod. 
Process., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1–12, 2015, doi: 10.1186/s40759-015-0006-1. 
[82] P. M. Bhuyan, R. Kant, and S. N. Joshi, “Experimental investigation on laser bending 
of metal sheets using parabolic irradiations,” In Proceedings of the 5th International 
and 26th All India Manufacturing Technology, Design and Research Conference 
AIMTDR 2014, no. Aimtdr, pp. 1–6, 2014. 
[83] S. N. Joshi and Ravi Kant, “Numerical simulation of multi-pass laser bending pro￾cesses using finite element method,” Second International Conference on Intelli￾gent Robotics, Automation and Manufacturing (IRAM) 2013, no. December 2013, 
pp. 1–7, 2013. 
[84] R. Nair, R. Kant, R. Yadav and H. Gurung “Experimentally validated analytical 
modelling of the laser bending of low carbon steel sheets,” Lasers Eng., vol. 53, 
pp. 253–265, 2022. 
[85] R. Kant and S. N. Joshi, “Thermo-mechanical studies on bending mechanism, 
bend angle and edge effect during multi-scan laser bending of magnesium M1A 
alloy sheets,” J. Manuf. Process., vol. 23, pp. 135–148, 2016, doi: 10.1016/j. 
jmapro.2016.05.017. 
[86] R. Kant and S. N. Joshi, “Numerical and experimental studies on the laser bending 
of magnesium M1A alloy,” Lasers Eng., vol. 35, no. 1–4, pp. 39–62, 2016. 
[87] R. Yadav, D. K. Goyal, and R. Kant, “A comprehensive study on the effect of line 
energy during laser bending of duplex stainless steel,” Opt. Laser Technol., vol. 151, 
no. September 2021, p. 108025, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.optlastec.2022.108025. 
[88] R. Yadav, D. K. Goyal, and R. Kant, “Enhancing process competency by forced 
cooling in laser bending process,” J. Therm. Stress., vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 617–629, 
2022, doi: 10.1080/01495739.2022.2103057. 
[89] R. Yadav, D. K. Goyal, and R. Kant, “Multi-scan laser bending of duplex stain￾less steel under different cooling conditions,” CIRP J. Manuf. Sci. Technol., vol. 39, 
pp. 345–358, 2022, doi: 10.1016/j.cirpj.2022.10.002. 
[90] R. Yadav, D. K. Goyal, and R. Kant, “An experimental study of forced cooling in 
single scan laser bending,” in Advances in Forming, Machining and Automation, U. 
S. Dixit, Uday S., Kanthababu M., Babu A. Ramesh, Ed. Singapore: Springer, 2022, 
pp. 13–21. 
[91] R. Yadav and R. Kant, “Effectiveness of forced cooling during laser bending of 
duplex-2205,” Mater. Manuf. Process., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 598–607, 2022, doi: 
10.1080/10426914.2022.2146717. 
[92] R. Yadav and R. Kant, “Improving bend angle by using forced cooling when laser 
bending Al sheet,” Lasers Eng., vol. 55, pp. 75–85, 2023. 
[93] R. Kant and S. N. Joshi, “Finite element simulation of laser assisted bending with 
moving mechanical load,” Int. J. Mechatronics Manuf. Syst., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 351– 
366, 2013, doi: 10.1504/IJMMS.2013.057128.  
 
 
 
 
 
266 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[94] Y. Pal, B. Singh, R. Kant, and R. Yadav, “Enhancing the bend angle and mechanical 
properties of mild steel using fiber laser bending technique under the influence of 
electromagnetic force,” Opt. Lasers Eng., vol. 168, no. March, p. 107631, 2023, doi: 
10.1016/j.optlaseng.2023.107631. 
[95] N. Deswal and R. Kant, “Machinability analysis during laser assisted turning of alu￾minium 3003 alloy,” Lasers Manuf. Mater. Process., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 56–71, 2022, 
doi: 10.1007/s40516-022-00163-9. 
[96] N. Deswal and R. Kant, “Laser-assisted turning of aluminium 3003 alloy,” Lasers 
Eng., vol. 53, no. 3–4, pp. 197–214, 2022. 
[97] N. Deswal and R. Kant, “Experimental investigation on magnesium az31b alloy dur￾ing ultrasonic vibration assisted turning process,” Mater. Manuf. Process., vol. 37, 
no. 15, pp. 1708–1714, 2022, doi: 10.1080/10426914.2022.2039701. 
[98] N. Deswal and R. Kant, “FE analysis of ultrasonic vibration assisted turning of mag￾nesium az31b alloy,” Mater. Today. Proc., vol. 62, no. 14, pp. 7473–7479, 2022, doi: 
10.1016/j.matpr.2022.03.507. 
[99] N. Deswal and R. Kant, “Synergistic effect of ultrasonic vibration and laser energy 
during hybrid turning operation in magnesium alloy,” Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 
vol. 121, no. 1–2, pp. 857–876, 2022, doi: 10.1007/s00170-022-09384-w. 
[100] N. Deswal and R. Kant, “Hybrid turning process by interacting ultrasonic vibration 
and laser energies,” Mater. Manuf. Process., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 570–576, 2022, doi: 
10.1080/10426914.2022.2065014. 
[101] N. Deswal and R. Kant, “A study on ultrasonic vibration and laser assisted turning 
of aluminium alloy,” in Advances in Forming, Machining and Automation, Lecture 
Notes on Multidisciplinary Industrial Engineering. Singapore: Springer, 2023, doi: 
10.1007/978-981-19-3866-5_14. 
[102] N. Deswal and R. Kant, “Radial ultrasonic-vibration and laser assisted turn￾ing of al3003 alloy,” Mater. Res. Express, vol. 10, no. 4, p. 044004, 2023, doi: 
10.1088/2053-1591/acce24. 
[103] D. Przestacki, “Conventional and laser assisted machining of composite A359/ 
20SiCp,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 14, pp. 229–233, 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2014. 
03.029. 
[104] S. Affan Ahmed, M. Mohsin, and S. M. Zubair Ali, “Survey and technological analy￾sis of laser and its defense applications,” Def. Technol., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 583–592, 
2021, doi: 10.1016/j.dt.2020.02.012. 
[105] T. A. K. Al-Aish, “Design and analysis the fiber laser weapon system FLWS,” Adv. 
Phys. Theor. Appl., vol. 47, pp. 59–69, 2015. 10
 
Chapter 10
 
Utilization of ultrasonic 
vibration and laser energies 
during sustainable machining 
Neeraj Deswal and Ravi Kant 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
The major contributors to energy consumption in the world are industries, trans￾portation, and construction. Industries contribute towards the urbanization, mod￾ernization, and economic growth of a country. However, the development of 
industries has led to the consumption of a great amount of energy and fossil fuels. 
They also generate a significant amount of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse 
gas emissions [1]. These emissions have substantially impacted human health and 
environmental pollution. Industry has accounted for about 32% of the world’s 
energy consumption [2]. Additionally, fossil fuels comprise approximately 80% 
of the overall world energy supply [3]. Furthermore, the industrial sector is the 
primary source of greenhouse gas emissions, accounting for approximately 29% 
of carbon dioxide emissions related to electricity production [4]. Manufacturing 
operations consume approximately 40% of the overall energy and about 25% 
of the global natural resources [5]. The manufacturing sector utilizes numer￾ous processes during production, and the machining process is the most com￾monly utilized in the manufacturing industries. Machining processes are among 
the most widely utilized manufacturing methods in various industries, including 
automotive, aviation, marine, and more [6]. It is an energy-consuming and waste￾generating process, apart from creating environmental pollution and occupational 
health hazards [7]. 
10.2 CHALLENGES DURING MACHINING PROCESS 
In conventional machining processes, heat is generated in the cutting zone as a 
result of the interaction between the cutting tool and the workpiece material. This 
heat generation presents several challenges, including large machining forces, rapid 
cutting tool wear, reduced surface quality, an impact on the mechanical properties 
of the workpiece, increased processing time for finishing a product, and higher 
production costs due to frequent cutting tool replacement [8]. To overcome heat￾generated issues, wet machining is utilized to minimize heat generation, achieve 
DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-10 267  
268 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
better surface quality, and enhance cutting tool life [9]. Hence, cutting fluids are 
used significantly during machining operation in the manufacturing industries. 
Energy usage and cutting fluids (also known as metalworking fluid (MWF)) are 
major sources of higher manufacturing costs, waste generation, and environmen￾tal deterioration [10]. Energy consumption is related to various adverse impacts 
because of the usage of non-renewable resources, resulting in harm to the eco￾system, habitat alteration, increased emissions, intensified land usage, and higher 
risks to human health. Moreover, higher energy utilization from conventional fos￾sil fuel sources has increased the generation of more greenhouse gases, such as 
carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide, and nitrogen oxide, to the atmosphere [11]. The 
cutting fluids are toxic and non-biodegradable because they are produced by min￾eral oils, and some additives contribute to the depletion of the ozone layer [12]. 
They are also one of the primary health threats on the machine shop floor [13]. 
Additionally, cutting fluids break down chemically due to the high cutting temper￾ature of the machining operation, resulting in an adverse impact on human health 
both externally via skin and internally due to inhalation [14]. The major factors 
contributing to higher manufacturing costs are power consumption, maintenance 
of the lubrication system, and disposal and cleaning of the cutting fluids [15]. 
10.3 NEED FOR SUSTAINABLE MACHINING PROCESS 
The 1972 Stockholm UN summit on the human environment has emphasized the 
need for sustainable development methodologies to resolve the global environ￾mental challenges, such as ecological system degradation, resource depletion, 
waste minimization, and environmental pollution [16]. Moreover, as per ISO￾14000 standards, manufacturing industries should limit their adverse activities to 
reduce environmental pollution [17]. Therefore, to overcome the ever-increasing 
challenges of natural resource consumption and environmental pollution, coun￾tries are required to implement a sustainable development strategy for better 
product quality and productivity. Sustainable manufacturing is mainly focused on 
economically feasible machining processes which can minimize environmental 
hazards by conserving natural resources and energy. Sustainable manufacturing 
can be defined as the development of machining processes for the manufacturing 
of components/products in such a manner that it would minimize adverse environ￾mental impacts, minimize waste, conserve energy, conserve natural resources, and 
be economically feasible and safer for the operator, community, and consumers 
[8]. Hence, the primary goals of sustainable manufacturing processes are related 
to minimal energy requirement, minimal environmental pollution, minimal carbon 
emissions, increased resource utilization, and better machinability characteristics 
(such as lower machining force, higher tool life, better surface finish, and more) 
[18]. The significant functional elements of sustainable manufacturing are sus￾tainable products, processes, and systems [19]. The concept behind sustainable 
manufacturing is presented in Figure 10.1 [20].  
Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 269 
Figure 10.1 A layout of sustainable manufacturing. 
Industries and researchers are exploring various techniques to enhance the 
machining methods in terms of energy efficiency, eco-friendliness, and sustain￾ability [18]. Therefore, various sustainable machining techniques have been 
developed to minimize energy consumption and environmental pollution. Dry 
machining, minimum quantity lubrication, cryogenic machining, hybrid machin￾ing, and the like are some of the sustainable machining methods employed. Hence, 
these machining methods are discussed in the next sections with more emphasis 
on hybrid machining processes. 
10.4 DRY MACHINING 
A machining process that uses no cutting fluids is termed dry machining. By 
eliminating the costs associated with cutting fluid procurement, management, dis￾posal, and machine tools equipped with subsystems for cutting fluids, significant 
reductions in capital investments can be achieved. Furthermore, the environment 
impacts related to cutting fluids are also eliminated. Hence, the main functions of 
cutting fluids during conventional machining processes, such as lubrication, chip 
removal, and lower heat generation, have to be accomplished by some other means 
in the dry machining process [21, 22]. Modifications to cutting tool design, devel￾opment of cutting tool materials, and changes in the machine tool have been carried 
out to dissipate heat during the dry machining operation. Thermoelectric cooling, 
undercooling by providing coolant under the cutting tool, and self-lubricating 
tools by inserting solid lubricant into the rake and flank face of the cemented  
270 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
carbide tool have been developed to modify the cutting tool design [16]. The coat￾ings on the cutting tool material provide enhanced thermal insulation, hardness, 
and self-lubrication. The cutting tool materials should be more heat resistant and 
generate less heat [23]. The monolayer coating could suffer early delamination or 
crack. Therefore, preferred is a multilayer coating which combines various coating 
materials for enhanced tool life. The various coating materials which have been 
used to obtain better tool life are titanium aluminum nitride (TiAlN) for better heat 
resistance, titanium carbonitride (TiCN) for enhanced toughness, titanium nitride 
(TiN) for better adhesion characteristics, and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) for 
self-lubrication [24]. The machine tool design has been modified primarily to 
remove and dispose of chips. Conveyor, suction pump, compressed air, tilt table 
to tilt the part from vertical to horizontal, vertical inversion fixture, liquid flushing 
at the end of the machining process, and vacuum shroud surrounding the tool are 
some of the modifications to machine tool design [16]. However, dry machining 
is preferable at higher cutting speed to avoid premature failure of the cutting tool. 
Moreover, residual stresses are found to be comparable with wet machining, which 
can hamper the surface integrity in the machining process. 
10.5 MINIMUM QUANTITY LUBRICATION 
Minimum quantity lubrication (MQL) is an innovative technique in which a mini￾mal amount of cutting fluid is sprayed with a flow rate of 10–500 ml/h in the 
cutting zone during the machining operation [20]. It is also known as the near 
dry machining (NDM) technique in which synthetic esters, fatty alcohols, emul￾sions, gaseous substances, oil-water mixture, and so on are used most commonly 
as a cooling lubricating fluid during the machining operation. These lubricating 
fluids are injected in a small quantity to the machining zone with or without the 
assistance of a transporting medium. A pump equipped with a precision-metered 
droplet is used to deliver the cooling fluids at a rapid succession at the cutting 
zone. In certain cases, high-pressure (usually 4–6 bar) compressed air is used to 
deliver atomized fine droplets to the machining region in the form of aerosol spray 
[19]. However, the cooling and lubricating capabilities of the aerosol spray are 
considered poor compared to conventional cutting fluids. Fatty alcohols, synthetic 
esters, vegetable oils, and the like have provided better cooling and lubrication 
characteristics as well as better machining performance [25]. In certain cases, oil 
is used as the lubricant in the air-based MQL technique, but its cooling capabilities 
are limited. It poses a significant challenge in the machining operation, especially 
when low thermal conductivity materials are machined. Hence, carbon dioxide 
at a supercritical state can dissolve many lubricating oils and provide adequate 
lubrication in the cutting zone, especially when machining low thermal conductiv￾ity materials. The supercritical carbon dioxide provides deeper penetration of the 
lubricating fluids in the cutting zone and uniform oil coating on the surface of the 
workpiece and cutting tool [26]. The MQL technique provides better machining  
 
Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 271 
performance compared to conventional machining, but further studies are required 
to obtain the optimal design of external nozzles and to deliver the optimal amount 
of lubricating fluids in the cutting zone. 
10.6 CRYOGENIC MACHINING 
Cryogenic machining is another effective method of cooling the cutting region 
during the machining process. In this technique, a cryogenic cooling lubricat￾ing fluid is used as a coolant to provide lubrication in the machining zone and 
lower the temperature at the chip-tool interface [27]. Cryogenic machining is 
significantly different from the conventional cutting fluids technique and MQL 
technique. In other cooling techniques, the cooling fluids flush the chips from 
the machining zone after breaking. However, in cryogenic machining, cooling 
promotes brittle fracture of chips and chemical stability to the cutting tool [16]. 
The benefits of cryogenic machining include reduced tool wear, improved surface 
finish, lower temperatures at the chip-tool interface, increased production rates, 
absence of harmful emissions, and environmental friendliness. Cryogenic cooling 
can be applied in several ways, such as workpiece pre-cooling, spraying at the cut￾ting tool edge, indirect cryogenic cooling, cooling at the cutting tool back surface, 
cooling at the chip-tool interface, cooling by dual nozzle system, and direct cryo￾genic treatment of cutting tools [19]. Moreover, cryogenic machining employs 
various cooling mediums, including liquid nitrogen, air, water, steam, vapor, 
refrigerated carbon dioxide, and refrigerated compressed air. Liquid nitrogen is 
most commonly used as a cooling medium in cryogenic machining due to its vari￾ous unique properties, such as abundance in the environment, non-combustibility, 
non-corrosive properties, no harmful emissions production, no chemical reaction 
with the cutting tool or the workpiece, no residual oil on chips, safer to the opera￾tor, and elimination of coolant disposal cost. However, additional equipment costs 
are associated with the cryogenic machining setup, and liquid nitrogen is costly 
and not reusable because it evaporates in the atmosphere. Apart from that, due to 
the cryogenic cooling, the temperature at the workpiece is decreased. It becomes 
harder and results in higher cutting forces compared to the conventional machin￾ing process, which is not desirable. Also, the cooling effect is reduced significantly 
at higher cutting speeds due to the lower penetration of the cryogenic cooling at 
the cutting tool tip [16]. 
10.7 HYBRID MACHINING PROCESSES 
The hybrid machining (HM) process is defined according to the International 
Academy for Production Engineering (CIRP): “Hybrid manufacturing process is 
based on the simultaneous and controlled interaction of process mechanisms and/ 
or energy sources/tools having a significant effect on the process performance.”  
272 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
In the definition of the HM process, “simultaneous and controlled interaction” 
reveals that the interaction of various processes or energies should be at the same 
time and at the same impact/processing/machining zone [28, 29]. Generally, in 
manufacturing technology, the “hybrid” term is used when a combination of dif￾ferent kinds of technologies is associated with the manufacturing of specified 
parts. HM reveals a relationship between various process energies or assistance 
of a particular process via different process energies or by some other means. So, 
hybrid can have various meanings in the manufacturing process [30]: 
1. Combination of various energies acting at a similar time and same zone. 
2. Combination of various process steps which are produced separately earlier. 
3. Combination of various machines on a single machine platform. 
4. Combination of various products with hybrid function. 
The principal idea in developing hybrid processes is to gain significant advantages 
from the developed process and minimize the disadvantages in a single process, 
especially in a cost effective and eco-friendly manner [31]. The combination of 
two or more processes in HM should have significant benefits, such as reduction in 
process chains which leads to minimization of clamping, referencing, alignment at 
several workplaces, ability to precisely handle dimensionally complex products, 
processing of materials effectively, potential benefits on the machinability, and 
substantial improvement in surface integrity. Several energies have been utilized 
during the HM process, such as ultrasonic vibration [32], thermal [33], electric 
field [34], and magnetic field [35]. 
The ultrasonic vibration HM process is one of the most commonly utilized pro￾cesses due to its frequent separation of the cutting tool with the workpiece surface 
during the machining operation. The thermal HM process is used widely due to 
the softening of the workpiece material by means of various heat sources such 
as laser, induction, plasma, and gas torch prior to the machining operation. The 
electric field HM process is used to reduce the flow stress of the workpiece mate￾rial which eases the machining process. The magnetic field HM process is used to 
increase the machining temperature and reduce machine-tool vibrations, resulting 
in significant improvement in machining. Among the various energies utilized so 
far, thermal and ultrasonic vibration energy are the most commonly applied dur￾ing the HM process. Therefore, the application of thermal and ultrasonic vibration 
energy is discussed here. 
10.7.1 Thermally assisted machining process 
The thermally assisted machining (TAM) process is a hybrid machining process in 
which an external heat source is utilized to preheat the workpiece material in the 
cutting region before the machining operation [36]. The yield strength, hardness, 
and strain hardening of the workpiece material are decreased, leading to thermal 
softening of the material, which in turn facilitates the material removal process Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 273 
by the cutting tool [37]. The basic idea of the TAM process is to rapidly heat the 
workpiece material, leading to thermal softening, while ensuring that the chips 
efficiently remove the maximum heated material from the cutting zone without 
causing thermal damage to the cutting tool and machined surface. The applied heat 
source should fulfill some basic conditions [38, 39]: 
1. Rapid and controlled heating should be supplied by the source for smooth 
operation. 
2. Heating should be restricted to a small region to prevent any other part 
damage. 
3. The machined surface should be prevented from overheating to restrict any 
metallurgical changes. 
4. Sufficient intensity should be supplied by the heat source for quick and 
localized heating. 
5. The source should be cost-effective, safe to the operator, and environmen￾tally friendly. 
Several external heat sources are utilized during the TAM process, such as elec￾tric current, furnace, resistance, gas flame, electron beam, induction, plasma, and 
laser beam [40–45]. A non-consumable electrode is used to transfer the current 
in the workpiece material, which raises workpiece temperature using the elec￾tric current heat source. A furnace is used to preheat the workpiece material in 
the furnace heat source. An electric current is passed through the workpiece to 
the cutting tool during resistance heating. The liquefied petroleum gas or oxy￾acetylene gas is used to heat the workpiece material when employing a gas flame 
heat source. A high-energy electron beam is applied to the workpiece surface for 
thermal softening of the material when using an electron beam heat source. Induc￾tion coils are used like an electric source that induces a high-frequency alternating 
electric current to preheat the workpiece material when using an induction heat 
source. A stream of ionized gas is used to increase the workpiece temperature, 
ensuring thermal softening of the material when employing a plasma heat source. 
A laser beam is used to preheat the workpiece material prior to the machining 
operation in the laser heat source process. Although all of the heat sources have 
benefits, they also have some limitations. Electric current requires stabilization 
equipment and arc ignition; furnace possesses insufficient energy and temperature 
is lost during machining; resistance is unable to maintain uniform temperature 
and requires an insulating machine tool; gas flame possesses poor controllability 
and low power intensity; electron beam requires a vacuum, works only on metals, 
and is expensive; induction possesses low power intensity; plasma requires eye 
protection for the operator; and laser requires high capital cost. A laser beam is the 
preferred external heat source due to its easy controllability, rapid and localized 
heating, higher power intensity on small areas, and a smaller heat affected zone 
(HAZ) compared to the aforementioned heat sources [46]. Therefore, the laser 
heat source is discussed in the present study.  
274 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Turning is one of the most widely utilized techniques for fabricating parts 
among the various machining processes [47]. The turning operation is performed 
on the lathe machine, with the workpiece material securely held in place. A cut￾ting tool is used to remove the unwanted material from the workpiece material 
and obtain the desired shape and size. The turning process is controlled by cutting 
speed, feed rate, and depth of cut [48]. Cutting speed is defined as the speed at 
which the workpiece rotates with respect to the cutting tool. Feed rate is defined 
as the distance covered by the cutting tool during one revolution of the workpiece. 
Depth of cut is defined as the amount of material removed during each revolution 
of the workpiece material. Cutting speed, feed rate, and depth of cut are generally 
expressed in m/min, mm/rev, and mm, respectively [49]. 
10.7.2 Laser assisted turning process 
The laser assisted turning (LAT) process is a hybrid machining process in which 
a high-intensity defocused laser beam is utilized to preheat the workpiece mate￾rial usually above the recrystallization temperature to facilitate material removal 
through a conventional cutting tool. The yield strength and hardness of the mate￾rial are decreased due to the preheating of the workpiece material, which ensures 
thermal softening of the workpiece material [50, 51]. The thermal softening of 
the material leads to enhanced machining performance such as lower machining 
forces, higher tool life, higher material removal rate (MRR), lower surface rough￾ness, and lower residual stresses [52, 53]. The LAT operation has been investigated 
for various materials, including iron [54], steel [55], ceramics [56], waspaloy [57], 
titanium alloys [58], nickel alloys [59], metal matrix composites [60], and single￾crystal silicon [61]. LAT is mainly used in various industries, including marine, 
automotive, aviation, biomedical, and more [62, 63]. A schematic of the LAT pro￾cess is shown in Figure 10.2. 
The utilization of laser heat source in thermally assisted machining areas was 
initiated in the late 1970s. Initially, it was explored to machine aerospace alloys 
such as titanium and nickel alloy. With the advancement in materials, it has been 
utilized to machine various materials, as mentioned earlier. Various types of lasers 
have been utilized in laser assisted machining processes, such as CO2, Nd: YAG, 
Excimer, high power diode, and fiber laser [64–66]. Fiber lasers have excellent 
energy efficiency, easier beam transfer, better beam profile controllability, and so 
on compared to other lasers [67]. The laser unit consists of a laser generator, laser 
source, and laser head. The generator is used to create the laser and transfer it to 
the source. The source carries the laser through an optical fiber cable to the laser 
head. The laser cutting head is connected to the output of the laser source through 
an optical fiber cable. The laser cutting head is positioned in such a manner that the 
laser beam is always focused on the workpiece surface but not on the cutting tool. 
Furthermore, compressed air is generally used through the laser nozzle to protect 
the focusing lens from extreme heat and debris generated during the experiments. 
The performance of laser heat source depends on various laser parameters, such  
 
 
Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 275 
Figure 10.2 A schematic of the LAT process. 
as laser power, laser diameter, laser approach angle, the distance between laser 
nozzle and workpiece surface, and distance between laser beam spot and cutting 
tool edge, and also on the machining parameters, i.e., cutting speed, feed rate, and 
depth of cut. 
Advantages and disadvantages of the LAT process 
The LAT process has various advantages over the conventional turning (CT) 
process. The important advantages are discussed as follows [68–73]: 
1. The laser beam is focused precisely, which eventually creates rapid, local￾ized, controlled heating and minimizes HAZ on the workpiece surface. 
2. Laser is operated easily in air and does not require any other media such as 
a vacuum in electron beam and gas atmosphere in plasma. 
3. The laser beam can be applied to any optically reachable location with the 
required intensity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
276 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
4. The machining time is reduced, which significantly reduces the production 
cost and enhances productivity. 
5. The average machining forces are reduced compared to CT due to thermal 
softening of the workpiece material which eases machining. 
6. The machine power consumption is reduced due to the low load on the cut￾ting tool. 
7. The MRR is increased because of the lower machining forces and power 
consumption. 
8. Tool wear, tool breakage, and chatter generation are decreased due to the 
reduction in machining forces and power consumption. 
9. The surface quality of the machined surface is improved and a crack-free 
surface is produced. 
10. Compressive residual stresses are generated due to the thermal softening effect. 
11. The metallurgical properties are enhanced due to the better machining 
performance. 
12. The process is environmentally friendly due to the elimination of cutting 
fluids. 
Despite its many advantages, the LAT process has some disadvantages, which are 
described as follows: 
1. The initial investment for the laser machine is high, leading to an overall 
increase in the process cost. 
2. External fixtures are required to mount the laser head on the machine prior 
to machining operation, which also raises the installation cost. 
3. The highly reflective workpiece surfaces are difficult to process; however, 
coatings on the surface can resolve this issue. 
4. The laser heating can deteriorate the workpiece surface and even melt the 
surface if laser parameters are not controlled properly. 
5. The laser can harm the operator if proper precautions are not followed, such 
as using goggles, gloves, and other safety measures. 
10.7.3 Ultrasonic vibration assisted turning process 
The ultrasonic vibration assisted turning (UVAT) process is a hybrid machining 
process in which high frequency–low amplitude vibration is provided to the tool. 
The contact between tool and workpiece occurs for a specific period and after that 
it disengages and the process continues engaging and disengaging [74]. Due to 
the periodic separation, machining performance experiences significant enhance￾ments, including lower machining forces, longer tool life, better surface finish, 
lower segmented chips, better machine stability, no burr formation, and lower 
built-up edge (BUE) [75, 76]. UVAT has been applied on a variety of materials 
such as soft metals and alloys [77], hard to machine steels [78], difficult to machine 
alloys [79], amorphous materials [80], single-crystal materials [81], sintered alloys Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 277 
[82], ceramics [83], metal matrix composites [84], and fiber-reinforced plastic 
composites [85]. UVAT is utilized in various industries like electronics, petro￾chemical, automotive, power generation, aerospace, biomedical, and more. [86]. 
A schematic of the UVAT process is presented in Figure 10.3. 
The vibration system consists of a frequency generator, transducer, and booster. 
The vibration is provided by an ultrasonic generator that utilizes a piezoelectric 
or magneto-restrictive transducer to generate ultrasonic motion of low amplitude 
and high frequency. The frequency generator is employed to generate an electric 
signal, and these signals are converted into ultrasonic vibration by the transducer. 
The booster is used to enhance the ultrasonic vibration amplitude given by the 
transducer and propagate these vibrations on the cutting tool. The cutting tool is 
clamped to the bottom of the booster by a standard screw [87]. The cutting tool 
Figure 10.3 A schematic of the UVAT process.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
278 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
is excited by the ultrasonic motion and starts vibrating in the direction of cutting, 
usually at a high frequency (15–40 kHz) with a low amplitude of 1–20 µm [88]. 
The one-dimensional (1D) UVAT was first introduced in the late 1950s to enhance 
the conventional machining process, aiming for a better surface finish, longer tool 
life, and lesser machining forces. This method was initially used for brass, cast 
iron, mild steel, and aluminum materials. But when this method was tested with 
other materials like difficult-to-cut materials and glass, it showed better results 
than did conventional machining. So, researchers explored this area more, and in 
the 1990s, two-dimensional (2D) UVAT was proposed. As expected, 2D UVAT 
exhibits improved performance in comparison to the 1D UVAT in terms of longer 
tool life, better surface finish, and lower machining forces. Nowadays, both 1D 
and 2D UVAT are being utilized to machine various materials and generate com￾plex dimensional parts or surfaces in the manufacturing industries [89]. 
Advantages and disadvantages of the UVAT process 
The UVAT process has various advantages over the conventional turning pro￾cess. The important advantages are described as follows [90–95]: 
1. The average machining forces than in the CT process due to the periodic 
separation of the cutting tool with the workpiece surface, which introduces 
aerodynamic lubrication. 
2. The lubrication is enhanced due to the effect of aerodynamic lubrication, 
which reduces friction between the cutting tool and workpiece. 
3. The burr formation and BUE are suppressed due to the reduction in pushing 
and bending stress in the deformation zone. 
4. The chatter generation is minimized irrespective of the cutting tool geom￾etry which ensures stable cutting compared to the CT process. 
5.	 The tool life is enhanced due to the reduction in effective cutting time and bet￾ter heat dissipation due to the periodic separation with the workpiece surface. 
6. The chip generation is continuous, and fewer segmented chips are obtained 
due to the lower stress generated during the UVAT process. 
7. The surface quality of the machined surface is enhanced due to the lower 
machining forces, minimization of burr and chatter, and lesser tool wear. 
8. A better roundness profile is generated due to improved chip generation and 
quality of the machined surface. 
9. The residual stresses are compressive in nature due to lower stress generation. 
10.	 The critical depth of cut increases due to the reduction in machining 
forces, which prohibits the initiation of brittle fracture and ensures ductile 
regime cutting. 
11. The process can be applied to any type of material; for example, ductile, 
brittle, soft, and other difficult-to-machine materials. 
12. It is an eco-friendly and cost-effective process due to the elimination of cut￾ting fluids.  
 
Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 279 
Despite its numerous advantages, the UVAT process has some disadvantages, 
which are discussed as follows: 
1. External fixtures are required to mount the system on the machine prior to 
machining operation, which increases the installation cost. 
2. The selection of a suitable control unit is desirable to achieve efficient vibra￾tion cutting. A controlled resonant system can display better stability with 
strong nonlinearity. 
3. The booster can be heated rapidly and the cutting tool can be broken at 
higher vibration amplitudes. Therefore, lower amplitudes are preferable. 
4. Higher cutting speeds are not achieved due to the dependence on frequency 
and amplitude. At higher cutting speeds, the advantages of the UVAT pro￾cess are not obtained and the process becomes similar to the CT process. 
5. In certain cases, the flank face of the cutting tool collides with the machined 
surface, which leads to the generation of chipping and unusual wear. Hence, 
to avoid these changes the cutting and the vibratory direction of the cutting 
tool should remain the same. 
10.7.4 Thermal and ultrasonic vibration assisted 
turning process 
The thermal and ultrasonic vibration assisted turning process is the advanced mod￾ification of the UVAT process. In this process, the workpiece material is preheated 
before the turning operation and ultrasonic vibration is provided to the cutting tool, 
simultaneously in a single machine platform [96]. The researchers have termed 
this process as hot ultrasonic assisted turning (HUAT). The simultaneous applica￾tion of heat and vibration to the workpiece and cutting tool respectively has shown 
lower machining forces, higher machining temperature, and lower surface rough￾ness compared to conventional, heat, and vibration turning processes [97, 98]. Up 
to now, the heat sources used in the HUAT process include band-resistance heaters, 
plasma, and tunnel furnaces. The HUAT process is explored for Ti-15333 alloy, 
Inconel 718, Hastelloy-X alloy, aluminum alloy, and magnesium alloy [99–105]. 
10.8 SUMMARY 
Industries are the backbone of any nation’s progression towards urbanization, mod￾ernization, and economic growth. Within these industries, manufacturing opera￾tions play a pivotal role in the development of various products and components. 
Machining processes are a part of these manufacturing operations and are com￾monly utilized in manufacturing industries. However, these processes are the big￾gest consumers of natural resources and energy globally. Generally, cutting fluids 
are used during the machining process, which is responsible for harmful greenhouse 
gas emissions. They have significant adverse impacts on energy consumption,  
 
 
280 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
environmental pollution, human health, ozone layer depletion, higher machining 
cost, and more. Furthermore, production costs are also increased with the applica￾tion of cutting fluids due to maintenance of the lubrication system, disposal, and 
cleaning of the cutting fluids. Therefore, the necessity for sustainable manufactur￾ing has arisen on a global scale in order to address challenges like degradation of 
the ecological system, depletion of resources, higher energy consumption, higher 
greenhouse gases emission, waste minimization, and environmental pollution. Sus￾tainable machining aims at developing a machining process which is energy efficient 
and eco-friendly. Hence, various techniques are explored to minimize the usage of 
cutting fluids for a sustainable process. Dry machining, minimum quantity lubrica￾tion (MQL), cryogenic machining, and hybrid machining are the various advance￾ments in machining methods that aim to meet the goal of sustainable machining. 
Dry machining utilizes self-lubricating tools, coated tools, and modified machine 
tools to eliminate the usage of cutting fluids. The MQL technique uses various cool￾ing lubricating fluids such as synthetic esters, fatty alcohols, emulsions, gaseous 
substances, and oil-water mixture by spraying minimum quantity at a low flow rate 
on the cutting zone. Cryogenic machining uses cryogenic cooling lubricating fluids 
like liquid nitrogen, air, water, steam, vapor, refrigerated carbon dioxide, and refrig￾erated compressed air to cool the machining area in an eco-friendly manner. Hybrid 
machining utilizes various energies during the machining process by eliminating the 
need for any fluids or other modification in machine tools or cutting tools. Thermal 
and ultrasonic vibration assisted turning processes are the most commonly utilized 
hybrid machining processes due to the significant benefits in the machining perfor￾mance compared to the conventional turning process. The laser heat source is the 
most widely used thermal source due to its rapid, localized, and controlled heating 
at the workpiece surface. Additionally, thermal and ultrasonic vibration energies 
are combined in a single machine platform to obtain the benefits of both of these 
energy sources. Therefore, it can be concluded that hybrid machining processes 
play a crucial role in sustainable machining, offering substantial contributions to 
the manufacturing industries. These processes eliminate the need for cutting fluids, 
reduce the consumption of natural resources, minimize waste generation, lower 
environmental pollution, decrease machining costs, and promote eco-friendliness. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Li K, Lin B (2015) Impacts of urbanization and industrialization on energy consump￾tion/CO2 emissions: Does the level of development matter? Renew Sustain Energ Rev 
52:1107–1122. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.07.185 
[2] Zhou L, Li J, Li F, et al. (2016) Energy consumption model and energy efficiency 
of machine tools: A comprehensive literature review. J Clean Prod 112:3721–3734. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.05.093 
[3] Azarpour A, Suhaimi S, Zahedi G, Bahadori A (2013) A review on the drawbacks of 
renewable energy as a promising energy source of the future. Arab J Sci Eng 38:317– 
328. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13369-012-0436-6  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 281 
[4] Bruzzone AAG, Anghinolfi D, Paolucci M, Tonelli F (2012) Energy-aware schedul￾ing for improving manufacturing process sustainability: A mathematical model for 
flexible flow shops. CIRP Ann Manuf Technol 61:459–462. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cirp.2012.03.084 
[5] Campitelli A, Cristóbal J, Fischer J, et al. (2019) Resource efficiency analysis of 
lubricating strategies for machining processes using life cycle assessment methodol￾ogy. J Clean Prod 222:464–475. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.03.073 
[6] Wickramasinghe KC, Sasahara H, Rahim EA, Perera GIP (2020) Green metalwork￾ing fluids for sustainable machining applications: A review. J Clean Prod 257:120552. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.120552 
[7] Dambhare S, Deshmukh S, Borade A, et al. (2015) Sustainability issues in turning 
process: A study in Indian machining industry. Procedia CIRP 26:379–384. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2014.07.092 
[8] Bhattacharya S, Protim Das P, Chatterjee P, Chakraborty S (2021) Prediction of 
reponses in a sustainable dry turning operation: A comparative analysis. Math Probl 
Eng 2021. https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/9967970 
[9] Siniawski M, Bowman C (2009) Metal working fluids: Finding green in the 
manufacturing process. Ind Lubr Tribol 61:60–66. https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
00368790910940374 
[10] Fernando R, Gamage J, Karunathilake H (2021) Sustainable machining: Environmen￾tal performance analysis of turning. Int J Sustain Eng 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/1 
9397038.2021.1995524 
[11] Huang H, Ameta G (2014) Computational energy estimation tools for machining 
operations during preliminary design. Int J Sustain Eng 7:130–143. 
[12] Dahmus JB, Gutowski TG (2016) An environmental analysis of machining. In: Pro￾ceedings of IMECE04, 2004 ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress 
and Exposition, pp. 1–10. 
[13] Schultheiss F, Zhou J, Gröntoft E, Ståhl JE (2013) Sustainable machining through 
increasing the cutting tool utilization. J Clean Prod 59:298–307. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2013.06.058 
[14] Pervaiz S, Kannan S, Kishawy HA (2018) An extensive review of the water consump￾tion and cutting fluid based sustainability concerns in the metal cutting sector. J Clean 
Prod 197:134–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.06.190 
[15] Pusavec F, Krajnik P, Kopac J (2010) Transitioning to sustainable production—part 
I: Application on machining technologies. J Clean Prod 18:174–184. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2009.08.010 
[16] Zhao F, Sharma A (2015) Environmentally friendly machining. In: HandBook of 
Manufacturing Engineering and Technology. Springer, London, pp. 1127–1154. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4471-4670-4_14. 
[17] Jamil M, Zhao W, He N, et al. (2021) Sustainable milling of Ti–6Al–4V: A trade￾off between energy efficiency, carbon emissions and machining characteristics under 
MQL and cryogenic environment. J Clean Prod 281:125374. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2020.125374 
[18] Lv L, Deng Z, Meng H, et al. (2020) A multi-objective decision-making method for 
machining process plan and an application. J Clean Prod 260:121072. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2020.121072 
[19] Fratila 	D (2013) Sustainable manufacturing through environmentally-friendly 
machining. 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-33792-5_1  
 
 
282 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[20] Rajmohan T, Kalyan Chakravarthy VV, Nandakumar A, Satish Kumar SD (2020) Eco 
friendly machining processes for sustainability—review. IOP Conf Ser Mater Sci Eng 
954. https://doi.org/10.1088/1757-899X/954/1/012044 
[21] Sharma R, Jha BK, Pahuja V, Sharma S (2022) Role of environmental friendly 
machining on machinability. Mater Today Proc 50:640–648. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matpr.2021.03.652 
[22] Sharma R, Jha BK, Pahuja V (2021) Impact of environmental friendly machin￾ing on machinability: A review. Mater Today Proc 46:10362–10367. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.12.498 
[23] Weinert K, Inasaki I, Sutherland JW, Wakabayashi T (2004) Dry machining and 
minimum quantity lubrication. CIRP Ann Manuf Technol 53:511–537. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0007-8506(07)60027-4 
[24] Grigoriev SN, Vereschaka AA, Vereschaka AS, Kutin AA (2012) Cutting tools made 
of layered composite ceramics with nano-scale multilayered coatings. Procedia CIRP 
1:301–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2012.04.054 
[25] Itoigawa F, Childs THC, Nakamura T, Belluco W (2006) Effects and mechanisms in 
minimal quantity lubrication machining of an aluminum alloy. Wear 260:339–344. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wear.2005.03.035 
[26] Supekar SD, Clarens AF, Stephenson DA, Skerlos SJ (2012) Performance of super￾critical carbon dioxide sprays as coolants and lubricants in representative metalwork￾ing operations. J Mater Process Technol 212:2652–2658. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jmatprotec.2012.07.020 
[27] Ahmad-Yazid A, Taha Z, Almanar IP (2010) A review of cryogenic cooling in high 
speed machining (HSM) of mold and die steels. Sci Res Essays 5:412–427. 
[28] Lauwers B (2011) Surface integrity in hybrid machining processes. Procedia Eng 
19:241–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2011.11.107 
[29] Chavoshi SZ, Luo X (2015) Hybrid micro-machining processes: A review. Precis Eng 
41:1–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.precisioneng.2015.03.001 
[30] Lauwers B, Klocke F, Klink A, et al. (2014) Hybrid processes in manufacturing. CIRP 
Ann Manuf Technol 63:561–583. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cirp.2014.05.003 
[31] Rajurkar KP, Zhu D, McGeough JA, etal. (1999) New developments in electro-chemical 
machining. Ann CIRP 48:567–579. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0007-8506(07)63235-1 
[32] Arka GN, Sahoo SK, Iqbal MM, Singh S (2021) Acoustic horn tool assembly design 
for ultrasonic assisted turning and its effects on performance potential. Mater Manuf 
Process 37:260–270. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2021.2016819 
[33] Bijanzad A, Munir T, Abdulhamid F (2022) Heat-assisted machining of superal￾loys: A review. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 118:3531–3557. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00170-021-08059-2 
[34] Ulutan D, Pleta A, Mears L (2015) Electrically-assisted machining of titanium alloy 
Ti-6Al-4V and Nickel-based alloy IN-738: An investigation. In: Proceedings of the 
ASME 2015 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference, Vol￾ume 1: Processing, Charlotte, NC, June 8–12, pp. 1–5. 
[35] Hatefi S, Abou-El-Hossein K (2022) Review of magnetic-assisted single-point dia￾mond turning for ultra-high-precision optical component manufacturing. Int J Adv 
Manuf Technol 120:1591–1607. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-022-08791-3 
[36] Stevenson MG, Oxley PLB (1973) High temperature stress-strain properties of a low￾carbon steel from hot machining tests. Proc Inst Mech Eng 187:263–272. https://doi. 
org/10.1243/PIME_PROC_1973_187_107_02  
Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 283 
[37] Parida AK (2017) Heat assisted machining of nickel base alloys: Experimental and 
numerical analysis. PhD Dissertation, National Institute of Technology, Rourkela. 
[38] Lei S, Pfefferkorn F (2007) A review on thermally assisted machining. In: Proceed￾ings of the ASME 2007 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Con￾ference, Atlanta, GA, October 15–18, pp. 325–336. 
[39] Shams OA, Pramanik A, Chandratilleke TT (2017) Thermal-assisted machining 
of titanium alloys. In: Advanced Manufacturing Technologies. Materials Forming, 
Machining and Tribology. 4th ed. Springer, Cham, pp. 49–76. 
[40] Komanduri R, Flom DG, Lee M (1985) Highlights of the DARPA advanced machin￾ing research program. J Eng Ind 107:325–335. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3186005 
[41] Maity KP, Swain PK (2008) An experimental investigation of hot-machining to 
predict tool life. J Mater Process Technol 198:344–349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jmatprotec.2007.07.018 
[42] Sun S, Brandt M, Dargusch MS (2010) Thermally enhanced machining of hard￾to-machine materials-a review. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 50:663–680. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2010.04.008 
[43] Ahmed N, Abdo BM, Darwish S, et al. (2017) Electron beam melting of titanium 
alloy and surface finish improvement through rotary ultrasonic machining. Int J Adv 
Manuf Technol 92:3349–3361. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-017-0365-3 
[44] Kim EJ, Lee CM (2019) A study on the optimal machining parameters of the induction 
assisted milling with Inconel 718. Materials (Basel) 12:233. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
ma12020233 
[45] Lee Y, Lee C (2019) A study on optimal machining conditions and energy efficiency 
in plasma assisted machining of Ti-6Al-4V. Materials (Basel) 12:2590. https://doi. 
org/10.3390/ma12162590 
[46] Sun SJ, Brandt M, Mo JPT (2013) Current progresses of laser assisted machining 
of aerospace materials for enhancing tool life. Adv Mater Res 690–693:3359–3364. 
https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMR.690-693.3359 
[47] Nalbant M, Gökkaya H, Sur G (2007) Application of Taguchi method in the optimiza￾tion of cutting parameters for surface roughness in turning. Mater Des 28:1379–1385. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2006.01.008 
[48] You SH, Lee JH, Oh SH (2019) A study on cutting characteristics in turning oper￾ations of titanium alloy used in automobile. Int J Precis Eng Manuf 20:209–216. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12541-019-00027-x 
[49] Dutta S, Narala SKR (2021) Investigations on chip formation of turned novel AM 
alloy. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part E J Process Mech Eng 235:332–341. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/0954408920961196 
[50] Venkatesan K, Ramanujam R, Kuppan P (2014) Laser assisted machining of diffi￾cult to cut materials: Research opportunities and future directions—a comprehensive 
review. Procedia Eng 97:1626–1636. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proeng.2014.12.313 
[51] Punugupati G, Kandi KK, Bose PSC, Rao CSP (2016) Laser assisted machin￾ing: A state of art review. IOP Conf Ser Mater Sci Eng 149:012014. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/1757-899X/149/1/012014 
[52] Chryssolouris G, Anifantis N, Karagiannis S (1997) Laser assisted machining: An 
overview. J Manuf Sci Eng 119:766–769. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2836822 
[53] Kong XJ, Zhang HZ, Wu XF, Wang Y (2014) Laser-assisted machining of advanced 
materials. Mater Sci Forum 800–801:825–831. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scien￾tific.net/MSF.800-801.825  
 
284 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[54] Skvarenina S, Shin YC (2006) Laser-assisted machining of compacted graphite iron. 
Int J Mach Tools Manuf 46:7–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2005.04.013 
[55] Kaselouris E, Baroutsos A, Papadoulis T, et al. (2020) A study on the influence of 
laser parameters on laser-assisted machining of Aisi H-13 steel. Key Eng Mater 
827:92–97. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/KEM.827.92 
[56] Rozzi JC, Pfefferkorn FE, Incropera FP, Shin YC (2000) Transient, three-dimensional 
heat transfer model for the laser assisted machining of silicon nitride: I. Comparison 
of predictions with measured surface temperature histories. Int J Heat Mass Transf 
43:1409–1424. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0017-9310(99)00217-3 
[57] Ding H, Shin YC (2013) Improvement of machinability of Waspaloy via laser￾assisted machining. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 64:475–486. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00170-012-4012-8 
[58] Yang N, Brandt M, Sun S (2009) Numerical and experimental investigation of 
the heat-affected zone in a laser-assisted machining of Ti-6Al-4V alloy process. 
Mater Sci Forum 618–619:143–146. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/ 
MSF.618-619.143 
[59] Ahn DG, Byun KW, Kang MC (2010) Thermal characteristics in the cutting of Inco￾nel 718 superalloy using CW Nd:YAG laser. J Mater Sci Technol 26:362–366. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/S1005-0302(10)60059-X 
[60] Venkatesan K, Ramanujam R, Kuppan P (2014) A review on conventional and 
laser assisted machining of aluminium based metal matrix composites. Eng Rev 
34:75–84. 
[61] Chen X, Liu C, Ke J, et al. (2020) Subsurface damage and phase transformation in 
laser-assisted nanometric cutting of single crystal silicon. Mater Des 190:108524. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matdes.2020.108524 
[62] Deswal N, Kant R (2022) Machinability analysis during laser assisted turning of alu￾minium 3003 alloy. Lasers Manuf Mater Process 9:56–71. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s40516-022-00163-9 
[63] Deswal N, Kant R (2022) Laser-assisted turning of aluminium 3003 alloy. Lasers Eng 
53:197–214 
[64] Kim KS, Kim JH, Choi JY, Lee CM (2011) A review on research and development 
of laser assisted turning. Int J Precis Eng Manuf 12:753–759. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s12541-011-0100-1 
[65] Jeon Y, Lee CM (2012) Current research trend on laser assisted machining. Int J Pre￾cis Eng Manuf 13:311–317. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12541-012-0040-4 
[66] Li L (2000) Advances and characteristics of high-power diode laser materials process￾ing. Opt Lasers Eng 34:231–253. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0143-8166(00)00066-X 
[67] Kim IW, Lee CM (2016) A study on the machining characteristics of specimens 
with spherical shape using laser-assisted machining. Appl Therm Eng 100:636–645. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2016.02.005 
[68] Pfefferkorn FE, Rozzi JC, Incropera FP, Shin YC (1997) Surface temperature mea￾surement in laser-assisted machining processes. Exp Heat Transf 10:291–313. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/08916159708946549 
[69] Rozzi JC, Pfefferkorn FE, Incropera FP, Shin YC (1998) Transient thermal response 
of a rotating cylindrical silicon nitride workpiece subjected to a translating laser heat 
source, part II: Parametric effects and assessment of a simplified model. J Heat Trans￾fer 120:907–915. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2825910  
 
Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 285 
[70] Rozzi JC, Pfefferkorn FE, Shin YC, Incropera FP (2000) Experimental evaluation of 
the laser assisted machining of silicon nitride ceramics. J Manuf Sci Eng Trans ASME 
122:666–670. https://doi.org/10.1115/1.1286556 
[71] Pfefferkorn FE, Incropera FP, Shin YC (2005) Heat transfer model of semi-transpar￾ent ceramics undergoing laser-assisted machining. Int J Heat Mass Transf 48:1999– 
2012. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2004.10.035 
[72] Tian Y, Shin YC (2006) Thermal modeling for laser-assisted machining of silicon 
nitride ceramics with complex features. J Manuf Sci Eng Trans ASME 128:425–434. 
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.2162906 
[73] Zhao 	F, Bernstein WZ, Naik G, Cheng GJ (2010) Environmental assess￾ment of laser assisted manufacturing: Case studies on laser shock peening and 
laser assisted turning. J Clean Prod 18:1311–1319. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jclepro.2010.04.019 
[74] Dixit US, Pandey PM, Verma GC (2019) Ultrasonic-assisted machining processes: 
A review. Int J Mechatronics Manuf Syst 12:227–254. https://doi.org/https://doi. 
org/10.1504/IJMMS.2019.103479 
[75] Lotfi M, Akbari J (2021) Finite element simulation of ultrasonic-assisted machin￾ing: A review. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 116:2777–2796. https://doi.org/https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00170-021-07205-0 
[76] Sonia P, Jain JK, Saxena KK (2021) Influence of ultrasonic vibration assistance in 
manufacturing processes : A review. Mater Manuf Process 36:1451–1475. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/10426914.2021.1914843 
[77] Luo H, Wang Y, Zhang P (2020) Effect of cutting and vibration parameters on the 
cutting performance of 7075-T651 aluminum alloy by ultrasonic vibration. Int J Adv 
Manuf Technol 107:371–384. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-020-05098-z 
[78] Khajehzadeh M, Boostanipour O, Razfar MR (2020) Finite element simulation and 
experimental investigation of residual stresses in ultrasonic assisted turning. Ultra￾sonics 108:106208. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ultras.2020.106208
[79] Llanos I, Campa Á, Iturbe A, et al. (2018) Experimental analysis of cutting force 
reduction during ultrasonic assisted turning of Ti6Al4V. Procedia CIRP 77:86–89. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.08.227 
[80] Gan J, Wang X, Zhou M, et al. (2003) Ultraprecision diamond turning of glass with 
ultrasonic vibration. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 21:952–955. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 
s00170-002-1416-x 
[81] Suzuki N, Masuda S, Haritani M, Shamoto E (2004) Ultraprecision microma￾chining of brittle materials by applying ultrasonic elliptical vibration cutting. In: 
Micro-Nanomechatronics and Human Science, 2004 and The Fourth Symposium 
Micro-Nanomechatronics for Information-Based Society, pp. 133–138. 
[82] Liu K, Li XP, Rahman M (2008) Characteristics of ultrasonic vibration-assisted duc￾tile mode cutting of tungsten carbide. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 35:833–841. https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/s00170-006-0761-6 
[83] Weber H, Herberger J, Pilz R, Ddr THK (1984) Turning of machinable glass ceramics 
with an ultrasonically vibrated tool. CIRP Ann Manuf Technol 33:85–87. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/S0007-8506(07)61385-7 
[84] Zhong ZW, Lin G (2006) Ultrasonic assisted turning of an aluminium-based metal 
matrix composite reinforced with SiC particles. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 27:1077– 
1081. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-004-2320-3  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
286 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
[85] Xu W, Zhang LC (2014) On the mechanics and material removal mecha￾nisms of vibration-assisted cutting of unidirectional fibre-reinforced polymer 
composites. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 80–81:1–10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijmachtools.2014.02.004 
[86] Deswal N, Kant R (2022) Experimental investigation on magnesium AZ31B alloy 
during ultrasonic vibration assisted turning process. Mater Manuf Process 37:1708– 
1714. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2022.2039701 
[87] Deswal N, Kant R (2022) FE analysis of ultrasonic vibration assisted 	turn￾ing of magnesium AZ31B alloy. Mater Today Proc 62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
matpr.2022.03.507 
[88] Sharma V, Pandey PM (2016) Recent advances in ultrasonic assisted turning: 
A step towards sustainability. Cogent Eng 3:1–20. https://doi.org/10.1080/23311 
916.2016.1222776 
[89] Xu S, Kuriyagawa T, Shimada K, Mizutani M (2017) Recent advances in ultrasonic￾assisted machining for the fabrication of micro/nano-textured surfaces. Front Mech 
Eng 12:33–45. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11465-017-0422-5 
[90] Xiao M, Karube S, Soutome T, Sato K (2002) Analysis of chatter suppression in 
vibration cutting. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 42:1677–1685. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0890-6955(02)00077-9 
[91] Zhou M, Wang XJ, Ngoi BKA, Gan JGK (2002) Brittle—ductile transition in the 
diamond cutting of glasses with the aid of ultrasonic vibration. J Mater Process 
Technol 121:243–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0924-0136(01)01262-6 
[92] Ma C, Shamoto E, Moriwaki T, et al. (2005) Suppression of burrs in turning with 
ultrasonic elliptical vibration cutting. Int J Mach Tools Manuf 45:1295–1300. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijmachtools.2005.01.011 
[93] Mitrofanov AV, Ahmed N, Babitsky VI, Silberschmidt VV (2005) Effect of lubrication 
and cutting parameters on ultrasonically assisted turning of Inconel 718. J Mater Pro￾cess Technol 162–163:649–654. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmatprotec.2005.02.170 
[94] Zhong ZW, Lin G (2005) Diamond turning of a metal matrix composite with 
ultrasonic vibrations. Mater Manuf Process 20:727–735. https://doi.org/10.1081/ 
AMP-200055124 
[95] Khajehzadeh M, Razfar MR, Akhlaghi M (2014) Experimental investigation of tool 
temperature during ultrasonically assisted turning of aerospace aluminum. Mater 
Manuf Process 29:1453–1460. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426914.2014.930962 
[96] Muhammad R, Maurotto A, Roy A, Silberschmidt VV (2011) Analysis of forces in 
vibro-impact and hot vibro-impact turning of advanced alloys. Appl Mech Mater 
70:315–320. https://doi.org/10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMM.70.315 
[97] Deswal N, Kant R (2021) A study on ultrasonic vibration and laser assisted turning 
of aluminium alloy. In: Advances in Forming, Machining and Automation. Springer, 
Singapore, pp. 165–172. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-19-3866-5_14. 
[98] Deswal N, Kant R (2022) Hybrid turning process by interacting ultrasonic vibration 
and laser energies. Mater Manuf Process 38:570–576. https://doi.org/10.1080/10426 
914.2022.2065014 
[99] Muhammad R, Maurotto A, Roy A, Silberschmidt VV (2012) Hot ultrasonically 
assisted turning of β-Ti alloy. Procedia CIRP 1:336–341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
procir.2012.04.060 
[100] Feyzi T, Safavi SM (2013) Improving machinability of Inconel 718 with a new 
hybrid machining technique. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 66:1025–1030. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00170-012-4386-7  
 
 
 
Utilization of ultrasonic vibration and laser energies 287 
[101] Sofuoğlu MA, Çakır FH, Gürgen S, et al. (2018) Numerical investigation of hot 
ultrasonic assisted turning of aviation alloys. J Brazilian Soc Mech Sci Eng 40:1–12. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40430-018-1037-4 
[102] Deswal N, Kant 	R (2023) Radial direction ultrasonic-vibration and laser 
assisted turning of Al3003 alloy. Mater Res Express 10:044004. https://doi. 
org/10.1088/2053-1591/acce24 
[103] Deswal N, Kant R (2022) Synergistic effect of ultrasonic vibration and laser energy 
during hybrid turning operation in magnesium alloy. Int J Adv Manuf Technol 
121:857–876. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-022-09384-w 
[104] Deswal N, Kant R (2023) Machinability and surface integrity analysis of magnesium 
AZ31B alloy during laser assisted turning. J Manuf Process 101:527–545. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.jmapro.2023.06.022 
[105] Deswal N, Kant R (2022) Surface integrity analysis of aluminum 3003 alloy during 
ultrasonic-vibration-laser assisted turning. Proc Inst Mech Eng Part B J Eng Manuf 
00:1–12. https://doi.org/10.1177/09544054231178951 11
 
Chapter 11
 
Machining performance 
and optimization of process 
parameters of monel alloy 
400 using ECM process 
P. Sudhakar Rao, Akhilesh Sinha, Shashwath G. Patil, 
Ravi Kant and Sri Phani Sushma 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
Electrochemical machining (ECM) is a novel machining technique based on elec￾trochemistry. ECM is commonly employed in sectors where different components 
that are hard to cut and where complicated contours are required. A direct current 
(DC) (5–30 volt) voltage is provided throughout the inter-electrode gap across the 
pre-shaped electrode tool and the job material. Electrolyte moves quickly across 
the IEG, and typical density of current is about 20–200 A/cm 2
. The electrochemi￾cal characteristics of metal, electrolytic properties, and electric voltage/current 
provided all influence the anode dissolution that is determined by Faraday’s equa￾tions of electrolysis. ECM produces a nearly similar imprint of the tool electrode 
upon that work item [1–3]. 
ECM clearly outperforms other traditional machining methods in terms of 
application irrespective of work hardness, greater MRR, reduced tool wear, 
plane and brilliant surface, and manufacturing of parts with complicated struc￾tures having crack-free and stress-free surfaces [4, 5]. High residual stresses 
are created during conventional machining with Monel 400 alloys, resulting in 
a quick hardening which slows down the operation and causes tool electrode 
failure. As a result, machining these metals using ordinary machine tools is 
extremely challenging. On the other hand, we could compare machines almost 
with every alloy made with specific hardness or tensile strength. As a result, it 
may be a profitable option to machine Monel alloys, and its importance may 
grow in future. The goal here is to create comprehensive computational equa￾tions for relating interactive as well as higher-order effects of different pro￾cess variables, including applied voltage (V), electrolyte concentration (EC), 
and inter-electrode gap (IEG), in relation to key machining parameters such as 
material removal rate (MRR), tool wear rate (TWR) as well as surface rough￾ness (SR). This is aimed at maximizing the potential of the ECM process [6, 7]. 
To organize and analyse the studies, response surface methodology (RSM) is 
used. The goal of employing RSM is not only to study the response across the 
entire factor space, but also to identify the area of concern in which response 
achieves an optimal or near-optimal value [8–10]. 
288 DOI: 10.1201/9781032703046-11  
 
 
 
 
Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 289 
11.2 CURRENT STATUS OF RESEARCH 
Haisch et al. [11]: Anodic metal dissoluteness for steel-100Cr6 was considered in 
aqueous NaNO3 as well as NaCl solutions. Flow of passage investigations were 
conducted with a large density of current up to 70 A/cm2
. Unsolvable carbide 
particles enhanced apparent current efficiency for NaCl by more than 100% and 
in NaNO3 by more than 67%. Munda and Bhattacharyya [12]: This paper aimed 
to obtain an overall mathematical prototype using for relating the collective and 
high-order factors of various machining variables such as applied voltage pulse 
off/on ratio, electrolyte concentration, and frequency of voltage, as well as fre￾quency of tool vibration upon most significant machining standards, namely the 
MRR as well as overcut. Santhi et al. [13]: Their objective was to develop a revo￾lutionary method for optimizing titanium alloy process parameters (Ti6Al4V). 
Design, strategy, and method—A desire function study, the fuzzy set concept, and 
order preference method through similarity to ideal solution methods were used 
in order to construct ECM processing parameters for titanium alloys. Bahre et al. 
[14]: The feasibility of precision electrochemical machining (PECM) for lamellar 
cast iron machining was investigated in terms of machinability with NaNO3 as 
the electrolyte and stainless steel as the tool material. The accuracy of created 
geometries, as well as the possibility of producing certain surface properties, was 
investigated in this study. Muthukumar et al. [15]: The core composite design 
technique was used in this experiment. After analysing 30 tests, a mathematical 
model was created to connect the machining factors with the rate of cut (ROC). 
The relevant coefficients were calculated using ANOVA with a 5% significance 
level. Kalaimathi et al. [16]: Different process parameters affect machining out￾comes in terms of MRR and surface roughness (SR) for Monel 400 alloy. MRR 
and SR were improved by using an electrolyte concentration of 15 g/l and also an 
IEG of 0.4 mm. ANOVA was used to evaluate the results. Tiwari et al. [17] 
attempted to build a mathematical prototype for characteristics like MRR and SR 
for ECM over EN 19 steel using regression analysis. The analysis of variance was 
utilized to evaluate the sufficiency of developed prototypes. Krishnamurthy et al. 
[18]: MRR was discovered to be very important in ECM, and employing the best 
ECM process parameters typically save operating, tool, and maintenance costs 
while generating higher-accuracy products. This paper explored the effect and 
direct development of several process factors for titanium ECM. Li et al. [19]: 
A 10% sodium nitrate slurry was employed in the ECM process to make a number 
of holes in a titanium alloy sheet. In order to understand the electric characteris￾tics of titanium alloy (Ti 6Al 4V) within a 10% NaNO3 electrolyte, a current 
efficiency graph that included a polarization graph of the alloy was generated. 
Chen et al. [20]: In this study, orthogonal experiments were performed to test 
Ti60 ECM in order to regulate the impacts of different electrochemical method 
factors on SR. The most relevant characteristic was found to be the frequency of 
a voltage source. It has been observed that using correctly adjusted ECM settings 
may greatly reduce a work item’s surface roughness. Rao et al. [21]: Based on a  
 
290 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
combination of the ECM process with a high MRR and a standard honing process 
that generates a controlled smooth surface finish, electrochemical honing was 
investigated as the maximum precise machining technology discovered for 
machining gears and cylinders. Jeykrishnan et al. [22]: This study focuses on the 
application of three critical factors in the vehicle industry: current, voltage, and 
electrolyte concentration. As a result, updated methods must be implemented to 
achieve the best results. Soundrapandian et al. [23]: The microscopic system was 
used in their research to measure overcut and conicity for drilled holes, and a 
profilometer was utilized to analyse the SR of the machined region to discover 
the optimal machine variable. ANOVA was used to evaluate the impact of each 
variable on MRR, overcut, and drilled hole circularity. Geethapriyan et al. [24]: 
In his work, the researchers used the Taguchi–Grey relational analysis technique 
to discover the relevance of various process factors and to examine the variables 
for the machining of titanium. Sharma et al. [25]: The outcomes of process vari￾ables like applied voltage, IEG, electrolyte concentration and electrolyte flow 
upon MRR and radial overcut were examined. A Taguchi (orthogonal array)­
based approach was used to optimize several input parameters and final responses 
in ECM. Kumar [26]: ECM is a novel machining technique that employs Fara￾day’s law to eliminate metal from a workpiece. Titanium alloys are employed in 
the manufacture of jet engines as well as other aerospace components. In this 
review study, the process properties of ECM, like MRR, surface finish, and over￾cut, were examined when titanium alloy was deposited in different electrolytes. 
Khan et al. [27] sought to improve ECM method variables using a combination 
comprising SS 316 (workpiece) and copper as a tool (tool material). A total of 27 
tests were performed to assess the effect of ECM variables like electrolyte con￾centration, applied voltage, and current, as well as the tool’s feed rate upon the 
work’s MRR and SR. Khan et al. [28]: Other than the mechanical qualities of 
metal, it was discovered that thermal properties play a more important role; the 
forces created in this technique are modest, and thus burrs were not obtained. 
Khan et al. [29] explored the possibility of utilizing jatropha oil as a source of 
dielectric medium to replace kerosene oil, which is environmentally benign. 
Other dielectric fluids, such as hydrocarbons, have a negative effect on environ￾ment. Khan et al. [30]: Micro-machining was investigated, and combining micro￾EDM and laser produced a decrease in machining time. They also discovered that 
a mixture of ultrasonic machining and the EDM process is commonly employed. 
Yadav et al. [31]: The researchers examined multi-objective optimization of pro￾cess variables using principal component examination and grey relational exami￾nation to improve metal removal and to minimize roughness of Ti 6Al 4V. Daniel 
et al. [32]: In this study, the researchers used a variety of SiC combinations based 
on their weight percentage and particle size. In addition, a preset weight propor￾tion of molybdenum disulphide was used. The aluminium composite was created 
by stir casting. Aluminium was fused using silicon carbide elements sized 10, 20, 
and 40 µm that are 5%, 10%, and 15% by weight, accordingly, and 2% molybde￾num disulphide. A Taguchi L-27 array was utilized to achieve the desired target  
 
 
Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 291 
levels and investigate the influence of ECM parameters on MRR and SR. Debta 
et al. [33] investigated the most intriguing of magnesium alloys, AZ91D (90% 
magnesium), because of its remarkable toughness, high strength-to-weight ratio, 
and exceptional resistance to environmental rust. It can also be cast well, enabling 
it to be employed in the automobile and aerospace sectors. Kumar et al. [34] 
examined the behaviour of Incoloy during EDM machining, with response vari￾ables based on input power, pulse on/off duration, and voltage applied. They also 
demonstrated that variable optimization in EDM may be accomplished by com￾bining dielectric fluid with powder. Sahu et al. [35] discovered variable optimiza￾tion in the EDM process. Because ANOVA was applied, optimal findings were 
achieved. Suitable optimization was also used to optimize machining. Thakur 
et al. [36] considered the use of graphite tool electrodes in suitable dielectric 
media for the machining of titanium alloy. Machining performance was designed 
using appropriate methodologies for performance evaluation. Following adequate 
testing in the EDM process, optimal variables were determined. Sharma et al. 
[37] examined electrochemical machining of titanium alloy using various electro￾lytes and a Cu tool in their experimental study. The electrolytes KCl, NaNO3, and 
NaCl were employed. Gobikrishnan et al. [38]: One of the most important aspects 
of removing MRR was determining electrolyte content. As input variables, volt￾age, current, and electrolyte concentration were used. The output parameters 
were obtained using MRR. In their study, the value of the trial was based on the 
orthogonal array of Taguchi’s technique. Ramana et al. [39]: This study focused 
on the ability to machine nickel A286 by utilizing PVD-coated materials over a 
lengthy period. The machining performance of nickel A286 was evaluated utiliz￾ing experimental tests that adjusted the speed of cutting and depth of cut, as well 
as tool electrode feed rate with taking chip shape, flank wear rate, and surface 
roughness into consideration. Jerin et al. [40]: Special materials, like steel 
12X18H10T, can withstand extreme temperatures while retaining their inherent 
properties. In order to widen its usefulness, this study evaluated its machining 
capabilities using the ECM technique for surface finishing. Thangamani et al. 
[41]: This research investigated how three different NaCl-based electrolytes 
affect the cutting of alloy Ti 6Al 4V, and the Taguchi model of experimentation 
was used to find features on the basis of electro chemical micro machining 
(ECMM) constraints such as voltage, electrolyte concentration, frequency of 
voltage, and duty cycle. Khan et al. [42] examined how vegetable oil contributes 
to sustain EDM machining and prevent environmental harm, although no such 
adjustment was necessary to support other types of biodegradable lubricants. 
Wasif et al. [43]: Al 5454 alloys, which are widely used in industrial works to 
create tool dies, moulds, blocks for engine, aviation parts, and a range of other 
components, were studied. Nagarajan et al. [44]: In this work, the researchers 
discovered that by varying the voltage (ranging from 11 to 15 volts), the electro￾lyte flow rate (from 1 to 3.0 L/min), and the electrolyte concentration (ranging 
from 120 to 190 g/l), they could utilize algorithms such as MFO, GWO, and PSO 
to determine key parameters like MRR and the presence of nickel in the sludge.  
 
 
 
 
292 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Vengatajalapathi et al. [45]: In this work, nickel hydroxide was cleaned from 
sludge in an environmentally friendly way during Monel 400 ECM. Filter materi￾als included powdered coconut shell and wood dust. RSM’s central composite 
design (CCD) was used for experiments. Singh et al. [46]: In this study, a higher 
MRR was obtained with a electrolyte concentration of 200 g/l and feed rate of 
about 18 micron/min. To obtain increased MRR with regulated input settings, a 
little expenditure of tool life was incurred. 
11.3 EXPERIMENTAL METHODOLOGY 
Pilot experiments conducted utilizing the one factor at a time (OFAT) technique 
aided in providing appropriate ranges of input variables for the ECM machine. 
Before starting the machining, a certain layer of input variables is chosen and an 
associated range is established, accompanied by a systematic layout of the experi￾mentation performance. An accurate evaluation of variables for input, as shown in 
Table 11.1, and a proper setting of their ranges are essential for obtaining appropri￾ate results. This allows for a reduction in the required number of performance tests 
during the machining process. This basic experiment served as a platform for future 
investigation [47, 48]. As a result, the OFAT approach determines the input param￾eters to be employed as well as the optimal range of primary experiments. The 
multiple pieces of Monel alloy 400 with dimensions of 25 mm × 25 mm × 5 mm 
depicted in Figure 11.1 are used for pilot and experimental operations. The notable 
ranges observed are as follows. To develop the design of experiment, the model is 
created utilizing the three stages of experiment design based on the Box–Behnken 
design (BBD) approach. As the electrode, copper is the most appropriate metal to 
use. The electrode has a diameter of 3 mm and a length of 60 mm, as illustrated in 
Figure 11.2. A surface roughness tester is utilized to assess the integrity of surface. 
MRR as well as TWR are computed by the weight change between them (initial 
weight – final weight). 
11.4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
This study was carried out with the usage of copper tool and the RSM-based 
BBD method approach. Three levels of each input variable were chosen for testing 
Table 11.1 Ranges fixed for main experiment based on pilot experiment 
S. No. Parameter Level (–1) Level (0) Level (+1) 
1. Voltage 15 17 19 
2. Electrolyte conc. 40 50 60 
3. IEG 0.15 0.20 0.25 Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 293 
Figure 11.1 Machined workpiece. 
Figure 11.2 Copper tool. 
performance by running every run for 10 minutes, and the outcomes are displayed 
in Table 11.2. The weight difference between the MRR and TWR was calculated 
after each experimental run. Each experimental run includes three levels of param￾eter values for analysis and optimization [49, 50].  
294 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 11.2 Experimental results 
Parameter 1 Parameter 2 Parameter 3 Response 1 Response 2 Response 3 
Std Run Applied Electrolyte IEG MRR TWR SR 
voltage conc. 
volts g/l mm mm3
/minute mm3
/minute micro meter 
8 1 19 50 0.25 6.8613 0.1858 1.51 
14 2 17 50 0.2 3.56 0.0669 3.44 
9 3 17 40 0.15 2.4545 0.0732 3.85 
4 4 19 60 0.2 4.242 0.0389 4.06 
17 5 17 50 0.2 2.6386 0.0468 3.42 
10 6 17 60 0.15 3.01 0.0145 4.28 
6 7 19 50 0.15 3.61 0.029 3.2 
16 8 17 50 0.2 3.5534 0.01 3.4 
12 9 17 60 0.25 5.3034 0.1101 3.229 
7 10 15 50 0.25 5.79 0.0569 2.03 
1 11 15 40 0.2 4.7545 0.0111 3.35 
3 12 15 60 0.2 2.52 0.0256 4.28 
15 13 17 50 0.2 4.1727 0.0044 3.05 
2 14 19 40 0.2 3.54 0.0234 4.006 
11 15 17 40 0.25 6.51 0.0322 2.529 
13 16 17 50 0.2 3.2295 0.0145 3.41 
5 17 15 50 0.15 2.625 0.114 2.896 
11.4.1 Analysis and optimization for MRR,TWR, and SR 
In Table 11.3, an F-value of 13.71 shows that the model looks significant. A large 
F-value is might occur due to noise just 0.12% of the time. Significant model terms 
have p-values less than 0.0500. In this situation, C, AB, and C2 are critical model 
variables. Values greater than 0.1000 indicate that model terms are insignificant. 
If a model has a large number of insignificant model terms, model reduction may 
improve it. Lack of fit has an F-value of 0.42, indicating that it is not significant in 
comparison to pure error. Noise has a 74.66% chance of causing significant lack 
of fit F-value. 
Table 11.4 showing an F-value of 8.09 suggests that the model seems significant. 
Only 0.58% of the time will an F-value this large be caused by noise. Significant 
model terms have p-values less than 0.0500. In this situation, crucial model terms 
include C, AC, BC, and C2
. Values greater than 0.1000 indicate that model terms 
were insignificant. If a model has a large number of insignificant model terms, model 
reduction may improve it. The F-value for lack of fit is 0.14, indicating that the lack 
of fit is small in contrast to the pure error. Noise has a 93.00% risk of causing a 
significant lack of fit F-value. 
Table 11.5 showing an F-value of 40.69 suggests that the model is significant. 
A large F-value might occur due to noise just 0.01% of the time. Significant model Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 295 
Table 11.3 ANOVA for toolwear rate 
Source Sum of df Mean square F-value p-value 
squares value 
Model type 29.05 9 3.23 13.71 0.0012 significant 
A-Applied voltage 0.8216 1 0.8216 3.49 0.1039 
B-electrolyte conc. 0.5960 1 0.5960 2.53 0.1556 
C-IEG 20.37 1 20.37 86.53 < 0.0001 
AB 2.16 1 2.16 9.16 0.0192 
AC 0.0019 1 0.0019 0.0079 0.9316 
BC 0.7762 1 0.7762 3.30 0.1122 
A² 0.5693 1 0.5693 2.42 0.1639 
B² 0.0050 1 0.0050 0.0212 0.8884 
C² 3.59 1 3.59 15.24 0.0059 
Residuals 1.65 7 0.2354 
Lack of fit 0.3975 3 0.1325 0.4239 0.7466 not significant 
Pure errors 1.25 4 0.3126 
Total Cor 30.69 16 
Table 11.4 ANOVA for material removal rate 
Source Sum of df Mean F-value p-value 
squares square 
Model type 0.0337 9 0.0037 8.09 0.0058 significant 
A-Applied voltage 0.0006 1 0.0006 1.30 0.2909 
B-electrolyte conc. 0.0003 1 0.0003 0.6539 0.4453 
C-IEG 0.0030 1 0.0030 6.43 0.0389 
AB 2.500E-07 1 2.500E-07 0.0005 0.9821 
AC 0.0114 1 0.0114 24.72 0.0016 
BC 0.0047 1 0.0047 10.08 0.0156 
A² 0.0013 1 0.0013 2.81 0.1375 
B² 0.0019 1 0.0019 4.15 0.0812 
C² 0.0107 1 0.0107 23.05 0.0020 
Residuals 0.0032 7 0.0005 
Lack of fit 0.0003 3 0.0001 0.1415 0.9300 not significant 
Pure errors 0.0029 4 0.0007 
Total Cor 0.0369 16 
terms have p-values less than 0.0500. In this situation, the model variables B, C, 
AB, AC, A2
, B2
, and C2
 are critical. Values greater than 0.1000 indicate that the 
model terms are insignificant. If a model has a large number of insignificant model 
terms, model reduction may improve it. The F-value for lack of fit is 0.73, indicat￾ing that the lack of fit is negligible in contrast to the pure error. Noise has a 58.34% 
risk of causing a significant lack of fit F-value.  
296 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Table 11.5 ANOVA for surface roughness 
Source 
Model 
A-voltage 
B-electrolyte 
concentration 
C-IEG 
AB 
AC 
BC 
A² 
B² 
C² 
Residuals 
Lack of fit 
Pure errors 
Total Cor 
Sum of 
squares 
8.84 
0.0061 
0.5586 
3.04 
0.1918 
0.1697 
0.0182 
0.2456 
2.84 
2.03 
0.1690 
0.0600 
0.1089 
9.01 
df 
9 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
7 
3 
4 
16 
Mean 
square 
0.9822 
0.0061 
0.5586 
3.04 
0.1918 
0.1697 
0.0182 
0.2456 
2.84 
2.03 
0.0241 
0.0200 
0.0272 
F-value 
40.69 
0.2507 
23.14 
125.77 
7.95 
7.03 
0.7551 
10.17 
117.73 
83.90 
0.7349 
p-value 
< 0.0001 
0.6320 
0.0019 
< 0.0001 
0.0258 
0.0328 
0.4137 
0.0153 
< 0.0001 
< 0.0001 
0.5834 
significant 
not significant 
11.4.2 Mathematical modelling and regression analysis 
MRR = 59.2866 + −4.84361 * voltage + −0.440684 * electrolyte conc. + 
−75.3891 * IEG + 0.0367062 *voltage*electrolyte conc. + 0.21575 * voltage*IEG + 
−0.88105 * electrolyte conc.*IEG + 0.0919231 * voltage2
 + −0.000344075 * elec￾trolyte conc2
 + 369.217 * IEG2 
The real equation is derived after doing the experiment; therefore, the metal 
removal rate is significantly dependent on the main voltage. 
TWR = 3.90008 + −0.25264 * voltage + 0.00809 * electrolyte conc. + −20.1724 * 
IEG + 1.2505 * voltage*electrolyte conc. + 0.53475 * voltage*IEG+ 0.0683 * 
electrolyte conc.*IEG + 0.00439437 * voltage2
 + −0.000213475 * electrolyte 
conc.2
 + 20.131 * IEG2 
Because the tool wear rate is significantly dependent on the voltage, the follow￾ing real equation was generated while completing the experiment. 
SR = −18.7154 + 3.026 * voltage + −0.635925 * electrolyte conc. + 126.91 * 
IEG + −0.01095 * voltage*electrolyte conc. + −2.06 * AC + 0.135 * electrolyte 
conc.*IEG + −0.060375 * voltage2
 + 0.008215 * electrolyte conc.2
 + −277.4 * IEG2 
The real equation is derived after doing the experiment, so the surface rough￾ness is significantly dependant on the voltage. 
Figure 11.3 depicts the projected vs real value of material removal rate where 
the graph evidently illustrates that the real model of MRR established differs from 
theoretical values predicted during the experimental performance, which can be 
easily checked by examining the spread of the true values to the predict line. 
Figure 11.4 depicts the expected vs the real value of the outcome parameter, 
which is the amount of tool wear rate. The graph clearly illustrates that the real Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 297
 
Figure 11.3 Predicted vs actual values of material removal rate. 
Figure 11.4 Predicted vs actual value of tool wear rate. 298 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
model of tool wear rate created is next to and near to the expected theoretical val￾ues obtained during the experimental performance, which can be easily checked 
by examining the spread of the true values to the expected actual line. 
Figure 11.5 depicts the expected vs experimental result of surface integrity. 
This graph clearly illustrates that the real model of surface roughness established 
is very near to the expected theoretical values obtained during the experimental 
performance, which can be readily checked by looking at the dispersion of the real 
values to the estimated actual line. 
Figure 11.6 displays a perturbation graph for MRR, which may be used to 
compare the effect on various variables in an appropriate point position in the 
design area. The output is distinguished by the variation of each element within 
its assigned holdings. A strong inclination in the characteristic curve indicates that 
the reaction is sensitive to the output parameter factor MRR. Closeness to the flat 
line indicates insensitivity to change upon that particular element. 
Perturbation plot for rate of tool wear shown in Figure 11.7 will aid in 
comparing the effect on various factors in an appropriate point position in 
the design region. Variation of each element within its assigned holdings and 
other static factors characterizes the result. A strong inclination in the slope 
indicates that the reaction is sensitive to the specified output variable electrode 
wear rate. Closeness to the flat line indicates insensitivity to change upon that 
particular element. 
Figure 11.5 Predicted vs actual value of the surface roughness. Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 299
 
Figure 11.6 Perturbation graph for the material removal rate. 
Figure 11.7 Perturbation graph of tool wear rate.  
 
 
300 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
Figure 11.8 depicts a perturbation plot for surface roughness, which will aid 
in assessing the effect on various factors in a suitable point position in the design 
area. The outcome is defined by altering each element within its specified limita￾tions. A strong inclination in the characteristic curve indicates that the reaction is 
sensitive to the output variable factor surface roughness. Closeness to the flat line 
indicates insensitivity to change upon that particular element. 
11.4.3 Multiresponse optimization 
Design Expert 13 software can perform multiple response optimization. The sug￾gested model has three response variables and three input parameters, which are 
listed in Table 11.6. The instance illustrates how to optimize all output variables by 
evaluating each outcome and optimizing the variables. The optimization produced 
from the numeric report comprises Tables 11.6 and 11.7, the first of which pres￾ents a description of the constraints utilized to construct the next table of optimal 
process solutions. 
The optimal value of the different parameters achieved during the electrochemi￾cal machining of Monel 400 alloy for output parameters were voltage = 15 volts, 
electrolyte concentration = 41.54 g/l, and IEG = 0.25 by machining it with a cop￾per tool. 
Figure 11.8 Perturbation graph for the surface roughness.  
 
Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 301 
Table 11.6 Optimization of parameters 
Name Aim Lower Upper Lower Upper Significance 
limit limit weight weight 
A: applied voltage In range 15 19 1 1 3 
B: electrolyte conc. In range 40 60 1 1 3 
C: IEG In range 0.15 0.25 1 1 3 
Material removal rate To maximize 2.4545 6.8613 1 1 3 
Tool wear rate To decrease 0.0044 0.1858 1 1 3 
Surface roughness To decrease 1.51 4.28 1 1 3 
Table 11.7 Optimized results 
S. No. Voltage (V) Electrolyte IEG MRR (mm3/ TWR (mm3/ SR(μm) Desirability 
conc.(gm/l) minute) minute) 
1. 15 41.54 0.25 7.175 0.004 2.093 0.924 
11.5 CONCLUSIONS 
The Box–Behnken design is utilized at three levels in order to build mathematical 
models for calculating the surface integrity factor of Monel alloy 400. The results 
were synthesized using a variety of multiple objective optimization techniques. 
The conclusions drawn are to be achieved: 
•	 Influential factors for output results are as follows: applied voltage, electro￾lyte concentration, and IEG. 
•	 Surface roughness was more noticeable at substantially higher voltages. The 
anticipated optimal value for surface roughness is 2.093 µm. 
•	 It was discovered that a voltage of 15 volts, an electrolyte concentration 
of 41.54 g/l, and an IEG of 0.25 mm worked well for machining. Surface 
roughness of 2.093 m, material removal rate of 7.175 mm3
/min, and tool 
wear rate of 0.004 mm3
/min were measured as reaction metrics. 
•	 On the Monel alloy 400, the copper tool produced the best reaction results. 
Terminology 
ANOVA Analysis of variance 
BBD Box–Behnken design 
CCD Central composite design 
ECM Electrochemical machining 
EDX Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy 
GWO Grey wolf optimizer 
IEG Inter-electrode gap 
MFO Moth-flame optimization  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
302 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
MRR Material removal rate
 
RSM Response surface methodology
 
SR Surface roughness
 
PECM Precision electrochemical machining
 
TWR Tool wear rate
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Fortana, M.G., 1986. Corrosion Engineering. McGraw-Hill. 
[2] Moarrefzadeh, A., 2011. Finite element simulation of dimensional limitation of elec￾tro chemical machining (ECM) process. International Journal of Multidisciplinary 
Sciences and Engineering, 2, pp. 39–43. 
[3] McGeough, J.A., 1974. Principles of Electrochemical Machining. Chapman & Hall. 
[4] Tam, S.C., Loh, N.L., Mah, C.P.A. and Loh, N.H., 1992. Electrochemical polishing of 
biomedical titanium orifice rings. Journal of Materials Processing Technology, 35(1), 
pp. 83–91. 
[5] Kumar, J., Mandal, S. and Mahato, N., 1999. Study of electro chemical machining 
etching effect on surface roughness and variation with chemical etching process, 
07–09 Dec 2017, COPEN 2017, IIT Madras, pp. 646–649. 
[6] Verma, N.K., 2013. Experimental investigation of process parameters in electrochem￾ical machining (Doctoral dissertation), Indian institute of technology, IIT Mandi, HP. 
[7] Muttamara, A. and Purktong, S., 2010. Improving the quality of groove in electro 
chemical machining (ECM) processed by Taguchi method. First TSME International 
Conference on Mechanical Engineering, The International Journal of Advanced 
Manufacturing Technology, 35(7), pp. 821–832.. 
[8] Munda, J. and Bhattacharyya, B., 2008. Investigation into electrochemical microma￾chining (EMM) through response surface methodology based approach. The Interna￾tional Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 35(7), pp. 821–832. 
[9] Selvakumar, G., Sarkar, S. and Mitra, S., 2012. Experimental investigation on die 
corner accuracy for wire electrical discharge machining of Monel 400 alloy. Pro￾ceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering 
Manufacture, 226(10), pp. 1694–1704. 
[10] Parida, A.K. and Maity, K., 2018. Comparison the machinability of Inconel 718, Inco￾nel 625 and Monel 400 in hot turning operation. Engineering Science and Technol￾ogy: An International Journal, 21(3), pp. 364–370. 
[11] Haisch, T., Mittemeijer, E. and Schultze, J.W., 2001. Electrochemical machining of 
the steel 100Cr6 in aqueous NaCl and NaNO3 solutions: Microstructure of surface 
films formed by carbides. Electrochimica Acta, 47(1–2), pp. 235–241. 
[12] Munda, J. and Bhattacharyya, B., 2008. Investigation into electrochemical microma￾chining (EMM) through response surface methodology based approach. The Interna￾tional Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, 35(7), pp. 821–832. 
[13] Santhi, M., Ravikumar, R. and Jeyapaul, R., 2013. Optimization of process parameters 
in electro chemical machining (ECM) using DFA-fuzzy set theory-TOPSIS for tita￾nium alloy. Multidiscipline Modeling in Materials and Structures 9(2), pp. 243–255. 
[14] Bähre, D., Weber, O. and Rebschläger, A., 2013. Investigation on pulse electrochemi￾cal machining characteristics of lamellar cast iron using a response surface methodol￾ogy-based approach. Procedia CIRP, 6, pp. 362–367.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 303 
[15] Muthukumar, V., Rajesh, N., Venkatasamy, R., Sureshbabu, A. and Senthilkumar, N., 2014. 
Mathematical modeling for radial overcut on electrical discharge machining of Incoloy 
800 by response surface methodology. Procedia Materials Science, 6, pp. 1674–1682. 
[16] Kalaimathi, M., Venkatachalam, G. and Sivakumar, M., 2014. Experimental inves￾tigations on the electrochemical machining characteristics of Monel 400 alloys and 
optimization of process parameters. Jordan Journal of Mechanical & Industrial Engi￾neering, 8(3), pp. 30–36. 
[17] Tiwari, A., Mandal, A. and Kumar, K., 2015. Multi-objective optimization of electro￾chemical machining by non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm. Materials Today: 
Proceedings, 2(4–5), pp. 2569–2575. 
[18] Krishnamurthy, V.P., Sivakumar, E.R. and Manikandan, M., 2015. Optimization of 
machining parameters of titanium alloy grade 2 in ECM by RSM method. South 
Asian Journal of Engineering and Technology, 22, pp. 256–267. 
[19] Li, H., Gao, C., Wang, G., Qu, N. and Zhu, D., 2016. A study of electrochemical 
machining of Ti-6Al-4V in NaNO3 solution. Scientific Reports, 6(1), pp. 1–11. 
[20] Chen, X., Xu, Z., Zhu, D., Fang, Z. and Zhu, D., 2016. Experimental research on elec￾trochemical machining of titanium alloy Ti60 for a blisk. Chinese Journal of Aero￾nautics, 29(1), pp. 274–282. 
[21] Rao, P.S., Jain, P.K. and Dwivedi, D.K., 2015. Electro chemical honing (ECH) of exter￾nal cylindrical surfaces of titanium alloys. Procedia Engineering, 100, pp. 936–945. 
[22] Jeykrishnan, J., Ramnath, B.V., Elanchezhian, C. and Akilesh, S., 2017. Optimization 
of process parameters in electro-chemical machining (ECM) of D3 die steels using 
Taguchi technique. Materials Today: Proceedings, 4(8), pp. 7884–7891. 
[23] Soundrapandian, E., Tajdeen, A. and Chari, K.K.B.A., 2017. Experimental study of elec￾trochemical micro machining on titanium (Ti-6Al-4V) Alloy. In Proceedings of 10th 
International Conference on Precision, Meso, Micro and Nano Engineering (copen 10), 
COPEN 2017, IIT Madras, pp. 949–952. 
[24] Geethapriyan, T., Kalaichelvan, K., Muthuramalingam, T. and Rajadurai, A., 2018. 
Performance analysis of process parameters on machining α–β titanium alloy in elec￾trochemical micromachining process. Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical 
Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture, 232(9), pp. 1577–1589. 
[25] Sharma, L.K., Sharma, S., Dubey, Y. and Parwani, L., 2019. Taguchi method approach 
for multi factor optimization of S1 tool steel in electrochemical machining. Interna￾tional Journal of Research and Analytical Reviews (IJRAR), 6(2), pp. 403–409. 
[26] Kumar, K.K. and Prasanna, J., 2019. A study on the electrochemical machining per￾formance of titanium alloy in different electrolytes—a review. International Journal 
of Emerging Technologies and Innovative Research, 5, pp. 73–75. 
[27] Khan, I.A., Rani, M., Deb, R.K. and Bundel, B.R., 2019. Effect on material removal 
rate and surface finish in ECM process when machining stainless steelV316 with Cu 
electrode. International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering, 8(4). 
[28] Khan, M.Y. and Rao, P.S., 2019. Electrical discharge machining: Vital to manufactur￾ing industries. International Journal of Innovative Technology and Exploring Engi￾neering, 8(11), pp. 1696–1701. 
[29] Khan, M.Y., Rao, P.S. and Pabla, B.S., 2020. Investigations on the feasibility of Jatro￾pha curcas oil based biodiesel for sustainable dielectric fluid in EDM process. Materi￾als Today: Proceedings, 26, pp. 335–340. 
[30] Khan, M.Y., Rao, P.S. and Pabla, B.S., 2020. Review of electrical discharge machin￾ing process with nanopowder and CNT mixed dielectric fluid. In Proceedings of 4th  
 
 
 
 
 
304 Modern Materials and Manufacturing Techniques 
international online multidisciplinary research conference (IOMRC‑2020), Hyder￾abad, October, Vol. 23. 
[31] Yadav, S.K. and Yadav, S.K.S., 2020. Multi-objective optimization of electrochemi￾cal cut-off grinding process of Ti-6Al-4V using PCA based grey relational analysis. 
Materials Today: Proceedings, 22, pp. 3089–3099. 
[32] Daniel, S.A.A., Ananth, S.V., Parthiban, A. and Sivaganesan, S., 2020. Optimization 
of machining parameters in electro chemical machining of Al5059/SiC/MoS2 com￾posites using Taguchi method. Materials Today: Proceedings, 21, pp. 738–743. 
[33] Debta, M.K., Mishra, R. and Masanta, M., 2020. Experimental investigation on the 
machining performance of AZ91D (90% Mg) alloy by wire-cut EDM. Materials 
Today: Proceedings, 33, pp. 5557–5560. 
[34] Kumar, N. and Rao, P.S., 2019. Analysis and optimization of process parameters dur￾ing electric discharge machining of Incoloy 800: A review. International Journal of 
Scientific & Technology Research, IJSTR, Volume 9, Issue 02, February 2020, pp. 
6002–6005. 
[35] Sahu, P.K. and Rao, P.S., 2019. A review on parametric investigation and improve￾ment of electrical discharge machining process. International Journal for Research 
in Applied Science & Engineering Technology (IJRASET), Volume 8 Issue XI Nov 
2020, pp. 582–585. 
[36] Thakur, A., Rao, P.S. and Khan, M.Y., 2021. Study and optimization of surface rough￾ness parameter during electrical discharge machining of titanium alloy (Ti-6246). 
Materials Today: Proceedings, 44, pp. 838–847. 
[37] Sharma, V., Rao, P.S., Kumar, H. and Khan, M.Y., 2021. An experimental investiga￾tion ECM of titanium 6AL-4V-ELI alloy with different electrolytes, Journal of Uni￾versity of Shanghai for Science and Technology, JUSST, 23(2), pp. 292–303. 
[38] Gobikrishnan, U., Suresh, P. and Kumaravel, P., 2021. Drilling investigations on Inc￾onel alloy 625 material of material removal rate using micro electrochemical machin￾ing. Materials Today: Proceedings, 37, pp. 1629–1633. 
[39] Ramana, M.V., Rao, G.K.M., Sagar, B., Panthangi, R.K. and Kumar, B.R.R., 2021. 
Optimization of surface roughness and tool wear in sustainable dry turning of iron 
based Nickel A286 alloy using Taguchi’s method. Cleaner Engineering and Technol￾ogy, 2, pp. 100–114. 
[40] Jerin, A. and Karunakaran, K., 2021. Machinability investigation and optimizing 
process parameters in ECM of stainless steel − 12X18H10T for minimizing surface 
roughness. Materials Today: Proceedings. Volume 81, Part 2, 2023, pp. 443–448. 
[41] Thangamani, G., Thangaraj, M., Moiduddin, K., Mian, S.H., Alkhalefah, H. and 
Umer, U., 2021. Performance analysis of electrochemical micro machining of 
titanium (Ti-6Al-4V) alloy under different electrolytes concentrations. Metals, 
11(2), p. 247. 
[42] Khan, M.Y., Rao, P.S. and Pabla, B.S. 2022. Biodiesel as dielectric fluid for elec￾trical discharge machining-A. Turkish Journal of Physiotherapy and Rehabilita￾tion, 32, p. 3. 
[43] Wasif, M., Khan, Y.A., Zulqarnain, A. and Iqbal, S.A., 2022. Analysis and optimiza￾tion of wire electro-discharge machining process parameters for the efficient cutting 
of Aluminum 5454 alloy. Alexandria Engineering Journal, 61(8), pp. 6191–6203. 
[44] Nagarajan, V., Solaiyappan, A., Mahalingam, S.K., Nagarajan, L., Salunkhe, S., Nasr, 
E.A., Shanmugam, R. and Hussein, H.M.A.M., 2022. Meta-heuristic technique-based  
Machining performance and optimization of monel alloy 400 305 
parametric optimization for electrochemical machining of Monel 400 alloys to inves￾tigate the material removal rate and the sludge. Applied Sciences, 12(6), p. 2793. 
[45] Vengatajalapathi, N., Ayyappan, S. and Rajasekar, V., 2022. Eco-friendly filtration of 
nickel from the sludge during electrochemical machining of Monel 400 alloys. Global 
NEST Journal, Vol 24, Issue 02, pp. 203–211. 
[46] Singh, G., Singh, R. and Rao, P.S., 2022. Electrochemical Machining of Cu substrate 
with Cu tool,. Advances in Manufacturing Technology: Computational Materials 
Processing and Characterization, CRC Press, pp. 89–93. 
[47] Rao, P.S., Jain, P.K., Dwivedi, D.K., 2015. “Precision Finishing of External Cylindri￾cal Surfaces of Eon Finishing of External Cylindrical Surfaces of EN8 Steel By Elec￾tro Chemical Honing (ECH) Process Using OFAT Technique”, Elsevier Publishers, J. 
of Materials Today Proceedings, 2 (2015), pp. 3220–3229. 
[48] Rao, P.S., Jain, P.K., Dwivedi, D.K., 2015. “Electro Chemical Honing (ECH) of 
External Cylindrical Surfaces-An Innovative Step”, DAAAM International Vienna 
Publishers, 09 Chapter, DAAAM International Scientific Book (2015), pp. 097–116. 
[49] Rao, P.S., Jain, P.K., Dwivedi, D.K., 2016. “Electro Chemical Honing (ECH)-A New 
Paradigm in Hybrid Machining Process”, DAAAM International Vienna Publishers, 
26 Chapter, DAAAM International Scientific Book (2016), pp. 287–306. 
[50] T. Singh, J.P. Misra, V. Upadhyay, P. Sudhakar Rao, 2018. “An adaptive neuro-fuzzy 
inference system (ANFIS) for Wire-EDM of ballistic grade aluminium alloy”, Inter￾national Journal of Automotive and Mechanical Engineering, Volume 15, Issue 2, 
(2018), pp. 5295–5307.  
C 
Index
 
A 
 active circuit, 71 

 active filter, 72 

 additive manufacturing, 28 , 154 , 211 

 adiabatic shear instability, 182 

 advance materials, 165 

 advanced fabrication, 40 

 analysis of variance, 102 

 ANOVA, 102 , 294 

 apparent power, 65 

applications, 13 , 27 , 150 , 235 

 automatic controller, 76 

automation, 225 

 autonomous robots, 171 

B 
 binder jetting, 43 , 220 

biocoating, 8 

biodegradable, 12 

 biodegradability, 12 

 bonding mechanism, 181 

boost power factor correction, 81 

 bulk fabrication, 39 

CAD, 30 

 capacitor bank, 70 

 case studies, 215 

 CFRP, 166 

challenges, 52 

characterization, 49 

classification, 28 , 34 , 215 

CMC, 3 

coatings, 8 , 38 

 cold spray, 162 , 180 , 215 

 cold spray systems, 185 

 collaborative robots, 170 

composites, 3 

 Compositionally Graded Material, 33 

 conventional fabrication, 36 , 38 

 corrosion resistance, 202 

 crack propagation, 139 

 cryogenic machining, 271 

CSAM, 162 , 180 

CVD, 39 

D 
 DC/DC converter, 74 

DED, 42 , 158 

 deep learning, 215 

defects, 147 

 defence sector, 258 

 dentistry, 254 

 dermatology, 251 

 design of experiments, 101 

developments, 13 

 digital twin, 224 

 direct energy deposition, 158 , 222 

 displacement sensor, 243 

 disposable plastics, 13 

 dry machining, 269 

DVR, 83 

 dynamic voltage restorer, 83 

E 
EaFSW, 124 

ECM, 288 

 EHaFSW, 140 

 elastic modulus, 203 

 electrical conductivity, 200 

 electrically assisted FSW, 124 

 electrochemical machining, 288 

 energy factor, 69 

307 308 Index 
energy storage devices, 88
 
E-PBF, 41
 
exothermic heat, 140
 
F 
fabrication methods, 34
 
fatigue striation, 139
 
feeding system, 47
 
FGAM, 40
 
FGM, 26, 166
 
fibre, 3
 
filature silk, 14
 
finishing tool, 96
 
fracture, 203
 
friction stir processing, 199
 
friction stir welding, 120
 
FSP, 199
 
FSW, 120
 
Functionally Graded Material, 26
 
G 
gammering, 199
 
genetic algorithm, 85
 
green composite, 1
 
H 
hardness, 134, 137, 202
 
heat treatment, 198
 
hybrid FSW, 120
 
hybrid machining, 271
 
hydrodynamic plasticity, 184
 
I 
IaFSW, 130
 
incompatibility, 53
 
induction assisted FSW, 130
 
industry 4.0, 214
 
insolubility, 53
 
interfacial failure, 133
 
internet of things, 225
 
IoT, 225
 
L 
LaFSW, 121
 
laser, 235
 
laser assisted FSW, 121
 
laser assisted turning, 274
 
laser forming, 257
 
laser grid sensor, 248
 
laser induced breakdown spectroscopy, 236
 
laser induced plasma spectroscopy, 236
 
laser machining, 258, 267
 
laser remelting, 199
 
laser sensors, 243
 
laser spark spectroscopy, 236
 
laser welding, 256
 
lasers in biomedical, 249
 
L-C filter, 75
 
LIBS, 236
 
LIPS, 236
 
LLC resonant, 84
 
L-PBF, 41
 
LSS, 236
 
M 
machine learning, 212
 
machining, 288
 
machining process, 267
 
Mach number, 195
 
magnetic gradient, 97
 
magnetorheological finishing, 96
 
magnetostatic simulation, 97
 
manufacturing, 255
 
manufacturing techniques, 34
 
masked stereolithography, 43
 
material extrusion, 43, 160, 219
 
material jetting, 43
 
materials, 26
 
matrix, 3
 
mechanical properties, 16
 
microplastic pollution, 14
 
microstructurally Graded Material, 32
 
minimum quantity lubrication, 270
 
MMAM, 29
 
MMC, 3, 166
 
mobile robots, 172
 
modeling, 30, 142, 296
 
MPPT, 74
 
MQL, 270
 
MRF, 96
 
MR finishing setup, 99
 
MR fluid, 96
 
MR polishing, 96
 
multiple materials, 29
 
multiresponse optimization, 300
 
N 
natural fibres, 3
 
natural polymer, 2
 
NDM, 270
 Index 309 
near dry machining, 270
 
nonbiodegradable, 12
 
nozzle geometry, 195
 
O 
on demand tap changer, 83
 
ophthalmology, 253
 
optimization, 30, 294
 
P 
particle swarm optimization, 79
 
PAS, 239
 
passive circuit, 70
 
path planning, 168
 
PBF, 41
 
penetration depth, 250
 
perturbation, 299
 
phase advancer, 71
 
photoacoustic spectroscopy, 239
 
photoelectric sensor, 247
 
photovoltaic system, 74
 
PLA, 12
 
PLC, 82
 
plug failure, 133
 
PMC, 3
 
postprocessing, 48, 197
 
powder bed fusion, 41, 216
 
power factor, 65
 
power factor calculation, 68
 
programmable logic controller, 82
 
PVD, 38
 
Q 
quality control, 212
 
quality control algorithm, 217
 
quality monitoring, 211
 
R 
Raman spectroscopy, 241
 
rebound phenomenon, 184
 
regression analysis, 102, 296
 
resistivity, 201
 
response surface methodology, 102
 
robot, 154
 
robot configuration, 156
 
robot types, 158
 
robotic systems, 159
 
robotics, 155
 
RSM, 102
 
S 
scanning strategies, 44
 
SEM, 15, 101
 
sensors, 243
 
SEPIC, 79
 
sheet lamination, 43
 
shot peening, 199
 
spectroscopy, 235
 
static capacitor, 69
 
static generator, 85
 
stereolithography, 42
 
Structurally Graded Material, 32
 
support structure, 47
 
sustainable machining, 268
 
SVG, 85
 
synchronous condenser, 71
 
synthetic polymers, 3
 
synthetic resin, 13
 
T 
testing, 49
 
thermally assisted machining, 272
 
thermoelectric materials, 86
 
thermoplastics, 3
 
thermosets, 3
 
thin film coating, 38
 
thyristorized system, 75
 
time-of-flight sensor, 245
 
toolpath planning, 44
 
trends, 54
 
TRIAC, 75
 
U 
ultrasonic vibration, 135, 267
 
UV assisted turning, 276
 
UVAT, 276
 
UVeFSW, 135
 
V 
virtual batteries, 88
 
W 
wheat gluten, 14
 
