MODERN MAGNETIC MATERIALS


Properties and Applications MODERN MAGNETIC MATERIALS


Properties and Applications 
Edited by
 Iuliana Stoica, PhD


Ann Rose Abraham, PhD


A. K. Haghi, PhD

 
First edition published 2024 
Apple Academic Press Inc. 
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA 
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19, 
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA 
CRC Press 
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, 
Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2024 by Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted 
to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to 
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so 
we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any 
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: Modern magnetic materials : properties and applications / edited by Iuliana Stoica, PhD, Ann Rose Abraham, PhD, 
A.K. Haghi, PhD. 
Names: Stoica, Iuliana, editor. | Abraham, Ann Rose, editor. | Haghi, A. K., editor. 
Description: First edition. | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 2023046985X | Canadiana (ebook) 20230469876 | ISBN 9781774912997 (hardcover) | 
ISBN 9781774913000 (softcover) | ISBN 9781003372066 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Magnetic materials. | LCSH: Magnetism. 
Classification: LCC TK454.4.M3 M63 2024 | DDC 621.34—dc23 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-299-7 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-300-0 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00337-206-6 (ebk) About the Editors


Iuliana Stoica, PhD 
Department of Physical Chemistry of Polymers, “Petru Poni” 
Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Romania 
Iuliana Stoica, PhD, is a Scientific Researcher in Physics at the Romanian 
Academy, “Petru Poni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Depart￾ment of Physical Chemistry of Polymers. She received her PhD from 
Romanian Academy, in the Department of Polymer Physics and Structure 
at the same institute. She joined a postdoctoral fellowship program at 
Politehnica University of Bucharest, Faculty of Applied Chemistry and 
Materials Science, Department of Bioresources and Polymer Science 
(2014–2015) as well as a postdoctoral fellowship awarded by L’Oreal -
UNESCO National Program “For Women in Science” (2020–2021). Her 
area of scientific activity is focused on characterization of a wide range 
of polymers, copolymers, polymeric composites, and polymeric mixtures. 
She has been an author or coauthor for over 115 papers in peer-reviewed 
ISI journals. She has edited three books and has contributed several book 
chapters on polymer and materials science. She has also been a member of 
the organizing and program committees of several scientific conferences. 
She has been a reviewer for a number of prestigious journals in the field 
of polymer science. She has an 18 Hirsch index, according to the Web of 
Science Core Collection. 
Ann Rose Abraham, PhD 
Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), Thevara, Kochi, Kerala, India 
Ann Rose Abraham, PhD, is currently an Assistant Professor at the 
Department of Physics, Sacred Heart College (Autonomous), Thevara, 
Kochi, Kerala, India. Dr. Ann received her MSc, MPhil, and PhD degrees 
in Physics from School of Pure and Applied Physics, Mahatma Gandhi 
University, Kerala, India. Her PhD thesis was titled “Development of 
Hybrid Mutliferroic Materials for Tailored Applications.” She has expertise 
in the field of condensed matter physics, nanomagnetism, multiferroics, 
and polymeric nanocomposites, etc. She has research experience at various vi About the Editors 
reputed national institutes like Bose Institute, Kolkata, India, SAHA Insti￾tute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata, India, UGC-DAE CSR Centre, Kolkata, 
India and collaborations with various international laboratories. She is a 
recipient of a Young Researcher Award in the area of physics and Best 
Paper Awards–2020, 2021, a prestigious forum for showcasing intellectual 
capability. She served as assistant professor and examiner, at the Depart￾ment of Basic Sciences, Amal Jyothi College of Engineering, under APJ 
Abdul Kalam Technological University, Kerala, India. Dr. Ann is a frequent 
speaker at national and international conferences. She has a good number 
of publications to her credit in many peer-reviewed high impact journals of 
international repute. She has authored many book chapters and edited more 
than 10 books with Taylor and Francis, Elsevier, etc. 
A. K. Haghi, PhD 
Coimbra University, Portugal 
A. K. Haghi, PhD, has published over 250 academic research-oriented 
books as well as over 1000 research papers published in various journals and 
conference proceedings. He has received several grants, consulted for several 
major corporations, and is a frequent speaker to national and international 
audiences. He is founder and former editor-in-chief of the International Journal 
of Chemoinformatics and Chemical Engineering, published by IGI Global 
(USA) as well as the Polymers Research Journal, published by Nova Science 
Publishers (USA). Professor Haghi has acted as an editorial board member 
of many international journals. He has served as a member of the Canadian 
Research and Development Center of Sciences and Cultures (CRDCSC) and 
the Research Chemistry Centre, Coimbra, Portugal. Dr. Haghi holds a BSc in 
urban and environmental engineering from the University of North Carolina 
(USA), an MSc in mechanical engineering from North Carolina A&T State 
University (USA) and an MSc in applied mechanics, acoustics, and materials 
from the Université de Technologie de Compiègne (France), and a PhD in 
engineering sciences from Université de Franche-Comté (France). Contributors.............................................................................................................ix


Abbreviations .........................................................................................................xiii


Preface ..................................................................................................................xvii


1.

 Explanations of Mesoparticles’ Magnetic Properties Changes 
during Red-Ox Processes and the Polarization Influence at the 
Polymeric Compositions Modification by Mesoparticles ............................1 
V. I. Kodolov and V. V. Kodolova-Chukhontzeva 
2.

 X-Ray Photoelectron Study of the Formation of the Chemical 
Bond and the Atomic Magnetic Moment in Nickel–Carbon 
Nanocomposites Modified by d-Metal Oxides ............................................13 
N. S. Terebova, V. I. Kodolov, and I. N. Shabanova 
3.

 Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites in 
Nanosized Reactors of Polymeric Matrices ................................................23 
V. V. Kodolova-Chukhontzeva and V. I. Kodolov 
4.

 Mechanochemical Modification of Metal-Carbon 
Mesocomposites.............................................................................................51


V. I. Kodolov, V. V. Trineeva, R. V. Mustakimov, N. S. Terebova, 
T. M. Makhneva, and I. N. Shabanova 
5.

 Investigation of Copper/Carbon Nanocomposites 
Modified with Phosphorus-Containing Groups as 
Inhibiting Additives in Mineral Oil.............................................................63


I. N. Shabanova, S. M. Reshetnikov, V. I. Kodolov, N. S. Terebova, 
R. V. Mustakimov, F. F. Chausov, and S. G. Bystrov 
6.

 Investigation of the Formation of the Electron Structure of 
Metallocarbonic Nanoforms ........................................................................73 
I. N. Shabanova, V. I. Kodolov, and N. S. Terebova 
7.

 Dependence of the Value of the Atomic Magnetic Moment of 
d-Metals on the Chemical Structure of Nanoforms ...................................85 
I. N. Shabanova, N. S. Terebova, and V. I. Kodolov 
Contents

 
8.

 Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composites With 
Regulated Magnetic Characteristics ...........................................................95


V. I. Kodolov, V. V. Kodolova–Chukhontseva, Yu. V. Pershin, 
R. V. Mustakimov, I. N. Shabanova, and N. S. Terebova 
9.

 Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities as 
Magnetic Mesoscopic Materials................................................................. 111


V. I. Kodolov, V. V. Kodolova-Chukhontzeva, Yu. V. Pershin, and 
R. V. Mustakimov 
10.

 Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% Nanodispersed Magnetites 
and Ferroxides: Strength, Heat Resistance, and Morphology................151


D. Starokadomsky, M. Reshetnyk, N. Bodul, and L. Kokhtych 
11.

 Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites: 
From Molecular Modeling to Applications...............................................167


Raluca Marinica Albu 
12.

 Magnetism Towards Smart Materials.......................................................191


V. N. Archana, N. G. Divya, and Reyha Benedict 
13.

 Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications...............................205


Namitha Binu, Ruby Varghese, and Yogesh B. Dalvi 
14.

 A Technical Note on Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 
Magnetic Characteristics Growth .............................................................223


V. I. Kodolov and V. V. Kodolova-Chukhontzeva 
15.

 Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles: A Review ........229


Vandana Chauhan, Rajpreet Kaur, Anita Gupta, and Poonam Khullar 
16.

 Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers.............................247


Roop Varghese Rubert, Maria Mathew, and Rony Rajan Paul 
17.

 Magnetic Polymer Composites and Their Role in 
Engineering Applications ...........................................................................291


Simona Luminita Nica 
Index.....................................................................................................................309


viii

 Contents Contributors


Raluca Marinica Albu 
“Petru Poni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Polymers, 
Iasi, Romania 
V. N. Archana 
Mar Athanasius College, Kothamangalam, Ernakulam, Kerala, India 
Reyha Benedict 
St. Teresa’s College, Ernakulam, Kerala, India 
Namitha Binu 
Pushpagiri Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Tiruvalla, Pathanamthitta, Kerala, India 
N. Bodul 
Ukrayinsky Phyzico-Mathematic Litseum, T. Schevchenko Kyiv National University, Ukraine 
S. G. Bystrov 
Udmurt Federal Research Center, UB RAS, Russian Federation 
Vandana Chauhan 
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
F. F. Chausov 
Udmurt Federal Research Center, UB RAS, Russian Federation 
Yogesh B. Dalvi 
Pushpagiri Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Tiruvalla, Pathanamthitta, Kerala, India 
N. G. Divya 
Bharat Mata College, Thrikkakkara, Ernakulam, Kerala, India 
Anita Gupta 
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
Rajpreet Kaur 
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India; Department of Chemistry, 
BBK DAV College for Women, Amritsar, Punjab, India 
Poonam Khullar 
Department of Chemistry, BBK DAV College for Women, Amritsar, Punjab, India 
V. I. Kodolov 
Basic Research–Research Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic, Udmurt Federal Research 
Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia; M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical 
University, Izhevsk, Russia 
V. V. Kodolova-Chukhontzeva 
Basic Research–High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic, UFRC RAS, Izhevsk, 
Russia; St. Petersburg Institute of Macromolecular Compounds, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
St. Petersburg, Russia

x Contributors 
L. Kokhtych 
School of Engineering and Architecture, Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts, Horw, 
Switzerland; Institute of Physics, NAS, National Academy of Sciences (NAS) of Ukraine, Ukraine 
T. M. Makhneva 
Basic Research–High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic,


Udmurt Federal Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia;


Institute of Mechanics, Udmurt Federal Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk,


Russia


Maria Mathew 
Department of Chemistry, CMS College, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
R. V. Mustakimov 
Basic Research–High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic, Udmurt Federal 
Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia; Izhevsk Electromechanical Plant 
“KUPOL,” M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
Simona Luminita Nica 
“Petru Poni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Department of Physical Chemistry of Polymers, 
Iasi, Romania 
Rony Rajan Paul 
Department of Chemistry, CMS College, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
Yu. V. Pershin 
Basic Research – High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic, UD, RAS, Izhevsk, 
Russia; M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State University, Izhevsk, Russia 
S. M. Reshetnikov 
Udmurt Federal Research Center, UB RAS, Izhevsk, Russian Federation; Udmurt State University, 
Izhevsk, Russian Federation 
M. Reshetnyk 
National Natural History Museum NAS, Ukraine; M. P. Semenenko Institute of Geochemistry, 
Mineralogy and Ore Formations, National Academy of Sciences (NAS) of Ukraine, Ukraine 
Roop Varghese Rubert 
Department of Chemistry, CMS College, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
I. N. Shabanova 
Basic Research–High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic, Udmurt Federal Research 
Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia; Physicotechnical Institute, Ural Branch, Udmurt 
Federal Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia 
D. Starokadomsky 
M. P. Semenenko Institute of Geochemistry, Mineralogy and Ore Formations, National Academy of 
Sciences (NAS) of Ukraine, Ukraine; Chuyko Institute of Surface Chemistry, NAS, Ukraine 
N. S. Terebova 
Basic Research–High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic, Udmurt Federal 
Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia; Physicotechnical Institute, 
Udmurt Federal Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia Contributors xi 
V. V. Trineeva 
Basic Research–High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic, Udmurt Federal 
Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia; Institute of Mechanics, Udmurt 
Federal Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia 
Ruby Varghese 
Department of Chemistry, School of Sciences, Jain Deemed to be University, Bangalore, Karnataka, 
India Abbreviations


AA 
AC 
AFM 
AG 
APPh 
B2
O3 
BC 
CBT 
CLL-37 
CNFs 
CNTs 
CS 
DC 
DIW 
DMF 
DMS 
EG 
EM 
EMI 
EPD 
EPR 
ER 
ERs 
FAS 
GO 
HMCs 
HM-PLLA 
IGF-1R 
LBL 
MCs 
ME 
Me–C MC 
MGCE 
MHT 
acetylacetone 
alternating current 
atomic force microscopy 
agarose 
ammonium polyphosphate 
boron oxide 
bacterial cellulose 
cyclic butylene terephthalate 
cathelicidin LL-37 
carbon nanofibers 
carbon nanotubes 
chitosan 
direct current 
direct ink writing 
dimethylformamide 
dilute magnetic semiconductors 
expanded graphite 
electromagnetic 
electromagnetic interference 
electrophoretic deposition 
electron paramagnetic resonance 
electrorheological 
epoxy resins 
fluoroalkyl silane 
graphene oxide 
hard magnetic composites 
high molecular weight poly-L-lactic acid 
insulin-like growth factor receptor 
layer by layer 
mesocomposites 
magnetoelectric 
metal-carbon mesocomposite 
magnetic glass carbon electrode 
magnetic hyperthermia treatment xiv Abbreviations 
MIONs magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles 
MNFs magnetic nanofibers 
MNPs magnetic nanoparticles 
MR magnetorheological 
MRI magnetic resonance imaging 
MSP merozoite surface protein 
NFe nickel spinel ferrite 
NMR nuclear magnetic resonance 
NPs nanoparticles 
ODA 4,4′-oxydianiline 
P(VDF–TrFE) poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene)


PAA polyacrylic acid


PCHMA poly(cyclohexyl methacrylate)


PCL poly(ɛ-caprolactone) 
PCU polycarbonate urethane 
PDA polydopamine 
PDMS polydimethylsiloxane 
PEI polyethyleneimine 
PEN polyethylene naphthalene 
PEO poly(ethylene oxide) 
PEPA polyethylene polyamine 
PET polyethylene terephthalate 
PLGA poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) 
PLLA poly(L-lactic acid) 
PMDA pyromellitic dianhydride 
PMMA poly(methyl methacrylate) 
PmT poly(m-toluidine) 
PS polystyrene 
PVA polyvinyl alcohol 
PVDF poly(vinylidene-fluoride) 
PVP poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) 
QSAR quantitative structure-activity relationships 
RF radiofrequency 
RH relative humidity 
RIU refractive-index units 
SAED selected area electron diffraction 
SE shielding effectiveness 
SEM scanning electron microscope 
SMCs soft magnetic composites Abbreviations xv 
SPMNPs superparamagnetic nanoparticles 
SPNs super-paramagnetic 
SPP surface plasmon polaritons 
SPR surface plasmon resonance 
SPS spark plasma sintering 
SUs structural units 
TBA tetrabutylammonium 
TEM transition electron microscopy 
TENGs triboelectric nanogenerators 
VSM vibrating sample magnetometer 
XPS X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy  
Preface


This new book will introduce postgraduate students to a range of advanced 
topics in physics and magnetic materials science covering basic physical 
concepts, experimental methods, and applications. 
It covers basic concepts and applications of magnetism science and 
focuses on state-of-the-art magnetic materials. It also presents the advanced 
treatment of materials that can hold a magnetic field and describes recent 
research developments in magnetic materials, including fabrication, 
characterization, applications, and many more related subjects which are 
covered in detail. 
This is a valuable and comprehensive research-oriented book for post￾graduate students seeking to understand this rather complicated and difficult 
subject. 
Meanwhile, at a practical level, this new research-oriented book covers 
several novel case studies. In this new title, selected fields for modern tech￾nical applications and a large diversity of magnetic materials are discussed 
in detail. 
Chapter 1 of this book is devoted to the changes in mesoparticles’ 
magnetic properties during red-ox processes and the polarization influence at 
the modification of the polymeric composition by mesoparticles. 
Chapter 2 is focused on the X-ray photoelectron study of the formation 
of the chemical bond and the atomic magnetic moment in nickel-carbon 
nanocomposites modified by d-metal oxides. 
Chapter 3 is dedicated to the explanation of the base of mesoscopic 
physics principles for metal-carbon mesocomposites obtained in the nano￾sized reactors (mesoreactors) of polymeric matrices. 
Mechanochemical modification of metal-carbon mesocomposites is 
presented in Chapter 4. The chapter presents materials at the practical rather 
than theoretical level allowing for a physical, quantitative, measurement￾based understanding of magnetism among readers. 
An investigation of copper/carbon nanocomposites modified with phos￾phorus-containing groups as inhibiting additives in mineral oil is reviewed 
in Chapter 5. 
The formation of the electron structure of metallocarbonic nanoforms is 
studied in Chapter 6. This chapter contains useful research ideas for readers xviii Preface 
approaching magnetism for the first time, as well as a quick reference for 
anybody seeking information about notions and facts pertaining to magne￾tism and magnetic materials. 
The dependence of the value of the atomic magnetic moment of d-metals 
on the chemical structure of nanoforms is reviewed in Chapter 7. 
In Chapter 8, we have shown how mesoscopic physics explains the 
red-ox synthesis of metal-carbon mesocomposites within polymeric matrices 
mesoreactors. 
In Chapter 9, metal-carbon mesocomposites application possibilities as 
magnetic mesoscopic materials are studied in detail. 
Epoxy composites with 5 wt.% nanodispersed magnetites and ferroxides 
with details of their strength, heat resistance, and morphology are presented 
in Chapter 10. 
It conveys the main physical ideas behind the macroscopic phenom￾enology of magnetism in the materials and their ultimate realization in actual 
technological applications. 
Chapter 11 is focused on important aspects related to magnetic particles 
and their contribution to the performance of magnetic composites with 
polymer matrix. 
In Chapter 12, magnetism towards smart materials is presented in 
detail. Biomedical applications of magnetic nanoparticles are discussed in 
Chapter 13. 
Metal-carbon mesocomposites’ magnetic characteristics growth are 
studied in Chapter 14. Synthesis and applications of magnetic nanoparticles 
are reviewed in Chapter 15. Chapter 16 is devoted to magnetic nanofibers in 
the electrospinning process. 
Magnetic polymer composites and their role in engineering applications 
are discussed in Chapter 17 in detail. By reading these interesting chapters, 
postgraduate students and materials scientists will enjoy the presentation of 
the different processing methods and their impact on magnetic properties. 
Meanwhile, readers will profit from the survey, starting from the basics of 
magnetism down to the applications. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 1


Explanations of Mesoparticles’
Magnetic Properties Changes during 
Red-Ox Processes and the Polarization 
Influence at the Polymeric Compositions 
Modification by Mesoparticles 
V. I. KODOLOV1,2 and V. V. KODOLOVA-CHUKHONTZEVA1,3 
1
BRHEC of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopics, 
Udmurt Federal Research Center, RAS, Izhevsk, Russia 
2
M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
3
Peter Great St. Petersburg Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
This chapter presents a new scientific trend (chemical mesoscopic) with 
examples of the reduction-oxidation reactions peculiarities with nano￾structures and mesoparticles participation and modifying the polymeric 
composition by mesoparticles. In these cases, such notions as interference 
(the chemical bond formation at the phase coherence), and annihila￾tion, which stimulates the electron shift and leads to the chemical bonds’ 
formation accompanied by atom magnetic moment growth, are discussed. 
The explanation of the magnetic characteristics with simultaneous growth 
unpaired electrons on the carbon fibers of mesoparticles is possible only 
owing to the annihilation of negative and positive charges quants in the 
red-ox processes with the participation of metal-carbon mesocomposites 
(MCs) and the oxidizers containing phosphates, silicates, and metal oxides. 2 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The hypothesis of Me–C MC interaction with modified agents (oxidizers) on 
the solid phase’s boundary is proposed. The obtained effect is concluded in 
the growth of metal cluster atomic magnetic moments because of unpaired 
d electron formation. The polarization influence is discussed in the observa￾tion of polymeric compounds and materials modification by Me–C MC. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
Mesoscopic Physics and later appeared mesoscopic chemistry can be 
presented as the basis of the new scientific trend – chemical mesoscopics. 
The above scientific trends are near to such scientific trends and theories as 
synergetics (self-organization), fractal theory (self-similarity), and Theories 
of Chemical Kinetics and Catalysis [1–3]. All these theories are used for 
the description of mesoscopic particles (or nanostructures) in the different 
media and at the various conditions changes. Therefore, the above new 
trend is very near to Chemical Physics on the considered objects and also 
on the phenomena and particularities of the various reactions and processes 
at the changes of conditions of their realization. However, the basic aim 
of this advanced trend is appeared in the investigation of nanostructures 
(or mesoparticles) reactivity in various media and at different, changed 
conditions. 
Especial attention is devoted to the interactions of metal (Copper, Nickel) 
carbon mesoparticles with such oxidizers as ammonium polyphosphate 
(APPh) and aluminum oxide. In these reactions, it is observed the reduction 
of Phosphorus and Aluminum, and also the growth of mesocomposite (MC) 
metal atomic magnetic moment, and the simultaneous increasing of spin 
quantity on the MC carbon shell. The introduction of “annihilation” notion 
explains the increasing of magnetic characteristics. 
The polymeric compositions polarization influence appeared under the 
action of Me–C MC is considered at the polymeric compounds’modification. 
1.2 ABOUT THE ANNIHILATION PHENOMENON AT RED-OX 
REACTIONS OF MESOPARTICLES AND OXIDIZERS (MODIFIED 
AGENTS) 
The metal atomic magnetic moments values of modified copper– and 
nickel–carbon MCs may be caused by the polarization of Met–O bonds Explanations of Mesoparticles’ Magnetic Properties 3 
participated in Red-Ox processes. In this case, the influence of correspon￾dent modified agents (oxidizers) on the changes of metal atomic magnetic 
moments remains constant. 
In Table 1.1, the examples of metal atomic magnetic moments changes 
(in Born magnetons) and quantities of unpaired electrons (in spin/g) for 
mesoparticles modified by APPh or silica (SiO2
) after the mechanochemical 
modification processes proceeding are given. 
TABLE 1.1 The Values of Copper (Nickel) Atomic Magnetic Moments and the Quantity of 
Unpaired Electrons at the Interaction of Mesocomposite Cu–C with Silica and Ammonium 
Polyphosphate 
Systems Cu–C MC – Substances 
Cu–C mesocomposite 
Cu–C MC – Silica 
μ cu 
1.3 
3.0 
Quantity of Unpaired Electrons (spin/g) 
1.2×1017 
3.4×1019 
Cu–C MC – APPh 2.0 2.8×1018 
Cu–C MC – APPh, relation 1:0.5 4.2 4.3×1020 
The presence of reduced forms of Carbon and Phosphorus is determined 
on the results of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and electron sound 
micro-roentgen spectroscopic analysis of element composition [4–6]. It’s 
noted that the phosphorus is reduced because of the interaction with unpaired 
electrons which are found on the MC carbon shell. It’s possible that the 
Phosphorus atom is disposed between the carbon fibers of Cu–C mesoscopic 
carbon shell. 
The reduction process and the mesoparticle structure change may be 
presented by the following multi-stage scheme: the first step – the negative 
charges quants are directed to the positive charged nucleus of Phosphorus 
atom, near which there is the cloud of positive charge quants; the second step 
– the interaction of negative charged quants with positive charged quants, 
which leads to the annihilation phenomena creation; the third step – at the 
annihilation the inner electromagnetic (EM) field is formed which stimulates 
the Phosphorus reduction process; the fourth step – at the reduction process 
the water vapors are formed and are evaporated, that leads to C=P bond 
formation (132.6 eV on X-ray photoelectron spectra [6]); the fifth step – 
the EM radiation formed stimulates across the coordination bonds d orbital 
of Copper atom that leads to the formation of unpaired electrons and the 
growth of Copper atomic magnetic moment; the sixth step – the fifth step 
explains the increasing of the spins number on the carbon cover of Copper 4 Modern Magnetic Materials 
cluster. The last two steps are accompanied by changes of MC carbon cover 
structure. According to X-ray photoelectron spectra data it’s observed the 
decrease of C–H bonds with simultaneous growth of the carbine fragments. 
These structure changes lead to the MCs reactivity increasing. 
A similar explanation of the mechanism of the reduction-oxidation reac￾tion is possible for the interaction of Aluminum oxide with nickel–carbon 
mesoscopic composite. In this case, Aluminum is reduced completely with 
simultaneous growth of Nickel atomic magnetic moment from 1.3 to 4.8 
Bohr magnetons. These changes are corresponded with the increasing of 
spin number on the Carbon shell from 1017 spin/g to 1020 spin/g [4]. The 
comparison of atomic magnetic moments in the series of copper and nickel– 
carbon MCs shows that the difference between series is equaled 1 Bohr 
magnetons. It is interesting to note that at the using of such oxidizers as 
metal oxides, the increasing of atomic magnetic moments of the MC metal 
and the oxide metal is observed (Table 1.2). 
TABLE 1.2 The Metal Atomic Magnetic Moments Changes at the Ni–C Mesocomposites 
Modification 
Mesocomposite – Modified Agent (Oxidizer) , μB μNi , μB μCu μFe, μB
Ni/C – NiO (0.5) 3.0 – – 
Ni/C – NiO 4.5 – – 
Ni/C – CuO 2.0 2.0 – 
Ni/C – Fe2 3 O 2.5 – 3.0 
Ni/C – Al O (0.2) 2 3 4.8 – – 
Ni–C MC – SiO2 4.0 – – 
Ni–C MC – APPh 3.0 – – 
The significant growth of Nickel atomic magnetic moment at the decreasing 
of modified agent layer when the modified agent is Aluminum oxide takes 
place. In these conditions the Aluminum oxide is reduced completely. 
Thus, proposed hypothesis about the processes of unpaired electrons 
forming and shift of metal electrons on the carbon cover of MCs is confirmed 
by the experimental data. In this case, the electrons quantity, which partici￾pates in the process, determines the value of metal atomic magnetic moment 
growth. 
The hypothesis is that the negative charge quants move to reducing element 
nucleus to provoke the positive charge quants and the creation of annihilation 
phenomenon. Therefore, the direct EM field formed promotes to d electrons Explanations of Mesoparticles’ Magnetic Properties 5 
shift on higher energetic levels including the carbon shell of nanocomposite 
nanogranyl. The picture of this phenomenon may be presented: 
i.

 At the joint grinding of modified agent with metal/carbon nanocom￾posites nanogranule the nanoreactor (multiplet) is formed on the 
boundaries of which the chemical potentials difference creates. 
ii.

 Because of potentials difference, the delocalized electrons, which 
are disposed on the nanogranule shell, move to positive charged 
atoms of the modified agent and stimulate the atoms positive charges 
quantization. 
iii. The annihilation phenomenon arises at the superposition of nega￾tive and positive charges on the boundary of reagents interaction. In 
this case the electron magnetic field activates the delocalization of d 
electrons of nanogranule metals and the electron shift to nanogranule 
carbon shell. 
iv.

 The electron shift process within nanogranule is facilitated by modi￾fied agent medium polarization growth. 
The hypothesis explains the growth of metal atomic magnetic moments 
which may be bigger than 4.5 μB because of the process of delocalization d 
electrons. The shift of electrons on nanogranule carbon shell restored the elec￾tron balance after Red-Ox synthesis. There is a correlation between electron 
number participated in Red-Ox synthesis and the value of atomic magnetic 
moment as well as between the polarization degree of reactive systems and 
the increasing of atomic magnetic moments of nanogranule metals. 
Thus, it’s possible to change the magnetic properties of mesoparticles 
and the number of unpaired electrons using the red-ox reactions of Me–C 
MC with different oxidizers. In other words, there is the possibility of the 
direct change of mesoparticles magnetic-electric properties. 
1.3 THE NANOSTRUCTURED COMPOSITION POLARIZATION IS 
CONDITION FOR THE MODIFICATION POLYMERIC SYSTEMS WITH 
POSITIVE RESULTS 
The MCs activity in the different media (materials) is changed in the 
dependence on polarity or polarization of their media. The reactivity of 
considered MCs can be explained by the radiation of negatively charged 
quants from mesoparticles. Therefore, the modification conditions for the 
different materials can be differed from each other. It’s noted [7–25], that the 6 Modern Magnetic Materials 
mechanism of polymer modification by the nanostructures or mesoparticles 
differs from the correspondent mechanism at the micro-particles using. The 
nanostructures radiate the quants of negative charges which increase polar￾ization of the medium and lead to the self-organization of medium molecules 
accompanied the density growth. 
The possible polarization leads to the increasing of medium (mate￾rial) density owing to the regular orientation of material fragments or the 
macromolecules self-organization with the creation of super molecular and 
crystalline structures. At the different cases there is the change of character 
of quants radiation wave propagation from 2D (in the surface plane) to 3D 
(in the space field at surface). 
The composition polarization is possible because of the presence of the 
charge quantization with the wave expansion on polar functional groups of 
media. These phenomena are determined by the IR spectra lines intensities 
changes. In Table 1.3, the instance of fine dispersed suspension Cu–C MC 
(hardener for epoxy resins (ERs)) is shown. According to data of Table 1.3, 
the decreasing of MC quantity to 0.001% leads to the intensity increasing of 
some fields in IR spectra. This effect is explained by the negative charged 
quants flow propagation freedom increasing in the considered medium. 
However, in these cases, the great influence on the suspensions IR spectra 
intensities can show the conditions of suspension preparation, for example, 
the ultrasound treatment (Table 1.4). 
TABLE 1.3 The Change of Peaks Intensity Depending on Cu–C Mesocomposite Concentration 
SL. No. ν (cm–1) I1
/Iϴ I0.01/Iϴ I0.001/Iϴ Atomic Groups 
1. 1,050 1,235 1,411 1,686 C–O–C st 
2. 1,450 1,179 1,590 1,744 C–H 
3. 1,776 1,458 1,347 1,691 C=O st as 
4. 1,844 1,463 1,412 1,678 C=O st sy 
5. 2,860–3,090 1,182 1,545 1,750 C–H 
At the second day of that suspension existence the floccules are formed, 
and peaks intensity sharply drops. However, the suspension activity can be 
increased with the use of ultrasound treatment (Table 1.4). For the instance, 
it’s established on the IR spectra data that the Cu–C MC suspension 
ultrasound treatment optimal duration determined as 7 minutes (the peak 
intensity in IR spectra is increased in 2–4 times). At the MCs suspension 
ultrasound treatment phase, coherence disturbance is possible. In this case, Explanations of Mesoparticles’ Magnetic Properties 7 
the phase coherence disturbance is observed at the duration equaled to 10 
minutes. 
The charge (electron) quantization should lead to the macromolecule 
electron structure change and, as a corollary, to change sub-molecular struc￾tures of polymeric substances. Therefore, the special raw of nanostructured 
materials such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polymethyl metacrylate, poly￾carbonate, which contain Me–C MC in the minute quantities (10–1–10–5%) 
are prepared. 
TABLE 1.4 The Changes of Peaks Intensity in IR Spectrum of Cu–C Mesocomposite 
Depending on the Duration of Ultrasound Treatment 
ν (cm–1) I7
/Iϴ I10/Iϴ Atomic Groups 
1776.6 3.7932 0.7574 C=O st as 
1844.1 2.5065 0.9115 C=O st sy 
3039.1 2.3849 0.9589 C–H st 
The samples obtained are studied by the XPS and by the atomic force 
microscopy (AFM). The samples investigations by XPS show that the 
samples based on polycarbonate have more changes of electron structure at 
the minute quantities introduction of copper–carbon MC in comparison with 
other polymeric samples because they are more polarized. 
According to the results of C1s spectra for polycarbonate, contained the 
different minute quantities of Cu–C MC, can note that after concentration 
equaled to 10–2% of Cu/C MC the peaks correspondent to sp2
 and sp3
 peaks 
are appeared in spectra. In other words, the “stamp” of MC which is used 
during modification is appeared. 
For the decision of question about the nanostructure influence on sub 
molecular composition structures the AFM method is applied. Polycarbonate 
nanostructured samples surface are presented in Figure 1.1. Polycarbonate 
is modified by Cu–C MC minute quantities (from 10–1 to 10–4%). As follow 
from AFM images (Figure 1.1), the surface layers structure strongly changes 
at the concentration of Cu–C MC equaled to 10–4% the transition from two￾dimensional level to three-dimensional level of sub-molecular structures 
orientation. This fact is confirmed by the growth of sp3
 in comparison with 
sp2
 peak from X-ray photoelectron C1s spectra. 
It’s necessary to note that the results obtained by AFM are confirmed by 
the x-RPES data (on C1s spectra). The peculiarities of structure surface on 
Figure 1.1(d) are, possibility, explained by the Blodgett effect [19]. 8 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The changes of samples materials structure are caused by the actions of 
Cu–C MC radiation flow of the negative charged quants on the polymeric 
compositions that in turn influence on the modified materials properties. 
Thus, the self-organization mechanism for polymeric compositions 
modified by the Me–C MC minute quantities is concluded in the composition 
polarization, which leads to the great change of electron and sub-molecular 
structures of materials. 
FIGURE 1.1 AFM images of polycarbonate nanostructured films surface: (a) 0.1% Cu–C 
MC; (b) 0.01% Cu–C MC; (c) 0.001% Cu–C MC; and (d) 0.0001% Cu–C MC. 
1.4 CONCLUSION 
The hypothesis of Red-Ox synthesis with the using of chemical mesoscopics 
idea about the charge quantization, annihilation, and interference phenomena 
is proposed. The hypothesis concludes in that the negative charge quants 
move to positive charged element nucleus to provoke the positive charge 
quants and the creation of annihilation phenomenon. Therefore, the direct 
EM field formed promotes to d electrons shift on higher energetic levels 
including the carbon shell of MC. Explanations of Mesoparticles’ Magnetic Properties 9 
These processes take place when such MCs are included in the polymeric 
compositions and the modification of polymeric materials with the change of 
the structure and properties of materials happens. 
KEYWORDS 
• atomic magnetic moments 
• charges quantization 
• interference and annihilation 
• mesocomposites reactivity 
• polarization 
• polymeric composition modification 
• red-ox reactions 
• unpaired electrons quantity 
REFERENCES 
1. Ivashkin, Yu. A., (2008). The Crystal Structure Defects of Deformed Cubic Crystals (p. 
137). Bryansk: Publisher BSPTL. 
2. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2017). New scientific trend – chemical mesoscopics. 
Chemical Physics & Mesoscopy, 19(3), 454–465. 
3. Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., Terebova, N. S., & Trineeva, V. V., (2012). X Ray 
Photoelectron Spectroscopy at the Investigation of Metal Carbon Nanosystems and 
Nanostructed Materials (p. 252). M. – Izhevsk: Publ. Udmurt University. 
4. Lipanov, A. M., Kodolov, V. I., Mel’nikov, M. Ya., Trineeva, V. V., & Pergushov, V. I., 
(2016). The Influence of Small Quantities of Metal Carbon Nanosystems on Polymeric 
Materials Properties (Vol. 466. No. 1. pp. 15–17). Doklagy RAS. 
5. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., & Vasil’chenko, Yu. M., (2014). The calculating experi￾ment for metal/carbon nanocomposites synthesis with the application Avrami equation. 
Nanostructure, Nanomaterials and Nanotechnologies to Nanoindustry (pp. 105–118, 
436). Toronto-New Jersey: Apple Academic Press. 
6. Wang, J. Q., Wu, W. H., & Feng, D. M., (1992). The Introduction to Electron Spectroscopy 
(XPS/XAES/UPS) (p. 640). Beijing: National Defense Industry Press. 
7. Kodolov, V. I., Lipanov, A. M., Trineeva, V. V., et al., (2013). The Changes of Properties 
of Materials Modified by Metal/Carbon Nanocomposites (pp. 327–373). Ibid. 
8. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2013). Theory of modification of polymeric materials by 
super small quantities of metal/carbon nanocomposites. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopy, 
15(3), 351–363. 10 Modern Magnetic Materials 
9. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2012). Perspectives of idea development about 
nanosystems self-organization in polymeric matrixes. In: Problems of Nanochemistry 
for the Creation of New Materials (pp. 75–100). Torun, Poland: IEPMD. 
10. Akhmetshina, L. F., Lebedeva, G. A., & Kodolov, V. I., (2012). Phosphorus containing 
metal/carbon nanocomposites and their application for the modification of intumescent 
fireproof coatings. Journal of Characterization and Development of Novel Materials, 
4(4), 451–468. 
11. Chashkin, M. A., (2012). Peculiarities of Modification by Metal/Carbon Nanocomposites 
for Cold Hardened Epoxy Compositions and the Investigation of Properties of Polymeric 
Compositions Obtained (p. 17). Thesis of cand. Diss. – Perm: PNSPU. 
12. Kodolov, V. I., & Kodolova, V. V., (Trineeva), Semakina, N. V., Yakovlev, G. I., 
Volkova, E. G., et al., (2008). Patent 2337062 Russia Technique of Obtaining Carbon 
Nanostructures from Organic Compounds and Metal Containing Substances. 
13. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Kovyazina, O. A., & Vasil’chenko, Yu. M., (2012). 
Production and application of metal/carbon nanocomposites. In: Problems of Nano￾chemistry for the Creation of New Materials (pp. 23–36). Torun, Poland: IEPMD. 
14. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2008). 
Activity of nanostructures and its display in nanoreactors of polymeric matrixes and in 
active media. Chem. Phys. & Mesoscopy, 10(4), 448–460. 
15. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2010). 
Problems of nanostructures activity estimation, nanostructures directed production and 
application. In: Nanomaterials Yearbook – 2009: From Nanostructures, Nanomaterials 
and Nanotechnologies to Nanoindustry (pp. 1–18). N.Y.: Nova Science Publ., Inc. 
16.

Nikolaeva, О. А., Kodolov, V. I., Zakharova, G. S., et al., (2004). Method of Obtaining 
Carbon-Metal-Containing Nanostructures. Patent of the RF 2225835. 
17. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2015). The metal/carbon nanocomposites influence 
mechanisms on media and compositions. In: Nanostructures, Nanomaterials and Nano￾technologies to Nanoindustry (pp. 171–185). Toronto, New Jersey: Apple Academic Press. 
18. Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., Terebova, N. S., et al., (2016). X-ray photoelectron 
study of the influence of the amount of carbon nickel containing nanostructures on the 
degree of the poly methyl methacrylate modification. In: Multifunctional Materials and 
Modeling (pp. 211–218). Canada-USA: AAP. 
19. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2016). Self-organization in processes under action of 
super small quantities of metal/carbon nanocomposites: Review on investigation results. 
In: Multifunctional Materials and Modeling (pp. 263–331, 343). Canada-USA: AAP. 
20. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Pershin Yu. V., et al., (2020). Method of Metal Carbon 
Nanocomposites Obtaining from Metal Oxides and Polyvinyl Alcohol. Pat. RU 
2018122 001. 
21. Mustakimov, R. V., Kodolov, V. I., Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2017). 
Modification of copper carbon nanocomposites with the use of ammonium polyphosphate 
for the application as modifiers of epoxy resins. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 19(1), 
50–57. 
22. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Kopylova, A. A., et al., (2017). Mechanochemical 
modification of metal carbon nanocomposites. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 19(4), 
569–580. Explanations of Mesoparticles’ Magnetic Properties 11 
23. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Terebova, N. S., et al., (2018). The change of electron 
structure and magnetic characteristics of modified copper carbon nanocomposites. 
Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 20(1), 72–79. 
24. Karavaeva, N. M., Pershin, Yu. V., Kodolov, V. I., et al., (2019). Change of morphology 
and swelling of cured epoxy compositions upon their modification with minute quantities. 
Pol. Sci., Ser. D., 12(2), 179–181. 
25. Kodolov, V. I., Semakina, N. V., & Trineeva, V. V., (2018). Introduction in science about 
nanomaterials. Monograph (p. 476). – Izhevsk: Publisher – M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk 
State Technical University. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 2 
X-Ray Photoelectron Study of the 
Formation of the Chemical Bond 
and the Atomic Magnetic Moment in 
Nickel–Carbon Nanocomposites Modified 
by d-Metal Oxides 
N. S. TEREBOVA1
, V. I. KODOLOV2
, and I. N. SHABANOVA1 
1
Udmurt Federal Research Center, Ural Branch, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia 
2
Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is used to study the modifica￾tion of Ni/C nickel-carbon nanocomposites with oxides (NiO, CuO, and 
Fe2
O3
) in the ratio of 0.5–1.0. Depending on the type of modifier used 
and its content, the magnetic moment of Ni atoms changes in the nano￾composite, i.e., during the Red-Ox process, the nanocomposite structure 
changes, and the interaction between the carbon skeleton and the modi￾fier metal is enhanced. In the presence of electron acceptors, the paired 
d electrons of the nanocomposite metal become unpaired and move to 
higher orbitals. This is indicative of self-organization processes in nano￾structures, which leads to an increase in the atomic magnetic moment of 
the metal. 14 Modern Magnetic Materials 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The mechanical, thermal, electrical, magnetic, and other properties of Me/C 
(Ме is metal) nanocomposites provide their diverse applications [1–3]. In 
order to improve the dispersion and solubility of nanocomposites along 
with the magnetic, electrical, and strength properties and to prevent beam 
coagulation, Me/C nanocomposites are modified by sp [4] and d elements. 
To examine the formation of a chemical bond between atoms, X-ray 
photoelectron study of the core levels (C1s, O1s, Me2p, Me3s) of modified 
nanocomposites is performed. X-ray photoelectron Мe3s spectra are used to 
estimate the spin state of 3d metal atoms in the nanocomposites under study 
because they have a multiplet structure due to spin-spin interactions [5–10]. 
The parameters of multiplet splitting in the Me3s spectra correlate with the 
number of uncompensated d electrons of metal atoms and its spin magnetic 
moment. It is also proved that the relative intensity of peaks of multiplets in the 
3s spectra correlates with the number of unpaired d electrons of atoms in 3d 
metal systems, and the distance between the multiplet peaks gives information 
about the exchange interaction of 3s–3d shells [11, 12]. From changes occurring 
in the 3d shell (an increase in the degree of localization or hybridization of d 
electrons of metal atoms), it is possible to gain information about a change in the 
distance between neighboring atoms and the nearest environment of 3d metal 
atoms. An increase in the number of uncompensated d electrons is explained 
by the participation of d electrons of modifier metal atoms in the hybridized 
chemical bond with p electrons of carbon atoms in the nanocomposites. 
The model developed is applied to determine a change in the atomic 
magnetic moment of the metal in metal-carbon nanocomposites compared to 
bulk metal samples [13]. A change in the relative intensity of peaks of the multi￾plet splitting and the distance between them in the nanocomposites is shown in 
comparison with the bulk samples. The results obtained indicate an increase in 
the number of uncompensated d electrons in d metal atoms and the appearance 
of copper atoms on their shells in copper–carbon mesocomposites (MCs) [13]. 
The aim of the work is the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) study 
of the effect of modifying Ni–C MCs by metal oxides on a change in the 
atomic magnetic moment of the metal. 
2.2 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 
Nickel-carbon MCs with a modifier were mechanically and chemically 
treated. The red-ox saturated shell of the nickel-carbon nanocomposites. X-Ray Photoelectron Study 15 
The ratio of the modifiers (NiO, CuO, Fe2
O3
) relative to the Ni/C nanocom￾posites varied from 0.5 to 1.0. To activate the process, the reaction mixture 
was moistened. After the Ni–C MC and oxide were ground together in a 
mechanical mortar at an energy consumption of about 260–270 kJ/mol, 
the mesoscopic product formed was dried and kept in a closed crucible 
at about 150°С, and then in vacuo at 100–150°C for no more than 3 min. 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic analysis was conducted on a magnetic 
spectrometer with a resolution of 10–4, instrument luminosity of 0.085%, 
AlKα excitation energy of 1486.5 eV in a vacuum chamber with a residual 
pressure of 10–8–10–10 Torr [14]. 
At present, commercial electrostatic electron spectrometers are used 
internationally. X-ray photoelectron magnetic spectrometers were earlier 
designed in Sweden under the guidance of Nobel laureate K. Siegbahn 
[15]; however, after his death this work ceased. In Russia, it has continued 
under the leadership of K. Siegbahn’s disciple Prof. V. A. Trapeznikov [14]. 
The advantages of X-ray photoelectron magnetic spectrometers are due to 
the fact that the magnetic energy analyzer is meaningfully separated from 
the vacuum chamber of the spectrometer. This enables the application of 
technological impacts on the sample, which are accompanied by aggressive 
gas release. Moreover, magnetic spectrometers are characterized by more 
contrast spectra than electrostatic spectrometers. 
2.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
2.3.1 Ni–C MESOCOMPOSITE (MC) MODIFIED BY THE OXIDE NiO 
Ni–C MC modified by NiO oxide in the ratios Ni/C:NiO = 1:0.5 and 1:1 was 
studied. Figure 2.1 presents the Ni2p spectrum of the MC sample modified 
by nickel oxide NiO in the 1:1 ratio. 
The sample surface contains oxygen contaminants, and the peak of the 
Ni2p spectrum corresponds to an energy of 854.2 eV (curve 1). After cleaning 
the sample in the spectrometer chamber, the spectral peak shifts to a lower 
binding energy of 852 eV (curve 2), which is characteristic of unoxidized 
nickel and indicates reduction of the modifier metal during mechanical and 
chemical treatment. 
Table 2.1 summarizes the data obtained from the Ni3s spectra on the 
atomic magnetic moments of the metal for unmodified Ni/C nanocomposites 
and two samples of nanocomposites modified by NiO. It is seen that the Ni 
atomic magnetic moment varies from 1.8 μB for the unmodified MC [13] to 16 Modern Magnetic Materials 
3.0 μB in the modified sample of the composition Ni/C: NiO = 1: 0.5 and to 
4.0 μB in the sample with the 1: 1 composition. 
FIGURE 2.1 X-ray photoelectron Ni2p spectra of NiO (1); and Ni (2).


Figure 2.2 depicts the X-ray photoelectron Ni3s spectra of two samples.


FIGURE 2.2 X-ray photoelectron Ni3s spectra of Ni/C: NiO =1: 0.5 (1); and 1: 1 (2). X-Ray Photoelectron Study 17 
TABLE 2.1 Parameters of the Me3s Spectra and Magnetic Moments of Metal d Atoms in 
the Reference Samples and Samples of Nanostructures Ni/C:NiO = 1:0.5; Ni/C:NiO = 1:1; 
Ni/C:CuO = 1:1; and Ni/C:Fe2
O3
 = 1:1 
Sample I2
/I1Ni ∆Ni (eV) μNi, μБ I2
/I1Cu ∆Cu (eV) μCu, μБ I2
/I1Fe ∆Fe (eV) μFe, μБ
Ni/C 0.32 3.0 1.8 – – – – – – 
Cu/C – – – 0.2 3.5 1.3 – – – 
Fe/C – – – – – – 0.5 4.0 2.5 
Ni/C + NiO = 1:0.5 0.6 2.6 3.0 – – – – – – 
Ni/C + NiO = 1:1 0.8 2.2 4.0 – – – – – – 
Ni/C + CuO = 1:1 0.5 3.0 2.5 0.4 3.0 2.0 – – – 
Ni/C + Fe O = 1:1 2 3 0.5 2.4 2.5 – – – 0.6 2.0 3.0 
Note: I2
/I
1 is the intensity ratio of the multiplet splitting peaks; Δ is the energy distance 
between the multiplet-splitting peaks in the 3s spectra, which determines the exchange 
integral between 3s and 3d electrons of the metal atom and depends on the overlap of its 3s 
and 3d shells. 
The C1s spectrum of the reference sample of the unmodified Ni/C MC 
(Figure 2.3, curve 1) exhibits three components: 285 (C–H), 284 (C–C, sp2 
hybridization), and 286 eV (С–С, sp3
 hybridization of carbon atom electrons). 
In the C1s spectrum of the sample with the composition Ni/C MC: 
NiO=1:0.5, the 284-eV component (C–C, sp2
) increases. In the C1s spectrum 
of the sample Ni/C MC: NiO = 1:1 (Figure 2.3, curve 3), the 286-eV compo￾nent of the C–C bond with the sp3
 hybridization of carbon-atom valence 
electrons increases. Enhancement of the atomic magnetic moment of nickel 
in the nanocomplexes is caused by a change in their structures, which is 
evidenced by alterations in the C1s spectra. An increase in the С–С-bond 
component with the sp3
 hybridization of valence electrons in addition to C–C 
bonds with the sp2
 hybridization leads to appreciable enhancement of the 
metal atomic magnetic moment in the modified MC. 
Thus, when the nickel-carbon MC is modified by nickel oxide, the atomic 
magnetic moment of nickel considerably increases. The largest nickel 
atomic magnetic moment is observed when the MC is modified by nickel 
oxide (NiO) in the 1:1 ratio. Nickel reduction from the oxide is seen in the 
Ni2p spectra. Released oxygen is bonded to hydrogen atoms from С–H 
fragments of the MC. The component characteristic of the C–C bond with 
the sp3
 hybridization of valence electrons simultaneously increases in the 
C1s spectrum. Electron consumption from the surface of MC С–С fragments 
increases due to the bond with atoms of the reduced modifier metal. 18 Modern Magnetic Materials 
FIGURE 2.3 X-ray photoelectron C1s spectra of the nanostructures: Ni/C (1); Ni/C 
MC:NiO = 1:0.5 (2); and Ni/C MC:NiO = 1:1 (3). 
2.3.2 Ni/C MESOCOMPOSITE (MC) AND THE CuO MODIFIER 
Figure 2.4 shows the X-ray photoelectron Ni3s and Cu3s spectra of the 
sample. 
Table 2.1 lists data on the metal atomic magnetic moments for the 
Ni/C MC modified by CuO. It is seen that the Ni atomic magnetic moment 
varies from 1.8 μB for the unmodified MC to 2.5 μB in the modified 
sample; also a copper atomic magnetic moment of 2.0 μB appears in 
the modified sample of the composition Ni/C MC: CuO = 1:1, which is 
noticeably larger than that (1.3 μB) in the Cu/C nanostructures studied 
previously [13]. 
The C1s spectrum of the Ni/C: CuO sample consists of three components: 
284 (С–С, sp2
), 286 (С–С, sp3
), and 285 eV, which corresponds to C–H. 
Thus, modification of the Ni/C MC by copper oxide, in comparison with 
modification of this sample by nickel oxide, results in lower enhancement 
of the nickel atomic magnetic moment, but at the same time, the magnetic 
moment of reduced copper atoms increases. X-Ray Photoelectron Study 19 
(a) (b) 
FIGURE 2.4 X-ray photoelectron Ni3s (a); and Cu3s (b) spectra of Ni/C MC: CuO = 1:1. 
2.3.3 Ni/C MESOCOMPOSITE (MC) AND THE Fe2O3 MODIFIER (1:1) 
When this sample is heated to 150°С, iron oxide is retained on the surface 
and decomposes in the spectrometer chamber upon heating to 500°С, and 
iron atoms incorporate into the Ni/C MC, interacting with carbon atoms 
having free bonds. The results of the multiplet splitting of the Ni3s and Fe3s 
spectra are summarized in Table 2.1 and Figure 2.5. A change in the Ni atomic 
magnetic moment is observed from 1.8 μB in the unmodified Ni/C MC to 
2.5 μB in the modified one along with a change in the iron atomic magnetic 
moment from 2.5 μB in the Fe/C MC [13] to 3.0 μB in the sample studied. 
(a) (b) 
FIGURE 2.5 X-ray photoelectron Ni3s (a); and Fe3s (b) spectra of Ni/C MC:Fe2
O3
 = 1:1. 
Thus, when nickel-carbon nanocomposites are modified by copper or 
iron oxide, the nickel atomic magnetic moment increases insignificantly. 20 Modern Magnetic Materials 
This can be explained by the fact that copper or iron oxides are reduced in 
steps. In the case of copper oxide, copper(I) oxide must form first, with the 
possible equilibrium transfer of this oxide to copper and initial oxide arising. 
A sufficiently active oxygen atom of copper(I) oxide interacts with C–H 
bonds of the polyacetylene moiety, pushing it to the surface, whereas a part 
of the С–С bonds “sinks.” If this occurs, then the displacement of electrons 
from the metal of the nanostructure to the carbon shell is insignificant, and 
enhancement of the nickel atomic magnetic moment should not be expected. 
2.4 CONCLUSIONS 
Hence, during the red-ox process, the fraction of nickel-carbon nanostructures 
increases and its form changes, i.e., positively charged metal atoms are reduced, 
hydrocarbon groups are dehydrogenated, and the interaction between the 
carbon framework and metal is enhanced. The modifier interacts with carbon 
atoms of the MC where free bonds are present. In the presence of electron 
acceptors, the paired d electrons of the MC metal become unpaired and move 
to higher orbital [16]. This indicates self-assembly processes in the nanostruc￾tures, which results in an increase in the metal atomic magnetic moment. 
The red-ox process on the surface of the metal-carbon MC facilitates 
a significant change in the chemical bond of metal atoms. By varying the 
composition and structure of nanosized forms, it is possible to control the 
physical characteristics of mesoscopic materials. Consequently, the possi￾bility arises to manage the magnetic properties and obtain mesomaterials 
with a super high atomic magnetic moment upon mechanical and chemical 
modification by metal oxides of metal-carbon MCs. 
KEYWORDS 
• atomic magnetic moment 
• carbon atoms 
• nanocomposites 
• nickel-carbon nanocomposites 
• sp, sp2, and sp3 hybridization 
• valence electrons 
• X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy X-Ray Photoelectron Study 21 
REFERENCES 
1. Gubin, S. P., Koksharov, Yu. A., Khomutov, G. B., et al., (2005). Usp. Khim., 74(6), 489. 
2. Eletskii, A. V., (2007). Phys.–Usp., 50(3), 225. 
3.

Bocharov, G. S., Eletskii, A. V., Zakharenkov, A. V., et al., (2018). J. Surf. Invest.: X-ray, 
Synchrotron Neutron Tech., 12, 27. 
4. Shabanova, I. N., Terebova, N. S., Sapozhnikov, G. V., & Kodolov, V. I., (2017). Phys. 
Solid State, 59, 174. https: doi.org/10.1134/S1063783417010279. 
5. Van, V. J. H., (1934). Phys. Rev., 45, 405. 
6. Vasudevan, S., Vasan, H. N., & Rao, C. N. R., (1979). Chem. Phys. Lett., 65(3), 444. 
7. Fadley, C. S., Shirley, D. A., Freeman, A. J., et al., (1969). Phys. Rev. Lett., 23, 1397. 
8. Briggs, D., & Seah, M. P., (1983/1987). Practical Surface Analysis by Auger and X-Ray 
Photoelectron Spectroscopy. New York, Wiley; Mir, Moscow. 
9. Van, A. F., Stadnik, Z. M., Fuggle, J. C., et al., (1988). Phys. Rev. B, 37, 6827. 
10. Selwood, P. W., (1943/1958). Magnetochemistry. Interscience, New York; Inostr. Lit., 
Moscow. 
11. Fadley, C. S., & Shirley, D. A., (1970). Phys. Rev. A, 2, 1109. 
12. Lomova, N. V., & Shabanova, I. N., (2004). J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 
137–140, 511. 
13. Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2010). Surf. Interface Anal., 42(6, 7), 846. 
14. Trapeznikov, V. A., Shabanova, I. N., Dobysheva, L. V., et al., (1986). Izv. Akad. Nauk 
SSSR, Ser. Fiz., 50(9), 1677. 
15. Siegbahn, K., Nordling, C., Fahlman, A., & Nordberg, R., (1967/1971). Atomic, 
Molecular and Solid-State Structure Studied by Means of Electron Spectroscopy. Royal 
Society of Sciences of Uppsala, Uppsala, Sweden; Mir, Moscow. 
16. Al Ma’Mari, F., Moorsom, T., Teobaldi, G., et al., (2015). Nature, 524, 69. https: doi. 
org/10.1038/nature14621. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 3


Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon 
Mesocomposites in Nanosized Reactors 
of Polymeric Matrices 
V. V. KODOLOVA-CHUKHONTZEVA1,2 and V. I. KODOLOV1,3 
1
BRHEC of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopics, 
Udmurt Federal Research Center, RAS, Izhevsk, Russia 
2
Peter Great St. Petersburg Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russia 
3
M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
This chapter explains the base of mesoscopic physics principles for metal-carbon 
mesocomposites (MCs) obtained in polymeric matrices’ nanosized reactors 
(mesoreactors). The conditions of mesoscopic physics principles applications 
are proved. These conditions include such phenomena as interference, spectrum, 
and charge quantization, which take place at the action of mesoscopic (nano) 
particles having sizes from 1,000 to 0.1 nm on different media. In addition to 
that, the correspondent particles can only vibrate and conduct motions. It’s 
shown that these particularities of clusters or mesoparticles are possible during 
the red-ox synthesis of Me–C MC in mesoreactors of polymeric matrices. 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
At present, some hypothesis and the investigations results are explained by 
means of mesoscopic physics principles [1, 2], and also by the fractal theory 
equations [3–5]. Self-organization in system and self-similarity (image) are 24 Modern Magnetic Materials 
the ground notions in mesoscopic physics as well as in the fractal theory and 
technology for nanosized particles or nanostructures. 
Therefore, it is interesting in this chapter to consider the application of 
these disciplines for the synthesis of nanostructures, including metal-carbon 
mesocomposites (Me–C MCs). Mesoscopic Physics deals with mesoscopic 
particles which have linear size from 1,000 to 0.1 nm, because the length 
of coherence wave equals to 1,000 nm, and the electron wavelength in 
different materials changes from 100 to 0.1 nm. For these particles such 
particularities are known as the interference, spectrum quantization and 
charge quantization [1]. 
The application Mesoscopic Physics principles is possible, if the meso￾scopic particle will be established within small volume space, for instance, 
mesoscopic reactor (mesoreactor), in which this mesoparticle is coordinated 
on active groups of mesoreactor walls in correspondence with realized condi￾tions. In these cases, the correspondent particle can only vibrate and conduct 
the electrons across oneself. Therefore, the mesoreactor can be presented as 
the nanosized hollow or the limited free volume in polymeric matrix. Then 
chemical particles are directly self-organized in this hollow for the creation 
of transitional (mesoscopic) state before the mesoscopic product formation. 
Also, the mesoreactor definition can be proposed as the specific porous nano￾structure, in which the distance between walls changes from 1 nm to 100 nm. 
3.2 THEORETICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATIONS OF 
SYNTHESIS WITHIN NANOREACTORS OF POLYMERIC MATRICES 
To our mind, the formation of Me–C MC within mesoreactors of polymeric 
matrices may be similar to the photography processes. At the beginning, 
when metal containing phase is mixed up with the polymeric phase, the 
mesoreactor within polymeric matrix is filled by metal clusters of metal 
containing phase. The process is accompanied with cluster coordination 
on active centers of mesoreactor walls. It’s similar to photography process. 
Then during process of xerogel formation the development flows. And then 
at the heating of obtained product the fixation occurs. 
Thus, at the Me–C MC obtaining there are following processes: the coor￾dination reactions, the red-ox reactions and certainly the self-organization 
processes. 
Let us discuss this picture of the nanostructure’s formation. Now the 
active chemical metal containing particle is taken root in the free nano￾sized hollow of polymeric matrices. It coordinates with functional groups Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 25 
on mesoreactor walls and loses the ability to diffusion and rotation. This 
muddled particle can be characterized by vibration motion, and also electron 
motion including the transport electrons across it. However, if the electrons 
transport across our particle (cluster) will be carried out, the red-ox reactions 
will be stimulated, and the metal reduction will be occurred. This process is 
direct and lead to self-organization which may be observed with using AFM 
investigations. For the further stimulation of Me–C MC formation process it 
is necessary the regular regime of unfinished product heating. 
Consequently, the red-ox synthesis of Me–C MC can be explained by 
basic principles of Mesoscopic Physics. 
The investigation of Red-Ox synthesis of Me–C MC in mesoreactors of 
polymeric matrices is realized [9, 10] in three stages (Scheme 3.1). 
Polymeric Matrices, → 
for example, Polyvinyl 
Alcohol 
Nanoreactors of Polymeric 
Matrices for the filling by 
Metal Compounds Phase 
← Metal Compounds, for 
instance, Clusters of Copper 
or Nickel Oxides 
Coordination Reactions and, Partially, Red-Ox Processes ↓ 
The obtaining of xerogels containing the different mesoreactors 
in dependence on metal nature 
The estimation of energetic and geometric characteristics of Nanoreactors ↓ 
Thermochemical stage (Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal-carbon Mesocomposites) 
DTA-TG investigations for the determination of temperature conditions and the 
heating duration (the middle temperature for the Copper–Carbon Synthesis 
films equals to 200°C, at the middle duration equals to 3 hours). 
SCHEME 3.1 The scheme of metal-carbon mesocomposites synthesis within mesoreactors 
of polymeric matrices. 
Before the experimental investigations, the computational designing of 
mesoreactors filled by metal containing phase as well as quantum chemical 
modeling of processes within mesoreactors are carried out. 
Then the experimental designing and mesoreactors filling by metal 
containing phase are realized with using two methods: 
i.

 The mixing of salt solution with the solution of functional polymer, 
for example, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) solution; and 
ii.

 The common degeneration of polymeric phase with metal containing 
phase (metal oxides) in active medium (water). 
The following stage includes the obtaining of xerogels filled by metal 
containing phase. The third stage is the properly red-ox synthesis of Me–C 26 Modern Magnetic Materials 
MC in mesoreactors of polymeric matrices (obtained xerogels) at narrow 
temperature intervals. 
The first and second stages concern to preparatory stages. On the second 
stage the functional groups in nanoreactor walls participate in coordination 
reactions with metal ions [(i) method] or with the clusters of metal containing 
phase [(ii) method]. 
The computational experiment was carried out with Gamess and 
HyperChem software products, with visualization. The definite result of the 
computational experiment is obtained stage by stage. Any transformations 
at the initial stages are taken into account at further stages. The prognostic 
possibilities of the computational experiment consist in defining the prob￾ability of the formation of nanostructures of definite shapes. The optimal 
dimensions and shape of internal cavity of nanoreactors, optimal correla￾tion between metal containing and polymeric components for obtaining 
the necessary mesoproducts are found with the help of quantum-chemical 
modeling [9]. 
If the method (i) is used, for instance, the interaction of PVA and metal 
chloride solutions where metals are iron, cobalt, nickel, and copper, than the 
colored xerogels is formed as follows: iron – brown-red, nickel – pale-green, 
cobalt – blue and copper – yellow-green. Consequently, PVA interacts with 
metal ions with the formation of complex compounds. 
For the corresponding correlations “polymer-metal containing phase” the 
dimensions, shape, and energetic characteristics of nanoreactors are found 
with the help of coordination, the structure and relief of xerogel surface 
change. The comparison of phase contrast pictures on the corresponding 
films indicates a greater concentration of the extended polar structures in the 
films containing copper, in comparison with the films containing nickel and 
cobalt (Figure 3.1). 
The processing of the pictures of phase contrast to reveal the regions 
of energy interaction of cantilever with the surface in comparison with the 
background produces practically similar result with optical transmission 
microscopy [11, 12]. 
Corresponding to data of AFM [11], the sizes of nanoreactors obtained 
from solutions of metal chlorides and the mixture of PVA with polyethylene 
polyamine (PEPA) are determined (Table 3.1). 
The results of AFM investigations of xerogels films obtained from metal 
oxides and PVA [13, 14] is distinguished (Figure 3.2) in comparison with 
previous data, which testify to the difference in reactivity of metal chlorides 
and metal oxides. Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 27 
FIGURE 3.1 Pictures of phase contrast of PVA surfaces containing copper (а); nickel (b), 
and cobalt (c).


TABLE 3.1 Sizes of Nanoreactors Found with the Help of Atomic Force Microscopy


Composition Sizes of AFM Formations 
Length Width Height Area Density 
PVA:PEPA:СоCI2 = 2:1:1 400–800 150–400 30–40 60–350 5.5 
PVA:PEPA:NiCI2 = 2:1:1 80–100 80–100 25–35 6–12 120 
PVA:PEPA:СuCI2 = 2:1:1 80–100 80–100 20–30 6–20 20 
PVA:PEPA:СоCI2 = 2:2:1 600–900 300–600 100–120 180–500 3.0 
PVA:PEPA:NiCI2 = 2:2:1 40–80 40–60 10–30 2–4 350 
FIGURE 3.2 Phase contrast pictures of xerogels films PVA–Ni (a); and PVA–Cu (b). 28 Modern Magnetic Materials 
According to AFM results investigation the addition of Ni/C MC in PVA 
leads to more strong coordination in comparison with analogous addition 
Cu/C MC. 
The mechanism of formation of nanoreactors filled with metals was 
found with the help of IR spectroscopy. Depending on metal coordinating 
ability and conditions for nanostructure obtaining (in liquid or solid medium 
with minimal content of liquid), we obtain “embryos” of future nanostruc￾tures of different shapes, dimensions, and composition. It is advisable to 
model coordination processes and further red-ox processes with the help of 
quantum chemistry apparatus. 
The availability of d metal in polymeric matrix results, in accordance 
with modeling results, in its regular distribution in the matrix and self￾organization of the matrix. 
At the same time, the metal orientation proceeds in interface regions 
and nanosized pores of polymeric phase which stipulates further direc￾tion of the process to the formation of metal/carbon nanocomposites. In 
other words, the birth and growth of nanosized structures occur during the 
process in the same way as known from the macromolecule physics and 
fractal theory [16]. 
The mechanism of formation of nanoreactors filled with metals was found 
with the help of IR spectroscopy. Thus, at the second stage the coordination 
of metal containing phase and corresponding orientation in mesoreactor take 
place. 
To investigate the processes at the second stage of obtaining metal/ 
carbon nanocomposites X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), transmis￾sion electron microscopy and IR spectroscopy are applied. The sample for 
IR spectroscopy was prepared when mixing Me–C MC powder with one 
drop of Vaseline oil in agate mortar to obtain a homogeneous paste with 
further investigation of the paste obtained on the appropriate instrument. As 
the Vaseline oil was applied when the spectra were taken, we can expect 
strong bands in the range 2,750–2,950 сm–1. 
At the third stage, it is required to give the corresponding energy impulse 
to transfer the “transition state” formed into carbon metal MC of definite size 
and shape. To define the temperature ranges in which the structuring takes 
place, DTA-TG investigation is applied. 
It is known that small changes of weight loss (TG curve) at invariable 
exothermal effect (DTA curve) testify to the self-organization (structural 
formation) in the system. Below typical curves of DTA-TG investigation 
are shown. Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 29 
According to data of DTA-TG investigation optimal temperature field 
for film nanostructure obtaining is 230–270°C, and for spatial nanostructure 
obtaining – 325–410°C. 
It is found that in the temperature range at 200°C nanosized films, from 
carbon fibers associated with metal phase as well, are formed on metal or 
metal oxide clusters. When the temperature elevates up to 400°C, 3D nano￾structures are formed with different shapes depending on the coordinating 
ability of the metal. 
Assuming that the nanocomposites obtained can be considered as oscil￾lators transferring their oscillations onto the medium molecules, we can 
determine to what extent the IR spectrum of liquid medium will change. 
It is proposed to consider the obtaining of Me–C MC in mesoreactors of 
polymeric matrixes as self-organization process similar to the formation of 
ordered phases. 
The perspectives of this investigation are looked through in an opportunity 
of thin regulation of processes and the entering of corrective amendments 
during processes. 
This process can be considered as the crystallization and can be described 
by the fractal theory with the application of Avrami-Kolmogorov equation. 
However, this equation was adapted to the conditions of Me–C MC red-ox 
synthesis. At the beginning let us discuss the possibilities of Avrami equa￾tions for the determination of the heating regime conditions at the red-ox 
synthesis of Me–C MC. 
The difference of potentials between the interacting particles and object 
walls stimulating these interactions is the driving force of self-organization 
processes (formation of mesoparticles with definite shapes). The potential 
jump at the boundary “mesoreactor wall-reacting particles” is defined by 
the wall surface charge and reacting layer size. If we consider the red-ox 
process as the main process preceding the nanostructure formation, the work 
for charge transport corresponds to the energy of mesoparticle formation 
process in the reacting layer. Then the equation of energy conservation for 
mesoreactor during the formation of mesoparticle will be as follows: 
 N  nF∆ϕ = RT ln  p
, (1)  Nr 
where; n is the number reflecting the charge of chemical particles moving 
inside “the mesoreactor;” F is the Faraday number; ∆ϕ is the difference of 
potentials between the mesoreactor walls and flow of chemical particles; 
R is the gas constant; T is the process temperature; Np
 is the mol share of 30 Modern Magnetic Materials 
mesoparticles obtained; and Nr
 is the mol share of initial reagents from which 
the mesoparticles are obtained. 
Using the above equation, we can determine the values of equilibrium 
constants when reaching the certain output of mesoparticles, sizes of 
mesoparticles and shapes of mesoparticles formed with the appropriate equa￾tion modification. The internal cavity sizes or mesoreactor reaction zone and 
its geometry significantly influence the sizes and shapes of nanostructures. 
The sequence of the processes is conditioned by the composition and 
parameters (energy and geometry) of mesoreactors. To accomplish such 
processes, it is advisable to preliminarily select the polymeric matrix containing 
the nanoreactors in the form of nanosized pores or crazes as process appropriate. 
Such selection can be realized with the help of computer chemistry. Further, 
the computational experiment is carried out with the reagents placed in the 
mesoreactor with the corresponding geometry and energy parameters. 
Examples of such computations were given in Ref. [3]. The experimental 
confirmation of polymer matrix and mesoreactor selection for the obtaining 
of the carbon metal containing nanostructures was given in Refs. [4, 5]. 
Kolmogorov-Avrami equations are widely used for such processes which 
usually reflect the shares of a new phase produced. 
When the metal ion moves inside the mesoreactor with red-ox interaction 
of ion (mol) with mesoreactor walls, the balance setting in the pair “metal 
containing-polymeric phase” can apparently be described with the following 
equation: 
 p  RT ln K = RT ln 
N
zF∆ϕ =  = RT ln 1 ( −W ) (2)  Nr 
where; z is the number of electrons participating in the process; Δφ is the 
difference of potentials at the boundary “mesoreactor wall-reactive mixture;” 
F is the Faraday number; R is the universal gas constant; T is the process 
temperature; K is the process balance constant; Np
 is the number of moles of 
the product produced in mesoreactor; Nr
 is the number of moles of reagents 
or atoms (ions) participating in the process which filled the mesoreactor; and 
W is the share of nanosized product obtained in mesoreactor. 
In turn, the share of the transformed components participating in phase 
interaction can be expressed with the equation which can be considered as a 
modified Avrami equation: 
  zF∆ϕ  W = 1− exp −τn exp   (3)   RT 
where; τ is the duration of the process in mesoreactor; and n is the number of 
freedom degrees changing from 1 to 6. Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 31 
When “n” equals 1, one-dimensional nanostructures are obtained (linear 
nanostructures, nanosized fibers). If “n” equals 2 or is changed from 1 to 2, 
flat nanostructures are formed (nanosized films, circles, petals, wide nano￾sized bands). If “n” changes from 2 to 3 and more, spatial nanostructures are 
formed as “n” also indicates the number of freedom degrees. The selection 
of the corresponding equation recording form depends on the mesoreactor 
(nanostructure) shape and sizes and defines the nanostructure growth in the 
mesoreactor. 
During the red-ox process connected with the coordination process, the 
chemical bonds character changes. Therefore, correlations of wave numbers 
of the changing chemical bonds can be applied as the characteristic of the 
nanostructure formation process in mesoreactor: 

τn ν is 

W = 1− exp − ⋅  (4)  ν  fs 
where; νin corresponds to wave numbers of the initial state of chemical bonds, 
and νf
 is the wave numbers of chemical bonds changing during the process. 
By the analogy with the above calculations, the parameters a in the Eqn. 
(5) should be considered as a value that reflects the transition from the initial 
to the final state of the system and represents the ratios of activities of system 
states. 
The experimental modeling of obtaining nanosized films after the align￾ment of copper compounds with PVA at 200°C revealed that optimal duration, 
when the share of mesoscopic films approaches 100%, equals 2.5 hours. This 
corresponds to the calculated value based on the aforesaid Avrami equation. 
The calculations are made supposing the formation of copper nano￾crystals on the nano-films. It is pointed out that copper ions are predomi￾nantly reduced to metal. Therefore, it was accepted for the calculations that 
n equals 2 (two-dimensional growth), potential of red-ox process during 
the ion reduction to metal (Δφ) equals 0.34 V, temperature (T) equals 473 
K, Faraday number (F) corresponds to 26.81 (А⋅hour/mol), gas constant R 
equals 2.31 (W⋅hour/mol⋅degree). The analysis of the dimensionality shows 
zF∆ϕ the zero dimension of the ratio: . RT
The calculations are made when changing the process duration with a 
half-hour increment. Results of calculations on the Eqn. (3) are brought in 
table. 
If nano-films are scrolled together with copper nano-wires β is taken as 
equaled to 3, the temperature increases up to 400°C, the optimal time when 32 Modern Magnetic Materials 
the transformation degree reaches 99.97%, corresponds to the duration of 2 
hours, thus also coinciding with the experiment. According to the calculation 
results, if following the definite conditions of the system exposure, the dura￾tion of the exposure has the greatest influence on the value of nanostructure 
share. 
The selection of the corresponding equation form depends upon the 
shape and sizes of mesoreactor (nanostructure) and defines the nanostructure 
growth in mesoreactor or the influence distribution of the nanostructure 
on the structurally changing medium. At the same time νis corresponds to 
the frequency of skeleton oscillations of C–C bond at 1,100 cm–1, νfs is the 
symmetrical skeleton oscillations of C=C bond at 1,050 cm–1. In this case the 
equation looks like Eqn. (4). 
For the example discussed the content of Nano-films in % will be 
changing together with the changes in the duration as follows in table. 
Under the aforesaid conditions, the linear sizes of copper (from ion radius 
to atom radius) and carbon-carbon bond (from C–C to C=C) are changing 
during the process. Apparently, the structure of copper ion and electron 
interacts with electrons of the corresponding bonds forming the layer with 
linear sizes ri
 + lC–C in the initial condition and the layer with the size ra
 + lC=C 
in the final condition. Then the equation for the content of Nano-films can be 
written down as follows: 

 n r
r l
+ lC C= 
 W = 1− exp τ (5) α − ⋅
 i + C C− 
At the same time ri
 for Cu2+ equals 0.082 nm, ra
 for four-coordinated copper 
atom corresponds to 0.113 nm, bond energy C–C equals 0.154 nm, and C=C 
bond – 0.142 nm. Representing the ratio of activities as the ratio of corre￾sponding linear sizes and taking the value n as equaled to 2, at the same time 
changing τ in the same intervals as before, we get the following change in the 
transformation degree based on the process duration (Table 3.2). 
Modified Kolmogorov-Avrami equations were tested to prognosticate 
the duration of the processes of obtaining metal-carbon Nano-films in the 
system “Cu–PVA (PVA)” at 200°C [2]. The calculated time (2.5 hours) 
correspond to the experimental duration of obtaining carbon Nano-films on 
copper clusters. 
Thus, with the help of Kolmogorov-Avrami equations or their modified 
analogs we can determine the optimal duration of the process to obtain the 
required result. It opens up the possibility of defining other parameters of the 
process and characteristics of nanostructures obtained (by shape and sizes). Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 33 
TABLE 3.2 The Changes of Nano-films Content Calculated Dependent on the Duration of 
Synthesis 
Duration (hours) 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
Content of Eqn. (3) 22.5 63.8 89.4 98.3 99.8 
nanofilms (%) Eqn. (5) 23.0 64.9 90.5 98.5 99.9 
Eqn. (6) 23.7 66.0 91.2 98.7 99.9 
The methods of optical spectroscopy and XPS give the possibility 
to determine the energy of the interaction of the chemical particles in the 
mesoreactors with the mesoreactor walls active centers, which stimulate 
reduction-oxidation processes. 
Depending on the nature of the metal salt and the electrochemical 
potential of the metal, different metal reduction mesoscopic products in the 
carbon shells differing in shape are formed. Based on this result we may 
speak about a new scientific branch – mesoscopic metallurgy. The stages of 
nanostructures synthesis may be represented by the scheme in Figure 3.3. 
FIGURE 3.3 Scheme of copper/carbon nanostructures obtained from copper ions and poly￾vinyl alcohol. 
Otherwise, as follows from this scheme, the first step (stage) of Me–C 
MC formation is the growth carbon fibers associated with metal clusters. 
The second stage is the formation of carbon film which covers metal clusters. 
And then, this film transforms in the 3D nanostructures with metal containing 
clusters inside. 
The possible ways for obtaining metallic nanostructures in carbon shells 
have been determined. The investigation results allow considering the possi￾bility of the isolation of metallic and metal-containing nanoparticles (NPs) 34 Modern Magnetic Materials 
in the carbon shells differing in shape and structure. However, there are still 
problems related to the calculation and experiment because using the existing 
investigation methods it is difficult unambiguously to estimate the geometry 
and energy parameters of nanoreactors under the condition of ‘erosion’ of 
their walls during the formation of metallic nanostructures in them. 
It is interesting that the scheme (Figure 3.4) and the succession of stages 
on fractal dimension correspond to experimental morphology of nanocom￾posites obtained after corresponding heating stages (Figure 3.5). 
It is found that in the temperature range at 200°C mesoscopic films, from 
carbon fibers associated with metal phase as well (Figure 3.4), are formed on 
metal or metal oxide clusters. When the temperature elevates up to 400°C, 
3D nanostructures are formed with different shapes depending on the coor￾dinating ability of the metal. 
FIGURE 3.4 Microphotographs obtained with the help of transmission electron microscopy 
– Cu/C mesocomposite. 
Two types of nanocomposites rather widely applied during the modi￾fication of various polymeric materials were investigated. These were: Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites

 35 
copper–carbon MC and nickel–carbon MC specified below. In turn, the 
mesoscopic powders obtained were tested with the help of high-resolution 
transmission electron microscopy, electron micro-diffraction, laser analyzer, 
XPS and IR spectroscopy. 
The method of Me–C MC synthesis applied has the following advantages: 
•

 Originality of stage-by-stage obtaining of metal/carbon nanocompos￾ites with intermediary evaluation of the influence of initial mixture 
composition on their properties. 
•

 Wide application of independent modern experimental and theoretical 
analysis methods to control the technological process. 
•

 Technology developed allows synthesizing a wide range of metal/ 
carbon nanocomposites depending on the process conditions. 
•

 Process does not require the use of inert or reduction atmospheres and 
specially prepared catalysts. 
•

 Method of obtaining metal/carbon nanocomposites allows applying 
secondary raw materials. 
So, the mesoreactor walls, containing the functional groups, have different 
potentials. When the mesoscopic particles (in our case, ions or metal oxide 
clusters) are coordinated with functional groups of mesoreactor walls, their 
potentials change too. 
Now, according to mesoscopic physics principles, the conditions are created 
for electrons transport across mesoscopic particles (clusters) in which there are 
reducers (positively charged metal or metal ions). The red-ox processes are 
begun and the d metal electron structure changes with the growth of unpaired 
electron number. d-metal becomes paramagnetic. At the same time, the 
hydrocarbon shells, corresponding to mesoreactor walls, are oxidized with the 
aromatic cycles or hexagon formation in which π electrons are interacted with 
metal unpaired electrons. Otherwise, there is the possibility of unpaired electrons 
formation on the carbon shell of Me–C MC obtained. Let us discuss the proper￾ties and especially energetic characteristics of metal/carbon nanocomposites. 
3.3 METAL-CARBON MESOCOMPOSITES (ME–C MCS) PROPERTIES, 
INCLUDING ENERGETIC AND MAGNETIC CHARACTERISTICS 
Metal-carbon mesocomposite (Me–C MC) will be more active than carbon 
or silicon nanostructures because their masses are bigger at identical sizes 
and shapes. Therefore, the vibration energy transmitted to the medium is 
also high. 36 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Me–C MC represents metallic clusters stabilized in carbon cover which 
contains structures [12–14]. In turn, nanosized film structures are formed 
from carbon amorphous nanosized fibers associated with metal containing 
phase. As a result of stabilization and association of metal mesoparticles 
with carbon phase, the metal chemically active particles are stable in the air 
and during heating as the strong complex of metal mesoparticles with carbon 
material matrix is formed. 
For the corresponding correlations “polymer-metal containing phase” the 
dimensions, shape, and energy characteristics of nanoreactors are found with 
the help of AFM [9, 15]. Depending on a metal participating in coordination, 
the structure and relief of xerogel surface change. 
To investigate the processes at the second stage of obtaining metal/carbon 
nanocomposites XPS, transmission electron microscopy and IR spectroscopy 
are applied. 
In turn, the mesoscopic powders obtained were tested with the help of 
such methods as high-resolution transmission electron microscopy, electron 
micro-diffraction, IR spectroscopy, XPS and also with using of laser analysis. 
The test results of MCs obtained are given in Table 3.3. 
The distinctive feature of the considered technique for producing metal/ 
carbon nanocomposites is a wide application of independent, modern, 
experimental, and theoretical analysis methods to substantiate the proposed 
technique and investigation of the composites obtained (quantum-chemical 
calculations, methods of transmission electron microscopy and electron 
diffraction, method of XPS, X-ray phase analysis, etc.). The technique 
developed allows synthesizing a wide range of metal/carbon nanocomposites 
by composition, size, and morphology depending on the process conditions. 
In its application it is possible to use secondary metallurgical and polymer 
raw materials. Thus, we can adjust the MC structure to extend the function 
of its application without pre-functionalization. Controlling the sizes and 
shapes of nanostructures by changing the metal-containing phase, we can, 
to some extent, apply completely new, practicable properties to the materials 
which sufficiently differ from conventional materials. 
The essence of the method [11] consists in coordination interaction of 
functional groups of polymer and compounds of 3D-metals as a result of 
grinding of metal-containing and polymer phases. Further, the composition 
obtained undergoes thermolysis following the temperature mode set with 
the help of thermogravimetric and differential thermal analyzes. At the same 
time, we observe the polymer carbonization, partial or complete reduction 
of metal compounds and structuring of carbon material in the form of nano￾structures with different shapes and sizes. 37 
TABLE 3.3 Characteristics of Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites (Met/C NC)
Type of Met/C NC Cu/C Ni/C Co/C Fe/C 
Composition, metal/carbon 50/50 60/40 65/35 70/30 
(%)
Density (g/сm3) 1.71 2.17 1.61 2.1 
Average dimension (nm) 20(25) 11 15 17 
Specific surface (m2/g) 160 (average) 251 209 168 
Metal mesoparticle shape Close to spherical, there are 
dodecahedrons 
There are spheres and rods Nano-crystals Close to spherical
Caron phase shape (shell) Nano-fibers associated with Nano-films scrolled in Nano-films associated Nano-films forming
metal phase forming Nan nanotubes with nano-crystals of nano-beads with metal￾coatings metal-containing phase containing phase
Atomic magnetic moment 0.0 0.6 ~1.0 2.1 
(metal) [8] (µB)
Atomic magnetic moment 0.6 1.6 1.7 2.3 
(nanocomposite) (µB) 
Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 38 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The conditions of metal/carbon nanocomposites red-ox synthesis such 
as nature of metal containing phase and also polymeric phase (for example, 
molecular mass and acetate groups number for PVA) influence on the 
composition and structure of Me–C MC. 
Examples for the phase composition changes and the morphology of 
copper–carbon MCs obtained in different conditions are presented in Figures 
3.5(a) and (b); Table 3.4. 
FIGURE 3.5(a) The roentgenogram of nickel–carbon mesocomposite obtained in different 
conditions. 
FIGURE 3.5(b) The roentgenograms of copper–carbon mesocomposite obtained in different 
conditions. Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 39 
TABLE 3.4 The Example of Copper–Carbon Mesocomposites Morphology Changes Stipu￾lated by Different Conditions 
Nanocomposite 
Code 
Reagents of 
Synthesis 
Temperature 
Regime of 
Synthesis (°C) 
Morphology of 
Nanocomposites 
Particles Sizes of 
Nanocomposites 
Cu/C 1 Copper oxide 
+ PVA 
420 Metal crystal 
phase within 
carbon nanosized 
films 
Min. – 5 nm 
Max. – 35 nm 
Individual mesopar￾ticles near to 100 nm 
Cu/c 2 Copper oxide 
+ PVA 
390 Metal spherical 
mesoparticles 
within 
carbon film 
nanostructure 
Min. – 2 nm 
Max. – 40 nm 
Individual mesoparti￾cles near to 70–100 nm 
Here, Me–C MC represents metal mesoparticles stabilized in carbon film nanostructures [12, 
13]. 
In turn, Nan film structures are formed with carbon amorphous Nano￾fibers associated with metal containing phase. As a result of stabilization and 
association of metal mesoparticles with carbon phase, the metal chemically 
active particles are stable in the air and during heating as the strong complex 
of metal mesoparticles with carbon material matrix is formed. 
Figure 3.6 demonstrates the microphotographs of transmission electron 
microscopy specific for different types of metal/carbon nanocomposites. 
If the metal/carbon nanocomposites are considered as supermolecules, 
their surface energies analogously energy of usual molecules consists of 
portions of energy which correspond to progressive, rotation, and vibration 
motions and also electronic motion: 
ε NC = ε + ε + εvib + εelm (6) s prog rot
where; ε NC is the surface energy of MC; ε is the MC surface energy portion s prog
which corresponds to the progressive motion; εrot is the MC surface energy 
portion which corresponds to the rotation motion; εvib is the MC surface 
energy portion which corresponds to the vibration motion; and εelm is the 
nanocomposite surface energy portion which corresponds to electron motion 
for the interactions of nanocomposites with surroundings molecules. 
When the MC progressive motion portion increases the mesoparticles 
diffusion processes importance grows in media that leads to their coagula￾tion with the decreasing of the surface energy aggregate obtained. 40 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The coagulation of mesoparticles increases at the increasing of their 
quantities in a medium which has little viscosity. 
(A) (B) 
(C) (D) 
FIGURE 3.6 Microphotographs of metal/carbon nanocomposites: (а) Cu/C; (b) Ni/C; (c) 
Co/C; and (d) Fe/C. 
From the metal/carbon nanocomposites Raman and IR spectra analysis 
it follows that the skeleton vibration of them on the vibrations frequencies 
corresponds to ultrasonic vibrations. The MC vibrations energy values are 
determined by the corresponding mesoparticles sizes and masses. The mass 
of mesoparticle (Me–C MC) depends on their content and types of metal 
containing phase clusters. 
Usually Me–C MC have the great dipole moment. Therefore, it is possible 
the proposition that MC is a vibrator which radiates electromagnetic (EM) 
waves. 
The MC vibration emission in the medium is determined by their dielec￾tric characteristics and the corresponding functional groups presence in the 
medium. Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 41 
At the metal/carbon nanocomposites obtaining the interaction of poly￾meric matrix with metal containing phase leads to the formation of metal 
clusters covered by carbon shells accompanied by metal electron structure 
changes. In some cases, the medium characteristics influence on nano￾composites throw into the increasing of MC surface energy portion, which 
concerns with changes of their electron structure and equally with electron 
structure of medium. 
In these cases, the growth of metal atomic magnetic moments is 
observed (Table 3.5) that corresponds to the unpaired electron number 
increasing. The considerable changes of metal atomic magnetic moments 
in MCs proceed when the phosphorus atoms include to carbon shells of 
MCs. 
TABLE 3.5 The Comparison of Atomic Magnetic Moments of Some 3D Metals in Metal￾Carbon Mesocomposites and Their Functionalized Phosphorus Containing Analogs [6, 13] 
Metal in Mesocomposite Cu Ni Co Fe 
Metal atomic magnetic moment for mesocomposite. 0.6 1.6 1.7 2.3 
Metal atomic magnetic moment for Phosphorus 2.0 3.0 2.5 2.5 
containing mesocomposite. 
The appearance or increasing of paramagnetic properties is linked with 
the possibility of chemical bonds formation, and also the growth of Me–C 
MC reactivity into polar media. 
Vibration portion of surface energy of metal/carbon nanocomposites can 
be presented as: 
2 muvib ε vib = 2 (7) 
where; m is the mass of Me–C MC, which includes summary mass of carbon 
or carbon, polymeric shell and cluster of metal containing phase; uvib is the 
vibration velocity correspondent to product of vibration amplitude on vibra￾tion frequency. 
Usually, the fine dispersed suspensions or sols of nanostructures are used 
for the modification of polymeric compositions (matrixes) to distribute NPs 
into polymeric matrix. The liquids, which are used for polymeric materials 
production, are represented as dispersion medium. For the obtaining of fine 
dispersed suspensions small and super small quantities of metal/carbon 42 Modern Magnetic Materials 
nanocomposites are introduced into dispersed media at the mechanical and 
further the ultrasonic mixing. 
The MC vibration amplitude is the product of wave number on velocity 
of light. Therefore, the Eqn. (7) can be written: 
(mcl +msh ) dvc
ε vib = 2 (8) 
where; mcl is the mass of metal containing phase; msh is the mass of carbon or 
carbon polymeric shell; d is the average linear size of Me–C MC particles; ν 
is the wave number of MC skeleton vibration; and c is the velocity of light. 
Under the influence by EM radiation arising at the ultrasonic vibration 
of MC the self-organization of polymeric compositions macromolecules is 
possible. According to the Eqn. (8), the MC vibration energy is determined 
by the average mass and size of MC (Table 3.6). 
TABLE 3.6 Energetic Characteristics of Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites [11–13] 
Metal in Metal/Carbon Nanocomposites Cu Ni Co Fe 
Summary mass of metal/carbon nanocomposite (au) 36.75 40.01 42.50 42.69 
Specific surface of metal/carbon nanocomposite, S 160 251 209 163 
(m2
/g) 
Skeleton vibration frequency of metal/carbon 4×1011 4.2×1011 4.1×1011 4×1011 
nanocomposite (ν , s–1) vib
Average vibration velocity of metal/carbon 8.5×105 4.6×105 6.1×105 6.9×105 
nanocomposites (u , cm/s) vib
Average vibration energy of metal/carbon 1.6×1013 4.3×1012 7.6×1012 9.9×1012 
nanocomposites (ε , erg) vib
The vibration motion portion energy essentially determines by the vibra￾tion amplitude because the MC skeleton vibration frequencies practically 
equal (the proximity of metal nature). 
If the vibration amplitudes and the MC sizes are correlated, the nanocom￾posites sizes show the great influence on the vibration energy and also on the 
vibration velocity. Therefore, according to the increasing of vibration energy 
as well as the increasing of metal/carbon MCs linear sizes, the correspondent 
MCs (M–C MC) are displaced in the following order: 
(Cu/C MC) > εvib (Fe/C MC) > εvib (Co/C MC) > εvib ε (Ni/C MC) vib
This disposition of nanocomposites on the vibration energy values is possible, 
when the vibration motion portion is greatly bigger on the comparison with Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 43 
other portions of surface energy. However, the common surface energy of 
nanocomposites obtained differs from previous row and corresponds to values 
of specific surface: 
S (Ni/C MC) > S (Co/C MC) > S (Fe/C MC) > S (Cu/C MC) sp sp sp sp
Certainly, in dependence on methods and conditions of the metal/carbon 
nanocomposites synthesis, the changes of forms and contents for nanocom￾posites are possible. At the same time, the fundamentals of the Me–C MC 
activity open the new perspectives for their interaction prognosis in the 
different media. 
The nanocomposites described above were investigated with the help of 
IR spectroscopy by the technique indicated above. In this chapter, the IR 
spectra of Cu/C and Ni/C nanocomposites are discussed (Figures 3.7 and 
3.8), which find a wider application as the material modifiers. 
FIGURE 3.7 IR spectra of copper–carbon mesocomposite powder. 
On IR spectra of two nanocomposites, the common regions of IR radia￾tion absorption are registered. Further, the bands appearing in the spectra and 
having the largest relative area were evaluated. We can see the difference in 44 Modern Magnetic Materials 
the intensity and number of absorption bands in the range 1,300–1,460 сm–1, 
which confirms the different structures of composites. 
In the range 600–800 сm–1 the bands with a very weak intensity are seen, 
which can be referred to the oscillations of double bonds (π-electrons) coor￾dinated with metals. 
FIGURE 3.8 IR spectra of nickel–carbon mesocomposite powder. 
In the spectrum of Cu/C MC a weak absorption is found at 720 сm–1, and 
in case of Ni/C MC the absorption at 620 сm–1 is also observed. 
In IR spectrum of copper–carbon MC two bands with a high relative area 
are found: 
i) at 1,323 сm–1 (relative area – 9.28) 
ii) at 1,406 сm–1 (relative area – 25.18). 
These bands can be referred to as skeleton oscillations of polyphenylene 
rings. 
In IR spectrum of Nickel/Carbon MC the band mostly appears at 1,406 
сm–1 (relative area – 14.47). The investigations of Carbon films in Metal/ 
Carbon Nanocomposites and their peculiarities are carried out by Raman 
spectroscopy with the use of Laser Spectrometer Horiba Lab Ram HR 800. Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 45 
The Raman spectra and PEM microphotograph of Copper/Carbon (Cu/C) 
MC are represented in Figure 3.9. 
Wave numbers and intensity relation testify to the presence of NPs 
containing the Copper atoms coordinated. At the same time, the comparison 
of IR and Raman spectra shows their closeness on wave numbers and inten￾sities relation. 
FIGURE 3.9 Raman spectra of Cu–C mesocomposites: Cu/C 1 (28 nm); and Cu/C 2 (25 nm). 
According to the investigations with transmission electron microscopy, 
the formation of carbon Nan film structures consisting of carbon threads is 
characteristic for copper–carbon MC. 
In contrast, carbon fiber structures, including nanotubes, are formed 
in nickel–carbon MC. There are several absorption bands in the range 
2,800–3,050 сm–1, which are attributed to valence oscillations of C–H bonds 
in aromatic and aliphatic compounds. These absorption bonds are connected 
with the presence of Vaseline oil in the sample. It is difficult to find the presence 
of metal in the composite as the metal is stabilized in carbon nanostructure. 
At the same time, it should be pointed out that apparently nanocomposites 
influence the structure of Vaseline oil in different ways. The intensities and 
number of bands for Cu/C and Ni/C nanocomposites are different: 
•

 for copper–carbon mesocomposite in the indicated range – 5 bands, 
and total intensity corresponds by the relative area – 64.63. 
•

 for nickel–carbon mesocomposite in the same range – 4 bands with 
total intensity (relative area) – 85.6. 
The distribution of mesoparticles in water, alcohol, and water-alcohol 
suspensions prepared based on the above technique are determined with the 
help of laser analyzer. 46 Modern Magnetic Materials 
In Figures 3.10 and 3.11, distributions of copper–carbon MC in the media 
different polarity and dielectric penetration are shown. 
At the comparison of Figures 3.10 and 3.11, the difference in distribution 
of Cu–C mesoparticles is shown which is explained by the polarity values of 
alcohol and water. 
In water solution, the average size of Cu/C nanocomposite equals 20 nm, 
and in alcohol medium – greater by 5 nm. 
FIGURE 3.10 Distribution of copper–carbon mesocomposites in alcohol. 
FIGURE 3.11 Distribution of copper–carbon mesocomposites in water. Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 47 
Assuming that the nanocomposites obtained can be considered as oscillators 
transferring their oscillations onto the medium molecules, we can determine to 
what extent the IR spectrum of liquid medium will change, e.g., PEPA applied 
as a hardener in some polymeric compositions, when small and super small 
quantities of MC into it are introduced. 
The introduction of a modifier based on Me–C MC into the composi￾tion results in medium structuring, decreasing the number of defects and 
improving the material physical and mechanical characteristics [5, 6]. The 
availability of metal compounds in MCs can provide the final material 
with additional characteristics, such as magnetic susceptibility and electric 
conductivity. Data of EPR spectra investigations for copper–carbon and 
nickel–carbon MCs are given in Figure 3.12 and Table 3.7. 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
-0.2 
-0.4 
3150 3200 3250 3300 3350 
FIGURE 3.12 EPR spectrum of copper–carbon mesocomposite. 
EPR spectrum of copper/carbon MC is presented as a singlet spectrum 
in which the distance between points of incline maximum ΔHpp = 6.8 
Hz, g-factor equals to g-factor of biphenyl picryl hydrazyl (g = 2.0036), 
and the unpaired electrons number corresponds to value 1.2×1017 spin/g 
(Figure 3.11). In the comparison with this spectrum, the EPR spectrum for 
nickel–carbon MC has ΔH pp corresponding to 2,400 Hz, g – 2.46 and the 
unpaired electrons number – 1022 spin/g (Table 3.7). 
It is possible, the spectra difference explains the Carbon shape differ￾ence for these nanocomposites. Thus, the Me–C MC are stable radicals 
with the migration of unpaired electrons from metal to carbon shell and 48 Modern Magnetic Materials 
back. These mesoparticles can stimulate the transport of electrons within 
media. 
TABLE 3.7 Data of EPR Spectra for Copper/Carbon and Nickel/Carbon Nanocomposites 
Type of Metal/Carbon g-Factor Number of Unpaired Electrons (spin/g) 
Mesocomposite 
Copper/carbon mesocomposite 2.0036 1.2×1017 spin/g 
Nickel/carbon mesocomposite 2.46 1022 spin/g 
3.4 CONCLUSION 
In this chapter, the possibilities of developing new ideas on base of Meso￾scopic Physics principles for self-organization processes during red-ox 
synthesis within nanoreactors of polymeric matrices are discussed on the 
examples of Me–C MC. It is proposed to consider the obtaining of Me–C 
MC in nanoreactors of matrices as the self-organization process similar to 
the formation ordered phases analogous to crystallization. The perspectives 
of investigations are looked through in an opportunity of thin regulation 
of processes and the entering of corrective amendments during processes 
stages. 
According to the analysis of Me–C MC characteristics, which are deter￾mined by their sizes and content, their activities are stipulated the correspon￾dent dipole moments and vibration energies. 
The introduction of phosphorus in MCs by the method similar to red-ox 
synthesis in mesoreactors leads to the growth of dipole moments and metal 
magnetic moments for corresponded MCs. It’s shown that the MCs vibration 
energies depend on their average masses. 
It’s noted that the specific surface of Me–C MC particles changes in 
dependence on the nature of MC in other order than the correspondent order 
of the vibration energies. Therefore, the energetic characteristics of MCs are 
more important for the activity determination in comparison with their size 
characteristics. Red-Ox Synthesis of Metal/Carbon Mesocomposites 49 
KEYWORDS 
• atomic force microscopy 
• Kolmogorov-Avrami equations 
• mesoreactors 
• metal-carbon mesocomposite 
• polyethylene polyamine 
• polyvinyl alcohol 
• x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
REFERENCES 
1. Imri, (2009). Introduction in Mesoscopic Physics (p. 304). M.: Physmatlit. 
2. Moskalets, M. V., (2010). Fundamentals of Mesoscopic Physics. Khar’kov: NTU KhPI. 
3. Morozov, A. D., (2002). Introduction in Fractal Theory (p. 160). M.-Izhevsk: ICT. 
4. Kolmogorov, A. N., & Fomin, S. V., (2009). Introductory Real Analysis (p. 403). USA, 
Portland: Prentice Hall. 
5. Wunderlikh, B., (1979). Physics of Macromolecules (Vol. 2, p. 422). M.: Mir. 
6. Brown, J. F. Jr., & White, D. M., (1960). J. Am. Chem. Soc., 82, 5671. 
7. Morgan, P. W., (1970). Condensation polymers by interfacial and solution methods 
(translated) L.; Chemistry, 448. 
8. Buchachenko, A. L., (2003). Nanochemistry–Direct Way to High Technologies (Vol. 72, 
No 5, pp. 419–437). Uspechi Chimii. 
9. Kodolov, V. I., & Khokhriakov, N. V., (2009). Chemical Physics of Formation and 
Transformation Processes of Nanostructures and Nanosystems (V. 1, 2, pp. 361, 415). 
Izhevsk: Publ. IzhSACA. 
10. Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., Terebova, N. S., & Trineeva, V. V., (2012). X-Ray 
Photoelectron Spectroscopy Investigations of Metal/Carbon Nanosystems and Nano￾structured Materials (p. 252). M.: Izhevsk: Publ. Udmurt university. 
11. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2008). 
Nanostructure activity and its display in nanoreactors of polymeric matrices and in 
active media. Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 10(4), 448–460. 
12. Kodolov, V. I., (2009). The addition to previous paper. Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 
11(1), 134–136. 
13. Trineeva, V. V., Vakhrushina, M. A., Bulatov, D. I., & Kodolov, V. I., (2012). The obtaining 
of metal/carbon nanocomposites and investigation of their structure phenomena. 
Nanotechnics, 4, 50–55. 
14. Trineeva, V. V., Lyakkhovich, A. M., & Kodolov, V. I., (2009). Forecasting of the 
formation processes of carbon metal containing nanostructures using the method of 
atomic force microscopy. Nanotechnics, 4(20), 87–90. 50 Modern Magnetic Materials 
15.

Kodolov, V. I., Blagodatskikh, I. I., Lyakhovich, А. М., et al., (2007). Investigation 
of the formation processes of metal containing carbon nanostructures in nanoreactors 
of polyvinyl alcohol at early stages. Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 9(4), 422–429. 
16. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., & Kuznetsov, A. P., (2006). To the issue of the 
mechanism of the influence of nanostructures on structurally changing media at the 
formation of “intellectual” composites. Nanotechnics, 3(7), 27–35. 
17. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2010). 
Problems of nanostructure activity estimation, nanostructures directed production and 
application. Nanomaterials Yearbook–2009: From Nanostructures, Nanomaterials and 
Nanotechnologies to Nanoindustry (pp. 1–18). N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
18.

Fedorov, V. B., Khakimova, D. K., Shipkov, N. N., & Avdeenko, М. А., (1974). To Ther￾modynamics of Carbon Materials (Vol. 219. No. 3. pp. 596–599). Doklady AS USSR. 
19. Fedorov, V. B., Khakimova, D. K., Shorshorov, M. H., et al., (1975). To Kinetics of 
Graphitation (Vol. 222. No. 2. pp. 399–402). Doklady AS USSR. 
20. Khokhriakov, N. V., & Kodolov, V. I., (2005). Quantum-chemical modeling of 
nanostructure formation. Nanotechnics, 2, 108–112. 
21.

Lipanov, А. М., Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., et al., (2005). Challenges in creating 
nanoreactors for the synthesis of metal nanoparticles in carbon shells. Alternative 
Energy and Ecology, 2(22), 58–63. 
22.

Kodolov, V. I., Didik, А. А., Volkov, Yu. A., & Volkova, E. G., (2004). Low-temperature 
synthesis of copper nanoparticles in carbon shells. HEIs’ news. Chemistry and Chemical 
Engineering, 47(1), 27–30. 
23.

Serkov, А. Т., (1975). Theory of chemical fiber formation (p. 548). edited by – М.: Himiya. 
24. Palm, V. A., (1967). Basics of Quantitative Theory of Organic Reactions (p. 356). L: Himiya. 
25. Kodolov, V. I., (1965). On modeling possibility in organic chemistry. Organic Reactivity 
(Vol. 2. No. 4. pp. 11–18). Tartu: TSU. 
26.

Chashkin, M. A., Kodolov, V. I., Zakharov, A. I., et al., (2011). Metal/carbon nanocom￾posites for epoxy compositions: Quantum-chemical investigations and experimental 
modeling. Polymer Research Journal, 5(1), 5–19. 
27. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2013). Fundamental definitions for domain of 
nanostructures and metal/carbon nanocomposites. In: Nanostructure, Nanosystems and 
Nanostructured Materials: Theory, Production and Development (pp. 1–42). Toronto￾New Jersey: Apple Academic Press. 
28. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Blagodatskikh, I. I., Vasil’chenko, Yu. M., Vakhrushina, 
M. A., & Bondar, A. Yu., (2013). The nanostructures obtaining and the synthesis of metal/ 
carbon nanocomposites in nanoreactors. In: Nanostructure, Nanosystems and Nanostruc￾tured Materials: Theory, Production and Development (pp. 101–145). Toronto-New 
Jersey: Apple Academic Press. 
29. Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2012). Dependence of the value of the atomic 
magnetic moment of d metals on the chemical structure of nanoforms. In: Problems of 
Nanochemistry for the Creation of New Materials (pp. 123–131). Torun, Poland: IEPMD. 
30. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2012). Perspectives of idea development about nano￾systems self-organization in polymeric matrixes. In: “The Problems of Nanochemistry 
for the Creation of New Materials (pp. 75–100)/Torun. Poland: IEPMD. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 4 
Mechanochemical Modification of 
Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 
V. I. KODOLOV,1,2 V. V. TRINEEVA,1,3 R. V. MUSTAKIMOV,1,4 
N. S. TEREBOVA,1,5 T. M. MAKHNEVA,1,3 and I. N. SHABANOVA1,5 
1
Basic Research–Research Center of Chemical Physics and Mesoscopic, 
Udmurt Federal Research Center, Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, 
Russia 
2
M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
3
Institute of Mechanics, Udmurt Federal Research Center, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia 
4
Izhevsk Electromechanical Plant “KUPOL,” Izhevsk, Russia 
5
Physicotechnical Institute, Udmurt Federal Research Center, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
The conditions of copper (nickel) carbon mesocomposites (MCs) modifica￾tion by such substances as silica, ammonium polyphosphate (APPh), ammo￾nium sulfite, and metal oxides are given. The mechanochemical modification 
mechanism of correspondent nanocomposites is proposed. The results of 
modified nanocomposite production with the mechanism confirmation are 
discussed. The following methods investigate the structures and properties 
of modified nanocomposites: X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), 
radiography, IR spectroscopy, and transition electron microscopy (TEM). 
The structure changes of modified nanocomposites and the increasing metal 52 Modern Magnetic Materials 
atomic magnetic moments are presented. In the phosphorus-containing Cu/C 
nanocomposites, the Copper atomic magnetic moment is increased from 1.3 
to 3 Bohr Magnetons, and the oxidation state of the Phosphorus atom is 
decreased from 5 to zero, according to XPS. 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
Some possible methods of nanostructures (nanosized systems) modification 
are known [1–3]. The substances interaction processes with nanostructures 
can be occurred at the formation of covalent or coordinative bonds, and also 
possibly at dispersion interaction. These processes are realized when the 
gaseous or liquid substances act on nanostructures or, as in our case, when 
the interaction between solid mesocomposite (MC) and active components 
takes place. In other words, in our case the mechanochemical modification 
is carried out with inclusion Red-Ox process. For the investigation and 
the far production of MCs modified the following MCs and substances in 
pairs are used: cooper carbon, nickel–carbon, iron carbon MCs, and also 
silica, silica gel, ammonium polyphosphate (APPh), ammonium sulfite. 
The investigations of initial MCs show that metal-carbon mesocomposite 
(Me–C MC) represent to the metal clusters associated with carbon fibers 
or the metal clusters within carbon shell consisting of 3–4 layers of carbon 
fibers. Each from carbon fiber includes polyacetylene and carbine fragments 
with delocalized electrons on fragments joints. In other words, the Me–C 
MC obtained by the mechanochemical method have active surface, which 
contains double bonds and delocalized electrons [4]. 
4.2 METHOD OF METAL/CARBON NANOCOMPOSITES 
MECHANOCHEMICAL MODIFICATION 
The representation about Me–C MC is based on the results of such inves￾tigations as IR or Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
(XPS), electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), transition electron micros￾copy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM). The image of copper–carbon 
MC structure shows on Figure 4.1. 
The presence of active double bonds and delocalized electrons in the 
carbon shell of metal/carbon nanocomposites gives the possibility for 
their modification by means of red-ox and addition processes. Therefore, 
the substances interactions, in which elements (Si and P) have the highest Mechanochemical Modification of Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 53 
oxidation state (+4 or +5), with such electron containing compounds as 
metal/carbon nanocomposites, is evident. The plain scheme of reduction 
process is shown below: 
НК (–δ, или ∑e) + P+5 → НК – P+3 (P+2, P0
) 
НК (–δ, или ∑e) + Si+4 → НК – Si0
 (Si+2) 
FIGURE 4.1 TEM microphotograph for copper–carbon mesocomposite. 
Mechanism based on the chemical mesoscopics notions for electron 
transport across mesoparticle (metal cluster) from one to other bank (meso￾reactor walls) is proposed (Figure 4.2). 
FIGURE 4.2 Scheme of electron transport and the red-ox reactions within nanoreactors. 54 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The chemical activity of nanosized granule obtained is determined by 
their interaction with polar substances containing p elements with the posi￾tive oxidation state, for example, Si+4, P+5 and S+6. 
The Me–C MC modification process consists in the grinding of copper– 
carbon or nickel–carbon MCs with the corresponding substances containing 
P or Si. As the mechanochemical process result – the xerogel is formed 
which is dried at 80°C. 
4.3 INVESTIGATION OF METAL-CARBON MESOCOMPOSITES 
(ME–C MCS) PROPERTIES AND CHARACTERISTICS 
The early created method [5] is used for the copper–carbon MC modification 
mechanism investigation. The inner levels spectra for C1s, O1s, Si2p, P2p, 
S2p Cu3s are studied to investigate the mechanism of chemical bonds forma￾tion between metal or carbon atoms and silicon or phosphorus atoms. Cu3s 
spectra of nanosized systems modified by Si, P, and S containing compounds 
are presented in Figure 4.3. 
FIGURE 4.3 X-ray photoelectron spectra of copper/carbon nanocomposites modified by 
p-element containing substances. Mechanochemical Modification of Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 55 
As early as in chapter [1], it’s shown that the Copper atomic magnetic 
moment in copper–carbon MC is appeared. At the modification the atomic 
magnetic moments of Metal/Carbon nanocomposites are increased in the 
comparison with non-modified nanocomposites (Table 4.1). The analysis of 
Table 4.1 data shows the influence of modifier nature on the magnetic charac￾teristics as well as the influence of its layer thickness on the nanosized granule 
surface. At the same time, it’s shown that atomic magnetic moment grows in 
modifier (elements) row Si, P, S at the identical conditions. It’s established that 
at the modification all modifiers are changed because of elements reduction. 
TABLE 4.1 The Parameters of the Multiple Splitting of the 3s Spectra of the Metal/Carbon 
Nanocomposites Modified with Phosphorus-, Silicon-, and Nickel-Containing Compounds 
Sample I2
/I1 ∆ (eV) μNi, μB μCu, μB μFe, μB 
Ni3s (crystal) 0.15 4.3 0.5 – – 
Ni3s (non-modified) 0.32 3.0 1.8 – – 
Ni3s (NC/Si s – 1) 0.80 3.8 4.0 – – 
Ni3s (NC/P s – 1) 0.60 3.6 3.0 – – 
Ni3s (NC/S s – 1) 0.56 4.0 2.8 – – 
Cu3s (non-modified) 0.20 3.6 – 1.3 – 
Cu3s (NC/Si s – 1) 0.60 3.0 – 3.0 – 
Cu3s (NC/P s – 2) 0.85 3.5 – 4.2 – 
Cu3s (NC/P s – 1) 0.42 3.6 – 2.0 – 
Cu3s (NC/S s – 1) 0.40 3.6 – 1.8 – 
Cu3s (NC/Ni s – 1) 0.4 Cu/0.4 Ni 3 Cu/2 Ni – 2.0 Cu/2.3 Ni – 
Fe3s (non-modified) 0.42 3.9 – – 2.2 
Fe3s (NC/P s – 1) 0.50 4.0 – – 2.5 
Fe3s (NC/P s – 2) 0.60 4.0 – – 3.2 
Note: I
2
/I1 is the relation of the maxima intensities of the lines of the multiple splitting; and ∆ 
is the energy distance between the maxima of the multiple splitting in Me3s-spectra. 
According to P2p spectrum (Figure 4.4) Phosphorus in Phosphorus 
containing copper–carbon MC changes the oxidation state from +5 to zero. 
The binding energy P2p changes from 135 eV, corresponding to PO4 group, 
to 129 eV for P0
. The process flows on 90%. It’s possible the interaction 
Copper and Phosphorus in this case. 
C1s spectrum of this MC (Figure 4.5(b)) is distinguished from C1s spec￾trum of non-modified MC (Figure 4.5(a)): the correspondent form C–H on 
15% smaller than in spectrum of non-modified MC. In turn, the relation of  
56 Modern Magnetic Materials 
intensities for sp2 and sp3 hybridization is increased that can be linked with 
the nanosized granule increasing and approaching its form to roundish. 
FIGURE 4.4 P2p spectrum of Cu C mesocomposite modified by ammonium polyphosphate 
at the relation 1:1. 
FIGURE 4.5 C1s spectra: (a) C1s spectrum of copper–carbon mesocomposite; and (b) C1s 
spectrum of modified phosphorus containing copper–carbon mesocomposite. Mechanochemical Modification of Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 57 
Analogous investigations are carried out [4, 5] for copper– and nickel– 
carbon MCs modified by Silicon containing substances. Spectra Si2p and 
C1s for Cu–C MC modified by Silica at the relation MC/Silica = 1 shown in 
Figure 4.6. 
FIGURE 4.6 X-ray photoelectron spectra for modified Cu C (by silica) mesocomposite: (a) 
Si2p spectrum; and (b) C1s spectrum. 
According to Si2p spectrum the relation of spectrum form intensities 
shows the red-ox process development on 51.4%. 
C–H intensity in spectrum of modified Si containing MC on 65% smaller 
the correspondent value in spectrum of initial MC. 
The thickness Si containing shell for Cu C (Si) MC in comparison with a 
shell of modified P containing MC is higher in 4 times. 
For confirmation and development of notions about the modification 
process and the obtaining modified magnetic Me–C MC, the investigations 
with application of the following methods: radiography, IR spectroscopy, 
and TEM—are carried out. 
It should be taken that in all cases of Me–C MC modification by Si, 
P, S containing substances the results corresponding to reduction of these 
elements are appeared. 
For example, the X-ray pattern analysis of Phosphorus containing Cu C 
MC shows the presence of peaks for groups Cu–C–P at θ equaled to 43°. 
Modified nanocomposites are studied by IR spectroscopy. For Phosphorus 
containing MCs the highest intensity of spectra lines corresponds to P–O–C 
group vibration which is formed at the interaction of APPh with the MC shell 
(Table 4.2). 58 Modern Magnetic Materials 
TABLE 4.2 The Characteristics of Lines for IR Spectra of Samples Cu C MC ↔ P (1:1); Cu 
C MC ↔ P (1:0.5); and Cu C MC ↔ P (1:1.5) 
No. of Spectrum of Characteristics of Spectrum Lines Corres￾Lines Samples Wave Number 
(cm–1) 
Intensity Half 
Width 
D ponding 
Groups 
1. Cu/C↔P (1:0.5) 911 0.010519 42,324 2.49×10–4 P–O–P 
Cu/C↔P (1:1) 904 0.011797 51,674 2.28×10–4 P–O–P 
Cu/C↔P (1:1.5) 895 0.024485 57,447 4.26×10–4 P–O–P 
2. Cu/C↔P (1:0.5) 1,073 0.054722 1,49,260 3.67×10–4 P–O–C 
Cu/C↔P (1:1) 1,072 0.039904 1,35,310 2.95×10–4 P–O–C 
Cu/C↔P (1:1.5) 1,073 0.019365 71,075 2.72×10–4 P–O–C 
3. Cu/C↔P (1:0.5) 1,254 0.005739 50,479 1.14×10–4 P=O 
Cu/C↔P (1:1) 1,254 0.0090368 48,373 1.87×10–4 P=O 
Cu/C↔P (1:1.5) 1,253 0.022251 53,025 4.20×10–4 P=O 
The investigation of copper–carbon MC modified by Silica with using 
IR spectroscopy shows the increasing of medium self-organization index D 
(Figure 4.7) which is calculated on formula: 
D = I/(a/2) 
where; ‘I’ is the line intensity; and a/2 is the half width of line. 
FIGURE 4.7 IR spectra of samples: (a) silica; and (b) silica + Cu C mesocomposite. Mechanochemical Modification of Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 59 
According to data of Table 4.3, the self-organization is increased in field 
980–1,300 cm–1 (52.11%). The line in this field corresponds to the vibration 
of Si–O and, probably, Si–C bonds. 
TABLE 4.3 Characteristics of IR Spectra Lines for Samples Silica and System Silica with 
Cu–C Mesocomposite 
No. of Sample Characteristics of Spectra Lines Corresponding 
Lines Start 
(cm–1) 
Finish 
(cm–1) 
Intensity Half 
Width 
D to Lines of 
Spectrum 
1. (SiO2
)n 759.98 848.7 0.016287 53.711 3.032×10–4 Si–O–H 
(SiO2
)n
 + 763.83 854.49 0.022069 47.481 4.648×10–4 Si–O–H 
Сu/С НК Si–C 
2. (SiO2
)n 983.73 1303.9 0.10186 102.66 9.922×10–4 Si–O 
Si–O–Si 
(SiO2
)n
 + 983.73 1292.3 0.19596 102.2 19.174×10–4 Si–O 
Сu/С НК Si–O–Si 
Si–C 
The investigation of modified Me–C MC by means of TEM of energy 
resolution shows that the shell from carbon fibers on mesogranule surface is 
well preserved. For instance, the TEM image of Phosphorus containing Cu 
C MC is presented in Figure 4.8. 
FIGURE 4.8 TEM image of phosphorus containing copper–carbon mesocomposite. 60 Modern Magnetic Materials 
In contrast to Figure 4.1, in this case there are bulges and strands of fibers. 
At the same time the possible phases fields are found Carbon – 70%; phases 
Cu–C–P–O and C–Cu–P–O in which the content of Copper equals to 15%, 
and Phosphorus – 7%. 
The results obtained cause natural question about the reason of magnetic 
characteristics growth for metal atoms in the clusters within the MCs meso￾granule. Answer on this question may be found in the following hypothesis: 
“The hypothesis is concluded in the formation of delocalized (unpaired) 
electrons because of the electrons shift on high energetic levels at the action 
electromagnetic (EM) radiation (field). It’s possible the appearance of this 
radiation may be conditioned by the annihilation of quants of positive and 
negative charges which are appeared in the Red-Ox process at mechano￾chemical modification of Me–C MC. Certainly, this hypothesis is necessary 
to confirm by corresponding experiments.” 
4.4 CONCLUSION 
For the first time the metal/carbon nanocomposites which contain silicon, 
phosphorus, or sulfur, are produced within active media by means of mecha￾nochemical modification. In this case the change of element oxidation states 
as well as the increasing of metal (Copper, Nickel, Iron) atomic magnetic 
moment takes place. At the same time above elements and functional groups 
with them are appeared in carbon shell of nanocomposites. These facts open 
a new era for further investigations and development of metal/carbon nano￾composites application fields. 
KEYWORDS 
• atomic magnetic moment 
• IR spectroscopy 
• mechanochemical modification 
• metal/carbon nanocomposites 
• radiography 
• red-ox synthesis 
• X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy Mechanochemical Modification of Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 61 
REFERENCES 
1. Pat. RF 2393110, publ., (2010). Applicant and Patent Holder “IEMZ-KUPOL” Method 
for Preparation of Carbon Metal-Containing Nanostructures. 
2. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2017). New scientific trend-chemical mesoscopics. 
Chemical Physics & Mesoscopy, 19(3), 454–465. 
3. Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., Terebova, N. S., & Trineeva, V. V., (2012). X Ray 
Photoelectron Spectroscopy for Investigation of Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Systems and 
Nanostructured Materials (p. 252). M. - Izhevsk: Publisher “Udmurt University.” 
4. Kopylova, A. A., & Kodolov, V. I., (2014). Investigation of the copper carbon mesocom￾posite action with silicon atoms from silica compounds. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopy, 
16(4), 556–560. 
5.

Kopylova, A. A., Zaitseva, E. A., & Kodolov, V. I., (2015). The functionalization of copper/ 
carbon mesocomposite by silicon atoms. Abstracts of Fifth International Conference 
from Nanostructures, Nanomaterials and Nanotechnologies to Nanoindustry (pp. 93–95). 
Izhevsk. 
6. Mustakimov, R. V., (2015). The Elaboration of Intumescent Fireproof Coating Modified 
by Phosphorus Containing Copper Carbon Mesocomposite. Magister Thesis, IzhSTU, 
Izhevsk. 
7. Pigalev, S. A., & Kodolov, V. I., (2015). Quantum chemical modeling of copper/carbon 
nanocomposite functionalization by Sulphur containing compounds. Abstracts of Fifth 
International Conference from Nanostructures, Nanomaterials and Nanotechnologies 
to Nanoindustry (p. 153). Izhevsk. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 5


Investigation of Copper/Carbon 
Nanocomposites Modified with 
Phosphorus-Containing Groups as 
Inhibiting Additives in Mineral Oil 
I. N. SHABANOVA,1
 S. M. RESHETNIKOV,1,2 V. I. KODOLOV,3 
N. S. TEREBOVA,1
 R. V. MUSTAKIMOV,3
 F. F. CHAUSOV,1
 and 
S. G. BYSTROV1 
1
Udmurt Federal Research Center, Izhevsk, Russian Federation 
2
Udmurt State University, Izhevsk, Russian Federation 
3
M.T. Kalashnikov State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russian Federation 
ABSTRACT 
The mechanism responsible for a protective anticorrosive preservative layer 
composed of mineral oil with various amounts of a phosphorus-containing 
copper/carbon nanocomposite was studied by the XPS method from room 
temperature to 700°C. It was shown that a durable corrosion-protective layer 
was formed due to the donor-acceptor bonds between iron and phosphorous 
atoms. No changes in the nature of the contact between the protective 
layer and the steel substrate were found upon heating in a spectrometer 
chamber (in vacuo) with simultaneous acquisition of X-ray electron spectra. 
Optical microscopy surface analysis revealed that, at room temperature, the 
nanocomposites in mineral oil formed separate conglomerates on the steel 
surface. The conglomerates disintegrated into individual nanoparticles (NPs) 
at temperatures of 100–200°C, and NPs distributed over the entire surface. 
The interactions between the nanocomposite and iron led to the formation 64 Modern Magnetic Materials 
of a durable protective coating that hindered the attack of corrosive surface 
environments. The corrosion protection of alloy-free steel was studied by a 
Monicor corrosion meter. A sulfate–chloride solution simulating moisture 
condensate during atmospheric corrosion was used as the corrosive 
medium. The study provided evidence that the incorporation of copper/ 
carbon nanocomposites modified with phosphorus-containing groups could 
suppress atmospheric corrosion by 70–95%. 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
Mineral oils with various additives are known to be utilized for application 
of protective coatings on metals in order to prevent their corrosion damage 
[1]. The additives based on nitrated mineral oils are most effective [2–4]. A 
mineral-oil based lubricant containing nitrated mineral oil, synthetic fatty 
acid soaps, alkyl sulfates, alkyl sulfonates, and butyl ethers is described in 
Ref. [4]. The high anti-corrosion properties of the protective lubricant are 
attributed to a combination of complex additives of very diverse chemical 
nature. A drawback of the lubricant is its complex composition, which makes 
it challenging to prepare. 
A series of studies [5–8] provided evidence of high protective proper￾ties shown by nanosized layers, which are formed by additives capable of 
chemosorption followed by chemical transformations, under conditions 
simulating atmospheric corrosion. In fact, under these conditions, complex 
nanocomposites largely suppressing corrosion are synthesized on the surface. 
Nanocomposites are known to exhibit high reactivity due to the high 
surface energy of nanoparticles (NPs) [9]. A phosphorus-containing copper/ 
carbon nanocomposite is one such example of a highly active nanocomposite; 
its synthesis and properties were reported in Ref. [10]. An attempt was made to 
utilize this nanocomposite as a component of a mixed amine-based inhibitor 
to protect steel surface from corrosion in a neutral aqueous environment 
[11]. It should be noted that the increase in the protection efficiency was not 
as high as expected. Apparently, this is due to the fact that a steel surface in 
contact with an aqueous solution of neutral electrolyte contains iron oxides 
or hydroxides that prevent the formation of strong binding between the 
nanocomposite elements and the surface being protected. 
We assumed that a protective coating containing a phosphorus-containing 
copper/carbon nanocomposite could be obtained in a hydrocarbon environ￾ment created by mineral oil applied to a steel surface. In this case, the contact Investigation of Copper/Carbon Nanocomposites 65 
between the steel surface and the aqueous solution of the inhibitor was 
excluded. 
Based on this assumption, the purpose of this work was to study inter￾atomic interactions and protective properties of a coating obtained with the 
use of the high chemical and adsorption activity of a copper/carbon nano￾composite modified with phosphorous-containing groups that was added to 
the mineral oil base as an inhibitor. 
For this purpose, a copper/carbon nanocomposite modified with phospho￾rous-containing groups was prepared by the mechanochemical method [10]. 
5.2 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 
The copper/carbon nanocomposite modified with phosphorous-containing 
groups [10] and I–20 industrial oil [GOST 20799-88] were used. 
The nanocomposite is a nanostructure including a copper cluster. The 
copper clusters with an average size of 15 nm are enclosed in carbon shells 
containing polyacetylene and carbyne fragments with unpaired electrons at 
their joints. According to the electron diffraction and X-ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy (XPS) data, the phosphorus atoms are located between carbon 
fibers in P–C bonds [12]. 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic measurements were carried out on 
an X-ray electron magnetic spectrometer with a resolution of 10–4 and an 
instrument luminosity of 0.085% with excitation by the AlKα line at 1486.5 
eV [13]. The advantages of X-ray photoelectron magnetic spectrometers 
are due to separation of the magnetic electron analyzer from the vacuum 
chamber of the spectrometer. Hence, a sample can be heated in the chamber 
with simultaneous recording of XPS spectra. 
An OLYMPUS SZ-STB2O optic microscope was used to obtain the 
optical images of the samples. The pure I–20 industrial oil and I–20 industrial 
oil-based formulations containing 1, 5, 30, 50, or 75 wt.% of the copper/ 
carbon nanocomposite modified with phosphorous-containing groups were 
tested as anti-corrosion preservative lubricants. The copper/carbon nanocom￾posite modified with phosphorous-containing groups was mixed with the 
base mineral oil and applied to a sample after grinding in a porcelain mortar. 
Steel samples with 20×20×20 mm dimensions were cleaned with P-600 
sandpaper, then covered with two layers of Zapon lacquer, leaving 400 
mm2
 as the working surface. Afterward, the samples were immersed in the 
test protective (preservative) lubricants for 5–7 min. Where, according to 
experimental procedure, the coated samples were heated in a muffle furnace, 66 Modern Magnetic Materials 
the non-working surfaces were insulted with Zapon lacquer after cooling the 
samples. The working surface exposed in a corrosion meter cell had an area 
of 400 mm2
. 
The protective properties of the formulations were examined by evaluating 
the corrosion rates of steel 08 samples. The corrosion rate was determined 
from the polarization resistance measured on a Monicor corrosimeter. Solution 
No. 7 (NaCl – 30 mg/L, Na2
SO4
 – 70 mg/L in accordance with GOST 9.502-
82), which simulates a moisture condensate under weathering conditions of 
industrial cities, was employed as the corrosive medium. The corrosion rates 
were expressed in relative units as the fraction of the corrosion rate relative to 
an uncoated reference sample whose corrosion rate was taken as unity. 
The samples were mounted on the corrosion meter sensor. After 
immersing the sensor with samples into the model corrosive medium, the 
corrosion rates were measured for two hours. Within this period of time, the 
corrosion rates of all samples reached constant values. These values were 
then used in the evaluation of the protective (inhibitory) effect. Measure￾ments and data processing were carried out according to GOST 9.514-99. 
5.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
We examined the chemical composition of the surface protective layers 
produced on steel upon adsorption of the preservation oil formulations 
containing 5 to 75% nanocomposite prepared in this way. The X-ray photo￾electron spectra of core levels such as C1s, O1s, Fe2p, P2p, Cu2p, and Cu3s 
were studied. 
The XPS study of the steel substrate surface onto which the protec￾tive coatings were subsequently applied showed that after cleaning from 
contamination by heating in the spectrometer chamber from 50 to 100°C, 
oxides were removed from the steel surface and the Fe2p spectrum showed 
a Fepure peak (707 eV) (see Figure 5.1, spectrum 1). 
In addition to the maximum in the range of pure iron, the Fe2p spectrum 
of the oil formulations applied on the steel substrate before heating showed 
two weak peaks attributed to Fe–O surface oxides at 709–711 eV (see Figure 
5.1, spectrum 2). When the sample was heated from ~50 to –100°C and 
up to 700°C, the position of the main peak at 707 eV in the Fe2p spectrum 
corresponded to pure iron or the Fe–P covalent (donor-acceptor) bond (see 
Figure 5.1, spectrum 3). 
In addition to the main P–Fe peak at 130 eV in the P2p spectrum of the 
non-heated sample, a weak maximum at high bond energies corresponding Investigation of Copper/Carbon Nanocomposites 67 
to the P–O bond was recorded (Figure 5.2, spectrum 1) that corresponded 
to the fragments adsorbed on the surface. When the sample was heated to 
50–70°C, this maximum disappeared. However, an intense P–Fe maximum 
with a bond energy of 130 eV persisted (Figure 5.2, spectrum 2). The P–Fe 
bond persisted even when the sample was heated to 700°C or higher in vacuo. 
FIGURE 5.1 Fe2p spectra of uncoated steel surface upon heating (1); steel surface with 
the protective coating without heating (2); and steel surface with the protective coating upon 
heating (3). 
No copper was found in the surface layers of the protective coating. The 
peak position in the C1s spectrum (285 eV) corresponded to the C–H bond 
in the hydrocarbons, but after the sample was heated, the contrast ratio of the 
spectrum decreased by half. No formation of Fe–C bonds was found. 
Thus, the phosphorus atoms are bonded to carbon (C–P bond) in the 
copper/carbon nanocomposite; the P–O bond that is quite strong under 
ordinary conditions is not formed even at room temperature. The reason 
lies in the high reductive activity of the copper/carbon nanocomposite 
modified with phosphorous-containing groups, including the highly active 
carbyne and polyacetylene moieties, combined with the Red-Ox catalytic 
activity of copper/carbon moieties in which copper as the transition metal 
with a highly labile 3D-subshell serves as a common Red-Ox catalyst, and a 
developed carbon matrix acts as an electron density transfer carrier. The C–P 68 Modern Magnetic Materials 
bond is broken on contact of the copper/carbon nanocomposite modified 
with phosphorous-containing groups with steel surface, and the phosphorus 
atoms form a strong covalent (donor–acceptor) bond with iron. Therefore, 
the copper/carbon nanocomposite modified with phosphorous-containing 
groups is involved in the creation of a highly efficient anticorrosive protec￾tive coating both as a depot of reactive phosphorus atoms enclosed in the 
carbon matrix and as a transport structure that ensures the delivery of reac￾tive forms of phosphorus to the steel surface to form an iron phosphide layer. 
FIGURE 5.2 P2p spectra of the steel surfaces with a protective coating before (1); and after 
heating (2). 
It is crucial that due to the structure of the copper/carbon nanocomposite 
modified with phosphorous-containing groups determined by the technology 
of its preparation, copper NPs are encapsulated in the carbon matrix, which 
prevents their direct contact with the steel surface. This eliminates the stimu￾lating effect of NPs of metal copper on the corrosion of the steel surface. 
An OLYMPUS SZ-STB2 optical microscope was used to obtain the 
surface images of the samples at room temperature and after heating to 
50–100°C. This study revealed that at room temperature, the nanocompos￾ites in the mineral oil formed separate conglomerates on the steel surface Investigation of Copper/Carbon Nanocomposites 69 
(Figure 5.3). When the samples were heated to 50–100°C, these conglom￾erates disintegrated, and the nanocomposite was evenly distributed in the 
mineral oil over the entire coating surface (Figure 5.4). 
FIGURE 5.3 Optical images of the protective coating at room temperature. The eyepiece 
readings were 3.5, and the frame size was 740×580 mkm. 
FIGURE 5.4 Optical images of the protective coating after heating up to 50–100°C. The 
eyepiece readings were 3.5, and the frame size was 740×580 mkm. Composition of the Protective Coating The Corrosion Rate, Arb. Units, at 
(wt.%, Nanocomposite in Activation Temperature (°C) 
I–20 Mineral Oil) Room Temperature 100 200 
Reference (Uncoated Steel) 10 0.90 0.90 
0 0.91 0.88 0.85 
1 0.88 0.72 0.70 
5 0.88 0.70 0.65 
30 0.72 0.12 0.10 
50 0.68 0.08 0.06 
75 0.66 0.06 0.04 
70 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The protective properties of the formulations were examined using the 
Monicor corrosion meter. The Monicor corrosion meter enabled the measure￾ment of relative corrosion rates. The corrosion rate in the background solu￾tion was taken as 1. 
The samples for testing were prepared by dipping into a suspension of the 
nanocomposite in I–20 industrial oil. After that, some samples were subjected 
to thermochemical treatment, i.e., heated for 20 min in a muffle furnace at 
100°C and 200°C in air. After cooling, the corrosion rates of the samples 
were measured by the Monicor corrosion meter. Table 5.1 summarizes the 
test results. 
TABLE 5.1 The Corrosion Rates in the Model Corrosion Medium, Arb. Units 
Note. Legend: Reference (without a coating); 0 – I–20 oil without the NC additive; numbers 
1, 5, 30, 50, and 75 correspond to the NC concentration (wt.%) in I–20 oil. 
It was found in the experiments that heating of a sample coated with a 
mixture of the oil with the nanocomposites studied to 100–200°С increased 
its chemical activity. As a result, a protective coating was formed on the 
surface that reduced the corrosion rate by 70–95% depending on the nano￾composite concentration. 
Thus, a formulation with a high nanocomposite content becomes efficient 
in forming a durable surface layer only after thermal activation. 
5.4 CONCLUSION 
The protective coating produced by thermal treatment of a suspension of 
a copper/carbon nanocomposite modified with phosphorous-containing Investigation of Copper/Carbon Nanocomposites 71 
groups in a hydrocarbon medium consisting of a mineral (petroleum) oil 
applied to a steel surface was studied. 
The X-ray photoelectron spectra of the adsorbed layers on the steel surface 
were recorded. The interatomic interactions in these layers were studied. 
It was shown that the formation of a protective layer upon adsorption 
of the inhibited mineral-oil formulation occurs due to the formation of 
covalent (donor–acceptor) bonds between iron and phosphorus atoms of the 
nanocomposite. 
Corrosion tests revealed that the thermal activation of protective surface 
layers on steel surface from preservative oil formulations comprising 5 to 
75% copper/carbon nanocomposite modified with phosphorous-containing 
groups increased the chemical activity of the nanocomposite. The resultant 
efficient protective layer on steel surface reduces the corrosion rate by 
70–95% depending on the nanocomposite concentration. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Thus, study was carried out within the framework of a state task (state regis￾tration no. AAA-A17-117022250040-0). The investigations were performed 
using the facilities of the Center for collective usage “Center of physical and 
physicochemical methods of analysis, study of properties and characteristics 
of surfaces, nanostructures, materials, and products” of UdmFTIS UB RAS 
supported by the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian 
Federation under the Federal Target Program “Study and Development in 
Priority Areas of Development of the Scientific and Technological Complex 
of Russia for 2014–2020” (unique project identifier: RFMEFI62119X0035). 
KEYWORDS 
• anticorrosive layer 
• copper/carbon nanocomposite 
• corrosion meter 
• optical microscopy 
• X-ray electron spectroscopy 
• X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic 72 Modern Magnetic Materials 
REFERENCES 
1. Bogdanova, T. I., & Shekhter, Yu. N., (1984). Inhibited Oil Compositions for Corrosion 
Protection (p. 284). Moscow, Khimiya, (in Russian). 
2. Shekhter, Yu. N., Legezin, N. E., Murav’eva, S. A., & Muryzyova, N. O., (1998). 
Corrosiological principles of the protection of inner metallic surfaces with inhibitors and 
inhibited formulations. Prot. Met., 33(3), 239−246 (in Russian). 
3. Shekhter, Yu. N., Murav’eva, S. A., Puzevich, N. L., Podchinov, V. M., & Egorov, S. 
A., (1998). The use of the corrosion inhibitor AKOR-1B for improving the protective 
properties of lubricants. Prot. Met., 34(3), 322−324 (in Russian). 
4.

Shekhter, Yu. N., Bogdanova, T. I., Bakaleynikov, V. M., Zubareva, M. A., Shkaruba, E. 
V., Aliev, A. E., & Ustalov, A. V., (1994). Protective Lubricant. RF Patent 2017798 C1, 
15.08. (In Russian). 
5. Avdeev, Ya. G., Kuznetsov, D. S., Tyurina, M. V., & Chekulaev, M. A., (2015). Protection 
of nickel-chromium steel in sulfuric acid solution by a substituted triazole. Int. J. Corros. 
Scale Inhib., 4(2), 146−161. doi: 10.17675/2305-6894-2015-4-1-146-161. 
6. Gladkikh, N. A., Maleeva, M. A., Maksaeva, L. B., Petrunin, M. A., Rybkina, A. A., 
Yurasova, T. A., Marshakov, A. I., & Zalavutdinov, R. Kh., (2018). Localized dissolution 
of carbon steel used for pipelines under constant cathodic polarization conditions. 
Initial stages of defect formation. Int. J. Corros. Scale Inhib., 7(4), 683−696. doi: 
10.17675/2305-6894-2018-7-4-14. 
7. Grafov, O. Yu., Kazansky, L. P., Dubinskaya, S. V., & Kuznetsov, Yu. I., (2019). 
Adsorption of depocolin and inhibition of copper dissolution in aqueous solutions. Int. 
J. Corros. Scale Inhib., 8(3), 549−559. doi: 10.17675/2305-6894-2019-8-3-6. 
8. Shabanova, I. N., Reshetnikov, S. M., Naimushina, E. A., & Terebova, N. S., (2020). 
XPS investigation of adsorption protective layers based on industrial inhibited oil. Int. 
J. Corros. Scale Inhib., 9(2), 903–911. doi: 10.17675/2305-6894-2020-9-3-6. 
9. Suzdalev, I. P., (2009). Nanotechnologies: Physicochemistry of Nanoclusters and Nano￾materials (p. 592). Moscow, Librokom, (in Russian). 
10. Mustakimov, R. V., (2019). Method for Modification of Metal/Carbon Nanostructures 
with Ammonium Polyphosphate. RF Patent No. 2694092 C1, 09.07.2019, Bul. No. 19 
(in Russian). 
11. Pletnev, M. A., Ovechkina, O. A., Buldakova, N. C., Novikova, N. V., & Miller, V. K., 
(2014). Effect of metal-carbon nanocomposites on protective effect of corrosion inhibitors. 
Intell. Syst. Prod., (1), 150−152 (in Russian). 
12. Kolodov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Terebova, N. S., Shabanova, I. N., Makhneva, T. M., 
Mustakimov, R. V., & Kopylova, A. A., (2018). The changes in the electron structure 
and magnetic characteristics of modified copper/carbon nanocomposites. Chem. Phys. 
Mesoscopy, 20(1), 72−79 (in Russian). 
13. Shabanova, I. N., Trapeznikov, V. A., Dobysheva, L. V., Varganov, D. V., Karpov, 
V. G., Kovner, L. G., Klyushnikov, O. I., et al., (1986). Advanced automated x-ray 
photoelectron magnetic spectrometers: Spectrometer with technological attachments 
and manipulators, melt spectrometer. Izv. AN SSSR, 50(9), 1677−1682 (in Russian). Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 6


Investigation of the Formation of the 
Electron Structure of Metallocarbonic 
Nanoforms 
I. N. SHABANOVA,1
 V. I. KODOLOV,2
 and N. S. TEREBOVA1 
1
Physical–Technical Institute, Ural Branch, Russian Academy of Sciences, 
Izhevsk, Russia 
2
M.T. Kalashnikov State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
Model samples of nanostructures are synthesized with the use of transition 
metals, with a different number of d electrons and sp elements of groups II and 
III with a different number of valence p electrons, as modifiers. The activity of 
nanostructure synthesis is investigated depending on the addition of sp elements. 
A procedure is developed for determining the atomic magnetic moment of the 
d metals and the change in the distances between atoms of the metal and the sp 
element via the parameters of the X-ray photoelectron spectrum of transition 
metals, which allows the degree of hybridization of valence electrons in the 
chemical bond of adjacent atoms (Me–X) to be determined. As a result of the 
investigation, the laws of nanoform growth are found, which facilitate the develop￾ment of new directions in the synthesis of nanostructures with unique properties. 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
The nanotechnological approach lies in the purposeful control of the proper￾ties of materials at the molecular and supramolecular levels, i.e., obtaining 74 Modern Magnetic Materials 
nanostructures bottom-up from molecules to supramolecular structures. In 
spite of the enormous number of theoretical and experimental works in the 
study of carbon nanosystems, until now, there has been no single pattern 
allowing the structure and properties of new forms to be explained. 
For understanding the nature of quantum mechanical effects, there is a 
need to apply experimental methods investigating the chemical structure of 
nanoparticles (NPs) at the atomic level. One of the principal problems is the 
development of diagnostic methods allowing one to control the intermediate 
and final results of nanomaterial creation. In this context, the development of 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) has become very significant. 
The aim of the work is to determine the laws of the effect of filling the 
d and p atom shells of d metal and sp elements of groups II and III on the 
chemical structure and form of the created metallocarbonic nanoforms in 
polymer nanoreactors by XPS. The basis of the investigations into the forma￾tion of nanostructures with a defined form and their properties is the concept 
of the study of the interatomic interaction of the initial components and the 
formation of a hybridized chemical bond between d electrons of metal atoms 
and p electrons of sp-element atoms (carbon). 
For studying the interatomic interaction of the initial components and 
the formation of the hybridized chemical bond of d–p electrons, a system￾atic investigation was carried out for the dependence of nanoform growth 
on filling of the d shell of the modifiers and the component content; the 
electron structure of the systems of d metals with sp elements of groups 
II and III; the effect of additions of sp elements (N, Si, P) into a polymer 
matrix on the activity of the synthesis of met allocarbonic nanostructures; 
and the dependence of the nanostructure form on the nanoreactor structure. 
The atomic magnetic moment of the d metals in the nanostructures was 
estimated. 
6.2 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 
For determination of the form of metallocarbonic structures and the chemical 
bond of their components atoms, XPS was applied. An important feature of 
the method is its nondestructive character; this cannot be said of surface￾analysis methods connected to ion or electron bombardment. 
The investigations were carried out on an X-ray electron magnetic 
spectrometer with a resolution of 10–4 in vacuum with a residual pressure 
of 10–8–10–10 Pa. The device’s luminosity was 0.085% upon excitation of 
the AlKα line. The given spectrometer has advantages in comparison with Investigation of the Formation of the Electron Structure 75 
electrostatic X-ray photoelectron spectrometers; these lie in the constancy of 
the luminosity and resolution capability without dependence on the electron 
energy, high spectral contrast, and the possibility of external influences on 
the sample during measurements [1–4]. 
The subjects of investigation were metallocarbonic nanostructures 
obtained by low-temperatures synthesis (to Т = 400°С) in nanoreactors which 
were extended cavities formed by macromolecules in gels of polymeric 
materials. d-metals were used as metal modifiers [5]. The samples were 
finely dispersed powders. The powder was rubbed into a corrugated copper 
substrate into a thin layer with a thickness of about 1 μm. As nanosystem 
references, we used single- and multi-walled nanotubes, amorphous carbon, 
etc. The formation of d-metal-containing carbon nanostructures occurs in the 
course of the oxidation–reduction reaction in which the d-metal compounds 
are oxidizers, and hydrocarbon and amine groups are reducing agents. During 
the process the interaction region releases chlorine, hydrogen, and oxygen; 
carbonization occurs with the formation of corresponding nanostructures. 
Transition-metal nanoclusters deposited by the galvanic method into nano￾porous silicon were also studied. The obtained results were compared with 
data of transmission electron microscopy. 
6.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Systematic investigations of the electron structure of nanosystems were 
carried out with synthesized model samples of nanostructures using transi￾tion metals with a different number of d electrons and sp elements of groups 
II and III with a different number of valence p electrons as modifiers. For the 
development of XPS to study the chemical bond, sp hybridization of valence 
electrons and the vicinity of carbon atoms within the nanostructures, there 
is a need to interpret the C1s spectrum, i.e., to decompose it into its compo￾nents. For that, graphite C–C (sp2
), diamond C–C (sp3
), and hydrocarbons 
C–H were used as standards. 
Polymer systems with unsaturated bonds may possibly demonstrate the 
appearance of a shake-up satellite at a distance of 7 eV from the main line 
with an intensity that is 10% that of the main line. Such a structure unam￾biguously corresponds to two transitions with the excitation of an electron, 
situated at one of two filled orbitals and at an unfilled orbital. Consequently, 
the presence of these satellites in the C1s spectrum is an indicator of the 
presence of C–H groups in the material under investigation. 76 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The satellite in the graphite spectrum is at a distance of 22 eV from the 
principal maximum, and it has a relative intensity of 10%. The satellite is 
caused by plasma losses [6]. The X-ray photoelectron study of diamond 
reveals a satellite with a binding energy of 313 eV at a distance of 27 eV 
and with a relative intensity of 10% of the principal maximum. Spectral 
calibration was carried out by the position and intensity of the satellite lines. 
The spectral width was determined from reference spectra. The component 
decomposition of the spectra was performed by the least squares method. 
The accuracy in the determination of the peak position is 0.1 eV. Subtrac￾tion of the background intensity was carried out by a standard procedure 
proposed by Shirley [7]. The error in the determination of the electron 
spectrum contrast in this case was no more than 5%. 
In order to identify the form of the nanostructures of samples investi￾gated, model nanoforms with well-known structures were studied, namely, 
single and multilayer nanotubes and amorphous carbon. The C1s spectrum of 
single-layer nanotubes shows the presence of C–C components with the sp2 
and sp3
 hybridizations of valence electrons with a binding energy of 284.3 
and 286.1 eV and an intensity ratio of 2: 1. A similar situation is observed in 
the C1s spectrum of multilayer nanotubes. The C1s spectrum of a fullerene 
demonstrates the preferential presence of a component characteristic of the 
C–C bond with the sp3
 hybridization of valence electrons. For single and 
multilayer nanotubes and fullerenes with large diameters, one can explain 
the significant increase in the sp2
 hybridization of valence electrons of carbon 
atoms in comparison with the sp3 hybridization. Consequently, the ratio of 
sp2
 and sp3
 hybridized valence electrons of carbon changes depending on the 
size and form of the nanostructures obtained. Thus, the study of standards of 
NPs with well-known structures enables identification of the structure under 
investigation by the form of its C1s spectra, which is of importance for the 
development of a new technology for creating nanostructures. 
It was found by means of XPS and electron microscopy that the relative 
content of C–C and Me–C bonds and the hybridization type of the s and p 
electrons of carbon atoms allow one to control the formation and growth of 
nanostructures. The increase in the intensity of the peaks which is evidence 
of an increase in the content of these bonds in the spectrum correlates, 
according to the data of electron microscopy, with the growth of metal￾carbon nanostructures (Figure 6.1). 
The study of the formation of metal-carbon nanostructures and the effect 
of the type and concentration of the complexing element and metal modifiers 
on the yield of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) according to the C1s and Me2p Investigation of the Formation of the Electron Structure 77 
spectra showed the following. The application of salts of transition d metals 
as modifiers results in the formation of the C–C bond with the sp2
 and sp3 
hybridizations of valence electrons and the C–Me bond. The content ratio 
of the C–C (Me) and C–H bonds depends on the modifier content. The 
number of C–C and C–Me bonds relative to the C–H bond also depends 
on the filling of the d shell of the metal modifier. With the filling of the 
d shell upon the transfer from Mn to Co and Ni, the relative number of 
C–C and C–Me bonds increases. Because Mn atoms have a lapping of 
the d–p-wave functions of the Mn and metalloid (C, Cl) atoms occurs, a 
significant amount of hydrocarbons remains. The formation of the strong 
Mn atom–C atom bond inhibits graphitization. Upon substituting manganese 
with nickel with a d-shell, close to complete filling, which has a strongly 
localized d-wave function in the vicinity of its atom, weaker bonds of Ni 
atoms with the metalloid (Cl) form. Therefore, hydrocarbon decomposition 
because of the formation of H–Cl bonds proceeds easier than in the case of 
FIGURE 6.1 Ratio of the number of C–C and C–H chemical bonds as a function of the 
content of the metal modifier and filling of the metal d shell. 78 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Mn. Comparison of the results of XPS with the data of transmission electron 
spectroscopy showed that multiple carbon accumulations form around Ni 
atoms, the sp3
 hybridization of valence electrons of carbon forms parallel 
with the sp2
 hybridization, and the graphene lattice and then, the nanotube 
form. In the case of cobalt, an intermediate situation occurs, namely, an 
insignificant portion of hydrocarbons remains, and C–C bonds with the sp2 
and sp3 hybridization of valence electrons of carbon appear in a ratio less 
than for Ni. The quantum-chemical calculations given in Ref. [8] are in good 
agreement with the experimental results of XPS. Data obtained by the C1s 
spectra are represented in Figure 6.2. 
It is found that the structure of the nanoforms being formed depends on the 
sizes and form of the nanoreactors [9]. The formation of nanoreactors from 
gels of complex composition, including polyethylene polyamine (PEPA) 
and acetyl acetone (AA), results in the acceleration of metal reduction and 
graphitization. 
FIGURE 6.2 The X-ray photoelectron С1s spectra of the simple and complex gels of PVA 
and PEPA. Investigation of the Formation of the Electron Structure 79 
In contrast to PVA gels, the content of reduced nickel coordinated on 
С=С bonds increases within complex PEPA gels. As the nickel content in the 
nanoreactor increases, the formation of nanotubes is observed. 
The effect of sp element (N, P, Si) additions into the polymer matrix 
on the activity of nanostructure growth was investigated. The most effect 
is shown by nitrogen forming a strong covalent bond with hydrogen and 
releasing carbon atoms and by phosphor interacting easily with oxygen. 
This is evidenced by the example of the synthesis of nanostructures in 
nanoreactors when Fe2
O3 is used as the modifier. In this case reduction 
is difficult, and the yield of the nanoproduct is small. The reduction 
activity rises when, during synthesis, (NH4
)5
PO4
 is added in addition to 
the polymer and iron oxide. In this case, iron reduces with the formation 
of nanostructures. 
For investigation of the formation of nanostructures with a certain form, 
there is a need to study the interatomic interaction of the initial components, 
the possibility of the formation of a hybridized chemical bond of d elec￾trons of metal atoms with p electrons of atoms of sp elements. For that, a 
systematic investigation was carried out for the 3s spectra in order to reveal a 
correlation between the parameters of the multiplet splitting of the 3s spectra 
and the number of uncompensated d electrons of metal atoms and also the 
change in the neighborhood of the atom. 
For most transition metal-ligand systems, the model connecting the 
parameters of the X-ray photoelectron 3s spectra with the change in the spin 
state on the metal atom correctly predicts a tendency toward a change in the 
atomic structure [10]. The relative intensity of the maxima of 3s-spectrum 
multiplets correlates with the number of unpaired d-electrons of atoms in 
the systems of 3d metals. The interval between the maxima of multiplets 
yields information on the exchange interaction of the 3s and 3d shells which 
depends on changes occurring in the 3d shell (localization or hybridization), 
i.e., we obtain information on the change in the spacing between adjacent 
atoms. The form of the valence bands, which is the energy distribution of 
the density of d states, determines their localization connected to interatomic 
interaction yielding information on the neighborhood of the atom. The 
presence of changes in the shape of the 3s spectra and the valence bands 
yields information on structure variation in the immediate vicinity of the 
3D-metal atoms [11]. 
The given model was used in the investigation of metal–carbon nano￾structures obtained in a nanoreactor of PVA with the use of superdispersed 
Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu powders as modifiers. The O1s spectrum in all the studied 80 Modern Magnetic Materials 
samples is low in intensity and typical for adsorbed oxygen. The C1s spec￾trum for all the investigated samples of nanostructures contains the Me–C 
and C–C components which are evidence of the formation of metal-carbon 
nanostructures [12]. 
The study of special features of the structure of the Me3s spectra for the 
samples under investigation revealed a change in the relative intensities of 
the multiplet-splitting maxima and the interval between them in comparison 
with the 3s spectra of pure metals (Table 6.1). 
TABLE 6.1 Parameters of Multiplet Splitting for the 3s Spectra in the Reference Samples 
and Formed Nanostructures 
Sample I2
/I1 Δ (eV) μCo μB μNi μB μCu, μB μFe, μB 
Ni3sbody 0.15 4.3 – 0.5 – – 
Ni3s nano (C) 0.32 3.0 – 1.8 – – 
Ni3s nano (Si) 0.4 4.3 – 2.0 – – 
Co3sbody 0.29 4.6 1.6 – – – 
Co3s nano (C) 0.48 5.4 2.3 – – – 
Cu3s nano (C) 0.24 3.5 – – 1.5 – 
Fe3sbody 0.48 3.9 – – – 2.2 
Fe3s nano (PVA + NH4
)5
РO4
) 0.5 4.0 – – – 2.5 
Note: I2
/I
1 is the ratio of the line intensities of multiplet splitting; Δ is the energy range 
between the maxima of multiplet splitting in the 3s spectra of the pure metals Fe, Co, and Ni 
and nanostructures of Fe, Ni, Co, and Cu. 
The obtained results indicate an increase in the number of uncompensated 
d electrons in metal atoms in the nanostructures with Co and Ni and their 
appearance in Cu atoms. The increase in the number of uncompensated d 
electrons can be explained by the participation of d electrons of metal atoms 
in the hybridized chemical bond with p electrons of carbon atoms. Conse￾quently, the atomic magnetic moment in Co and Ni increases in comparison 
with that in pure metals in the nanostructures and appears on Cu atoms. The 
difference in the intervals of multiplet splitting in the 3s spectra of Fe, Co, 
and Ni in comparison with pure metals are evidence of the difference in the 
spacings between carbon and metal atoms in the nanostructures. This can 
be explained by the appearance of different nanoforms depending on the 
modifiers used. 
The decrease in the interval between the multiplets in Ni nanostructures 
in comparison with pure Ni indicates the approaching of Ni and C atoms at Investigation of the Formation of the Electron Structure 81 
significantly smaller spacings than between the Ni–Ni and Ni–C atoms in 
metal carbides [13] due to carbon atom implantation into the metal particle. 
This is evidence of the formation of a strong hybridized Ni–C bond. The 
increase in the interval between the multiplets in the Co and Fe nanostruc￾tures in comparison with pure metals indicates an increase in the spacing 
between the Co and C atoms in the nanostructures. This spacing has the same 
order as that in Me–C carbides. 
Based on XPS data and analysis of the computational models for 
nanostructure formation, we proposed mechanisms for the growth of 
metal-carbon nanostructures. An explanation of the formation of multilayer 
nanotubes is proposed in the mechanism of turning a graphite sheet into a 
scroll. The broken bonds are compensated by interaction with metal (Co, 
Fe, Mn) atoms [14]. 
The single-layer nanotubes in the presence of modifiers (salts or metal 
oxides) grow on metal (Ni, Cu) particles with carbon atoms implanted into 
them. 
These nanotubes set down (are adsorbed) at the particle surface in the 
form of islands and form a fullerene like structure with sp3 hybridization 
(Figure 6.3) which is a center for the formation of nanostructures with 
dimensions and a form determined by the metal modifier. In the case of 
the application of Ni and Cu as modifiers, single-layer nanotubes grow 
on their particles. The d electrons in Pt and Ag metals are more strongly 
localized than in Ni and Cu, and the bonds between the d and p electrons 
of the metal and carbon are significantly weaker. Therefore, the growth of 
fullerene-like structures on Pt, Pd, and Ag metal particles is accompanied 
by their separation. This mechanism is verified by the data of published 
works [15, 16]. 
FIGURE 6.3 Integration of carbon adatoms in the base of the fullerene half-molecule at the 
nickel surface. 82 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The table lists data of the X-ray photoelectron study of Ni nanostructures 
obtained by galvanic deposition into nanoporous silicon [17]. The analysis 
of the Ni3s spectrum for the given sample shows that the mechanism for 
the formation of such nanostructures is different than that for the formation 
of metal-carbon nanostructures. The interval of the multiplet splitting of 
the Ni3s spectrum for nanostructures with silicon remains the same as for 
crystalline nickel. This is evidence that Si atoms replace Ni atoms in the 
lattice, but do not implant into it as occurs in the case with metal-carbon 
nanostructures. The ratio of the line intensities of the multiplet splitting in 
the given sample is 0.4, which corresponds to ~2.0 μB, i.e., the number of 
uncompensated d electrons of Ni increases in these nanostructures, and, 
consequently, the atomic magnetic moment on the Ni atom grows. The work 
of Shabanova et al. [18] describes the formation of a strongly hybridized 
covalent bond in Me–Si systems in comparison with Me–C, Me–P, etc. The 
formation of a strongly hybridized covalent Ni–Si bond results in an increase 
in uncompensated d electrons of Ni and, consequently, in an increase in the 
atomic magnetic moment on the Ni atoms, which is greater than for metal￾carbon nanostructures. 
6.4 CONCLUSIONS 
Thus, it is shown that investigations of the formation of nanostructures 
with a defined form and also of their properties are based on the concept of 
studying the interatomic interaction of the initial components and the forma￾tion of the hybridized chemical bond of d electrons of metal atoms with 
p electrons of atoms of sp elements. The laws of metal reduction and the 
synthesis of various nanoforms in the nanoreactors were studied depending 
on the content, modifier type, and nanoreactor structure. 
An increase in the amount of metal-carbon nanostructures directly 
depends on the degree of filling of the 3d electron shell of the metals. The 
same mixture content shows the growth of C–C and Me–C bonds among 
Mn–Co–Ni. The dependence of the formation activity and form of the 
nanostructures on the nanoreactor structure and the effect of additions of sp 
elements (N, P) to the polymer matrix on the synthesis activity for metal￾carbon nanostructures were studied. It is shown that the sp hybridization 
of carbon atoms and the filling and type of d shell determine the form of 
metal-carbon nanostructures. Investigation of the Formation of the Electron Structure 83 
KEYWORDS 
• acetylacetone 
• catalysts 
• low-energy synthesis 
• metal-carbon nanosystems 
• metallocarbonic structures 
• polyethylene polyamine 
• satellite structure of C1s spectra 
• X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
REFERENCES 
1. Shabanova, I. N., Varganov, D. V., Dobysheva, L. V., et al., (1986). Izv. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 
Ser. Fiz. 50, 1677. 
2. Vasil’ev, L. S., Lomaeva, S. F., & Shabanova, I. N., (1993). Poverkhnost, (11), 94. 
3. Bragin, V. G., Shabanova, I. N., Kulyabina, O. A., Kholin, N. A., & Trapeznikov, V. A., 
(1982). Poverkhnost, (11), 105. 
4. Shabanova, I. N., Samoilovich, S. S., & Zhuravlev, V. A., (1982). Poverkhnost, (2), 129. 
5. Kodolov, V. I., & Khokhryakov, N. V., (2009). Chemical Physics of Processes of Forma￾tion and Transformations of Nanostructures and Nanosystems (Vol. 1, 2). IzhGSKhA, 
Izhevsk, in Russian. 
6. Pines, D., (1963/1965). Elementary Excitations in Solids (Benjamin, New York; Mir, 
Moscow). 
7. Briggs, D., & Seah, M. P., (1983/1987). Practical Surface Analysis by Auger_ and X_ray 
Photoelectron Spectroscopy. Wiley, New York; Mir, Moscow. 
8. Kodolov, V. I., Shabanova, I. N., Szargan, R., Kuznetsov, A. P., Nicolaeva, O. A., 
Makarova, L. G., Khokhryakov, N. V., et al., (2001). J. Surf. Interface Anal., 32, 10. 
9. Kodolova, V. I., Khokhryakov, N. V., Tyneeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2008). Khim. 
Fiz. Mezoskop., 10, 448. 
10. Lomova, N. V., Shabanova, I. N., Terebova, N. S., et al., (2005). Izv. Akad. Nauk, Ser. Fiz., 
69, 1015. 
11. Lomova, N. V., Shabanova, I. N., Kholzakov, A. V., et al., (2008). Inorg. Mater., 44, 818. 
12. Makarova, L. G., Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., et al., (2004). Electron Spectrosc. Relat. 
Phenom., 137–140, 239. 
13. Slavinskii, M. P., (1952). Physicochemical Properties of Elements (Nauchno_Tekh. Izd. 
Liter. Chern. Tsvetn. Metallurgii, Moscow) [in Russian]. 
14. Makarova, L. G., Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., et al., (2008). Bull. Russ. Acad. Sci.: 
Phys., 72, 459. 84 Modern Magnetic Materials 
15. Pazhetnov, E. M., Koshcheev, S. V., & Boronin, A. I., (2003). Kinet. Catal., 44, 414. 
16. Tontegode, A. Y., (1991). Prog. Surf. Sci., 38, 201. 
17. Kashkarov, V. M., Len’shin, A. S., & Agapov, B. L., (2009). Tech. Phys. Lett., 35, 827. 
18. Shabanova, I. N., Mitrokhin, Yu. S., & Terebova, N. S., (2004). Electron Spectrosc. Relat. 
Phenom., 137–140, 565. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 7


Dependence of the Value of the Atomic 
Magnetic Moment of d-Metals on the 
Chemical Structure of Nanoforms 
I. N. SHABANOVA,1
 N. S. TEREBOVA,1
 and V. I. KODOLOV2 
1
Udmurt Federal Research Center, Ural Branch, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia 
2
Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to study the dependence 
of the 3D-metal spin state in nanoforms on the nanoform chemical structure. 
For studying the nanoform chemical structure, a model developed by us was 
used, which allowed us to find out the interrelation between the parameters of 
the X-ray electron 3s spectra of transition metals and the number of uncom￾pensated electrons in metal atoms. It is shown that the nanoform chemical 
structure is determined by the methods used for their preparation and by the 
nanoreactor form. By changing the structure of nanoforms, it is possible, to 
a certain extent, to control the magnetic characteristics of nanoform-based 
materials. 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
In the creation of the effective nanoscale materials for wide application and 
the implementation of nano-technological ideas, it is important to investi￾gate the principles of self-organization of a substance and the creation of 86 Modern Magnetic Materials 
nanoscale materials from molecules to per molecular structures. By control￾ling the sizes and forms of nanostructures, one can impart quite new and 
often unprecedented properties to an object. To develop new approaches to 
the nanostructure preparation, experimental studies of the regularities of the 
formation of nanoparticles (NPs) in nanoreactors are needed. 
In Ref. [1], a model was developed and used for revealing the interrela￾tion between the parameters of the XPS 3s spectra and the change of the spin 
state on the atoms of d metals, which was helpful in the determination of the 
nanoform atomic magnetic moment. It was shown that the atomic magnetic 
moment of 3D-transition metals in carbon metal-containing nanostructures 
was larger than that in massive samples. 
One of the most powerful direct methods for studying electronic struc￾ture, chemical bond, nearest surrounding of atoms of a substance is X-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The choice of an electron magnetic 
spectrometer is due to a number of its advantageous features in comparison 
with electrostatic spectrometers, which are the persistence of luminosity and 
resolution capacity independent on the electron energy, and high contrast 
of spectra. In addition, the constructive separation of the energy analyzer 
of a magnetic type from the spectrometer vacuum chamber allows various 
actions upon a sample in vacuum directly during spectra taking. Thus, sample 
heating and cooling or the mechanical cleaning of the sample surface from 
impurities do not deteriorate the spectrometer resolution. 
The objective of the present work is the XPS study of the dependence of 
the spin state of a 3D-metal contained in nanoforms on the chemical structure 
of the nanoforms, which greatly depends on methods used for the nanoform 
preparation, and the nanoreactor structure. 
7.2 EXPERIMENTAL METHODS 
The XPS spectra were obtained on an X-ray electron magnetic spectrometer 
constructed in the Physicotechnical Institute, Ural Branch of Russian Academy 
of Sciences [2]. The chemical structure of nanoforms was studied; the following 
methods were used for their production: 
i.

 Low-temperature synthesis (in the polyvinyl alcohol nanoreactor 
(PVA)), wherein superdispersed powders of Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu were 
used as modifiers. Multilayer nanotubes were produced. 
ii.

 Pyrolysis (700C) of injected ferrocene and nickel acetylacetonate solu￾tions in benzene-ethanol mixture. The multilayer carbon nanotubes Dependence of the Value of the Atomic Magnetic Moment 87 
(CNTs) produced were cleaned from amorphous carbon impurities by 
annealing in the air at the temperature 330°C for two hours. 
iii. Galvanic (electrochemical) deposition of transition-metal nanoclus￾ters in nanoporous silicon. 
The samples were evaluated by the method of transmission electron 
microscopy. 
In the present chapter, the dependence of the value of the atomic magnetic 
moment of 3D-metals on the size and form of nanostructures was investi￾gated. The investigations were conducted: 
a.

 For multilayer carbon metal-containing nanotubes produced by low￾temperature synthesis and pyrolysis; 
b.

 For multilayer carbon metal-containing nanotubes prepared in nano￾reactors with different composition and structure; 
c.

 Metal-silicon nanocomposites produced by the galvanic (electro￾chemical) deposition of a d-metal (Ni) into the pours of silicon. 
In contrast to conventional methods presenting the information 
integrated over a sample, the XPS spectra give the information about the 
local characteristics of the structure of a substance. It is known that the 
parameters of the XPS 3s spectra of transition metals correlate with the 
magnetic moment of metal atoms [3]. The XPS 3s spectra of reference 
metals are characterized by the presence of two maxima, which indicates 
a multiplet splitting in the spectra [1]. The intensity ratio of the multiplet 
maxima (I2
/I1
) correlates with the number of uncompensated d electrons 
of the atoms of 3D-metals; and the distance between the multiplet maxima 
(∆) characterizes the exchange interaction between 3s- and 3D-shells, and, 
thus, the localization of 3D electrons in the neighborhood of their own atom, 
which, in its turn, determines a change in the distance between neighboring 
atoms [4]. Consequently, a change in the 3s spectra parameters presents the 
information about a change in the chemical structure of nanoforms. 
7.3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Changes in the structure of carbon metal-containing nanoforms prepared by 
different methods of synthesis are investigated. Figures 7.1(a) and (b) show 
Me3s spectra and Table 7.1 presents the parameters of the Me3s spectra 
obtained from the studied samples. Multilayer carbon metal-containing 
nanotubes were produced by low-temperature synthesis and pyrolysis. In 88 Modern Magnetic Materials 
the case of pyrolysis and low-temperature synthesis, multilayer nanotubes 
grown on the d-metal particles are formed [5, 6]. 
FIGURE 7.1 X-ray photoelectron Ni3s spectra of nanostructures produced by different 
methods: (a) low-temperature synthesis (400°С) in the PVA + NiO nanoreactor; (b) pyrolysis 
(700°С) of the injected solutions of ferrocene and nickel acetylacetonate in the benzene￾ethanol mixture; (c) low-temperature synthesis (400°C) in the PVA + NiO reactor with 
addition of (NH4
)5
РO4
; and (d) galvanic (electrochemical) deposition of Ni into nanoporous 
silicon. Dependence of the Value of the Atomic Magnetic Moment 89 
TABLE 7.1 The Parameters of the Multiplet Splitting of the 3s Spectra of Massive Samples 
and Fe-, Ni-, and Cu-Containing Nanostructures Produced by Different Methods 
Samples I2
/I1 ∆ (eV) µNi, µB µCu,µB µFe µB 
Ni3s nano (C) low temperature 0.32 3.0 1.8 – – 
Ni3s nano (C) pyrolysis 0.40 4.7 2.0 – – 
Ni3s nano (PVA + NH4
)5
РO4 0.60 3.6 3.0 – – 
Ni3s nano (Si) 0.40 4.3 2.0 – – 
Fe3smassive 0.42 3.9 – – 2.2 
Fe3s nano (PVA +NH4
)
5
РO4
) 0.50 4.0 – – 2.5 
Сu3s nano (C) 0.24 3.5 – 1.5 – 
Cu3s nano (PVA + NH4
)5
РO4 0.40 3.6 – 2.0 – 
It is shown that the nanotubes produced by pyrolysis have a considerably 
smaller diameter (2–6 nm) than that of the multilayer nanotubes produced 
by low-temperature synthesis (17 nm). Table 7.1 presents the multiplet 
splitting parameters and the atomic magnetic moments for nickel in the 
nanostructures produced by the above methods. When the size of the nano￾structures prepared by pyrolysis decreases, the ratio of maxima intensities of 
the multiplet splitting lines (I2
/I1
) increases, i.e., the magnetic moment of a 
nickel atom increases. It can be explained by the approachment of nickel and 
carbon atoms and an increase in the number of uncompensated d electrons 
due to the overlapping of their wave functions. 
Further, the influence of the nanoreactor composition and structure on the 
chemical structure of the nanoforms produced by low-temperature synthesis 
has been studied (Figure 7.1(c) and (d); Table 7.1). In particular, the influ￾ence of the addition of sp-elements into the polymer matrix on the activity 
of the nanostructure growth has been shown. Most influence is produced by 
the presence of nitrogen and phosphorus. Nitrogen forms a strong covalent 
bond with hydrogen and doing so it releases carbon atoms; phosphorus 
readily interacts with oxygen reducing metal atoms. It is observed in the 
synthesis of nanostructures in nanoreactors, when d-metal oxides are used 
as d-metal compounds. The process of the Cu, Ni, and Co reduction goes 
without any difficulties. In the case of Fe2
O3
, the iron reduction process is 
complicated and the yield of a nanoproduct is insignificant. In this case, the 
activity of the reduction process increases when in addition to polymer and 
iron oxide, (NH4
)5
PO4 is used during the synthesis. It results in the reduction 
of iron and the formation of carbon metal-containing nanostructures. In the 
Fe-containing nanostructures, the change of the atomic magnetic moment 
is insignificant in comparison with the Fe massive sample (Table 7.1). 90 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Consequently, in this case the formation of nanostructures is not active. 
The number of d electrons participating in the bond with carbon p electrons 
and the number of uncompensated d electrons change to a very little degree 
(within the experimental error). Such behavior can be explained by a greater 
degree of ionicity in the chemical bond of the atoms of these nanostructures, 
which is characteristic of Me–C carbides. 
Let us consider a change in the atomic magnetic moment of carbon Ni￾and Cu–Containing nanotubes without additions of nitrogen and phosphorus 
and, vice versa, with the nitrogen and phosphorus additions into a polymer 
matrix (a nanoreactor). In both cases (for Ni and Cu–Containing nanotubes), 
the growth of the Ni and Cu atomic magnetic moments is observed, i.e., the 
growth of the number of uncompensated d electrons of the metals, which 
is indicated by the increase of the ratio of the maxima intensities of the 
3s spectra multiplets (I2
/I1
) (see Table 7.1 and Figure 7.1). It indicates the 
change of the nanoform structure at adding phosphorous and nitrogen into 
the polymer matrix, and first of all, as mentioned above, a decrease in the 
sizes of the nanotubes. The decreasing distance between atoms leads to an 
increase in the number of uncompensated d electrons, which is confirmed by 
an increase in the distance between the maxima (∆) of the multiplet splitting 
in the nickel and copper 3s spectra. The results received for the dependence of 
the atomic magnetic moment of nanoforms on the nanoreactor structure are 
in agreement with the data for the nanostructure growth with the increasing 
number of electrons on the d shell of a metal (Fe, Ni, and Cu). 
Further, silicon metal-containing nanocomposites prepared by galvanic 
(electrochemical) deposition of a 3D metal into nanoporous silicon [7] have 
been studied. The mechanism of the formation of such nanostructures differs 
from that of the formation of the carbon metal-containing nanostructures. 
Nanocomposites are formed only on the basis of Ni, since the Ni–Si bond 
is the strongest [8]. The distance between the maxima of the multiplet split￾ting of the Ni3s spectrum of silicon nanostructures is the same as that for 
crystalline nickel, which indicates that Si atoms replace Ni atoms in the 
lattice, while in the case of carbon metal-containing nanostructures they 
incorporate into the lattice [9]. It is evidenced by the ∆ values showing that 
the distance between Ni and C atoms is smaller than that between Ni and Si 
atoms. However, despite this fact the ratio of the maxima intensities of the 
multiplet splitting in the studied sample is 0.4, which corresponds to ~2.0µB, 
and it is ~1.8µB for Ni–C, which means that in the silicon nanostructures the 
number of uncompensated d electrons of Ni increases. In Ref. [8], the forma￾tion of a much stronger hybridized covalent bond in the Me–Si systems is Dependence of the Value of the Atomic Magnetic Moment 91 
shown in comparison with the Me–C systems. The formation of the strongly 
hybridized covalent Ni–Si bond leads to an increase in the number of 
uncompensated d electrons of Ni, and, consequently, to a greater increase in 
the atomic magnetic moment on Ni atoms in comparison with that in carbon 
metal-containing nanostructures. 
Thus, by changing the composition and structure of nanoreactors or the 
method of nanostructure production, it is possible, to a certain extent, to 
control the magnetic properties of materials based on nanostructures. 
7.4 CONCLUSION 
The nanostructures formed as the result of the interaction of transition 
metal oxides with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) are not of the same type. The 
differences are due to different filling of the d shell of the transition metals 
participating in their formation. 
An increase in the atomic magnetic moment of d metals in nanostructures 
is shown to be dependent on the decrease of the nanotube diameter which 
is associated with the decrease of the distance between the atoms of a metal 
and carbon, the increase of the overlapping of the wave functions of their d 
and p electrons and the increase of the number of the metal uncompensated 
d electrons. 
In nanostructures, the degree of the chemical bond covalence of the 
component atoms increases with the d-shell filling growth from Fe to Cu, 
and consequently, the number of uncompensated d electrons increases to a 
greater extent. 
A model was developed showing the dependence of the parameters of 
the multiplet splitting of the 3s spectra on the spin state or atomic magnetic 
moments; it was used in the carbon metal-containing nanoform investigation 
for studying the hybridized bond of ‘d’ electrons of a metal atom with ‘p’ 
electrons of an sp-element and a change in the number of uncompensated d 
electrons: 
1.

 The comparative study of the influence of carbon and other sp 
elements (N, P, Si) on the activity of the synthesis of carbon metal￾containing nanostructures, their form and properties has been 
conducted. The addition of sp elements (P, N) into a polymer matrix 
results in the acceleration of the reduction of the Fe, Co, Ni, and 
Cu metals and the increased activity of the nanostructure synthesis. 
Nanoreactors are mainly intended for facilitating the formation of 92 Modern Magnetic Materials 
the activated complex and decreasing the activation energy of the 
main reaction between the components. 
2.

 The study of the interatomic interaction in carbon metal-containing 
and silicon metal-containing nanostructures shows that it has the same 
features in both cases, i.e., the formation of the hybridized chemical 
bond of d and p atoms of components depends on d and sp shell 
filling, and there is an increase in the atomic magnetic moment on a 
metal atom in nanostructures in comparison with massive samples. 
3.

 A number of properties of nanostructures depend on the method 
of production and their structure. In the cases of low-temperature 
synthesis and pyrolysis on the basis of polymers and d metals, there 
is a strong interatomic interaction, and carbon metal-containing nano￾tubes with different diameters are readily formed. In nanocomposites 
prepared by the electrochemical deposition of a metal into nanoporous 
silicon, nanoforms are formed only on the basis of Ni, since the Ni–Si 
bond is the strongest. 
Thus, for manufacturing magnetic materials with a super-high atomic 
magnetic moment, both the iron- and cobalt-containing and nickel- and 
copper-containing nanostructures with minimal sizes can be used. 
KEYWORDS 
• atomic magnetic moment of d-metals 
• chemical structure of nanoforms 
• electronic structure 
• interatomic interaction 
• nanoforms 
• spin state 
• X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
REFERENCES 
1. Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2010). Application of the x-ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy method for studying the magnetic moment of 3d metals in carbon-metal 
nanostructures. Surface and Interface Analysis, 42(6, 7), 846–849. Dependence of the Value of the Atomic Magnetic Moment 93 
2.

Trapeznikov, V. A., Shabanova, I. N., & Zhuravlev, V. A., (2004). The use of the x-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy for studying inverse β-decay. Electron Spectroscopy and 
Related Phenomena, 137–140, 731–734. 
3. Briggs, D., & Sikh, M. P., (1987). The Surface Analysis by Auger- and X-Ray Photoelectron 
Spectroscopy (p. 600). M.: Mir. 
4. Lomova, N. V., & Shabanova, I. N., (2004). The study of the electronic structure and 
magnetic properties of invar alloys based on transition metals J. of Electr. Spectr. and Rel. 
Phen., 137–140, 511–517. 
5. Kirikova, M. N., (2009). Physicochemical Properties of Functionalized Multi-Walled 
Carbon Nanotubes (p. 24). After abstract of dissertations for competitive academic 
degrees, PhD, Mostov. 
6. Kodolov, V. I., Blagodatskikh, I. I., Volkova, E. G., Terebova, N. S., & Makarova, L. 
G., (2008). Method for Production of Carbon Metal-Containing Nanostructures by 
Interaction of Organic Substances and D-Metal Salts. Patent No. 2323876. 
7. Kashkarov, V. M., Lenshin, A. S., Agapov, B. L., Turishchev, S. Yu., & Domashevskaya, 
E. P., (2009). Electron structure of iron and cobalt nanocomposites on the basis of porous 
silicon. Phys. Status Solidi C., 6(7), 1656–1660. 
8. Shabanova, I. N., Mitrokhin, Yu. S., & Terebova, N. S., (2004). Experimental and 
theoretical study of electronic structures of Ni-X(X = Al, Si, P) systems. Electron 
Spectroscopy and Related Phenomena, 137–140, 565–568. 
9. Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2011). X-ray photoelectron investigation of 
the regularities of the growth of carbon metal-containing nanoforms in nanoreactors. 
Journal of Structural Chemistry. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 8


Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon 
Mesoscopic Composites With Regulated 
Magnetic Characteristics 
V. I. KODOLOV,1,2 V. V. KODOLOVA–CHUKHONTSEVA,1,3 YU. V. PERSHIN,1 
R. V. MUSTAKIMOV,1,2 I. N. SHABANOVA,1,4 and N. S. TEREBOVA1,4 
1
Basic Research–High Educational Centre of Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 
Izhevsk, Russia 
2
Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
3
Great Peter St Petersburg Polytechnic University, St Petersburg, Russia 
4
Udmurt Federal Research Centre, Ural Division, 
Russian Academy of Sciences, Izhevsk, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
This book chapter reviews some important aspects of the metal-carbon 
mesocomposites in detail. We have also focused on the chemical mesoscopic 
characteristics. The process takes place at the quantization of the charge 
considering specific phase consistency along with the chemical bond forma￾tion. This is because of real involvement and the reduction-oxidation process 
destruction that could possibly take place. Meanwhile, the process is analyzed 
by the destruction origin. In such conditions, we have to note that, in fact, the 
metal atomic magnetic moment growth will be in the reliance on electrons 
number that could be evidently engaged in oxidation decrement approach 
(i.e., red-ox process). Metal carbon production of mesoscopic composites 
could be clearly carried out with the application of mechanical–chemical 
interaction. 96 Modern Magnetic Materials 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
The mesoscopic proposition could be used to analyze the chemical particles 
reactivity when the charge quantization along with phase coherence is an 
important factor. These incidences are the main cause for the interven￾tion and feasible destruction aspects. This transformation is worked-out 
by means of the reflection of mesoscopic systems interaction along with 
the macroscopic systems. Based on the studies presented in Refs. [1, 2], 
the mesoscopic system (ms) frequently depends on the types of applied 
samples. Here, the macroscopic systems are called reservoirs, contacts, or 
banks. Therefore, these banks or reservoirs are expected to be the main 
sources and/or drains for particles and energy. These reservoirs are large to 
transfer the energy between ms particles. So in any condition, the electron 
systems within reservoirs are expected to appear in equilibrium condition. 
This is characterized by a certain amount of temperature (T) and chemical 
potential (μ). 
The restrictions for processes are explained clearly by the limits of 
Chemical Mesoscopics. These could be summarized as: 
1.

 The mesoscopic particle; 
2.

 The size of phase consistency is placed in limits up to 1000 nm; 
3.

 As the circumstances such as spectrum quantization, charge quanti￾zation, and interference, are appeared. 
8.2 MESOSCOPIC REACTORS (NANOREACTORS) 
Mesoscopic reactors are very particular nanostructures. These reactors could 
be provided as a nanosized cavity in polymeric matrices or could be designed 
as the space bounded part. 
Mesoscopic one-dimensional nanoreactors are classified as [3,4]: clearance 
between probe and surface, crystal canals, complexes, crystal solvates, 
macromolecules, micelles, vesicles, or pores. 
Mesoscopic two-dimensional nanoreactors (mesoscopic reactors) are 
classified as double electrical layers, monomolecular layers on the surface, 
membranes, interface layers (boundaries), or adsorption layers. 
Different types of mesoscopic reactors exist with various conditions 
that could take place. Meanwhile, the formation of activated complexes is 
observed within the reactors. It should be pointed out that the formations 
of nanostructures within mesoscopic reactors are observed by the nature of Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composites 97 
reactants. These, of course, participate in synthesis and by the energetic and 
geometric characteristics of mesoscopic reactors. 
According to our analysis of modern scientific data and based on our 
studies, the following form in the nanoreactors could be noted: 
1.

 The main abnormality is the decline of parallel collateral processes 
and the process direction to the special product side. 
2.

 The low energetic costs and the high rates of processes. 
3.

 The dependence of nanostructures properties obtained by energetic 
and geometric characteristics of nanoreactors. 
The basic parameters and equations needed the matrices. First of all, the 
coordination number of elements or elements group is needed. And then, the 
growth and form of nanostructures could be observed using Kolmogorov– 
Avrami equations [5–7]. Expansion of the nanostructures self-organization 
process is approximated by means of the Kolmogorov-Avrami equations [8, 9]. 
In this equation, the Red Ox potentials are considered. As the metal 
reduction happens in the process of Metal Carbon mesocomposite forma￾tion, we can show; 
W = 1 – k exp [– τn exp(zFΔφ/RT)], 
where; the parameter (k) is the proportionality coefficient, the parameter (τ) 
is the duration of the process, the parameter (n) is the fractal dimension, 
the parameter (z) is the number of electrons participating in the process, 
the parameter (Δφ) is the difference of potentials on the border “mesore￾actor wall–reaction mixture,” the parameter (F) is the Faraday number, the 
parameter (R) is the universal gas constant, and the parameter (T) is the 
temperature. 
During the calculating process, our process duration takes within half￾hour intervals. In this regard, for such calculations, we considered the 
following: 
n = 2 (two-dimensional growth), 
where; potential of Red ox process during the metal reduction = 0.34V, 
temperature = 473K, Faraday number = 26.81 A×hr/mol, and universal gas 
constant (R) = 2.31 W×hr/mol×degree. 
However, our calculations are done for the thermal stage duration of 
the synthesis of Copper Carbon mesocomposites. The results are shown in 
Table 8.1. 
It should be noted that Table 8.1 results practically agree with experi￾mental data. 98 Modern Magnetic Materials 
TABLE 8.1 Results Obtained 
Duration (hrs) 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 
Content of product, % 22.5 63.8 89.4 98.3 99.8 
8.3 MESOSCOPIC REACTORS FOR METAL CARBON MESOSCOPIC 
COMPOSITES SYNTHESIS 
Metal carbon mesoscopic composites are designed using metal oxides (e.g., 
CuO) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA). In the dependence of metal oxidation 
state (for Cu+1, CN is equaled to 2; for Cu+2 – 4). The coordination number 
(CN) of copper could be equal to 2 or 4. The reagents relation (CuO/PVA) 
can be equated to 4. At the first stage (at the grinding of reagents), when the 
reagents relation is given as 1:4 (1 part – metal oxide, for example, copper 
oxide, and four parts – PVA), the decline of metal-containing phase sizes 
is observed using reduction-oxidation (redox) process. With the metal￾containing cluster, the carbon formation from PVA chains is characterized 
by four chain fragments. The reduction of metals with the change of electron 
structure is expected [10–13], and the difference of banks of chemicals are 
obtained (Figure 8.1) 
μ1
 = μ + eφ1


──┬──┬──┬──┬──┬──┬── bank 1


Δμ ↕ ↑e ☼ ↑e ☼ ↑ e ☼ ion or cluster with M+


──┴──┴──┴──┴──┴──┴── bank 2


μ2 = μ + eφ2


FIGURE 8.1 Nanostructures formation stages. 
In this particular case study, metal (e.g., copper) within the cluster is 
considered with a positive charge. Meanwhile, the annihilation process 
stimulates the formation of (d) electrons flow from metal to the carbon shell 
of the mesoscopic particle formed, which is presented as metal (e.g., copper) 
and carbon mesoparticle (or mesogranul). 
This process is observed by the growth of metal atomic magnetic 
moment. Such scheme of copper carbon mesoscopic composites formation 
is accepted by: TEM (transition electron microscopy), (X-ray) photoelectron 
spectroscopy, roentgenograph or X-ray image, and also EPR spectroscopy 
(the electron paramagnetic resonance) or ESR spectroscopy (electron spin 
resonance). Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composites 99 
It should be noted that mesoscopic composites have magnetic charac￾teristics. Considering the delocalized electrons on the carbon shell, our 
mesoscopic composites are active at the modification by the mechanic 
chemical methods. 
The structures of metal-carbon mesoscopic composites with active 
carbon shells are defined by means of complex methods, including x-ray 
photoelectron spectroscopy, transition electron microscopy with high 
permission, electron microdiffraction, and also EPR spectroscopy (please 
refer to Figures 8.2–8.5 and Tables 8.1–8.3). 
The image of copper/carbon mesoscopic composite structure observed 
by transition electron microscopy (TEM). This is shown in Figure 8.2 as the 
TEM microphotograph for copper/carbon mesocomposite. 
FIGURE 8.2 Transition electron microscopy (TEM microphotograph). 
Data from transition electron microscopy with high solution indicates 
that the carbon fiber contains Carbon atoms because of the correspondence 
of the fiber diameter and carbon atom diameter or C–H group diameter value. 
In Figure 8.2, the carbon structure shells for clusters of copper are 
presented as carbon fibers. This fact is confirmed by electron microdiffrac￾tion results. The carbon fiber formation is generated by the realization of the 
reduction-oxidation process with the appearance of declined copper and the 
carbonization of polymeric hydrocarbon chains. 100 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The declined copper formation at the red ox process is confirmed in 
Figure 8.3 [The diffract gram of copper carbon mesoscopic composites 
obtained from copper oxide within matrices for different marks of PVA Cu/C 
NC (red) – PVA mark BF-14, NC (blue) – BF-17, NC (dark) – BF-24]. 
FIGURE 8.3 The diffract gram of copper carbon mesoscopic composites. 
Table 8.2 shows the dependence of process results from the nature of the 
polymeric matrix or marks of PVA. 
TABLE 8.2 Influence of PVA 
Marks of PVA The Line color on diffract grams 
of Copper Carbon mesoscopic 
composite 
Process 
completion, % 
PVA mark BF-17 Blue 77 
PVA mark BF-14 Red 82 
PVA mark BF-24 Dark 72 Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composites 101 
The correspondent marks of PVA or polyvinyl alcohol contain different 
quantities of acetic groups. The big number for PVA designates the most 
quantity of acetic groups in the polymer. Meanwhile, the process completion 
using this PVA mark is less in comparison with PVA mark B-14. There￾fore the PVA mark B-14 is used for Copper Carbon mesoscopic composite 
synthesis. The composition of the metal-containing phase in this mesoscopic 
particle is shown in Table 8.3. 
TABLE 8.3 Composition of Metal-Containing Phases in Copper Carbon Mesocomposite 
Phase Cu/C mesocomposite 
CuO 1.17% 
Cu2
O 5.19% 
Cu 93.64% 
Therefore, the decline of the oxidation process observed by the copper 
formation takes place at the interaction of copper oxide and PVA. Meantime, 
in this process, the carbon fibers are formed. 
In correspondence with C1s spectra (please refer to Figure 8.4), the 
carbon fibers contain the carbine and polyacetylene fragments. 
FIGURE 8.4 C1s spectrum of Cu/C mesoscopic composite. 102 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Here is our observation: 
•

 In C1s spectra, there are lines corresponding to the C1s energy for CH 
groups. 
•

 Peak at 285 eV (C–H bond) can be considered poly acetylene fragment 
of carbon fiber. In addition, the peak at 281–282 eV is considered to 
be a Carbine fragment. 
•

 Based on C1s spectra three types of satellites (sp, sp2
, and sp3 
hybridization) with different relation between them are noted. These 
satellites also take place in the C1s spectrum. 
•

 The intensities relation as I 2
sp /I 3
sp for Cu/C mesocomposite corre￾sponds to 1.7. The connection of these fragments is only possible at 
the unpaired electrons formation on the joints of connections. There￾fore the investigations of EPR spectra are carried out. 
•

 The results of these investigations are shown in Figure 8.5 and Table 8.4. 
0.6 
0.4 
0.2 
0.0 
-0.2 
-0.4 
3150 3200 3250 3300 3350 
FIGURE 8.5 EPR spectrum of Cu-C mesoscopic composite carbon shell. Relation of Copper and Carbon content, % 50/50 
The density of Copper Carbon mesocomposite, g/cm3 1.71 
Summary mass of Copper Carbon mesocomposite, au 36.75 
The middle size of Copper Carbon mesocomposite, d, nm 25 
The specific surface of Copper Carbon mesocomposite, m2
/g 160 
Frequency of skeleton vibration of Copper/Carbon mesoscopic composite, s-1 4×1011 
Middle vibration energy of Copper Carbon mesoscopic composite, erg 1.6×1013 
Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composites 103 
The coordination processes lead to changes in metal electron structure 
with unpaired electrons formation. That is established by an increase of metal 
atomic magnetic moment and also the appearance of unpaired electrons on 
the carbon shell surface (please refer to Table 8.4). 
TABLE 8.4 Empirical Results for EPR Data and Atomic Magnetic Moments (μB) for 
Copper/Carbon Mesoscopic Composite 
Copper carbon g-factor Number of Atomic magnetic moment, 
mesoscopic composite unpaired 
electrons, spin/g 
μ copper carbon mesoscopic B 
composite/massive sample 
Copper carbon 2.0036 1.2×1014 1.3 
mesoscopic composite 
Based on Ref. [15], the energetic characteristics of copper carbon meso￾scopic composite can be shown in Table 8.5. 
TABLE 8.5 Energetic Features of Copper /Carbon Mesoscopic Composite 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [15] 
Based on our observation, the mesoscopic particles needed to compare 
to the energetic parameters, for example, on middle vibration energy or the 
quant’s radiation energy for mesoscopic particles. 
8.4 REACTIVITY OF COPPER CARBON MESOSCOPIC COMPOSITE 
AT THE REACTIONS WITH OXIDIZERS 
The existence of active double bonds and delocalized electrons in the carbon 
shell of metal-carbon mesoscopic composites gives a chance for their modera￾tion by means of Red Ox and other processes. For this reason, in such substances 
interactions, in which elements (Si and P) have the highest oxidation state 
(+4 or +5) are evident. Such electron-containing compounds as metal/carbon 
nanocomposites. The scheme of the reduction process is shown below. 104 Modern Magnetic Materials 
НК (-δ, or∑e) + P+5 → НК – P+3 (P+2, P0
) 
НК (–δ, or ∑e) + Si+4 → НК – Si0 (Si+2) 
Such a mechanism is based on the chemical mesoscopic notions for 
electron transport across positively charged chemical particles. Therefore 
the proposed scheme is controlled by x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (P2p 
and Si2p spectra). 
Based on the P2p spectrum (please refer to Figure 8.6) Phosphorus 
containing Copper/Carbon mesoscopic composite changes the oxida￾tion state from +5 to zero. The binding energy P2p changes from 135 eV, 
corresponding to the PO4
 group, to 129 eV for P0 (The process flows on 
90%). In such cases, we can expect that the interaction between Copper 
and Phosphorus occurs [16]. Meanwhile, from the X-ray pattern analysis of 
phosphorus-containing Cu-C mesocomposite, we can easily see the presence 
of peaks for groups Cu-C-P at θ equaled to 43º. 
FIGURE 8.6 P2p spectrum of Cu/C mesocomposite modified by ammonium polyphosphate 
at the relation 1:1. 
C1s spectrum of this mesoscopic composite (please refer to Figure 8.7b) 
is eminent from the C1s spectrum of non-modified mesocomposite (please 
refer to Figure 7a) [Figue 8.7(a) shows the C1s spectrum of Copper/Carbon 
mesocomposite, and Figure 8.7(b) shows C1s spectrum of modified P 
containing Copper/Carbon mesoscopic composite]. Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composites 105 
The result shows the C–H on 15% smaller than in the spectrum of non￾modified mesocomposite. Hence, the relation of intensities for sp2 and sp3 
hybridization is augmented. Then this can be linked with the mesoscopic 
granule increasing and approaching its form to roundish. 
FIGURE 8.7 C1s spectra: (a) C1s spectrum of Copper/Carbon mesocomposite; (b) C1s 
spectrum of modified P containing Copper/Carbon mesoscopic composite. 
Similar studies are carried out in references [17, 18] for Copper/Carbon 
mesoscopic composite modified by Silicon containing substances. Spectra 
Si2p and C1s for Cu/C nanocomposite (MC) modified by Silica at the rela￾tion MC/Silica = 1 leads to Figure 8.8. 
FIGURE 8.8 X-ray photoelectron spectra for modified Cu/C (Si) mesocomposite: (a) Si2p 
spectrum; (b) C1s spectrum. 106 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Based on the Si2p spectrum, the relation of spectrum form intensities 
indicated that the reduction-oxidation process developed at 51.4%. C–H 
intensity in the spectrum of modified Si-containing mesocomposite on 65% 
smaller than the correspondent value in the spectrum of initial mesocom￾posite. The thickness of the Si-containing shell for Cu/C (Si) mesocomposite 
in comparison with a shell of modified P-containing mesoscopic composite 
is higher than four times. 
The studies of modified metal/mesoscopic carbon composites by means 
of transition electron microscopy (TEM) of energy resolution indicated 
that the shell from carbon fibers on mesoscopic granules surface is well 
preserved. As an example, the TEM image of phosphorus-containing Cu-C 
mesocomposite cab be seen in Figure 8.9. 
FIGURE 8.9 Transmission electron microscopy image of phosphorus-containing copper 
carbon mesoscopic composite. 
At the reduction process, the Copper atomic magnetic moment growth is 
observed (please refer to Table 8.6). 
This is accompanied by an increase in unpaired electron values (Table 8.7). 
The observed results cause natural questions regarding the reason for 
magnetic characteristics growth for metal atoms in the clusters within the 
nanocomposite granules. The correct response to this question may be found 
in the following hypothesis: Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composites 107 
•

 The hypothesis is concluded in the formation of delocalized (unpaired) 
electrons because the electrons shift on high energetic levels at the 
action electromagnetic radiation (field). 
•

 It’s possible the appearance of this radiation may be conditioned by 
the annihilation of quants of positive and negative charges, which are 
appeared in the redox process at mechanochemical modification of 
metal/carbon nanocomposites. 
•

 As a matter of fact, this hypothesis is necessary to confirm by corre￾sponding experiments. 
It’s worth mentioning that these processes are realized by mechano￾chemical methods, which can be a perspective for mesoscopic composite 
production. 
TABLE 8.6 The Values of Copper Atomic Magnetic Moment in the Interaction Products for 
Systems Cu-C NC – APPh (or SiO2
) 
Systems Cu/C NC – substances μ cu 
Cu/C NC – Silica 3.0 
Сu/C NC – APPh 2.0 
Cu/C NC - APPh, relation 1:0,5 4.2 
TABLE 8.7 The Unpaired Electron Values (from EPR spectra) for Systems “Cu/C NC– 
silica” and “Cu/C NC – APPh” (relation 1:1) in Comparison with Mesoparticle Cu/C NC 
Substance

 Quantity of unpaired electrons, spin/g 
Cu-C mesocomposite 
system «Cu/C NC – SiO » 2
system «Cu/C NC – APPh» 
1.2 × 1017 
3.4×1019 
2.8×1018 
8.5 MECHANOCHEMICAL METHOD 
The magnetic mesoparticles obtaining the possibility to the regulation of metal 
magnetic atomic moment is based on the combination of third variants of 
action on mesosystems formed on the boundary of reagents phases because of 
sign variable loadings (Figure 8.10). 
The modification of different materials by metal-carbon mesoscopic 
composites is also studied in Refs. [20–23]. The theoretical and empirical 
methods indicate that the mesoscopic composites' electromagnetic field 
action on the medium molecules ends up in the formation of nanostructured 
fragments in the material composition (Figure 8.11). 108 Modern Magnetic Materials 
FIGURE 8.10 Mechanic loadings on reactive mesoscopic systems (Left–the combination 
of pressure with displacement loadings, Middle–mechanical pulsation loadings, Right–the 
pressure increasing with next momentary decreasing). 
FIGURE 8.11 C1s spectra for polyvinyl alcohol modified by: (a) Cu-C mesocomposite in 
comparison with initial mesoscopic composite; (b) 0.001%; (c) 0.0001%. 
8.6 CONCLUSION 
The process studied in this book chapter, in general, is expected to happen 
among microscopic particles of metal oxides along with the macromolecules 
of polymers in the active medium presence. 
Thereafter, and during the production process of the mesoscopic 
composites, changeable loadings are applied. It should be noted that these Some Aspects of Magnetic Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composites 109 
loadings became available at the grinding with successive pressing through 
the existing pores in the stream of inert heat gas. This stream moves through 
the nozzle into the vapor phase, which carries a protective polymer solution. 
KEYWORDS 
• Chemical Mesoscopics 
• Electron Transport on High Energetic Levels 
• Metal Atomic Magnetic Moment 
• Metal Carbon Mesoscopic Composite 
• Quantization Spectrum 
• Reduction Oxidation Processes 
REFERENCES 
1. Imri, I. (2009). Introduction in Mesoscopic Physics. Physmatlit. 304p. 
2. Moskalets, M. V. (2010). Fundamentals of Mesoscopic Physics. Khar’kov: NTU KhPI, 
186p. 
3. Kodolov, V. I., & Khokhriakov, N. V., (2009). Chemical Physics of Formation and Trans￾formation Processes of Nanostructures and Nanosystems–Izhevsk: Publ. IzhSACA,– Vol. 
1, 361 p; Vol. 2, 415p. 
4. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V. (2017). New scientific trend–Chemical Mesoscopics. 
Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 19(3), 454–465. 
5. Morozov, A. D. (2002). Introduction in Fractal Theory. M.-Izhevsk: ICT, 160p. 
6. Kolmogorov, A. N., & Fomin, S. V. (2009). Introductory Real Analysis. USA, Portland: 
Prentice Hall, 403p. 
7. Wunderlikh, B. (1979). Physics of Macromolecules. Vol. 2, M.: Mir, 422p. 
8. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., Blagodatskikh, I. I. (2008). 
Nanostructure activity and its display in nanoreactors of polymeric matrices and in 
active media. Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 10(4), 448–460. 
9. Kodolov, V. I. (2009). The addition to previous paper – Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 
11(1), 134–136. 
10. Trineeva, V. V., Vakhrushina, M. A., Bulatov, D. I., & Kodolov, V. I. (2012). The obtaining 
of metal/carbon nanocomposites and investigation of their structure phenomena. Nano￾technics, 4, 50–55. 
11. Trineeva, V. V., Lyakhovich, A. M., & Kodolov, V. I. (2009). Forecasting of the formation 
processes of carbon metal containing nanostructures using the method of atomic force 
microscopy. Nanotechnics, 4(20), 87–90. 110 Modern Magnetic Materials 
12.

Kodolov, V. I., Blagodatskikh, I. I., Lyakhovich А.М. et al. (2007). Investigation of 
the formation processes of metal containing carbon nanostructures in nanoreactors of 
polyvinyl alcohol at early stages. Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 9(4), 422–429. 
13. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Blagodatskikh, I. I., Vasil’chenko Yu. M., Vakhrushina, 
M. A., & Bondar, A. Yu. (2013). The nanostructures obtaining and the synthesis of 
metal/carbon nanocomposites in nanoreactors. In Nanostructure, Nanosystems and 
Nanostructured Materials: Theory, Production and Development. Toronto-New Jersey: 
Apple Academic Press, pp. 101–145. 
14. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V. (2013). Fundamental definitions for domain of 
nanostructures and metal/carbon nanocomposites. In Nanostructure, Nanosystems and 
Nanostructured Materials: Theory, Production, and Development. Toronto-New Jersey: 
Apple Academic Press, pp. 1–42. 
15. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V. (2015). Energetic characteristics of Metal/Carbon 
nanocomposites. JCDNM, 7(2), 223–228. 
16. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Kopylova, A. A. et al. (2017). Mechanochemical modifica￾tion of metal/carbon nanocomposites. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 19(4), 569–580. 
17. Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., Terebova, N. S., & Trineeva, V. V. (2012). X-Ray Electron 
Spectroscopy in Investigations of Metal/Carbon Nanosystems and Nanostructured 
Materials. M.-Izhevsk: Publ. “Udmurt University,” 252p. 
18. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Terebova, N. S. et al. (2018). Changes of electron 
structure and magnetic characteristics of modified copper/carbon nanocomposites. 
Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 20(1), 72–79. 
19. Kopylova, A. A., & Kodolov, V. V. (2014). Investigation of coper/carbon nanocomposite 
interaction with silicium atoms from silicon comp ounds. Chemical Physics & Meso￾scopics, 16(4), 556–560. 
20. Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2012). Dependence of the value of the atomic 
magnetic moment of d metals on the chemical structure of nanoforms. In The Problems 
of Nanochemistry for the Creation of New Materials, Torun, Poland: IEPMD, 123–131. 
21. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., & Kuznetsov, A. P. (2006). To the issue of the 
mechanism of the influence of nanostructures on structurally changing media at the 
formation of “intellectual” composites. Nanotechnics, 3(7), 27–35. 
22. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I. (2010). 
Problems of Nanostructure Activity Estimation, Nanostructures Directed Production 
and Application. Nanomaterials Yearbook–2009: From Nanostructures, Nanomaterials 
and Nanotechnologies to Nanoindustry. N. Y.: Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 1–18. 
23.

Chashkin, M. A., Kodolov, V. I., Zakharov, A. I., et al. (2011). Metal/carbon nanocom￾posites for epoxy compositions: quantum-chemical investigations and experimental 
modeling. Polymer Research Journal, 5(1), 5–19. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 9


Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 
Application Possibilities as Magnetic 
Mesoscopic Materials 
V. I. KODOLOV,1,2 V. V. KODOLOVA-CHUKHONTZEVA,1,3 
YU. V. PERSHIN,1,2 and R. V. MUSTAKIMOV1,2 
1
Basic Research–High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and 
Mesoscopic, UD, RAS, Izhevsk, Russia 
2
M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State University, Izhevsk, Russia 
3
Peter Great St. Petersburg Polytechnic University, St. Petersburg, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
The chapter is dedicated to the consideration of the metal-carbon mesocom￾posites (Me–C MCs) application possibilities for the different practical trends. 
Each of these trends is determined by correspondent peculiarities of content 
and structure of mesoscopic composites. The main peculiarities of these 
nanosized particles are the following: (i) the presence of unpaired electrons 
on the carbon shell; (ii) the structure of the carbon shell from poly acetylene 
and carbine fragments; and (iii) the atomic magnetic moment of inner metal 
is equaled to more than 1–3 μB. The creation of reactive mesoscopic mate￾rials with regulated magnetic characteristics that can be used as modifiers of 
materials properties, catalysts for different processes, and effective inhibitors 
of oxidation processes, including corrosion processes, sorbents, and plant 
growth stimulators as magnetic medicine transport within organisms, is very 
topical. The present investigation has a fundamental character. It’s based on 
the ideas concerning the change of Me–C MC reactivity. The using is possible 112 Modern Magnetic Materials 
as Me–C MC both, and they have modified analogously. The application 
examples are presented for the property’s improvement of concretes, polymer 
compounds, and plastics and for the increasing positive qualities of such 
substances as glues, corrosion inhibitors, fire retardants, stimulators of plant 
growth, and magnetic medicine transport. 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
The manuscript is presented as the review of a series of papers, manuscripts, 
and patents on the obtaining, investigations, and applications of uncials 
magnetic mesoparticles which are mesoscopic metal-carbon composites 
[1–41]. The correspondent structure and content of these mesocomposites 
(MCs) are caused by the special conditions of their production. In as much 
as the application of mesoparticles is determined by the properties of these 
particles which are defined by their structure and content. At the beginning 
the initial metal-carbon mesocomposite (Me–C MC) electron structure and 
correspondent magnetic characteristics (metal atomic magnetic moments, 
and the spin quantities on carbon shell) are considered. The activity of metal￾carbon mesoscopic composites is caused by the structure and composition 
of corresponding MCs, which contain the delocalized electrons and double 
bonds on the surface of the carbon shell. Therefore, the initial mesoscopic 
composites are early participated in reactions, especially radical processes 
and reduction oxidation processes. This activity may be used in modifica￾tion processes MCs accompanied by the magnetic characteristics changes 
in modified mesoscopic composites. That development of possibilities 
processes opens a new era for further investigations and development of 
metal-carbon mesoscopic composites application fields. The expansion of 
Me–C MC application chances takes place. Seven trends of MCs application 
are presented in succeeding sections. 
9.2 THE GLUES AND ADHESIVES ON THE BASE OF MAGNETIC 
METAL-CARBON MESOSCOPIC COMPOSITES 
The presence of unpaired electrons and double bonds in the carbon shell of 
Me–C MC guarantees the additional conditions for the adhesion increasing 
especially at the metal materials connection. In these cases, the positive 
meaning has the presence of above MCs magnetic properties. For example, 
the introduction of nickel–carbon MC in the composition of Silver containing Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 113 
current conductive glue leads to the improvement of adhesion and electric 
conductivity (Figures 9.1 and 9.2; Table 9.1). 
FIGURE 9.1 The adhesion durability on shift for Ag containing glue (pink) and paste (blue), 
initial (a) and modified by nickel–carbon mesocomposite. 
FIGURE 9.2 The adhesion durability on separation for Ag containing glue (pink) and paste 
(blue), initial (a) and modified by nickel–carbon mesocomposite. 
TABLE 9.1 The Measuring Results of the Current Conductive Paste (Glue) Electro-Resistance, 
Modified by Nickel–Carbon Mesocomposite 
Characteristics Current Conductive Current Conductive 
Paste Glue 
Specific volume electro-resistance, 
Om∙cm (initial sample) 
2.4×10–4 3.6×10–4 
Specific volume electro-resistance, 
Om·cm (modified sample) 
2.2×10–5 3.3×10–5 114 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The specific volume electro-resistances for current conductive pastes in 
comparison with current conductive glues are presented in Table 9.1. From 
the comparison of the specific volume resistances of pastes and glues it’s 
shown that the pastes on the electroconductivity better than the correspon￾dent glues. 
Thus, the Me–C MCs can be applied for the improvement of the current 
conductive materials characteristics. 
Analogous results are obtained at the modification of cold hardened 
epoxy resins (ERs) by the Me–C MC. According to the investigation on the 
modification results of cold hardened ERs the following conclusion may be 
made: 
“The test for defining the adhesive strength and thermal stability correlate 
with the data of quantum-chemical calculations and indicate the formation 
of a new phase facilitating the growth of cross-links number in polymer grid 
when the concentration of Cu–C MC goes up. The optimal concentration 
for elevating the modified ERs adhesion equals 0.003% from ER weight. 
At this concentration the strength growth is 26.8%. At the same time, the 
optimal quantity of Cu–C MC for elevating the modified industrial epoxy 
materials adhesion equals 0.005% that leads to the strength growth equals 
60.7%. From the concentration range studied, the concentration 0.05% from 
ER weight is optimal to reach a high thermal stability. At this concentration 
the temperature of thermal destruction beginning increases up to 195°С.” 
The modification of hot hardened ERs by means of copper–carbon MCs 
is carried out with the application of the finely dispersed suspension based 
on isomethyl tetra phthalic anhydrate or based on toluene. After testing the 
samples of four different schemes, the increase in the strength at detachment 
up to 50% and shear τsh σ up to 80% takes place, the concentration of det 
copper–carbon MC introduced corresponds to 0.0001–0.0003%. 
The application of these materials as adhesives for the gluing of metals 
and vulcanite is realized on the schemes “metal1
–adhesive1
–vulcanite– 
adhesive2
–metal2
.” To define the adhesive tear and shear strengths the above 
proposed scheme was used (Figures 9.3 and 9.4). The investigations carried 
out revealed that the modification of the conventional recipe of the glue 
51-К-45 results not only in increasing the glue adhesive characteristics but 
also in changing the decomposition character from adhesive-cohesive to 
cohesive one. 
The availability of metal compounds in MCs can provide the final 
material with additional characteristics, such as magnetic susceptibility and 
electric conductivity. Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 115 
FIGURE 9.3 Relative changes of adhesive tear strengths of epoxy glues modified by copper– 
carbon mesocomposites (content of MC – 0.0001%). 
FIGURE 9.4 Relative changes of adhesive shear strengths of epoxy glues modified by 
copper–carbon mesocomposites (content of MC–0.0001%). 
The modification of different materials by minute quantities of Me–C 
MC allows improving their technical characteristics, decreasing material 
consumption and extending their application. 
9.3 MAGNETIC TRANSPORT OF MEDICINES WITHIN ORGANISM 
FROM METAL-CARBON MESOCOMPOSITES (ME–C MCS) 
At last time the great attention is spared to the creation of medicine remedies 
with address direction for the action on the organs which are needed in 116 Modern Magnetic Materials 
correspondent healing. Usually, the transport of therapeutically active 
substances to the correspondent organ is carried out by means of the magnetic 
mesoparticles containing the linker connected with medicine substance. In 
other words, the remedies of medicine carriage in organisms are constructed 
on the following scheme: transport magnetic mesoparticle-linker-medicine 
[42]. In above patents the iron containing nanosized particles, for example, 
Fe3
O4
, are used as magnetic mesoparticle, and the organic substances 
connected with this mesoparticle by covalent or coordinative bonds as linker. 
In this case it’s possible the certain difficulties on the undoing of medicine 
because of the bio active substances big interaction with some functional 
groups. The medicine release from magnetic mesoparticles with linker 
occurs at the variable magnetic fields. The best linker can be phosphorus 
organic compounds which, as it’s known, are easily destructed in water 
media. Therefore, its proposed [34] to accomplish the modification of metal 
containing magnetic mesoparticle by ammonium polyphosphate (APPh). 
At the same time, the copper–carbon MC [37] is proposed as a magnetic 
mesoparticle since the Copper has bactericides and anti-microbes’ properties 
and increases the organism’s protective forces. For that reason, the copper– 
carbon mesoscopic composite modified by APPh chooses as the investiga￾tions object. The modification process is carried out by mechanical chemical 
method in processing which the Phosphorus reduction and the formation of 
linker which consists of phosphorus with the following oxidation states such 
as 0, +3, and +5 takes place. 
The obtaining of remedy for medicine delivery to definite organ is carried 
out on the following scheme: 
“The phosphorus containing copper–carbon mesoscopic composites (mc(P)) 
is applied as magnetic mesoparticles. Then the medicines (M) are linked 
with mc(P) at the relation (mc(P)/M) correspondent to 1:(0.02–0.5) by means 
of mechanic chemical method with the using the mechanical mortar. The 
mc applied are obtained by the interaction of copper–carbon mesocom- (P)
posite (Cu–C MC) and ammonium polyphosphate (APPh) at the relation 
1:0.5 for the obtaining of high atomic magnetic moment of copper. The 
therapeutically active substances such as adenosine tri phosphorus acid (the 
relation mc(P)/M = 1:0.02), ascorbic acid (mc(P)/M = 1:0.2) and Urotropine 
(mc(P)/M = 1:0.5) is linked with phosphorus containing MC across the 
phosphorus containing liker.” 
The investigations of phosphorus containing copper–carbon MC and its 
analogous are realized with the application of methods complex from which 
the basic methods are X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), transition Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 117 
electron microscopy (TEM) of high solution (permeation) (TEM), electron 
micro-diffraction, electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), X-ray diffraction 
measuring. 
According to these investigations, the copper atomic magnetic moment 
growth is established at the copper–carbon MC modification by APPh and 
therapeutically active substances. The atomic magnetic moment of copper 
is obtained more (μ = 4.5 μБ) in the comparison with iron containing nano￾structures (μ = 2.5 μБ). Hence the proposed magnetic mesoparticles can be 
interested as the remedies of medicine carriage in organisms by means of 
drive magnetic field. 
The production of magnetic mesoscopic particles with connected thera￾peutically active substances is realized by mechanic chemical method on the 
next scheme: 
•

 The reduction-oxidation synthesis of copper–carbon MC from CuO 
and PVA at the reagents relation equaled to 1 mol:4 mol [31]. 
•

 The copper–carbon MC modification by APPh at the reagent’s relation 
[33, 39]. 
•

 The phosphorus containing copper–carbon MC modification by 
therapeutically active substances, such, as adenosine tri phosphoric 
acid (relation–1:0.02), ascorbic acid (relation–1:0.2) and Urotropine 
(relation–1:0.5) (Pat. 2018143197). 
The mechanic chemical synthesis is carried out with the use of mechanical 
mortar by the joint grinding of reagents at the energetic expenses approxi￾mately equaled to 260–270 kJ/mol. After mechanic chemical process the 
mesoscopic product obtained is dried in the closed crucible at 400°C for 
the first stage, and at 150°C for second and third stages. Then the product 
obtained is endured in vacuum at 100–150°C for 3 minutes. 
The results of mechanic chemical process with thermochemical finishing 
are estimated with the application of the following methods: XPS, EPR, 
TEM with high permission. 
The transition analytic electron microscope FET Tecnai G2F20 with prefix 
EDAX is used for the investigation of copper–carbon mesoscopic composite 
structure and phase content. High permission corresponds to 2 nm in 1.5 cm. 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic investigations are realized by X-ray 
photoelectron magnetic spectrometer with the permission 10–4 at the activa￾tion AlKα
 line 1,486 eV in vacuum 10–8–10–10 Torre. On the basis of Van 
Fleck theory, the model for metal atomic magnetic moments calculation is 
proposed. 118 Modern Magnetic Materials 
EPR investigations are carried out by means of EPR spectrometer Е-3 
of firm “Varian.” The peak correspondent to binding energy 132.5 eV is 
ascribed [43] bond C=P that can be possible at the appearance of interference 
phenomenon because of the direct electromagnetic (EM) field which arises 
at annihilation in red-ox process. The unpaired electrons presence on the 
carbon shell of MC can promote the decreasing of free radical activity in the 
defeat part of the organism. The high atomic magnetic moment of copper 
(more than 4 μB) can be used for the address carriage of medicine. 
Thus, the transport remedy included the copper–carbon MC and linker 
containing phosphorus for the connection of therapeutically active substances 
is proposed. 
The investigations of medicines modified by the above magnetic MCs are 
carried out with the application of XPS. C1s spectra for these medicines are 
presented in Figure 9.5. 
FIGURE 9.5 C1s spectra phosphorus containing copper–carbon mesocomposite (a); and 
its analogous modified adenosine tri-phosphorus acid (relation 1:0.02) (b); ascorbic acid 
(relation 1:0.2) (c); and urotropine (relation 1:0.5) (d). Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 119 
The discussion of the electron structures changes for the modified bioac￾tive substances takes place below in the following order: (i) ATP; (ii) AA; 
and (iii) U. 
After the modification of phosphorus-containing copper–carbon MC, 
obtained at the relation Cu–C MC/APP equaled to 2, by adenosine-tri￾phosphorus acid (relation 1:0.02) the following changes of the mesoparticle 
surface structure takes place: 
•

 In C1s spectrum the maximum for C–H bond is considerably increased; 
•

 In this spectrum the appearance new content at 283 eV correspondent 
to sp hybridization, and the maximum for sp2
 (C–C) and also sp3
 (C–C) 
hybridization are decreased; 
•

 In C1s spectrum new maximum (286.7 eV) for C–N bond is observed; 
•

 In Cu2p and P2p spectra the peaks for Cu–P and Cu–P–O are found. 
It’s necessary to note that the magnetic moment determined on Cu3s 
spectrum did not exchange and is equaled to 4.5 μB. 
Above changes in spectra can be explained by the carbon phosphorus 
shell deformation at the interaction of adenosine tri phosphorus acid with 
transport remedy. 
In the X-ray photoelectron spectra of mesoparticles obtained by means of 
the phosphorus containing MC modification by ascorbic acid at the reagent’s 
relation 1:0.2 the following changes are discovered: 
•

 In C1s spectrum in comparison on the spectrum of initial MC the new 
maximum (Eb
 = 288 eV) for C–OH group is present; 
•

 In Cu2p and P2p spectra the maximums for Cu–P, Cu–O and P–O 
bonds are observed. 
The magnetic moment determined on Cu3s spectrum also as in above 
example is not changed and equaled to 4.5 μB. 
The changes in X-ray photoelectron spectra of phosphorus containing 
Cu–C MC modified by Urotropine at the relation 1:0.5 also take place. The 
following peculiarities in spectra are given: 
•

 In C1s spectrum the C–H maximum increasing is found; 
•

 In the same spectrum the maximum for C–N bond (Eb
 = 287 eV) is 
appeared, and the maximums attributed to sp2
 and sp3
 hybridization 
have near intensity; 
•

 In P2p spectrum the maximums at 135 eV (P+5) and 129 eV (P0
) take 
place; 
•

 In N1s spectrum the covalent bond C–N is determined. 120 Modern Magnetic Materials 
In this case the copper atomic magnetic moment is near to 4.5 μB. It’s 
interesting to note that the carbine component (sp hybridization) is observed 
at the MC quantity increasing. 
Thus, the above said examples show on the connection of therapeutically 
active substances with transport remedy (phosphorus containing copper– 
carbon MC) at the conservation of magnetic properties. Latter is necessary 
for the application of the obtained substances in practice. 
9.4 STIMULATORS FOR PLANTS GROWTH WITH ADDITIVES OF 
MAGNETIC METAL-CARBON MESOCOMPOSITES (ME–C MCS) 
The metal-carbon mesoscopic composites owing to structure and properties 
can be effective for the increasing and improvement of agricultural produc￾tion. These substances can be initiators or inhibitors for the definite vital 
processes in different fields of agriculture. In this chapter, as examples the 
stimulation of plants growth under the action of Me–C MC are considered. 
As examples of plants the lilies are discussed. In this case the bulbs of lilies 
came in peat; they were packed in film bags, from a dense film that had 18 
holes 1 cm in diameter for air intake. Packages with lily bulbs were stored in 
container boxes at a temperature of –1°C, which allows them to remain at rest. 
Samples of this peat were sampled, and agrochemical analysis was carried out 
[35] using a volumetric analysis of the preparation of aqueous extract (with 
recalculation of the results of the analysis for volume) and a sample with 
recalculation of the results of the analysis for dry weight (Table 9.2). 
The moisture content of the peat corresponds to the normative indices. 
According to the degree of acidity, peat refers to a very acidic. The specific 
electrical conductivity of peat does not exceed 1.0 mS/cm. Peat has a low 
content of nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in terms of the degree of 
supply of food elements. Such properties of this peat contribute to the long 
storage and transportation of bulbs of long lilies and do not allow them to 
germinate. 
For the growth of plants on top peat, the optimum moisture content is 
within 78–85% of the mass. The moisture content in the peat mixture is 
normal. 
A very important factor for the development of roots and the absorption 
of nutrients by them is the acidity of the soil. High acidity of soil leads to 
insufficient intake of such elements as phosphorus, magnesium, and iron. 
When growing Oriental hybrids of lilies, which include our variety, the pH 
should be between 5.0 and 6.5. Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 121 
TABLE 9.2 Agrochemical Characteristics of Peat During Storage of Lily Bulbs Imported 
from Holland 
Index Result The Value of the Horse Peat Sphagnum 
Moisture of peat (%) 60.0 59.46 
pH (suspension) 4.0 5.5–6.1 
Specific conductivity of the 0.093 – 
suspension (mS/cm), at 25°C 
The Content of Mobile Forms of Batteries 
Nitrate nitrogen (N-NO3
) 0.57 26.3 
0.1 29.0 
Nitrogen ammonium (N-NH4
) 7.36 135.6 
1.5 149.0 
Р2
О5 1.64 291.0 
0.3 320.0 
K2
О 34.56 353.0 
7.0 388.0 
Са2+ + Мg2+ (mmol/g) 2.98 – 
0.6 
Note: Numerator (for dry matter) – mg/100 g; denominator – mg/l. 
Lilies are sensitive to soil salinity. With a high content of salts in the 
soil, the roots of the lilies become hard, brittle, and acquire a yellow-brown 
color. Soil salinity is determined by the specific electrical conductivity. Lilies 
require low EU levels. 
The content of mobile forms of nutrients is low, but the level of plant 
nutrition is regulated by a computer program in accordance with the needs 
of lily bulbs. Thanks to the inherent peat strength of buffer and high sorption 
capacity, mineral fertilizers are not washed out and stored in an accessible 
form for plants; at the same time, the danger of creating an increased concen￾tration of salts harmful to plants is reduced. 
High productivity and quality of flowers largely depend on the full 
provision of plants with trace elements, so when planting lily bulbs, an 
analysis was carried out for the content of trace elements in the peat mix 
(Table 9.3). 
According to the content of trace elements, peat mixes contain a very low 
content of such elements as zinc, copper, iron, manganese, and boron [8]. By 
processing bulbs of lilies, copper–carbon MC, we contribute to replenishing 122 Modern Magnetic Materials 
available forms of copper in lily plants. In the period of growth and 
development, the level of nutrition of lily plants is regulated by a computer 
program in accordance with the needs of macro- and microelements. 
TABLE 9.3 Chemical Analysis of Peat Mixture for Micronutrients Content 
Microelements (mg/kg Dry Weight) The Actual Value of the Test Results 
Zinc 15.60 
Copper 3.81 
Iron 126.60 
Manganese 57.30 
Boron 8.27 
For two years, the reaction of the lily to the treatment of copper–carbon 
MC was studied. The biometric parameters of the lily were determined as the 
height of the flower bud in the bud budding phase (Table 9.4), the number 
of buds, the diameter of the open flower, and the height of the stem when 
cutting plants. 
When processing with MCs, there was a significant increase in the 
height of the flowering shoot of lilies from 4.9 to 8.4 cm (at HSR = 1.7) 
(Table 9.4). The highest plants were Santander lily plants when treated with 
a 0.01% MC. 
TABLE 9.4 Height of Flowering Shoot (cm) (Average for 2015–2016, the Phase of the 
Beginning of Budding) 
Hybrids of Lilies Concentration of Mesocomposites (Factor B) Average by 
(Factor А) Without 
Processing (k) 
Water 
(к) 
0.01 
(%) 
0.02 
(%) 
0.05 (%) Factor А 
НSR05 А = 1.7 
Siberia (к) 79.6 71.9 87.7 87.9 87.2 82.8 
Santander 77.9 81.6 89.1 82.2 82.3 82.6 
Average by Factor 79.2 76.9 88.5 85.2 84.6 – 
В НSR05 В = 2.7 
НSR05 private differences 3.8 
The number of buds on the shoot was higher for the Siberia variety, than 
for the Santander variety by 1.1 pcs. (at HSR = 0.06 pcs.). When processing 
with MCs, there was a significant increase in the number of buds to 5.0–5.3 
pieces (Table 9.5). Hybrids of Lilies 
(Factor А) 
Concentration of Mesocomposites (Factor B) 
Without Water 0.01 0.02 0.05 
Processing (k) (к) (%) (%) (%) 
Average by 
Factor А 
НSR05 А= 0.06 
Siberia (к) 4.7 4.7 5.8 5.6 5.4 5.2 
Santander 3.5 3.5 4.7 4.5 4.6 4.1 
Average by Factor В 4.1 4.1 5.3 5.1 5.0 – 
НSR В = 0.1 05
НSR05 private differences 0.1
Hybrids of Lilies Concentration of Mesocomposites (Factor B) Average by 
(Factor А) Without Water 0.01 0.02 0.05 Factor А 
НSR05 А=0.06 Processing (k) (к) (%) (%) (%) 
Siberia (к) 10.1 10.3 10.9 10.6 10.6 10.5 
Santander 9.0 9.1 9.6 9.5 9.3 9.3 
Average by Factor В 9.5 9.7 10.3 10.0 9.9 – 
НSR05 В = 0.09 
НSR 0.1 05 private differences 
Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 123 
The length of the bud in Siberia variety averaged 10.5 cm, while the 
Santander variety was 1.2 cm lower (Table 9.6). The largest length was 
found in lilies treated with a 0.01% copper–carbon MC suspension. 
TABLE 9.5 Number of Buds, pcs (Average for 2015–2016, the Phase of the Beginning of 
Budding) 
TABLE 9.6 Length of Bud, cm (Average for 2015–2016, the Phase of the Beginning of 
Budding) 
The length of the bud and the number of buds depends on the photosyn￾thetic activity, which is directly related to the width of the leaves, so the width 
of the lily leaf was measured during the bud budding phase (Table 9.7). 
The variety Santander leaves was wider than that of Siberia, which is one 
of the varietal traits. The increase in the number and length of buds in both 
varieties when processing bulbs with copper–carbon MC was associated 
with an increase in the width of the leaves. 
The productivity of the lily (lily cut) is determined by the number of buds 
in the inflorescence, the diameter of the flower and the height of the plant. In 
this regard, the plants of lilies count the number of buds when cutting plants 
(Table 9.8). Hybrids of Lilies 
(Factor А) 
Concentration of Mesocomposites (Factor B) 
Without Water 0.01 0.02 0.05 
Processing (k) (к) (%) (%) (%) 
Average by 
Factor А 
НSR05 А = 0.05 
Siberia (к) 3.0 3.1 3.4 3.3 3.1 3.2 
Santander 3.4 3.5 3.7 3.6 3.6 3.6 
Average by Factor В 3.2 3.3 3.6 3.5 3.4 – 
НSR В = 0.08 05
НSR05 private differences 0.1
Hybrids of Lilies Concentration of Mesocomposites (Factor B) Average by 
(Factor А) Without 
Processing (k) 
Water 
(к) 
0.01 
(%) 
0.02 
(%) 
0.05 
(%) 
Factor А 
НSR05 А = 0.04 
Siberia (к) 4.8 4.7 6.0 5.6 5.5 5.3 
Santander 3.6 3.5 4.7 4.5 4.6 4.2 
Average by Factor 4.2 4.1 5.4 5.0 5.0 – 
В НSR05 В = 0.06 
НSR 0.09 05 private differences 
124 Modern Magnetic Materials 
TABLE 9.7 The Width of the Leaf, cm (Average for 2015–2016, the Phase of the Beginning 
of Budding) 
TABLE 9.8 Number of Buds When Cutting Plants, pcs (Average for 2015–2016) 
When cutting lilies, the number of buds on the plant remains the same 
as in the bud budding phase. There were also a greater number of buds in 
the Siberia lily variety than in Santander. Depending on the treatment with 
various concentrations, the maximum number of buds was noted at 0.01% 
concentration of copper–carbon MC. 
The diameter of the open flower in the Santander variety was significantly 
larger than that of the Siberia variety (21.3 cm) (Table 9.9). Processing of 
bulbs with MCs promoted a substantial increase in the diameter of the open 
flower. The largest diameter of the flower was noted when treated with 0.01% 
MC (22.0 cm). 
The height of the stem when cutting lilies increased by treatment with 
copper–carbon MC to 131–141 cm in comparison with the control (99.0–102.3 
cm). The sort of lily Siberia was slightly higher than the Santander variety. 
Thus, the treatment of bulb lily copper–carbon MCs contributes to the 
increase in plant height, the number and diameter of the flowers. 
According to the results of scientific and industrial experiments, processing 
of bulb lily copper–carbon MCs promotes an increase in the height of the Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 125 
flower sprout, the height of the stem during the cutting of plants, the number 
of buds and the diameter of the open flowers. 
TABLE 9.9 Diameter of the Open Flower, cm (Average for 2015–2016, Cutting Plants) 
Hybrids of Lilies Concentration of Mesocomposites (Factor B) Average by 
(Factor А) Without 
Processing (k) 
Water 
(к) 
0.01 
(%) 
0.02 
(%) 
0.05 
(%) 
Factor А 
НSR05 А = 0.3 
Siberia (к) 18.7 18.3 21.3 20.0 20.0 19.7 
Santander 20.0 20.0 22.7 22.0 21.7 21.3 
Average by Factor В 19.3 19.2 22.0 21.0 20.9 – 
НSR05 В = 0.5 
НSR05 private differences 0.7 
The use of 0.01% copper–carbon MC in the cultivation of lilies led to 
an increase in the cost of sales and, accordingly, profit and profitability of 
production. Treatment of lily bulbs with a 0.01% copper–carbon MC is 
energetically effective, since allowed to get products of high quality. 
The mechanism of Me–C MC action on the development of plants can be 
caused by the following reasons: 
•

 the definite quantity of copper with the introduced copper–carbon 
mesocomposite; 
•

 the magnetic properties of mesocomposite; 
•

 the active electrons presence on the carbon shell of copper–carbon 
mesocomposite. 
It’s possible these factors may be substantial for the development of vital 
processes in plants and also in other vital organisms. 
This trend of investigations needs in the development of serious theoret￾ical elaborations in the direction to new mesoscopic biology and medicine. 
In these fields the Metal-Carbon mesoscopic composites application for the 
proceeding of vital processes, compared with the studies of mechanisms of 
their action, can give new impulse in the phenomena understanding, and 
also in the expansion of application fields of these exceptional mesoscopic 
particles in different trends of biology and medicine. 
However, at present the widest development takes place concerning to 
the application of Me–C MC as modifiers of different materials. The MCs 
application possibilities as modifiers of inorganic and organic materials are 
considered in succeeding sections. 126 Modern Magnetic Materials 
9.5 MAGNETIC METAL-CARBON MESOSCOPIC COMPOSITES AS 
MODIFIERS OF CONCRETES, GLASSES, AND ANALOGOUS MATERIALS 
The MCs activity in the different media (materials) is changed in the depen￾dence on polarity or polarization of their media. Therefore, the modification 
conditions for the different materials can be differed from each other. 
According to the scheme of possible polarization the increasing of 
medium (material) density takes place owing to the regular orientation of 
material fragments with the creation of super molecular and crystalline 
structures takes place (Figure 9.6). 
Designations: MC (☼) is the MC, δe is the negative charges quant (electron), 
→ the polarization direction, ♀───♀ is the macromolecule fragment with 
functional groups. 
Polarization growth can be expressed as: 
P = Σpfg + pNC (1) com
where; P is the common (summary) polarization; Σpfg is the sum of func- com 
tional groups polarizations; and pNC is the polarization (or dipole moment) of 
MC (Scheme 9.1).


SCHEME 9.1 Scheme of polarization at charge quantization with expansion of quant 
influence on materials polar groups.


The polarization extent depends on the quants EM radiation phase 
velocity. It’s necessary to note that this velocity will be decreased in the 
media with high dielectric constant according to following formula: 
v = c/√ε (2) 
where; ‘v’ is the phase velocity of electromagnetic radiation; ‘c’ is the light 
velocity; and ‘ε’ is the dielectric constant. 
When the dielectric constant is increased, the decrease of MC influence 
on the media arises and the self-organization process is finished. 
Depending on the development of self-organization process (single 
measured–1D, double measured–2D, third measured–3D) the super molecular Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 127 
structures (mesoparticles) of correspondent forms and sizes are organized. 
The surface energy of embryos increased influences on the mesoparticles 
formation. This energy can be expressed as the sum of energetic parts for the 
realization of different movements: 
+ E(r) E (3) S
 = E(tr) + E(osc) + E(em) 
where; ES
 is the surface energy of macromolecule (mesoparticle); E(tr) is the 
part of translational motion energy; E(r) is the part of rotary motion energy; 
 is the part of oscillatory motion energy; and E(em) E is the part of electron (osc)
motion in surface layer. 
In accordance with the formation of mesoparticles which have the identical 
orientation with each other, the parts of translational motion energy and of 
rotary motion energy will be near to zero. Therefore, the main contribution 
to the mesoparticle surface energy will be bring the oscillatory motion and 
transport of electrons in the surface layer of macromolecules (mesoparticles). 
Then the change of character of quants radiation wave propagation from 2D 
(in the surface plane) to 3D (in the space field at surface). 
The modification of foam concrete and dense concrete is usually carried 
out for the increasing of compressive strength. Therefore, the investigations 
of foam concrete strength changes in depending on the content and nature of 
Me–C MC are accomplished. The dependence of foam concrete strength on 
Cu–C MC content (in %) is given in Figure 9.6. 
FIGURE 9.6 The dependence of foam concrete strength on copper–carbon mesocomposite 
content (%). 128 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The introduction of super small quantities of MCs leads to the increasing 
of foam concrete surface layer density (Figure 9.7). 
FIGURE 9.7 The foam concrete structure (×90) without mesocomposite and with the addition 
of mesocomposite (0.002%). 
The foam concrete or gas concrete production at their modification by 
Me–C MC leads to improvement of building constructions durability in 1.5–2 
times. The hard concrete production with the Me–C MC using increases the 
strength characteristics on 30–50%. 
At the same time, the kinetics of these materials’ strength growth is 
studied. In this case, the modification of foam concrete is realized with the 
use of MCs finely dispersed water suspension. According to the results, the 
strength increasing of foam concrete modified by MC is more on 80% in 
comparison on foam concrete without MC. After 56 days this increasing is 
decreased to 30%. It is possible during the period of composition hardening 
the coordination of MC particle with composition molecules takes place. 
An analogous effect is observed during the modification of dense (hard) 
concrete. 
After seven days the growth of modified dense concrete strength more 
than the increasing of strength of non-modified dense concrete on 66% and 
after 28 days the increasing of strength makes 43%. Owing to the large 
density of the dense concrete composition the MC re coordination process 
became difficult. 
According to investigation results the following conclusion may be made: 
•

 The production of foam concrete modified by metal-carbon nano￾structures leads to the improvement of its characteristics in 1.5–2 
times and to the increasing of its durability. Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 129 
•

 The strength characteristics of dense concrete modified by Me–C MC 
increase by 30–50%. 
The introduction of a modifier based on Me–C MC into the composi￾tion results in medium structuring, decrease in the number of defects, thus 
improving the material physical and mechanical characteristics. 
The definite peculiarities encountered at the modification of silicates and, 
especially, liquid glass. The interest to liquid glass is conditioned, first of 
all, by its ecological friendliness and production and application simplicity, 
inflammability, and, practically, the absence of toxicity, biological stability, 
and raw material availability. Such nanostructures as Me–C MC can be used 
to improve such characteristics of paints as elasticity, adhesion to the basic 
construction, hydrophobic behavior and also helps solving the problems 
connected with coating flaking-off from the base, discoloration, limited 
color range, etc. Due to the unique properties of Me–C MC it’s possible to 
apply new properties to silicate paints, for example, to produce the coating 
protecting from EM action. The application of nanostructures in silicate 
materials to improve their stability to external action is known [1]. The intro￾duction of nanostructures into the liquid glass allows qualitatively changing 
the material behavior in a positive way. This possibly occurs in the process 
of binder super molecular structure change. 
Based on the aforesaid, it is important to improve operational proper￾ties of compositions on liquid glass basis modifying them with Me–C MC, 
providing a wider field of their application. 
Before the liquid glass modification by Me–C MC the correspondent 
preparation of reactive composition needs. It’ concluded in the ultrasound 
processing of reactionary masses for the fine dispersion obtaining. In this 
case it’s necessary to define the processing time interval during which 
the optical density will be at the maximum, i.e., it will correspond to 
the maximal saturation of MC suspension. To define the time interval of 
ultrasound processing four suspensions were prepared for each soaking 
period – 3, 5, 10, 15 min, respectively, and also the reference solution 
without ultrasound processes – for comparison. The concentration in all 
solutions was 0.003%. 
Thus, the optimal time interval for ultrasound processing is 5 minutes. 
Further processing of suspensions for investigation will be carried out within 
this interval. After the preparations of correspondent suspensions or glue 
samples with Iron or Nickel containing MCs the optical (visible) spectra 
investigations are carried out. In accordance with the results of investiga￾tions of modified films in the glue sample with Fe and glue with Ni, the shift 130 Modern Magnetic Materials 
of optical density is observed at some wavelengths, indicating the changes 
taking place when nanostructures are introduced (Figure 9.8). 
FIGURE 9.8 Changes of liquid glass (3) optical density in comparison with optical densities 
of liquid glasses, modified by Fe–C (1); or Ni–C (2) mesocomposites. 
At other wavelength values, the optical density only increases indicating 
the possibility to apply nanostructures as coloring pigments in paints. At the 
same time, the increase in the optical density of films with nanostructures 
in comparison with liquid glass films possibly indicates the increase in the 
density of compositions and the formation of new structural elements in them. 
Then the heat-physical properties of samples obtained are studied. At the 
beginning to obtain the details of changes in heat-physical characteristics, Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 131 
the heat capacity and thermal conductivity of the samples based on card￾board and modified liquid glass are investigated. The samples are prepared 
by gluing several layers of cardboard with liquid glass modified with MCs. 
The sample dimensions are found by the technique for measuring heat 
capacity and thermal conductivity. The sample being tested was 15 mm in 
diameter and 10 mm in height. The sample dimensions are measured with 
a micrometer with 0.01 mm accuracy. The sample mass was measured with 
the allowance not exceeding 0.001 g. Heat capacity of the samples is investi￾gated on c-calorimeter IT-c-400. To find thermal conductivity the calorimeter 
IT-λ-400 is used. Further the specific thermal conductivity of the sample was 
calculated as follows: 
λ = h/Rs (4) 
where; ‘λ’ is the specific thermal conductivity, W/m*К; and ‘h’ is the sample 
thickness, m. 
The results of thermal physical investigations are given in Table 9.10. 
TABLE 9.10 Thermal Physical Characteristics of the Samples 
Samples Cardboard/Glue Cardboard/ Cardboard/ 
without Fe and Ni Glue with Fe Glue with Ni 
Mesocomposites (Change in %) (Change in %) 
Density (kg/m3
) 624.5 744 (↑ 19%) 669 (↑ 7%) 
Heat capacity Сspec (J/kg*К) 1,790 2,156 (↑ 20%) 2,972 (↑ 66%) 
Thermal conductivity λ (W/m*К) 0.083 0.061 (↓ 27%) 0.064 (↓ 23%) 
Heat capacity of the sample, containing Fe–C MC, increased on 20% 
on the relation to the standard sample, and sample with Ni–C MC – on 
66%. At the same time, thermal conductivity decreased by 27% and 23% 
for the samples with Fe and Ni, respectively. So, when nanostructures are 
introduced, in the average, the characteristics change as follows: density 
increases by 13%, heat capacity by 40%, thermal conductivity decreases by 
25%. Further, using the experimental results, the temperature conductivity is 
calculated by the following formula: 
a = λ/cρ (5) 
where; ‘a’ is the temperature conductivity coefficient; ‘λ’ is the thermal 
conductivity coefficient; ‘с’ is the heat capacity; and ‘ρ’ is the density. 
Inserting the experimental data into the formula, we can define the 
temperature conductivity values (in %): 132 Modern Magnetic Materials 
a = λ/cρ = 0.75λ0
/1,4c0
*1.13ρ0
 = 0.47a0 (6) 
or calculate separately: 
a1
/a0
 = λ1
ρ0
C0
/λ0
ρ1
C1
 = 0.51 (7) 
a2
/a0
 = λ2
ρ0
C0
/λ0
ρ2
C2
 = 0.43 (8) 
where; a1
, λ1
, ρ1
, C1 are the characteristics of the sample with Fe/C NC; a2
, λ2
, 
ρ2
, C2
 are the characteristics of the sample with Ni/C NC; and a0
, λ0
, ρ0
, C0
 are 
the characteristics of non-modified sample. Thus, temperature conductivity 
decreased by nearly 50% in comparison with the initial values (a0
). 
When nanostructures are introduced, self-organization takes place. 
Mesoparticles structure the silicate matrix leading to the formation of new 
elements in the structure, thus increasing the material density and influencing 
its heat-physical characteristics. When additional structural elements and 
new bonds are formed, the system internal energy increases leading to heat 
capacity elevation and, consequently, temperature conductivity decrease. 
Thermal conductivity decreases of silicate paints when applied as a coating 
allows improving heat-physical characteristics of the whole protective 
structure of a building. In turn, temperature conductivity decreases results in 
decreasing the amount of heat passing through the coating, thus preserving 
the adhesive characteristics of the coating for a long time. 
9.6 THE APPLICATION OF MAGNETIC METAL-CARBON 
MESOCOMPOSITES (ME–C MCS) AS MODIFIERS OF POLYMERIC 
MATERIALS AND POLYMERIC COMPOSITES 
When the additive sizes are decreased to nanometer sizes, the phenomena of 
mesoscopic particles are appeared. According to Ref. [41], the phenomena 
such as interference, spectrum quantization, charge quantization occur 
when the mesoparticles have the limitation in motions or in the energetic 
possibilities realization. In this case the mesoparticle can only vibrate and 
also the electron transport is possible. 
The media (or polymeric compositions) properties changes under the 
mesoparticles influence can be achieved at equal distribution of these parti￾cles in composition volume and at its coagulation absence. Last is possible 
at the following conditions: 
• certain polarity and dielectric constant of medium; 
• minute concentration of mesoparticles; Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 133 
•

 ultrasound action on the correspondent suspension for the propor￾tional distribution of mesoparticles. 
The assignment of active nanostructures (mesoparticles) during the 
composition’s modification is concluded in the activation of matrices self￾organization in needful direction. For the realization of this goal, the deter￾mination of organized phase part is necessary. The Avrami-Kolmogorov 
equation is applied for the organized phase determination: 
W = 1 – exp(–kτn
)

 (9) 
where; ‘W’ is the part of organized phase; ‘k’ is the parameter defined the 
rate of organized phase growth; ‘τ’is the duration of organized phase growth; 
and ‘n’ is the fractal dimension. 
In some chapters [9–17] the positive results on materials properties 
improvement are presented when the minute quantities of Me–C MC are 
introduced in these materials. In this chapter [14], the hypothesis about nano￾structures influence transmission on macromolecules of polymeric matrices 
is proposed. This hypothesis is complied with mesoscopic physics principles 
which consider quantum effects at the certain conditions of mesoparticle 
existence. 
The composition polarization is possible because of there is the charge 
quantization with the wave expansion on polar (functional) groups of media 
(e.g., polymer macromolecule). 
The quantum charge wave expansion leads to the functional groups’ 
polarization (dipole moments) change as well as the extinction increasing. 
Last bring growth of peaks intensities in IR spectra. The individual peaks 
growth effects in IR spectra are observed at the introduction of MCs minute 
quantities (see, Table 1.3 from Chapter 1). Let us note, that the peaks inten￾sity growth in IR spectra is observed when the quantity of introduced MC 
is decreased. This fact is complied with fundamental principles of chemical 
mesoscopic. In an illustrated case, the instance of fine dispersed suspension 
Cu–C MC (hardener for ERs). According to data of Table 1.3, the decreasing 
of MC quantity to 0.001% leads to the growth of some peaks intensity in IR 
spectra. 
At the second day of that suspension existence the floccules are formed, 
and peaks intensity sharply drops. However, the suspension activity can be 
increased with the use of ultrasound treatment. The treatment optimal dura￾tion determined as 7 minutes. In this case, the peak intensity in IR spectra is 
increased in 2–4 times (see, Table 1.4 from Chapter 1). The investigations by 
X-ray PES show that the films based on polycarbonate have more changes 134 Modern Magnetic Materials 
of electron structure at the minute quantities introduction of copper–carbon 
MC in comparison with other polymeric films because these films are more 
polarized. The C1s spectra for Cu/C nanocomposite and for nanostructured 
polycarbonate are presented in Figure 9.9. 
FIGURE 9.9 X-ray photoelectron C1s spectra of nanostructured polycarbonate modified 
by minute quantities (10–1–10–5%) of Cu–C mesocomposite. 
The expansion of C1s spectra for nanostructured polycarbonate is 
possible owing to the determination of the energetic states for sp, sp2
, and 
sp3
 satellites. According to the results of C1s spectra for polycarbonate, the 
different minute quantities of Cu–C MC can contain concentration equaled 
to 10–2% of Cu/C MC. The peaks correspondent to sp2
 and sp3
 peaks are 
appeared in these spectra. In other words, the “stamp” of MC which is used 
during modification is appeared. That “stamp” is observed also at the MC Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 135 
containing, equaled to 10–5%, in polycarbonate film. It’s noted that the rela￾tion between sp2
 and sp3
 peaks changes. For instance, the intensity of sp2 
hybridization carbon peak is upper the intensity of sp3
 peak in the concen￾tration interval from 0.01 to 0.001% of MC. The change of concentration to 
10–4% bring the proximity of intensities sp2
 and sp3
 peaks. 
For the decision of question about the nanostructure influence on sub 
molecular composition structures the AFM method is applied. Some images 
of polycarbonate nanostructured films surface are presented in Figure 1.1 
(see, Chapter 1). Polycarbonate is modified by Cu–C MC minute quantities 
(from 10–1 to 10–4%) (see, Figure 1.1 from Chapter 1). 
It’s interesting to observe the direction of carbon fibers in comparison 
with the direction of sub molecular structures orientation in the nanostruc￾tured polycarbonate surface layers. 
Thus, it’s possible that the wave which initiates the self-organization 
process in polymeric composition is expensed from these fibers associated 
with metal cluster. The last leads to the correspondent orientation of sub 
molecular structures in nanostructured composite surface layers. 
The self-organization mechanism for polymeric compositions modified 
by the Me–C MC minute quantities is concluded in the conditions creation 
for composition polarization, which bring the great change of electron and 
sub molecular structures of materials. Certainly, these changes influence on 
the modified materials properties. 
Below the example of results for that modification with using of above 
considered suspensions will be presented. In this example, the epoxy compo￾sitions with different additives including MCs were investigated. As cross￾linking agent is used the fine dispersed suspension on based of isomethyl 
tetra hydro phthalates anhydrate and copper–carbon MC. 
In Figure 9.10, the results of modification epoxy compounds (materials 1 
and 2) are given. The comparison of adhesion strength for materials 1 (green) 
and 2 (dark blue) before modification (Figure 9.10(a)) and after modification 
by copper–carbon MC (Figure 9.10(b)) is shown. 
The modification by copper–carbon MC in quantity equaled to 0.005% 
improves the adhesion characteristics for the material 1 (green) on 59.77% 
and for the material 2 (dark blue) on 47.17%. 
It’s possible also other applications that nanostructures owing to its uncial 
structure and properties. 
Below the results of some working-outs [40, 41] show: 
1.

 The introduction of metal-carbon nanostructures (0.005%) in the 
form of fine suspension into PEPA or the mixture of amines into 136 Modern Magnetic Materials 
epoxy compositions allows increasing the thermal stability of the 
compositions by 75–100° and consequently increase the application 
range of the existing products. This modification contributes to the 
increase in adhesive and cohesive characteristics of glues, lacquers, 
and binders. 
FIGURE 9.10 Comparison of adhesion strength for materials 1 (green) and 2 (dark blue) 
before (a); and after (b) the modification by copper–carbon mesocomposites. 
2.

 Hot vulcanization glue was modified with copper–carbon and 
nickel–carbon nanostructures with using Toluene as a base for 
fine suspensions. On the test results of samples of four different 
schemes the tear strength σt increased at increased up to 50% and shear
strength τs
 – up to 80%, concentration of Me–C MC introduced was 
0.0001–0.0003%. 
3.

 Fine suspension of nanostructures was produced in dichloromethane 
and dichloroethane solutions to modify polycarbonate-based compo￾sitions. The introduction of 0.01% of copper–carbon MCs leads 
to the decrease in temperature conductivity of the material (in 1.5 
times). The increase in the transmission of visible light in the range 
400–500 nm and a decrease in the transmission in the range 560–760 
nm was observed. 
4.

 When modifying polyvinyl chloride film by the fine suspension 
containing Iron Carbon MC, the increase of the crystalline phase in the 
material was observed. The modified PVC film containing 0.0008% 
MC does not accumulate the electrostatic charge on its surface at the 
decreasing of electrostatic quantity more than two times. The material  
 
 
 
Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 137 
obtained completely satisfies the requirements applied to PVC films 
for stretch ceilings. 
5.

 The introduction of nickel–carbon MC (0.01% of the mass of polymer 
filled on 65% of silver microscopic particles) into the epoxy polymer 
hardened with PEPA leads to the decrease in electric resistance to 10–5 
Ohm·сm (10–4 Ohm·сm without MC). 
9.7 THE APPLICATION POSSIBILITIES OF MAGNETIC METAL￾CARBON MESOCOMPOSITES (ME–C MCS) AS INHIBITORS OF 
CORROSION 
From the foregoing follows that the metal-carbon mesoscopic composites 
radiate the negative charged quants within media and stimulate the media 
polarization. This MCs energetic action on media leads to media self￾organization and the density growth, and also chemical bonds formation. It’s 
possible the high surface energy of Me–C MC influences on the corrosion 
inhibitor reactivity and the adsorbed layer protective properties. 
According to Ref. [38], the addition of copper–carbon MC to such corro￾sion inhibitor as 1-morpholine methyl cyclohexyl amine is effective at the 
quantity equaled to 0.001 mg/m3
. In this chapter, it’s shown that the joint 
using of copper–carbon MC with previous corrosion inhibitor improves the 
protective properties in different corrosive media. The MC content increasing 
in the mixture with corrosion inhibitor promotes to the growth of protection 
degree at the corrosion. 
The dependence of the inhibitor protection degree from copper–carbon 
MC concentration logarithm is presented in Figure 9.11. 
The experimental results show that the increasing of concentration of 
mesocomposite (Cu–C MC) leads to the growth of inhibitor protection 
efficacy. 
The MC containing inhibitor efficacy relations in comparison with initial 
inhibitor are increased. These relations changes are shown as follows: 
Inhibitor Content: 
Relations of combined (with Cu–C MC) 25 15 10 5 
Inhibitor efficacy in comparison with the initial inhibitor: 1.06 1.33 1.5 5.4 
Protection Degree: 
Inhibitor, Z% 80 60 50 5 
Inhibitor with 0.001 mg/dm3
 of Cu–C MC, Z% 85 80 75 27 138 Modern Magnetic Materials 
FIGURE 9.11 The dependence of the inhibitor protection degree at steel corrosion from 
copper–carbon mesocomposite concentration logarithm. 
These changes are also shown on the Figure 9.12. 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0


25 15 10 5


FIGURE 9.12 The dependence of the inhibitor protection degree from concentrations of 
inhibitor and the mixture of inhibitor and mesocomposite.


Note: The inhibitor concentration (mg/m3
); (1) without mesocomposite; and (2) with meso￾composite (0.001 mg/m3
).


Therefore, the following conclusion can be made Cu–C MC can be an 
effective inhibitor of corrosion. MC fulfills two functions: (i) for corrosion Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 139 
active agent decrease; and (ii) for the protective film creation on the material 
surface. These functions are carried owing to the presence on the MC carbon 
shell of the unpaired electrons and double bonds. Actually, the stable coating 
with the protection degree approximately 95% can be obtained from the oil 
fine suspension of the Phosphorus containing MC at the multi graded thermal 
processing (with the temperature increasing to 500°C). 
9.8 MAGNETIC FIREPROOF MATERIALS ON THE BASE OF 
MAGNETIC MESOPARTICLES 
9.8.1 FIRE RESISTANT GLUES BASED ON PHENOL-FORMALDEHYDE 
RESINS 
In this paragraph, the results of modification of fireproof materials, fire 
resistant intumescent coatings and glues, modified by nanostructures are 
considered. In the beginning, the example of application of Me–C MC for 
the obtaining of fire-resistant materials is brought. In this case, the modifica￾tion of phenol-formaldehyde glues for the obtaining from them intumescent 
fire-resistant glues are done. 
The glues based on phenol-formaldehyde resins (BF-19) are modified 
by copper–carbon MC and also by Phosphorus containing analog. It’s noted 
that the introduction of these MCs into the glue significantly decreases the 
material flammability. The samples with Phosphorus containing MCs have 
better test results. In the case, when Phosphorus containing MC is introduced 
into the glue, foam coke is formed on the sample surface during the fire 
exposure. The coating flaking off after flame exposure is not observed at the 
coating preserved good adhesive properties even after the flammability test. 
The Phosphorus presence on the MC surface allows improving the MC 
structure and increases the activity in different liquid media thus increasing 
their influence on the material modified. The modification of coatings by 
MCs obtained finally results in improving their fire-resistance and physical 
and chemical characteristics. 
The modification of BF-19 glues by Me–C MC and Phosphorus containing 
analogs is considered below. 
The glue BF-19 is intended for gluing metals, ceramics, glass, wood, and 
fabric in hot condition, as well as for assembly gluing of cardboard, plastics, 
leather, and fabrics in cold condition. The glue composition: organic solvent, 
synthetic resin (phenol-formaldehyde resins of new lacquer type), synthetic 
rubber. 140 Modern Magnetic Materials 
When modifying the glue composition, at the first stage the mixture of 
alcohol suspension (ethyl alcohol + Cu–C MCmod) and APPh is prepared. At 
the same time, the mixtures containing ethyl alcohol, Cu–C MC and APPh, 
ethyl alcohol and APPh are prepared. At the second stage the glue composi￾tion is modified by the introduction of phosphorus containing compositions 
prepared into the glue BF-19. 
For flammability determination the following method of preparation 
samples is used. 
The samples to be tested are the plates with the dimensions 150×15×3 
mm. The plates consist of foam polyethylene and paper glued together with 
phosphorus containing glue modified with Me–C MC with and without 
phosphorus. At the same time, check samples are prepared. These are the 
plates of foam polyethylene and paper glued together with the glue BF-19 
filled with APPh with phosphorus content in the glue 3, 4, 5% from its mass. 
For the testing of sample flammability, the estimation method on the 
determination of the lengths of carbonized parts with 1.5 minute flame expo￾sure is used. To compare the results of coating flammability, three samples 
of glue are selected and tested. 
The test results revealed that the length of carbonized part of the samples 
containing APPh and exposed to burner flame for 1.5 minutes can be about 
8.5 cm with 3% phosphorus content in the sample (Table 9.11). 
TABLE 9.11 Results of Testing Samples Containing Ammonium Polyphosphate 
Sample Sample Phosphorus Flame Exposure Length of Carbonized 
No. Composition Content (%) Time (min) Part of Samples (mm)


1.

 APPh 5 1.5 65.33 
2.

 APPh 4 1.5 82 
3.

 APPh 3 1.5 84.67 
Average 77.33 
The tests of check samples confirmed that with the phosphorus content 
increase in composition, the length of carbonized parts of samples goes down. 
The composition of sample coating: glue BF-19 + APPh + Cu–C MCpure
The next step was to test samples containing MCs with the decreasing of 
phosphorus content. The average value of the carbonized part of the samples 
was 21.81 mm. The test results (Table 9.12) allow making the conclusion 
that nanocomposite inclusion significantly decreases the material flamma￾bility (in 3.5 times). Sample Sample Composition Phosphorus MC Flame Length of 
No. Content Content Exposure Carbonized Part 
(%) (%) Time (min) of Samples (mm) 
4. Cu–C MC + APPh 5 0.00025 1.5 15.33 pure 
5. Cu–C MC + APPh 4 0.0002 1.5 23.43 pure 
6. Cu–C MC + APPh 3 0.00015 1.5 26.66 pure 
Average

 21.81 
Sample Sample Composition Phosphorus NC Flame Length of 
No. Content (%) Content Exposure Carbonized Part 
(%) Time (min) of Samples (mm) 
7.

 Cu–C MCmod + APPh 5 0.00025 1.5 14.67 
8.

 Cu–C MCmod + APPh 4 0.0002 1.5 16.67 
9.

 Cu–C MCmod + APPh 3 0.00015 1.5 25.33 
Average 18.89 
Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 141 
TABLE 9.12 Results of Testing Samples of Modified Compositions with Mesocomposite 
The composition of sample coating: glue BF-19 + APPh + Cu–C MCmod. 
Phosphorus containing samples of Cu–C MC had better flammability test 
results than samples with APPh and samples containing APPh and Cu–C 
MCpure. The length of the carbonized part of the samples was less by 3 mm 
in the average [39]. The average value of the carbonized part of the samples 
was 18.89 mm (Table 9.13). Thus, it can be concluded that the inclusion of 
Phosphorus in MC decreases the material flammability to a greater extent 
than MC which do not contain phosphorus. 
TABLE 9.13 Results of Testing Samples of Compositions Modified by Phosphorus 
Containing Mesocomposites 
From the data demonstrated based on the test results it can be concluded 
that MC inclusion into the glue composition significantly decreases the mate￾rial flammability. The length of the carbonized part of the samples modified 
with MCs was in 4.1 times in the average less in comparison with similar 
parameters of the samples not containing MCs. The samples with phosphoric 
groups in MCs have better test results (Figure 9.13). 
The coating flaking off after flame exposure is not observed, i.e., the 
coating preserves good adhesive properties even after the flammability test. 
When the intumescent glue composition is modified with nanostructures, 
the material is structured with the formation of crystalline regions. In turn, 142 Modern Magnetic Materials 
such structuring under the influence of mesoscopic systems results in the 
increased physical and mechanical characteristics, including their stability 
against high and low temperatures. 
FIGURE 9.13 Diagram of the lengths of carbonized parts of the samples depending on 
phosphorus content in the composition. 
9.8.2 PROPERTIES STUDIES OF FIREPROOF COATING BASED ON 
EPOXY AND MELAMINE FORMALDEHYDE RESINS 
The obtaining and investigations of properties for the intumescent fireproof 
materials based on epoxy and melamine formaldehyde resins are considered. 
In both cases the Phosphorus containing copper–carbon MC together with 
APPh (P →Cu–C MC) is used. At the production of fireproof materials 
based on the ERs, the MC P →Cu–C MC is introduced into PEPA for the 
fine dispersion preparation. In the case when the fireproof coating is based 
on the melamine formaldehyde resin the P →Cu–C MC is introduced into Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 143 
melamine formaldehyde lacquer. For the testing of correspondent coatings 
such metal substances as steel and aluminum are applied. It’s necessary to 
note that the last coating will be simultaneously fireproof and anticorrosive 
coating. This is especially significant for the protection of aluminum. Both 
coating is studied on the adhesive durability and fire proof efficiency. These 
tests are necessary because it’s known that the coating adhesive durability is 
decreased at the fire action on coating. However, when the heat capacity of 
coating is increased at the influence of MC the coating adhesion strength is 
conserved. At the investigations of correspondent characteristics of coatings, 
the following methods are applied: for the tests on the fire proof efficiency– 
ASTM E-14-10 method, and for the tests on the adhesive durability–GOST 
14753–73 method (Russian). 
The studies on the ASTM E-14-10 method are carried out on samples 
which have plate forms with the following sizes: length–50–55 mm, width– 
10–15 mm, thickness–1–1.3 mm. The fire-resistant composition covers the 
correspondent plate. The coating layer thickness on plate compiles 1 mm. 
The samples are cross linked at normal conditions during 24 h. In the case 
when fire resistant composition is presented as ERs modified by APPh with 
MCs or without them the flame of gas burner is used at these tests. The 
characteristics of fire-resistant protection can be the height of foam coke 
formed from above fire resistant compositions. The height of foam coke is 
measured from the surface of the steel plate to upper level of foam coke layer. 
The results of the studies of fireproof efficiency for the coatings containing 
APPh in the comparison with the coatings modified by the copper–carbon 
MC (Cu–C MC) or by the Phosphorus containing Cu–C MC (P→Cu–C MC) 
are presented in Figure 9.14. 
In correspondence with results obtained, the height of foam cokes samples 
which are modified by means of phosphorus containing copper–carbon MC 
is approximately 47% upper than initial sample. 
For the determination of copper–carbon MCs introduction efficiency the 
following compounds are prepared: 
1.

 ED-20 – APPh (20%) with polyethylene polyamine initial samples. 
2.

 ED-20 – APPh (20%) with fine dispersed suspension of Cu–C MC. 
3.

 ED-20 – APPh (20%) with fine dispersed suspension of P containing 
Cu–C MC. 
The quantity of MCs which are introduced in compositions is equaled 
to 0.1%. This quantity of MCs is considered as maximum for the getting 
of positive effect without negative consequences and forms is presented in 
Figure 9.15. 144 Modern Magnetic Materials 
FIGURE 9.14 The dependence of the samples foam cokes height from the fireproof coating 
content. 
FIGURE 9.15 The dependence of samples adhesive durability from contents of them. 
According to Figure 9.15, the introduction phosphorus containing 
copper–carbon MC in coating composition (sample c, red) leads to the Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 145 
increase of adhesive durability on 30% in the comparison with the fireproof 
coatings without the presence of MC (sample a, yellow). 
Thus, on the basis of the above experiments, more effective fireproof 
coating is intumescent coating based on ERs with APPh modified by 
phosphorus containing copper–carbon MC that testify about the increasing 
of copper–carbon MC activity after modification of initial MC by APPh. 
The application of these active nanosystems for the obtaining of fireproof 
intumescent coatings containing ERs and APPh is perspective. 
At the investigations of coatings based on melamine formaldehyde 
lacquer modified by APPh with copper–carbon mesocomposite (Cu–C MC) 
the following optimal quantities of modifiers were established: APPh – 15%; 
Cu–C MC – 0.008%. In this case, the dense protective layer formation on 
steel is determined by means of AFM method. 
The coating fireproof efficiency properties improvement is observed: 
• The mass losses decreasing on 43% at the burning; 
• The burnt part length abridgement on 66% in the burning conditions; 
• The burnt velocity decreasing on 45% in the same conditions. 
Thus, the coating based on melamine formaldehyde lacquer modified 
by 15% of APPh with 0.008% of copper–carbon mesoscopic composite can 
be applied as intumescent fireproof and anticorrosive coating for metals 
including steel and aluminum. 
9.9 CONCLUSION 
The presented review is dedicated to the consideration of properties and 
the possible applications of a new class of such mesoscopic particles as 
Metal-Carbon mesoscopic composites and their modified analogs. This 
review consists of row paragraphs in which the consecutive description 
of structures and properties for Me–C MC and their modified analogs is 
done. The paragraphs, beginning with the second, are accompanied by the 
correspondent examples of the described MCs applications in the different 
spheres. In the first paragraph the structures and properties for initial Me–C 
MC are considered. The unique structures of Me–C MC are explained by 
the reactivity of Carbon shells which contain the poly acetylene and carbine 
fragments with unpaired electrons on the joints of fragments. The stability 
of shells is possible because of the interactions of double bonds, which 
take place in fragments, with metal clusters within MCs. The increasing of 146 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Carbon shell activity is obtained after the reduction oxidation reactions at 
the modification of initial Metal-Carbon mesoscopic composites by reagents 
containing the positive charged atoms (or oxidizers). These processes as 
its established in experiments lead to the shift of electrons on the higher 
energetic levels and the formation of unpaired electrons that is accompanied 
by the growth of atomic magnetic moments of MC cluster metals. These 
phenomena of structures and energetic characteristics of MCs obtained cause 
their possibilities for applications in the different fields. 
The examples of following applications in radical, red-ox and addition 
processes as catalysts, reagents, and also inhibitors as well as additives 
and modifiers improving properties of materials (inorganic and organic 
polymeric materials), adhesives and glues, fireproof systems, corrosion 
inhibitors, medicine magnetic transport remedies, stimulators of plant 
growth are presented. The metal-carbon mesoscopic composites owing to 
their magnetic characteristics can be used in the EM radiation focal systems. 
This unique scientific trend discovers a new era in the development of novel 
nanostructures application widening. 
KEYWORDS 
• adhesives 
• annihilation 
• charge quantization 
• corrosion inhibitors 
• fire retardants 
• inorganic and organic polymeric materials 
• interference 
• magnetic transport 
• mesocomposites 
• modifiers 
• phase coherency 
• red-ox synthesis 
• self-organization 
• stimulators Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 147 
REFERENCES 
1. Kodolov, V. I., & Khokhryakov, N. V., (2009). Chemical Physics of the Processes of 
Formation and Transformation of Nanostrustures and Nanosystems (Vol. 1, 2, pp. 360, 
415). Izhevsk: Izhevsk State Agricultural Academy. 
2. Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., Terebova, N. S., & Trineeva, V. V., (2012). X Ray 
Electro Spectroscopy in Investigation of Metal/Carbon Nanosystems and Nanostructured 
Materials (p. 252). Izhevsk–Moscow: Publ. “Udmurt University.” 
3. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2013). Fundamental definitions for domain of 
nanostrustures and metal/carbon nanocomposites. In: Book: Nanostructure, Nanosystems 
and Nanostructured Materials: Theory, Production and Development (pp. 1–42, 559). 
Toronto, Canada – New Jersey, USA: Apple Academic Press. 
4. Khokhryakov, N. V., Kodolov, V. I., Korablev, G. A., et al., (2013). Prognostic Investi￾gations of Metal or Carbon Nanocomposites and Nanostructures Synthesis Processes 
Characterization (pp. 43–99). Ibid. 
5. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Blagodatskhikh, I. I., et al., (2013). The Nanostructures 
Obtaining and the Synthesis of Metal or Carbon Nanocomposites in Nanoreactors (pp. 
101–146). Ibid. 
6. Kodolov, V. I., Akhmetshina, L. F., Chashkin, M. A., et al., (2013). The Functionalization 
of Metal or Carbon Nanocomposites or the Introduction of Functional Groups in Metal/ 
Carbon Nanocomposites (pp. 147–175). Ibid. 
7. Shabanova, I. N., Terebova, N. S., Kodolov, V. I., et al., (2013). The Investigation 
of Metal or Carbon Nanocomposites Electron Structure by X Ray Photoelectron 
Spectroscopy (pp. 177–230). Ibid. 
8. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., et al., (2013). Computation Modeling 
of Nanocomposites Action on the Different Media and on the Composition Modification 
Processes by Metal/Carbon Nanocomposites (pp. 231–286). Ibid. 
9. Kodolov, V. I., Lipanov, A. M., Trineeva, V. V., et al., (2013). The Changes of Properties 
of Materials Modified by Metal/Carbon Nanocomposites (pp. 327–373). Ibid. 
10. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2013). Theory of modification of polymeric materials 
by super small quantities of metal/carbon nanocomposites. Chemical Physics & 
Mesoscopy, 15(3), 351–363. 
11. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2012). Perspectives of idea development about nano￾systems self-organization in polymeric matrixes. In: “The Problems of Nanochemistry 
for the Creation of New Materials (pp. 75–100). Torun, Poland: IEPMD. 
12. Akhmetshina, L. F., Lebedeva, G. A., & Kodolov, V. I., (2012). Phosphorus containing 
metal/carbon nanocomposites and their application for the modification of intumescent 
fireproof coatings. Journal of Characterization and Development of Novel Materials, 
4(4), 451–468. 
13.

Kodolov, V. I., Kovyazina, О. А., Trineeva, V. V., Vasilchenko, Yu. M., Vakhrushina, М. 
А., & Chmutin, I. A., (2010). On the production of metal/carbon nanocomposites, water 
and organic suspensions on their basis. VII International Scientific-Technical Conference 
“Nanotechnologies to the Production – 2010”: Proceedings (pp. 52, 53). Fryazino. 
14. Chashkin, M. A., (2012). Peculiarities of Modification by Metal/Carbon Nanocomposites 
for Cold Hardened Epoxy Compositions and the Investigation of Properties of Polymeric 
Compositions Obtained (p. 17). Thesis of cand. diss.–Perm: PNSPU. 148 Modern Magnetic Materials 
15. Kodolov, V. I., & Kodolova, V. V., (Trineeva), Semakina, N. V., Yakovlev, G. I., 
Volkova, E. G., et al., (2008). Patent 2337062 Russia Technique of Obtaining Carbon 
Nanostructures from Organic Compounds and Metal Containing Substances. 
16. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Kovyazina, O. A., & Vasilchenko, Yu. M., (2012). 
Production and application of metal/carbon nanocomposites. In: “The Problems of 
Nanochemistry for the Creation of New Materials (pp. 23–36). Torun, Poland: IEPMD. 
17. Akhmetshina, L. F., Kodolov, V. I., Tereshkin, I. P., & Korotin, A. I., (2010). The 
influence of carbon metal containing nanostructures on strength properties of concrete 
composites. Internet Journal “Nanotechnologies in Construction,” 6, 35–46. 
18. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2008). 
Activity of nanostructures and its display in nanoreactors of polymeric matrixes and in 
active media. Chem. Phys.& Mesoscopy, 10(4), 448–460. 
19. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2010). 
Problems of nanostructures activity estimation, nanostructures directed production and 
application. In: Nanomterials Yearbook – 2009: From Nanostructures, Nanomaterials 
and Nanotechnologies to Nanoindustry (pp. 1–18). N.Y.: Nova Science Publ., Inc. 
20. Kodolov, V. I., Blagodatskikh, I. I., Lyakhovitch, A. M., et al., (2007). Investigation of 
the formation processes of metal containing carbon nanostructures in nanoreactors of 
polyvinyl alcohol at early stages Chem. Phys.& Mesoscopy, V., 9(4), 422–429. 
21. Trineeva, V. V., Lyakhovitch, A. M., & Kodolov, V. I., (2009). Forecasting of the formation 
processes of carbon metal containing nanostructures using the method of atomic force 
microscopy. Nanotechnics, 4(20), 87–90. 
22. Khokhriakov, N. V., & Kodolov, V. I., (2005). Quantum-chemical modeling of nano￾structure formation Nanotechnics, 2, 108–112. 
23. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Nikolaeva, O. A., & Volkov, V. L., (2001). Quantum￾chemical investigation of alcohols dehydration and dehydrogenization possibility in 
interface layers of vanadium oxide systems Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 3(1), 53–65. 
24.

Kodolov, V. I., Didik, А. А., Volkov, А. Yu., & Volkova, Е. G., (2004). Low-temperature 
synthesis of copper nanoparticles in carbon shell Bulletin of HEIs. Chemistry and 
Chemical Engineering, 47(1), 27–30. 
25.

Lipanov, А. М., Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., et al., (2005). Challenges in the 
production of nanoreactors for the synthesis of metallic nanoparticles in carbon shells 
Alternative Energetic and Ecology (ISJAEE), 2(22), 58–63. 
26.

Nikolaeva, О. А., Kodolov, V. I., Zakharova, G. S., et al., (2004). Method of Obtaining 
Carbon-Metal-Containing Nanostructures. Patent of the RF 2225835. 
27. Didik, A. A., Kodolov, V. I., Volkov, A. Yu., et al., (2003). Inorganic Materials, 39(6), 
693–697. 
28. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2015). The metal/carbon nanocomposites influence 
mechanisms on media and compositions. In: Nanostructures, Nanomaterials and Nano￾technologies to Nanoindustry (pp. 171–185). Toronto, New Jersey: Apple Academic Press. 
29. Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., Terebova, N. S., et al., (2016). x-Ray photoelectron 
study of the influence of the amount of carbon nickel containing nanostructures on the 
degree of the poly methyl metacrylate modification. In: Book Multifunctional Materials 
and Modeling (pp. 211–218). Canada-USA: AAP. 
30. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2016). Self-organization in processes under action of 
super small quantities of metal/carbon nanocomposites: Review on investigation results. 
In: Book Multifunctional Materials and Modeling (pp. 263–331, 343). Canada-USA: AAP. Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites Application Possibilities 149 
31. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Pershin, Yu. V., et al., (2020). Method of Metal Carbon 
Nanocomposites Obtaining from Metal Oxides and Polyvinyl Alcohol. Pat. RU 2018122 
001. 
32. Mustakimov, R. V., Kodolov, V. I., Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2017). 
Modification of copper carbon nanocomposites with the use of ammonium polyphosphate 
for the application as modifiers of epoxy resins. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 19(1), 
50–57. 
33. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Kopylova, A. A., et al., (2017). Mechanochemical 
modification of metal carbon nanocomposites. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 19(4), 
569–580. 
34. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Terebova, N. S., et al., (2018). The change of electron 
structure and magnetic characteristics of modified copper carbon nanocomposites. 
Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 20(1), 72–79. 
35. Merzlyakova, V. M., Lapin, A. A., & Kodolov, V. I., (2019). Efficiency of metal 
carbon nanocomposite application in lily growing under protected soil conditions. In: 
Nanoscience and Nanoengineering: Novel Applications (pp. 177–188, 355). Toronto-New 
Jersey: Apple Academic Press. 
36. Karavaeva, N. M., Pershin, Yu. V., Kodolov, V. I., et al., (2019). Change of morphology 
and swelling of cured epoxy compositions upon their modification with minute 
quantities. Pol. Sci., Ser. D., 12(2), 179–181. 
37. Kodolov, V. I., et al., (2019). Modified magnetic metal carbon mesoscopic composites 
with bio active substances. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 21(3), 446–454. 
38. Pletnev, M. A., Ovechkina, O. A., Buldakova, N. S., et al., (2014). The influence of 
metal carbon nanocomposites on protective action of corrosion inhibitors. Intellectual 
Systems in Engineering, 1(23), 150–152. 
39. Mustakimov, R. V., (2019). The Method of Modification of Metal Carbon Nanostructures 
by Ammonium Polyphosphate. Pat. N 2694092. 
40. Kodolov, V. I., Semakina, N. V., & Trineeva, V. V., (2018). Introduction in science about 
nanomaterials. Monograph (p. 476). Izhevsk: Publisher – M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk 
State Technical University. 
41. Kodolov, V. I., & Kodolova–Chukhontzeva, V. V., (2019). Fundamentals of chemical 
mesoscopics. Monograph (p. 218). Izhevsk: Publisher – M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State 
Technical University. 
42. Pat. RUN 2490027, 2017. Volume 9, Issue 4, August 2021, pp. 97–104. 
43. Wang, J. Q., Wu, W. M., & Feng, D. M., (1992). The Introduction of Electron Spectros￾copy (p. 640). Beijing: National Definite Industry Press. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 10


Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% 
Nanodispersed Magnetites and 
Ferroxides: Strength, Heat Resistance, 
and Morphology 
D. STAROKADOMSKY,1,2 M. RESHETNYK,3,1 N. BODUL,4
 and 
L. KOKHTYCH5,6 
1
M. P. Semenenko Institute of Geochemistry, Mineralogy and Ore Formations, 
National Academy of Sciences (NAS) of Ukraine, Ukraine 
2
Chuyko Institute of Surface Chemistry, NAS, Ukraine 
3
National Natural History Museum NAS, Ukraine 
4
Ukrayinsky Phyzico-Mathematic Litseum, T. Schevchenko Kyiv National 
University, Ukraine 
5
School of Engineering and Architecture, Lucerne University of Applied 
Sciences and Arts, Horw, Switzerland 
6
Institute of Physics, NAS, National Academy of Sciences (NAS) of Ukraine, 
Ukraine 
ABSTRACT 
The morphology and physico-mechanical properties of magnetically sensi￾tive ferro-containing epoxycomposites, were studied. Optical microscopy 
indicates the ability of magnetites and ferroxides to form carcass-like struc￾tures that can enhance strength. AFM microscopy of the composites indicates 
a change in the surface morphology after filling and integration of structure 152 Modern Magnetic Materials 
heterogeneities. SEM and optical microscopy show significant morphological 
changes after filling. A larger number of pores and large agglomerates, as well 
as air bubbles stabilized by nanoparticles (NPs), appear in the structure of 
composites. 
The data obtained indicate a negligible effect of 5 wt.% – filling on 
compressive strength, both during the normal treatment of cured compos￾ites (50–60°C) and after exposure under aggressive conditions (250°C or 
water-endurance). After heat treatment, the compressive strength of filled 
composites decreases as a rule, while the elastic modulus can increase. 
But the effect of thermo-strengthening is observed for ferric red pigment 
(compressive strength), and ferrite (modulus). After water-endurance, 
compressive strength falls for unfilled, and can be stable for same ferro￾filled composites. 
Approximately such effect of these fillers is seen in the assessment of 
flexural strength. Therewith, the modulus of elasticity (both in compression 
and flexural) can be increased by 10–15% after filling. Therewith, the filling 
can significantly (2–2.5 times) increase the fire resistance of polyepoxide. 
The filling increases the resistance of composites to aggressive organic 
media (acetone, ethylacetate), but weakens resistance in oxidizers (60% 
H2
O2
). These results open the way to create magnetically sensitive polymer 
nanocomposites with susceptible strengths. 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
Epoxy resins (ERs) are used in almost all spheres of human activity, in the 
manufacture and repair of devices, as adhesives and compounds in construc￾tion, as osteoprostheses in medicine, hulls for yachts, aircraft, and machines 
in the aerospace shipbuilding and engineering industries, in demand in the 
manufacture of toys (handmade) [1–4]. Therefore, on the basis of ERs, 
new compositions are created that are resistant to various conditions of use 
and for solving various problems. In our work, the task was set to create a 
composite more resistant to aggressive environments and high loads, which 
included magnetite. Epoxy composites with mineral fillers—is a popular 
area of research today [1–24]. 
Iron-containing epoxy composites have found application in industries 
requiring special adhesives and polymer composites – magnetically sensi￾tive, heat-conducting, or similar in properties to iron and its alloys [8–13]. To 
a large extent, they are needed when repairing chips and equipment defects, Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% Nanodispersed Magnetites 153 
when welding methods are expensive or unacceptable [2–4]. In particular, 
epoxy-magnetite composites have attracted ongoing scientific attention. 
Magnetite (α-Fe2
O3
) is iron oxide, an ore mineral common in eastern Europe 
among other iron oxide minerals [6–8]. 
Articles about the effect of ferrites, iron particles and magnetic powders 
in organic coatings and compositions constantly appear in scientific periodi￾cals [9–24]. 
Wu [11] placed carbon nanotube fibers with Fe3
O4
 (own production) in ERs. 
In this way, they obtained magnetic and electrically conductive composites. 
The authors consider such composites to be useful for industry. At the same 
time, the authors state that, as a rule, there is a decrease in strength and other 
properties, or rather, their discrepancy with the declared theoretically high 
estimates (Introduction [11]). They explain this by imperfect distribution, 
poor interphase interactions, and poor structuring of the filler. 
In Ref. [13], magnetite powder with different weight percent (4, 8, and 12 
wt.%) was dispersed into epoxy composition (with ratio 2:1 epoxy and hard￾ener) matrix mixture and poured into samples (22.86 width × 10.16 height 
×2 thickness) mm. The 12 wt.% composite had the highest value of real part 
of permittivity due to greater reflection coefficient and also highest dielectric 
loss factor. Each of the composite had very low magnetic loss mechanism, 
and the value of μ r was nearly unity. The σ of the composites increased with 
frequency where the 8 and 12 wt.% contents showed the highest value of 
conductivity. 
The particle size of nanomagnetites does not allow to introduce a lot of 
them into the ERs, and already at 5–10 wt.% the composition is significantly 
thickened. In this case, there are many structural changes that can signifi￾cantly change the strength of the final cured product. It is known [3] that the 
ERs are well combined with iron powders of micro- and nanoscale, and even 
capable of better curing in their presence. 
Our laboratory has experience in the development of magnetites (as 
elements of targeted drug transport), and some experience in studying them 
in polymers [15, 25]. When planning this work, it was decided to compare 
the properties of composites with several types of magnetites, as well as 
with yttrium ferrite and ordinary minimum (α-Fe2
O3
). Their comparison 
can provide very complete and thereby valuable information about what to 
expect from the introduction of magnetites and ferroxides into ERs (and this 
is often practiced on an industrial and repair-service scope). At the same 
time, the obtained data is logically correlated with visual information from 
various microscopy methods. 154 Modern Magnetic Materials 
10.2 METHODS AND REAGENTS 
For testing, Italian resin EPOSiR-7120 was used, which is characterized by 
frost resistance (does not freeze at 0–10°C) and heat resistance of the polymer. 
The reason for this heat resistance is evident in the characteristics of the resin 
modifiers. The manufacturer claims the presence of a certain “epoxyalkyl 
diluent,” which gave it such properties. The same chemical modification 
obviously led to a decrease in compressive strength by almost a factor of 2 – 
in our case, from 400 + –50 kgf (for the Czech and Soviet/Russian trademark 
ED-20) to 270 + –20 kgf. And this same additive interferes with determining 
the adhesion for EPOSiR to steel, since it does not allow the surfaces to 
be glued (possibly due to the release of alkyl on the interphase surface). 
As can be seen from Table 10.1, after 250°C the properties of the polymer 
from EPOSiR, unlike the ED-20 and its analogs, remain the same; even the 
plasticity of the material is not violated (as can be seen from the diagrams). 
The following fillers were used for the study: 
1.

 (M) Magnetite M–nanoscale, with an average size of primary particles 
30 nm; 
2.

 (A) Magnetite A–nanoscale, with an average size of primary particles 
50 nm; 
3.

 (T) Magnetic toner for Hewlett Packard printers; 
4.

 (Y) Nano-microdispersed Yttrium Ferrite of the general formula 
Y4
Fe5
O12; 
5.

 (C) Ferroxide Fe3
O4
 micron-sized industrial “Meerkat red pigment” 
(production of Ukraine). 
Strength tests were carried out in accordance with or taking into account 
standard methods (GOST or ASTM). 
Tensile strength (GOST 56810-2015, ASTM D790). For bending tests, 
plates 6 × 1 × 0.2 cm in size were made. Their fracture during bending was 
carried out on the basis of L = 3 cm of the DI-1 bending testing machine. 
Based on the test results, the strength i was calculated (i = 3РL/2h2b, P is the 
resulting load in kgf on a scale of 1 cm = 1 mm, L is the length of the fracture 
base equal to 30 mm, h is the thickness of 2 mm, b is the width of the sample 
equal to 10 mm) and modulus elasticity in bending I (I = PL3/4bh3W, where 
W is displacement on a scale of 1 cm = 20 µm). 
Compression tests (ISO 604: 2002) were subjected to cylinder-shaped 
samples with a diameter of 6.5 mm and a height of 10–12 mm (using a Louis 
Shopper press machine) manufactured at 25°C and heat-treated. The adhesive 
peel tests (GOST 14760-69) were subjected to gluing of metal cylinders with Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% Nanodispersed Magnetites 155 
a diameter of 2.2 cm on a test binder, on a UMM-10 Armavir installation. 
All rounding, including averaging, is done towards a larger value, and the 
smallest 1–2 values are not taken into account. 
10.3 THE RESULTS OF THE EXPERIMENT 
10.3.1 MICROSCOPIC MORPHOLOGY 
10.3.1.1 AFM MICROSCOPY OF THE SURFACE OF COMPOSITES 
The AFM does not always provide complete information about the structure 
but is very useful for assessing surface changes—roughnesses, pores, smooth 
zones. It can be seen from them (Figure 10.1) that composites with magnetite 
tend to enlarge and group “micro-islands” of the surface, to form zones of a 
smooth surface – up to their dominance (Figure 10.1-2). 
FIGURE 10.1 AFM images of the surface of composites. 
The AFM clearly shows the difference in the structures of epoxy magne￾tites from the epoxy-suric composite – which does not change the polymer 
structure so much (Figure 10.1-3). Possible reasons for this we do not under￾take to explain. 
10.3.1.2 OPTICAL MICROSCOPY 
It can be seen from Figure 10.2 that magnetite powders have a granular 
aggregate structure. Initial magnetite powders are formed into aggregates and 
agglomerates, reaching 500 microns (Figure 10.2) and often forming chains 
and dendritic structures. This is especially noticeable in the microstructure 
of the toner powder (No. 3), where, in addition to magnetic nanoparticles 
(MNPs), there are half-dimensional additives. The iron oxide pigment forms 
magnetite-like structures (Figure 10.2, No. 5). –Fe2
O3 (meerkat).αSometimes 
dendritic structures are manifested in magnetite agglomerates, which are even ×100 ×400 ×100 ×400 
No. 1 (М) With Magnetite 1 No. 2 (A) With Magnetite 2 
×100 ×400 ×100 ×400 
No. 3 (T) With Magnetic Printers-Toner No. 5 With Red Meerkat Pigment 5 (F) (α-Fe O 2 3 ) 
FIGURE 10.2 Optical microphoto of magnetite powders, with an increase of 100 or 400 times (with a screen length of 7 cm). 
156 Modern Magnetic Materials Unfilled No. 1 (M), Magnetite No. 2 (A) Magnetite No. 3 (T) Toner No. 4 (Y) Ferrite No. 5 (C), Pigment
FIGURE 10.3 Optical microphotographs of epoxy compositions with magnetites, with an increase of 100 times (with a screen base length of 
7 cm). 
Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% Nanodispersed Magnetites 157 Unfilled No. 1 (M) Magnetite No. 2 (A) Magnetite 
No. 3 (T) Toner No. 4 (Y) Ferrite No. 5 (С), α-Fe2
O3 
FIGURE 10.4 SEM photo of composites (× 200). 
158 Modern Magnetic Materials 
more common in This gives hope for the formation of soft semi-organized 
matrices in the ERs and later in the polymer. This makes it possible to predict 
a very good compatibility and distribution of these powders in the epoxide, 
which may improve the strength and resistance of composites. 
From the optical photos (Figure 10.4) of epoxy compositions, a fairly 
uniform distribution of almost all magnetites (except for coarsely dispersed 
No. 4) and meerkat is noticeable. And sometimes magnetite can “tighten” in 
the system and stabilize very large air bubbles by the surface layer of NPs (sm. 
No. 1 and No. 4). As we see, the unfilled composite has practically no serious 
defects (bubbles, inhomogeneities). The uniform distribution of magnetite 
can be useful for enhancing hardened composites in a number of ways. 
10.3.1.3 SEM MICROSCOPY 
The initial unfilled composite is characterized by a fairly uniform distribu￾tion of pores and irregularities. That generally corresponds to modern ideas 
about the fibrillar-pack structure of three-dimensional thermosetting plastics. 
Although the initial resin does not contain obvious inhomogeneities in the 
photo of non-hardened compositions, in the hardened epoxy polymer, they are 
still visible as separate shapeless inclusions up to 50 microns (Figure 10.4). Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% Nanodispersed Magnetites 159 
10.3.2 STRENGTH 
It can be seen from the experiments that, according to the compressive strength, 
the unfilled polymer based on EPOSiR-7120 resin (heat-resistant) is insensi￾tive to either hard heating or 7-day exposure in water (7 days). The strength 
practically does not change (by 2–3% – see Table 10.1, samples “H”), and if 
the module E decreases slightly then by 2–3% (to 10.8 instead of 11.1. Table 
10.1 see samples “H”). This is uncharacteristic for standard epoxides, since 
from our recent work (on resin ED20 and Epoxy520 [1–4]), it is clear that 
heat treatment and holding in water led to a noticeable drop in the indicators 
of unfilled epoxy polymers. Recall that an ordinary resin like ED20 after such 
heating loses strength by a third or more (see our early works Refs. [1–4]). 
TABLE 10.1 Strength Parameters of Samples of Composites with 5 wt.% of Fillers# 
Н 1 (М) 2 (А) 3 (T) 4 (Y) 5 (F) 
Soft Thermo-Treatment (55°C, 5 h) 
285450 270330 280430 290410 300 Compression’s load Cd 420 (kgf) 280480 
Max. compression’s load С (kgf) 290 280 290 300 310 290 
Modulus Е*
1000 (kg/cm2
) 11.1 12.8 – 11.2 12.0 12.0 
Fire-resistance (seconds) 1 2 2 2 2 2.5* 
Hard Thermo-Treatment (55°C, 5 h, after that 250°C, 1 h) 
300 С (kgf) after 250°С 450 270 280 160* 160* 310360 
Modulus Е*
1000 (kg.cm2
) 10.9 10.6 12.4 10.3 12.8 11.7 
Aqua-Treatment (55°C, 5 h, after that – 7 days in H2
O) 
С (kgf)* 270 270 260 270 250 290 
Modulus Е*1000 (kg.cm2
) 10.8 11.2 10.6 – – – 
#
Designations of the samples correspond to the numbering of magnetites in the section 
“methods and reagents.” For limit of plasticity C at compression’s load Cd
 index d
 shows load 
of filly destruction. 
*
– estimation. 
It can be seen that the presence of magnetite particles (as well as iron oxide) 
is not very significant on the compressive strength (see Table 10.1, samples 1 
(M) and 2 (A). True, for a mixture of magnetite with a thermoplastic (toner 3 
(T), Table 10.1), the load of yield stress C increases by 5–6% (for compression 
tests this also matters), and for ferrite 4 (Y) it grows even by almost 10% 
(Table 10.1). It does not change, only in some cases changing by 5–10% (Table 
10.1). On the contrary, the modulus of compression elasticity can noticeably 
change. So, it grows by 5–8% for ferrite 4 (Y) and ferroxide pigment 5 (C), – 
Н & 2 (А) 1 (М) 3 (Т) 4 (Y) 5 (F) 
FIGURE 10.5 The type of compression diagram “load-deformation” for different composites, 
after conventional heat treatment (50–60°C). 
160 Modern Magnetic Materials 
and for magnetite 2 (M) – even by 15%. That is, iron oxides, even at 5 wt.%, 
can give the polymer much higher elasticity, and this, by the way, can also 
be seen from the diagrams (Figures 10.2–10.4). This is also true for samples 
aged in water. That can be considered a very acceptable result for the tasks 
of creating magnetic, or iron-containing epoxides. After harsh heat treatment, 
the compressive strength of the filled polymers drops, sometimes substantially 
(Table 10.1). The elastic modulus E, on the contrary, can noticeably increase 
with filling (Figure 10.4). For several templates (N 2 (A) and 4 (Y)) E increases 
after hard heat-treatment (Table 10.1). Thus, for epoxy-ferroxides we can 
observe the effects of “thermo-hardening of composites,” which we described 
earlier for filled epoxides after destructive heating 250–300°С [1, 3, 4, 9]. 
A diagrams “load-compressive deformation” for composites shows a 
certain increase in elasticity after filling. Indeed, an unfilled polymer after 
a load of the plastic limit (letter ‘P’ in Figure 10.5) already weakly resists 
further loading (Figure 10.5). This can be seen by the small angle of the 
slope before the final destruction (letter ‘D’ in Figure 10.5). But almost all 
filled composites have a steeper slope angle before D (Figure 10.6). 
From Table 10.2, it is seen that the tensile strength deteriorates after 
filling (which is typical after filling of polyepoxides). At the same time, the 
elastic modulus can appreciably increase. 
10.3.3 SWELLING AND RESISTANCE IN AGGRESSIVE ENVIRONMENTS 
Resistance in acetone and ethyl acetate. Acetone is a very aggressive environ￾ment for polyepoxides (especially unheated ones). It follows from our early  
Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% Nanodispersed Magnetites 161 
work that exposure to acetone leads to rapid swelling on the 1st day, and then 
(if there is no reinforcing filler or 100° heat treatment) the sample is destroyed 
[1, 3, 4, 9, 16]. Ethyl acetate also gives a similar effect [3, 4, 9]. 
FIGURE 10.6 A comparative histogram of the values of the modulus of elasticity of 
compression of the samples at different exposure modes–the usual 60°C; hard 250°C and 
exposure in water for seven days (Еaq). 
TABLE 10.2 Strength and Modulus of Elasticity in Bending Plates (1.5 mm Thick, 1 cm Wide) 
Н 1 (М) 3 (Т) 
Bending Strength (kgf/mm2
) 3.8 3.1 2.8 
Bending Modulus (1,000 kgf/cm2
) 19 16 23 
Heat treatment of the epoxy polymer leads to a marked improvement 
in resistance to these solvents, including a decrease in swelling in the later 
stages of curing (1–2 days, Table 10.3). A similar effect can be achieved by 
simple filling with magnetite (Table 10.3), without heat treatment. This is 
important in cases where heat treatment is not possible (for example, when 
coating walls). Table 10.3 also shows (on the example of sample 3 (T)), that 
not every ferro-powder is able to increase resistance. 
Swelling and destruction in peroxide. In a strong oxidizing agent, the unfilled 
polymer is slightly more stable than the magneto-filled ones (Table 10.4). The 162 Modern Magnetic Materials 
composites collapsed after 3–6 days of exposure, showing a double increase in 
the degree of swelling. 
TABLE 10.3 Swelling (%) and Destruction of Composite Tablets in Acetone-Ethylacetate 
Mix 
Н Н2
 (thermo) 3 (Т) 1(М) 
0 0 0 0

 0 
0.1 6.0 6.2 8.0 9.5 
0.2 9.5 8.7 14.3 9.5 
1 31.0 11.8 28.6 14.4 
2 Destruct 18.0 Destruct 11.9 
3 – 24.2 – 19.9 
6 – – – 19.9 
TABLE 10.4 Swelling (%) and Destruction of Composite Tablets in 60% H2
O2 
Н Н2
 (thermo) Т М 
0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 
0.08 31.3 7.6 6.3 4.7 
0.21 41.6 12.9 14.5 7.7 
1 68.7 35.9 44.9 27.7 
2 94.0 75.3 78.3 48.9 
3 111.4 101.8 108.7 100.9 
6 100.0 105 112.6 Destruct 
8 Destruct – Destruct – 
10.4 CONCLUSIONS 
1.

 Epoxy composites with 5 wt.% of iron-oxide nanodispersed fillers 
are characterized by a high modulus of elasticity and acceptable 
(100–115% compared to unfilled polymer) compressive strength. 
Bending strength is reduced, while the modulus of elasticity in 
bending can increase markedly. 
The introduction of fillers increases the resistance of composites 
to open fire by 2–2.5 times. 
2.

 The hard heat-treatment (250+–10o
C), leads to increase of compres￾sion strength for unfilled polymer (load increases from 285 to 300 Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% Nanodispersed Magnetites 163 
kgf), but not for most of filled composites. An interesting exception 
is only a composite with the cheapest filler - iron oxide (growth 
from 280 to 310 kgf). This indicates the manifestation of the effect 
of thermo-strengthening for the unfilled polymer and the composite 
with Fe2
O3
. Also, we see the effect of thermo-strengthening for 
compression-modulus in composite with ferrite (4(Y)). Filling can 
enhance resistance of the compressive strength to water-endurance 
(what can be seen from composites with magnetite and iron oxide). 
3.

 Аnalysis of AFM, SEM and optical microimages shows a noticeable 
effect of fillers on the morphology of the composites. According 
AFM, magnetites group aggregates and “micro-islands” of the 
composite surface, and form zones of a smooth surface. And epoxy￾Fe2
O system is able to form a large crystallites in a native surface of 3 
composite. According SEM, the initial resin does not contain obvious 
inhomogeneities in the photo of non-hardened compositions, in the 
hardened epoxy polymer they are still visible as separate shapeless 
inclusions up to 50 microns. The optical microscopy visualizes 
air bubbles stabilized by nanoparticles (NPs), that appear in the 
composites after filling. 
4.

 The work shows the possibilities and limitations (strength, durability, 
resistance, morphology) in the preparation of magnetically sensitive 
epoxy-composites. An interesting combination of conclusions can be 
considered the high prospects for the production of composites with 
the cheapest filler-pigment iron oxide. 
KEYWORDS 
• AFM microscopy 
• epoxy resins 
• microscopic morphology 
• microscopy 
• nanoparticles 
• polymer composites 
• SEM microscopy 
• thermo-strengthening 164 Modern Magnetic Materials 
REFERENCES 
1. Starokadomsky, D., & Reshetnyk, M., (2019). Microfilled epoxy-composites, capable of 
thermo-hardening and thermo-plasticization after hard heating (200–300°С)–for “in-field/ 
offroad” use in bio-, agro-, medservice. Biomedical Journal of Scientific & Technical 
Research, 19(1), 14118–14123. https: doi.org/10.26717/BJSTR.2019.19.003257. 
2. Matykiewicz, D., Barczewski, M., & Mousa, M., (2021). Impact strength of hybrid 
epoxy–basalt composites modified with mineral and natural fillers. Chem Engineering, 
5(3), 56–65. https: doi.org/10.3390/chemengineering5030056. 
3. Starokadomsky, D. L., (2019). Possibilities of creating fire-resistant, heat-hardening 
and thermoplastic at 250°С epoxy-composite plastics with micro dispersions of SiC, 
TiN and cement. Plasticheskie Massy, 5–6, 40–43. https: doi.org/10.35164/0554- 2901-
2019-5-6-40-43. 
4. Starokadomsky D., Halysh V., Starokadomska A., Nikolaychuk A., Shulga S., Sigareva 
N., & Reshetnyk M. (2020). Restorative biocompatible polymer composites on the base 
of epoxy-resin filled by surface-modified disperse utilizated solid waste of industrial 
paper products. Journal of Applied Surfaces and Interfaces. 8(1–3), 1–6. http://revues. 
imist.ma/?journal=jasi. 
5. Mostovoy, A. S., Nurtazina, A. S., Burmistrova, I. N., & Kadykova, Yu. A., (2018). 
Effect of finely dispersed chromite on the physicochemical and mechanical properties of 
modified epoxy composites. Russian Journal of Applied Chemistry, 91(11), 1758−1766. 
6. Reshetnyk, M., Starokadomsky, D., & Popov, C. (2012). The complex magnetic scanning 
as an effective method to investigate the exposures of Precambrian basement: example 
of Ukrainian Shield. Scientific Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences, 1(1), 22–29. 
7. Reshetnyk, M., (2020). Rock magnetic properties of enderbites in Gaisin block of 
Ukrainian shield. International Journal of Geography, Geology and Environment, 2(2), 
23–28. 
8.

Reshetnyk, М., & Starokadomsky, D., (2021). Rock magnetic properties of enderbite￾charnokites in Gaisin block of Ukrainian shield The Scientific Heritage, 62, 20–27. doi: 
10.24412/9215–0365-2021-62-1-20-27. https://ru.calameo.com/read/005059769b0b 
36329d 938 (accessed on 16 January 2022). 
9. Starokadomskii, D. L., (2017). Epoxy composites with 10 and 50 wt% micronanoiron: 
Strength, microstructure, and chemical and thermal resistance. Russian Journal of 
Applied Chemistry, 90(8), 1337–1345. 
10. Ulbrich, M., & Kalendova, A., (2013). Properties of organic coatings with nonisometric 
ferrite particles. Physics Procedia, 44, 247–255. 
11.

Wu, S., Ladani, R., Zhang, J., & Wang, C., (2015). Epoxy nanocomposites containing 
magnetite-carbon nanofibers, aligned using a weak magnetic field. Polymer, 68, 25–34. 
12. Atta, A., El-Saeed, A., El-Mahdy, G., & Al-Lohedan, H., (2015). Application of magnetite 
nano-hybrid epoxy as protective marine coatings for steel. RSC Advances, 2015, 123. 
13. Chan, Y. L., Esa, F., You, K., & Jusoh, A., (2017). Electromagnetic properties of magnetite/ 
epoxy resin composites at x-band frequency. Conference: 2017 Progress in Electromag￾netics Research Symposium.–Fall (Singapore). doi: 10.1109/PIERS-FALL.2017.8293649. 
https:www.researchgate.net/publication/276271709_ (accessed on 16 January 2022). 
14.

Chigna, T., Zannoni, M., Jones, M., & Simonetto, A. (2020). Permittivity and Permeability 
of Epoxy-Magnetite Powder Composites at Microwave Frequencies. https:arxiv.org/ 
pdf/2001.02336.pdf (accessed on 16 January 2022). Epoxy Composites with 5 wt.% Nanodispersed Magnetites 165 
15. Starokadomsky, D., Reshetnyk, M., & Rassokhin, D., (2020). Epoxy composites 
with 5 wt.% of nanodispersed magnetites and ferroxides. Strength, heat resistance, 
morphology. J. Material & Environmental Sciences, 11(8), 1241–1249. https: www. 
jmaterenvironsci.com/Document/vol11/vol11_N8/JMES-2020-11109-Staromsky.pdf 
(accessed on 16 January 2022). 
16. Starokadomsky, D., Reshetnyk, M., & Terebilenko, A., (2021). Restorative and industrial 
reinforced epoxy composites with micro-nano-dispersed (Si, Ti, Zr, Cr, Mo, and Nb)-carbide 
fillers. The Scientific Heritage, 2(64). doi: 10.24412/9215-0365-2021-64-2-10-19. 
17.

Kakhramanov, N. T., Azizov, A. G., Osipchik, V. S., Mamedly, U. M., & Arzumanova, N. 
B., (2016). Nanostructured composites and polymeric materials technology. Plasticheskie 
Massy, 1, 2, 49–57. https://doi.org/10.35164/0554-2901-2016-1-2-49-57; https:www. 
plastics-news.ru/jour/article/view/18 (accessed on 16 January 2022). 
18. Kakhramanov, N. T., Allahverdieva, K. V., & Koseva, N. S., (2022). Adhesive features 
of functionalized metal–polymer systems based on polyolefins. Polym. Sci. Ser. D, 15, 
19–24. https: doi.org/10.1134/S1995421222010105. 
19. Danchenko, Y., Andronov, V., Barabash, E., Rybka, E., & Khmyrova, A., (2019). Acid￾basic surface properties of dispersed fillers based on metal oxides TiO2
, Al2
O3
, CaO, and 
Fe2
O3
. IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 708, 012083. doi: 
10.1088/1757-899X/708/1/012083. 
20. Danchenko, Andronov, V., Barabash, E., Obigenko, T., Rybka, E., Meleshchenko, 
R., & Romin, A., (2017). Research of the intramolecular interactions and structure in 
epoxyamine composites with dispersed oxides. Eastern-European Journal of Enterprise 
Technologies, 6(12). 4–12. https: doi.org/10.15587/1729-4061.2017.118565. 
21. Ramajo, L. A., Cristóbal, A. A., Botta, P. M., PortoLópez, J. M., Reboredo, M. M., & 
Castro, M. S., (2009). Dielectric and magnetic response of Fe3
O4
/epoxy composites. 
Composites Part A: Applied Science and Manufacturing, 40(4), 388–393 https: doi. 
org/10.1016/j.compositesa.2008.12.017. 
22. Darwish, M., Trukhanov, A., Senatov, O., Morchenko, A., Saafan, S., & Singh, C., 
(2020). Investigation of AC-measurements of epoxy/ferrite composites. Nanomaterials 
(Basel), 10(3), 492. doi: 10.3390/nano10030492. 
23.

Zaidi, M. G. H., Sah, P. L., Alam, S., & Rai, A. K., (2009). Synthesis of epoxy ferrite 
nanocomposites in supercritical carbon dioxide Journal of Experimental Nanoscience, 
4(1), 55–66. doi: 10.1080/17458080802656515. 
24. Kanapitsas, A., Tsonos, C., Psarras, G., & Kripotou, S., (2016). Barium ferrite/epoxy 
resin nanocomposite system: Fabrication, dielectric, magnetic and hydration studies. 
eXPRESS Polymer Letters, 10(3), 227–236. doi: 10.3144/expresspolymlett.2016.21; 
https:www.researchgate.net/publication/289378337_Barium_ferriteepoxy_resin_ 
nanocomposite_system_Fabrication_dielectric_magnetic_and_hydration_studies 
(accessed on 16 January 2022). 
25. Chang, C., Su, S., Chang, T., & Chang, C., (2021). Frequency-induced negative magnetic 
susceptibility in epoxy/magnetite nanocomposites. Sci. Reports, 11, 3288. https: doi. 
org/10.1038/s41598-021-82590-w. 
26. Starokadomsky, D., (2021). New effects of thermo-hardening and thermo-plasticization 
after hard heating in epoxy-composites with optimal micro-nano-fillers. Globus an 
International Journal of Medical Science, Engineering and Technology, 10(2), 55–62. 
doi: 10.46360/globus.met.320212010. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 11


Magnetic Particles and Their Role in 
Polymer Composites: From Molecular 
Modeling to Applications 
RALUCA MARINICA ALBU 
“Petru Poni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Laboratory of Physical 
Chemistry of Polymers, Iasi, Romania 
ABSTRACT 
The domain of electromagnetism is very vast and led to noteworthy advances 
in the field of material science. The chapter presents important aspects 
related to magnetic particles and their contribution to the performance 
of magnetic composites with polymer matrix. Principal classes of single/ 
multi-component magnetic materials are described, together with the known 
types of magnetic behavior. Molecular modeling studies of polymer matrix 
and filled polymer systems are presented to understand the advantages 
introduced by the selected matrix on the final composite features. Certain 
recent applications of polymer magnetic composites in several technical 
domains and biomedical areas are reviewed. 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
The design of materials for an engineering product or a targeted use requires 
deep knowledge on the chemical and physical properties. Aside from the 
thermal resistance, mechanical strength and dimensional stability, the 
electrical or magnetic characteristics are of paramount importance in many 
practical cases. Among these, the magnetic properties of materials display 168 Modern Magnetic Materials 
a particular role in several applications, such as absorbers based on magne￾torheological (MR) fluids [1], drug release carriers [2], cancer curing [3], 
bio-separation [4], hyperthermia treatment [5], sensors [6, 7] and electrical 
machines [8]. In the past years, the advances in the area of magnetic mate￾rials have brought outstanding breakthroughs, which have contributed to the 
progress in the multidimensional fields [6]. There is a broad spectrum of 
magnetic compounds, which have facilitated the disclosure of some spec￾tacular new phenomena. Furthermore, besides the influence on magnetic 
performance induced by the chemical composition, a remarkable importance 
is observed as a function of the morphology and the dimensions of the 
magnetic particles [10]. 
In order to enhance the functionality and applicability of a product that 
concerns the modern technologies, the principles of nanotechnology, electro￾magnetism, material science, plastics technology, and chemical engineering 
have been interfering and inspiring scientists to fabricate multifunctional 
composites with appropriate matrices [11]. Magnetic composites generally 
contain magnetic inclusions (of micro- or nano-dimensions) inserted in 
non-magnetic or magnetic matrix. In this context, polymers have gained 
huge interest owing to their benefits, like lightweight, reduced expenses, 
flexibility, wear resistance, and ease of processing in precise conditions 
[12]. Different types of synthetic or natural polymers have been employed 
over the time to produce novel engineering materials. The continuous phase 
represented by the polymer has the role to bring the filler together and ensure 
an adequate transfer of load between them. So, the matrix acts as a platform 
to distribute the micro- or nanoparticles (NPs) uniformly throughout the 
structure. As a consequence, the mechanical and physicochemical proper￾ties of such polymer composites are affected by the content of the matrix, 
reinforcing agent and the interphase interactions/compatibility [13–15]. 
Another relevant factor resides from the thermal behavior of the polymer 
during composite processing. Derived from this aspect, literature indicates 
that there are two main classes, namely thermoset and thermoplastic matrix 
composites. The first class is more common, while the second one appears 
to experience a faster development. The benefits introduced by the compos￾ites with thermoplastic matrix in regard to the thermoset ones arise from 
diminished preparation costs since it is no need for curing, the materials 
display prolonged shelf life, possibility of re-processing, good weldability, 
combined with reduced moisture content [16, 17]. Relatively recent trends 
are devoted to the combination of magnetism and additional functions. Thus, 
such approaches have attracted tremendous attentiveness since they helped 
to make progress in the domain of smart magnetic materials [18–20]. One Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 169 
problem could reside in the fact that magnetic reinforcements present a 
powerful tendency to make agglomerates for lowering the energy ascribed 
to the high surface area-to-volume ratio of the micro/nano-sized fillers. 
To resolve the issue of aggregation of magnetic reinforcements, certain 
strategies have been proposed and they are relying on surface protection. 
These approaches are meant to chemically stabilize the pristine magnetic 
filler by grafting of or covering with organic compounds (i.e., surfactants or 
macromolecules) or overlay with an inorganic layer (i.e., silica or carbon). 
The embedding of these functionalized magnetic fillers in polymers or other 
matrices demonstrated a higher efficiency of the composite [21]. Further 
refinement of the magnetic polymer composites requires not only complex 
synthesis routes, but also deep elucidation of the interactions among the 
phases of the system. The latter can be predicted prior preparation step by 
performing molecular modeling experiments, which allow extracting data on 
the quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) properties. 
In this context, this work presents a current state-of-art in the area of 
magnetic materials and polymer composites containing magnetic inclusions. 
The chapter starts by describing some introductive aspects concerning the 
main types of magnetic materials that are utilized as fillers. Additionally, 
the types of magnetic behavior are depicted. Molecular modeling of several 
important commercial polymers is performed to depict the implications of 
the conformational properties on the composite performance. The practical 
uses of the magnetic composites in many technical domains and biomedical 
areas are reviewed. 
11.2 GENERALITIES ON MAGNETIC MATERIALS 
11.2.1 PRINCIPAL CLASSES OF SINGLE/MULTI-COMPONENT 
MAGNETIC MATERIALS 
Current advances in the field of magnetism are indicating that there are many 
basic sorts of materials that display magnetic behavior, namely [22]: 
1.

 Metals: Iron, nickel, cobalt, steel, gold, rare earth metals represent 
the most relevant metals known for their magnetic properties; 
2.

 Metal Oxides: Iron oxides (e.g., magnetite, hematite, and maghemite) 
and not only are included here. Dilute magnetic semiconductors 
(DMS) denote a category of substances that exhibit semiconducting 
abilities, as well as magnetic features. In DMS, a part of the cations 170 Modern Magnetic Materials 
in the network are replaced with magnetic ions, so that their atomic 
spin gives the possibility of interaction with the carriers in the mate￾rial structure to render global ferromagnetic order. Therefore, these 
materials depict unique magnetic features owing to the existence of 
separated magnetic ions in semiconducting network. Considerable 
research has been done to develop new DMS products but also for 
clarifying the origin of magnetism in such compounds since the 
1980s. Among the DMS materials can be considered simple oxides 
like tin (IV) oxide, zinc oxide, titanium oxide, or mixed oxides rein￾forced with particular transition metals (Fe, Co, Ni, Mn) [23] or rare 
earths metals (Eu, Dy, Er) [24]; 
3.

 Ceramics: These are oxide materials which have a particular sort of 
permanent magnetization, such as barium titanate, strontium titanate, 
etc.; 
4.

 Polymer Magnets: It is a nonmetallic magnet constructed based 
on a polymer, like DNA and other proteins. This can be regarded 
as a novel class of magnetic compounds that have drawn the 
interest of researchers. Torrance & collaborators [25] have prepared 
poly(1,3,5-triaminobenzene) that was oxidized with iodine to render 
a ferromagnetic property up to 400°C. Subsequently, Rajca et al. 
[26] have fabricated an organic polymer with π-conjugated structure 
that enabled a tremendous magnetic moment and magnetic order at 
cold temperatures under – 263°C. Another relevant investigation was 
performed by Zaidi et al. [27] which made a new magnetic polymer 
based on polyaniline (PANi) combined with an acceptor component 
(i.e., tetracyanoquinodimethane). This was the first polymer system 
with magnetism emphasized at room temperature. Their new mate￾rial mingles the advantages of the conjugated nitrogen from the main 
chain with molecular charge transfer side groups. Such approach 
generates a stable polymer with a significant density of localized 
spins that could contribute to the rise to coupling. Magnetic assess￾ments reveal that the polymeric system is ferri- or ferromagnetic 
with a curie temperature of beyond 77°C and highest saturation 
magnetization of 0.1 JT–1 kg–1. Crayston & co-workers [28] have also 
studied the synthesis of polymer-based magnets; 
5.

 Other Materials: Water, hydrogen, crown glass, alcohols, solutions 
of salts of iron and oxygen. 
Regarding the architecture of composites with magnetic properties, 
literature [22] emphasizes four types of categories, namely: Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 171 
• Core-shell inorganic composites; 
• Self-assembled composites; 
• Silica-based magnetic composites; 
• Organic-inorganic composites. 
Among these, organic-inorganic magnetic filled systems have raised an 
immense interest because of the combination of peculiar features of organic 
and inorganic counterparts from the material. Hybrid organic-inorganic 
magnetic composites could be attained by in situ, ex situ, co-precipitation, 
microwave reflux, melt mixing, ceramic-glass synthesis, and plasma 
polymerization approaches. The magnetic behavior is depending on the used 
materials for the preparation of the new magnets, temperature of processing, 
or sometimes of the system composition. 
11.2.2 TYPES OF MAGNETIC BEHAVIOR 
Literature survey [29–31] on this topic describes several major classes of 
magnetic properties of the materials, namely: 
• Diamagnetism; 
• Paramagnetism; 
• Ferromagnetism; 
• Ferrimagnetism; 
• Antiferromagnetism; 
• Metamagnetism. 
The acknowledged distinct forms of magnetic phenomena appear to be 
the consequence of the modalities in which moments of the negative charges 
in molecular and supramolecular arrays might be found. In the next para￾graphs, a brief presentation concerning the peculiarities of each sort of bulk 
magnetic behavior is made: 
1.

 Diamagnetic Compounds: These are those that have occupied 
orbital shells and are lacking a magnetic moment in the absence of an 
external field. When the latter is present, the spinning electrons process 
and such movement generates a magnetization along the reverse 
direction. When such a magnetic substance is under the influence of 
a non-uniform magnetic field, it is repulsed from the zone of bigger 
field strength to the area of smaller field strength. The diamagnetic 
materials are also known for their reduced and negative susceptibility 
(independent of temperature), but also for their subunitary values 172 Modern Magnetic Materials 
of the relative permeability. A diamagnetic solid substance is able 
to levitate under powerful magnetic fields, as shown in transducer 
applications. Many materials display diamagnetic properties, though it 
is frequently screened by the stronger paramagnetic or ferromagnetic 
term [29–31]. 
2.

 Paramagnetic Materials: These are those that present partially filled 
orbitals and the unpaired spins make electrons to act as magnetic 
dipoles. In the presence of a magnetic field, these dipoles arrange 
themselves parallel to the direction of imposed field, producing 
a magnetization in the same direction. Under the action of non￾uniform magnetic fields, the paramagnetic substance is drawn by the 
zones of bigger field strength from smaller field strength areas. Such 
compounds present a low positive susceptibility (decreases with 
increasing temperature) and relative permeability slightly larger than 
unity [29–31]. 
3.

 Ferromagnetism: This happens in materials with unpaired electrons 
and powerful exchange interaction, all these resulting in orientation 
of magnetic dipoles over extensive zones. This is observed in certain 
ordered lattices, where atomic magnetic moments are interacting to 
line up parallel to each other. Two distinctive features of ferromag￾netic substances are their spontaneous magnetization and the occur￾rence of magnetic ordering temperature. Hence, such substances have 
areas with magnetization even when the magnetic field is missing. 
Inside these regions, the magnetic field is powerful, but in overall, 
the substance is not magnetized since most domains are randomly 
disposed in regard to one another. This sort of magnetic behavior 
manifests itself in the fact that a weak external field is able to line 
up magnetic regions so that the material gains magnetization. The 
driving magnetic field will be enhanced by a huge factor which is 
often reflected in the relative permeability for the substance. Ferro￾magnets can remain magnetized to an extent beyond being under the 
action of the external magnetic field and the property to memorize 
magnetic history is generally named hysteresis. The amount of the 
saturation magnetization which is retained when the driving field 
is stopped is referred to as the remanence of the material and is a 
paramount key in the operability of permanent magnets. This can 
be ascribed to crystalline anisotropy or shape anisotropy. In order 
to fully demagnetize such a material, it is mandatory to utilize a 
magnetic field of strength that acts in the reverse direction (named Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 173 
coercive field). The dissimilarity among the spontaneous magnetiza￾tion (net magnetization noticed in the absence of a field) and the 
saturation magnetization is arising from the magnetic domains. The 
saturation magnetization represents an intrinsic feature, not relying 
on particle size, but sensitive to the temperature. The electronic 
exchange forces within the ferromagnets can be strong; however, 
thermal energy overcomes this and induces a randomizing effect. 
The temperature at which ferromagnetic property vanishes is named 
the Curie temperature. Ferromagnetic magnetic compounds present 
relative permeability values of the order of 1,000 or larger [29–31]. 
4.

 Antiferromagnetism: It is a property highlighted at room tempera￾ture only by chromium. The main distinction in regard to ferro￾magnets resides in the fact that the exchange interaction among the 
adjacent atoms determines the anti-parallel orientation of the atomic 
magnetic moments. Consequently, the magnetic field annuls, and 
the substance seems to behave analogously to the paramagnetic 
compounds [29–31]. 
5.

 Ferrimagnetism: It is mainly noticed in substances having a highly 
complex crystal structure in comparison to the pure elements. 
Inside such materials, the exchange interactions produce parallel 
disposition of atoms in certain part of the crystal and anti-parallel 
one in others. The substance breaks down into magnetic regions 
similarly to ferromagnetic compound, and the magnetic character is 
analogous, but ferrimagnetic materials often have smaller saturation 
magnetizations. Another feature is that the susceptibility is large 
under the Curie temperature. Ferrimagnetic, ferromagnetic, and 
anti-ferromagnetic substances display hysteresis, which denotes an 
irreversibility of magnetic property as the applied magnetic field is 
modified [29–31]. 
6.

 Metamagnetism: It is an abrupt and sometimes dramatic augmenta￾tion of the magnetization of a substance with a low variation in an 
externally applied magnetic field. The sudden variation might be 
caused by the transient spontaneous magnetization generated as a 
result of high magnetic field breaking the antiferromagnetic spin 
orientation. So, metamagnetism can be regarded as the transition 
under magnetic field to a saturated ferromagnetic phase via a first￾order transformation. Oppositely to normal ferromagnetism, no 
hysteresis is remarked. The metamagnetic property might display 
very distinct physical causes for many sorts of metamagnets [29–31]. 174 Modern Magnetic Materials 
In order to make a conclusive picture of the categories of compounds 
with magnetic properties and the aforementioned types of magnetic behavior, 
Figure 11.1 illustrates a general scheme on these aspects. 
FIGURE 11.1 General scheme of the categories of substances with magnetic properties and 
the known types of magnetic behavior. 
Also, Figure 11.1 depicts the most relevant magnetic properties of 
magnetic substances. These features influence the ability of the compounds 
to be appropriate for a targeted magnetic application. Among the typical 
magnetic features of engineering materials, the following one must be 
mentioned [32–34]: 
1.

 Permeability: The feature of a magnetic substance that reveals the 
facility level to build up a magnetic flux inside the material. It is 
established to be the ratio of magnetic flux density to magnetizing 
force generating the magnetic flux density; Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 175 
2.

 Retentivity or Magnetic Hysteresis: It refers to materials whose 
magnetic domains get arranged along the magnetic field and after its 
action stops, still a magnetization is observed, denoting the magnetic 
retentively of the compound; 
3.

 Coercive Force: It is related to the fact that certain compound display 
retentivity even when the external field is turned off and in order to 
cancel the residual magnetization another field of reverse direction 
is applied, and the new forces (coercive forces) are overcoming the 
residual magnetism; 
4.

 Reluctance: The feature of a magnetic substance to resists to occur￾rence of magnetic flux in the bulk. 
The substance depicting a big value of residual magnetization and coer￾cive force are named magnetically hard materials, while those displaying 
the opposite properties are known as magnetically soft materials. In 
Table 11.1, some important magnetic materials and their basic properties 
are listed [35–43]. 
11.3 MOLECULAR MODELING OF POLYMERS AND THEIR 
MAGNETIC COMPOSITES 
The design of a magnetic composite requires profound knowledge on the 
properties of each constituting phase. Conformational characteristics of 
the matrix dictate its physical parameters and thereby the performance of 
the composite. Table 11.2 presents some physical properties of common 
polymers used for composite fabrication [44–49]. 
The presence of the magnetic particles in a polymer is expected to change 
its properties as a function of the filler size, morphology, and amount. In 
certain situation, it is preferable to perform molecular modeling to under￾stand the conformational modifications induced by magnetic fillers and how 
these could affect the performance of the loaded polymer. In the following 
paragraphs, some case studies of molecular modeling are presented. Two 
polymer matrices are selected for computations, namely poly(m-toluidine) 
(PmT) (see Figures 11.2 and 11.3) and Kapton polyimide (see Figures 11.4 
and 11.5). These polymers are simulated to interact with several amounts of 
magnetic fillers (i.e., Fe3
O4
 and Co3
O4
). 
As seen in these figures, the presence of the fillers slightly affects the 
conformational properties of the polymer matrix. Further, from these compu￾tations, the quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) properties 176 
TABLE 11.1 Common Properties of the Most Important Magnetic Materials
Formula Density Size (mm) Magnetic Behavior Magnetic Susceptibility Band Gap References 
(g/cm3) (eV) 
Strontium ferrite (SrFe O ) 12 19 5.3 131 ± 3 Ferrimagnetic 0.0004 emu/mol ~ 2 [35]
Barium ferrite (BaFe O ) 12 19 5.28 55 Ferrimagnetic 0.0002 emu/g 1.86 [36]
Neodymium-iron-boron (NdFeB) 7.51 98 ± 2 Ferrimagnetic 0.05–10 (χ ) ┴ 1.56 [37] 
Cobalt ferrite (CoFe O ) 2 4 5.23 8.5–9.6 Ferromagnetic 15,000 emu/gG 2.27 [38] 
Iron nitrate (Fe-(NO ) ·9H O) 3 3 2 1.68 – Paramagnetic 15,200×10–6 cm3/mol 2.53 [39]
Cobalt nitrate (Co-(NO ) ·6H O) 3 2 2 2.49 – Ferromagnetic 10,000 cm3/g – [40]
Fe 7.87 1–30 Ferrimagnetic 15,900×10–8 m3/kg – [41] 
Ferrous oxide (FeO) 5.74 14.6 Ferrimagnetic 7,200×10–6 c.g.s. units 2.57–2.75 [41] 
Ferric oxide (Fe O ) 2 3 5.242 85 Ferrimagnetic 0.0055 emu/cm3 2.2 [41] 
Iron oxide (magnetite) Fe O3 4 5.18 78 ± 10 Ferrimagnetic 50,000×10–8 m3/kg 2.6 [41] 
Pyrite (FeS ) 2 5 1.9 μm Paramagnetic 30×10–8 m3/kg 0.7–2.6 [42] 
Ferrihydrite (5Fe O ·9H O) 2 3 2 3.77 gm/cc 9–16 Paramagnetic 40×10–8 m3/kg 2.47 [42]
Ilmenite (FeTiO ) 3 4.3–4.6 48 Superparamagnetic 200×10–8 m3/kg 2.5 [42] 
Copper nickel alloy 8.5–8.95 34 Ferromagnetic 1×106, 30% Ni 2.41 [43] 
Cobalt oxide (Co O ) 3 4 6.11 <50 Antiferromagnetic 10×10–3 emu/(mol Co2+) 1.66–2.12 [43] 
Carbonyl iron (CI) 7.86 6 µm Ferromagnetic 4.5–4.8 (χ ) s – [43] 
Modern Magnetic Materials Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 177 
for all fillers, polymers, and polymer/filler systems are obtained and listed in 
Tables 11.3 and 11.4. It can be seen that the addition of the magnetic fillers 
increases the surface area, van der Waals volume (vwv), refractivity, and 
polarizability of all studied systems. In case of Kapton-based composites, the 
computed parameters present larger values, probably to its higher aromatic 
content in the structural unit in regard to PmT. 
TABLE 11.2 Main Magnetic Properties of Common Polymers Used for Composite Fabrication 
Polymer Magnetic Magnetic References 
Susceptibility Behavior 
Poly(m-toluidine) 97 (emu/mol) Diamagnetic [44] 
Polyaniline 24 (emu/mol) Diamagnetic [44] 
Poly(o-ethylaniline) 115 (emu/mol) Diamagnetic [44] 
Poly(o-propylaniline) 158 (emu/mol) Diamagnetic [44] 
Polystyrene <1 Diamagnetic [45] 
Polypyrrole 1.52×10–7 (emu/g) Diamagnetic [46] 
Polythiophene 1.33×10–7 (emu/g) Diamagnetic [46] 
Kapton 8.02×10–7 (emu/g) Diamagnetic [47] 
Polyethyleneimine-based structures 11÷41×10–6 (emu/g) Paramagnetic [48] 
Vanadoarenophane-derived structures – Paramagnetic [49] 
FIGURE 11.2 The conformational optimized structures of poly(m-toluidine) (PmT) having 4 
structural units (SUs) with 2, 4, and 8 Fe3
O4
 fillers (overlapping spheres–fillers, tubes – polymer). 178 Modern Magnetic Materials 
FIGURE 11.3 The conformational optimized structures of PmT (4 SUs) with 2, 4, and 8 
Co3
O4
 fillers (balls and cylinders – fillers, tubes – polymer). 
FIGURE 11.4 The conformational optimized structures of KAPTON (4 SUs) with 2, 4, and 
8 Co3
O4
 fillers (overlapping spheres – fillers, tubes – polymer). Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 179 
FIGURE 11.5 The conformational optimized structures of KAPTON (4 SUs) with 2, 4, and 
8 Co3
O4
 fillers (overlapping fillers – solvents, tubes – polymer). 
TABLE 11.3 QSAR Data of the Fillers, PmT, and PmT/Filler Systems 
Compound/System Surface Area 
(Grid) (Å2
) 
Volume 
(vwv) (Å3
) 
Refractivity
(Å2
) 
Polarizability
(Å3
) 
Fe3
O4 208.76 47.97 6.48 2.60 
Co3
O4 290.86 49.38 5.59 2.51 
PmT 285.28 114.18 35.80 13.62 
PmT 4SU 753.24 422.70 136.38 52.16 
PmT/2·Fe3
O4 918.57 520.12 147.18 57.35 
PmT/4·Fe3
O4 934.24 616.76 157.99 62.54 
PmT/8·Fe3
O4 1264.74 808.08 179.59 72.93 
PmT/2·Co3
O4 1093.53 524.04 147.55 57.17 
PmT/4·Co3
O4 1244.94 593.95 158.73 62.18 
PmT/8·Co3
O4 1767.60 819.26 181.07 72.20 
The molecular modeling experiments also enabled to determine the log P 
parameter (partition coefficient), which is related to hydrophobicity degree 
of the system. The obtained log P values against the amount of the consid￾ered magnetic fillers from the aforementioned composites are presented in 
Figures 11.6 and 11.7. The positive values reflect a hydrophobic character, 180 Modern Magnetic Materials 
and it ranges as a function of the used magnetic particles. The presence of 
Fe3
O4
 increase the hydrophobicity, while Co3
O4
 leads to its decreasing. 
TABLE 11.4 QSAR Data of KAPTON and KAPTON/Filler Systems 
Compound/System Surface Area 
(Grid) (Å2
) 
Volume 
(vwv) (Å3
) 
Refractivity
(Å2
) 
Polarizability
(Å3
) 
KAPTON 603.93 321.98 101.50 39.23 
KAPTON 4SU 2110.03 1254.64 401.83 154.59 
KAPTON/2·Fe3
O4 2437.94 1350.58 412.63 159.79 
KAPTON/4·Fe3
O4 2828.75 1446.98 423.43 164.98 
KAPTON/8·Fe3
O4 3304.65 1638.17 445.04 175.36 
KAPTON/2·Co3
O4 2691.33 1353.42 413.00 159.60 
KAPTON/4·Co3
O4 3011.79 1452.08 424.18 164.61 
KAPTON/8·Co3
O4 3901.94 1648.43 446.52 174.63 
FIGURE 11.6 Log P data for PmT/filler systems. 
FIGURE 11.7 Log P data for KAPTON/filler systems. Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 181 
11.4 APPLICATIONS 
Practical use of the magnetic composites with polymer matrix is very vast. 
This part of the chapter is describing several technical applications of 
magnetic filled polymers by analyzing the most representative achievements 
in this research area. 
Several years ago, Tawansi et al. [50] studied the interfacial effects on 
the magnetic properties of polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) loaded with 
several sorts of magnetic particles attained by casting approach. The PMMA 
systems filled with Fe present no significant variations of the magnetic 
susceptibility with temperature (0–100 K), while for the composites with 
Y Fe O 3 5 12 a slight decrease is noted after ~230 K and those with Er3 5 12 Fe O
am increase in susceptibility is noticed up to 180 K and after that it remains 
almost invariable. At room temperature this magnetic feature at many 
filler amounts could not fit the magnetic dilution model. The differences 
between measured values and the estimated ones could be ascribed to the 
long-distance ferromagnetic interactions occurring among the moment of 
the filler phase and the spin moment of the macromolecular phase at the 
interfacial zones. Such investigations are essential for understanding how 
to design composites with polymer matrix in order to control their magnetic 
performance. 
A highly relevant property for magnetic registering applications is the 
coercivity. This feature can be enhanced by the shape anisotropy via the 
following procedures [51]: 
•

 Acicular filler forms growing; 
•

 Magneto-crystalline anisotropy via the non-null angular momentum 
ion incorporation; 
•

 Surface anisotropy via the absorption of specific ions at the outer 
layers of the particles. 
Dai et al. [52] have made self-assembled polymer composites containing 
cobalt ferrite fillers for magnetic recording uses. The magnetic inclusions 
were introduced in a solution of an amphiphilic diblock copolymer, whose 
acid groups allow linking to the surface of the filler, whereas other segments 
of the copolymer facilitate the filler-polymer complex occurrence. In this 
way, the colloidal stability is enhanced by lowering the forces among the 
magnetic phase responsible for their aggregation. The system was spin￾coated onto a silicon layer to facilitate self-organized films, where the 
particle inter-distance was adjusted by the copolymer molecular mass. The 
solid composites were exposed to a magnetic field and concomitantly heated 182 Modern Magnetic Materials 
beyond the glass transition temperature of one block of the matrix to enable 
filler rotation and orientation of easy axes parallel to the direction of the 
external field. The attained self-assembled magnetic filled polymer was 
adequate as a magnetic recording media and read/write cycles were proved. 
Another applicative direction of magnetic composites is represented 
by energy storing/retrieving. This was studied by Sanida et al. [53], which 
prepared four series of epoxy nanocomposites loaded with several sorts of 
magnetic particles. Experimental analyzes prove that the inserting of hard 
magnetic hexaferrite fillers (such as BaFe12 and SrFe12 O ) determines 19 O19
an optimum thermomechanical performance of the materials, whereas the 
systems loaded with soft magnetic fillers (such as Fe3
O4 and ZnFe2
O4
) 
having spinel structure, reveal large values of dielectric permittivity and 
AC conductivity, as well as energy storage features. The reported systems 
demonstrated versatile magnetic characteristics that were shown to be 
advantageous in energy-related applications. 
Another important use of magnetic polymer composites is for sensing 
applications. Fullerene/polymer composites were reported by Konchits 
& collaborators [54] to have paramagnetic behavior. They evidenced that 
there is a sudden variation in the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) 
data when the temperature ranged between 20°C and 300°C. This seems 
to be the result of the interactions among the carbon defects and adsorbed 
gas molecules in the samples. It is proved that the paramagnetic centers in 
the incorporated fillers in the composite are heterogeneous. The analysis 
of EPR in regard to absorbed structures is useful for construction of gas 
sensors. Qin et al. [55] inserted ferromagnetic microwires in a polymer for 
sensing uses. The materials display a huge magnetoimpedance effect of up 
to 320% within the frequency domain of 1–100 MHz. This is caused by 
stress augmented transverse magneto-anisotropy. When addition a larger 
percent of magnetic phase, the magnetoimpedance is further influenced 
showing that the prepared polymer system is good for sensing applica￾tions. The microwire-doped system also presents remarkable stress-sensing 
resolution being around 134 kHz/microstrain, which is extremely higher 
in regard to another short-range radar sensor. As proved by the structural 
evaluations and tensile data, the low volume fraction of filler (0.01 vol.%) 
enable the wire-composites to gain outstanding stress sensing features. The 
ferromagnetic/dielectric composites display remarkable microwave tunable 
features and electromagnetic (EM) interference shielding abilities. So, these 
multi-functional materials present great potential for a range of engineering 
applications. Alfadhel et al. [56] have made nanocomposites based on wires Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 183 
introduced in polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) or UV sensitive SU-8. Their 
materials employ the permanent magnetic behavior derived from the filler 
enabling remote operation in the absence of a supplementary magnetic field 
to magnetize the reinforcement agent. This is good for constructing minia￾turized devices. The composite has also the advantage of easy patterning 
rendering corrosion resistant, very elastic, combined with permanent 
magnetic product suitable for sensitive applications. Nanocomposite pillars 
are made and incorporated in the magnetic sensor parts to accomplish very 
sensitive, flow, and tactile sensors. The reported sensor could register air or 
water flow at considerable small power consumption. A tactile sensor unit 
prototype is fabricated based on the same concept, where a pressure of about 
0–169 kPa is ascertained with good resolution. 
An interesting applicative direction of magnetic composites is that of smart 
materials [57]. Thévenot et al. [20] have reviewed the responsive behavior of 
some magnetic composites with polymer matrix. Magnetic actuation offers 
special capabilities since it is possible to spatially and temporally control 
it, and to be triggered outside the system, making possible a non-invasive 
remote control. According to their work [57], there are several categories of 
magnetic responsive reinforced materials which are divided as a function to 
their activation mode and possible use: 
•

 Composites with elastomeric matrix that depict the ability to be 
deformed (stretching, bending, rotation) after subjecting to magnetic 
field which is highly desirable for many technical applications. 
•

 Composites with biocompatible matrix have an ability to remotely 
drag to a desired area, named magnetic guidance, which is especially 
useful for biomedical uses. 
•

 Composites with the capacity to employ magnetic induction for ther￾moresponsive actuation sustained by the matrix, which is suitable for 
controlled substance release and shape memory devices. 
Regarding the first category, Zrinyi et al. [58] have prepared ferrogels by 
loading magnetite in glutaraldehyde cross-linked poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA). 
In the presence of inhomogeneous static magnetic field such materials 
perform great stretching, contraction or bending. It was shown that at low 
strains, the elongation is ranging with the square of steady current intensity, 
while the elastic modulus of composites is not affected by the magnetic field. 
Zamora-Mora et al. [59] reported the preparation and characterization of 
chitosan/agarose (CS/AG) ferrogels. The incorporation of oleic-acid-coated 
iron oxide filler led to larger degradation temperatures in regard to neat CS/ 184 Modern Magnetic Materials 
AG. Mechanical experiments proved that the elastic moduli of the reinforced 
ferrogels indicated that the insertion of magnetic filler avoid the AG gelation 
observed during cooling the CS/AG matrix solution. Also, the composites 
tend to heat as a consequence of exposure to an alternating magnetic field 
so that they can be regarded as good candidates for magnetic hyperthermia 
treatments (MHTs). Magnetic polymer actuators can be attained by intro￾ducing CI in silicone-based elastomers. Such material present small Young’s 
modulus (∼106
 Pa) combined with a large magnetization (>104 A∙m–1), but 
also wide deformation, in both field gradients and homogeneous magnetic 
fields [60, 61]. 
The second category involves a controlled displacement of a material, 
made of magnetic filler combined with a polymeric matrix. In a variable 
field, the polymer has the role of multifunctional structure that is capable 
of adsorbing distinct species, permitting their ulterior separation or just 
displacement. Levy et al. [62] have shown the magnetic guidance of 
endothelial cells bearing magnetic fillers. The magnetic platform relied on 
iron oxide particles and albumin stabilized poly(lactide). Full and uniform 
bovine aortic endothelial overlay was attained in the presence of the uniform 
magnetic field. Oppositely, when no magnetic exposure is used, the magnetic 
filler loaded cells were not detected. 
The third category of composites requires the use of inductive heating 
under the action of the alternative magnetic field. In such situation, magnetic 
filler produce heat via hysteresis losses (ferromagnetic substances) or via 
oscillation of the magnetic moment because of the Néel and Brownian 
relaxations (superparamagnetic fillers). Shape memory materials might 
perform significant shape modification, upon application of a programming 
process after which they regain the initial shape. Lendlein et al. [53] have 
obtained triple-shape polymer composites based on containing poly(ε￾caprolactone) (PCL) and poly(cyclohexyl methacrylate) (PCHMA) useful 
for non-contact actuation. The prepared systems display two thermal 
transitions. The insertion of magnetic filler did not affect much the thermal 
performance of the matrix but influenced the mechanical performance by 
reducing the elongation at break. Therefore, the amount of filler must be 
selected to have a good balance among the heating characteristics (bigger 
reachable temperature) and the mechanical ones. An essential factor that must 
be considered in order to attain the desired control on shape recuperation is 
the surface to volume ratio (S/V). As a function of the S/V parameter, the 
heat loss (caused by differences with environment) might range, involving 
considerable differences regarding the magnetic field strength demanded to Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 185 
acquire the transition temperature. The remarkable triple shape features with 
full recuperation of the initial shape were attained for samples with 40 wt.% 
of PCL. A stepwise enhancement of the magnetic field strength facilitated 
the recuperation of the intermediate and initial shapes in a gradual manner. 
Such studies open novel perspectives on actuation devices with futuristic 
design. 
11.5 CONCLUSIONS 
The magnetic composites are important materials in many technical applica￾tions. This work presents the main classes of magnetic materials and the 
sorts of magnetic behaviors. Some molecular modeling data are described 
for some magnetic fillers and their polymer composites by emphasizing 
the influence of the filler on the QSAR properties and log P parameter. It 
can be noted that these are changed as a function of both polymer type and 
filler nature. Finally, some application of magnetic polymer composites in 
sensors, magnetic recording, actuators, and energy storing/retrieving are 
briefly reviewed. 
KEYWORDS 
• dilute magnetic semiconductors 
• magnetic filler 
• magnetorheological 
• molecular modeling 
• poly(m-toluidine) 
• polymer 
• structural units 
REFERENCES 
1. Kumbhar, B. K., Patil, S. R., & Sawant, S. M., (2015). Synthesis and characterization of 
magneto-rheological (MR) fluids for MR brake application. Eng. Sci. Technol. an Int., 
18, 432–438. 186 Modern Magnetic Materials 
2. Adams, S. A., Hauser, J. L., Allen, A. C., Lindquist, K. P., Ramirez, A. P., Oliver, S., 
& Zhang, J. Z., (2018). Fe3
O4
@SiO2 Nanoparticles functionalized with gold and poly 
(vinylpyrrolidone) for bio-separation and sensing applications. ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 
1, 1406–1412. 
3. Baghban, R., Soleymani, M. A. J., & Rahimi, M., (2021). Were magnetic materials 
useful in cancer therapy? Biomed. Pharmacother, 144, 112321. 
4.

Sun, C., Lee, J. S. H., & Zhang, M., (2008). Magnetic nanoparticles in MR imaging and 
drug delivery. Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 60, 1252–1265. 
5. Gorodov, V. V., Kostrov, S. A., Kamyshinskii, R. A., Kramarenko, E. Y., & Muza￾farov, A. M., (2018). Modification of carbonyl iron particles by carboxyl-containing 
polydimethylsiloxanes. Russian Chem. Bull., 67, 1639–1647. 
6. Ding, L., Xuan, S., Feng, J., & Gong, X., (2017). Magnetic/conductive composite fiber: 
A multifunctional strain sensor with magnetically driven property. Compos. Part A Appl. 
Sci. Manuf., 100, 97–105. 
7. Khan, M. A., Alfadhel, A., Kosel, J., & Bakolka, M., (2016). Fabrication and charac￾terization of magnetic composite membrane pressure sensor. IEEE Sensors Applica￾tions Symposium (SAS). doi: 10.1109/sas.2016.7479871. 
8.

Guo, Y. G., & Zhu, J. G., (2006). Applications of soft magnetic composite materials in 
electrical machines. Aust. J. Electr. Electron., 3, 37–46. 
9. Kumar, U. N., Kratz, K., Wagermaier, W., Behl, M., & Lendlein, A., (2010). Non-contact 
actuation of triple-shape effect in multiphase polymer network nanocomposites in 
alternating magnetic field. J. Mater. Chem., 20, 3404–3415. 
10. Hassnain, J. G., Ekiert, T., Unruh, K. M., & Ismat, S. S., (2012). Effect of particle size 
distribution on the magnetic properties γ-Fe2
O3
 nanoparticles. Mater. Sci. Eng. B, 177, 
935–941. 
11.

Wu, S., Hu, W., Ze, Q., Sitti, M., & Zhao, R., (2020). Multifunctional magnetic soft 
composites: A review. Multifunct. Mater., 3, 042003. 
12. Liew, K. B., Goh, C. F., Sajid, A. H., & Syed, K., (2021). Overview of mechanical 
and physicochemical properties of polymer matrix composites. In: Brabazon, D., (ed.), 
Encyclopedia of Materials: Composites (Vol. 1, pp. 565–576). Elsevier: USA. 
13. Filimon, A., Albu, R. M., Stoica, I., & Avram, E., (2016). Blends based on ionic poly￾sulfones with improved conformational and microstructural characteristics: Perspec￾tives for biomedical applications. Compos. B. Eng., 93, 1–11. 
14. Barzic, A. I., Albu, R. M., Stoica, I., & Hulubei, C., (2022). New shielding covers based 
on transparent polyimide/ferrous sulfide composites that reduce optical losses in solar 
cells. Compos. Sci. Technol., 218, 109140. 
15. Albu, R. M., Avram, E., Stoica, I., & Ioan, S., (2012). Polysulfones with chelating groups 
for heavy metals retention. Polym. Compos., 33, 573–581. 
16. Freile-Pelegrín, Y., & Madera-Santana, T. J., (2017). Characterization techniques 
for algae-based materials. In: Zia, K. M., Zuber, M., & Ali, M., (eds.), Algae Based 
Polymers, Blends, and Composites: Chemistry, Biotechnology and Materials Science 
(pp. 649–670). Elsevier: USA. 
17. Mahesh, V., Joladarashi, S., & Kulkarni, S. M., (2021). A comprehensive review on 
material selection for polymer matrix composites subjected to impact load. Def. Technol., 
17, 257–277. 
18.

Liao, X., Liao, Q., Zhang, Z., Yan, X., Liang, Q., Wang, Q., Li, M., & Zhang, Y., 
(2016). A highly stretchable ZnO@ fiber-based multifunctional nanosensor for strain/ 
temperature/UV detection. Adv. Funct. Mater., 26, 3074–3081. Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 187 
19.

Huang, G., Liu, L., Wang, R., Zhang, J., Sun, X., & Peng, H., (2016). Smart color￾changing textile with high contrast based on a single-sided conductive fabric. J. Mater. 
Chem. C, 4, 7589–7594. 
20. Thévenot, J., Oliveira, H., Sandre, O., & Lecommandoux, S., (2013). Magnetic responsive 
polymer composite materials. Chem. Soc. Rev., 42, 7099. 
21. Kango, S., Kalia, S., Celli, A., Njuguna, J., Habibi, Y., & Kumar, R., (2013). Surface 
modification of inorganic nanoparticles for development of organic–inorganic nano￾composites: A review. Prog. Polym. Sci., 38, 1232–1261. 
22. Kalia, S., Kango, S., Kumar, A., Haldorai, Y., Kumari, B., & Kumar, R., (2014). Magnetic 
polymer nanocomposites for environmental and biomedical applications. Colloid. Polym. 
Sci., 292, 2025–2052. 
23. Gopinadhan, K., Kashyap, S. C., Pandya, D. K., & Chaudhary, S., (2007). High tempera￾ture ferromagnetism in Mn-doped SnO2 nanocrystalline thin films. J. Appl. Phys., 102, 
113513–113518. 
24. Kant, K. M., Sethupathi, K., & Rao, M. S. R., (2004). Magnetic properties of 4f element 
doped SnO2
. International Symposium of Research Students on Materials Science and 
Engineering, ISRS-2004. Chennai, India. Technical Proceedings. 
25. Torrance, J. B., Bagus, P. S., Johhannsen, I., Nazzal, A. I., Parkin, S. S. P., & Batail, 
P., (1998). Ferromagnetic interactions in organic solids: An overview of theory and 
experiment. J. Appl. Phys., 63, 2962–2965. 
26. Rajca, A., Wongsriratanakul, J., & Rajca, S., (2001). Magnetic ordering in an organic 
polymer. Science, 294, 1503–1505. 
27.

Zaidi, N. A., Giblin, S. R., Terry, I., & Monkman, A. P., (2004). Room temperature 
magnetic order in an organic magnet derived from polyaniline. Polymer, 45, 5683–5689. 
28. Crayston, J. A., Devine, J. N., & Walton, J. C., (2000). Conceptual and synthetic 
strategies for the preparation of organic magnets. Tetrahedron, 56, 7829–7857. 
29. Scepka, T. (2016). Noninvasive Control of Magnetic State in Ferromagnetic Nanodots by 
Hall Probe Magnetometry. https:www.researchgate.net/publication/301549615 (accessed 
on 16 January 2022). 
30.

Magnetic Materials: Types of Magnetism, Applications, and Origin of Magnetism. 
https:msestudent.com/magnetic-materials-types-of-magnetism-applications-and￾origin-of-magnetism/ (accessed on 16 January 2022). 
31. Khan, M. A., (2019). Magnetic Polymer Composite Transducers for Integrated Systems. 
Dissertation thesis, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology Thuwal, 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
32. Cullity, B. D., & Graham, C. D., (2008). Introduction to Magnetic Materials (2nd edn.). 
Wiley: USA. 
33. Coey, J. M. D., (2010). Magnetism and Magnetic Materials. Cambridge University Press: 
Dublin. 
34. Shokrollahi, H., (2017). A review of the magnetic properties, synthesis methods and 
applications of maghemite. J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 426, 74–81. 
35. Urogiova, E., Hudec, I., Bellusova, D., & Suri, P., (2007). Structure and properties of 
rubber blends with ferromagnetic fillers. Polym. Adv. Technol., 18, 128–134. 
36. Pullar, R. C., (2012). Hexagonal ferrites: A review of the synthesis, properties and applica￾tions of hexaferrite ceramics. Prog. in Mater. Sci., 57, 1191–1334. 
37. Önal, M. A. R., Dewilde, S., Degri, M., Pickering, L., Saje, B., Riaño, S., Walton, A., 
& Binnemans, K., (2020). Recycling of bonded NdFeB permanent magnets using ionic 
liquids. Green Chem., 22, 2821. 188 Modern Magnetic Materials 
38. Loan, N. T. T., Lan, N. T. T., Hang, N. T. T., Hai, N. Q., Anh, D. T. T., Hau, V. T., Tan, 
L. V., & Tran, T. V., (2019). CoFe2
O4
 nanomaterials: Effect of annealing temperature on 
characterization, magnetic, photocatalytic, and photo-Fenton properties. Processes, 7, 885. 
39.

Căpraru, A., Moacă, E. A., Păcurariu, C., Ianoş, R., Lazău, R., & Barbu-Tudoran, L., 
(2021). Development and characterization of magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles using 
microwave for the combustion reaction ignition, as possible candidates for biomedical 
applications. Powder Technol., 394, 1026–1038. 
40. Rahmana, A., Yusufa, A., Putria, R. A., Anggrainia, Y., Pujaningsihb, F. B., Kurniaa, 
D., Wonorahardjoc, S., & Sutjahja, I. M., (2021). Effect of static magnetic field on 
nucleation of cobalt nitrate hexahydrate. Mater. Res., 24, e20210088. 
41. Ganapathe, L. S., Mohamed, M. A., Yunus, R. M., & Berhanuddin, D. D., (2020). 
Magnetite (Fe3
O4
) nanoparticles in biomedical application: From synthesis to surface 
functionalization. Magnetochemistry, 6, 68. 
42. Van, D. R. L., Hendrickx, J. M. H., Harrison, B., Borchers, B., Norman, D. I., Ndur, S., 
Jasper, C., et al., (2004). Spatial variability of magnetic soil properties. In: Harmon, R. 
S., Broach, J. T., & Holloway, Jr. J. H., (eds.), Detection and Remediation Technologies 
for Mines and Minelike Targets XI (Vol. 5415, pp. 665–676). Proceedings of SPIE: 
Bellingham, WA. 
43. Lu, Q., Choi, K., Nam, J. D., & Choi, H. J., (2021). Magnetic polymer composite 
particles: Design and magnetorheology. Polymers, 13, 512. 
44. Kahol, P. K., Spencer, W. R., Pinto, N. J., & McCormick, B. J., (1994). Magnetic￾susceptibility analysis of polyaniline and its derivatives in terms of triplet bipolarons. 
Phys. Rev. B, 50, 18647–18650. 
45. https:www.rgpballs.com/en/polystyrene-ps-balls/ (accessed on 16 January 2022). 
46. Nalwa, H. S., (1989). Phase transitions in polypyrrole and polythiophene conducting 
polymers demonstrated by magnetic susceptibility measurements. Phys. Rev. B, 39, 
5964–5974. 
47.

Jiang, J., Han, H., Xia, W., Guo, Y., Zhang, Y., Fang, H., & Yan, L., (2018). Observation 
of Meisser Effect in Kapton Tapes. https:arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1805/1805.12458.pdf 
(accessed on 16 January 2022). 
48.

Yu, X., Yuan, X., Zhao, Y., & Ren, L., (2015). Synthesis of paramagnetic polymers 
based on polyethyleneimine (PEI). RSC Adv., 5, 92207–92211. 
49. Braunschweig, H., Adams, C. J., Kupfer, T., Manners, I., Richardson, R. M., & Whittell, 
G. R., (2008). Synthesis of a paramagnetic polymer by ring-opening polymerization of 
a strained. Vanadoarenophane, 47, 3826–3829. 
50.

Tawansi, A., & Zidan, H. M., (1991). Interfacial effects on the magnetic susceptibility of 
PMMA composites. Internat. J. Polym. Mater., 15, 45–56. 
51. Kronmüller, H., Parkin, S., Waser, R., Böttger, U., & Tiedke, S., (2007). Handbook of 
Magnetism and Advanced Magnetic Materials. Wiley: USA. 
52. Dai, Q., Berman, D., Virwani, K., Frommer, J., Jubert, P. O., Lam, M., Topuria, T., 
Imaino, W., & Nelson, A., (2010). Self-assembled ferrimagnet−polymer composites for 
magnetic recording media. Nano Lett., 10, 3216–3221. 
53. Sanida, A., Stavropoulos, S. G., Speliotis, Th., & Psarras, G. C., (2021). Evaluating the 
multifunctional performance of polymer matrix nanodielectrics incorporating magnetic 
nanoparticles: A comparative study. Polymer, 236, 124311. 
54. Konchits, A. A., Shanina, B. D., Krasnovyd, S. V., Burya, A. I., & Kuznetsova, O. Y., 
(2017). Paramagnetic properties of fullerene-derived nanomaterials and their polymer 
composites: Drastic pumping out effect. Nanoscale Res. Lett., 12, 475. Magnetic Particles and Their Role in Polymer Composites 189 
55. Qin, F., Peng, H. X.,Tang, J., & Qin, L. C., (2010). Ferromagnetic microwires enabled 
polymer composites for sensing applications. Compos.-A: Appl. Sci. Manuf., 41, 1823–1828. 
56. Alfadhel, A., Li, B., & Kosel, J., (2014). Magnetic polymer nanocomposites for sensing 
applications. IEEE Sensors Proceedings, 2066–2069. 
57.

Filipcsei, G., Csetneki, I., Szilágyi, A., & Zrínyi, M., (2007). Magnetic field-responsive 
smart polymer composites. In: Oligomers-Polymer Composites-Molecular Imprinting: 
Advances in Polymer Science (Vol. 206, pp. 137–189). Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg. 
58.

Zrinyi, M., Barsi, L., & Buki, A., (1996). Deformation of ferrogels induced by nonuniform 
magnetic fields. J. Chem. Phys., 104, 8750–8756. 
59.

Zamora-Mora, V., Soares, P., Echeverria, C., Hernández, R., & Mijangos, C., (2015). 
Composite chitosan/agarose ferrogels for potential applications in magnetic hyperthermia. 
Gels, 1, 69–80. 
60. Bellan, C., & Bossis, G., (2002). Field dependence of viscoelastic properties of MR 
elastomers. Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 16, 2447–2453. 
61. Nguyen, V. Q., Ahmed, A. S., & Ramanujan, R. V., (2012). Morphing soft magnetic 
composites. Adv. Mater., 24, 4041–4054. 
62. Polyak, B., Fishbein, I., Chorny, M., Alferiev, I., Williams, D., Yellen, B., Friedman, 
G., & Levy, R. J., (2008). High field gradient targeting of magnetic nanoparticle-loaded 
endothelial cells to the surfaces of steel stents. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 105, 698–703. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 12


Magnetism Towards Smart Materials


V. N. ARCHANA,1
 N. G. DIVYA,2
 and REYHA BENEDICT3 
1
Mar Athanasius College, Kothamangalam, Ernakulam, Kerala, India 
2
Bharat Mata College, Thrikkakkara, Ernakulam, Kerala, India 
3
St. Teresa’s College, Ernakulam, Kerala, India 
ABSTRACT 
‘Smart materials’ have awakened an increased interest in recent years since 
they can be exploited to achieve the ‘respond to stimuli’ nature. The stimuli 
can be a magnetic field, electric field, or temperature. The idea of changing 
the mechanical properties of materials by applying a magnetic field is not at 
all a new concept. This chapter gives a brief introduction to magnetism and 
nanomagnetism. Also, the magnetic properties of smart nanomaterials are 
discussed in detail. 
12.1 MAGNETISM AND NANOSCALE MAGNETISM 
Magnetism is a fundamental phenomenon of nature, and the history of 
magnetism dates back to ancient civilizations. It is a property of a material to 
react to a useful magnetic field that causes the material to be either attracted 
or repelled. Some practical materials that show simply detectable magnetic 
properties (called magnets) are: 
• nickel; 
• iron; 
• cobalt; and 
• gadolinium and their alloys. 192 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Meanwhile, all materials are formed to much greater or somehow, lesser 
degree by the presence of a magnetic field. However, the potentiality of 
magnets to act on objects at a distance makes them valuable tools of science. 
There was an earlier saying that history cannot be changed. But the 
technology especially nanotechnology make revolutions in history. Thus, 
miniaturization became the technological trend to produce smaller, lighter, 
and cheaper devices having improved functionality using less energy. Nano￾technology is defined by the understanding and manipulation of the material 
world at the nanoscale or near atomic scale. Nano which means dwarf is 
the 1 billionth of a meter (10–9 m). Nanoscience and nanotechnology are 
concerned with the science and engineering of creating materials, functional 
structures, and devices with at least one of the dimensions in the size range 
of 1–100 nm. The main idea of nanotechnology and nanoscience is first 
introduced by the physicist Richard P. Feynman in his famous lecture titled 
“There’s plenty of room at the bottom” in 1959. He thus first paved the idea 
of manipulation of matter at a very small scale. Eric Drexler, an American 
Engineer introduced and popularized the word ‘nanotechnology’ through his 
book Engines of Creation: The Coming Era of Nanotechnology in 1986. 
Nanomagnetism is now at the frontiers of nanoscience and technology, 
and nanosized magnetic materials exhibit a rich variety of magnetic 
phenomena in comparison with the bulk counterparts, giving rise to a 
novel range of applications. It basically involves the study of ferromagnetic 
materials behavior when they are analytically controlled in at least one 
dimension. The physical properties observed at such reduced dimensions are 
strongly sensitive to slight variations of size, shape, composition, structure, 
and morphology as well as myriad surface effects. Compared to the bulk 
counterparts, magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) exhibit a dramatic change in 
their magnetic properties. 
According to Weiss’s theory, a ferromagnet consists of small regions 
called domains, where dipoles are aligned parallel to one another. All the 
domains align in the same direction and there exists a net non-zero magneti￾zation. Magnetization process in a ferromagnetic material can be explained 
using domain theory. Initially the domains are aligned in such a way that 
net magnetization is “zero.” In the existance of “Magnetic Field,” domains 
grow at the expense of other domains by domain wall motion. When the 
field is sufficient to eliminate all domain walls, a single domain exists [1, 2]. 
Superparamagnetism and single domain particles are the two major aspects 
related to nanomagnetism. Single domain is a state of ferromagnet in which 
the magnetization direction is the same throughout the material. When the 
particle size is reduced and when it is closer to a critical size, the formation Magnetism Towards Smart Materials 193 
of domain walls will not be energetically favorable, and the particles become 
single domain. For a single domain particle magnetization will change by the 
rotation of spins. Superparamagnetism is seen in ferromagnetic or ferrimag￾netic nanoparticles composed of a single domain. Zero remanence and zero 
coercivity are the two characteristic features of superparamagnetism. 
12.2 MAGNETIC PROPERTIES OF SMART NANOMATERIALS 
The term “Smart Materials” is frequently used for special materials that 
have the potential to sense changes in their environment and can particularly 
respond in a very controlled and practical manner. Incorporating such 
materials in structures makes the structures smart, in the sense that they 
have a capability to respond to external stimuli to compensate for undesired 
effects, or to enhance their performance. The terms “active,” “adaptive,” and 
“intelligent” materials are also used to describe this kind of material [3, 4]. 
Examples of smart materials that are commercially available are piezoelectric 
materials (which change length with the application of an electric field), 
magnetostrictive materials (which change length with the application of 
a magnetic field), shape memory alloys (which regain their original shape 
when heated, if they have been deformed at ambient temperature), biomimetic 
materials (which imitate biological tissues and structures by changing their 
dimensions or chemical diffusivity as a response to a chemical or an electrical 
input), electrochromic coatings (which change color when an electric 
potential is applied), and electrorheological (ER) and magnetorheological 
(MR) materials [4]. Therefore, these materials should be some types of: 
• sensor; 
• processor; and 
• actuator. 
These characteristics must be looped, and the effect of changing the 
“materials properties” must be done in “real time.” 
The magnetic structures at the nanoscale size range also possess great 
potential for the development of smart nanomaterials with huge functional 
diversity. The optical, chemical, physical, and electrochemical properties of 
the smart magnetic nanomaterials can be tuned by modifying the externally 
applied magnetic fields. Thus, by considering the benefits of these smart 
functional magnetic nanomaterials, several research attempts are recently 
being made to develop more efficient nanoscale magnetic assembly for 
technological advancement in various fields. 194 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Magnetic properties of nanomaterials arise from the spin and orbital 
motions of electrons. Depending on the magnetic properties, the nanomate￾rials are broadly classified into different categories such as: 
• ferromagnetic; 
• paramagnetic; 
• diamagnetic; 
• ferrimagnetic; and 
• antiferromagnetic materials. 
Among these different kinds of magnetic materials, ferromagnetic and 
ferrimagnetic materials are preferred for hyperthermia therapy applications. 
Ferromagnetism is an inherent property of certain materials such as Fe, Ni, 
Co, and their alloys. In ferromagnetic materials with a large and positive 
magnetic susceptibility, the magnetic moments existing in the same ferro￾magnetic domains are aligned parallel to each other at room temperature 
which gives rise to net magnetic moments in each domain, at the same time 
the net magnetic moments of various domains are arbitrary oriented at room 
temperature, hence the net magnetization of the ferromagnetic material 
will be zero. However, in the presence of an applied magnetic field, these 
moments get aligned along the direction of the applied field. 
The plot of magnetization versus applied magnetic field produces 
hysteresis loops in ferromagnetic materials. The ferromagnetic materials 
with thin hysteresis loops are grouped into soft ferromagnets and those with 
wider hysteresis loops are grouped into hard ferromagnets. Above a critical 
temperature known as transition temperature Tc
, the ferromagnetic mate￾rials lose their ferromagnetic properties and become paramagnetic. These 
functional traits can also be utilized for the magnetic applications of smart 
functional nanomaterials in industries. 
The ferrimagnetism arises in oxides of Fe combined with one or more 
transition metals such as Zn, Ni, Mn, etc., in which unequal and adjacent 
magnetic spins are aligned antiparallel to each other which produces a net 
nonzero magnetic moment even in the absence of an applied magnetic field. 
In the presence of an externally applied magnetic field, these moments get 
aligned along the direction of the applied field. 
Superparamagnetism with a non-hysteresis curve having zero Hc (coer￾civity) and Mr (remnant magnetization) occurs in both ferromagnetic and 
ferrimagnetic materials with particle sizes around a few nanometers. When 
the size of these materials is of the order of the diameter of a domain, they 
enter into a superparamagnetic state, which is a promising thermal agent for 
magnetic fluid hyperthermia applications. These materials are aligned in a Magnetism Towards Smart Materials 195 
preferred arrangement, thus getting magnetized quickly compared to other 
states, whereas each of the atomic magnetic moments maintains its ordered 
state. Thus, biocompatible superparamagnetic nanoparticles (SPMNPs) are 
promising candidates to be utilized in magnetic hyperthermia applications as 
compared with other magnetic nanomaterials. 
12.2.1 SMART MAGNETIC NANOMATERIALS FOR HYPERTHERMIA 
Hyperthermia is a therapeutic method for cancer treatment in which cancerous 
cells or tumors are selectively destroyed by exposure to higher temperatures 
usually in the range of 41–46°C without destroying the healthy cells. The 
term hyperthermia is derived from the Greek words hyper (rise) and therme 
(heat). This treatment procedure is possible due to the lack of heat resistance 
capacity of tumor cells compared to normal cells [5]. During this procedure, 
MNPs are injected near the site of the tumor cells within the vicinity of the 
external alternating magnetic field which helps to focus the heat energy only 
on the affected cells. This is known as magnetic hyperthermia or magnetic 
nanofluid hyperthermia if the colloidal suspension of MNP in a liquid 
medium is used for hyperthermia applications [6]. This treatment procedure 
has a long-lasting history in the annals of cancer treatment, either alone or in 
combination with other therapeutic techniques. The schematic illustration of 
magnetic hyperthermia application is given in Figure 12.1. 
FIGURE 12.1 Schematic illustration of magnetic hyperthermia application using magnetic 
nanoparticles. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. [6]; Copyright ©2022, Elsevier. 196 Modern Magnetic Materials 
The use of magnetic materials for magnetic hyperthermia applications 
to produce heat when exposed to an alternating magnetic field was first 
proposed by Gilchrist et al. in the 1950s [7]. Then, the idea of intracellular 
magnetic hyperthermia treatment (MHT) was coined by Gordon et al. by 
employing dextran-coated magnetite materials to increase the temperature 
of tumor cells in an alternating magnetic field [8]. Later in 2004, the first 
clinical treatment system was developed in Berlin, and a few years later, 
magnetic hyperthermia has been clinically approved for brain tumor treat￾ment in Europe. However, this treatment procedure is still not commonly 
utilized in hospitals, especially in the USA and some other parts of the world, 
which can be attributed to gaps in the development of optimized MNP hyper￾thermia agents. Recently, with the advent of nanotechnology, the ongoing 
scientific progress in cancer treatment research has taken a new dimension 
and more innovative magnetic nanomaterials have been proposed by several 
researchers to kill cancer cells [9]. 
MNPs are generally zero-dimensional, inorganic, magnetic particles in 
nanosize that can be manipulated in an external alternating magnetic field 
and consequently employed in vitro (outside the body) and in vivo (inside 
the body) bio-medical applications like the MRI or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), and magnetic hyperthermia, respectively. These materials 
usually exhibit unique properties, such as superparamagnetism, high satura￾tion magnetization (Ms), biocompatibility, and low toxicity. The biomedical 
applications of MNPs depend on a number of factors such as physicochemical 
properties, particle size distribution, synthesis methods, interaction among 
particles, etc. [6]. 
Upon excitation in an external alternating magnetic field, MNPs trans￾form the electromagnetic (EM) energy into heat energy, which can be utilized 
to destroy cancer cells in hyperthermia treatment procedures. In magnetic 
hyperthermia, the heating of MNPs occurs due to the eddy current heating 
due to induction in an alternating magnetic field, frictional heating due to 
mutual interaction between NPs and the surrounding medium, or hysteretic 
losses and spin relaxation of MNPs. However, the structural changes and 
inter-particle connections surely affect the heating capability of these NPs. 
Thus, in-depth scientific investigations are required in this direction for 
efficient practical applications of these NPs in biomedical fields [9]. 
One of the major theoretical advantages of MHT includes the possibility 
of local, regional, or generalized heating while keeping the surrounding 
healthy cells safe [10]. Research works are still in progress in this area to 
use MNPs in the medical field more effectively as an efficient medium to 
produce heat. However, several drawbacks are yet to be addressed, such Magnetism Towards Smart Materials 197 
as the difficulty of temperature monitoring and in vivo temperature control 
during the treatment procedure for more efficient clinical applications [5]. 
The clinical applications of magnetic hyperthermia also require proper 
optimization of the magneto-structural properties, the effect of magnetic 
dipolar interactions, and the reliability of methods used in hyperthermia 
measurements that need to be addressed on priority. This method is not 
very effective in fully curing cancer cells due to some serious drawbacks of 
hyperthermia such as heterogeneous distribution of heat and incapability to 
prevent overheating on the affected site. 
12.2.1.1 COMMON MAGNETIC NANOMATERIALS FOR HYPERTHERMIA 
APPLICATIONS 
MNPs with inherent properties such as magnetic metal oxide NPs and alloys 
have widely been investigated for the past several years for hyperthermia 
applications. Upon excitation with an externally applied alternating magnetic 
field, these nanomaterials produce heat energy that can be utilized to destroy 
cancer cells in hyperthermia treatment. 
Magnetic metal oxide NPs include materials such as iron oxide, ferrites, 
nickel oxide, etc. Among the different magnetic metal oxide NPs, iron 
oxide is explored extensively for hyperthermia applications due to its 
natural abundance, low cost, tunable magnetic properties, biocompatibility, 
and potential as a diagnostic and therapeutic agent. Iron oxide exists in 16 
pure phases comprised of oxides such as α-Fe2
O3
, β-Fe2
O3
, Fe3
O4
, γ-Fe2
O3
, 
etc., and oxyhydroxides such as akaganeite, goethite, feroxyhyte, etc., and 
hydroxides. Ferrites are having a general representation of M(Fex
Oy
), where 
M represents metal cations and x and y are variables. Still, several kinds of 
research are going on to develop more efficient magnetic nanomaterials with 
minimum drawbacks for practical applications. 
12.2.1.2 EFFECTS OF SIZE AND SHAPE OF MAGNETIC NANOPARTICLES 
(MNPS) ON HYPERTHERMIA 
Magnetic properties of nanomaterials depend on the size, shape, shape 
anisotropy, and uniformity of the NPs. Normally, small magnetic particles 
with a size in the range of 5–20 nm, leading to a high magnetization and high 
induction heating efficiency. However, NPs with a size below 5 nm suffer 
surface spin disorders, decreasing nanomaterials’ magnetization. The wide 198 Modern Magnetic Materials 
size distribution adversely affects the magnetic properties such as saturation 
magnetism, coercivity, etc. Magnetic materials produce heat via eddy current 
loss, hysteresis losses in multi-domain magnetic particles (size > 1 μm), 
relaxation losses in single-domain SPMNPs, and frictional losses especially 
in viscous suspension in an alternating magnetic field. 
The majority of magnetic particles have higher electrical resistivity, which 
causes the induction of very low eddy current loss. The eddy current loss is 
more prominent in multi-domain magnetic particles which is negligible in 
MNPs and thus the prominent heat loss mechanism in multidomain magnetic 
materials with ferromagnetic properties is the hysteresis loss (size > 20 nm). 
When the size of the particle is small (< 20 nm), the thermal energy barrier 
for the reflux of magnetization will be decreased, causing a multidomain to 
single-domain magnetic transition that leads to a relaxation loss mechanism. 
Once the alternating magnetic field is removed, the magnetic moments 
undergo Néel relaxation (relaxation of internal magnetic spins) or Brownian 
relaxation (rotation of individual NPs). Usually, superparamagnetic Néel and 
Brownian heat loss mechanisms are preferred for magnetic hyperthermia 
applications which exhibit good magnetic properties with a lack of magneti￾zation in the absence of an applied magnetic field. 
12.2.2 MAGNETICALLY RESPONSIVE PLASMONIC NANORODS 
Surface plasmon resonance (SPR) refers to the collective motion of conduction 
electrons oscillating on the surface of metallic nanostructures when irradiated 
with light, which is highly sensitive to size, shape, and the surrounding 
medium. One-dimensional anisotropic plasmonic nanostructures produce 
novel optical band structures due to their anisotropic nature, compared 
to isotropic spherical nanostructures that can be effectively controlled by 
employing an externally applied driving force such as the magnetic field. 
The externally applied magnetic fields have been usually preferred due to 
positional adjustment, synergistic effects, magnetic separation, etc. 
Surface plasmons are sensitive to the refractive index of the dielectric 
medium that can be utilized for the development of plasmonic biosensors for 
the detection of analyte molecules. Most of the commercially available SPR 
biosensors use surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs), which can provide detection 
up to a limit exceeding 10–5 refractive-index units (RIU) [11]. However, the 
SPP-based method needs further improvement in sensitivity and selectivity, 
especially size-based selectivity, and selective nano-architectures. Consid￾ering all these drawbacks of sensing applications of plasmonics structures, Magnetism Towards Smart Materials 199 
new plasmonic metamaterials, and composite structures that are capable of 
providing more sensitive detection than SPPs are still under investigation 
because when the distance between the nanorods is smaller or comparable 
with the wavelength, the metamaterial supports a guided mode with the field 
distribution inside the layer depend on the plasmon-mediated interaction 
between the nanorods. This has resonant excitation conditions similar to SPP 
of a metal film, with high sensitivity to refractive-index change [11]. 
SPR of noble metal nanomaterials have been studied for several appli￾cations like optoelectronics, photothermal therapy, chemical sensing, etc. 
Since the oscillation of electrons depends on the size, shape, and neighboring 
particles, several research investigations have been devoted to controlling 
the plasmonic property by tuning these parameters during the synthesis of 
these nanostructures. However, reversible tuning of plasmonic property of 
colloidal metal nanostructures is possible by changing their orientation using 
an external magnetic field. The magnetic orientations of these nanostructures 
can be controlled by binding them to superparamagnetic iron oxide nanorods 
so that the resulting hybrid nanostructures tend to align in the direction of 
the externally applied magnetic field to minimize their potential energy, thus 
enabling the excitation of the plasmon modes of nanostructures through the 
alteration of the field direction compared to the directions of incidence and 
polarization of light. 
Nanostructures like gold NPs usually exhibit transverse and longitudinal 
modes of resonance, which produces distinct bands with different wave￾lengths in the extinction spectrum. The shorter wavelength bands correspond 
to the excitation of transverse plasmon due to the oscillation of electrons 
along short axes, and the longer wavelength bands are produced by the 
excitation of longitudinal plasmon due to the oscillation of electrons along 
the longer axis. The excitation of these different modes is determined by 
the orientation of the nanorods concerning the direction of polarization of 
incident light. When the direction of polarization of incident light is parallel 
to the longer axes of nanorods, longitudinal plasmonic excitation occurs. 
And the transverse mode will be excited when the polarization of light is 
parallel to the short axes of nanorod structures [12]. 
The presence of an external magnetic field allows tuning the optical 
properties of nanorod structures even under normal light illumination. The 
magnetic field enables the instant and reversible alignment of nanorod 
structures in three dimensions. Moreover, the anisotropic nature of magnetic 
interactions allows the proper alignment of magnetic dipoles along the direc￾tion of the external magnetic field. When the nanorod structure is nonmag￾netic, magnetically active nanomaterials need to be incorporated into the 200 Modern Magnetic Materials 
nanorods to enable magnetic control. As the magnetic nanorods orient 
themselves in the direction of the externally applied magnetic field to reduce 
their potential energy and dipole-dipole interactions, thus the nanostructures 
also will be aligned in the same direction enabling magnetic control of these 
nanostructures plasmonic excitation [12]. However, the net magnetization 
should be small enough to minimize the magnetically induced agglomera￾tion of magnetic nanostructures, at the same time the magnetic response of 
these nanostructures should be strong enough to ensure the reorientation 
under the influence of normal magnetic fields. The diameter of nanorods and 
the size of the nanostructures should be close so that a parallel attachment of 
these nanostructures is preferred [12, 13]. The colloidal dispersion of such 
nanostructures shows instant optical switching concerning a change in the 
orientation or strength of externally applied magnetic fields. The optical 
switching is highly sensitive, which is possible even under a weak applied 
magnetic field. These tunable plasmonic hybrid nanostructures provide an 
efficient platform for developing novel optical components, display devices, 
and highly efficient sensors [11, 12]. 
12.2.3 MAGNETORHEOLOGICAL (MR) FLUIDS 
Among smart materials, ER and MR materials are an important group. They 
are a class of materials where rheological properties are rapidly varied by 
the application of an external electric or magnetic field. The change in their 
properties is in proportion to the magnitude of the field applied and is imme￾diately reversible. 
‘Deformation’ is the motion of the body relative to other parts so that the 
body changes its size or shape, i.e., a displacement occurs between points 
in the body, and a ‘flow’ is a continuous change of deformation with time. 
The section of mechanics that deals with such motion is called continuum 
mechanics or mechanics of deformable media. Many examples of deforma￾tion are observed in everyday experiences, the motion of the liquid being 
poured, of water in a flowing river, of flag fluttering in the wind, of water 
boiling, of a rubber band being stretched and of a violin string when it 
is plucked. When an external force is applied to a material, it assumes a 
deformed shape in equilibrium and returned to their original shape after 
the forces are removed. Such reversible deformations are known as ‘elastic 
deformation’ or ‘elasticity’ and such materials are known as ‘elastic solids.’ 
Other materials can maintain an equilibrium shape when subjected to hydro￾static pressure (the force perpendicular to the surface). These materials, both Magnetism Towards Smart Materials 201 
liquids and gases are known as ‘fluids.’ Under other types of forces, they 
deform indefinitely as long as the external force is applied and do not return 
to their original form even if these forces are removed. Such an irreversible 
deformation is called ‘flow.’ 
Rheology, the branch of condensed matter physics and takes its name from 
the Greek word “rei” (to flow) and is defined (by the Society of Rheology) as 
the “science of deformation and flow”[14]. It is concerned with the mechanical 
response of the material with the applied force. Most of the scientists and 
engineers who work in this field, called rheologists are concerned with the 
mechanics of complex, fluid-like substance that exhibits widely different flow 
behavior depending on the deformation to which they are subjected. 
‘Rheology’ is a part of continuum mechanism which deals with the forma￾tion of constitutive equations, i.e., the relation between force and deformation 
that describes the mechanical behavior of a given material. Such relation 
describes an appropriate description of the behavior over a certain range of 
circumstances. For example, a metal under a light load might be considered 
as rigid, under heavier load or with more accurate measurement of length￾linearly elastic, under a very large load–a plastic solid and under a small 
oscillatory motion–a linearly viscoelastic solid. Two of the basic concepts of 
continuum mechanisms are those of strain, the measure of amount of defor￾mation and of stress (in units of force per unit area), as a measure of contact 
force, i.e., the force exerted by one part of a body on neighboring part [14]. 
Thus, rheological materials demonstrate dramatic changes in their rheological 
properties including yield stress, loss, and storage moduli, etc., in response 
to an externally applied electric field or magnetic field (electrorheology or 
magnetorheology). Electrorheology is a phenomenon whereby a suspension 
of fine polarizable particles (0.1–100 μm in diameter) in a dielectric liquid 
undergoes orders of magnitude increase in viscosity upon application of 
an electric field. This effect was first reported by Winslow in 1949 and is 
sometimes termed the “Winslow effect” [15]. As Winslow reported, apparent 
viscosities can increase by several orders of magnitude when electric fields 
of the order of 1 kV/mm are applied. Whereas magnetorheology refers to the 
phenomenon whereby magnetizable particles are dispersed in a non-magnetic 
matrix in which rheological properties can be changed continuously, rapidly, 
and reversibly by an applied magnetic field. 
The MR fluids are field responsive rheology where their fluid proper￾ties can be controlled by varying the external magnetic field. The discovery 
of MR fluids was credited to Rabinow [16] at the US National Bureau of 
Standard [16]. MR fluid is the first developed magneto-sensitive smart 
material, which is a suspension by mixing micro-meter-sized ferromagnetic 202 Modern Magnetic Materials 
fillers, non-magnetic fluid, plus some additives together. On applying an 
external magnetic field, the MR fluid will switch from Newtonian-like fluid 
to semi-solid material quickly. The magnetic fillers dispersed randomly will 
be re-arranged to form chain-like ordered micro-structure throughout the 
magnetic interaction. 
Typical MR fluids are the suspensions of micron sized, magnetizable parti￾cles (mainly iron) suspended in an appropriate carrier liquid such as mineral 
oil, synthetic oil, water or ethylene glycol, etc. The carrier fluid serves as a 
dispersed medium and ensures the homogeneity of the particles in the fluid. 
A variety of additives (stabilizers and surfactants) are also used in the MR 
fluid to prevent gravitational settling and to promote a stable particles suspen￾sion, which enhances the lubricity and change the initial viscosity of the MR 
fluids [16]. The stabilizers serve the purpose to keep the particles suspended 
in the fluid, whilst the surfactants are absorbed on the surface of the magnetic 
particles in order to enhance the polarization induced in the suspended particles 
on application of the magnetic field. When there is no applied magnetic field, 
the ferrous particles in the MR fluid will be randomly dispersed in the medium. 
In the presence of an externally applied magnetic field, the particles start to 
align themselves along the lines of magnetic flux [17]. As this change occurs 
almost instantly, the MR fluids are attractive solutions for real-time control 
applications, such as shock absorbers, brakes, clutches, engine mounts, valves, 
etc. The changes of liquid-solid-liquid state or the consistency or yield strength 
of the MR fluid can be controlled precisely and proportionally by altering the 
strength of the applied magnetic field [18–20]. 
The changes in the microstructure while applying an external field, is 
responsible for the changes in the rheology of the fluid. That is, a stronger 
external magnetic field will induce a more ordered chain-like micro-structure 
parallel to the direction of the magnetic field. 
MR fluids are being used for various operations in which active vibration 
control or transfer of torque or force is required. Therefore, considerable 
efforts have been paid in the development of dampers using MR fluids. The 
other applications of MR fluids are related to energy management in the 
automotive industry. Similarly, MR fluid devices for aerospace applications 
as well as optical polishing are also promising and emerging. 
12.3 CONCLUSION 
Smart nanomaterials, or stimuli-responsive nanomaterials, have been inves￾tigated widely due to their potential applications in diverse fields. Among Magnetism Towards Smart Materials 203 
the different development processes of smart functional nanomaterials, the 
most widely accepted is the reliable bottom-up approach in which the collec￾tive physical and chemical properties of the resulting smart nanomaterials 
can be tailored by the spatial arrangements of their building blocks and their 
chemical nature. A smart material can sense changes in their environment 
and respond in a controlled and useful manner. Smart magnetic materials 
are of great interest nowadays to enable high end applications since their 
physical properties can easily be controlled by a suitable magnetic field. The 
properties of smart materials can be easily and reversibly tuned by changing 
the environment, i.e., temperature, EM fields, stresses, etc. The engineering 
applications of smart magnetic materials have to be concerned for the better 
performance of the device fabricated. Development of new smart materials 
as well as new ways of their effective control is thus a challenging task. 
KEYWORDS 
• magnetic hyperthermia 
• magneto rheological fluids 
• nanomagnetism 
• plasmonic nanorods 
• smart magnetic nanoparticles 
• smart nanomaterial 
• superparamagnetic nanoparticles 
• surface plasmon resonance 
REFERENCES 
1. Vatta, L. L., Sanderson, R. D., & Koch, K. R., (2006). Magnetic nanoparticles: Properties 
and potential applications. Pure and Applied Chemistry, 78, 1793–1801. 
2. Owens, F. J., (2015). Physics of Magnetic Nanostructures. John Wiley & Sons. 
3. Aguirre, M. A., & NeroneandACalvo, N., (2001). Granular Matter, 2, 75. 
4. Garg, D. P., & Anderson, G. L., (2000). Research in active composite materials and 
structures: An overview. Proc. SPIE, 3992, 2–12. 
5.

Zhang, W., Wu, C. W., & Ravi, S. R. P., (2018). Proposed use of self-regulating tempera￾ture nanoparticles for cancer therapy. Expert Rev. Anticancer Ther., 18(8), 723–725. 204 Modern Magnetic Materials 
6.

Hedayatnasab, Z., Abnisa, F., & Daud, W. M. A. W., (2017). Review on magnetic nanopar￾ticles for magnetic nanofluid hyperthermia application. Mater. Des., 123(5), 174–196. 
7. Gilchrist, R. K., Medal, R., Shorey, W. D., Hanselman, R. C., Parrott, J. C., & Taylor, 
C. B., (1957). Selective inductive heating of lymph nodes. Ann. Surg., 146, 596–606. 
8. Gordon, R. T., Hines, J. R., & Gordon, D., (1979). Intracellular hyperthermia: A 
biophysical approach to cancer treatment via intracellular temperature and biophysical 
alterations. Med. Hypotheses, 5, 83–102. 
9. Abenojara, E. C., Wickramasinghe, S., Bas-Concepcion, J., & Samia, A. C., (2016). 
Structural effects on the magnetic hyperthermia properties of iron oxide nanoparticles. 
Prog. Nat. Sci., 26(5), 440–448. 
10. Vilas-Boas, V., Carvalho, F., & Espiña, B., (2020). Magnetic hyperthermia for cancer 
treatment: Main parameters affecting the outcome of in vitro and in vivo studies. Molecules, 
25, 2874. 
11. Kabashin, A. V., Evans, P., Pastkovsky, S., Hendren, W., Wurtz, G. A., Atkinson, R., Pollard, 
R., et al., (2009). Plasmonic nanorod metamaterials for biosensing. Nat. Mater., 8, 867–871. 
12.

Wang, M., Gao, C., He, L., Lu, Q., Zhang, J., Tang, C., Serkan, Z., & Yin, Y., (2013). 
Magnetic tuning of plasmonic excitation of gold nanorods. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 135, 
15302–15305. 
13. Jung, I., Jang, H., Han, S., Acapulco, J. A. I., & Park, S., (2015). Magnetic modulation 
of surface plasmon resonance by tailoring magnetically responsive metallic block in 
multisegment nanorods. Chem. Mater., 27(24), 8433–8441. 
14. Herman, F. M., Norman, G. G., & Norbert, M. B., (1971). Encyclopedia of Polymer 
Science and Engineering, 14. 
15. Aguirre, M. A., Grande, J. G., Calvo, A., Pugnaloni, L. A., & Géminard, J.-C. (2010). 
Pressure independence of granular flow through an aperture. Phys. Rev. Lett., 104, 238002. 
16. Ashwani, K., & Mangal, S. K., (2013). Modeling, testing and evaluation of magneto￾rheological shock absorber. Int. J. Mech. Eng. & Rob. Res., 2. 
17. Ashwani, K., & Mangal, S. K., (2010). Comparative study of vibration-control systems. 
International Conference on Engineering Innovations. 
18. Carlson, J. D., & Jolly, M. R., (2000). MR fluid, foam and elastomer devices. Mecha￾tronics, 10, 555. 
19. Jolly, M. R., Carlson, J. D., & Munoz, (1996). A model of the behavior of magnetorheo￾logical materials. Smart Mater. Struct., 5, 607. 
20. Bossis, G., Lacis, S., Meunier, A., & Volkova, (2002). Magnetorheological fluids. J. 
Magn. Magn. Mater., 252, 224. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 13


Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical
Applications 
NAMITHA BINU,1
 RUBY VARGHESE,2
 and YOGESH B. DALVI1 
1
Pushpagiri Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Center, Tiruvalla, 
Pathanamthitta, Kerala, India 
2
Department of Chemistry, School of Sciences, Jain Deemed to be University, 
Bangalore, Karnataka, India 
ABSTRACT 
Nanomedicine introduced various novel materials for the delivery of drugs as 
well as applications in CT scans and MRI, PET, and CT, where its legitimacy 
is directly proportional to its molecular signatures. Magnetic nanoparticles 
(MNPs) have now been believed to have magical properties, which have gained 
a wide interest present time and have impacted nanomedicine biosensing 
and analytical chemistry fields. The modification and functionalization 
of MNPs with various kinds of ligands of biomolecules have already been 
exploited. The application of magnetic particles can be easily observed in 
the microscopic manipulation of Nanosized and micro-objects. Manipulating 
these particles needs immense care, especially on their immunogenicity and 
biocompatibility, as these are applied in procedures covering from catalysis 
to delivery of drugs and healing. Appropriate layering and also particle 
coating with suitable agents can alleviate this hurdle. This chapter describes 
the general characteristics of MNPs, information regarding their physical 
and chemical designs, and various factors that are to be taken care of when 
dealing with the preparation of “MNPs” for biomedical applications. MNPs 
Find their profound use in theranostics platforms for diagnosis and as an 206 Modern Magnetic Materials 
interventional modality in disease management. Nanocomposites, such as 
magnetic liposomes, magnetic hydrogels, and magnetic dendrimers, have 
improved the premature burst release of loaded drugs and increased targeting 
efficacy. Even the most dreaded disease, cancer, could be fought by making use 
of the principles of ‘Magnetic hyperthermia-assisted apoptosis and necrosis. 
These potent magnetically driven delivery systems can facilitate quick and 
versatile site-specific delivery of biotherapeutic interventions, which include 
therapeutic viruses, cell-based therapies, and nucleic acid and protein delivery. 
Many stringent maladies could be grappled with the synergistic effect of 
localized magnetic hyperthermia and can pinpoint targeted drug delivery to 
diseased sites, entitling it as a cutting-edge technology. 
13.1 INTRODUCTION 
Nanomedicine has adopted the principle of induction of kinetic motion 
through magnetism, a theory that had a profound stance in physics and 
chemistry. It also has found a vehement role in biology that enabled to stretch 
conventional biology far beyond towards arenas of nanotechnology due to 
the multidimensional roles played by the so-called Magnetic nanoparticles 
(MNPs). These magic particles have greatly impacted the fields of analytical 
chemistry, biosensing, drug delivery, and biomedical diagnostic research. 
MNPs or microparticles used in the diagnosis and treatment of diseases are 
as follows: 
•

 Magnetic segregation of biological entities in diagnostic research; 
•

 Magnetic nano-carriers as drug delivery systems; 
•

 Magnetic nanoparticles in cancer therapy which are RF (radiofre￾quency controlled); 
•

 “MRI” or “magnetic resonance imaging” applications. 
The functionalization along with modification of MNPs with various kinds 
of ligands of biomolecules have been already exploited. Innate molecular 
configuration of the novel micro-sized objects introduced in nanomedicine for 
drug delivery and applications has got its fingerprints in molecular imaging, 
making it readily detectable for analysis. Proper layering and coating of 
particles make them biocompatible and less immunogenic. Magnetic particles 
have found their applications ranging from catalysis to drug delivery and 
remediation. Also, its activity spectrum ranging from catalysis, drug delivery, 
and antidotal qualities are warranted. Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications 207 
To achieve a fast progress in this area of study and the prospects into 
the limelight, it is very essential to work on challenges connected with the 
design, synthesis, and characterization of the MNP [1]. 
Previously, MNP synthesis was a pivotal step in all research connected 
to ameliorating their properties and testing their realistic utilization. 
Currently, many of these nanomaterials are extensively used commercially. 
MNPs comprise a magnetic material (such as iron, cobalt, and nickel) with 
a chemical component. These are the class of nanoparticles that can be 
modulated and set into a magnetic field. MNPs are composed of magnetic 
nanobeads of diameter 50–200 nm exhibiting superparamagnetic nature. 
13.2 PHYSICAL DESIGN 
The size of MNPs is one of the major physical properties that could be applied 
to tailor other properties such as surface area and magnetism. Control over 
size synthesis of iron oxide NPs has been examined by many scientists [2, 3]. 
The fate of a cell can be controlled by manipulating cell signaling at 
the molecular level which can be achieved by driving a mechanical force 
inside the cell. The “magnetic force” can be applied for the movement 
and transportation of biological entities. The decisive magnetic properties 
harvested as a result of externally controlled hyperthermia or heat-induced 
by generated magnetic fields were used in: 
• Applications of drug release; 
• Disease treatment; and 
• Remote of single-cell function control [5, 6]. 
MNPs are steadier and more flexible as single-domain structures 
deployed in conditions that pass the “Curie” temperature and are therefore 
super-paramagnetic (SPNs) or SPNs nanoparticles show several desirable 
characteristics, such as “low remanence” and “coercivity,” coupled with 
“high magnetic susceptibility.” 
The particles are coated to produce a stable system. The “surface charge” 
plays an important role in maintaining repulsion between particles; however, 
it is very important to optimize the ratio of inert to reactive compounds on the 
surface to ensure the colloidal stability of the NPs. For example, despite iron 
fabricated MNPs showing a higher level of magnetic characteristics, they 
must be coated to protect themselves from oxidation. Gold fabricated MNPs 
show desired magnetic and optical characteristics. Platinum fabricated MNP 208 Modern Magnetic Materials 
acts as a great contrast agent for “magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)” and 
“X-ray” computed tomography or “CT.” Meanwhile, porous MNPs have 
obviously the same characteristics as solid NPs, yet they offer the additional 
opportunity to store and release drugs. 
13.3 CHEMICAL DESIGN 
The stratagem involved in the functionalization of the MNP reports the use of 
oligonucleotides and antibodies, for example, in the treatment of cancer cells 
by hyperthermia and magneto-liposomes or by the integration of inorganic 
materials with other nanocomponents like quantum dots [4]. 
Covalent and non-covalent modification opens up a modern view of 
addressing the chemical designing of a particle’s surface, with the objective 
of drug delivery [5]. The former is functional to avoid “cancer drug resis￾tance” and “therapeutic side effects.” Non-covalent modifications have been 
explored but successful drug delivery was reported using conjugate drugs 
to “magnetic nanoparticles” via hydrophobic interaction [6], electrostatic 
interactions [7], and coordination chemistry [8]. During the design process, 
it is quite important to consider the strength of the “binding interactions” 
and the “collective strength” of these compounds with various other interac￾tions at the same time. Much of the current works on “MNPs” is focused 
on studying such interactions for the design and “innovation” of novel and 
desirable “functions” [9] (Figure 13.1). 
FIGURE 13.1 Structure of magnetic particle and their coating. Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications 209 
Any drug delivery system (DDS) whether polymeric or based on magnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles (MIONs), must satisfy several common criteria. 
Specifically, a DDS must: 
•

 Avoid nonspecific interactions with the body cells or the induction of 
unpropitious reactions and avoid capture by macrophages. 
•

 Facilitate the biologically active molecules-BAM’s (like genes, enzymes, 
drugs, proteins, or nucleotides) transport to the site of action (organ, 
tissue, cell, or organelle) from the site of administration in a high yield 
while keeping the BAM in a safe (inactive) state during transport. 
•

 Protect the BAM from detrimental effects during transport like enzy￾matic degradation and hydrolysis in the body. 
•

 Release effective quantities of active BAM in or around the target in 
a controlled fashion such that a desired tissue/cell concentration is 
achieved. 
•

 Total elimination of all components of the DDS from an organism 
after the carrier function is fulfilled [10]. 
Each DDS offers its own set of specific solutions. Some of these are 
routine, but others are quite unique and depend on the details of the carrier’s 
structure and architecture. Some DDS are better suited to covalent drug 
conjugation (e.g., polymer-drug conjugates or single magnetic nanocrystals) 
and some to noncovalent approaches (e.g., polymer NPs or magnetic nano￾clusters). Broadly speaking, these approaches apply to diverse kinds of DDS 
for cancer treatment including MNPs and nanoclusters as well as polymer￾drug conjugates, polymer micelles, and polymer NPs. Other polymer-based 
drug delivery systems such as nonmodified and polymer-modified liposomes 
(one of a few DDS to have been extensively clinically tested and approved 
for clinical use) [11]. 
MNPs can be synthesized in various sizes with a “submicron diameter” 
and with the same composition, e.g., according to the work published by 
Grasset et al. [12] (Figure 13.2). 
Mn–Zn ferrite MNPs were prepared through coprecipitation and are used 
for the heat-inducible gene expression method and the surface of particles 
was covered by polyethyleneimine (PEI) (polyaziridine) [13]. 
Zinc-substituted ferrite nanoparticles Zn0.9 Fe2
O4 Fe synthesized by a 0.1
polyol method were used for heating glioma cells on hyperthermia assay [14]. 
The potential “toxicity” and their “chemical instability” have partially 
limited the biological applications of metallic iron NPs. Metal alloy based or 
Bimetallic MNPs is another propitious nanomaterial with superparamagnetic 
properties attractive for MRI. 210 Modern Magnetic Materials 
FIGURE 13.2 Outline of synthesis of magnetic nanoparticle. 
Iron-platinum (FePt) NPs useful for bio-medical applications have been 
prepared by different methods, such as solution-phase synthesis or vacuum 
deposition [15]. 
The “reduction” of platinum acetylacetonate and “decomposition” of 
Fe(CO)5
 while using oleic acid and oleyl amine as stabilizers enhances the 
preparation of monodispersed and size tenable Fe–Pt NPs [16]. 
Such NPs were stable in a “cell culture medium” or phosphate-buffered 
saline and exhibit the ability of DNA and protein binding. 
Carboxylate- and amine-based surfactants improve the water solubility 
of Fe–Pt NPs by aiding in surface modification [17]. 
Furthermore, FePt NPs can be encapsulated with shells based on cobalt 
sulfide (FePt@CoS2
). Such NPs exhibit cytotoxicity towards cancer cells 
[18, 19]. 
Biocompatibility of FePt NPs can be increased by covering it with a gold 
shell (FePt/Au) [20]. There are references for works coating gold with FePt 
NPs that were synthesized from a “High-Temperature” solution phase by the 
simultaneous reduction of platinum(II) acetylacetonate and decomposition 
of Fe(CO)5
 in octyl ether solvent. Other types of binary metallic nano-alloys 
with advantageous “magnetic properties” are the NPs containing iron and 
cobalt [21]. 
These NPs are formed by a “physical” or “chemical” vapor deposition 
process (Fe12Co88, Fe40Co60, and Fe60Co40). These require gold, silver, or Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications 211 
graphitic protective coating to impede oxidation based on studies presented 
in [22, 23]. 
Gadolinium iron garnet particles were reported to be prepared from two 
techniques: ‘Gd3
Fe5
O preparation.’ 12
i.

 Pyrolysis of aerosol spray; and 
ii.

 Drying the precursor solutions gives a crispy product that is 
mechanically grounded then dried and this was further subjected to 
pyrolysis [24]. 
13.4 BIOMEDICINE FIELD 
As therapeutic agent, magnetic particles possess several applications— 
hyperthermia, drug, and “DNA” delivery exploiting magnetic field guiding 
and MRI. In modern medicine, the local increase of tumor tissue temperature 
(hyperthermia) is extensively accepted as an effective adjunctive cancer 
therapy as indicated in Ref. [25]. 
Prevalent ways to increase tissue temperature to the required level using 
“RFM” (radio frequency microwave) or “laser wavelengths” were proposed. 
Hyperthermia is in agreement with the fact that the cells heated to a tempera￾ture greater than 42°C show signs of apoptosis and cells heated above 50C 
show necrosis [26]. Despite this, there is an ambiguous understanding of the 
optimum temperature that should be switched on for acquiring temperature 
homogeneity in the target tissue. Physiological conditions like local perfu￾sion variations render the situation more challenging [27]. A higher rate of 
metabolism greater will be the cancer cell’s susceptibility to heat than normal 
cells [28]. On a tissue level, disorganized vasculature and decreased ability 
to dissipate heat are observed in tumor cells. 
Radiation therapy or chemotherapy finds its effectiveness of cellular 
sensitivity amidst elevated temperatures. Regarding other methods, magnetic 
particle hyperthermia enables local heating of the target tissue by embedding 
“Magnetic Particles” to the target tissue and by using a “Magnetic Field” 
externally to heat it. “Magnetic Particles” are directly injected within the 
tumor body or in the artery furnishing the tumor. “Magnetic Particles” can 
now be visualized using MRI, as a result of which both diagnosis and combi￾nation therapies could be possible. 
The potential for using MNPs as contrast enhancers in MR imaging is 
now a topic of research due to the detailed results and minimal irradiation 
impact [63, 64]. 212 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Visualizing the uptake of the cell line (head and neck cell lines) is made 
especially easy by magnetic iron nanoparticles called as ‘SPIONS’ and, both 
MRI and MPI (magnetic particle imaging) began to employ them extensively. 
Surface modification of such particles is vital to hamper them from 
aggregation. Surface modification of “Magnetic Particles” effects their 
magnetization and “Specific Absorption Rate” (which measured in W·kg–1), 
the most important property for practical use (“the higher the specific 
absorption rate, the lower the injected dose to the patient”). It has been seen 
that the specific absorption rate of “Magnetic Particles” decreases by several 
tens of percent when it was modified with SiO2
 according to the studies 
reported in Ref. [29]. 
The shape of “Magnetic Particles” also plays an important role during 
hyperthermia. In the case of ellipsoidal NPs, heat release is increased due to 
the additional anisotropy shape and dynamic reorientation of rods [30]. 
It was shown that using a “micro-tumor-like” environment that in 
comparison with exogenous hyperthermia magnetic hyperthermia requires 
approximately 6C lower target temperature to produce same the cell death 
effect and exhibit more significant cytotoxic effects according to the results 
observed in Ref. [31]. Meanwhile, it should be noted that the heat is generated 
because of the friction of particles due to their oscillation and due to the 
particle’s magnetic moment rotation owing to an alternating magnetic field. 
On the other hand, “photo-thermal therapy” based on NPs with strong 
plasmonic properties was explored as an alternative to “Magnetic Hyper￾thermia.” The enhanced heating ability is reached by a successful combina￾tion of plasmonic, and “magnetic properties” called “hybrid multifunctional,” 
and MPPs or magnetic/photonic particles are based on “magnetic particles” 
decorated with Au or Ag NPs (or vice versa) based on the research studies 
presented in Refs. [32, 33]. 
The absorption spectrum of Au and Ag NPs absorbs strongly in the 
Vis-NIR region and heating is induced by SPR. Meanwhile, Au provides 
promising surface chemistry for modifications, and in the case of Au presence 
in shells protects NPs against external agents. On the other hand, the synergic 
effects of heating can be easily enhanced using the loading of MMPPs with 
chemotherapeutic agents according to the research studies presented in detail 
in Ref. [34]. 
Systemic drug administration is troublesome in current medicine, 
especially in the case of drugs exhibiting cytotoxic effects like “cytostatic 
drugs.” The large doses needed to obtain a sufficient drug concentration 
within the pathological site and low drug specificity towards the target Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications 213 
causes objectionable treatment side effects based on the report presented in 
Ref. [35]. Meanwhile, “site-specific drug delivery” is a commonly accepted 
mechanism to obviate such complications. “Magnetic” targeting (drug 
immobilized on “Magnetic” materials and targeting it using a “Magnetic” 
field) is one possibility in this field. For such applications, the size, charge, 
and surface chemistry of particles are important since they influence blood 
circulation time and bioavailability. “Magnetic” particles (10–100 nm) are 
the most suitable for intravenous injection and perform the most prolonged 
bloodstream circulation time as it is reported in Ref. [36]. 
It is worth mentioning that particles of size higher than 200 nm are 
removed from the bloodstream by mechanical filtration in the spleen and 
eventually by the phagocyte system. Smaller particles of size <10 nm is 
rapidly removed by extravasation and renal clearance. Not only the surface 
of “Magnetic,” but the surface of all colloidal particles influences their fate 
within living organisms. The stability of materials in physiological condi￾tions is complicated by the presence of proteins and high ion concentration 
based on studies presented in Ref. [37]. For example, the adsorption of coun￾terions can screen the repulsive surface charge of particles and decrease their 
stability. In addition, it is well known that proteins adsorb to solid materials. 
According to Ref. [37], in the case of colloidal particles, the title protein 
corona is being used. 
However, the biological fluids are so complicated that the reason for 
particles instability can hardly be ascertained. Particle aggregation can make 
treatment ineffective or can cause negative health effects, so surface modi￾fication which makes magnetic particles stable in physiological conditions 
is a highly researched area. Innumerable preparation techniques of magnetic 
particle and their functionalization procedures were reported, but particles 
coated with polysaccharides or silica were only the two types of particles 
that entered clinical trials readily [38, 39]. 
Further, polymeric compounds should be sequestered from the immune 
system. PEG is one among them since it is biocompatible, uncharged, and 
hydrophilic, possesses low toxicity and immunogenicity, and can be prepared 
with a wide range of terminal functional groups and sizes. Other polymers 
like chitosan (CS) or PEI were also used [40, 41]. 
Sufficiently modified magnetic particles mostly exhibit no side effects on 
cell viability [42]. Targeting drug delivery can be based on active-passive or 
physical targeting. Magnetic particles can be used in all approaches. In the 
case of physical targeting, magnetic particles can be localized in the desired 
place by an external magnetic field; however, a low ability to recognize 
specific tissues is evident. 214 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Passive targeting is based on specific properties of a drug or its carrier 
and differences between a target site and a healthy site. Typically, enhanced 
permeability and retention effect (EPR effect) can enhance localization of 
drug/carrier complex in tumors due to disrupted vasculature. Active targeting 
is based on transfiguring target material with target-specific biomolecules, 
which increase the probability of its uptake by specific cells. 
•

 Targeted drug delivery based on magnetic particles was reported by 
Huang et al. [43]. The proposed magnetic particles were modified 
with two polymers PEG and PEI. These could conjugate targeting 
ligand for receptors overexpressed on cancer cells—folic acid in this 
case—and to interact with negatively charged cell membranes. 
•

 The acidic environment of tumors caused polymer’s protonation and 
drug release, so drugs modified with doxorubicin by manipulating 
the electrostatic attraction and hydrogen bonds find their application. 
•

 Reports are suggesting pH-responsive behavior for γ-Fe2
O3
 particles 
modified with porous silica using rhodamine B as a reporter [44]. 
•

 Magnetic targeting of Paclitaxel, an anti-cancer drug sparingly soluble 
in water can be stabilized by a carrier based on l-arginine and human 
serum albumin [42]. 
•

 Therapeutic delivery of nucleic acids into a patient’s cells as an alterna￾tive to drugs is of importance currently. However, low cell membrane 
translocation efficiency, short in vivo half-time, and poor cell-specific 
targeting complicate its wider application. 
•

 miRNAs are short non-coding RNA molecules that interact with target 
mRNAs to down-regulate or inhibit translation. This field is highly 
investigated for the delivery of microRNA (miRNA). Enhanced 
apoptosis of cancer cells is induced by the combined effect of hyper￾thermia and miRNA delivery by magnetic particles. They target heat 
shock proteins Hsp70 and Hsp90 which protect cellular proteins from 
degradation and hinder hyperthermia-induced apoptosis [45]. 
13.5 USE OF MNPS IN MOLECULAR IMAGING 
It is observed that “magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)” is one of the most 
important diagnostic tools in medical science due to its soft tissue contrast 
and high spatial resolution. It mostly uses the “Magnetic Properties” of 
hydrogen and its interaction with “Magnetic Fields” and radio waves (like 
nuclear magnetic resonance or NMR) to produce images of living organisms. Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications 215 
There is a high abundance of hydrogen in tissues (approximately 63%) 
signifies “Magnetic Moments.” The contrast in images is obtained due to 
different molecular structures and hydrogen densities in tissues which are 
responsible for specific proton behavior in “Magnetic Fields” that enable 
observation of it. It is noteworthy that without contrast agents in most tissues, 
it is difficult to obtain information-rich images. There are two main groups 
of contrast agents—chelated lanthanide or transition metal ions (Gd3+, Mn2+) 
and “Paramagnetic Particles.” Iron oxide “Magnetic Particles” are the most 
frequently used “magnetic-particle-based” contrast agents. Requirements for 
MRI contrast agents are: 
• they need to improve contrast (induce large fluctuating magnetic fields); 
• should be biocompatible; 
• should provide a desirable surface for targeting therapeutic molecules. 
The advantage of “Magnetic Particles” is that their biocompatibility has 
been highly explored based on the results reported in Ref. [45]. 
Physiologic iron metabolism is responsible for the degradation of MNPs. In 
addition, due to their ‘superparamagnetic’ properties, iron oxide MNPs strongly 
distort magnetic fields and create contrast when exceeding their physical size. 
The current trend in medical research is to bridge desired properties for inter￾ventions to obtain diagnostic and therapeutic (shortened as theranostic) tools. 
A convenient example is magnetic particles where drug delivery combined 
with hyperthermia or MRI is customary. The phenomenon of magnetism provides 
easy, fast, and cost-effective separation of targets. The list of targets is broad 
and is not limited since several biological and physics-chemical approaches for 
target binding on magnetic materials are available. Beyond this magnetic mate￾rial can serve as therapeutic agent carriers, magnetic hyperthermia treatment 
(MHT) of malignancies, and MRI contrast agents for diagnosis. 
13.6 MNPs AND TARGETED DRUG DELIVERY 
Innate specificities of MNPs make these procedures significant practices in 
modern clinical interventions [46]. 
13.6.1 USE OF MNPS WITH THERAPEUTIC VIRUSES 
Therapeutic viruses especially the adenoviruses had played a profound role 
in cancer therapy as a powerful gene-delivery system [47]. The hurdle faced 216 Modern Magnetic Materials 
with the use of adenoviruses was their low transfection efficiency and non￾specific immune responses of the body which impedes the viable virus-based 
interventions in the clinical arena. The main problem encountered with such 
treatments is the degradation of these vector viruses by the body’s immune 
cells. Conjugation of adenoviral particles to MNPs employing electrostatic 
interactions guards the virus against inactivation against the defender cells 
of the body. 
Magnetofection is the process by which the application of an external 
magnetic field aids the virus conjugated MNPs to site targeted gene transfec￾tion [48]. SPNs in complex with adenovirus particles have a higher transfec￾tion rate than compared adenovirus particles lacking SPN functionalization 
[49]. The potential use of therapeutic viruses has given attractive results 
authenticating paving the way to developing techniques that can use viruses’ 
clinical interventions [50]. 
13.6.2 USE OF MNPS WITH NUCLEAR AND PROTEIN DELIVERY 
Cellular uptake is the key factor that plays a major role in Nucleic acid and 
protein-based treatments. In the light of issues like viral safety, the require￾ment of high-end machinery, higher cost of production, inconsistent use of 
non-viral vectors, MNPs are resourceful and highly sought after. In-vitro 
studies using silencing RNA molecules (siRNA) and functional MNPs are 
gaining interest due to their suppressing gene regulation action [51]. Magnec￾tofection was used by Ref. [52] had conjugated polyethylenimine-coated 
MNPs and plasmid DNA expressing short-hairpin RNA with lipofectamine 
targeting Type 1 insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF-1R), that recorded 
2-fold higher gene suppression rate after 72 hrs. incubation time. 
SPNs are also promising vectors for nucleic acid-based vaccines [53]. A 
nucleic acid–base vaccine that encoded for the Plasmodium yoelii merozoite 
surface protein (MSP119) was able to transfect African green monkey kidney 
cells at a higher rate than comparable chemical-based methods in vitro. 
Moreover, the delivery of therapeutic proteins promoting their deposition at 
target sites has been mediated SPNs [54, 56, 57]. 
Cancer cells are inhibited by two peptides named Cathelicidin LL-37 
(CLL-37) and chlorotoxin (from Leiurus quinquestriatus) [58]. In vitro 
experiments showed that chlorotoxin-coated SPNs significantly reduced the 
proliferation of glioma cells by 98% compared to free chlorotoxin, which 
predominantly inhibited cell growth by 48%. The magnetic driven tech￾nology will soon be deployed in near future. Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications 217 
13.6.3 USE OF MNPS WITH CELL-BASED THERAPIES 
Cell-based therapies along with stem cell research are great interventions 
for life-threatening conditions, such as ischemia [59]. Cell transplantation 
faces a serious drawback of poor cell retention that comes in the way of cell 
transplantation procedures. Graft retention and subsequent gene transfection 
have been improved by conjugating the MNPs on the surface of stem cells 
and immune cells. 
A research work done by Kyrtatos et al. [60] in an in-vivo demonstrated 
the delivery of human CD133+
 endothelial progenitor cells to sites of vascular 
injury to male Sprague-Dawley rats Human CD133+
 were successfully 
delivered to sites of vascular injury to male Sprague-Dawley rats CD133+ 
cell engraftment was increased to 5.4 fold, reduced restenosis, and fewer 
incidences of scar tissue formation was observed. This was done by the 
application of an external magnetic field accumulating MNPs at sites of cath￾eterization. More recent works were done on female Wistar Kyoto rats that 
were injected with nanoparticle labeled cardiospheres. The results showed 
4-fold higher cell retention in 24 hr. period and 3-week period [61]. Host 
cells can be made super magnetic as they can enhance molecular mimesis 
by adhering SNPs to immune cells, thereby stimulating the endocytosis of 
MNPs by cells of interest [62]. 
13.7 CONCLUSION 
The emergence of therapeutics based on nanoparticulate polymer and iron 
oxide drug carriers is currently evolving. These comprise magnetic nano￾clusters, single-crystal NPs, polymer-drug conjugates, sophisticated stimuli￾responsive systems, polymerosomes, micelles, dendritic polymer-carriers, 
polymer-coated liposomes, magnetoliposomes, and niosomes, nanocapsules, 
and nanoemulsions, nanorobots, and other diagnostic devices. Clinical devel￾opment of polymer conjugates and other organic or inorganic Drug Delivery 
systems and their evaluation are augmenting biomedical interventions. PEG 
conjugates and surface-modified nanomedicines in combination with other 
hydrophilic polymers and novel biodegradable polymer systems. Together, 
these advancing technologies have consummated the development and 
exploration of new polymer-based therapeutic concepts for cancer treatment 
including combination therapies and new vectors for the delivery of siRNA, 
genes, and other oligonucleotides. As of now, there are still limitations to 218 Modern Magnetic Materials 
the use of “MNPs” as a therapeutic agent. But the extensive research data 
demonstrated in myriad studies show the versatility of MNPs as a profound 
agent for clinical interventions and diagnosis in the near future. 
KEYWORDS 
• biocompatibility 
• drug delivery system 
• enhanced permeability 
• hyperthermia 
• magnetic nanoparticles 
• molecular imaging 
• retention effect 
REFERENCES 
1. Mahmoudi, M., Sant, S., Wang, B., Laurent, S., & Sen, T., (2011). Superparamagnetic 
iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs): Development, surface modification and applications 
in chemotherapy. Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews, 63(1, 2), 24–46. 
2.

Sun, S., & Zeng, H., (2002). Size-controlled synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 124(28), 8204, 8205. 
3.

Sun, S., Zeng, H., Robinson, D. B., Raoux, S., Rice, P. M., Wang, S. X., & Li, G., 
(2004). Monodisperse MFe2
O4
 (M= Fe, Co, Mn) nanoparticles. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society, 126(1), 273–279. 
4. Lee, J. H., Jang, J. T., Choi, J. S., Moon, S. H., Noh, S. H., Kim, J. W., Kim, J. G., et al., 
(2011). Exchange-coupled magnetic nanoparticles for efficient heat induction. Nature 
Nanotechnology, 6(7), 418. 
5. Yoo, D., Lee, J. H., Shin, T. H., & Cheon, J., (2011). Theranostic magnetic nanoparticles. 
Accounts of Chemical Research, 44(10), 863–874. 
6. Gao, J., Gu, H., & Xu, B., (2009). Multifunctional magnetic nanoparticles: Design, 
synthesis, and biomedical applications. Accounts of Chemical Research, 42(8), 1097–1107. 
7.

Ulbrich, K., Hola, K., Subr, V., Bakandritsos, A., Tucek, J., & Zboril, R., (2016). Targeted 
drug delivery with polymers and magnetic nanoparticles: Covalent and noncovalent 
approaches, release control, and clinical studies. Chemical Reviews, 116(9), 5338–5431. 
8. Tietze, R., Lyer, S., Dürr, S., Struffert, T., Engelhorn, T., Schwarz, M., Eckert, E., et 
al., (2013). Efficient drug-delivery using magnetic nanoparticles—Biodistribution and 
therapeutic effects in tumor bearing rabbits. Nanomedicine: Nanotechnology, Biology 
and Medicine, 9(7), 961–971. Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications

 219 
9. Yu, M. K., Jeong, Y. Y., Park, J., Park, S., Kim, J. W., Min, J. J., Kim, K., & Jon, S., (2008). 
Drug-loaded superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles for combined cancer imaging 
and therapy in vivo. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 47(29), 5362–5365. 
10. Gautier, J., Allard-Vannier, E., Burlaud-Gaillard, J., Domenech, J., & Chourpa, I., (2015). 
Efficacy and hemotoxicity of stealth doxorubicin-loaded magnetic nanovectors on breast 
cancer xenografts. Journal of Biomedical Nanotechnology, 11(1), 177–189. 
11. Pillai, G., (2014). Nanomedicines for cancer therapy: An update of FDA approved 
and those under various stages of development. SOJ Pharm. Pharm. Sci., 1(2), 13. 
Nanomedicines for cancer therapy: An update of FDA approved and those under various 
stages of development. 
12. Grasset, F., Mornet, S., Demour
⩽ ⩽
gues, A., Portier, J., Bonnet, J., Vekris, A., & Duguet, E., 
(2001). Synthesis, magnetic properties, surface modification and cytotoxicity evaluation 
of Y3
Fe − Al O (0 5 x x 12 x 2) garnet submicron particles for biomedical applications. 
Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 234(3), 409–418. 
13.

Tang, Q. S., Zhang, D. S., Cong, X. M., Wan, M. L., & Jin, L. Q., (2008). Using thermal 
energy produced by irradiation of Mn–Zn ferrite magnetic nanoparticles (MZF-NPs) for 
heat-inducible gene expression. Biomaterials, 29(17), 2673–2679. 
14. Hanini, A., Lartigue, L., Gavard, J., Kacem, K., Wilhelm, C., Gazeau, F., Chau, F., & 
Ammar, S., (2016). Zinc substituted ferrite nanoparticles with Zn0.9Fe2.1O4
 formula used
as heating agents for in vitro hyperthermia assay on glioma cells. Journal of Magnetism 
and Magnetic Materials, 416, 315–320. 
15. Sun, S., (2006). Recent advances in chemical synthesis, self-assembly, and applications 
of FePt nanoparticles. Advanced Materials, 18(4), 393–403. 
16. Sun, S., Murray, C. B., Weller, D., Folks, L., & Moser, A., (2000). Monodisperse FePt 
nanoparticles and ferromagnetic FePt nanocrystal superlattices. Science, 287(5460), 
1989–1992. 
17. Hong, R., Fischer, N. O., Emrick, T., & Rotello, V. M., (2005). Surface PEGylation and 
ligand exchange chemistry of FePt nanoparticles for biological applications. Chemistry 
of Materials, 17(18), 4617–4621. 
18.

Gao, J., Zhang, B., Gao, Y., Pan, Y., Zhang, X., & Xu, B., (2007). Fluorescent magnetic 
nanocrystals by sequential addition of reagents in a one-pot reaction: A simple preparation 
for multifunctional nanostructures. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 129(39), 
11928–11935. 
19.

Gao, J., Liang, G., Zhang, B., Kuang, Y., Zhang, X., & Xu, B., (2007). FePt@ CoS2 
yolk− shell nanocrystals as a potent agent to kill HeLa cells. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society, 129(5), 1428–1433. 
20. De La Presa, P., Multigner, M., Morales, M. P., Rueda, T., Fernandez-Pinel, E., & 
Hernando, A., (2007). Synthesis and characterization of FePt/Au core-shell nanoparticles. 
Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 316(2), e753–755. 
21. Reiss, G., Brueckl, H., Huetten, A., Schotter, J., Brzeska, M., Panhorst, M., Sudfeld, D., 
et al., (2005). Magnetoresistive sensors and magnetic nanoparticles for biotechnology. 
Journal of Materials Research, 20(12), 3294–3302. 
22.

Bai, J., & Wang, J. P., (2005). High-magnetic-moment core-shell-type FeCo–Au∕ Ag 
nanoparticles. Applied Physics Letters, 87(15), 152502. 
23.

Seo, W. S., Lee, J. H., Sun, X., Suzuki, Y., Mann, D., Liu, Z., Terashima, M., et al., 
(2006). FeCo/graphitic-shell nanocrystals as advanced magnetic-resonance-imaging 
and near-infrared agents. Nature Materials, 5(12), 971. 220 Modern Magnetic Materials 
24. Xu, H. K., Sorensen, C. M., Klabunde, K. J., & Hadjipanayis, G. C., (1992). Aerosol 
synthesis of gadolinium iron garnet particles. Journal of Materials Research, 7(3), 712–716. 
25. Issa, B., Obaidat, I. M., Albiss, B. A., & Haik, Y., (2013). Magnetic nanoparticles: 
Surface effects and properties related to biomedicine applications. International Journal 
of Molecular Sciences, 14(11), 21266–21305. 
26. Milleron, R. S., & Bratton, S. B., (2007). ‘Heated’ debates in apoptosis. Cellular and 
Molecular Life Sciences, 64(18), 2329–2333. 
27. Wust, P., Hildebrandt, B., Sreenivasa, G., Rau, B., Gellermann, J., Riess, H., Felix, R., 
& Schlag, P. M., (2002). Hyperthermia in combined treatment of cancer. The Lancet 
Oncology, 3(8), 487–497. 
28.

Huff, T. B., Tong, L., Zhao, Y., Hansen, M. N., Cheng, J. X., & Wei, A., (2007). 
Hyperthermic Effects of Gold Nanorods on Tumor Cells, 125–132. 
29. Larumbe, S., Gomez-Polo, C., Pérez-Landazábal, J. I., & Pastor, J. M., (2012). Effect 
of a SiO2
 coating on the magnetic properties of Fe3
O4
 nanoparticles. Journal of Physics: 
Condensed Matter, 24(26), 266007. 
30. Simeonidis, K., Morales, M. P., Marciello, M., Angelakeris, M., De La Presa, P., Lazaro￾Carrillo, A., Tabero, A., et al., (2016). In-situ particles reorientation during magnetic 
hyperthermia application: Shape matters twice. Scientific Reports, 6, 38382. 
31. Sanz, B., Calatayud, M. P., Torres, T. E., Fanarraga, M. L., Ibarra, M. R., & Goya, 
G. F., (2017). Magnetic hyperthermia enhances cell toxicity with respect to exogenous 
heating. Biomaterials, 114, 62–70. 
32.

Das, R., Rinaldi-Montes, N., Alonso, J., Amghouz, Z., Garaio, E., García, J. A., 
Gorria, P., et al., (2016). Boosted hyperthermia therapy by combined AC magnetic and 
photothermal exposures in Ag/Fe3
O4
 nanoflowers. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 
8(38), 25162–25169. 
33. Lai, J. J., Lai, W. R., Chen, C. Y., Chen, S. W., & Chiang, C. L., (2013). Multifunctional 
magnetic plasmonic nanoparticles for applications of magnetic/photo-thermal hyper￾thermia and surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic 
Materials, 331, 204–207. 
34. Balasubramanian, S., Girija, A. R., Nagaoka, Y., Fukuda, T., Iwai, S., Kizhikkilot, V., 
Kato, K., et al., (2015). An ‘all in one’ approach for simultaneous chemotherapeutic, 
photothermal and magnetic hyperthermia mediated by hybrid magnetic nanoparticles. 
RSC Advances, 5(32), 25066–25078. 
35. Verstappen, C. C., Heimans, J. J., Hoekman, K., & Postma, T. J., (2003). Neurotoxic 
complications of chemotherapy in patients with cancer. Drugs, 63(15), 1549–1563. 
36. Gupta, A. K., & Gupta, M., (2005). Synthesis and surface engineering of iron oxide 
nanoparticles for biomedical applications. Biomaterials, 26(18), 3995–4021. 
37.

Nissinen, T., Nä kki, S., Laakso, H., Kuč iauskas, D., Kaupinis, A., Kettunen, M. I., 
Liimatainen, T., et al., (2016). Tailored dual PEGylation of inorganic porous nanocarriers 
for extremely long blood circulation in vivo. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 8(48), 
32723–32731. 
38.

Karimi, Z., Karimi, L., & Shokrollahi, H., (2013). Nano-magnetic particles used in 
biomedicine: Core and coating materials. Materials Science and Engineering: C, 33(5), 
2465–2475. 
39. McBain, S. C., Griesenbach, U., Xenariou, S., Keramane, A., Batich, C. D., Alton, E. 
W., & Dobson, J., (2008). Magnetic nanoparticles as gene delivery agents: Enhanced 
transfection in the presence of oscillating magnet arrays. Nanotechnology, 19(40), 405102. Magnetic Nanoparticles in Biomedical Applications 221 
40. Patil, R. M., Shete, P. B., Thorat, N. D., Otari, S. V., Barick, K. C., Prasad, A., Ningthoujam, 
R. S., et al., (2014). Superparamagnetic iron oxide/chitosan core/shells for hyperthermia 
application: Improved colloidal stability and biocompatibility. Journal of Magnetism and 
Magnetic Materials, 355, 22–30. 
41.

Sattarahmady, N., Azarpira, N., Hosseinpour, A., Heli, H., & Zare, T., (2016). Albumin 
coated arginine-capped magnetite nanoparticles as a paclitaxel vehicle: Physicochemical 
characterizations and in vitro evaluation. Journal of Drug Delivery Science and 
Technology, 36, 68–74. 
42.

Huang, Y., Mao, K., Zhang, B., & Zhao, Y., (2017). Superparamagnetic iron oxide 
nanoparticles conjugated with folic acid for dual target-specific drug delivery and MRI 
in cancer theranostics. Materials Science and Engineering: C., 70, 763–771. 
43.

Li, L., Zhang, R., Guo, Y., Zhang, C., Zhao, W., Xu, Z., & Whittaker, A. K., (2016). 
Functional magnetic porous silica for T 1–T 2 dual-modal magnetic resonance imaging 
and pH-responsive drug delivery of basic drugs. Nanotechnology, 27(48), 485702. 
44. Yin, P. T., Shah, B. P., & Lee, K. B., (2014). Combined magnetic nanoparticle-based 
microRNA and hyperthermia therapy to enhance apoptosis in brain cancer cells. Small, 
10(20), 4106–4112. 
45. Miyagawa, T., Saito, H., Minamiya, Y., Mitobe, K., Takashima, S., Takahashi, N., Ito, 
A., et al., (2014). Inhibition of Hsp90 and 70 sensitizes melanoma cells to hyperthermia 
using ferromagnetic particles with a low curie temperature. International Journal of 
Clinical Oncology, 19(4), 722–730. 
46. Arami, H., Khandhar, A., Liggitt, D., & Krishnan, K. M., (2015). In vivo delivery, 
pharmacokinetics, biodistribution and toxicity of iron oxide nanoparticles. Chemical 
Society Reviews, 44(23), 8576–8607. 
47.

Mok, H., & Zhang, M., (2013). Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle-based 
delivery systems for biotherapeutics. Expert Opinion on Drug Delivery, 10(1), 73–87. 
48. Wold, W. S. M., & Toth, K., (2013). Adenovirus vectors for gene therapy, vaccination 
cancer gene therapy. Current Gene Therapy, 13(6), 421–433. 
49. Choi, J. W., Park, J. W., Na, Y., et al., (2015). Using a magnetic field to redirect an onco￾lytic adenovirus complexed with iron oxide augments gene therapy efficacy. Biomaterials, 
65, 163–174. 
50. Sapet, C., Pellegrino, C., Laurent, N., et al., (2012). Magnetic nanoparticles enhance 
adenovirus transduction in vitro and in vivo. Pharmaceutical Research, 29(5), 1203–1218. 
51. Singh, D., McMillan, J. M., Liu, X. M., et al., (2014). Formulation design facilitates 
magnetic nanoparticle delivery to diseased cells and tissues. Nanomedicine: Nanotech￾nology, Biology, and Medicine, 9(3), 469–485. 
52. Lee, S., Shim, G., Kim, S., et al., (2011). Enhanced transfection rates of small-interfering 
RNA using dioleylglutamide-based magnetic lipoplexes. Nucleic Acid Therapeutics, 
21(3), 165–172. 
53. Wang, C., Ding, C., Kong, M., et al., (2011). Tumor-targeting magnetic lipoplex delivery 
of short hairpin RNA suppresses IGF-1R overexpression of lung adenocarcinoma A549 
cells in vitro and in vivo. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications, 
410(3), 537–542. 
54. Nawwab Al-Deen, F., Ho, J., Selomulya, C., et al., (2011). Superparamagnetic nanopar￾ticles for effective delivery of malaria DNA vaccine. Langmuir: The ACS Journal of 
Surfaces and Colloids, 27(7), 3703–3712. 222 Modern Magnetic Materials 
55. Veiseh, O., Gunn, J. W., Kievit, F. M., et al., (2009). Inhibition of tumor-cell invasion 
with chlorotoxin-bound superparamagnetic nanoparticles. Small (Weinheim and Der 
Bergstrasse, Germany), 5(2), 256–264. 
56. Kim, C., Lee, Y., Kim, J. S., et al., (2010). Thermally triggered cellular uptake of quantum 
dots immobilized with poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) and cell penetrating peptide. 
Langmuir: The ACS Journal of Surfaces and Colloids, 26(18), 14965–14969. 
57. Niemirowicz, K., Prokop, I., Wilczewska, A., et al., (2015). Magnetic nanoparticles 
enhance the anticancer activity of cathelicidin LL-37 peptide against colon cancer cells. 
International Journal of Nanomedicine, 10, 3843–3853. 
58. Ojeda, P. G., Wang, C. K., & Craik, D. J., (2016). Chlorotoxin: Structure, activity, and 
potential uses in cancer therapy. Biopolymers, 106(1), 25–36. 
59. Cores, J., Caranasos, T. G., & Cheng, K., (2015). Magnetically targeted stem cell delivery 
for regenerative medicine. Journal of Functional Biomaterials, 6(3), 526–546. 
60. Kyrtatos, P. G., Lehtolainen, P., Junemann-Ramirez, M., et al., (2009). Magnetic tagging 
increases the delivery of circulating progenitors in vascular injury. JACC: Cardiovascular 
Interventions, 2(8), 794–802. 
61. Cheng, K., Malliaras, K., Li, T. S. S., et al., (2012). Magnetic enhancement of cell retention, 
engraftment, and functional benefit after intracoronary delivery of cardiac-derived stem 
cells in a rat model of ischemia/reperfusion. Cell Transplantation, 21(6), 1121–1135. 
62. Riemer, J., Hoepken, H. H., Czerwinska, H., et al., (2004). Colorimetric ferrozine-based 
assay for the quantitation of iron in cultured cells. Analytical Biochemistry, 331(2), 
370–375. 
63. Comanescu, C. (2022). Magnetic Nanoparticles: Current Advances in Nanomedicine, 
Drug Delivery and MRI. Chemistry. 4(3), 872–930. 
64. Balk, M., Haus, T., Band, J., Unterweger, H., Schreiber, E., Friedrich, R. P., Alexiou, C., 
& Gostian, A. O. (2021). Cellular SPION uptake and toxicity in various head and neck 
cancer cell lines. Nanomaterials. 11(3), 726. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 14 
A Technical Note on Metal-Carbon 
Mesocomposites Magnetic Characteristics
Growth 
V. I. KODOLOV1,2 and V. V. KODOLOVA-CHUKHONTZEVA2,3 
1
M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State Technical University, Izhevsk, Russia 
2
Basic Research–High Educational Center of Chemical Physics and 
Mesoscopic, UD RAS, Izhevsk, Russia 
3
Peter Great St. Petersburg Technical University, St. Petersburg, Russia 
ABSTRACT 
This information is dedicated to the reasons for the metal-carbon 
mesocomposites (Me–C MCs) magnetic characteristics growth. The magnetic 
properties of substances and materials are usually caused by the presence 
of the unpaired electron. Among these substances, the series of metals and 
carbon radicals may be considered. The possibility of magnetic characteristics 
growth with simultaneous increasing of unpaired electrons quantity may be 
realized by reduction-oxidation processes. These possibilities are considered 
in the present communication. 
14.1 STRUCTURE OF METAL-CARBON MESOCOMPOSITES 
(ME–C MCS) 
The mechanochemical process of metal-carbon mesocomposite (Me–C MC) 
obtaining consists in the joint grinding of polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) with 
metal oxides in the mechanical mortars or in the paddle mills. At this red-ox 224 Modern Magnetic Materials 
process, the metal from its oxide is reduced with the metallic cluster forma￾tion and simultaneous water vaporization at the PVA destruction that leads 
to the carbon fibers formation. These fibers contain the polyacetylene and 
carbine fragments with coordinate bonds which are created between metal 
cluster and unsaturated bonds of carbon fibers. As a result, the creation of a 
common electron system which includes nucleus-metal cluster with carbon 
cover which consists of polyacetylene and carbine fragments. 
14.2 MECHANISM OF REDUCTION OXIDATION REACTIONS OF 
METAL-CARBON MESOCOMPOSITES 
The Me–C MC red-ox processes consist in the grinding of copper–carbon 
or nickel–carbon nanocomposites with the corresponding substances 
containing P or Si. As the mechanochemical process result – the xerogel is 
formed which is dried at 80°C. At the interaction of oxidizers with Me–C 
MC the common electron system is organized and, in this system, the red-ox 
process flows owing to the interaction of negative charged quants on the 
positive charged quants. The annihilation phenomenon is appeared because 
of this interaction which leads to the creation of inner electromagnetic (EM) 
radiation rousing the unpaired electrons formation with simultaneous shift on 
the high energetic orbitals. The presence of coordinate bonds between metal 
cluster and unsaturated bonds of carbon cover rouses the cover change with 
the sizes carbine fragments decreasing, that correspondent to the fragments 
number increasing and the unpaired electrons growth. In other words, the 
growth of fragments alternation number takes place at which the unpaired 
electrons quantity grows. 
14.3 ABOUT THE REASONS OF THE METAL-CARBON 
MESOCOMPOSITES (ME–C MCS) MAGNETIC CHARACTERISTICS 
GROWTH AT RED-OX PROCESSES 
The first reason is caused by the magnetic characteristics’ growth because 
of the formation of unpaired electrons in metal cluster electron shell. This 
effect is explained by the annihilation phenomenon at the reduction oxida￾tion process. 
The second reason is associated with the electron structure carbon 
cover change at the alternation fragments order change. It’s noted that the A Technical Note on Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 225 
unsaturated bonds (double bonds) of polyacetylene and carbine are alterna￾tive. On the boundary of these bonds the unpaired electrons are appeared. 
14.4 CONCLUSION 
All above statement is confirmed by the theoretical investigations and 
authors experimental results presented in Refs. [1–35]. 
KEYWORDS 
• electromagnetic radiation 
• magnetic characteristics growth 
• magnetic properties 
• mechanochemical process 
• nanocomposites 
• reduction-oxidation processes 
REFERENCES 
1. Imri, (2009). Introduction in Mesoscopic Physics (p. 304). M.: Physmatlit. 
2. Moskalets, M. V., (2010). Fundamentals of Mesoscopic Physics. Khar’kov: NTU KhPI. 
3. Morozov, A. D., (2002). Introduction in Fractal Theory (p. 160). M.-Izhevsk: ICT. 
4. Kolmogorov, A. N., & Fomin, S. V., (2009). Introductory Real Analysis (p. 403). USA, 
Portland: Prentice Hall. 
5. Wunderlikh, B., (1979). Physics of Macromolecules (Vol. 2, p. 422). M.: Mir. 
6. Brown, J. F. Jr., & White, D. M., (1960). J. Am. Chem. Soc., 82, 5671. 
7. Morgan, P. W., (1970). Condensation polymers by interfacial and solution methods 
(translated) L.; Chemistry, p. 448. 
8. Buchachenko, A. L., (2003). Nanochemistry – Direct Way to High Technologies (Vol. 72, 
No 5, pp. 419–437). Uspechi Chimii. 
9. Kodolov, V. I., & Khokhriakov, N. V., (2009). Chemical Physics of Formation and 
Transformation Processes of Nanostructures and Nanosystems (Vol. 1, 2, pp. 361, 415). 
Izhevsk: Publ. IzhSACA. 
10. Shabanova, I. N., Kodolov, V. I., Terebova, N. S., & Trineeva, V. V., (2012). X-Ray Photo￾electron Spectroscopy Investigations of Metal/Carbon Nanosystems and Nanostructured 
Materials (p. 252). M.: Izhevsk: Publ. “Udmurt university.” 226 Modern Magnetic Materials 
11. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2008). 
Nanostructure activity and its display in nanoreactors of polymeric matrices and in 
active media. Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 10(4), 448–460. 
12. Kodolov, V. I., (2009). The addition to previous paper. Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 
11(1), 134–136. 
13. Trineeva, V. V., Vakhrushina, M. A., Bulatov, D. I., & Kodolov, V. I., (2012). The obtaining 
of metal/carbon nanocomposites and investigation of their structure phenomena. 
Nanotechnics, (4), 50–55. 
14. Trineeva, V. V., Lyakkhovich, A. M., & Kodolov, V. I., (2009). Forecasting of the 
formation processes of carbon metal containing nanostructures using the method of 
atomic force microscopy. Nanotechnics, 4(20), 87–90. 
15.

Kodolov, V. I., Blagodatskikh, I. I., Lyakhovich, А. М., et al., (2007). Investigation 
of the formation processes of metal containing carbon nanostructures in nanoreactors 
of polyvinyl alcohol at early stages. Chemical Physics and Mesoscopy, 9(4), 422–429. 
16. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., & Kuznetsov, A. P., (2006). To the issue of the 
mechanism of the influence of nanostructures on structurally changing media at the 
formation of “intellectual” composites. Nanotechnics, 3(7), 27–35. 
17. Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., Trineeva, V. V., & Blagodatskikh, I. I., (2010). 
Problems of nanostructure activity estimation, nanostructures directed production and 
application. Nanomaterials Yearbook–2009: From Nanostructures, Nanomaterials and 
Nanotechnologies to Nanoindustry (pp. 1–18). N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers, Inc. 
18.

Fedorov, V. B., Khakimova, D. K., Shipkov, N. N., & Avdeenko, М. А., (1974). To 
thermodynamics of carbon materials (Vol. 219. No. 3. pp. 596–599). Doklady AS USSR. 
19. Fedorov, V. B., Khakimova, D. K., Shorshorov, M. H., et al., (1975). To Kinetics of 
Graphitation (Vol. 222. No. 2. pp. 399–402). Doklady AS USSR. 
20. Khokhriakov, N. V., & Kodolov, V. I., (2005). Quantum-chemical modeling of 
nanostructure formation. Nanotechnics, 2, 108–112. 
21.

Lipanov, А. М., Kodolov, V. I., Khokhriakov, N. V., et al., (2005). Challenges in creating 
nanoreactors for the synthesis of metal nanoparticles in carbon shells. Alternative 
Energy and Ecology, 2(22), 58–63. 
22.

Kodolov, V. I., Didik, А. А., Volkov, Yu. A., & Volkova, E. G., (2004). Low-temperature 
synthesis of copper nanoparticles in carbon shells. HEIs’ news. Chemistry and Chemical 
Engineering, 47(1), 27–30. 
23.

Serkov, А. Т., (1975). Theory of Chemical Fiber Formation (p. 548). edited by– М.: Himiya. 
24. Palm, V. A., (1967). Basics of Quantitative Theory of Organic Reactions (p. 356). L: Himiya. 
25. Kodolov, V. I., (1965). On modeling possibility in organic chemistry. Organic Reactivity, 
2(4), 11–18. Tartu: TSU. 
26.

Chashkin, M. A., Kodolov, V. I., Zakharov, A. I., et al., (2011). Metal/carbon nanocom￾posites for epoxy compositions: Quantum-chemical investigations and experimental 
modeling. Polymer Research Journal, 5(1), 5–19. 
27. Kodolov, V. I., & Trineeva, V. V., (2013). Fundamental definitions for domain of nano￾structures and metal/carbon nanocomposites. In: Nanostructure, Nanosystems and Nano￾structured Materials: Theory, Production and Development (pp. 1–42). Toronto-New 
Jersey: Apple Academic Press. 
28. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Blagodatskikh, I. I., Vasil’chenko, Yu. M., Vakhrushina, 
M. A., & Bondar, A. Yu., (2013). The nanostructures obtaining and the synthesis of 
metal/carbon nanocomposites in nanoreactors. In: Nanostructure, Nanosystems and A Technical Note on Metal-Carbon Mesocomposites 227 
Nanostructured Materials: Theory, Production and Development (pp. 101–145). 
Toronto-New Jersey: Apple Academic Press. 
29. Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2012). Dependence of the value of the atomic 
magnetic moment of d metals on the chemical structure of nanoforms. In: Problems of 
Nanochemistry for the Creation of New Materials (pp. 123–131). Torun, Poland: IEPMD. 
30. Mustakimov, R. V., Kodolov, V. I., Shabanova, I. N., & Terebova, N. S., (2017). 
Modification of copper nanocomposites with the use of ammonium polyphosphate for 
the application as modifiers of epoxy resins. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 19(1), 
50–57. 
31. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Kopylova, A. A., et al., (2017). Mechanochemical 
modification of metal carbon nanocomposites. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 19(4), 
569–580. 
32. Kodolov, V. I., Trineeva, V. V., Terebova, N. S., et al., (2018). The change of electron 
structure and magnetic characteristics of modified copper carbon nanocomposites. 
Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 20(1), 72–79. 
33. Kodolov, V. I., et al., (2019). Modified magnetic metal carbon mesoscopic composites 
with bio active substances. Chemical Physics & Mesoscopics, 21(3), 446–454. 
34. Mustakimov, R. V., (2019). The Method of Modification of Metal Carbon Nanostructures 
by Ammonium Poly Phosphate. Pat. N 2694092. 
35. Kodolov, V. I., & Kodolova–Chukhontzeva, V. V., (2019). Fundamentals of chemical 
mesoscopics. Monograph (p. 218). Izhevsk: Publisher–M.T. Kalashnikov Izhevsk State 
Technical University. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 15


Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic 
Nanoparticles: A Review 
VANDANA CHAUHAN,1
 RAJPREET KAUR,1,2 ANITA GUPTA,1
 and 
POONAM KHULLAR2 
1
Department of Chemistry, Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, India 
2
Department of Chemistry, BBK DAV College for Women, Amritsar, 
Punjab, India 
ABSTRACT 
Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) have gained tremendous interest in the 
past few decades due to their superparamagnetism property. To produce 
MNPs with desired structures and properties, various routes for its prepa￾ration have been explored. To produce the next generation of advanced 
magnets, it is important to synthesize MNPs that have controllable size, 
shape, and chemical composition. So here, some main methods are covered 
to synthesize MNPs. As MNPs show unique characteristics which have 
increased their demand in the field of industries and biomedical. There￾fore, here the application of MNPs is covered in three main areas that 
represent them are biomedical, ferrofluids, and data storage. In the case 
of biomedical MNPs can target or detect biological entities with the help 
of modification of specific biomolecules and they can be used to apply in 
photothermal therapy, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), biosensing, and 
drug delivery. 230 Modern Magnetic Materials 
15.1 INTRODUCTION 
Nanomaterials are really small particles ranges between 1 and 100 nm in 
diameter and also, they are about 1,000 times smaller than a single cell. 
Sometimes this term is also used for the larger particles up to 500 nm or tubes 
and fibers that are less than 100 nm in only two directions. Nanoparticles 
(NPs) are classified into different types depending on their morphology and 
size [1]. 
Some of the main NPs are lipid-based NPs, ceramic NPs, polymeric NPs, 
semiconductor NPs, carbon-based NPs, and metal NPs. In recent times NPs 
are being used in the manufacturing of various things like crack-resistant 
paints, coating for walls, stain-repellent fabrics, ceramic coating for solar 
cells, windows that can be easily self-cleaned, and transparent sunscreen. 
When these are compared with bulk material then they show some unique 
characteristics which make them interesting in the field of industries and for 
medical applications [2]. 
Magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) are a group of NPs which in presence 
of an external magnetic field show some responses to an applying magnetic 
field. These particles consist of magnetic elements like chromium, iron, 
cobalt, manganese, gadolinium, nickel, and their chemical compounds. 
MNPs are typically classified into metal oxide NPs, metal alloy NPs, and 
metal NPs. The common NPs used are silver (Ag), gold (Au), iron (Fe), 
nickel (Ni), and cobalt (Co). Metal oxide NPs mostly consist of ferrites 
(CoFe O and MnO.6ZnO.4Fe O ) and iron oxides (γ-Fe O and Fe O ) and 2 4 2 4 2 3 3 4
metal alloy NPs include FePt, FeCo, and so on. Among all of them, the 
most widely use MNPs are metal oxide magnetite (Fe3
O4
)2 and maghemite 
(γ-Fe2
O3
) MNPs these particles can be easily controlled in particle shape 
and size also can be conveniently prepared and have low toxicity. Figure 
15.1 shows the general view and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles 231 
of β-magnetite by TEM analysis. By adding zinc (Zn) and manganese (Mn) 
to nanosized iron oxide structure variety of ferrite NPs like Mn3
Zn7
Fe2
O4
, 
MnO.6ZnO.4Fe2
O4
, and many more can be prepared. So, when these ferrite 
NPs get prepared then these have stronger magnetism and higher relaxation 
rate [3–6]. 
FIGURE 15.1 Transmission electron microscope (TEM) analysis of β-magnetite NPs (a) 
general view; and (b) corresponding SAED pattern. 
In different types of NPs, MNPs have gained a lot of attention among 
researchers because of their unique magnetic properties like superpara￾magnetic, low Curie temperature, high magnetic susceptibility, etc. 
Superparamagnetic is observed in small materials (10 nm–150 nm) and 
MNPs are of nano-size, so they show this feature [4]. As MNPs show 
superparamagnetic feature, this, when the field is applied than the particles, 
get attracted towards the magnetic field but after removal of the field, 
they retain no residual magnetism. Thus, this characteristic makes these 
MNPs easily separated with target compounds from complex matrices like 
biological samples, environment, and food by just applying an external 
magnetic field [5, 6]. 
Synthesizing MNPs is an important part, over the years several methods 
have been developed to obtain MNPs with magnetic characteristics, 
controllable size, shape, reproducibility, surface chemistry, and size 
distribution. For a long period for synthesizing MNPs by chemical method 
has been commonly used, as it is one of the cheapest ways of preparing large 232 Modern Magnetic Materials 
quantities of the desired MNPs. There are many techniques to synthesize 
MNPs such as combustion, chemical vapor deposition, lab on a chip 
system, carbon arc, laser pyrolysis techniques, electrochemical synthesis, 
and microbial synthesis. For obtaining stable, monodisperse, and shape 
controllable MNPs various popular routes are present such as co-precipitation 
technique, thermal decomposition technique, hydrothermal synthesis, 
sol-gel synthesis, aero-sol/vapor-phase based synthesis techniques, flow 
injection, microemulsion, and hydrothermal synthesis. The simplest and 
efficient chemical pathway among all of them to synthesize MNPs is the 
co-precipitation technique, then for obtaining monodispersed NPs with high 
crystallinity, size, and shape control high-temperature thermal decomposition 
seems to be an interesting technique. The hydrothermal process is used for 
the formation of small-sized MNPs whereas the microemulsion method 
is used to synthesize MNPs of size and shape-controlled. MNPs obtained 
by using co-precipitation and decomposition approaches are the finest 
studied types of the synthesis techniques of the MNPs. According to the 
work of Grassel et al., he explained that γ3Fe5
O particles were prepared 12
by different synthetic approaches – hydroxide coprecipitation, hydrolysis, 
citrate gel process, co-precipitation in microemulsion, glass crystallization 
or glycothermal synthesis, and some other related method. 
MNPs are used in several technological applications in the field of infor￾mation storage, high-frequency electronics, ferrofluids, magnetic refrigerants, 
and high-performance permanent magnets. MNPs are also widely used in 
biomedical and industrial applications. The main four applications of MNPs 
in biomedical are: (i) for magnetic separation of biological entities; (ii) radio 
frequency controlled MNPs; (iii) drug delivery; and (iv) magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI). Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (MIONs) are mostly 
used for biomedical applications. For biomedical applications, magnetite 
Fe3
O4 or maghemite γ-Fe2
O3
 are the most widely used oxides. The main 
factor for using magnetite and maghemite is their good biocompatibility and 
chemical stability. When magnetic properties are taken into consideration 
in that case metal NPs are more powerful, but their downfall is that they are 
toxic, so cannot be used for clinical applications. Also, MNPs are used in 
the treatment of infectious diseases and cancer. For medical applications, the 
important attributes of MNPs which make them a great choice are their high￾level aggregation in the desired tissue, non-toxicity, and biocompatibility. 
Some real-life application of MNPs is in Analytical chemistry, separation of 
heavy metals from a contaminant, preconcentration, cells, and biomolecules, Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles 233 
inorganic compounds and therapy. MNPs can also be used in the field of 
environmental purification and catalysis [7–9]. 
15.2 SYNTHESIS OF MNPS 
There are numerous methods developed to synthesize MNPs, a lot of studies 
have been done by researchers to synthesize MNPs. The most common 
techniques to synthesize controllable shape, size, high crystallinity, stable, 
and monodisperse MNPs are sol-gel synthesis, thermal decomposition, 
co-precipitation, microemulsion, hydrothermal synthesis, aerosol/vapor￾phase base synthesis, and flow injection technique. For synthesizing MNPs, 
there are two approaches: (i) bottom-up; and (ii) top-down approaches. In both 
approaches, there are many methods present to prepare MNPs. The bottom-up 
approach contains methods like plasma spraying synthesis, electrochemical 
reactions, bio-assisted synthesis, chemical vapor deposition, thermal evapo￾ration, molecular condensation, and sol-gel processing synthesis to prepare 
MNPs while in top-down technique it employs microfabrication processes 
like lit off, lithographical patterning, wet etching or ion milling. Basically, 
for representing MNPs, Maghemite (γ-Fe2
O3
) and Magnetite (Fe3
O4
) ferrite 
colloids are the main representatives of MNPs. They have received so much 
attention from researchers due to their characteristics of biocompatibility 
and biodegradability. Mainly there are three main pathways to synthesize 
Fe3
O4
 NPs: (i) wet chemical preparation method; (ii) microbial methods; 
and (iii) physical methods [10]. Some of the main syntheses are discussed in 
subsections. 
15.2.1 THERMAL DECOMPOSITION TECHNIQUE 
MNPs can be synthesized by thermal decomposition firstly thermal decom￾position of metal precursors takes place which includes metal oleates and 
metal-carbonyls like Ni(CO)4
, Co2
(CO)8
, Fe(CO)5
, and then high tempera￾ture and pressure is applied to reactors or autoclaves during the synthesis 
process. The products yield by the thermal decomposition technique have 
excellent crystallinity of dispersible iron oxide MNPs, great monodispersity, 
narrow size distribution, and excellent controllable particle size and shape. 
By using metal-carbonyl precursors (i.e., Fe(CO)5 and Co2
(CO)8
) a number 234 Modern Magnetic Materials 
of magnetic metal NPs were synthesized with the help of the Thermal 
decomposition approach. By Decomposition of polyene metal complexes 
or low valent alkene with H2
 at room temperature magnetic metal NPs (i.e., 
Co and Ni) can be easily synthesized. Recently water-soluble MNPs were 
successfully synthesized, which yields a product having narrow size distri￾bution and controllable particle size. 
Three main factors control the shape and size of the obtained MNPs by 
thermal decomposition technique: (i) duration of the reaction when it reaches 
the boiling point; (ii) decomposition temperature; and (iii) the precursor. 
Lee & co-workers carried out a study in which at high temperature in the 
organic medium high-quality magnetism-engineered Fe2
O3
 NPs as contrast 
agents for the application of magnetic resonance and also, they tested out 
their applicability for the sensitive recognition of target biomolecules as 
molecular imaging probes. Some main drawbacks of this technique are high 
cost, need for high temperature, use of toxic chemicals/organic solvents, 
and need for modification to increase biocompatibility during the synthesis 
process of MNPs [11–15]. 
15.2.2 COPRECIPITATION TECHNIQUE 
To synthesize MNPs below 50 nm diameter, coprecipitation is the most 
efficient and simplest pathway. So, the synthesis process takes place in an 
aqueous solution of a mixture of ferrous and ferric salts base is added in it, 
following chemical reaction takes place: 
Fe2+ + 2Fe3+ + 8OH–
 → Fe3
O4
 + 4H2
O 
After the Massart method which was developed in 1981, a lot of studies 
have been done to understand the effects of parameters of synthesis like 
concentration and nature of salts, reaction temperature, ionic strength and 
pH of the medium, injection flux rates, presence of oxygen. In all these 
studies not only the synthesis parameter is taken into consideration but also 
along with it the whole procedure is adopted so that the shape, size, composi￾tion, magnetic behavior, and morphology of the MNPs can be controlled. 
To avoid aggregation of NPs polymers or surfactants are added in order to 
stabilize and control the surface of MNPs, also the addition of surfactants 
in the reaction increases biocompatibility. Figure 15.2 shows the TEM 
analysis of supermagnetic iron oxide NPs synthesized by the coprecipitation 
method [10–15]. However, there are many advantages of the co-precipitation 
method, but some disadvantages are also there like it produces NPs which Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles 235 
ranges between 4 and 20 nm, control of size distribution is poor, irregular 
morphologies [14–18]. 
FIGURE 15.2 TEM analysis of Fe3
O4
 particles that are obtained by coprecipitation method. 
15.2.3 HYDROTHERMAL METHOD 
The hydrothermal process is used to yield MNPs at high pressure and high 
temperature in autoclaves or reactors in aqueous media which results in fast 
growth and rapid nucleation of freshly formed MNPs which later on forms 
in MNPs whose size is really small. When this reaction gets completed then 
autoclaves are left to cool down to room temperature, after all, this is done 
then the MNPs are washed numerous times using different solvents so that 
the impurities present in them can be eliminated. For obtaining hollow iron 
oxide NPs hydrothermal process is a conventional and facile method. For 
this the ion which is used as ion source is Fe3+ then sodium citrate, acetate, 236 Modern Magnetic Materials 
and urea under continuous stirring mixed in ethylene glycol after this the 
solution is transferred to properly sealed Teflon, these Teflons are tightly 
sealed because these are to be kept at a high temperature which is approx. 
200°C for a time of 8–24 hrs. Figure 15.3 shows the formation of MNPs by 
the hydrothermal process by using Teflon. There are some other different 
architectures possible with the help of this method for producing along with 
nanoring’s, short nanorods, and nanospheres [10, 15, 19, 20]. The following 
reaction is expected to occur in order to produce MNPs: 
Fe2+ + 2Fe3+ + 8OH–
 → Fe3
O4
 + 4H2
O 
FIGURE 15.3 Synthesis of the magnetic nanoparticle by hydrothermal method. (a) 
Formation of MNPs; (b) when magnets placed near MNPs then the MNPs gets attracted 
towards it and moves to the surface; (c) this is the steel jacket and inside it, Teflon is placed at 
very high temperature; (d) Teflon; and (e) diagrammatic representation of Teflon. 
15.2.4 SOL-GEL METHOD 
The sol-gel method is used to yield MNPs of controllable size and particle 
structure. The other name used for the sol-gel method is chemical solution Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles 237 
deposition. This method is used to produce nanostructured metal oxides, So, 
it is an appropriate wet route. This synthesis process is based on the solution 
of molecular precursors, on its condensation and hydroxylation from this, 
a sol is formed by nanometric particles. In addition, inorganic polymeriza￾tion and condensation lead to the formation of a three-dimensional (3D) 
network of metal oxide-dominated wet gel. As this reaction occurs at room 
temperature than to reach the final state of crystalline more heat treatments 
are done. The factor on which gel depends is the sol-stage when the structure 
is formed during the synthesis of sol-gel. The main parameters that affect 
the hydrolysis, kinetics, properties, structure, growth reaction of the gel are 
nature, agitation, salt precursors concentration, and temperature. From an 
experiment conducted for the synthesis of MNPs it has been found out that 
maghemite can be synthesized at high temperature (approx. 400°C) by direct 
heat treatment of gels from all this procedure it is concluded that the NPs 
form through this procedure ranges between 6 and 15 nm. This approach 
has many advantages like low process temperature, good mixing uniformity, 
and high reaction activity but there is a disadvantage of this process that 
while MNPs are synthesizing during the posttreatment process MNPs get 
coagulated [15, 21, 22]. 
15.2.5 MICROEMULSION-BASED SYNTHESIS 
The microemulsion method is used to synthesize MNPs of controllable size 
and shape. This method is based on the isotropic stable system which consists 
of two immiscible phases a polar (usually water) and a nonpolar (commonly 
oil) phase in the presence of surfactant, surfactant molecules can be either 
poly-vinylpyrrolidone, bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate, cetyltrimethylam￾monium bromide. The microemulsion method for preparing MNPs in a way 
that the size of MNPs can be controlled is done by a chemical reaction like 
reduction or co-precipitation in microemulsions. This is accomplished with 
the help of thermal initiations in which two reactants are placed in a single 
micelle system or two separate micelle systems. This method is also used 
to synthesize MNPs which are monodisperse and have various morpholo￾gies. There are some disadvantages of this method are also present, some of 
its main disadvantages are yield produce through this method are low and 
during the synthesis process, the consumption of organic solvents is high 
[10, 14, 15, 23, 24]. 238 Modern Magnetic Materials 
15.2.6 FLOW INJECTION METHOD 
MNPs that have narrow size distribution can be efficiently synthesized 
through the flow injection method. This method “consists of continuous or 
segmented mixing of reagents under a laminar flow regime in a capillary 
reactor.” From a study, it is noticed that Fe3
O4
 MNPs of narrow size distribu￾tion can be synthesized using this technique. Figure 15.4 shows using flow 
injection method Fe3
O4
 NPs were obtained having a narrow size distribution 
range between 2 and 7 nm. Some of the main advantages of this technique 
are its high mixing homogeneity, precise control of the process, and have 
good reproducibility [10, 15, 16]. 
FIGURE 15.4 TEM analysis and diagrams of particle size distribution for iron oxide 
(Fe3
O4
) nanoparticles synthesized by continuous flow injection (A and B); and batch methods 
(C and D). Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles 239 
15.2.7 AEROSOL/VAPOR METHODS 
Aerosol technologies like laser and spray pyrolysis are efficient techniques 
because these techniques allow high-rate production in a continuous chemical 
process. In the case of the spray pyrolysis technique, in an organic solvent 
solution of reducing agent and ferric salts are sprayed into a series of reactor, 
then aerosol is condensed, and the solvent is evaporated. After all, these dried 
residues are obtained which are then changed into MNPs where all matters are 
the initial size of original droplets of the NPs formed. By using an alcoholic 
solution that contains “different iron precursors salts” maghemite particles 
have been obtained whose size ranges from 5 to 60 nm. Now comes laser 
pyrolysis, which is also a promising approach for synthesizing MNPs. For 
reducing the volume of reaction, laser pyrolysis can be used. In this technique 
firstly the laser heats the flowing mixture of gas and iron precursor (like 
iron pentacarbonyl) mixture which then produces non-aggregated, narrow, 
and small size NPs. This whole process of laser pyrolysis is carried out into 
generators which helps in obtaining high yield MNPs. Under conditions of 
the optimum process, MNPs can be prepared which have a crystal size with 
narrow size distribution (between 2 and 7 nm) [21, 25]. 
15.3 APPLICATIONS 
15.3.1 BIOMEDICAL 
MNPs have shown great potential in the field of biomedicine, as they show 
some unique characteristics when the magnetic field is applied to them. 
MNPs are also used in the treatment of cancer. They can detect the biological 
entity present inside the body and can be used to target that biological entity. 
Some of the main applications in the field of biomedicine are magnetic reso￾nance imagining (MRI), drug delivery, and imaging-guided photochemical 
therapy. So, in recent times biomedical applications have become one of the 
best and leading fields of research because of their different characteristics 
and irreplaceable advantages [26]. 
15.3.1.1 MRI 
Magnetic resonance imagining (MRI) is basically a diagnostic tool used for 
the non-invasive imagining of the internal organ of the body of a human. For 240 Modern Magnetic Materials 
diagnostics and medical research MRI has become a very essential tool. It 
is one of the common methods for the diagnosis of tumors [26]. MRI was 
founded by the NMR phenomenon. So, in the year 1946 through independent 
experiment two scientists named Edward Mills Purcell and Felix Bloch, they 
found that when a strong magnetic field is applied on paraffin or water and 
then at radio frequencies barraged with magnetic oscillation, after this they 
would release and absorb energy. This all was noticed at the very starting of 
the nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), with its help MRI was developed for 
imaging of the tissues in the body [25]. So MRI helps in monitoring the decay 
shown by the nuclei during its magnetization, here nuclei are considered as 
protons of the water molecule when the strong magnetic field is applied on 
the nuclei after that by a series of radiofrequency (RF) magnetic pulses they 
get excited [15]. The rate of signal decays depends on two properties first, 
the density of the nuclei and second on the local magnetic field. In the water 
contents when the variations are seen between organs then at that time it 
provides contrast in MRI images. As it shows changes in the content of water 
to the diseased area, so it is used for the diagnostics of the brain or neural 
diseases. MRI has shown some good results in the diagnosis of cancer and 
also in its treatment [27]. 
15.3.1.2 DRUG DELIVERY 
MNPs can efficiently deliver the drug to a particular site and can also control 
drug release remotely by real-time monitoring. Drug delivery helps in the 
treatment of cancer through improved chemotherapy treatments. Mostly in 
chemotherapy treatments, the drugs are circulated to the whole body so that 
the healthy tissues can be exposed to deleterious side effects. In this therapy, 
drugs are delivered magnetically so that they can be attached to NPs present in 
biocompatible ferrofluids, which are then injected into the body of the patient 
[8]. To concentrate the drugs added inside the body at a specific target than 
a high gradient external magnetic field may be used for this purpose. So, in 
this way, it reduces the chances of side effects that can happen on the healthy 
tissue and may be optimized the quantity of the dosage in a tumor [28]. 
15.3.1.3 PHOTOTHERMAL THERAPY 
Recently a technique developed for the treatment of cancer in that with laser 
radiation heat is generated under illumination. Firstly, NPs of light-activated Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles 241 
heated transfer into tumors than when they enter in the site tumor it attains 
high temperature and without doing any damage to the surrounding healthy 
tissue it kills the tumor cells. This is a very effective technique for treating 
the tumor. In this technique combination of both magnetic properties and 
plasmonic is seen which successfully provides materials that show enhanced 
heating ability. Synergic effects of heating can also be improved using multi￾functional (magnetic/photonic) particles with chemotherapeutic agents [26]. 
15.3.1.4 HYPERTHERMIA 
In this, the temperature of tumor tissue is increased which shows effec￾tive adjunctive cancer therapy. Several ways are proposed to increase the 
temperature of the tissue to the level required for it by using laser, micro￾wave, or radio frequency wavelengths. This therapy is based on the fact that 
above 42°C temperature when the cells are heated then it shows signs of 
apoptosis and when the temperature is set to above 50°C and cells are heated 
then it shows necrosis. Despite knowing all this the relevant temperature 
needed clinically to reach is still unclear and it is challenging to reach 
homogeneity of temperature in the particular target tissue because of local 
perfusion variations. Due to the higher rate of metabolism, cancer cells 
are more susceptible to heat compared to normal cells. Magnetic particles 
hyperthermia by embedding MNPs to the target tissue and also by applying 
external alternating magnetic field help in heating the particular target tissue. 
MNPs in this therapy is injected to target cells within the body. Further with 
the help of the MRI MNPs can be visualized so both diagnosis and treatment 
are possible. Magnetic iron oxide particles are mostly used for this therapy 
because of their higher biocompatibility [3, 25, 28–31]. 
15.3.1.5 BIOSENSING 
Using biosensing applications, the high surface area and magnetic proper￾ties of MNPs can be exploited to quantity and detect a variety of biological 
targets (another name analyte) like pathogens, cells, and molecules. The 
most effective method used for the detection of improved sensitivity is firstly 
concentrated all MNPs and then the analyte on the surface of the sensor by 
using a magnet. The MNPs used in biosensors fall into another category 
which depends on the signal transduction physical principle [15]. 242 Modern Magnetic Materials 
15.3.2 MAGNETIC DATA STORAGE 
From the invention by Valdemar Poulsen of magnetic recording, the infor￾mation stored in magnetic storage has become important in the field of 
digital magnetic data storage media. The progress done in magnetic data 
storage has been important for the modification of modern computers. The 
magnetic storage media involves MNPs of a single domain. When the induc￾tive write head is used then the information needed can be easily written on 
the medium which then generates the localized magnetic field that shows 
variation in time this all happens when the medium moves below the head. 
While the writing process has taken place the magnetization directions of 
the NPs which are single domain and when the field is applied then in its 
every bit, they get aligned in the direction of the applied field and after the 
removal of the field, it retains the memory of the field. And when the medium 
magnetic field sensor below a read head, the magnetization written state then 
gives rise to the magnetic field that varies with time and can be detected. In 
many digital media like hard disks of computer, in them, the stored binary 
information corresponds to magnetization orientation present in antiparallel 
of the media in its corresponding areas [15, 28]. 
15.3.3 FERROFLUIDS 
Ferrofluids can be defined as a colloidal suspension of ferrimagnetic or 
ferromagnetic particles present in a liquid. In the 1960s ferrofluids were 
discovered in the research center of NASA. At that time the scientists of 
NASA were investigating methods for controlling liquids in space. Then they 
notice that in absence of gravity location of a ferrofluid could be controlled 
with magnetic fields. For preparing a ferrofluid, it is very important to remove 
sedimentation and agglomeration of the particles. So the size of MNPs plays 
an important in that case, the size of MNPs should be below a critical limit 
so that the Brownian motion opposes the sedimentation and agglomeration 
tendency because of the presence of gravity [28]. Ferrofluids can be obtained 
with spiking effect characteristics when the magnetic field is applied, so the 
only thing that needed for it is high density of NPs should be dispersed in 
the water solvent. This was achieved by magnetic drying and decantation, 
after this few drops of tetrabutylammonium (TBA) hydroxide solution were 
added as shown in Figure 15.5 [19–23]. Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles 243 
FIGURE 15.5 Tetrabutylammonium (TBA) stabilized aqueous ferrofluids. 
15.4 CONCLUSION 
MNPs have opened a way to create various magnetic materials that can 
possess unique properties, especially when their nanoscale effects are 
considered. As MNPs show some characteristics that have increased their 
demand in the biomedical and industrial field. MNPs of the desired structure, 
composition, and sizes can be synthesized by various methods. Different 
synthesis process gives a different desired result like some gives control￾lable size or shape while some give great monodispersity and narrow size 
distribution, etc. The main problem that comes when MNPs are synthesized 
is aggregation, they can easily get aggregated. MNPs have great potential 
to play an important role in the progress of future medical applications 
whereas that is in diagnosis and imaging or through biosensing and drug 
delivery applications. They can also be used in magnetic data storage and 
ferrofluids applications. Hence it is not wrong to call MNPs as materials of 
the future. 244 Modern Magnetic Materials 
KEYWORDS


• hydrothermal 
• hyperthermia 
• maghemite 
• magnetic nanoparticles 
• magnetic resonance imaging 
• magnetite 
• superparamagnetism 
REFERENCES 
1.

Yin, L., & Zhong, Z., (2020). Nanoparticles. Biomater. Sci., 453–483. doi: 10.1016/ 
b978-0-12-816137-1.00031-3. 
2.

Sun, S., & Zeng, H., (2002). Size-controlled synthesis of magnetite nanoparticles. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc., 124, 8204, 8205. 
3. Bedanta, S., Barman, A., Kleemann, W., Petracic, O., & Seki, T., (2013). Magnetic 
Nanoparticles: A Subject for Both Fundamental Research and Applications, 2013. 
4. Wu, L., Mendoza-Garcia, A., Li, Q., & Sun, S., (2016). Organic phase syntheses of 
magnetic nanoparticles and their applications. Chem. Rev., 116, 10473–10512. 
5. Rahim, S., Jan, I. F., & Malik, M. I., (2019). Biomedical applications of magnetic 
nanoparticles. Met. Nanoparticles Drug Deliv. Diagnostic Appl., 301–328. doi: 10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-816960-5.00016-1. 
6. Slimani, Y., & Hannachi, E., (2020). Magnetic nanosensors and their potential applications. 
Nanosensors for Smart Cities (INC, 2020). doi: 10.1016/b978-0-12-819870-4.00009-8. 
7. Guo, T., et al., (2018). Review Article the Recent Advances of Magnetic Nanoparticles 
in Medicine, 2018. 
8. Sandler, S. E., & Fellows, B. M. © 2019. (2019). doi: 10.1021/acs.analchem.9b03518. 
9. Williams, H. M., (2017). Review Article the Application of Magnetic Nanoparticles in 
the Treatment and Monitoring of Cancer and Infectious Diseases, 10, 1–10. 
10. Reddy, L. H., Arias, J. L., Nicolas, J., & Couvreur, P., (2012). Magnetic nanoparticles: 
Design and characterization, toxicity and biocompatibility, pharmaceutical and biomed￾ical applications. Chem. Rev., 112, 5818–5878. 
11. Bu, S., Hussain, C. M., Science, E., & States, U., (2020). 5.1 Introduction. doi: 10.1016/ 
B978-0-12-816699-4.00005-0. 
12. Odularu, A. T., (2018). Metal nanoparticles: Thermal decomposition, biomedicinal 
applications to cancer treatment, and future perspectives. Bioinorg. Chem. Appl., 2018. 
13. Unni, M., et al., (2017). Thermal decomposition synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles 
with diminished magnetic dead layer by controlled addition of oxygen. ACS Nano, 11, 
2284–2303. Synthesis and Applications of Magnetic Nanoparticles 245 
14. Cardoso, V. F., et al., (2017). Advances in Magnetic Nanoparticles for Biomedical Appli￾cations, 1700845, 1–35. 
15. Applications, B., (2018). Multifunctional Magnetic Nanoparticles: Design, Synthesis, 
and. Comprehensive Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (2nd edn.). Elsevier Ltd. doi: 
10.1016/B978-0-12-803581-8.10462-X. 
16. Ahn, T., Kim, J. H., Yang, H. M., Lee, J. W., & Kim, J. D., (2012). Formation pathways of 
magnetite nanoparticles by coprecipitation method. J. Phys. Chem. C, 116, 6069–6076. 
17. Pereira, C., et al., (2012). Superparamagnetic MFe2
O4
 (M = Fe, Co, Mn) nanoparticles: 
Tuning the particle size and magnetic properties through a novel one-step coprecipitation 
route. Chem. Mater., 24, 1496–1504. 
18. Suh, S. K., et al., (2012). Synthesis of nonspherical superparamagnetic particles: In 
situ coprecipitation of magnetic nanoparticles in microgels prepared by stop-flow 
lithography. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 134, 7337–7343. 
19. Dalverny, A., et al., (2017). Comprehensive Approach to Amazing Magnetic Materials. 
doi: 10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00277. 
20. Ge, S., et al., (2009). Facile Hydrothermal Synthesis of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles with 
Tunable Magnetic Properties, 13593–13599. 
21. Laurent, S., et al., (2008). Magnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Stabilization, 
Vectorization, Physicochemical Characterizations, and Biological Applications, 2064–2110. 
22. Rosa, C., & Segarra, M. (2019). Optimization of the Synthesis of Copper Ferrite 
Nanoparticles by a Polymer-Assisted Sol − Gel Method. ACS Omega, 4(19), 18289. 
23. Okoli, C., et al., (2012). Comparison and Functionalization Study of Microemulsion￾Prepared Magnetic Iron Oxide Nanoparticles. doi: 10.1021/la300599q. 
24. Lo, J. A., Lo, M. A., Mira, J., Rivas, J., & Charles, S. W., (1997). Advances in the Prepa￾ration of Magnetic Nanoparticles by the Microemulsion Method, 101, 4–6. 
25. Li, Y., et al., (2020). Polymer-Assisted Magnetic Nanoparticle Assemblies for Biomedical 
Applications. doi: 10.1021/acsabm.9b00896. 
26.

Zhu, K., et al., (2018). Magnetic Nanomaterials: Chemical Design, Synthesis, and 
Potential Applications. doi: 10.1021/acs.accounts.7b00407. 
27. Duguet, E., (2006). Magnetic Nanoparticles and Their Applications in Medicine, 1, 
157–168. 
28. Mørup, S., Hansen, M. F., Frandsen, C. (2011). Magnetic Nanoparticles. Comp. Nanosci. 
Technol. 1, 437–491. 
29. Gao, J., Gu, H., & Xu, B., (2009). Multifunctional Magnetic Nanoparticles: Design, 
Synthesis, and Biomedical Applications, 42. 
30. Micheletti, G., et al., (2020). Magnetic Nanoparticles Coated with (R) - 9-Acetoxystearic 
Acid for Biomedical Applications. doi: 10.1021/acsomega.0c00163. 
31.

Kudr, J., Id, Y. H., Richtera, L., Adam, V., & Zitka, O. (2017). Magnetic Nanoparticles: 
From Design and Synthesis to Real World Applications. doi: 10.3390/nano7090243. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 16


Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic 
Nanofibers 
ROOP VARGHESE RUBERT, MARIA MATHEW, and RONY RAJAN PAUL 
Department of Chemistry, CMS College, Kottayam, Kerala, India 
ABSTRACT 
Electrospinning, a type of electrospraying technique that utilizes the electro￾hydrodynamic phenomenon, emerged as a flexible method to generate 
nanoscale and microscale objects. Electrospun nanofibers offer a variety 
of benefits, including a high surface area-to-volume ratio, tunable porosity, 
adequate malleability to get the desired size, shape, and dimension, and 
adaptability to achieve the desired physical qualities. Also, exceptional 
mechanical and thermal properties that are superior to ordinary fibers are 
observed. The magnetic nanofibers (MNFs) are found to have good electro￾magnetic (EM) performance, along with obvious magnetism like paramag￾netism, ferromagnetism, and diamagnetism, as well as other qualities like 
superparamagnetic effect, macroscopic tunneling effect, and so on. These 
special characteristics make them good enough for a wide range of applica￾tions, such as ultrahigh-density data storage, sensors, drug delivery systems, 
catalysis, and biological applications. This work reports updated progress 
made on electrospinning techniques as well as the recent developments in 
MNFs and their potential applications. 
16.1 INTRODUCTION 
Nanofibers are found to have profound applications in the recent years. They 
have persuasive size dependent chemical, mechanical, thermal, electrical, 248 Modern Magnetic Materials 
and biological properties which are in turn related to their one dimensionality 
[1, 2]. The widespread applications of nanofibers are evident in everyday 
implementations including batteries, mobile phones, solar cells, fuel cells, 
and so on. The fabrication of nanofibers is indeed very fascinating. The fabri￾cation technique can be generally categorized as: (i) physical and chemical 
techniques; and (ii) electrospinning and non-electrospinning techniques [3]. 
Electrospinning is a versatile tool that can be used for manufacturing of 
nanoscale and microscale structures. The process is initiated by the prepara￾tion of a viscous solution prepared by dissolving a polymeric substance 
in a sufficiently volatile solvent which is the fed into the tip of a metallic 
needle from a syringe. A grounded conducting collector is set at a specific 
distance from the needle’s tip. The needle is then placed at a high potential. 
Due to the strong electric field applied at the tip of the needle, the solution 
pop-up and appears in the form of a cone often referred to as Taylor cone [4, 
5]. From the peak of this cone, the jet of the viscous solution emerges and 
gets accelerated to the grounded conducting collector. In most cases, the 
solvent carrying the polymeric substance evaporates in-flight (before it hits 
the collector) and the fluid jet solidifies into a fiber. Figure 16.1(a) shows 
the schematic illustration of an electrospinning set-up Figure 16.1(b) shows 
the produced fiber mat [6]. 
Even though, there are some challenges associated with the process, 
electrospinning has been most widely examined and also applied to fabricate 
fibers in nanoscale from the early 2000s. Some of the difficulties include 
the low rate of production and the high capital expenditure in the use of the 
technology for making fibers over conventional methods [3]. The electros￾pinning is actually a kind of electrospraying technique which is based on the 
electro-hydrodynamic phenomenon. The adaptability of the electrospraying/ 
electrospinning technique is accredited to several beneficial characteristics 
such as: 
•

 The size of the droplet is even smaller than those produced by 
conventional atomizers. Hence the resulting material can be in the 
nanoscopic scale. 
•

 Usually, the size distribution of the droplet is thin. 
•

 Due to the mutual repulsion, charged particles are scattered in space. 
Hence the coalescence of the droplet is absent and consequently lower 
agglomeration is observed. 
•

 By varying the electric field strength, better control over the motion 
of charged particle is possible [8]. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 249 
FIGURE 16.1 (a) Illustration of standard electrospinning apparatus; and (b) an example 
of a fiber mat produced by an electrospinning process. This image is of polyethylene oxide 
nanofibers electrospun from a water/ethanol solution (20% 1,00,000 Mw polymer in 50/50 
water/ethanol by volume). 
16.2 HISTORY 
Electrospinning is an old method to produce nanofibers. Rayleigh observed 
the mechanism of hydrodynamic stability of the fluid jet “with” an external 
electric field and “without” using an external electric field. In 1882, using 
a charged fluid jet Rayleigh [9] scrutinized the instability mechanism and 
reported that the electrostatic force could exceed the surface tension, which 
acts in the opposite direction and the fluid was tossed out in the form of fine 
jet [10, 11]. 
In 1914, Zeleny [12] conducted a detailed study of the mechanism. The 
first patent on the technique of electrospinning was surfaced up in the year 
of 1934 by Formhals [13], the different experimental set-up, the collection 
of electrospun fibers and their applications at that time made it particularly 
attractive. The set-up consisted of an apparatus that can produce polymer 
filaments by taking advantage of the electrostatic repulsion between the 
surface charges. In 1964 Taylor [5] put forward the hypothesis of Taylor 
cone, which mainly dealt with the shape of the liquid droplet due to the elec￾trostatic forces which in turn is explained by some mathematical equations. 
He also derived the voltage balance equation of the cone and found that the 
stable Taylor cone is with a semi-vertical angle of 49.3°. Later, in 1969 this 
was experimentally proven and laid the foundation for the development in 
electrospinning processes. 
The phrase “electrospinning” comes from the term “electrostatic spin￾ning” which had been in use until 1994. Hayati & co-workers [14] in 1987 250 Modern Magnetic Materials 
investigated the factors affecting the process including experimental condition 
(ambient condition), electric field strength, stability of the fiber and atomi￾zation. They found that when it comes to electrostatic disruption of liquid 
surfaces, fluid conductivity is crucial. In conclusion, fluid which are highly 
conducting produced streams that are highly unstable, that whipped around 
various directions in the presence of an increasing applied potential difference. 
In 1971, Baumgarten [15] and in 2005 Subbiah & co-workers [16] success￾fully fabricated electrospun microfibers using a solution of polyacrylonitrile 
and dimethylformamide (DMF). The polymer solution was suspended from 
a stainless-steel needle when applied with a high potential difference. They 
observed that initially there is an inverse relationship between the diameter 
of the jet and the applied voltage. After reaching a minimum value of the 
diameter, a direct relationship was observed. An investigation of the relation￾ship between the melt temperature and the fiber diameter was conducted by 
Larrondo & Manley [17] using polyethylene and polypropylene as substrate 
and found that an inverse relationship exists between the fiber diameter and 
the melt temperature. In 1995, Chun [18] as well as in 1999, Fong & Reneker 
[19] fabricated different nanofibers from a number of polymeric solutions 
including poly(amic acid) and poly(acrylonitrile) using the electrospinning 
technique. By investigating the bending instability during the flight Reneker 
& co-workers [20, 21] proposed the experimental phenomenon and theory 
of electrospinning mechanical process (Figure 16.2). With the help of high￾speed cameras, the jet path has been observed and the inception and growth 
of the bending, whipping, and stretching motions were examined and it was 
found that it could reduce the cross-sectional area of the liquid up to 105 
times. Rutledge & co-workers [22] examined the solution parameters and 
processing parameters such as surface tension, flow rate, electrical current, 
etc., which influences the diameter of the liquid jet during electrospinning 
and an analytical model was developed to foretell the existence of a terminal 
jet diameter. 
In 2003, Larsen & co-workers [23] put forward the idea of fabricating 
core-shell composite ultrafine fiber using coaxial electrospinning. Chen 
et al. [24–26] in 2014 suggested the first ever triple coaxial electrospin￾ning technique to produce amorphous carbon nanotubes (CNTs). Jeong & 
co-workers [27] reported a method of incorporating antimicrobial actives 
such as silver nanoparticles (NPs) and Mefoxin in electrospun fibers. For 
the past couple of decades, electrospinning has been an area of notable 
research works. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 251 
FIGURE 16.2 Mathematical modeling of the electrospinning jet. 
16.3 SET-UP AND MECHANISM 
The electrospinning technique has been widely explored and used for the 
fabrication of different nanofibers for the past few decades. Spun nanofibers 
have a wide range of advantages including high surface area-to-volume ratio, 
tunable porosity, sufficient malleability to attain the required size, shape, and 
dimension and the adaptability to attain the required physical properties [3]. 
An electrospinning apparatus consists of three important components 
namely: (i) a high voltage power supply; (ii) a spinneret; and (iii) a grounded 
conducting collector [3]. Figure 16.3 depicts the schematic illustration of 
the set-up [28]. Though alternating current (AC) potential can be used for 
the purpose, direct current (DC) power supply is usually used [29–32]. The 
spinneret is associated with a syringe from which the solution of the polymer 
is supplied. The syringe pump enabled the controlled and constant delivery 
of the solution through the spinneret. DC voltage in the range of 10 kV is 
required in order to meet the electric field for the electrospinning process [7]. 
The process starts at the tip of the spinneret needle, where the droplet of the 
polymer solution is applied with a high potential difference. This will induce 
charges and eventually they will get dispersed over the collector surface. As 
a result of this, the droplets will experience two major kinds of electrostatic 252 Modern Magnetic Materials 
interactions; the electrostatic repulsion between the surface charges and the 
Coulombic interaction brought to bear by the external electric field [28]. The 
charged droplets that emerge from the tip of the spinneret are influenced by 
electrostatic forces and gradually deform into a cone known as the Taylor 
cone (Figure 16.3) [20, 29–31, 34]. Beyond a certain electric field strength 
value viz., threshold value, the electrostatic repulsion will exceed the surface 
tension offered by the polymer solution and hence compel the ejection of 
a liquid jet from the tip of the spinneret (nozzle). This electrified jet of the 
liquid then experiences a stretching, looping around and whipping process 
resulting in the production of long and fine threads [28]. During the flight 
Coulombic fission between the charge particles takes place and results in the 
evaporation of the solvent. 
FIGURE 16.3 Schematic illustration of the basic setup for electrospinning. The insets show 
a drawing of the electrified Taylor cone and a typical SEM image of the nonwoven mat of 
poly(vinyl pyrrolidone) (PVP) nanofibers deposited on the collector. 
The fabricated nanofibers will be amorphous, polycrystalline, dense, 
porous, hollow aligned or unaligned (random) [35]. The electrospun nanofi￾bers are usually obtained as randomly oriented unaligned or partially aligned 
fibrous mats. Figure 16.4 portrays the rendering process of these nanofibers. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 253 
The diameter of the formed nanofibers was usually in the range of 10 nm 
to a few micrometers. The length and the diameter of the nanofibers can be 
generally altered by changing the processing parameters and solution param￾eters including applied electric field, concentration of the polymer solution, 
feed rate, etc. [36]. 
FIGURE 16.4 The setup for electrospinning technique with different collecting methods: 
(a) with using a rotating single ground cylinder; (b) with using a single ground plate; 
(c) designing a practical dual ring; (d) designing a flexible dual bar; (e) the technique of 
electrospinning in vitro into cells; (f) using a practical single horizontal ring; (g) designing an 
electrospinning cells with polymer; (h) using a dual spinneret electrospinning technique (with 
second pink fibers); (i) electrospinning/electrospraying technique with parallel; and (j) also 
with a unique perpendicular spinnerets. 254 Modern Magnetic Materials 
16.4 BENDING INSTABILITY THEORY 
Positive and negative ions are formed when an external electric field is intro￾duced to a polymer solution, and they migrate in opposite directions. Posi￾tive ions are drawn to the negative electrode and vice-versa. The difference 
in the number of negative and positive ions in the polymer solution is called 
excess charge. In case of highly insulating polymer solution, salts like KCl, 
NaCl (1:1 electrolyte) are added which may dissociate into equal number of 
anions and cations. This can boost the polymer solution’s ionic conductivity 
without changing the excess charge since the addition of electrolyte only 
increases the ion per unit volume. The higher the conductivity, the faster the 
movement of excess charge will move in a certain direction under the effect 
of the applied electric field. 
When the polymer solution is encountered with the electrostatic field, it 
compels the surface of the solution to get charged, thereby causing the flood of 
ions through the polymer solution where the fluid jet is produced [28, 37–39]. 
The jet of the fluid emerges out from the peak of the cone resume to 
narrow down along the path through which it travels towards the collector. 
This mode of jetting is often referred to as electrohydrodynamic cone jet [40]. 
The jet of the fluid ejected from the needle of the spinneret initially follows a 
straight path. But later on, segments of a loop develop back-to-back bending 
instabilities. There are three stages to each cycle of the bending instability: 
•

 A laminar segment of the fluid jet that was initially straight suddenly 
starts to develop an array of bends; 
•

 The elongation of the segment of the jet in each bends and the array of 
bends eventually becomes sequence of spiraling loops with increasing 
diameter; and 
•

 The cross-sectional diameter of the fluid jet becomes thinner as the 
circumference of the loops get higher. 
The cycle of instability was found to be repeating several times on a 
smaller scale. It was also found that as time passes increasingly more insta￾bility in the cycle takes place, linearly decreasing the diameter of the fluid jet 
and thereby fabricating nanofibers. The axis of particular segment pointed in 
any direction (random orientation) occurs after the second cycle. The solvent 
in the jet evaporates before it hits the collector screen thereby producing 
electrospun nanofibers [40]. The bending instability was at first considered 
to be taking place as a result of the splitting of a single jet into a number of 
thin fiber filaments due to radial charge repulsion, which was known to be 
splaying. Reneker & Doshi [41] suggested that as a result of the concurrent Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 255 
stretching of the jet and the solvent evaporation the diameter of the fiber 
decreases. Also, the increased charge density causes the splitting of the fluid 
jet into smaller ones. This was expected to occur continuously, causing fibers 
with smaller diameter. But recent studies confirmed that the development of 
a non-axisymmetric or whipping instability is the reason for the stretching 
and bending of the fluid jet [34]. Warner & co-workers [42] as well as Shina 
and co-workers confirmed that in the shape of an inverted cone, the fluid 
jet’s unstable area appeared questioning the occurrence of multiple splitting 
which is in reality a single rapidly whipping jet (Figures 16.5(a) and (b)). 
Figure 16.5(c) shows the schematic illustration of different types of instabili￾ties ejected from the Taylor cone. 
FIGURE 16.5 Photographs illustrating the instability region of a liquid jet electrospun from 
an aqueous solution of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO). The capture time was on two different 
scales: (a) 1/250s; and (b) 18ns. (c) Schematic representation of various types of instabilities 
emerging from Taylor cone. 
16.5 FACTORS AFFECTING ELECTROSPINNING PROCESS 
There are two types of parameters that influence the electrospinning process 
and fiber creation: (i) system parameters; and (ii) process parameters. System 
parameters are those accompanied with the experimental set-up before the 
electrospinning process starts. This is usually based on the inference from 
previous works. Factors such as nature of the solvent, polymer used of the 
electrospinning, viscosity, conductivity, dielectric constant and surface tension 
of the solution can be brought under this category. Process parameters are 256 Modern Magnetic Materials 
those which are chosen after the experiment is being set-up. Factors including 
electrostatic field strength, flow/feed rate, the separation between the 
spinneret’s tip and the collector screen, ambient condition such as humidity, 
temperature, air velocity within the electrospinning chamber, concentration of 
the polymer solution, etc., falls under this division. These factors are supposed 
to influence the process and play an important role in determining the quality 
of the produced nanofibers [10, 43]. 
16.5.1 SYSTEM PARAMETER/SOLUTION PARAMETER 
16.5.1.1 CONCENTRATION 
Solution concentration determines the limiting boundaries for the fiber 
formation to occur since it can alter the viscosity and surface tension as 
well [44]. For the electrospun fiber formation to take place, a minimum 
concentration of the solution should be maintained. Several researchers 
reported that at low concentration of the polymer, a mixture of fibers and 
beads are formed and as gradually the concentration of the polymer solu￾tion increases, the appearance of spherical beads changes to spindle-like 
and later to uniform fibers with increased diameter due to the increased 
viscosity resistance [44–49]. Likewise, there is also an optimum concentra￾tion beyond which the continuous fiber formation declines. This is due to 
the difficulty in maintaining the solution flow at the tip of the needle which 
may further end up in the formation of large fibers [50]. Studies conducted 
by Tan & co-workers; Rutledge & co-workers; and Hsiao & co-workers 
[22, 44, 51] reported that at certain concentration level polymers such as 
PEO, PAN, PDLA show difficulty in forming the fiber via electrospin￾ning. Some other studies showed that by increasing the concentration level 
diameter of the fiber increases and pore size decreases to narrow in case of 
polystyrene (PS) solution [52]. In case of PEO solution made in water, at 
elevated concentration a bimodal distribution in the diameter of fiber was 
observed [44]. The average fiber diameter and the concentration of polymer 
solution were related as a power law relationship in case of PEO system. 
Table 16.1 shows a relation between the concentration and fiber diameter 
for certain polymers. Tan and co-workers also conducted a study in relating 
the variation in diameter of fiber and the morphology to the shape of the jet￾originating surface. The result was concordant with the studies conducted 
by Hsiao & co-workers [51]. Polymer Structural Formula Electrospinning Solution (Polymer/Solvent) Melting Fiber Diameter References 
Molecular Weight, Concentration Point (°C) (nm) 
PAN PAN/DMF 317 ~100 [76] 
M = 1,00,000, ~10 wt.% W
PVP PVP/Ethanol 130 ~1,500 [76] 
M = 13,00,000, ~10 wt.% W
PS PS/DMF 240 ~600 [35] 
M = 2,80,000, ~10 wt.% W
PVA PVA/Water 230–240 200–500 [76] 
M = 78,672, ~10 wt.% W
257 
TABLE 16.1 Properties of Some Typical Polymers and Their Corresponding Electrospun Fiber Diameters
Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers Polymer Structural Formula Electrospinning Solution (Polymer/Solvent) Melting Fiber Diameter References 
Molecular Weight, Concentration Point (°C) (nm) 
PMMA PMMA/DMF 130–140 ~300 [76] 
M = 60,000, ~8 wt.% W
PEO PEO/Water 62–64 ~300 [76] 
M = 3,00,000, ~6 wt.% W
258 TABLE 16.1 (Continued) 
Modern Magnetic Materials Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 259 
Surging morphology in fibers were accredited to the delayed drying of 
the solvent and the stress relaxation nature of the fiber exhibited at lower 
polymer concentration. It is obvious that the polymer solution concentra￾tion controls the spinning of fibers and influences the fiber structure and 
morphology. 
16.5.1.2 MOLECULAR WEIGHT OF THE POLYMER 
It is very important to note that the “molecular weight” of the polymer has a 
direct influence on the morphology of electrospun nanofibers. The molecular 
weight has showed a linear relationship with the viscosity of the polymer 
solution and the mixing-up of the polymer chain in solution [53]. Molecular 
weight also affects the electrical properties as well as other factors like surface 
tension, conductivity, and dielectric strength [49]. Solution of a polymer with 
relatively low molecular weight forms bead-like structures rather than clean 
fibers at a fixed concentration level. Polymer with high molecular weight is 
a favorite substrate for fabricating microfibers even at low concentration [54, 
55]. It is also noted that solution of high molecular weight polymers forms 
fibers with greater average diameter. The molecular weight of a polymer 
influences the number of mix-ups of polymer chains in a solution, thereby 
influencing the viscosity of the solution. Chain entanglement has a direct 
effect on the electrospinning process. Therefore, for instance, high molecular 
weight poly-L-lactic acid (HM-PLLA) will be able to maintain a sufficient 
number of chain entanglements even at a relatively low concentration of the 
polymer. This ensures an enough level of solution viscosity in order to render 
a uniform jet throughout the electrospinning process and hold back the effect 
associated with surface tension, i.e., as surface tension increases, there is a 
chance for obtaining fiber with beads. The association between molecular 
weight and bead production was investigated by Wilkes & coworkers [56] 
as well as Ramakrishna & co-workers [57]. For this, they have synthesized 
poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) with different chain lengths and molec￾ular weight ranging from 12.47 to 365.7 kDa. They identified an inverse 
relationship between the polymer’s molecular weight and the proportion 
of beads and droplets, i.e., with an increase in the molecular weight at a 
particular concentration, the number of beads and droplets decreases. It is 
obvious that polymers with high molecular weight is not always a neces￾sary element for the for the electrospinning process rather a better substitute 
which can ensure the interchain connectivity acquired as a result of the chain 
entanglement by adequate intermolecular interactions. Long & co-workers 260 Modern Magnetic Materials 
[58] as well as Hsiao & co-workers [59] have synthesized oligomer-sized 
phospholipids using electrospinning process from a solution of Lecithin into 
non-woven membranes [60, 61]. 
16.5.1.3 VISCOSITY 
One of the condemnatory factors influencing the structural morphology 
of the fabricated nanofiber is the viscosity of the polymer solution. The 
viscosity of the polymer solution has a direct relationship with the concentra￾tion in addition to the surface tension of the solution. Figure 16.6 shows the 
variation of morphology of electrospun polyethylene oxide (PEO) nanofiber 
with different viscosities. At low viscosity, no formation of continuous fiber 
was observed as well as at higher viscosity there was a trouble in the emer￾gence of the jet from the polymer solution. Therefore, as optimization of the 
viscosity for electrospinning was necessary. The studies conducted by Ko 
& co-workers [50] revealed that there was a significant effect of viscosity 
on silk nanofibers. Larrondo & Manley [17] reported that viscosity plays 
an important role while fabricating nanofibers through melt electrospinning. 
The fabrication of electrospun PLA nanofibers with different viscosities and 
concentration ranging from 1% to 5% by weight showed that no continuous 
nanofiber formation at a PLA concentration level below 3% [61]. By 
increasing the viscosity, the spherical beads are stretched, made longer and 
further transformed into spindle shaped nanofibers [62]. Apart from that, the 
studies conducted by Tan & co-workers [44] as well as Erman & co-worker 
[63] showed that the formation of larger fibers are often associated with 
more viscous polymer solution. 
Fong & Reneker [19] conducted a study on the viscosity of the polymer 
solution using PEO and concluded that the optimal viscosity range required 
for the uniform nanofiber formation to occur via electrospinning process is 
between 1 and 215 poise. This was concordant with the studies conducted 
by different other groups [15, 41, 65–66]. The molecular weight of the 
polymer, concentration of the polymer solution as well as the viscosity are 
interrelated. The relation between these three factors and the formation of 
electrospun nanofibers have been studied in detail using different polymeric 
systems such as PLGA (poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)), PEO (polyethylene 
oxide), PVA (polyvinyl alcohol), PMMA (poly(methyl acrylate)), PS, PLLA 
(poly(L-lactic acid)), gelatin, dextran, etc. [48, 54, 56, 62, 67–74]. Usually, 
protracted stress relaxation time were exhibited by highly viscous polymer 
solution. Hence it is possible to stave off the rupturing of the emerged jet Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 261 
while electrospinning. Furthermore, the viscosity of the polymer solution 
can also be used to determine the optimal range of concentration between 
which continuous fiber formation can be observed. In addition, there exists 
an exponential relation between the viscosity of the polymer solution and 
the diameter of electrospun fiber which can be explained by the following 
equation: 
d = 19.49η0.43 
where; η is the viscosity of the solution; and d is the diameter of the fiber 
which is usually expressed in nm [75]. 
16.5.1.4 SURFACE TENSION 
Another important parameter that decides the continuous electrospinning 
process is surface tension. Surface tension has an adverse effect such that 
it hinders the jet from becoming longer and narrow [76]. Surface tension 
can be considered as a function of the solvent composition rather than the 
polymer. The decrease in the surface tension of polymer solution results in 
nanofibers with less or no beaded structures because the solvent molecules 
would be capable of spreading over the mixed-up polymer molecules much 
more readily [49, 77]. The studies conducted by Hohman & co-workers 
[78] revealed that greater surface tension of the nanofiber solution is often 
associated with the inhibition of the process of electrospinning as a result 
of the instability offered by the jet and the triggering of sprayed droplets. 
The studies conducted by Haghi & Akbari [49] showed that the generation 
of different nanoscale structures associated with the electrospinning process 
such as beads, droplets, fibers have a direct relation with the surface tension 
of the solution. They also reported that the process can be run under the 
influence of a lower electric field strength if the spinning solution employed 
has a lower surface tension. It is to be noted that a solution having low 
surface tension could not be always employed for electrospinning process. 
Other solution parameters such as polymer concentration and viscosity are 
interrelated to surface tension in a much more complicated fashion. A study 
relating these three factors was conducted, and it was reported that surface 
tension is the governing factor in the case of solutions of low viscosity and 
also the formation of beads or beaded fiber was observed [41]. In addition, 
above a certain polymer concentration referred to as critical concentration, 
continuous fiber formation is observed and also the shape of the fiber is 
affected by the concentration. Furthermore, choosing a solution with low 262 Modern Magnetic Materials 
surface tension or the addition of suitable surfactant can induce the capacity 
of the electrospinning process to fabricate continuous fiber [62]. 
16.5.1.5 CONDUCTIVITY/SURFACE CHARGE DENSITY 
With some exceptions of dielectric material and charged ions in the poly￾mers, most of the polymer solution are conducting, which influences the 
jet formation. The type of the polymer, the solvent used and the presence of 
ionizable salt determines the conductivity of the solution [60]. It has been 
observed that at low solution conductivity the charging of the surface area 
and the capacitance between the electrodes will be very slow and the elec￾trostatic force is incapable of exceeding the surface tension and viscoelastic 
resistance to continue stretching the liquid body (by up to 105 times) [79, 
80]. It is also observed that there is a decrease in the diameter of electrospun 
nanofiber with an increase in the electrical conductivity of the solution while 
electrospinning. Hence the fluid jet generated from the highly conducting 
solution will experience a high tensile force. As a result, a considerable 
decrease in the diameter of the formed nanofiber has been observed. This 
was further confirmed by the studies conducted by Hsiao & co-workers 
[51]. They used PLLA as the polymer solution and used different salts such 
as KH2
PO4
, NaH2
PO4
, NaCl (fixed at 1% by weight). They found that the 
fabricated electrospun nanofiber were smooth and are free of beads and are 
of smaller diameter compared to those nanofibers fabricated from solution 
which doesn’t have salts. This proved that the presence of an electrolyte or 
a salt and a solvent which is highly conducting such as acetone, chloroform, 
ethyl acetate, etc. [79, 80] has significant effect on the morphology of elec￾trospun nanofibers, i.e., this inhibit the formation of bead in the fiber and 
lowers the fiber diameter to a range of 200–1,000 nm and in addition, the 
produced fibers are almost uniform [81]. 
The studies conducted by Baumgarten [15] revealed that the radius of 
the jet and the electrical conductivity have an exponential relationship, i.e., 
the radius of the jet is inversely proportional to the third root of electrical 
conductivity of a solution. Hayati and co-workers reported that under the 
influence of an extremely high electric field, a solution with high conductivity 
is exceedingly unstable which shows substantial bending instability and also 
large diameter distribution. Several groups have extended the study conducted 
by Hsiao [51] using different polymer systems such as PEO, collagen type 
I-PEO, PVA, polyacrylic acid (PAA), polyamide-6 and so on [19, 68, 72, 
82, 83]. Furthermore, in general, high charge densities are exhibited by ions Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 263 
of smaller size. Hence, the addition of these ions can furnish greater forces 
of elongation on nanofibers fabricated by electrospinning. Even so, with an 
outrageous electrical conductivity, the velocity of the ions will be higher, and 
as a result, the amount of solution emerging from the needle will be more. 
This causes a difficulty in vaporization of solvent leading to the incomplete 
evaporation before it hits the collector plate. Hence the generated nanofibers 
will be non-uniform consisting of bead-like structures. 
FIGURE 16.6 Variation in morphology of electrospun PEO nanofibers with different 
viscosities: (a) schematic representation; and (b) the corresponding scanning electron micro￾scope (SEM) images. 
16.5.2 PROCESSING PARAMETERS 
16.5.2.1 APPLIED VOLTAGE 
A critical factor in the electrospinning process is the applied voltage, since 
it controls the amount of charge applied to the solution. Figure 16.7 depicts 
the electrospinning process as a function of applied voltage. The strength 
of the electric field is directly influenced by the applied voltage and hence 264 Modern Magnetic Materials 
influences the electric forces on the Taylor cone and jet [84]. As the voltage 
increases the strength on the solution droplet also increases resulting in a 
greater jet elongation. However, it is observed that there is not much time 
for the jet to stretch before it hits the collector [61]. The flow of the fluid 
jet towards the collector causes charge transport under the effect of applied 
voltage. The quantity of polymer solution flowing from the tip of the needle 
can influence a change in the current (either increases or decreases). The 
studies conducted by Tan & co-workers [44] concluded that there is some 
sort of relation between the variation in the instability and variation in the 
spinning current. They demonstrated that there was a change in shape at the 
point of origin of the jet as the applied voltage increases. This had an effect 
on the structure and morphology of the fabricated fiber. Studies conducted 
on PEO/Water system revealed that there exists a direct relationship between 
the spinning current and the applied voltage, i.e., the spinning current 
increased as the applied voltage was increased [44]. The fiber formation is 
generally observed beyond a certain voltage known as critical voltage. When 
the critical voltage is attained an induction of the required charge on the solu￾tion as well as the electric field is observed. This initiates the electrospinning 
process. Different polymeric systems exhibit different end results when the 
applied voltage is varied. Reneker & Chun [85] reported that the diameter 
of the electrospun nanofiber is almost independent of the applied voltage in 
case of PEO system. Two arguments arose about the diameter of the fiber and 
the applied voltage. The first one is that a greater polymer emergence is often 
associated with a higher applied voltage, thereby resulting in a fiber with a 
large diameter. This was confirmed by an independent study conducted by 
Yuan’s group [72] as well as Erman’s group [63]. The later one is that an 
increase in electrostatic repulsive force is observed when the applied voltage 
is high, which forces the fluid jet to produce fiber with narrow diameter. 
However, in most cases at higher voltage, an increased Coulombic repul￾sive force in addition to a strong electric field was observed. This causes a 
prodigious stretching of the solution and eventually leads to the reduction in 
the diameter of the fiber and also causes a quick solvent evaporation from 
the fiber. It was further reported that at higher applied voltage, an increased 
stretching of the solution occurs and results in the formation of thinner fiber 
[66, 71]. Furthermore, an increase in the applied voltage causes a reduction 
in the fiber diameter [86]. After reaching a minimum value, the diameter of 
the fiber increases with each increment of voltage. 
Several researchers reported that at an elevated applied voltage, there 
exists an increased possibility of bead formation [44, 49, 63, 66, 71, 87–89]. 
After exceeding a certain optimal applied voltage further increase in the Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 265 
applied voltage make the process more unstable and the presence of more 
beads on the fiber was observed just like dewdrops in the shape of small 
spheres on spider web in the morning [90]. 
This was concordant with the previous reports [17, 91, 92]. A relationship 
between the applied voltage and fiber diameter was also tabulated. As the 
applied voltage was doubled the fiber diameter reduced to roughly half its 
original value. The studies conducted by Sas et al. [93] at a higher electric 
field/applied voltage yielded a fiber with decreased diameter and that can be 
represented by the equation: 
d ≈ V –1/2 
where; d is the fiber diameter; and V is the applied voltage. 
FIGURE 16.7 (a) General effect of increasing voltage on protruding droplet length and 
produced jet number with their corresponding field distribution. (b) Four jets from one drop 
each with a well-developed electrical bending coil with a high voltage. 
Hendrickson derived an equation showing minimum voltage required for 
the spinning of a suspended conducting hemispherical drop and is given as: 
V = 300 20πγ r
where; r is the radius of the Taylor cone; and γ is the surface tension of the 
polymer solution [93]. 
16.5.2.2 FLOW RATE/FEED RATE 
The electrospun nanofiber’s surface feature, geometry, and morphology are 
all influenced by the process flow rate. It has a great effect on the jet velocity 
and material transfer rate. Yuan & co-workers [94] reported that a low flow 
rate is most favorable for the process as it would provide adequate time 266 Modern Magnetic Materials 
for the solvent to evaporate. This is because when the flow rate increases, 
the jet of the polymer solution changes to periodic dripping, considerably 
increasing the fiber diameter and causing the formation of beaded structures 
were observed. Rabolt & co-workers [52] reported that when PS was used as 
the polymer solution, the pore diameter as well as the fiber diameter shows 
an increase with the feed rate. In addition to the flow rate, there is a minimum 
feed rate below which fiber formation is not observed. This is because at a 
lower flow rate, a rapid evaporation of the solvent before the solution leaves 
the needle was observed causing the clogging of the needle. 
16.5.2.3 DISTANCE BETWEEN THE NOZZLE AND COLLECTOR 
The nozzle-collector distance has an effect in controlling the fiber diameter 
and morphology. Studies revealed that a minimum distance has to be main￾tained, i.e., not too close or too far, in order to provide the fiber an enough 
time to dry before it hits the collector [44, 71, 95]. Indeed, if this condition 
is not satisfied, bead formation is observed. In case of electrospun PS fiber, 
it was observed that as the nozzle-collector distance decreases bead forma￾tion occurs [52]. It was also observed that small nozzle-collector distance 
resulted in small fiber in case of polysulfone [96]. Also, it was observed 
that by keeping the nozzle closer to the collector, flatter fiber formation is 
observed while increasing the distance, cylindrical fibers (i.e., fiber with 
circular cross-section) was found in the case of SLPF and nylon electrospun 
fiber [66]. When water is used as a solvent, a greater distance is required 
in order to provide sufficient time for the solvent to evaporate compared 
to systems with highly volatile organic solvents. Jalili and co-workers 
suggested that the electrospun fiber should be completely free of the solvent, 
i.e., to ensure complete vaporization of the solvent. Hence an optimization 
of the nozzle-collector distance was necessary. 
16.5.2.4 ENVIRONMENTAL PARAMETERS 
Besides the solution parameters and processing parameters, there are other 
factors that can also affect the electrospinning process and the morphology 
of the electrospun nanofiber. Those include temperature, humidity, air 
flow, moisture content, etc. Relative humidity (RH) and temperature play 
an important role in determining the surface features and morphology of 
electrospun nanofiber. Typically, the electrospinning process takes place at Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 267 
ambient temperature. As the temperature rises, so does the rate at which the 
solvent evaporates, thereby leading to fiber with large diameter [97]. A study 
was conducted to examine the influence of temperature on the electrospin￾ning process using Polyamide-6 as the polymer [83]. The investigation was 
carried out at a temperature range of 298 K to 333 K and was found that 
increasing the temperature has an effect on the fiber diameter, i.e., it forces 
the process to produce fiber with smaller diameter. This is because as the 
temperature increases viscosity of the solution decreases since temperature 
and viscosity are inversely proportional. Hence as viscosity decreases the 
fiber diameter also decreases [60]. Similarly, RH has a significant effect on 
the fiber formation. Srinivasarao & co-workers [98] reported that at elevated 
RH electrospinning process leads to the formation of fiber containing micro￾pores and nanopores on the surface as a result of the breathe figure effect. Due 
to the retained marks of the moisture droplets caused by the condensation as 
a result of the evaporative chilling of air moisture encompass the spinneret, 
breathe figures are observed [98]. It was reported that at lower humidity 
a reduced precipitation effect was observed and as a result, rapid solvent 
evaporation took place resulting in an electrospun nanofiber with greater 
diameter [99, 100]. However, studies conducted by Kocbek & co-workers 
[101] revealed that at higher RH condensation of the water was observed 
on the fluid jet surface which intercepts further elongation of the fiber. In 
addition, at a very low RH, solvent at the tip of the needle vaporizes rapidly 
which may block the tip of the needle [76]. 
16.6 PROPERTIES OF ELECTROSPUN NANOFIBERS 
Electrospun nanofibers have been largely studied due to their properties 
that are often affected by their size. In comparison with regular fiber, 
bulk polymer nanofibers have noteworthy difference in their thermal 
and mechanical properties. In addition to these properties, they also have 
advantageous properties including optical properties, thermal properties, 
size dependent effects and so on, which makes electrospun fibers a suitable 
substrate for reinforcements [16, 61, 102]. 
16.6.1 THERMAL PROPERTIES 
Detailed thermal analysis provides an exact idea about the nanostructure￾thermal property relationship. In a study using electrospun PLLA nanofiber 268 Modern Magnetic Materials 
it was observed that this fiber has a lower crystallinity, glass transition 
temperature (Tg) and melting point (Tm) compared to that of semi-crystalline 
PLLA resin. They also found that when air is used as the plasticizer, which 
increases the surface area to volume ratio of spun fiber which in turn lowers 
the glass transition temperature (Tg). The low crystallinity arises as a result 
of the rapid evaporation of the solvent and fiber solidification at the end of 
the process [51]. Kim & Lee [103] showed that as the heat of crystalline 
melting increases a considerable reduction in the glass transition tempera￾ture (Tg) and peak crystallization temperature (Tc) was observed in case of 
electrospun polyethylene terephthalate (PET) and polyethylene naphthalene 
(PEN). This is due to the increase in segmental mobility with an increase in 
heat of crystalline melting. Tan & co-workers [44] reported that compared 
to the PEO powder, PEO nanofibers have lower melting point and heat of 
fusion. This can be related to the poor crystallinity of the electrospun PEO 
nanofibers. The thermal degradation study was carried out using TGA ther￾mogram of PEN and PET before and after the electrospinning process, and 
it was reported that upon electrospinning there was a considerable decrease 
in the intrinsic viscosity of these polymers [103]. Reduction in the intrinsic 
viscosity as a result of the thermal degradation is considered to be the reason 
for the decrease in Tg and Tc. 
16.6.2 OPTICAL PROPERTIES 
Electrospun nanofibers have been mainly employed for reinforcement to 
manufacture optically transparent composites. Factors including the content of 
fiber, size, and index of refraction of the reinforced fiber has a great influence 
on the optical transparency of the composite [104]. Ramakrishna & co-workers 
[105] conducted a study showing the optical properties of electrospun TiO2 
nanofibers. Prior to their study, there was only a little knowledge about 
the relationship between the fiber diameter and optical band gap energy. 
However, their studies shred light over this. The optical absorption spectra 
were obtained using a UV-Visible spectrophotometer (Shimadzu UV-1601) 
with a resolution of 1 nm. With the excitation of the samples at 320 nm, 
the photoluminescence spectra (PL) were recorded. Figure 16.8(a) shows the 
UV-visible spectra of the fiber with different diameters. As the fiber diameter 
increases a slight shift in the spectra was observed. In addition, several 
research groups reported that as the size of the particles decreases in case of 
TiO2
 nanofibers a hypsochromic shift was observed [106–110]. However, no 
such shift in the wavelength was observed in case of the PL spectra and a peak Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 269 
appeared at 400 nm for the fiber (Figure 16.8(b)). Tang & Liu [104] produced 
a composite between PVA composite film and high volume of electrospun 
cellulose nanofiber. The film was capable of transmitting visible light with 
a transmittance of 75%. It has been suggested that if the nanofiber which is 
used as the reinforcement has a diameter less than 400 nm, the refraction on 
these fibers by the visible light will be not so prominent and hence will be 
transparent [102, 104]. Park & co-workers [112] reported that using PAN 
or PAA optically transparent and cable-like electrospun nanofibers can be 
fabricated at considerably high RH. 
16.6.3 MECHANICAL PROPERTIES 
The electrospun nanofibers have advantageous mechanical properties such 
as tensile strength, elastic moduli, toughness, etc. It has been observed that 
an inverse relationship exists between the fiber diameter and its strength, 
i.e., as the fiber diameter decreases, an increase in the strength of the fiber is 
observed. These are termed as size-dependent mechanical properties. Chew 
et al. [113] reported that in the case of electrospun PCL fiber as the diameter 
lowered from using the PCL fibers [114, 115]. 
FIGURE 16.8 (a) Absorption spectra of TiO2
 nanofibers; and (b) corresponding PL spectra. 
Similarly, an almost identical result was obtained using PAN fibers [116]. 
Park & co-workers [117] conducted a study on mechanical properties of 270 Modern Magnetic Materials 
various electrospun nylon-6,6/cyclic butylene terephthalate (CBT) composite 
fibers. In addition, in order to understand the property enhancement, they 
compared the results obtained with nylon-6,6 nanofibers and CBT film. 
Zhang [118] conducted a study on the mechanical property of random and 
aligned electrospun nylon-6 nanofiber. Figure 16.9(a) shows the relationship 
between the Young’s modulus and fiber diameter while Figure 16.9(b) shows 
that of tensile strength and fiber diameter. In conclusion, the aligned fiber has 
enhanced elastic modulus as well as tensile strength compared to the random 
oriented one. 
16.6.4 OTHER FIBER PROPERTIES 
There are other factors which can also enhance or affect the properties 
including pore size, molecular orientation, fiber structure, specific surface 
area, etc. Either the nature of the polymers or the internal structure of the 
fabricated fiber or both can be influential over the properties of electro￾spun nanofiber. Therefore, modifying the molecular orientation or internal 
structure definitely has an effect on modifying the properties [119–124]. In 
addition, the investigation and the optimization of molecular orientation is 
crucial due to their potential applications because the orientation can greatly 
alter other properties of the polymer including electrical, mechanical, 
thermal, and optical properties [120]. At sufficiently high drawn ratios and 
rates of strain, those electrospun nanofibers will be able to attain a higher 
degree of molecular orientation along the fiber axis while electrospinning 
[111]. As a result of the chain-entanglement while electrospinning, poly￾meric nanofibers possessing rigid-rod like molecular structure have a higher 
molecular orientation compared to fibers with softer molecular structure. A 
higher molecular orientation is possessed by fine nanofibers compared to 
that of chunky nanofibers since there is a possibility of random orientation of 
the polymer in chunky fiber while it is restricted in case of fiber nanofibers 
[125–128]. 
Altering the fiber diameter while electrospinning has a direct effect on 
the orientation of orders structure in case of electrospun liquid crystalline 
polymeric fibers [121]. 
The specific surface area of a nanofiber has an inverse relation with the 
fiber diameter, i.e., as the fiber diameter reduces to nanometer scale, an 
elevation in the specific surface area was observed [129]. The dimension of 
the electrospun nanofiber is in the range of 10 nm to 1 µm which indicates 
that those fibers have a surface area which is in the range of 300 to 3 m2
g–1.  (a)(b) 
Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 271 
Since the electrospun nanofibers possess a high specific surface area it will 
deliver enough area of contact between the fiber and the polymer matrix, 
thereby enhancing the interaction between them. Figure 16.10 shows size 
effect of different fibers on the specific surface area. 
FIGURE 16.9 (a) Young’s modulus vs. fiber diameter curves; and (b) tensile strength vs. 
fiber diameter curves for randomly oriented fiber mats and aligned fiber films. 
FIGURE 16.10 Dependence of specific surface area on fiber diameter. 
The pore size can also affect the properties of electrospun nanofiber. A 
change in the solvent composition, temperature of the solution and another 
factor can be influential over the total porosity and pore interconnectivity. 272 Modern Magnetic Materials 
There exists a direct relationship between the fiber diameter and pore size, 
i.e., a decrease in the pore size was observed with the decrease in the fiber 
diameter [130]. The study leading to this conclusion was done using a non￾woven electrospun nanofiber planted in an epoxy matrix [111, 131]. Figure 
16.11 shows a cross-section of non-woven electrospun nanofiber embedded 
in the epoxy matrix with two different fiber diameters and pore sizes. At a 
fiber diameter of 309 nm pores with size in the range of 1,000–2,000 nm was 
obtained while a larger pore with size of about 5,000 nm was observed when 
the diameter was 520 nm. An electrospun nanofiber composite with a pore 
size of about 100 µm was obtained when the fiber collector used was rotating 
frame cylinder. Furthermore, they also observed that the pore size can be 
varied even without changing the fiber diameter [132]. The investigations on 
the co-electrospinning of sacrificial fibers in addition to stable fibers pointed 
to the fact that the removal of the sacrificial fiber caused large pores on the 
stable fiber [133]. The special consideration of pore size would provide 
additional information which may lead to new potential application in the 
fabrication of electrospun nanofiber composites. 
FIGURE 16.11 Cross-section of PAN nonwovens embedded in an epoxy matrix with fiber 
diameter of (a) 309 nm; and (b) 520 nm. 
16.7 MAGNETIC NANOFIBERS (MNFS) BY ELECTROSPINNING 
Amongst the recent development in nanoscience and nanotechnology, 
nanofibers, one of the most attractive one-dimensional nanostructures have 
attained great attention, which in turn can be attributed to the unique physical 
properties it possesses. Their large surface area-to-volume ratio creates 
anisotropic physical properties that cannot be achieved in their bulk form 
[134–136]. Magnetic nanofibers (MNFs) are also found to possess excellent Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 273 
EM performance, apparent magnetism such as paramagnetism, ferromag￾netism, diamagnetism, and other properties like superparamagnetic effect, 
macroscopic tunneling effect and so on. These distinctive properties of MNFs 
make them suitable for various potential applications like ultrahigh-density 
data storages, sensors, drug delivery system, catalysis, biomedical applica￾tions, and so on [137–139]. The most important factors to be considered 
in preparing these magnetic nanostructures is to get uniform dispersion of 
magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) and the suitable method for fabricating them. 
The main limitation of the nanofibers synthesized from simply blended solu￾tion is that, in it, the MNPs cannot fully align along the external magnetic 
field and are not uniformly dispersed, because they are arrested within a 
solid polymer matrix [140, 141]. All these limitations are now overthrown 
through a new and successful technique called electrospinning. 
Electrospinning is an effective and simple method for the fabrication of 
nanofibers where continuous fibers are stretched in the form of a liquid jet 
from a polymer solution or melts by electrostatic force using high voltage 
[142]. Generally electrospinning can be subdivided into: (i) needle-based; 
and (ii) needleless techniques (Figure 16.12) [143]. In the needle-based 
method, a polymer solution or melt is pressed through a needle into a strong 
electrical field, thus the polymer is drawn into the substrate, and in this way, 
the fiber is stretched and thinned so that diameters of some 10 to some 100 
nanometers are reached. The needleless method is a wire-based technique in 
which a wire is coated with a polymer solution or melt which is drawn to the 
second wire by the strong electrical field between them. Similarly, by using 
rotating cylinders and other geometries as electrodes, the amount of fibers 
formed per time and their alignment can be modified. In both these methods 
Taylor-cones are formed between both electrodes. 
16.7.1 POLYMERS FOR ELECTROSPINNING 
The most commonly employed electrospinning polymers include water 
soluble polyethylene glycol (PEG or PEO), polyacrylonitrile (PAN) [144– 
146], which are often used as the precursors for carbon nanofibers (CNFs) 
and poly(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL) which is mainly used in cell growth applica￾tions [147, 148]. Polymers can play the following roles in MNFs: (i) as a 
template to control the size, shape, and structure; (ii) as protective coatings, 
insulators, separators or molding materials that are not affected by external 
environment; and (iii) the mechanical properties associated with MNFs are 
provided by these polymers. 274 Modern Magnetic Materials 
FIGURE 16.12 Different electrospinning techniques: (a) needle-based; (b) wire-based; and 
(c) using a rotating cylinder. 
Currently, there are four main methods for the preparation of MNFs 
through electrospinning: (i) MNPs are added to the polymer solution and 
the composite MNPs are prepared directly from the solution; (ii) through 
sol gel and electrospinning technique the precursor composite nanofibers are 
first prepared, followed by calcination to obtain MNFs; (iii) by using organic 
fibers prepared by electrospinning as a template, MNFs pipes can be produced 
by coating with metal salt sol; and (iv) MNFs with different morphologies 
and features can also be prepared by this method or atomic layer deposition 
method. Preparation of composite MNFs by several methods combined with 
the electrospinning method is shown in Table 16.2. 
16.7.2 FIELD ASSISTED ELECTROSPINNING TECHNOLOGY 
MNFs with polycarbonate urethane (PCU) as a polymer filled with nickel 
NPs has been synthesized by Guarino et al. The needle-based electrospin￾ning technique was utilized for that. The counter electrode with permanent 
magnets was modified, thus creating a constant magnetic field perpendicular 
to the electric field, leading to aligned MNFs in between the magnetic poles 
Figure 16.13. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 275 
TABLE 16.2 Preparation of Different Magnetic Composite NFs by Electrospinning Combining 
with Different Methods 
MNFs Fabrication Method Morphology Diameter 
CoFe2
O4 Sol-gel method Uniform and surface are smooth 100 nm 
NiFe2
O4 Calcination A pure phase with cubic spinel 64±18 nm 
SrFe12O19 Coating Both anatase phase and rutile phase 500~600 nm 
NaGdF4:0.5% Calcination and Rough, good dispersion and 246.06±5.84 nm 
+ Dy3 fluorination uniform size 
(PANI) Au, Lay deposit Both crystallites and POSS 700 nm 
Fe3
O4
 @Au molecules co-existed 
α-Fe2
O3 Sol-gel and layer A dense silica layer deposit on the – 
deposit surface 
CuFe2
O4
 @ Chemical A high specific surface area 200 nm 
CeO2 precipitation methods 
FIGURE 16.13 Magnetic field assisted needle-based electrospinning method. 
Nickel ferrite-barium titanate core shell nanofibers were developed by 
magnetic field assisted electrospinning technique, allowing them to assemble 
into disks or films in a uniform or gradient magnetic field [149]. 276 Modern Magnetic Materials 
16.7.3 CLASSIFICATION OF MAGNETIC NANOFIBERS (MNFS) 
16.7.3.1 FERRITE-BASED MAGNETIC NANOFIBERS (MNFS) 
Ferrite based MNFs are composed of iron, oxygen, and many other metals. 
Generally, they possess high resistivity and dielectric properties. Among 
the different categories of ferrite lattice, the most commonly used magnetic 
materials are magnetite-lead ferrite [150, 151], garnet-type ferrite [152], 
spinel-type ferrite [153], and perovskite ferrite [154]. 
Shen et al. [154] reported that SrFe12O19 magnetite lead nanofibers 
fabricated by sol-gel assisted electrospinning and calcination process have 
a diameter of about 100 nm and their magnetic properties are related to the 
structure and size of grains. MNFs with fine performance can be prepared 
by spinel-type ferrite. The pure single-phase spinel Ni Zn Fe O NF 0.2 0.8 2 4
membranes were fabricated by Streckova et al. [155] via needleless electros￾pinning and conventional thermal treatment of the precursor fibers at 800°C 
for 4 hours in air. 
16.7.3.2 METAL-BASED MNFS 
Metal-based MNFs are mainly composed of Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and their 
alloy in the transition metal zone. These ferromagnetic materials with strong 
magnetic properties find most extensive applications in high density magnetic 
recording, sensitive components, biological, and medical engineering [155]. 
Smooth, unceasing, hydrogen-free, and pure nickel metal NFs with an average 
diameter of 120 nm by electrospinning method was prepared by Barakat et al. 
[156] The nickel NFs thus obtained were vacuously dried and then calcined in 
an argon atmosphere at 700°C. These NFs showed unique magnetic proper￾ties, and much enhanced coercivities compared to their bulk materials. 
16.7.4 APPLICATIONS OF MNFS 
16.7.4.1 BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS 
The biocompatible magnetic materials are widely used in biomedical applica￾tions such as biological separation and purification, enzyme immobilization, 
drug release and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) due to the advantages 
of easy operation, separation, and non-toxic properties. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 277 
According to the principle of controlled drug release, the drug release 
system can be grouped into the following factors: 
• diffusion control system; 
• chemical control system; 
• solvent activation system; and 
• regulatory release system. 
The unique properties of magnetic nanomaterials are largely used in the 
controlled release of drugs, such as: 
• magnetic response; 
• biocompatibility; 
• high specific surface area; 
• low toxicity; 
• high transport efficiency; 
• targeted therapy; 
• controlled size; 
• biodegradability; and 
• super-paramagnetism.


Researchers such as Kim et al. [157] synthesized electrospun magnetic 
composite nanofibers which was composed of chemically-cross-linkable 
temperature-responsive polymers, MNPs with an anti-cancer drug. It has 
been showing that 70% of human melanoma cells died under the drug effect 
in 5 minutes. 
16.7.4.2 SENSING AND ELECTRONIC DEVICES 
Magnetic nanomaterials can be inserted into CNFs in order to obtain 
magnetic, dielectric, and adsorptive properties for sensing applications. A 
kind of composite polydopamine (PDA)-laccase (Lac)-nickel nanoparticle 
loaded CNFs (NiCNFs) was developed and a magnetic glass carbon 
electrode (MGCE) was added to separate and immobilize the composite 
(Figure 16.14) [158]. 
Flexible magnetic membranes based on bacterial cellulose (BC) NFs 
with amphiphilicity were prepared initially by the in-situ synthesis of the 
Fe3
O4 NPs on the BC NFs and then the fluoroalkyl silane (FAS) modification 
(Figure 16.15) [159]. The magnetometric measurements revealed that these 
membranes exhibited superparamagnetic behaviors and could be magneti￾cally actuated. Magnetically responsive BC membranes hydrophobic and 278 Modern Magnetic Materials 
lipophobic surface find potential applications in electronic actuators, magne￾tographic printing, information storage, EM shielding coating and so on. 
FIGURE 16.14 Guidelines to prepare PDA-Lac-NiCNFs composite and biosensors. 
16.7.4.3 WASTEWATER TREATMENT 
The unique properties of MNFs such as, super-paramagnetism, good adsorp￾tion properties, ease of recycling, are explored in the application in industrial 
wastewater treatment [160]. Compared to other traditional adsorbents MNFs 
have many advantages like higher adsorption rate, lower cost, small size 
with larger surface area and magnetic response [161]. In wastewater treat￾ment MNFs are mainly used for the adsorption of dyes and heavy metals. 
Lead adsorption from pollutedwater was developed by fabricated cellulose 
acetate MNFs were fabricated. Bhaumik et al. [162] fabricated composite 
NFs of polyaniline/FeO (PANI/FeO) for the reductive degradation and Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 279 
removal of Congo red from aqueous solutions. The degradation efficiency 
of Congo red increased when the initial concentration and solution pH 
decreased, however, it decreased on decreasing the dosage of the composite 
NF. Magnetic CuFe2
O4
@CeO2
 NFs were also found to be effective for dye 
removal. 
FIGURE 16.15 Flexible magnetic nano-hybrid membrane with amphiphobic surface. 
Most of the inorganic MNFs exhibited greater catalytic efficiency, hence 
these materials can be easily recycled using magnets. Li et al. [163]; and Chen 
et al. [164]. fabricated catalytic magnetic nanocomposite fibers. α-Fe2
O3
 NFs 
used as an effective catalyst were integrated for degradation and decoloriza￾tion of methyl orange in aqueous solution, and the decolorization efficiency 
of these MNFs was more than 99% in a short period time of 10 min under 
the optimum conditions [111]. 
In the design of waste water treatment arrangement, a porous catalytic 
scaffold and a nanostructured photocatalyst in the reactors have to be 
considered. Slurry reactor (Figure 16.16(a)) and the stationary reactor 
(Figure 16.16(b)) are two types of photocatalytic reactors for wastewater 
treatment. Ultrafiltration and membrane filtration are the two common 
membrane filtration techniques used for the effective recovery of NF 280 Modern Magnetic Materials 
photocatalyst. It was revealed that the activity of magnetic FeO3
 and Fe/ 
TiO2
/SnO2
 hybrid NF photocatalyst was very high. The uniform NFs cata￾lyst in organic, aqueous, and organic/photocatalytic water medium can be 
recovered easily from the product phase [64]. 
FIGURE 16.16 Different types of photocatalytic reactor arrangements: (a) slurry reactor; 
(b) immobilized reactor; and (c) continuous tubular flow reactor. 
16.8 CONCLUSION 
The unique physio-chemical properties and features made nanofibers 
interesting one-dimensional nanomaterials for a wide range of research 
and commercial applications. Till date, materials of many sorts have been 
manufactured into nanofibers using electrospinning techniques. The most 
advanced strategy involves incorporating metallic silver and gold NPs, as 
well as metal oxides based on titanium, zinc, copper, and iron. Other relevant 
features, such as mechanical, magnetic, catalytic, and optical capabilities, 
can be adjusted or bestowed on these inorganic compounds in the nano￾metric regime, expanding the prospect of developing multi-functional fibrous 
materials with broader application areas [33]. The electrospinning setup has 
been tweaked to allow for the fabrication of core-shell or hollow structures 
as well as uniaxially aligned or layer-by-layer stacked films. In addition 
to practical developments, theoretical modeling has advanced to provide 
a comprehensive guideline for better understanding of the electrospinning Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 281 
process [7]. MNFs have gained much attention in the recent years is mainly 
due to the difference in their magnetic properties in the bulk and on the 
surface. Through various functional modifications, their properties can be 
enhanced, facilitating their applications in a broader area. 
KEYWORDS 
• alternating current 
• chain entanglement 
• dimethylformamide 
• direct current 
• electrospinning technique 
• fiber diameter 
• magnetic nanofibers 
• Taylor cone 
REFERENCES 
1.

Li, Y., Yang, X. Y., Feng, Y., Yuan, Z. Y., & Su, B. L., (2012). One-dimensional metal oxide 
nanotubes, nanowires, nanoribbons, and nanorods: Synthesis, characterizations, properties 
and applications. Critical Reviews in Solid State and Materials Sciences, 37, 1–74. 
2. Liu, J., Xu, J., Hu, W., Yang, J., & Yu, S., (2016). Systematic synthesis of tellurium 
nanostructures and their optical properties: From nanoparticles to nanorods, nanowires, 
and nanotubes. ChemNanoMat., 2, 167–170. 
3. Gugulothu, D., Barhoum, A., Nerella, R., Ajmer, R., & Bechlany, M., (2018). Fabrication 
of nanofibers: Electrospinning and non-electrospinning techniques. Handbook of 
Nanofibers, 1–34. 
4. Yarin, A. L., Koombhongse, S., & Reneker, D. H., (2001). Taylor cone and jetting from 
liquid droplets in electrospinning of nanofibers. J. Appl. Phys., 90, 4836–4846. 
5. Taylor, G. I., (1964). Disintegration of water drops in an electric field. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London. Series A. Mathematical and Physical Sciences, 280, 383–397. 
6. Bellan, L. M., & Craighead, H. G., (2009). Nanomanufacturing using electrospinning. J. 
Manuf. Sci. Eng., 131. 
7. D., & Xia, Y., (2004). Electrospinning of nanofibers: Reinventing the wheel? Advanced 
Materials, 16, 1151–1170. 
8. Rodríguez-Tobías, H., Morales, G., & Grande, D., (2019). Comprehensive review on 
electrospinning techniques as versatile approaches toward antimicrobial biopolymeric 
composite fibers. Materials Science and Engineering: C, 101, 306–322. 282 Modern Magnetic Materials 
9. Rayleigh, L., (1882). XX. On the equilibrium of liquid conducting masses charged with 
electricity. The London, Edinburgh, and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of 
Science, 14, 184–186. 
10. Khan, W. S., Asmatulu, R., Ceylan, M., & Jabbarnia, A., (2013). Recent progress on 
conventional and non-conventional electrospinning processes. Fibers and Polymers, 14, 
1235–1247. 
11. Yarin, A. L., Kataphinan, W., & Reneker, D. H., (2005). Branching in electrospinning of 
nanofibers. J. Appl. Phys., 98, 064501. 
12.

Zeleny, J., (1914). The electrical discharge from liquid points, and a hydrostatic method 
of measuring the electric intensity at their surfaces. Physical Review, 3, 69. 
13. Anton, F., (1934). Process and Apparatus for Preparing Artificial Threads. Original 
Filed: Dec. 5. 1930; a Sheets-Sheet 1: Oct; 2; 1934. 
14. Hayati, I., Bailey, A. I., & Tadros, T. F., (1987). Investigations into the mechanisms of 
electrohydrodynamic spraying of liquids: I. Effect of electric field and the environment 
on pendant drops and factors affecting the formation of stable jets and atomization. 
Journal of Colloid and Interface Science, 117, 205–221. 
15. Baumgarten, P. K., (1971). Electrostatic spinning of acrylic microfibers. J Colloid 
Interface Sci., 36, 71–79. 
16. Subbiah, T., Bhat, G. S., Tock, R. W., Parameswaran, S., & Ramkumar, S. S., (2005). 
Electrospinning of nanofibers. J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 96, 557–569. 
17. Larrondo, L., & St. John, M. R., (1981). Electrostatic fiber spinning from polymer melts. 
I. Experimental observations on fiber formation and properties. Journal of Polymer 
Science: Polymer Physics Edition, 19, 909–920. 
18. Chun, H., (1997). Effect of Molecular Characteristics on Strength of Elastomer. The 
University of Akron. 
19. Fong, H., & Reneker, D. H., (1999). Elastomeric nanofibers of styrene–butadiene–styrene 
triblock copolymer. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics, 37, 3488–3493. 
20. Reneker, D. H., Yarin, A. L., Fong, H., & Koombhongse, S., (2000). Bending instability 
of electrically charged liquid jets of polymer solutions in electrospinning. Journal of 
Applied Physics, 87, 4531–4547. 
21. Reneker, D. H., & Yarin, A. L., (2008). Electrospinning jets and polymer nanofibers. 
Polymer (Guildf), 49, 2387–2425. 
22. Fridrikh, S. V., Jian, H. Y., Brenner, M. P., & Rutledge, G. C., (2003). Controlling the 
fiber diameter during electrospinning. Phys. Rev. Lett., 90, 144502. 
23. Larsen, G., Velarde-Ortiz, R., Minchow, K., Barrero, A., & Loscertales, I. G., (2003). 
A method for making inorganic and hybrid (organic/inorganic) fibers and vesicles 
with diameters in the submicrometer and micrometer range via sol− gel chemistry and 
electrically forced liquid jets. J. Am. Chem. Soc., 125, 1154, 1155. 
24.

Chen, Y., Lu, Z., Zhou, L., Mai, Y. W., & Huang, H., (2012). Triple-coaxial electrospun 
amorphous carbon nanotubes with hollow graphitic carbon nanospheres for high￾performance Li ion batteries. Energy Environ. Sci., 5, 7898–7902. 
25.

Yao, Y., Huang, Z., Xie, P., Lacey, S. D., Jacob, R. J., Xie, H., Chen, F., et al., (2018). 
Carbothermal shock synthesis of high-entropy-alloy nanoparticles. Science, 359, 
1489–1494. 
26.

Lu, P. H., Xie, D. G., Liu, B. Y., Ai, F., Zhang, Z. R., Jin, M. S., Zhang, X. F., et al., 
(2018). Highly Deformable and Mobile Palladium Nanocrystals as Efficient Carbon 
Scavengers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.00207. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 283 
27. Kim, J., Lee, J., Kwon, S., & Jeong, S., (2009). Preparation of biodegradable polymer/ 
silver nanoparticles composite and its antibacterial efficacy. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 
9, 1098–1102. 
28. Li, D., & Xia, Y., (2004). Electrospinning of nanofibers: Reinventing the wheel? 
Advanced Materials, 16, 1151–1170. 
29. Reneker, D. H., & Chun, I., (1996). Nanometre diameter fibers of polymer, produced by 
electrospinning. Nanotechnology, 7, 216. 
30. Frenot, A., & Chronakis, I. S., (2003). Polymer nanofibers assembled by electrospinning. 
Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 8, 64–75. 
31.

Huang, Z. M., Zhang, Y. Z., Ramakrishna, S., & Lim, C. T., (2004). Electrospinning and 
mechanical characterization of gelatin nanofibers. Polymer (Guildf), 45, 5361–5368. 
32. Kessick, R., Fenn, J., & Tepper, G., (2004). The use of AC potentials in electrospraying 
and electrospinning processes. Polymer (Guildf), 45, 2981–2984. 
33. Rodríguez-Tobías, H., Morales, G., & Grande, D., (2019). Comprehensive review on 
electrospinning techniques as versatile approaches toward antimicrobial biopolymeric 
composite fibers. Materials Science and Engineering: C, 101, 306–322. 
34. Hohman, M. M., Shin, M., Rutledge, G., & Brenner, M. P., (2001). Electrospinning and 
electrically forced jets. II. Applications. Physics of Fluids, 13, 2221–2236. 
35. Ajayan, P. M., (1993). Capillarity-induced filling of carbon nanotubes. Nature, 361, 
333, 334. 
36. Wright, D., York, A. E., Coleman, K., Green, M. H., & Hutchison, J., (1999). Capillarity 
and silver nanowire formation observed in single walled carbon nanotubes. Chemical 
Communications, 699, 700. 
37. Caruso, R. A., Schattka, J. H., & Greiner, A., (2001). Titanium dioxide tubes from sol–gel 
coating of electrospun polymer fibers. Advanced Materials, 13, 1577–1579. 
38. Dong, H., Prasad, S., Nyame, V., & Jones, W. E., (2004). Sub-micrometer conducting 
polyaniline tubes prepared from polymer fiber templates. Chemistry of Materials, 16, 
371–373. 
39. Ochanda, F., Atkinson, A., & Jones, W., (2003). Gold nanotubes by fiber templating 
techniques. In: Abstracts of Papers of the American Chemical Society (Vol. 226, pp. 
7547–7552). Amer Chemical Soc 1155 16th St, NW, Washington, DC 20036 USA. 
40. Cloupeau, M., & Prunet-Foch, B., (1990). Electrostatic spraying of liquids: Main 
functioning modes. J. Electrostat., 25, 165–184. 
41. Doshi, J., & Reneker, D. H., (1995). Electrospinning process and applications of 
electrospun fibers. J. Electrostat., 35, 151–160. 
42. Warner, S. B., Buer, A., Ugbolue, S. C., Rutledge, G. C., & Shin, M. Y., (1998). A 
fundamental investigation of the formation and properties of electrospun fibers. National 
Textile Center Annual Report, 83, 90. 
43.

Ren, L. F., Xia, F., Shao, J., Zhang, X., & Li, J., (2017). Experimental investigation of the 
effect of electrospinning parameters on properties of superhydrophobic PDMS/PMMA 
membrane and its application in membrane distillation. Desalination, 404, 155–166. 
44. Deitzel, J. M., Kleinmeyer, J., Harris, D. E. A., & Tan, N. C. B., (2001). The effect of 
processing variables on the morphology of electrospun nanofibers and textiles. Polymer 
(Guildf), 42, 261–272. 
45. Liu, H., & Hsieh, Y., (2002). Ultrafine fibrous cellulose membranes from electrospin￾ning of cellulose acetate. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics, 40, 
2119–2129. 284 Modern Magnetic Materials 
46. Ryu, Y. J., Kim, H. Y., Lee, K. H., Park, H. C., & Lee, D. R., (2003). Transport properties 
of electrospun nylon 6 nonwoven mats. European Polymer Journal, 39, 1883–1889. 
47. McKee, M. G., Wilkes, G. L., Colby, R. H., & Long, T. E., (2004). Correlations of 
solution rheology with electrospun fiber formation of linear and branched polyesters. 
Macromolecules, 37, 1760–1767. 
48. Ki, C. S., Baek, D. H., Gang, K. D., Lee, K. H., Um, I. C., & Park, Y. H., (2005). 
Characterization of gelatin nanofiber prepared from gelatin–formic acid solution. 
Polymer (Guildf), 46, 5094–5102. 
49. Haghi, A. K., & Akbari, M., (2007). Trends in electrospinning of natural nanofibers. 
Physica Status Solidi (a), 204, 1830–1834. 
50. Sukigara, S., Gandhi, M., Ayutsede, J., Micklus, M., & Ko, F., (2003). Regeneration 
of bombyx mori silk by electrospinning—Part 1: Processing parameters and geometric 
properties. Polymer (Guildf), 44, 5721–5727. 
51.

Zong, X., Kim, K., Fang, D., Ran, S., Hsiao, B. S., & Chu, B., (2002). Structure and 
process relationship of electrospun bioabsorbable nanofiber membranes. Polymer, 43, 
4403–4412. 
52. Megelski, S., Stephens, J. S., Chase, D. B., & Rabolt, J. F., (2002). Micro-and nanostruc￾tured surface morphology on electrospun polymer fibers. Macromolecules, 35, 8456–8466. 
53. Yarin, A. L., Koombhongse, S., & Reneker, D. H., (2001). Taylor cone and jetting from 
liquid droplets in electrospinning of nanofibers. J. Appl. Phys., 90, 4836–4846. 
54. Koski, A., Yim, K., & Shivkumar, S., (2004). Effect of molecular weight on fibrous PVA 
produced by electrospinning. Materials Letters, 58, 493–497. 
55.

Zhao, Y. Y., Yang, Q. B., Lu, X. F., Wang, C., & Wei, Y., (2005). Study on correlation 
of morphology of electrospun products of polyacrylamide with ultrahigh molecular 
weight. Journal of Polymer Science Part B: Polymer Physics, 43, 2190–2195. 
56. Gupta, P., Elkins, C., Long, T. E., & Wilkes, G. L., (2005). Electrospinning of linear 
homopolymers of poly (methyl methacrylate): Exploring relationships between fiber 
formation, viscosity, molecular weight and concentration in a good solvent. Polymer 
(Guildf), 46, 4799–4810. 
57. Tan, S. H., Inai, R., Kotaki, M., & Ramakrishna, S., (2005). Systematic parameter 
study for ultra-fine fiber fabrication via electrospinning process. Polymer (Guildf), 46, 
6128–6134. 
58. McKee, M. G., Layman, J. M., Cashion, M. P., & Long, T. E., (1979). Phospholipid 
nonwoven electrospun membranes. Science, 311, 353–355. 
59. Burger, C., Hsiao, B. S., & Chu, B., (2006). Nanofibrous materials and their applications. 
Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 36, 333–368. 
60. Bhardwaj, N., & Kundu, S. C., (2010). Electrospinning: A fascinating fiber fabrication 
technique. Biotechnol. Adv., 28, 325–347. 
61. Li, Y., et al., (2021). Developments of advanced electrospinning techniques: A critical 
review. Advanced Materials Technologies, 6, 2100410. 
62.

Zeng, J., Haoqing, H., Schaper, A., Wendorff, J. H., & Greiner, A., (2003). Poly-L￾lactide nanofibers by electrospinning–Influence of solution viscosity and electrical 
conductivity on fiber diameter and fiber morphology. e-Polymers, 3. 
63. Demir, M. M., Yilgor, I., Yilgor, E. E. A., & Erman, B., (2002). Electrospinning of 
polyurethane fibers. Polymer (Guildf), 43, 3303–3309. 
64. Mondal, K., (2017). Recent advances in the synthesis of metal oxide nanofibers and 
their environmental remediation applications. Inventions, 2, 9. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 285 
65. Deitzel, J. M., Kosik, W., McKnight, S. H., Tan, N. C. B., DeSimone, J. M., & Crette, S., 
(2002). Electrospinning of polymer nanofibers with specific surface chemistry. Polymer 
(Guildf), 43, 1025–1029. 
66. Buchko, C. J., Chen, L. C., Shen, Y., & Martin, D. C., (1999). Processing and micro￾structural characterization of porous biocompatible protein polymer thin films. Polymer 
(Guildf), 40, 7397–7407. 
67. Kim, K. H., Jeong, L., Park, H. N., Shin, S. Y., Park, W. H., Lee, S. C., Kim, T. I., 
et al., (2005). Biological efficacy of silk fibroin nanofiber membranes for guided bone 
regeneration. J. Biotechnol., 120, 327–339. 
68. Huang, L., Nagapudi, K., Apkarian, P. R., & Chaikof, E. L., (2001). Engineered 
collagen–PEO nanofibers and fabrics. Journal of Biomaterials Science, Polymer Edition, 
12, 979–993. 
69. Son, W. K., Youk, J. H., Lee, T. S., & Park, W. H., (2004). The effects of solution 
properties and polyelectrolyte on electrospinning of ultrafine poly (ethylene oxide) 
fibers. Polymer, 45, 2959–2966. 
70. Ding, B., Kim, H. Y., Lee, S. C., Shao, C. L., Lee, D. R., Park, S. J., Kwag, G. B., & 
Choi, K. J., (2002). Preparation and characterization of a nanoscale poly (vinyl alcohol) 
fiber aggregate produced by an electrospinning method. Journal of Polymer Science 
Part B: Polymer Physics, 40, 1261–1268. 
71. Lee, J. S., Choi, K. H., Ghim, H. D., Kim, S. S., Chun, D. H., Kim, H. Y., & Lyoo, W. S., 
(2004). Role of molecular weight of atactic poly (vinyl alcohol)(PVA) in the structure 
and properties of PVA nanofabric prepared by electrospinning. Journal of Applied 
Polymer Science, 93, 1638–1646. 
72.

Zhang, C., Yuan, X., Wu, L., Han, Y., & Sheng, J., (2005). Study on morphology of 
electrospun poly (vinyl alcohol) mats. Eur. Polym. J., 41, 423–432. 
73. Jarusuwannapoom, T., Hongrojjanawiwat, W., Jitjaicham, S., Wannatong, L., Nithi￾tanakul, M., Pattamaprom, C., Koombhongse, P., et al., (2005). Effect of solvents on 
electro-spinnability of polystyrene solutions and morphological appearance of resulting 
electrospun polystyrene fibers. Eur. Polym. J., 41, 409–421. 
74. Jiang, H., Fang, D., Hsiao, B. S., Chu, B., & Chen, W., (2004). Optimization and 
characterization of dextran membranes prepared by electrospinning. Biomacromolecules, 
5, 326–333. 
75. He, J. H., Wan, Y. Q., & Yu, J. Y., (2004). Application of vibration technology to polymer 
electrospinning. International Journal of Nonlinear Sciences and Numerical Simulation, 
5, 253–262. 
76.

Li, X., Chen, W., Qian, Q., Huang, H., Chen, Y., Wang, Z., Chen, Q., et al., (2021). Electro￾spinning-based strategies for battery materials. Advanced Energy Materials, 11, 2000845. 
77. Kalayci, V. E., Patra, P. K., Buer, A., Ugbolue, S. C., Kim, Y. K., & Warner, S. B., (2004). 
Fundamental investigations on electrospun fibers. Journal of Advanced Materials, 36, 
43–45. 
78. Hohman, M. M., Shin, M., Rutledge, G., & Brenner, M. P., (2001). Electrospinning and 
electrically forced jets. II. Applications. Physics of Fluids, 13, 2221–2236. 
79. Berkland, C., Pack, D. W., & Kim, K. K., (2004). Controlling surface nanostructure 
using flow-limited field-injection electrostatic spraying (FFESS) of poly (D, L-lactide￾co-glycolide). Biomaterials, 25, 5649–5658. 
80. Wu, X., Wang, L., Yu, H., & Huang, Y., (2005). Effect of solvent on morphology of 
electrospinning ethyl cellulose fibers. Journal of Applied Polymer Science, 97, 1292–1297. 286 Modern Magnetic Materials 
81. Uyar, T., & Besenbacher, F., (2008). Electrospinning of uniform polystyrene fibers: The 
effect of solvent conductivity. Polymer (Guildf), 49, 5336–5343. 
82. Kim, B., Park, H., Lee, S. H., & Sigmund, W. M., (2005). Poly (acrylic acid) nanofibers 
by electrospinning. Mater. Lett., 59, 829–832. 
83. Mit-uppatham, C., Nithitanakul, M., & Supaphol, P., (2004). Ultrafine electrospun 
polyamide-6 fibers: Effect of solution conditions on morphology and average fiber 
diameter. Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics, 205, 2327–2338. 
84. Yoon, J., Yang, H., Lee, B., & Yu, W., (2018). Recent progress in coaxial electrospinning: 
New parameters, various structures, and wide applications. Advanced Materials, 30, 
1704765. 
85. Reneker, D. H., & Chun, I., (1996). Nanometre diameter fibers of polymer, produced by 
electrospinning. Nanotechnology, 7, 216. 
86. Wu, C., Chiou, H., Lin, S., & Lin, J., (2012). Effects of electrostatic polarity and the 
types of electrical charging on electrospinning behavior. Journal of Applied Polymer 
Science, 126, E89–E97. 
87. Mo, X. M., Xu, C. Y., Kotaki, M. E. A., & Ramakrishna, S., (2004). Electrospun P 
(LLA-CL) nanofiber: A biomimetic extracellular matrix for smooth muscle cell and 
endothelial cell proliferation. Biomaterials, 25, 1883–1890. 
88. Katti, D. S., Robinson, K. W., Ko, F. K., & Laurencin, C. T., (2004). Bioresorbable 
nanofiber-based systems for wound healing and drug delivery: Optimization of 
fabrication parameters. Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part B: Applied 
Biomaterials: An Official Journal of The Society for Biomaterials, The Japanese Society 
for Biomaterials, and The Australian Society for Biomaterials and the Korean Society 
for Biomaterials, 70, 286–296. 
89. Pawlowski, K. J., Barnes, C. P., Boland, E. D., Wnek, G. E., & Bowlin, G. L., (2004). 
Biomedical nanoscience: Electrospinning basic concepts, applications, and classroom 
demonstration. MRS Online Proceedings Library (OPL), 827. 
90.

Huang, J. Y., Lo, Y. C., Niu, J. J., Kushima, A., Qian, X., Zhong, L., Mao, S. X., & Li, 
J., (2013). Nanowire liquid pumps. Nat. Nanotechnol., 8, 277–281. 
91. Larrondo, L., & St. John, M. R., (1981). Electrostatic fiber spinning from polymer 
melts. II. Examination of the flow field in an electrically driven jet. Journal of Polymer 
Science: Polymer Physics Edition, 19, 921–932. 
92. Larrondo, L., & St. John, M. R., (1981). Electrostatic fiber spinning from polymer melts. 
III. Electrostatic deformation of a pendant drop of polymer melt. Journal of Polymer 
Science: Polymer Physics Edition, 19, 933–940. 
93. Sas, I., Gorga, R. E., Joines, J. A., & Thoney, K. A., (2012). Literature review on super￾hydrophobic self-cleaning surfaces produced by electrospinning. Journal of Polymer 
Science Part B: Polymer Physics, 50, 824–845. 
94.

Yuan, X., Zhang, Y., Dong, C., & Sheng, J., (2004). Morphology of ultrafine polysulfone 
fibers prepared by electrospinning. Polym. Int., 53, 1704–1710. 
95. Geng, X., Kwon, O. H., & Jang, J., (2005). Electrospinning of chitosan dissolved in 
concentrated acetic acid solution. Biomaterials, 26, 5427–5432. 
96.

Pham, Q. P., Sharma, U., & Mikos, A. G., (2006). Electrospun poly (ε-caprolactone) 
microfiber and multilayer nanofiber/microfiber scaffolds: Characterization of scaffolds 
and measurement of cellular infiltration. Biomacromolecules, 7, 2796–2805. 
97. Khan, W. S., Asmatulu, R., Ceylan, M., & Jabbarnia, A., (2013). Recent progress on 
conventional and non-conventional electrospinning processes. Fibers and Polymers, 14, 
1235–1247. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 287 
98. Srinivasarao, M., Collings, D., Philips, A., & Patel, S., (1979). Three-dimensionally 
ordered array of air bubbles in a polymer film. Science, 292, 79–83. 
99. Park, J. Y., & Lee, I. H., (2010). Relative humidity effect on the preparation of porous 
electrospun polystyrene fibers. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 10, 3473–3477. 
100. Huan, S., Liu, G., Han, G., Cheng, W., Fu, Z., Wu, Q., & Wang, Q., (2015). Effect of 
experimental parameters on morphological, mechanical and hydrophobic properties of 
electrospun polystyrene fibers. Materials, 8, 2718–2734. 
101. Pelipenko, J., Kristl, J., Janković, B., Baumgartner, S., & Kocbek, P., (2013). The 
impact of relative humidity during electrospinning on the morphology and mechanical 
properties of nanofibers. Int. J. Pharm., 456, 125–134. 
102. Jiang, S., Chen, Y., Duan, G., Mei, C., Greiner, A., & Agarwal, S., (2018). Electrospun 
nanofiber reinforced composites: A review. Polymer Chemistry, 9, 2685–2720. 
103. Kim, J. S., & Lee, D. S., (2000). Thermal properties of electrospun polyesters. Polym. J., 
32, 616–618. 
104. Tang, C., & Liu, H., (2008). Cellulose nanofiber reinforced poly (vinyl alcohol) 
composite film with high visible light transmittance. Composites Part A: Applied Science 
and Manufacturing, 39, 1638–1643. 
105. Kumar, A., Jose, R., Fujihara, K., Wang, J., & Ramakrishna, S., (2007). Structural and 
optical properties of electrospun TiO2
 nanofibers. Chemistry of Materials, 19, 6536–6542. 
106. Kavan, L., Stoto, T., Graetzel, M., Fitzmaurice, D., & Shklover, V., (1993). Quantum size 
effects in nanocrystalline semiconducting titania layers prepared by anodic oxidative 
hydrolysis of titanium trichloride. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 97, 9493–9498. 
107. Kormann, C., Bahnemann, D. W., & Hoffmann, M. R., (1988). Preparation and 
characterization of quantum-size titanium dioxide. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 
92, 5196–5201. 
108. Anpo, M., Shima, T., Kodama, S., & Kubokawa, Y., (1987). Photocatalytic hydrogenation 
of propyne with water on small-particle titania: Size quantization effects and reaction 
intermediates. Journal of Physical Chemistry, 91, 4305–4310. 
109. Joselevich, E., & Willner, I., (1994). Photosensitization of quantum-size TiO2
 particles 
in water-in-oil microemulsions. The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 98, 7628–7635. 
110. Serpone, N., Lawless, D., & Khairutdinov, R., (1995). Size effects on the photophysical 
properties of colloidal anatase TiO2
 particles: Size quantization versus direct transitions 
in this indirect semiconductor? The Journal of Physical Chemistry, 99, 16646–16654. 
111.

Shalaby, T. I., El-Kady, M. F., Zaki, A. E. H. M., & El-Kholy, S. M., (2017). Preparation 
and application of magnetite nanoparticles immobilized on cellulose acetate nanofibers 
for lead removal from polluted water. Water Science and Technology: Water Supply, 17, 
176–187. 
112. Liu, Y., Liu, Y., Lee, J. H., Lee, C., Park, M., & Kim, H. Y., (2015). Ultrafine formation 
of optically transparent polyacrylonitrile/polyacrylic acid nanofiber fibrils via electro￾spinning at high relative humidity. Composites Science and Technology, 117, 404–409. 
113. Chew, S. Y., Hufnagel, T. C., Lim, C. T., & Leong, K. W., (2006). Mechanical properties 
of single electrospun drug-encapsulated nanofibers. Nanotechnology, 17, 3880. 
114. Sun, L., Han, R. P. S., Wang, J., & Lim, C. T., (2008). Modeling the size-dependent 
elastic properties of polymeric nanofibers. Nanotechnology, 19, 455706. 
115. Liao, C. C., Wang, C. C., Chen, C. Y., & Lai, W. J., (2011). Stretching-induced orientation 
of polyacrylonitrile nanofibers by an electrically rotating viscoelastic jet for improving 
the mechanical properties. Polymer (Guildf), 52, 2263–2275. 288 Modern Magnetic Materials 
116. Papkov, D., Zou, Y., Andalib, M. N., Goponenko, A., Cheng, S. Z. D., & Dzenis, Y. A., 
(2013). Simultaneously strong and tough ultrafine continuous nanofibers. ACS Nano, 7, 
3324–3331. 
117. An, T., Pant, B., Kim, S. Y., Park, M., Park, S. J., & Kim, H. Y., (2017). Mechanical 
and optical properties of electrospun nylon 6, 6 nanofiber reinforced cyclic butylene 
terephthalate composites. Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 55, 35–39. 
118. Zhang, S., (2009). Mechanical and Physical Properties of Electrospun Nanofibers. 
119. Matsumoto, H., & Tanioka, A., (2011). Functionality in electrospun nanofibrous 
membranes based on fiber’s size, surface area, and molecular orientation. Membranes 
(Basel), 1, 249–264. 
120. Richard-Lacroix, M., & Pellerin, C., (2013). Molecular orientation in electrospun fibers: 
From mats to single fibers. Macromolecules, 46, 9473–9493. 
121. Nakashima, K., Tsuboi, K., Matsumoto, H., Ishige, R., Tokita, M., Watanabe, J., & 
Tanioka, A., (2010). Control over internal structure of liquid crystal polymer nanofibers 
by electrospinning. Macromol. Rapid Commun., 31, 1641–1645. 
122. Danno, T., Matsumoto, H., Nasir, M., Shimizu, S., Minagawa, M., Kawaguchi, J., Horibe, 
H., & Tanioka, A., (2008). Fine Structure of PVDF Nanofiber Fabricated by Electrospray 
Deposition Part B Polymer Physics. 
123. Duan, G., Liu, S., Jiang, S., & Hou, H., (2019). High-performance polyamide-imide films 
and electrospun aligned nanofibers from an amide-containing diamine. J. Mater. Sci., 54, 
6719–6727. 
124. Yano, T., Higaki, Y., Tao, D., Murakami, D., Kobayashi, M., Ohta, N., Koike, J. I., et 
al., (2012). Orientation of poly (vinyl alcohol) nanofiber and crystallites in non-woven 
electrospun nanofiber mats under uniaxial stretching. Polymer (Guildf), 53, 4702–4708. 
125. Zhang, H., Jiang, S., Duan, G., Li, J., Liu, K., Zhou, C., & Hou, H., (2014). Heat-resistant 
polybenzoxazole nanofibers made by electrospinning. Eur. Polym. J., 50, 61–68. 
126. Huang, C., Chen, S., Lai, C., Reneker, D. H., Qiu, H., Ye, Y., & Hou, H., (2006). 
Electrospun polymer nanofibres with small diameters. Nanotechnology, 17, 1558. 
127. Xu, H., Jiang, S., Ding, C., Zhu, Y., Li, J., & Hou, H., (2017). High strength and high 
breaking load of single electrospun polyimide microfiber from water soluble precursor. 
Materials Letters, 201, 82–84. 
128. Jiang, S., Duan, G., Chen, L., Hu, X., & Hou, H., (2015). Mechanical performance of 
aligned electrospun polyimide nanofiber belt at high temperature. Materials Letters, 140, 
12–15. 
129. Gibson, P., Schreuder-Gibson, H., & Rivin, D., (2001). Transport properties of porous 
membranes based on electrospun nanofibers. Colloids and Surfaces A: Physicochemical 
and Engineering Aspects, 187, 469–481. 
130. Hussain, D., Loyal, F., Greiner, A., & Wendorff, J. H., (2010). Structure property 
correlations for electrospun nanofiber nonwovens. Polymer (Guildf), 51, 3989–3997. 
131. Li, D., Ouyang, G., McCann, J. T., & Xia, Y., (2005). Collecting electrospun nanofibers 
with patterned electrodes. Nano Lett., 5, 913–916. 
132. Zhu, X., Cui, W., Li, X., & Jin, Y., (2008). Electrospun fibrous mats with high porosity 
as potential scaffolds for skin tissue engineering. Biomacromolecules, 9, 1795–1801. 
133. Milleret, V., Simona, B., Neuenschwander, P., & Hall, H., (2011). Tuning electrospinning 
parameters for production of 3D-fiber-fleeces with increased porosity for soft tissue 
engineering applications. Eur. Cell Mater., 21, 286–303. Electrospinning Technique and Magnetic Nanofibers 289 
134. Sander, M. S., Prieto, A. L., Gronsky, R., Sands, T., & Stacy, A. M., (2002). Fabrication 
of high-density, high aspect ratio, large-area bismuth telluride nanowire arrays by 
electrodeposition into porous anodic alumina templates. Advanced Materials, 14, 665–667. 
135. Wang, M., Singh, H., Hatton, T. A., & Rutledge, G. C., (2004). Field-responsive super￾paramagnetic composite nanofibers by electrospinning. Polymer (Guildf), 45, 5505–5514. 
136. Xia, Y., Yang, P., Sun, Y., Wu, Y., Mayers, B., Gates, B., Yin, Y., et al., (2003). One￾dimensional nanostructures: Synthesis, characterization, and applications. Advanced 
Materials, 15, 353–389. 
137. Tan, S. T., Wendorff, J. H., Pietzonka, C., Jia, Z. H., & Wang, G. Q., (2005). Biocompatible 
and biodegradable polymer nanofibers displaying superparamagnetic properties. Chem 
PhysChem., 6, 1461–1465. 
138. Sawhney, A. P. S., Condon, B., Singh, K. V., Pang, S. S., Li, G., & Hui, D., (2008). Modern 
applications of nanotechnology in textiles. Textile Research Journal, 78, 731–739. 
139. Neuberger, T., Schöpf, B., Hofmann, H., Hofmann, M., & Von, R. B., (2005). Super￾paramagnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications: Possibilities and limitations of a 
new drug delivery system. Journal of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, 293, 483–496. 
140. Wu, H., Zhang, R., Liu, X., Lin, D., & Pan, W., (2007). Electrospinning of Fe, Co, and 
Ni nanofibers: Synthesis, assembly, and magnetic properties. Chemistry of Materials, 
19, 3506–3511. 
141. Gass, J., Poddar, P., Almand, J., Srinath, S., & Srikanth, H., (2006). Superparamagnetic 
polymer nanocomposites with uniform Fe3
O4
 nanoparticle dispersions. Advanced 
Functional Materials, 16, 71–75. 
142. Hutmacher, D. W., & Dalton, P. D., (2011). Melt electrospinning. Chemistry–An Asian 
Journal, 6, 44–56. 
143. Blachowicz, T., & Ehrmann, A., (2020). Most recent developments in electrospun 
magnetic nanofibers: A review. Journal of Engineered Fibers and Fabrics, 15, 15589250 
19900843. 
144. Zeugolis, D. I., Paul, R. G., & Attenburrow, G., (2008). Extruded collagen-polyethylene 
glycol fibers for tissue engineering applications. Journal of Biomedical Materials 
Research Part B: Applied Biomaterials: An Official Journal of The Society for 
Biomaterials, The Japanese Society for Biomaterials, and The Australian Society for 
Biomaterials and the Korean Society for Biomaterials, 85, 343–352. 
145. Wongchitphimon, S., Wang, R., Jiraratananon, R., Shi, L., & Loh, C. H., (2011). Effect of 
polyethylene glycol (PEG) as an additive on the fabrication of polyvinylidene fluoride￾co-hexafluropropylene (PVDF-HFP) asymmetric microporous hollow fiber membranes. 
Journal of Membrane Science, 369, 329–338. 
146. Grothe, T., Brikmann, J., Meissner, H., & Ehrmann, A., (2017). Influence of solution and 
spinning parameters on nanofiber mat creation of poly (ethylene oxide) by needleless 
electrospinning. Materials Science, 23, 342–349. 
147. Klinkhammer, K., Seiler, N., Grafahrend, D., Gerardo, N. J., Mey, J., Brook, G. A., 
Möller, M., et al., (2009). Deposition of electrospun fibers on reactive substrates for in 
vitro investigations. Tissue Engineering Part C: Methods, 15, 77–85. 
148. Dalton, P. D., Klinkhammer, K., Salber, J., Klee, D., & Möller, M., (2006). Direct in 
vitro electrospinning with polymer melts. Biomacromolecules, 7, 686–690. 
149. Sreenivasulu, G., et al., (2017). Multiferroic core-shell nanofibers, assembly in a 
magnetic field, and studies on magneto-electric interactions. Materials, 11, 18. 290 Modern Magnetic Materials 
150. Yaskiv, О. I., Fedirko, V. M., & Kukhar, I. S., (2016). The Effect of the Structural State of 
Steels on the Mechanical Properties in the Oxygen Saturated Lead (Vol. 104, pp. 32–36). 
Questions of atomic science and technology. 
151. Yaskiv, O. I., Kukhar, I. S., & Fedirko, V. M., (2015). Effect of preliminary diffusion 
oxidation on mechanical properties of ferritic steel in oxygen-containing lead. Fusion 
Engineering and Design, 101, 134–140. 
152. Akhtar, M. N., Sulong, A. B., Ahmad, M., Khan, M. A., Ali, A., & Islam, M. U., (2016). 
Impacts of Gd–Ce on the structural, morphological and magnetic properties of garnet 
nanocrystalline ferrites synthesized via sol–gel route. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 
660, 486–495. 
153. Chen, P., Wu, R., & Xiao, J. Q., (2014). Dynamic magnetic properties of electrospun 
NiZn spinel ferrite nanofibers. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, 50, 1–4. 
154. Shen, X., Liu, M., Song, F., & Meng, X., (2010). Structural evolution and magnetic 
properties of SrFe12O19 nanofibers by electrospinning. J. Solgel Sci. Technol., 53, 448–453. 
155. Streckova, M., Mudra, E., Sebek, M., Sopcak, T., Dusza, J., & Kovac, J., (2017). 
Preparation and investigations of Ni0.2Zn0.8Fe2
O4
 ferrite nanofiber membranes by
needleless electrospinning method. Acta Phys. Pol. A, 131, 729–731. 
156. Barakat, N. A. M., Kim, B., & Kim, H. Y., (2009). Production of smooth and pure 
nickel metal nanofibers by the electrospinning technique: Nanofibers possess splendid 
magnetic properties. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 113, 531–536. 
157. Kim, Y., Ebara, M., & Aoyagi, T., (2013). A smart hyperthermia nanofiber with switch￾able drug release for inducing cancer apoptosis. Advanced Functional Materials, 23, 
5753–5761. 
158. Li, D., Luo, L., Pang, Z., Ding, L., Wang, Q., Ke, H., Huang, F., & Wei, Q., (2014). Novel 
phenolic biosensor based on a magnetic polydopamine-laccase-nickel nanoparticle 
loaded carbon nanofiber composite. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces, 6, 5144–5151. 
159. Zhang, W., Chen, S., Hu, W., Zhou, B., Yang, Z., Yin, N., & Wang, H., (2011). Facile 
fabrication of flexible magnetic nanohybrid membrane with amphiphobic surface based 
on bacterial cellulose. Carbohydr. Polym., 86, 1760–1767. 
160. Kim, E. J., Lee, C. S., Chang, Y. Y., & Chang, Y. S., (2013). Hierarchically structured 
manganese oxide-coated magnetic nanocomposites for the efficient removal of heavy 
metal ions from aqueous systems. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 5, 9628–9634. 
161. Ghasemi, E., Ziyadi, H., Afshar, A. M., & Sillanpää, M., (2015). Iron oxide nanofibers: 
A new magnetic catalyst for azo dyes degradation in aqueous solution. Chemical Engi￾neering Journal, 264, 146–151. 
162. Bhaumik, M., McCrindle, R. I., & Maity, A., (2015). Enhanced adsorptive degradation 
of Congo red in aqueous solutions using polyaniline/Fe0
 composite nanofibers. Chemical 
Engineering Journal, 260, 716–729. 
163. Li, C. J., Wang, J. N., Li, X. Y., & Zhang, L. L., (2011). Functionalization of electrospun 
magnetically separable TiO2
-coated SrFe12O19 nanofibers: Strongly effective photocatalyst 
and magnetic separation. J. Mater Sci., 46, 2058–2063. 
164. Chen, L., Hong, S., Zhou, X., Zhou, Z., & Hou, H., (2008). Novel Pd-carrying composite 
carbon nanofibers based on polyacrylonitrile as a catalyst for Sonogashira coupling 
reaction. Catalysis Communications, 9, 2221–2225. Modern Magnetic Materials: Properties and Applications. Iuliana Stoica, Ann Rose Abraham, & 
A. K. Haghi (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 17


Magnetic Polymer Composites and Their 
Role in Engineering Applications 
SIMONA LUMINITA NICA 
“Petru Poni” Institute of Macromolecular Chemistry, Department of Physical 
Chemistry of Polymers, Iasi, Romania 
ABSTRACT 
Development of the materials with properties required in the field of EMI 
shielding or sensors applications has attracted the attention of researchers 
lately. Spinel ferrites are widely applicable in sensors or EMI shielding 
due to their properties. In this chapter, spinel ferrite-based polymers (either 
conducting or non-conducting material) are explored for the prevention of 
electromagnetic interference (EMI). Some preparation methods are also 
taken into consideration. The combination of electrical and magnetic loss is 
important for microwave absorption properties. 
17.1 INTRODUCTION 
Materials with advanced design (also named smart materials) to be used in 
electromagnetic (EM) or electronic devices are in continuous development. 
Manufactured products depend on the costs involved and there’s performance. 
Composite materials can be obtained by combining two or more constituents 
or phases with different properties [1, 2]. The components of the composite 
material are: (i) the continuous phase; (ii) the discontinuous phase; and (iii) 
the interface between the components [3, 4]. 
Since the focus is on development of EM or electronic devices to make 
life much easier, magnetic polymer composites [5] occupy a high place in 292 Modern Magnetic Materials 
the scientific community. In this manner, polymers could be modified by 
incorporating ferromagnetic fillers (in micro/nano-sizes) [6–8] to fabricate 
either soft magnetic composite (SMCs), which replace laminated steels [9] 
either hard magnetic composite (HMCs) [10]. 
Another classification of SMCs involves: 
• Soft metallic materials [11]; 
• Soft ferrite materials [12]. 
The structure of the fillers highly influences the properties of the final 
obtained material. Preparation of magnetic polymer composite materials or 
simply magnetic stimuli-responsive materials relay on the requirement of 
ensuring a long-time dispersion stability of hard or soft fillers. It is impor￾tant that fillers do not agglomerate or to aggregate during the synthesis 
process. 
Some application of magnetic composite-based on polymers materials 
are listed below: 
• Sensors and actuators [13, 14]; 
• Energy storage and harvesting [15]; 
• Wearable electronic devices [16]; 
• Human-machine interaction [17]; and also 
• Biomedical system [18]. 
Multifunctionality of polymer composites reinforced with magnetic filler 
for energy, shielding, sensors or actuator materials will be discussed in this 
chapter. Some issues and concepts are evidenced. 
17.2 RECENT TRENDS IN MAGNETIC POLYMER COMPOSITES 
In the past decades, many researchers were focused on studying magnetic 
polymer composites that can be used in technical applications. This part of 
the chapter describes some of the most important reports in this topic by 
highlighting the research tendencies and advantages made so far. Special 
attention was attributed to soft magnetic composite materials (SMCs). SMCs 
are ferromagnetic powder particles coated with electric insulating layer 
materials [19]. Selection of the insulating layer represents the key factor 
since dictates both the peculiar electronic and magnetic properties [20] and 
its applicability in electronic and electrical devices industry. To fabricate 
SMCs, the insulating layers which cover the surface of the magnetic powder 
could be from inorganic or organic materials. It is worth mentioned that Magnetic Polymer Composites 293 
thermoplastic polymers such as polyamides [21] or thermosetting polymers 
such as epoxy resins (ERs) [22, 23], silicon resin [24], polyurethanes [25] 
are materials used as organic coatings for SMCs. But polymers have poor 
stability. To balance this feature of the non-magnetic material, researchers 
found an alternative in developing coating layer from inorganic materials. 
So, Fe powder [26], Fe–Si powder [27], Mn–Zn ferrite [28], Ni–Zn ferrite 
[29], Co—Fe ferrite [30] or different type of oxides such as Fe3
O4
 [31], 
Fe2
O3 [32], Al2
O3
 [33]) are considered a proper choice to fabricate soft 
magnetic composite. It is known that Fe-based amorphous alloy has good 
soft magnetic properties. 
The main advantages of SMCs are: 
•

 Low eddy current loss at medium and high frequencies which is 
related to the accurately engineered microstructure [34]; 
•

 Isotropic three-dimensional (3D) magnetic flux paths and relatively 
high saturation magnetic induction [35]; 
•

 Low coercivity [36]; 
•

 High magnetic permeability reduces the hysteresis loss of the SMCs 
materials [37]. 
The shape geometric form and the size of powder particles determine 
the specific structure of the soft magnetic composite. Usually, the magnetic 
powder particles are spherical. In this manner, both the geometry of 
nonmagnetic gaps and concentration will affect the magnetic properties of 
the fabricated composite. 
Methods used for SMCs preparation involve: 
•

 Ball-milling [38]; 
•

 Sol-gel [39]; 
•

 Surface oxidation method [40]; 
•

 Thermal oxidation method [41], etc. 
Luo et al. [42] fabricated Fe–Si SMCs. As coating insulation layers 
researchers have prepared via ball milling method Fe–Si/γ-Fe2
O3
 powders. 
The full synthesis (by using subsequent spark plasma sintering (SPS) process) 
of three-shell structure of Fe2
SiO4
-γ-Fe2
O3
-γFe2
O3
 insulating-magnetic￾insulating (IMI) layer can be found in Ref. [42]. They reported both superior 
magnetic performance and insulating properties of the obtained IMI layer. 
Developed material found potential use as switching devices, transformers, 
and inductors. 
Gao et al. [43] reported fabrication of Fe–Si/SiO2 soft ferromagnetic 
composites. For this work a two-step method was proposed for material 294 Modern Magnetic Materials 
preparation: chemical vapor deposition and hot-pressed sintering. The aim 
of the study was to quantitatively describe the magnetic performance of the 
material. 
Zhang et al. [44] reported the preparation of Fe/MnO2
 SMCs. Synthesis 
method adopted by the researchers was ball milling in combination with 
SPS. The uniform MnO2
 coating layer proved to reduce eddy current loss. 
Hou et al. [45] prepared Fe/Fe3
O4
-FeSiAl SMCs. The material is charac￾terized by high permeability and low core loss. Process of SMCs fabrication 
material is based on the surface oxidation method. The preparation steps 
involve: the reduced iron powders where coated with an insulating layer of 
FexOy to obtain Fe/FexOy and Fe/FexOy-FeSiAl SMCs. Schematic prepa￾ration method can be found in Ref. [45]. 
Hu et al. [46] fabricated soft magnetic composite materials for engi￾neering applications purpose by mixing method of reagents. A non-conduc￾tive matrix, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), filled with different inclusions 
such as, carbonyl iron (CIPs), feroferric oxide (Fe3
O4
), NiFe-alloy (in the 
range of 0 VOL% to 33 VOL%) was tested at frequencies between 100 kHz 
and 1 MHz for soft-core transformer applications. Researchers compared 
both theoretical and experimental data regarding the magnetic permeability 
parameter. For dynamic tests of the materials, they have constructed a Buck 
circuit converter. The advantages of this circuit relay on its high frequency 
operation. Regarding the static tests of the soft magnetic composite mate￾rials a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) was involved. Experimental 
results of both cylindrical and toroidal materials indicated that magnetic 
permeability is insensitive to the applied frequency and the eddy current 
was avoided in the majority of the samples. However, they report that the 
PMDS-filled with Fe3
O4
 particles reach the saturation very fast as compared 
with the other tested materials. 
Sun et al. [47] prepared Fe-based SMCs. As insulating coating material 
for this soft composite was considered a polyimide due to its high thermal 
stability. Researchers investigated the magnetic properties of the SMCs. 
Evangelista et al. [48] made double-layered SMCs based on pure iron 
powder coated by zinc oxide nanoparticles (NPs) (nano-ZnO) – as the first 
layer and boron oxide (B2
O3
) – as the second layer. Researchers demon￾strated enhanced magnetic performance of the composite as compared with 
soft magnetic composite with one single insulating layer. Details about 
preparation method can be found in Ref. [48]. 
Meng et al. [50] developed Fe/Fe3
O4
/resin SMCs. The preparation 
method implies the oxidation of the Fe powders with 70-nm-thick Fe3
O4  
Magnetic Polymer Composites 295 
layers in situ formed on the surfaces of unoxidized Fe parts. After that 
initially oxidized products were coated with 0.8 wt.% silicone resin through 
a physical coating method. Excellent soft magnetic properties of the mate￾rial were obtained by the researchers such as high magnetic inductions and 
decreased core loss. 
Qing et al. [51] fabricated FeSiB/ERs composite using direct ink writing 
(DIW) technique. The advantage of this technique is to create complex￾shaped parts of the material. Also, after the material was formed is not 
necessary to heat it. Researchers investigated the magnetic properties of the 
material. Also, they evidenced a reduction of eddy current. 
Riesgo et al. [52] reported preparation of Fe81Ga19/silicone composite 
materials by milling technique method. Magnetic properties have been 
investigated by the researchers. 
Wang et al. [53] obtained FeSiCr/carbonyl-iron SMCs. As insulating layer 
researchers prepared nano-CaCO3
/epoxy nanocomposites. They reported a 
reduced eddy current which affect the hysteresis behavior of the SMCs. 
Also, many preparation methods have been proposed for developing 
magnetic polymer composite materials. To obtain magnetic polymer composite 
with specific morphology [54] is still a challenging task. Polymers used 
as matrices can be classified in conducting and non-conducting materials. 
Conducting polymers will not be discussed here. 
Wang et al. [55] developed a new magnetic polymeric composite (Fe3
O4
/ 
polystyrene (PS)) using a surface-initiated polymerization method. Magnetic 
particles were considered Fe3
O4
 while H2
O2
 was the initiator. The size of the 
microspheres polymer is controlled by both H2 2
A substantial difference in the size of the microsphere was observed: 
• Particles became bigger and bigger with the addition of the monomer; 
• Particles size decreases as the amount of H2
O2
 increase.


Hamciuc et al. [56] obtained magnetic polyimide/copper-nickel ferrite 
composites. As inorganic fillers researchers have used four different cerium￾doped ferrite particles such as NiFe1.92Ce0.08O4, Ni0.7Cu0.3Fe1.92Ce 
0.08O4, Ni0.4Cu0.6Fe1.92Ce0.08O4, and CuFe1.92Ce0.08O4. Material 
O and the amount of polymer. 
was analyzed from magnetically and dielectric point of view. 
Kim et al. [57] fabricated Fe3
O4
-encapsulated PS hybrid particles via 
a mini-emulsion polymerization process. Detailed preparation steps of the 
materials are found in Ref. [57]. Petcharoen et al. [58] fabricated polyure￾thane-Fe3
O4 composite to be used in the field of actuation. Magnetic response 
of the materials has been evaluated. 296 Modern Magnetic Materials 
17.3 APPLICATIONS OF THE MAGNETIC POLYMER COMPOSITES 
IN ENGINEERING 
As above-mentioned soft magnetic materials refer to soft ferrite particle, 
Fe3
O4
, Fe2
O3
, etc., which are embedded into different polymeric matrices. 
Choice to embedding magnetic iron oxide into polymeric matrices relay on 
their intrinsic magnetic properties [59]. Soft-magnetic materials have low 
coercivity field. Magnetic polymeric composites can be considered tribo￾electric nanogenerators (TENGs). These materials are applicable in renew￾able resources [60, 61]. Other application of magnetic polymer composite 
in electronic device covers the field of sensors [62], actuators [63, 64], elec￾tromagnetic (EMI) shielding [65, 66], transducing devices [67], wearable 
electronic devices [68, 69]. In this part of the chapter, utilization of materials 
as EMI shielding and also, sensors will be discussed. 
Advantages of fabrication magnetic composite having polymer as a 
matrix (either conductive or non-conductive) for electronic and EM devices 
besides their unique magnetic [70] and mechanical properties [71] include 
the capacity of obtaining complicated structures and shapes of the materials 
[72]. Among the conductive polymers, polyaniline (PANI) became the most 
studied material in the field of engineering applications since possess superior 
conducting nature [73]. Polymers could also be classified as thermosets and 
thermoplastics polymers. Advantage of using PANI as EMI shielding will be 
discussed through relevant scientific works. 
Besides semiconducting properties of PANI polymer, morphological 
flexibility was also an important property. This polymer can be easily synthe￾sized in thin films or fibers due to the requirements in electronic applications. 
As a result of the introduction of spinel ferrite in PANI matrix, the electrical 
properties of the material enhance [74]. 
Different applications of PANI-based composite are recorded in the 
scientific community due to its versatility. For example, its stability confers 
the ability to be used as sensor material. 
To reduce the size of the electronic devices is a growing demand on the 
electronics market. As a consequence, it is very possible to pick up some 
adverse effects – mostly, electromagnetic interference (EMI) of signals [75] 
which is considered as a pollutant for the human health. To annihilate this 
effect, it is necessary that bandwidth shielding materials to be analyzed. The 
mechanism of absorbance of EM radiation by the materials can be found in 
Ref. [76]. Magnetic Polymer Composites 297 
For example, Radoń et al. [77] studied the microwave absorption proper￾ties of dextrin-Fe3
O4
 composites by ball milling technique. They validated that 
the shape of the magnetic particles embedded in the dextran matrix influenced 
the magneto-dielectric properties of the material. A low bandwidth shielding 
between 0.3 and 2.5 GHz was explored. Results conducted that composites 
with spherical particles have a minimum reflection loss equal to – 25 dB for 
a 12 mm layer thickness. In case of cuboidal particles, the reflection loss was 
equal to – 22.5 dB for 20 mm thickness. Different value (–18.7 dB for 16 
mm absorber thickness) was obtained for the same cuboidal geometry of the 
magnetic particles prepared in a potassium hydroxide solution. 
The microwave absorption properties of the hollow spherical Fe3
O4
-
based composite were also tested by Shu et al. [78]. Magnetic particles 
with controlled morphology were prepared by solvothermal method. For 
characteristics of prepared composite, regarding thickness (3.62 mm) and 
bandwidth (4.56–9.24 GHz, 4.68 GHz) researchers reported a minimum 
reflection loss equal to – 56.90 dB. 
Ahmed et al. [79] fabricated poly(vinylidene-fluoride) (PVDF) based 
graphene and nickel spinel ferrite (NFe) hybrid nanocomposite for EMI 
shielding applications. They reported an EMI shielding effectiveness (SE) at 
about 22 dB. The thickness of the films was 0.22 mm. 
The work developed by Bhatti et al. [80] was centered on studying Y-type 
hexaferrite, in particular Ba2
Co2
Fe For their preparation sol-gel tech- 12O22.
nique was utilized. Conductive polymer (polyaniline (PANI)) was chosen 
as a matrix. By in-situ polymerization method hexaferrite-PANI composites 
were prepared. Resistivity determined was at 2.59 × 104 Ω-cm. These 
composite materials are applied in EMI shielding in low frequency range. 
Using the same polymer as matrix (PANI) another group of researchers 
[81] prepared Fe3
O4
@SiO2
@PANI ternary nanocomposite. The preparation 
procedure was a three-step method. Into the matrix, researchers added spinel 
ferrites (namely, Fe3
O4
) which were prepared by the hydrothermal method 
modified with SiO2
 particles to form Fe3
O4
@SiO2
 composite. A core-shall 
structure was obtained – Fe3
O4
@SiO2
@PANI composite. The structure and 
the properties of the final material were characterized. They reported that 
Fe3
O4
 were the core of the composites while the other two materials acted as 
shells – SiO2
 particles and PANI matrix. Regarding the EM performance of 
the final product remarkable properties were obtained: RLmax of the Fe3
O4
@ 
SiO2
@PANI composite reached – 44.9 dB at 4.0 GHz. Researchers pointed 
out that this material can be used successfully in EMI shielding applications. 298 Modern Magnetic Materials 
Another work conducted by Wang et al. [82] prepared complex core-shall 
composite structures material for high-performance EMI shielding. The 
fabricated probes were Ti3
C2
Tx MXene/Fe3
O4
@PANI composite films. Its 
selection relay on important properties such as: high electrical conductivity, 
large specific surface area, rich surface defects and the presence of numerous 
functional groups. The composites were obtained by vacuum-assisted filtra￾tion technique. As matrix researchers used Ti3
C2
Tx
 while Fe3
O4
@PANI 
was core-shall structure embedded into matrix. Results obtained by the 
researchers suggested that when the weight ratio of the Ti3
C2
Tx
 matrix to 
core-shall structure – Fe3
O4
@PANI was 12:5 the EMI SE reached 58.8 dB at 
a thickness of 12.1 µm. 
Complex heterostructures centered on PANI-conductive polymer to be 
used in EMI shielding applications developed Movassagh-Alanagh et al. 
[83]. Materials fabricated by the researchers implied PANI@nano-Fe3
O4
@ 
CFs (with different weight ratio of the fillers) by a two-step process technique 
which is discussed as follows. 
The preparation method implies: 
•

 First, particles of Fe3
O4
 having nano-dimensions were deposited on 
CFs material. A modified multi-step electrophoretic deposition (EPD) 
process was involved in this step of the material preparation. 
•

 Then researchers fabricated PANI@nano-Fe3
O4
@CFs heterostruc￾tures by in situ polymerization method, using a solution of HCl. 
Eventually, they obtained PANI@nano-Fe3
O4
@CFs mats with a layer by 
layer (LBL) assembly which was structurally demonstrated. 
Magnetic properties of the structures (PANI@nano-Fe3
O4
@CFs mats) 
revealed a decrease of magnetic saturation for nano-Fe3
O4
 from 72.612 to 
0.191 emu/g. Also, investigations of EM wave absorption of epoxy-based 
PANI@nano-Fe3
O4
@CFs hybrid composites heterostructures showed that 
in case of 1 wt.% nano-Fe3
O4
 embedded into matrix, probes indicate a 
maximum RL value of EMI SE at – 11.11 dB for a thickness of 1.5 mm pf the 
materials. The bandwidth was about 6 GHz. A variation effect was obtained 
for 5 wt.% fillers inclusion into the matrix with a difference recorded into the 
thickness of the probes at about 3 mm. In this case, the EMI SE was recorded 
at 29 dB at a frequency range of 8.2–18 GHz. 
Guo et al. [84] developed materials with hierarchically multifunctional 
structure to be used as electromagnetic interface (EMI) shielding in elec￾tronic devices. Two different electromagnetic interface (EMI) shielding 
layers are fabricated while the last layer represents the substrate made from 
electrospuned Pi fibers to improve mechanical properties of the composite. Magnetic Polymer Composites 299 
As polymeric materials they used in equimolar amount pyromellitic dianhy￾dride (PMDA) monomer and 4,4′-oxydianiline (ODA) monomer. First EMI 
shielding layer is represented by graphene oxide/expanded graphite (GO/ 
EG); while the second EMI shielding layer is given by Fe3
O4
/polyimide 
(Fe3
O4
/PI). All three layers are connected one to the other. They reported PI 
composite material having 61.0 wt.% of GO/EG and 23.8 wt.% of Fe3
O4
/ 
PI exhibit a thermal conductivity coefficient of 95.40 W (m K)–1. Also, 
mechanical properties indicate a tensile strength of about 93.6 MPa. 
Koner et al. [85] fabricated La0.7Ba0.3MnO3/poly(vinylidenefluoride￾co-trifluoroethylene) nanocomposite (0–3) films as magnetoelectric (ME) 
shields. Magnetic properties of the materials are also determined. 
Besides conducting polymers as matrix for materials to be used as EMI 
shielding applications, researchers tried to develop new materials using non￾conducting polymers for the same electronic application. 
For example, another group of researchers Ahmed et al. [86] inves￾tigated the structure-property relationship of graphene and spinel nickel 
ferrites based PVDF hybrid nanocomposites. The solution casting method 
was chosen for film preparation. Tests made revealed that estimated EMI 
SE at about 22 dB for PVDF/graphene (3 wt.%)/nFE (30 wt.%) hybrid 
nanocomposite exhibiting. The thickness of the probes films was deter￾mined to be 0.2 mm. Due to the characteristics of the materials researchers 
considered that PVDF/graphene/nFE hybrid nanocomposites can be 
applied in miniaturized electronic devices for capacitor and EMI shielding 
applications. 
Khodiri et al. [87] developed complex hybrid structures composites 
such as polyvinyl alcohol (PVA)/graphene/magnetite (Fe3
O4
) (PVA/Gr(x)/ 
Fe3
O4
(0.1–x)) to be used as EMI shielding materials. The method of prepara￾tion was casting technique. Evaluation of the composite indicated enhanced 
magnetic and dielectric properties. Results showed value for EMI SE at 
about 40.7 dB along with a high conductivity of 1.87 S/cm when embedded 
graphene is small (0.08 wt.%). 
Other fields in the electronics or EM devices are sustained by few remark￾able scientific work. 
Preparation of magnetic polymeric composites as humidity sensors 
devices represents a research area that received attention. Flexible poly￾imides are new materials that require different strategies [88]. To enhance 
the solubility of the material, structural modification of the polymer chain 
was adopted: 
• Flexible ether linkages were incorporated; 300 Modern Magnetic Materials 
•

 Incorporation of alicyclic dianhydride: 5-(2,5-dioxotetrahydrofurfuryl)-
3-methyl-3-cyclohexene-1,2-dicarboxylic acid anhydride (DOCDA, 
98% purity; Merck, Darmstadt, Germany [89]. 
Preparation method can be found in Ref. [88]. Also, thermal, magnetic, and 
dielectric properties were also discussed in correlation with their structure. 
So, the humidity sensitivity of pure polyimide and the DOCDA-ODA/ 
Fe3
O4 with different filler content of Fe3
O4
 (5, 10, and 20 wt.%) for various 
values of relative humidity (RH) were analyzed. 
Results showed that relative permittivity decreases as the frequency increase. 
This comportment is assigned to the Maxwell-Wagner model. Also, a decrease 
was recorded for electrical resistivity for these magnetic polymer composites 
as the frequency increases over the RH range of humidity. Both microstructure 
and composition change influenced the electrical resistivity of the material. A 
relevant sensitivity is recorded for samples at low frequency (200 Hz). Tests 
results have shown that the optimum humidity sensitivity features are given by 
DOCDA-ODA/iron oxide synthesized at 300°C with 20 wt.% Fe3
O4
 loadings. 
Another group of researchers obtained a magnetic polymeric composite 
material to be used in magnetoresistive devices [90]. As matrix they used a 
homopolymer (Moplen HP552R) while Fe3
O4
 (at different concentrations) 
was considered as magnetic fillers. Two technological methods were applied 
for obtained material such as hot pressing and extrusion. The process of 
fabrication had a strong influence on the final composite properties. Absorbed 
EM varied both quantitatively and qualitatively. 
Another work [91] fabricated flexible multiferroics ME polymer compos￾ites by casting method. As ME composite films they used polycrystalline 
iron fiber (Fef) which were magnetically oriented and poly(vinylidene 
fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) P(VDF–TrFE) – a copolymer that permits to 
obtain the electroactive phase. Researchers established the inclusions of 
iron fiber into the polymer matrix at different concentrations such as 4%, 
8%, 12%, 16% and 20%. Among the properties determined for the obtained 
composite material – in terms of structural, ferroelectric, and piezoelectric 
features – the focus is on magnetic properties which were measured both 
parallel and perpendicular to the fiber axial directions. In both cases magnetic 
polymer composite material evidenced anisotropic character. Also, magnetic 
saturation (Ms
 ~29.8 emu/cm3
) and magnetic remanence (Mr
 ~5.4 emu/cm3
) 
showed greater values when the magnetic field was applied perpendicular 
to the Fef axial directions evidencing that magnetic moments are aligning 
along the magnetic easy-axis of Fef. Besides, 16% Fef filler loadings into 
P(VDF–TrFE) matrix show a peak ME value of 44.5 mV⋅cm. Magnetic Polymer Composites 301 
Kumar et al. [92] reports preparation of magnetic polymeric composite 
material from multiferroic BiFeO3 (BFO) nanocrystalline powder and poly 
vinylidene-fluoride (PVDF) polymer matrix as component for sensor device. 
Thickness of the magnetic composite was determined at ~ 0.2 mm. All the 
materials have been prepared via hot pressing method. 
Charles et al. [93] prepared carbonyl iron particles-epoxy silane 
composite. Materials were reported to be applied in actuators field. Devel￾opments of the materials use a molding procedure. Detail on magnetic 
composite preparation can be found in the reference [93]. Magnetic polymer 
composites display a soft hysteresis. 
17.4 CONCLUSIONS 
Great efforts have been made to fabricate efficient materials in order to 
be used as devices in the electronic field. Two applications in the field of 
technology are widely discussed in this chapter: EMI shielding materials 
and materials for different type of sensors. Development of the materials 
which implies low-cost are a prerequisite task. The complex structure of the 
materials and also, the difference in properties of each individual component 
of the composites offer the possibility to enhance the SE of the final probes. 
There are numerous developed materials where the enhancement of the SE 
is due to the protective bilayer. But, lately, scientific community developed 
materials with very complex structures (values determined of EMI SE being 
very highly) where multilayer absorption are fabricated such as trilayer 
mechanism or even quaternary mechanism. 
KEYWORDS 
• electromagnetic interference 
• engineering applications 
• hard magnetic composites 
• magnetic composites 
• polymer matrix 
• soft magnetic composites 
• spark plasma sintering 302 Modern Magnetic Materials 
REFERENCES 
1. Pei, P., & Peng, Y., (2022). Constitutive modeling of magnetorheological fluids: A review. 
J. Magn. Magn. Mater, 550, 169076. 
2. Lucarini, S., Hossain, M., & Garcia-Gonzalez, D., (2022). Recent advances in hard￾magnetic soft composites: Synthesis, characterization, computational modelling, and 
applications. Compos. Struct, 279, 114800. 
3. Hooper, T. E., Roscow, J. I., Mathieson, A., Khanbareh, H., Goetzee-Barrala, A. J., & 
Bell, A. J., (2021). High voltage coefficient piezoelectric materials and their applications. 
J. Eur. Ceram. Soc, 41, 6115–6129. 
4. Elhajjar, R., Law, C. T., & Pegoretti, A., (2018). Magneto strictive polymer composites: 
Recent advances in materials, structures and properties. Prog. Mater. Sci. Prog., 97, 204–229. 
5. Namathoti, S., Ravindra, K. V. M., & Rama, S. P. S., (2022). A review on progress in 
magnetic, microwave, ultrasonic responsive shape-memory polymer composites. Mater. 
Today Proc., 56, 1182–1191. 
6. Liu, X. M., Yang, G., & Fu, S. Y., (2007). Mass synthesis of nanocrystalline spinel 
ferrites by a polymer-pyrolysis route. Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 27, 750–755. 
7. Drmota, A., Koselj, J., Drofenik, M., & Žnidaršič, A., (2012). Electromagnetic wave 
absorption of polymeric nanocomposites based on ferrite with a spinel and hexagonal 
crystal structure. J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 324, 1225–1229. 
8. Kurian, M., & Thankachan, S., (2021). Structural diversity and applications of spinel 
ferrite core-shell nanostructures: A review. Open Ceramics, 8, 100179. 
9. Ni, J. L., Duan, F., Feng, S. J., Hu, F., Kan, X. C., & Liu, X. S., (2022). High performance 
of FeSiAl/hBN soft magnetic composites. J. Alloys. Compd., 897, 163191. 
10. Slimani, Y., Almessiere, M. A., Guner, S., Baykal, A., Sertkol, M., Alahmari, F. S., 
Alsulami, E. M., & Auwal, I. A., (2022). An investigation on structural, optical and 
magnetic properties of hard-soft SrFe12O19/(CoEu0.02Fe1.98O4
)x nanofiber composites. J.
Alloys. Compd., 905, 164240. 
11. Pöhl, F., Hardes, C., & Theisen, W., (2016). Scratch behavior of soft metallic materials. 
AIMS Mater. Sci., 3, 390–403. 
12.

Thakur, P., Chahar, D., Taneja, S., Bhalla, N., & Thakur, A., (2020). A review on MnZn 
ferrites: Synthesis, characterization and applications. Ceram. Int., 46, 15740–15763. 
13. Huang, X., Panahi-Sarmad, M., Dong, K., Li, R., Chen, T., & Xiao, X., (2021). Tracing 
evolutions in electro-activated shape memory polymer composites with 4D printing 
strategies: A systematic review. Compos. Part A Appl. Sci. Manuf., 147, 106444. 
14. Wang, H. S., Cho, J., Park, H. W., Jho, J. Y., & Park, J. H., (2021). Ionic polymer–metal 
composite actuators driven by methylammonium formate for high-voltage and long￾term operation. J. Ind. Eng. Chen., 96, 194–201. 
15.

Wang, X., Zhou, Z., Lin, X., Pei, Z., Liu, D., & Zhao, S., (2022). Nanostructured hexaaza￾trinaphthalene based polymers for advanced energy conversion and storage. Chem. Eng. 
Sci., 427, 130995. 
16.

Zhou, Z., You, C., Chen, Y., Xia, W., Tian, N., Li, Y., & Wang, C. K., (2022). Piezoelectric 
sensing performance of flexible P(VDF-TrFE)/PBDMS porous polymer materials. Org. 
Electron., 105, 106491. 
17. Kumar, N., Tyeb, S., & Verma, V., (2021). Recent advances on metal oxide-polymer 
systems in targeted therapy and diagnosis: Applications and toxicological perspective. 
J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol., 66, 102814. Magnetic Polymer Composites

 303 
18. Kayal, S., (2021). Thermoresponsive magnetic/polymer composite nanoparticles for 
biomedical applications. Mater. Today. Proc., 41, 1116–1119. 
19.

Pan, Y., Peng, J., Qian, L., Xiang, Z., & Lu, W., (2020). Effects of compaction and heat 
treatment on the soft magnetic properties of iron-based soft magnetic composites Mater. 
Res. Express, 7, 016115. 
20.

Jiang, X., Liu, Q., Xing, J., Liu, N., Guo, Yu., Liu, Z., & Zhao, J., (2021). Recent progress 
on 2D magnets: Fundamental mechanism, structural design and modification. Appl. 
Phys. Rev., 8, 031305. 
21.

Chen, Y., Zhang, L., Sun, H., Chen, F., Zhang, P., Qu, X., & Fan, E., (2020). Enhanced 
magnetic properties of iron-based soft magnetic composites with phosphate-polyimide 
insulating layer. J. Alloys. Compd., 813, 152205. 
22. Laxminarayana, T. A., Manna, S. K., Fernandes, B. G., & Venkataramani, N., (2015). 
Study of AC magnetic properties and core losses of Fe/Fe3
O4
-epoxy resin soft magnetic 
composite. Phys. Procedia, 75, 1396–1403. 
23.

Ren, L., Zhao, J., Wang, S. J., Han, B. Z., & Dang, Z. M., (2015). Dielectric and 
magnetic properties of Fe@FexOy/epoxy resin nanocomposites as high-performance 
electromagnetic insulating materials. Compos. Sci. Technol., 114, 57–63. 
24.

Lu, H., Dong, Y., Liu, X., Liu, Z., Wu, Y., Zhang, H., He, A., et al., (2021). Enhanced 
magnetic properties of FeSiAl soft magnetic composites prepared by utilizing PSA as 
resin insulating layer. Polymers, 13, 1350. 
25.

Shi, Y., Wang, B., Ye, S., Zhang, Y., Wang, B., Feng, Y., Han, W., Liu, C., & Shen, C., 
(2021). Magnetic, superelastic and superhydrophobic porous thermoplastic polyurethane 
monolith with nano-Fe3
O4
 coating for highly selective and easy-recycling oil/water 
separation. Appl. Surf. Sci., 535, 147690. 
26.

Li, K., Cheng, D., Yu, H., & Liu, Z., (2020). Process optimization and magnetic 
properties of soft magnetic composite cores based on phosphated, and mixed resin coated 
Fe powders. J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 501, 166455. 
27.

Yang, T., Lu, K., Wang, J., Xu, J., Zheng, Z., & Liu, X., (2022). Fe-6.5 wt%Si soft magnetic 
composites with significant improvement of magnetic properties by compositing nano￾MnZn ferrites. J. Alloys. Compd., 909, 164660. 
28.

Xu, Z., Fan, J., Han, Y., Liu, T., Zhang, H., Song, K., & Zhang, C., (2019). Preparation 
and characterization of Mn–Zn ferrites via nano-in-situ composite method. Solid. State. 
Sci., 98, 106006. 
29.

Chang, J., Zhan, T., Peng, X., Li, J., Yang, Y., Xu, J., Hong, B., et al., (2021). Improved 
permeability and core loss of amorphous FeSiB /Ni-Zn ferrite soft magnetic composites 
prepared in an external magnetic field. J. Alloys. Compd., 886, 161335. 
30. Almessiere, M. A., Slimani, Y., Trukhanov, A. V., Sadaqat, A., Demir, K. A., Algarou, 
N. A., Aydın, H., et al., (2021). Review on functional bi-component nanocomposites 
based on hard/soft ferrites: Structural, magnetic, electrical and microwave absorption 
properties. Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 26, 100728. 
31.

Wei, H., Yu, H., Feng, Y., Wang, Y., He, J., & Liu, Z., (2021). High permeability and 
low core loss nanocrystalline soft magnetic composites based on FeSiBNbCu@Fe3
O4 
powders prepared by HNO3
 oxidation. Mater. Chem. Phys., 263, 124427. 
32.

Luo, Z., Fan, X., Hu, W., Luo, F., Wang, J., Wu, Z., Liu, X., Li, G., & Li, Y., (2020). 
Formation mechanism and enhanced magnetic properties of Fe–Si/Fe2
SiO4
 soft magnetic 
composites transformed from Fe-6.5 wt%Si/α-Fe2
O3
 core-shell composites. J. Alloys. 
Compd., 817, 152803. 304 Modern Magnetic Materials 
33.

Zhang, Z., Chang, J., Peng, X., Li, J., Yang, Y., Xu, J., Hong, B., Jin, D., Jin, H., Wang, 
X., & Ge, H., (2022). Structural and magnetic properties of flaky FeSiB/Al2
O3
 soft 
magnetic composites with orientation of a magnetic field. J. Mater. Res. Technol., 18, 
1381–1390. 
34. Uysal, S., Mercan, M., & Uzun, L., (2020). Serial number restoration on polymer 
surfaces: A survey of recent literature. Forensic Chemistry, 20, 100267. 
35.

Guo, Y., Zhu, J. G., Lin, Z. W., Zhong, J. J., Lu, H. Y., & Wang, S., (2007). Determination 
of 3D magnetic reluctivity tensor of soft magnetic composite material. J. Magn. Magn. 
Mater., 312, 458–463. 
36. Sunday, K. J., & Taheri, M. L., (2017). Soft magnetic composites: Recent advancements 
in the technology. Metal Powder Rep., 72, 425–429. 
37.

Zhao, X., Feng, S., & Lv, Q., (2022). Soft magnetic properties of FeSiCr cores in a 
transverse magnetic field. J. Supercond. Nov. Magn., https: doi.org/10.1007/s10948-022-
06157-0. 
38. Farea, M. A., Mohammed, H. Y., Shirsat, S. M., Sayyad, P. W., Ingle, N. N., Al-Gahouari, 
T., Mahadik, M. M., et al., (2021). Hazardous gases sensors based on conducting 
polymer composites: Review. Chem. Phys. Lett., 776, 138703. 
39. Charoensuk, T., Thongsamrit, W., Ruttanapun, C., Jantaratana, P., & Sirisathitkul, C., 
(2021). Loading effect of sol-gel derived barium hexaferrite on magnetic polymer 
composites. Nanomaterials (Basel), 11, 558. 
40. Wu, W., He, Q., & Jiang, C., (2008). Magnetic iron oxide nanoparticles: Synthesis and 
surface functionalization strategies. Nanoscale. Res. Lett., 3, 397–415. 
41. Suhasini, A., Vinod, K. K. P., & Maiyalagan, T., (2016). Synthesis, thermal and magnetic 
behavior of iron oxide-polymer nanocomposites. Sci. Eng. Compos, 25. 
42.

Luo, Z., Fan, X., Hu, W., Luo, F., Wang, J., Wu, Z., Liu, X., et al., (2020). High performance 
Fe-Si soft magnetic composites coated with novel insulating-magnetic-insulating (IMI) 
layer. J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 496, 165937. 
43.

Gao, Z., Jia, J., Zhao, Q., Kong, H., Wu, Z., & Li, J., (2022). Determination of a 
quantitative relationship between deposition duration and magnetic performance of soft 
ferromagnetic composites via data-analysis and theoretical models. J. Magn. Magn. 
Mater., 549, 168891. 
44.

Zhang, Y., Fan, X., Hu, W., Luo, Z., Yang, Z., Li, G., & Li, Y., (2020). Microstructure 
and magnetic properties of MnO2
 coated iron soft magnetic composites prepared by ball 
milling. J Magn. Magn. Mater., 514, 167295. 
45.

Hou, Z., Yan, P., Sun, B., Elshekh, H., & Yan, B., (2019). An excellent soft magnetic Fe/ 
Fe3
O4
-FeSiAl composite with high permeability and low core loss. Results in Physics, 
14, 102498. 
46.

Hu, X., Liang, Z., Li, Q., Hu, S., & Qu, S., (2022). Experimental study on the magnetic 
permeability of inclusion filled soft polymeric composite for soft-core transformer 
applications. Polymer Testing, 106, 107430. 
47.

Sun, H., Zhanga, L., Chen, Y., Chen, F., & Qu, X., (2019). Magnetic properties of iron￾based soft magnetic composites prepared by utilizing polyimide insulating layer. J Magn. 
Magn. Mater., 486, 165287. 
48. Evangelista, L. L., Ramos, F. A. I., Silva, B. S., Hammes, G., Binder, C., Klein, A. N., 
& Drago, V., (2021). Magnetic properties optimization of an iron-based soft magnetic 
composite coated by nano-ZnO and boron oxide. J Magn. Magn. Mater., 539, 168319. Magnetic Polymer Composites

 305 
49.

Meng, B., Yang, B., Zhang, X., Zhou, B., Li, X., & Yu, R., (2020). Combinatorial surface 
coating and greatly improved soft magnetic performance of Fe/Fe3
O4
/resin composites. 
Mater. Chem. Phys., 242, 122478. 
50. Qing, M., Chong, T., Jing, H., & Sun, B., (2021). Study on the soft magnetic properties 
of FeSiB/EP composites by direct ink writing. Front. Mater, 8, 792768. 
51. Riesgo, G., Elbaile, L., Moriche, R., Carrizo, J., Crespo, R. D., García, M. A., Sepúlveda, 
R., et al., (2019). Influence of the remnant magnetization, size distribution and content 
of soft magnetic reinforcement in micro-mechanical behavior of polymer matrix 
composites. Polymer Testing, 79, 106020. 
52. Wanga, F., Dong, Y., Chang, L., Pan, Y., Chi, Q., Gong, M., Li, J., et al., (2021). High 
performance of Fe-based soft magnetic composites coated with novel nano-CaCO3
/ 
epoxy nanocomposites insulating layer. J. Solid State Chem., 304, 122634. 
53. Palmero, E. M., Rial, J., De Vicente, J., Camarero, J., Skarman, B., Vidarsson, H., 
Larsson, P. O., & Bollero, A., (2018). Development of permanent magnet MnAlC/ 
polymer composites and flexible filament for bonding and 3D-printing technologies. 
Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 19, 465. 
54.

Wang, Y., Shi, L., Jin, Y., Sun, S., Gao, P., Wei, Y., Wang, Z., & Jiang, Y., (2020). Surface￾initiated polymerization for the preparation of magnetic polymer composites. Polym. 
Chem., 11, 1797–1805. 
55. Hamciuc, C., Asandulesa, M., Hamciuc, E., Roman, T., Olariu, M. A., & Pui, A., (2021). 
Novel polyimide/copper-nickel ferrite composites with tunable magnetic and dielectric 
properties. Polymers, 13, 1646. 
56. Kim, M. W., Bae, D. H., Kwon, S. H., & Choi, H. J., (2018). Magnetite embedded mini￾emulsion polymerized polystyrene particles and their magnetorheology. Macromol. Res., 
26, 353–358. 
57. Petcharoen, K., & Sirivat, A., (2016). Magneto-electro-responsive material based on 
magnetite nanoparticles/polyurethane composites. Mater. Sci. Eng. C., 61 , 312–323. 
58. Bustamante-Torres, M., Romero-Fierro, D., Estrella-Nuñez, J., Arcentales-Vera, B., 
Chichande-Proaño, E., & Bucio, E., (2022). Polymeric composite of magnetite iron 
oxide nanoparticles and their application in biomedicine: A review. Polymers, 14, 752. 
59. Hajra, S., Vivekananthan, V., Sahu, M., Khandelwal, G., Joseph, R. N. P. M., & Kim, 
S. J., (2021). Triboelectric nanogenerator using multiferroic materials: An approach 
for energy harvesting and self-powered magnetic field detection. Nano Energy, 85, 
105964. 
60.

Nasrollahzadeh, M., Issaabadi, Z., & Varma, R. S., (2019). Magnetic lignosulfonate￾supported Pd complex: Renewable resource-derived catalyst for aqueous Suzuki– 
Miyaura reaction. ACS Omega, 4, 14234–14241. 
61.

Xu, M., Zhang, Q., Tan, Q., Zhang, W., Sang, S., Yang, K., & Ge, Y., (2022). A 
magnetostrictive BaTiO3
-Fe-Ga & PDMS magnetic field sensor: Research on magnetic 
detection performance. Sens. Actuator A Phys., 335, 113383. 
62. Said, M. M., Yunas, J., Pawinanto, R. E., Majlis, B. Y., & Bais, B., (2016). PDMS based 
electromagnetic actuator membrane with embedded magnetic particles in polymer 
composite. Sens. Actuator A Phys., 245, 85–96. 
63.

Hao, Z., Song, S., Li, Bo., Jia, Q. X., Zheng, T., & Zhang, Z., (2022). A solvent driven 
dual responsive actuator based on MOF/polymer composite. Sens. Actuators B Chem., 
358, 131448. 306 Modern Magnetic Materials 
64. Velhal, N., Patil, N. D., Kulkarni, G., Shinde, S. K., Valekar, N. J., Barshilia, H. C., & Puri, 
V., (2019). Electromagnetic shielding, magnetic and microwave absorbing properties 
of polypyrrole/Ba0.6Sr0.4Fe12O19 composite synthesized via in-situ polymerization
technique. J. Alloys. Compd., 777, 627–663. 
65.

Liang, C., Gu, Z., Zhang, Y., Ma, Z., Qiu, H., & Gu, J., (2021). Structural design 
strategies of polymer matrix composites for electromagnetic interference shielding: A 
review. Nano-Micro Lett., 13, 181. 
66.

Guo, Q., & Zhang, X., (2021). A review of mechanochromic polymers and composites: 
From material design strategy to advanced electronics application. Compos. B. Eng., 
227, 109434. 
67.

Liu, S., Zou, H., Qin, B., Huang, S., & Deng, L., (2021). Tailored magnetoelectric 
coupling in magnetically oriented polymer-based iron fiber composite. J. Magn. Magn. 
Mater., 540, 168408. 
68.

Bi, H., Ye, G., Sun, H., Ren, Z., Gu, T., & Xu, M., (2022). Mechanically robust, 
shape memory, self-healing and 3D printable thermoreversible cross-linked polymer 
composites toward conductive and biomimetic skin devices applications. Addit. Manu., 
49, 102487. 
69. Pigliaru, L., Rinaldi, M., Ciccacci, L., Norman, A., Rohr, T., Ghidini, T., & Nanni, F., 
(2020). 3D printing of high-performance polymer-bonded PEEK-NdFeB magnetic 
composite materials. Funct. Compos. Mater., 1, 4. 
70. Martinez-Moreno, M., Fuentes-Ramírez, R., Contreras-Lopez, D., & Galindo-Gonzalez, 
R., (2021). Study of the mechanical properties of magnetic composites supported on a 
PU matrix. ECORFAN Journal-Taiwan, 5, 8–13. 
71. Lu, Q., Choi, K., Nam, J. D., & Choi, H. J., (2021). Magnetic polymer composite 
particles: Design and magnetorheology. Polymers, 13, 512. 
72. Qiu, Y., & Gao, L., (2005). Novel polyaniline/titanium nitride nanocomposite: 
Controllable structures and electrical/electrochemical properties. J. Phys. Chem. B, 109, 
19732–19740. 
73. Henaish, A. M. A., Salem, B. I., Meaz, T. M., Alibwaini, Y. A., Ajlouni, A. W., Hemeda, 
O. M., & Arrasheed, E. A., (2021). Synthesize, characterization, dielectric, linear and 
nonlinear optical properties of Ni–Al ferrite/PANI nanocomposite film. Opt. Mater., 
119, 111397. 
74.

Jia, L. C., Xu, L., Ren, F., Ren, P. G., Yan, D. X., & Li, Z. M., (2019). Stretchable 
and durable conductive fabric for ultrahigh performance electromagnetic interference 
shielding. Carbon, 144, 101–108. 
75. Mathews, S. A., & Rajan, B. D., (2021). Analysis of the role of M-type hexaferrite-based 
materials in electromagnetic interference shielding. Curr. Appl. Phys., 29, 39–53. 
76.

Radoń, A., Łukowiec, D., & Włodarczyk, P., (2020). Microwave absorption by dextrin￾magnetite nanocomposite in frequencies below 2.5 GHz: Role of magnetite content, 
shape and temperature on magneto-dielectric properties. Mater. Des., 193, 108860. 
77.

Shu, X., Zhou, J., Lian, W., Jiang, Y., Wang, Y., Shu, R., Liu, Y., Han, J., & Zhuang, Y., 
(2021). Size-morphology control, surface reaction mechanism and excellent electro￾magnetic wave absorption characteristics of Fe3
O4
 hollow spheres. J. Alloys. Compd., 
854, 157087. 
78. Ahmed, A., Jan, R., Khan, A. N., Gul, I. H., Khan, R., Javed, S., Akram, M. A., et 
al., (2020). Graphene-ferrites interaction for enhanced EMI shielding effectiveness of 
hybrid polymer composites. Mater. Res. Express, 7(1). Magnetic Polymer Composites

 307 
79. Bhatti, M. A., Siddiqa, A., Azam, S., Vu, T. V., Islam, M. U., Rani, M., & Muhammad, S., 
(2020). Magnetic and electrical properties of Ba2
Co2
Fe12O22/PANI composites prepared 
by in-situ polymerization. Phys. B. Condens. Matter, 597, 412410. 
80. Ding, J., & Cheng, L., (2021). Core-shell Fe3
O4
@SiO2
@PANI composite: Preparation, 
characterization, and applications in microwave absorption. J. Alloys. Compd., 881, 160574. 
81.

Wang, Z., Chen, Z., Xie, L., Hou, X., & Fang, C., (2021). Flexible and lightweight 
Ti3
C2
T x MXene/Fe3
O4
@PANI composite films for high-performance electromagnetic 
interference shielding. Ceram. Int., 47, 5747–5757. 
82. Movassagh-Alanagh, F., Bordar-Khiabani, A., & Ahangari-Asl, A., (2017). Three￾phase PANI@nano-Fe3
O4
@CFs heterostructure: Fabrication, characterization and 
investigation of microwave absorption and EMI shielding of PANI@nano-Fe3
O4
@CFs/ 
epoxy hybrid composite. Compos. Sci. Technol., 150, 65–78. 
83.

Guo, Y., Qiu, H., Ruan, K., Zhang, Y., & Gu, J., (2022). Hierarchically multifunctional 
polyimide composite films with strongly enhanced thermal conductivity. Nano-Micro 
Letters, 14, 26. 
84. Koner, S., Deshmukha, P., Khana, A. A., Ahlawat, A., Karnal, A. K., & Satapathy, 
S., (2020). Direction dependent strong magnetoelectric coupling in La0.7Ba0.3MnO3 
embedded poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) flexible nano-composite films 
at room temperature. Scripta Materialia, 189, 30–35. 
85. Ahmed, I., Khan, A. N., Jan, R., & Gul, H., (2022). Structure – properties relationships 
of graphene and spinel nickel ferrites-based poly(vinylidene fluoride) hybrid polymer 
nanocomposites for improved dielectric and EMI shielding characteristics. Mater. Res. 
Bull., 148, 11168. 
86. Khodiri, A. A., Al-Ashry, M. Y., & El-Shamy, A. G., (2020). Novel hybrid nanocomposites 
based on polyvinyl alcohol/graphene/magnetite nanoparticles for high electromagnetic 
shielding performance. J. Alloys. Compd., 847, 156430. 
87. Nica, S. L., Nica, V., Grigoras, V. C., Varganici, C. D., Popovici, D., Hulubei, C., & Ioan, 
S., (2015). Influence of two structural phases of Fe3
O4
and γ-Fe2
O3 on the properties of 
polyimide/iron oxide composites. Polym. Int., 64, 1172. 
88. Toshihiko, M., (1999). Nonaromatic polyimides derived from cycloaliphatic monomers. 
Macromolecules, 32(15), 4933–4939. 
89. Ramazanov, M. A., Shirinova, H. A., & Hajiyeva, F. V., (2020). The impact of 
manufacturing technology, of the polypropylene matrix and iron oxide nanoparticles 
based magnetodielectric nanocomposites on electrophysical parameters. Mater. Chem. 
Phys., 253, 123287. 
90. Eom, K., Shin, Y. E., Kim, J. K., Joo, S. H., Kim, K., Kwak, S. K., Ko, H., et al., 
(2020). Tailored poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-tri-fluoroethylene) crystal orientation for 
a triboelectric nanogenerator through epitaxial growth on a chitin nanofiber film. Nano. 
Lett, 20, 6651–6659. 
91. Kumar, A., Patel, P. K., Yadav, K. L., Singh, Y., Kumar, N., Abdullah, Sharma, G., & 
Singh, S., (2022). Enhanced magnetoelectric coupling response in hot pressed BiFeO3 
and polymer composite films: Effect of magnetic field on grain boundary and grain 
resistance. Mater. Res. Bull., 145, 111527. 
92. Charles, A. D. M., Rider, A. N., Brown, S. A., & Wang, C. H., (2020). Improving the 
actuation performance of magneto-polymer composites by silane functionalization of 
carbonyl-iron particles. Composites Part B., 196, 108091. Index


A 
Acetone, 152, 160, 161, 262


Acetyl acetone (AA), 78, 83, 119


Acicular filler forms, 181


Active


nanosystems, 145


targeting, 214


Actuator, 193, 292


Adenosine tri phosphorus acid, 116, 117, 119


Adhesive, 114, 146, 152


characteristics, 114, 132


durability, 143–145


peel tests, 154


properties, 139, 141


Adsorption


dyes, 278


layers, 96


Aerosol, 233, 239


vapor-phase synthesis techniques, 232


Agglomerates, 152, 155, 169


Agglomeration, 200, 242, 248


tendency, 242


Aggressive organic media, 152


Agricultural production, 120


Air velocity, 256


Akaganeite, 197


Alcoholic solution, 239


Aliphatic compounds, 45


Alkyl sulfates, 64


Alkyl sulfonates, 64


Allocarbonic nanostructures, 74


Alternating


current (AC), 182, 251, 281


magnetic field, 184, 195–198, 212, 241


Aluminum, 2, 4, 143, 145


oxide, 4


protection, 143


Ambient temperature, 193, 267


Amine surfactants, 210


Ammonium


polyphosphate (APPh), 2–4, 51, 52, 56, 
57, 104, 107, 116, 117, 140–143, 145


sulfite, 51, 52


Amorphous carbon, 75, 76, 87, 250


Amphiphilic, 277


diblock copolymer, 181


Anisotropic


character, 300


nature, 198, 199


physical properties, 272


Annihilation, 1–5, 8, 60, 98, 107, 118, 146, 
224


Anti-cancer drug, 214, 277


Anti-corrosion


coating, 143, 145


layer, 71


preservative


layer, 63


lubricants, 65


properties, 64


Antidotal qualities, 206


Antiferromagnetic, 171, 173


materials, 194


spin orientation, 173


substances, 173


Anti-microbes


actives, 250


properties, 116


Anti-parallel orientation, 173


Application


magnetic


field, 173, 193, 194, 198–202


resonance, 234


Atomic


force microscopy (AFM), 7, 8, 25–28, 36, 
49, 52, 135, 145, 151, 155, 163


microscopy, 151, 163


layer deposition method, 274


magnetic moment, 4, 5, 9, 13–15, 17–20, 
41, 52, 55, 60, 73, 74, 80, 82, 86, 87, 
89–92, 111, 116–118, 146, 172, 173, 
195


d-metals, 92


positive charges quantization, 5


Atomization, 250

310 
Autoclaves, 233, 235


Automotive industry, 202


Avrami-Kolmogorov equation, 29, 133


B 
Bacterial cellulose (BC), 277


Ball milling, 293


technique, 297


Bandwidth shielding materials, 296


Barium titanate, 170


Bead


like structures, 259, 263


production, 259


Bending


instability, 250, 254


strength, 162


Benzene-ethanol mixture, 86


Bimodal distribution, 256


Binary metallic nano-alloys, 210


Binding interactions, 208


Bio-assisted synthesis, 233


Biocompatibility, 196, 197, 205, 215, 218, 
232–234, 241, 277


matrix, 183


Biodegradability, 233, 277


Biological


active molecules, 209


applications, 209, 247


fluids, 213


properties, 248


separation, 276


stability, 129


tissues, 193


Biomedical, 205, 292


applications, 196, 205, 210, 232, 239, 
273, 276


diagnostic research, 206


interventions, 217


MNPs, 229


system, 292


Biomedicine, 239


Biometric parameters, 122


Biomimetic materials, 193


Biosensing, 206, 229, 241, 243


Bio-separation, 168


Biotherapeutic interventions, 206


Bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate, 237


Boron oxide, 294


Brain tumor treatment, 196


Index 
Brownian


motion, 242


relaxation, 184, 198


Butyl ethers, 64


C 
Calcination process, 276


Cancer


cell susceptibility, 211


curing, 168


drug resistance, 208


treatment, 195, 196, 209, 217


Capillary reactor, 238


Carbine fragments, 4, 52, 111, 145, 224


Carbon


atoms, 14, 19, 20, 54, 75, 76, 79–82, 89


fibers formation, 224


metal-containing


nanoform investigation, 91


nanoforms, 87


nanostructures, 86, 89–91


nanotubes, 92


nanofibers (CNFs), 273, 277


nanosystems, 74


nanotubes (CNTs), 76, 86, 87, 250


fibers, 153


NPs, 230


shell activity, 146


Carbonization, 36, 75, 99


Carbyne fragments, 65


Carcass-like structures, 151


Catalysts, 35, 83, 111, 146


Catheterization, 217


Cell


culture medium, 210


membrane translocation efficiency, 214


retention, 217


sensitivity, 211


signaling, 207


therapies, 206, 217


transplantation, 217


uptake, 216


Ceramic, 139, 170


glass synthesis, 171


Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, 237


Chain entanglement, 259, 270, 281


Charge


density, 255

Index 311 
quantization, 6, 8, 9, 23, 24, 96, 126, 132, 
133, 146 
Chelated lanthanide, 215 
Chemical 
bonds formation, 1, 41, 54, 95, 137 
characteristics, 139 
composition, 66, 168, 229 
control system, 277 
cross-linkable temperature-responsive 
polymers, 277 
diffusivity, 193 
engineering, 168 
instability, 209 
mesoscopic, 1, 2, 8, 53, 95, 96, 104, 109, 
133 
characteristics, 95 
modification, 20, 154 
sensing, 199 
stability, 232 
structure (nanoforms), 86, 87, 92 
transformations, 64 
vapor deposition, 232, 233, 294 
Chemotherapeutic agents, 212, 241 
Chitosan (CS), 183, 184, 213 
agarose (CS-AG), 183, 184 
matrix solution, 184 
Chromium, 173, 230 
Citrate gel process, 232 
Clinical 
interventions, 216, 218 
treatment system, 196 
Coating adhesive durability, 143 
Cobalt, 26, 27, 78, 92, 169, 181, 191, 207, 
210, 230 
Coherence disturbance, 6, 7 
Colloidal 
metal nanostructures, 199 
particles, 213 
stability, 181, 207 
Commercial 
applications, 280 
electrostatic electron spectrometers, 15 
polymers, 169 
Complex heterostructures, 298 
Composites 
resistance, 152, 158, 162 
thermo-hardening, 160 
Compound display retentivity, 175 
Compression 
strength, 127, 152, 154, 159, 160, 162, 
163 
tests, 154 
Conductivity, 121, 131, 132, 136, 153, 182, 
250, 254, 255, 259, 262, 299 
Conformational 
characteristics, 175 
modifications, 175 
properties, 169, 175 
Conjugated 
adenoviral particles, 216 
polyethylenimine-coated MNPs, 216 
Continuum mechanics, 200 
Conventional 
atomizers, 248 
biology, 206 
facile method, 235 
methods, 87, 248 
thermal treatment, 276 
Copolymer molecular mass, 181 
Copper, 2, 3, 25, 39, 45, 48, 52, 55, 60, 63, 
97, 100, 101, 103–107, 116, 122 
atomic magnetic moment, 3, 18, 52, 55, 
106, 117, 120 
carbon 
MC suspension ultrasound treatment, 6 
mesoscopic composite structure, 99 
mesoscopic composite, 116, 117, 145 
nanocomposite, 46, 54, 65, 67, 68, 70, 
71, 105, 134 
clusters, 32, 65 
containing nanostructures, 92 
Co-precipitation, 171, 232–234, 237 
method, 234, 235 
technique, 232 
Core-shell 
composite ultrafine fiber, 250 
inorganic composites, 171 
Corrosion 
inhibitor, 112, 137, 146 
meter, 66, 70, 71 
sensor, 66 
processes, 111 
surface environments, 64 
Coulombic 
interaction, 252 
repulsive force, 264 312 
Crack-resistant paints, 230


Critical voltage, 264


Crystal


anisotropy, 172


canals, 96


nickel, 82, 90


solvates, 96


structures, 6, 126


Crystallization, 29, 48, 232, 268


Cuboidal geometry, 297


Curie temperature, 173, 231


Cutting-edge technology, 206


Cyclic butylene terephthalate (CBT), 270


Cylinder-shaped samples, 154


Cytostatic drugs, 212


Cytotoxicity, 210


D 
Decantation, 242


Decolorization efficiency, 279


Degradation


efficiency, 279


temperatures, 183


Degree of swelling, 162


Dendritic


polymer-carriers, 217


structures, 155


Density


compositions, 130


magnetic recording, 276


Detailed thermal analysis, 267


Dextran, 196, 260, 297


DI-1 bending testing machine, 154


Diamagnetic, 171, 172, 194


compounds, 171


Dielectric


characteristics, 40


constant, 126, 132, 255


liquid, 201


material, 262


properties, 276, 297, 299, 300


strength, 259


Diffusion control system, 277


Digital magnetic data storage media, 242


Dilute magnetic semiconductors (DMS), 
169, 170, 185


Dimensional stability, 167


Dimethylformamide (DMF), 250, 281


Index 
Dipole-dipole interactions, 200


Direct


current (DC), 251, 281


voltage, 251


ink writing (DIW), 295


Disease treatment, 207


D-metal


compounds, 75, 89


containing carbon nanostructures, 75


Double electrical layers, 96


Doxorubicin, 214


Drug


carrier complex, 214


delivery, 206, 208, 209, 213–215, 217, 
218, 229, 232, 239, 243, 247, 273


applications, 243


system (DDS), 206, 209, 217, 218, 
247, 273


release carriers, 168


E 
Eddy current, 196, 198, 293–295


Effective


adjunctive cancer therapy, 211, 241


nanoscale materials, 85


Elastic


deformation, 200


modulus, 152, 160, 183, 184, 269, 270


Elastomeric matrix, 183


Electric


conductive, 47, 113, 114, 120, 121, 262, 
263, 298


composites, 153


current, 250


devices industry, 292


field strength, 248, 250, 252, 261


insulating layer materials, 292


machines, 168


resistivity, 198, 300


Electrochemical


deposition, 92


potential, 33


properties, 193


reactions, 233


synthesis, 232


Electrochromic coatings, 193


Electroconductivity, 114


Electrohydrodynamic cone jet, 254

Index 313 
Electromagnetic (EM), 3, 4, 8, 40, 42, 60, 
107, 118, 126, 129, 146, 167, 168, 182, 
196, 203, 224, 225, 247, 273, 278, 291, 
296–301 
interface (EMI), 291, 296–299, 301 
shielding applications, 297–299 
interference, 291, 296, 301 
radiation, 107, 126, 225 
Electron 
acceptors, 13, 20 
bombardment, 74 
containing compounds, 103 
density transfer carrier, 67 
diffraction, 36, 65 
magnetic field, 5 
micro-diffraction, 35, 36, 99, 117 
paramagnetic resonance (EPR), 47, 48, 
52, 98, 99, 102, 103, 107, 117, 118, 
182, 214 
spectrum, 76 
spin resonance, 98 
structure (nanosystems), 75 
transport (high energetic levels), 109 
wavelength, 24 
Electronic 
actuators, 278 
application, 296, 299 
devices, 291, 296, 298, 299 
exchange forces, 173 
market, 296 
structure, 86, 92 
Electrophoretic deposition (EPD), 298 
Electrorheological, 193, 201 
Electrospinning, 247–253, 255, 256, 259–264, 
266–268, 270, 272–276, 280, 281 
chamber, 256 
mechanical process, 250 
method, 274–276 
process, 249, 251, 255, 259–264, 
266–268 
technique, 247, 248, 250, 251, 253, 274, 
275, 280, 281 
Electrospraying technique, 247, 248, 253 
Electrospun 
cellulose nanofiber, 269 
fiber, 249, 250, 256, 261, 266, 267 
nanofiber, 247, 252, 254, 260, 262, 
264–272 
composite, 272 
nylon-6 nanofiber, 270 
PEO nanofibers, 263, 268 
Pi fibers, 298 
PLA nanofibers, 260 
PLLA nanofiber, 267 
TiO2 nanofibers, 268 
Electrostatic 
attraction, 214 
charge, 136 
disruption, 250 
field, 254, 256 
force, 249, 252, 262, 273 
interactions, 208, 216 
repulsion, 249, 252 
force, 264 
spectrometers, 15, 86 
spinning, 249 
X-ray photoelectron spectrometers, 75 
Endothelial cells, 184 
Energy 
consumption, 15 
interaction, 26 
parameters, 30, 34 
related applications, 182 
storage harvesting, 292 
Engine mounts, 202 
Engineering 
applications, 182, 203, 294, 296, 301 
industries, 152 
product, 167 
Enhanced 
apoptosis of cancer cells, 214 
heating ability, 212, 241 
permeability, 214, 218 
Environmental purification, 233 
Enzymatic 
degradation, 209 
immobilization, 276 
Epoxy 
alkyl diluent, 154 
composites, 152, 162 
compositions, 135, 136, 158 
compounds, 135 
magnetite composites, 153 
resins (ERs), 6, 114, 133, 142, 143, 145, 
152, 153, 158, 163, 193, 200, 293, 295 
Ethyl acetate, 152, 161 
Ethylene glycol, 202, 236 314 Index 
Excitation


longitudinal plasmon, 199


transverse plasmon, 199


Expanded graphite, 299


External


electric field, 249, 252, 254


magnetic field, 172, 199, 201, 202, 213, 
216, 217, 230, 231, 240, 273


stimuli, 193


Extinction spectrum, 199


F 
Fabricated 
catalytic magnetic nanocomposite fibers, 
279


core-shell, 280


electrospun nanofiber, 262


magnetic composite, 296


nanofibers, 248, 252, 254, 260, 273


polyurethane-Fe3O4 composite, 295


soft magnetic composite materials, 294


Female Wistar Kyoto rats, 217


Feroxyhyte, 197


Ferric red pigment, 152


Ferrimagnetic, 171, 173, 193, 194, 242


materials, 173, 194


Ferrite lattice, 276


Ferroelectric, 300


Ferrofluids, 229, 232, 240, 242, 243


Ferromagnetic, 170, 172, 173, 181, 182, 184, 
192–194, 198, 201, 242, 276, 292, 293


dielectric composites, 182


domains, 194


magnetic compounds, 173


material, 192, 194, 276


properties, 170, 173, 194, 198


Ferromagnetism, 171–173, 194, 247, 273


Ferromagnets, 172, 173, 194


Ferroxides, 151, 153, 160


Fiber


axial directions, 300


containing micropores, 267


diameter, 99, 250, 256, 262, 264–272, 281


formation, 99, 256, 261, 264, 266, 267


nanofibers, 270


solidification, 268


structure, 45, 259, 270


Filler-polymer complex, 181


Fire 
proof


efficiency, 143, 145


intumescent coatings, 145


systems, 146


resistant


composition, 143


intumescent coatings, 139


materials, 139


protection, 143


retardants, 112, 146


Flammability


determination, 140


test, 139, 141


Flexible magnetic membranes, 277


Flight coulombic fission, 252


Flow injection, 232, 233, 238


Fluid jet surface, 267


Fluoroalkyl silane (FAS), 277


Fractal theory, 2, 23, 24, 28, 29


Free chlorotoxin, 216


Fullerene, 76, 81


polymer composites, 182


Functional


magnetic fillers, 169


polymer, 25


G 
Gadolinium, 191, 230


Garnet-type ferrite, 276


Gene-delivery system, 215


Geometric


characteristics, 25, 97


nonmagnetic gaps, 293


Glass transition temperature, 182, 268


Global ferromagnetic order, 170


Glue composition, 139–141


Glycothermal synthesis, 232


Goethite, 197


Gold, 169, 199, 210, 230, 280


Gradient magnetic field, 275


Graft retention, 217


Graphene, 78, 297, 299


oxide, 299


expanded graphite (GO-EG), 299


Graphite


protective coating, 211


spectrum, 76


Graphitization, 77, 78


Grounded conducting collector, 248, 251

Index 315 
H 
Half-dimensional additives, 155


Hard magnetic


composite (HMCs), 292, 301


hexaferrite fillers, 182


Heat


conducting, 152


crystalline melting, 268


physical


characteristics, 130, 132


properties, 130


resistance capacity, 195


treatment, 152, 159–161, 237


Hematite, 169


Heterogeneous distribution, 197


Hierarchically multifunctional structure, 298


High end machinery, 216


High frequency


electronics, 232


operation, 294


High magnetic


inductions, 295


susceptibility, 207, 231


High molecular weight


poly-L-lactic acid (HM-PLLA), 259


polymers, 259


High performance permanent magnets, 232


High resolution transmission electron 
microscopy, 35, 36


High saturation magnetic induction, 293


High spatial resolution, 214


High specific surface area, 271, 275, 277


High temperature thermal decomposition, 232


Homogeneity


magnetic fields, 184


temperature, 241


Homopolymer, 300


Hot


pressing method, 301


vulcanization glue, 136


Human


CD133+ endothelial progenitor cells, 217


machine interaction, 292


melanoma cells, 277


serum albumin, 214


Humidity sensitivity, 300


Hybrid


chemical bond, 74, 79, 80, 82, 92


nanostructures, 199


organic-inorganic magnetic composites, 
171


Hydrocarbon


decomposition, 77


shells, 35


Hydrogen


bonds, 214


densities, 215


Hydrophilic polymers, 217


Hydrophobic, 179, 180


behavior, 129


character, 179


degree, 179


interaction, 208


Hydrostatic pressure, 200


Hydrothermal, 232, 233, 235, 236, 244, 297


process, 232, 235, 236


synthesis, 232, 233


Hydroxide coprecipitation, 232


Hydroxylation, 237


HyperChem software products, 26


Hyperthermia, 168, 194–197, 207–209, 211, 
212, 214, 215, 218, 241, 244


applications, 195, 197


induced apoptosis, 214


measurements, 197


therapy applications, 194


treatment, 168, 196, 197


Hypsochromic shift, 268


Hysteresis loops, 194


I


Imaging-guided photochemical therapy, 239


Immunogenicity, 205, 213


In vivo temperature control, 197


In-depth scientific investigations, 196


Induction


heating efficiency, 197


unpropitious reactions, 209


Industrial


epoxy materials adhesion, 114


wastewater treatment, 278


Inflammability, 129


Inhibitor protection efficacy, 137


Inhomogeneities, 158, 163


Injection flux rates, 234


Innate molecular configuration, 206

316 
Innumerable preparation techniques, 213


Inorganic


compounds, 233, 280


materials, 208, 293


organic polymeric materials, 146


polymerization, 237


In-situ polymerization method, 297


Insulating-magnetic-insulating (IMI), 293


Insulin-like growth factor receptor (IGF￾1R), 216


Interatomic interaction, 65, 71, 74, 79, 82, 92


Interchain connectivity, 259


Interference, 1, 8, 9, 23, 24, 96, 118, 132, 
146, 182


annihilation, 9


Inter-molecular interactions, 259


Inter-particle connections, 196


Inter-phase interactions, 153, 168


compatibility, 168


Interventional modality, 206


Intravenous injection, 213


Intrinsic viscosity, 268


Intumescent fire


proof materials, 142


resistant glues, 139


Invariable exothermal effect, 28


Ion milling, 233


IR spectroscopy, 28, 35, 36, 43, 51, 57, 58, 
60


Iron, 19, 20, 26, 52, 63, 64, 66, 68, 71, 79, 
89, 116, 117, 120, 121, 152, 153, 155, 
159, 160, 162, 163, 170, 183, 184, 191, 
197, 199, 202, 207, 209–212, 215, 217, 
230, 231, 233–235, 238, 239, 241, 276, 
280, 294–296, 300, 301


amorphous alloy, 293


containing


epoxides, 160


epoxy composites, 152


nanostructures, 89


oxide, 19, 20, 64, 79, 89, 153, 155, 159, 
160, 163, 183, 184, 197, 199, 207, 215, 
217, 230, 231, 233–235, 238, 241, 296, 
300


minerals, 153


pentacarbonyl, 239


phosphide layer, 68


precursor, 239


Index
Isomethyl tetra


hydro phthalates anhydrate, 135


phthalic anhydrate, 114


Isotropic


spherical nanostructures, 198


stable system, 237


J 
Jet velocity, 265


K 
Kapton


composites, 177


polyimide, 175


Kolmogorov-Avrami equations, 30, 32, 49, 
97


L 
Laminar flow regime, 238


Laser


pyrolysis, 232, 239


Spectrometer Horiba Lab Ram HR 800, 
44


wavelengths, 211


Layer by layer (LBL), 298


Lead adsorption, 278


Leiurus quinquestriatus, 216


Lilies oriental hybrids, 120


Linearly viscoelastic solid, 201


Lipophobic surface, 278


Lithographical patterning, 233


Load-compressive deformation, 160


Local


magnetic field, 240


perfusion variations, 211, 241


Longitudinal plasmonic excitation, 199


Long-time dispersion stability, 292


Louis Shopper press machine, 154


Low-energy synthesis, 83


M 
Macromolecular, 6, 42, 75, 96, 108, 127, 
133, 169


fragment, 126


phase, 181


self-organization, 6


Macrophages, 209

Index 317 
Macroscopic 
systems, 96 
tunneling effect, 247, 273 
Maghemite, 169, 230, 232, 233, 237, 239, 
244 
Magnectofection, 216 
Magnesium, 120 
Magnetic 
active nanomaterials, 199 
actuation, 183 
assessments, 170 
behavior, 167, 169, 171, 172, 174, 183, 
185, 234 
characteristics, 1, 2, 55, 60, 85, 99, 106, 
111, 112, 146, 167, 182, 207, 223–225, 
231 
growth, 60, 106, 223, 225 
composite, 167–169, 181–183, 185, 301 
preparation, 301 
compounds broad spectrum, 168 
dendrimers, 206 
dilution model, 181 
dipolar, 172, 199 
interactions, 197 
driven technology, 216 
drying, 242 
electron analyzer, 65 
field, 116, 117, 172, 173, 175, 181, 
183–185, 191–194, 196, 198–203, 207, 
211, 214, 215, 230, 231, 239, 240, 242, 
274, 275, 300 
strength, 184, 185 
filler, 175, 177, 179, 182, 184, 185, 202, 
292, 300 
fluid hyperthermia applications, 194 
flux 
density, 174 
lines, 202 
force, 207 
glass carbon electrode (MGCE), 277 
hard materials, 175 
hydrogels, 206 
hyperthermia, 184, 195–198, 203, 206, 
212, 215 
application, 195, 196, 198 
assisted apoptosis, 206 
treatment (MHT), 184, 196, 215 
interaction, 199, 202 
iron oxide nanoparticles (MIONs), 209, 232 
liposomes, 206 
materials, 92, 167–169, 175, 185, 192, 
194, 196, 198, 203, 215, 243, 276, 296 
matrix, 168, 201 
medicine transport, 111, 112 
mesoparticle, 107, 112, 116, 117 
metal oxide NPs, 197 
moments, 3, 17, 41, 103, 215 
nano-carriers, 206 
nano-clusters, 209, 217 
nano-fibers (MNFs), 247, 272–276, 278, 
279, 281 
nanofluid hyperthermia, 195 
nanomaterials, 195–197, 277 
nanoparticles (MNPs), 155, 192, 
195–198, 205, 206–209, 211, 215–218, 
229–244, 273, 274, 277 
endocytosis, 217 
nanostructures, 200, 273 
oscillation, 240 
particle, 167, 168, 175, 180–182, 196–198, 
202, 205, 206, 211–215, 241, 297 
imaging (MPI), 212 
performance, 168, 181, 293, 294 
permeability, 293, 294 
parameter, 294 
photonic particles (MPPs), 212 
polymer composites, 169, 182, 185, 291, 
292, 295, 296, 299–301 
potentiality, 192 
properties, 5, 20, 91, 112, 120, 125, 167, 
169–171, 174, 181, 191, 192, 194, 197, 
198, 207, 210, 212, 223, 225, 231, 232, 
241, 276, 281, 292–296, 298–300 
nanomaterials, 194, 197 
recording, 181, 182, 185, 242 
refrigerants, 232 
registering applications, 181 
reinforcements, 169 
remanence, 300 
resonance imaging (MRI), 196, 205, 206, 
208, 209, 211, 212, 214, 215, 229, 232, 
239–241, 244, 276 
response, 200, 277, 278 
BC membranes, 277 
saturation, 298 
segregation, 206 318 
sensitive 
epoxy-composites, 163 
polymer nanocomposites, 152 
separation, 198, 232 
soft materials, 175 
spectrometer, 15, 65, 74, 86, 117 
stimuli-responsive materials, 292 
targeting (paclitaxel), 214 
transport, 146 
Magnetite, 151–156, 158–161, 163, 169, 
183, 196, 230, 232, 233, 244, 276, 299 
agglomerates, 155 
Magnetization, 171–173, 175, 184, 192, 
194, 197, 198, 200, 212, 240, 242 
direction, 192, 242 
orientation, 242 
process, 192 
Magneto 
crystalline anisotropy, 181 
electric (ME), 35, 54, 115, 120, 132, 137, 
223, 224, 299, 300 
fection, 216 
graphic printing, 278 
impedance, 182 
effect, 182 
liposomes, 208, 217 
metric measurements, 277 
resistive devices, 300 
rheological (MR), 168, 185, 193, 
200–202, 211 
fluids, 203 
sensitive smart material, 201 
strictive materials, 193 
structural properties, 197 
Malleability, 247, 251 
Manganese, 77, 121, 230, 231 
Massart method, 234 
Mechanical 
characteristics, 47, 129, 142 
chemical 
interaction, 95 
method, 116 
force, 207 
mortars, 223 
performance, 184 
properties, 191, 267, 269, 273, 296, 298, 
299 
strength, 167 
Index 
Mechanochemical 
method, 52, 65, 107 
modification, 3, 51, 52, 60, 107 
process, 54, 223–225 
Medical engineering, 276 
Medicine 
magnetic transport remedies, 146 
remedies creation, 115 
Medium magnetic field sensor, 242 
Melamine formaldehyde 
lacquer, 143, 145 
resin, 142 
Melt 
mixing, 171 
point, 268 
temperature, 250 
Membrane filtration techniques, 279 
Merozoite surface protein (MSP119), 216 
Mesocomposite (MC), 1–9, 14, 15, 17–20, 
23, 26, 28, 29, 34–36, 38–48, 51–60, 
97, 99, 101, 102, 104–108, 111–131, 
133–146, 224 
cluster metals, 146 
reactivity, 9 
vibration energy, 42 
Mesogranule surface, 59 
Mesoparticle, 1–3, 5, 6, 23, 29, 30, 36, 39, 
40, 45–47, 112, 116, 119, 127, 132, 133 
existence, 133 
formation, 127 
process, 29 
magnetic-electric properties, 5 
participation, 1 
structure, 132 
surface energy, 127 
Mesoreactors, 23–26, 28–33, 35, 48, 49, 
53, 97 
polymeric matrices, 23–26 
Mesoscopic 
composites, 95, 98–100, 103, 107, 108, 
111, 112, 120, 137, 146 
granules, 106 
materials, 20, 111 
metal-carbon composites, 112 
metallurgy, 33 
one-dimensional nanoreactors, 96 
particles, 2, 24, 35, 103, 117, 125, 132, 
145 Index 319 
physics principles, 24, 48 
proposition, 96 
reactor, 24, 96, 97 
system (ms), 96, 108, 142 
two-dimensional nanoreactors, 96 
Metal, 41, 85, 169 
alloy NPs, 230 
atomic magnetic moment, 2–5, 17, 18, 
20, 41, 95, 98, 103, 109, 112, 117 
carbon 
mesoscopic composite (Me-C MC), 
1, 2, 5, 7, 8, 23–25, 28, 29, 33, 
35–43, 47–49, 52, 54, 57, 59, 60, 95, 
109, 111, 112, 114, 115, 120, 125, 
127–129, 133, 135–137, 139, 140, 
145, 146, 223, 224 
nanocomposites, 5, 28, 35, 36, 38–43, 
52, 53, 55, 60, 103, 107 
nanostructures, 76, 79–82, 128, 135 
nanosystems, 83 
production, 95 
carbonyl precursors, 233 
carbonyls, 233 
chemically active particles, 36, 39 
cluster 
atomic magnetic moments, 2 
formation, 224 
containing phase clusters, 40 
magnetic 
atomic moment, 107 
moments, 48 
nanostructures, 33, 34, 198 
NPs, 230, 232, 234 
oleates, 233 
orientation, 28 
oxidation state, 98 
oxide, 13, 169 
clusters, 29, 34, 35 
dominated wet gel, 237 
reduction mesoscopic products, 33 
salt sol, 274 
Metallocarbonic 
nanoforms, 74 
nanostructures, 75 
structures, 74, 83 
Metamagnetism, 171, 173 
Microbial 
methods, 233 
synthesis, 232 
Microelements, 122 
Microemulsion, 232, 233, 237 
method, 232, 237 
Microfabrication processes, 233 
Micro-islands, 155, 163 
MicroRNA (miRNA), 214 
Microscopic, 39, 76, 106, 117, 151, 153, 163 
manipulation, 205 
morphology, 163 
Micro-tumor-like, 212 
Microwave 
absorption properties, 291, 297 
reflux, 171 
tunable features, 182 
Microwire-doped system, 182 
Mineral 
fertilizers, 121 
oil lubricant containing nitrated mineral 
oil, 64 
Miniaturization, 192 
Mixed-up polymer molecules, 261 
Modulus of 
compression elasticity, 159 
elasticity, 152, 161, 162 
Molecular 
imaging, 206, 218, 234 
modeling, 167, 169, 175, 179, 185 
experiments, 169, 179 
studies, 167 
orientation, 270 
precursors, 237 
weight, 259, 260 
Monicor corrosion meter, 64, 70 
Mono-dispersity, 233, 243 
Multi-dimensional fields, 168 
Multi-domain magnetic particles, 198 
Multi-functional 
composites, 168 
fibrous materials, 280 
Multi-graded thermal processing, 139 
Multilayer 
absorption, 301 
carbon metal-containing nanotubes, 87 
Multiplet splitting, 14, 17, 19, 79, 80, 82, 
87, 89–91 
maxima, 80 
Myriad surface effects, 192 320 Index 
N 
Nanocapsules, 217 
Nanocomposite, 13–15, 20, 28, 29, 34–36, 
39, 41–45, 47, 48, 51, 55, 57, 60, 63, 64, 
68, 70, 87, 90, 92, 182, 206, 224, 225, 
295, 299 
elements, 64 
granules, 106 
nanogranyl, 5 
pillars, 183 
production, 51 
solubility, 14 
structure changes, 13 
Nanocrystalline powder, 301 
Nanoemulsions, 217 
Nanofiber, 39, 247 
solution, 261 
Nano-films, 31 
Nanoform, 76, 78, 80, 82, 85, 86, 89, 90, 92 
chemical structure, 85 
preparation, 86 
materials, 85 
Nanogranule carbon shell, 5 
Nanomagnetism, 191, 192, 203 
Nanomagnetites, 153 
Nanomaterials, 230 
Nanomedicine, 205, 206 
biosensing, 205 
Nanometric particles, 237 
Nano-microdispersed Yttrium Ferrite, 154 
Nano-particle (NPs), 33, 41, 45, 63, 64, 
68, 74, 76, 86, 152, 158, 163, 168, 193, 
196–199, 207–210, 212, 217, 229–235, 
237–240, 242, 250, 274, 280, 294 
labeled cardiospheres, 217 
Nanoporous silicon, 75, 82, 87, 88, 90, 92 
Nanoreactor, 26, 28, 30, 34, 36, 48, 53, 74, 
75, 78, 79, 82, 86, 87, 89, 91, 97 
composition, 89 
structure, 74, 82, 86, 90 
Nanorobots, 217 
Nanorod structures, 199 
Nanoscale 
effects, 243 
magnetic assembly, 193 
structures, 261 
Nanoscience, 192, 272 
Nanosized systems, 52, 54 
Nanospheres, 236 
Nanostructure, 17, 80, 89, 98, 199 
bottom-up, 74 
composite surface layers, 135 
formation, 29, 31, 81 
fragments, 107 
plasmonic excitation, 200 
polycarbonate, 134, 135 
preparation, 86 
properties, 97 
synthesis, 73, 91 
Nanotechnological, 168, 192, 196, 206, 272 
approach, 73 
Natural polymers, 168 
Negative 
charge quants, 4, 8 
susceptibility, 171 
Neural diseases, 240 
Neutral aqueous environment, 64 
Nickel, 2, 4, 13–15, 17–20, 26, 27, 35, 38, 
44, 45, 47, 51, 52, 54, 57, 77, 79, 81, 86, 
88–90, 112, 113, 136, 137, 169, 191, 197, 
207, 224, 230, 274, 276, 277, 295, 297, 
299 
acetylacetonate solutions, 86 
atomic magnetic moment, 4, 17–20 
carbon nanocomposites, 13–15, 19, 20, 
43, 45 
ferrite-barium titanate, 275 
spinel ferrite (NFe), 297 
Niosomes, 217 
Nitrogen, 89, 121 
Noble metal nanomaterials, 199 
Non 
contact actuation, 184 
covalent modification, 208 
hardened compositions, 158, 163 
hysteresis curve, 194 
invasive 
imagining, 239 
remote control, 183 
magnetic 
fluid, 202 
material, 293 
metallic magnet, 170 
modified nanocomposites, 55 
specific interactions, 209 
toxic properties, 276 Index 321 
uniform magnetic field, 171


woven


electrospun nanofiber, 272


membranes, 260


zero magnetic moment, 194


Normal


light illumination, 199


magnetic fields, 200


Novel


biodegradable polymer systems, 217


engineering materials, 168


micro-sized objects, 206


nanostructures application, 146


Nozzle-collector distance, 266


Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), 214, 240


Nucleotides, 209


O 
Objectionable treatment side effects, 213


Oleyl amine, 210


Oligomer-sized phospholipids, 260


Oligonucleotides, 208, 217


One-dimensional


anisotropic plasmonic nanostructures, 198


nanostructures, 31, 272


Optical


absorption spectra, 268


band gap energy, 268


characteristics, 207


density, 129, 130


microimages, 163


microscopy, 71, 152, 163


surface analysis, 63


polishing, 202


properties, 199, 267, 268, 270


switching, 200


transmission microscopy, 26


Optimization


MNP hyperthermia agents, 196


molecular orientation, 270


Optimum


humidity sensitivity, 300


thermomechanical performance, 182


Optoelectronics, 199


Organic


inorganic


composites, 171


magnetic filled systems, 171


materials, 125, 292


Osteoprostheses, 152


Oxidation processes, 111, 112


Oxyhydroxides, 197


P 
Paramagnetic, 35, 41, 172, 173, 182, 194


materials, 172


particles, 215


Paramagnetism, 171, 247, 273


Particle


aggregation, 213


inter-distance, 181


size distribution, 196, 238


Passive targeting, 214


Periodic dripping, 266


Permanent magnetization, 170


Permeability, 174


Perovskite ferrite, 276


Phagocyte system, 213


Phase coherency, 146


Phenol-formaldehyde


glues, 139


resins, 139


Phosphoric groups, 141


Phosphorus, 2, 3, 41, 48, 52, 54–57, 59, 
60, 63–65, 67, 68, 71, 89, 90, 104, 106, 
116–120, 139–145


atoms, 3, 41, 52, 54, 65, 67, 68, 71


containing


copper-carbon nanocomposite, 52, 63, 
64


groups, 64


organic compounds, 116


reduction process, 3


Photocatalytic reactors, 279


Photography process, 24


Photoluminescence spectra, 268


Photosynthetic activity, 123


Photothermal therapy, 199, 212, 229


Physical


coating method, 295


methods, 233


targeting, 213


Physico-chemical properties, 168, 196


Physico-mechanical properties, 151


Physics-chemical approaches, 215


Physio-chemical properties, 280

322 
Piezoelectric 
features, 300 
materials, 193 
Plasma 
polymerization approaches, 171 
spraying synthesis, 233 
Plasmodium yoelii, 216 
Plasmonic 
biosensors, 198 
mediated interaction, 199 
metamaterials, 199 
nanorods, 203 
property, 199 
structures, 198 
Plastics technology, 168 
Platinum(II) acetylacetonate, 210 
Polarization, 2, 5, 6, 8, 9, 66, 126, 133, 135, 
137, 199, 202 
light, 199 
Poly(1,3,5-triaminobenzene), 170 
Poly(acrylonitrile), 250 
Poly(cyclohexyl methacrylate) (PCHMA), 
184 
Poly(ethylene oxide), 255 
Poly(ɛ-caprolactone) (PCL), 184, 185, 269, 
273 
Poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), 260 
Poly(L-lactic acid), 260 
Poly(methyl methacrylate), 259 
Poly(m-toluidine) (PmT), 175, 177–180, 185 
Poly(vinyl pyrrolidone), 252 
Poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroeth￾ylene) (P(VDF–TrFE)), 300 
Poly(vinylidene-fluoride) (PVDF), 297, 
299, 301 
graphene-nFE hybrid nanocomposites, 
299 
Polyacetylene, 20, 52, 65, 67, 101, 224, 225 
moiety, 20 
Polyacrylic acid (PAA), 262, 269 
Polyacrylonitrile (PAN), 250, 256, 269, 272, 
273 
Polyamides, 293 
Polyaniline (PANI), 170, 275, 278, 296–298 
Polycarbonate, 7, 8, 133–136, 274 
compositions, 136 
nanostructured samples, 7 
urethane (PCU), 274 
Index 
Polycrystalline, 252, 300 
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), 183, 294 
Polydopamine (PDA), 277, 278 
Polyepoxide, 152, 160 
Polyethylene 
naphthalene (PEN), 268 
oxide (PEO), 249, 255, 256, 260, 262, 
264, 268, 273 
polyamine (PEPA), 26, 27, 47, 49, 78, 79, 
83, 135, 137, 142, 143 
terephthalate (PET), 205, 268 
Polyethyleneimine (PEI), 177, 209, 213, 214 
Polymer 
chain, 259, 299 
coated liposomes, 217 
composites, 152, 163, 168, 169, 181, 184, 
185, 292, 300, 301 
composition, 1, 2, 8, 9, 41, 42, 47, 132, 
135 
modification, 9 
compounds, 2, 112, 213 
drug 
conjugates, 209, 217 
delivery systems, 209 
filler systems, 177 
hydrocarbon chains, 99 
magnetic composites, 167 
materials, 9, 34, 41, 75, 299 
production, 41 
matrices, 23, 24, 28–30, 41, 48, 74, 79, 
82, 89–91, 96, 100, 133, 167, 175, 181, 
183, 184, 271, 273, 296, 300, 301 
nanosized reactors, 23 
metal containing phase, 26, 36 
modification, 6 
liposomes, 209 
nanofibers, 270 
phase, 24, 25, 28, 30, 38 
raw materials, 36 
substances, 7 
systems, 75, 260, 264 
Polymerosomes, 217 
Polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA), 181, 
259, 260 
Polypropylene, 250 
Polysaccharides, 213 
Polystyrene (PS), 177, 256, 260, 266, 295 
Polysulfone, 266 Index 323 
Polyurethanes, 293


Polyvinyl


alcohol (PVA), 7, 25–28, 31–33, 38, 39, 
49, 78, 79, 86, 88, 91, 98, 100, 101, 
108, 117, 183, 223, 224, 260, 262, 269, 
299


chloride, 136


Pore


catalytic scaffold, 279


interconnectivity, 271


Positive


magnetic susceptibility, 194


susceptibility, 172


Potassium hydroxide solution, 297


Power consumption, 183


Preservative oil formulations, 71


Pristine magnetic filler, 169


Protein


delivery, 206


treatments, 216


Pyrolysis, 87–89, 92, 211, 239


aerosol spray, 211


Pyromellitic dianhydride (PMDA), 299


Q 
Quantitative structure-activity relationships 
(QSAR), 169, 175, 179, 180, 185


Quants radiation wave propagation, 6, 127


Quantum


charge, 133


chemical
 calculations, 36, 78, 114


modeling, 26


chemistry apparatus, 28


dots, 208


mechanical effects, 74


R 
Radial charge repulsion, 254


Radiation therapy, 211


Radio frequencies (RF), 206, 240


microwave (RFM), 211


wavelengths, 241


Radiography, 51, 57, 60


Raman spectroscopy, 44, 52


Rare earths metals, 170


Rate of metabolism, 211, 241


Reaction temperature, 234


Real-time


control applications, 202


monitoring, 240


Reduction-oxidation


process, 1, 20, 28, 29, 31, 33, 35, 57, 95, 
99, 106, 109, 118, 223–225


reaction, 1, 4, 5, 9, 24, 25, 53


synthesis, 5, 8, 23, 25, 29, 38, 48, 60, 117, 
146


Reflection coefficient, 153


Refractive-index


change, 199


units (RIU), 198


Regulatory release system, 277


Relative


humidity (RH), 266, 267, 269, 300


electrospinning process, 267


permeability, 172, 173


Relaxation


internal magnetic spins, 198


loss mechanism, 198


Reluctance, 175


Renewable resources, 296


Residual magnetism, 175, 231


Resonant excitation conditions, 199


Retention effect, 214, 218


Rheology, 201


Roentgenograph, 98


Rotary motion energy, 127


S 
Salt precursors concentration, 237


Sample flammability, 140


Santander variety, 122–124


Saturation magnetization (Ms), 96, 170, 
172, 173, 196


Scanning electron microscope, 263


Sedimentation, 242


Segmental mobility, 268


Selected area electron diffraction (SAED), 
230, 231


Self-assembled


composites, 171


magnetic filled polymer, 182


Self-organization, 2, 6, 8, 13, 24, 25, 28, 29, 
42, 48, 58, 59, 85, 97, 126, 132, 135, 146


process, 13, 24, 29, 48, 97, 126, 135

324 Index 
Semi-crystalline PLLA resin, 268


Semi-organized matrices, 158


Sensor, 66, 168, 182, 183, 185, 193, 200, 
241, 247, 273, 291, 292, 296, 299, 301


actuators, 292


material, 296


Shape


anisotropy, 172, 181, 197


memory alloys, 193


Shielding effectiveness (SE), 297–299, 301


Shock absorbers, 202


Short-range radar sensor, 182


Signal transduction, 241


Silencing RNA (siRNA), 216, 217


Silica magnetic composites, 171


Silicate materials, 129


Silicon


elastomers, 184


nanostructures, 35, 90


resin, 293


Silk nanofibers, 260


Silver, 137, 210, 230, 250, 280


Single domain


magnetic transition, 198


particle magnetization, 193


Single magnetic nanocrystals, 209


Single micelle system, 237


Site


dependent mechanical properties, 269


distribution, 198, 231, 233–235, 238, 239, 
243, 248


selectivity, 198


specific drug delivery, 213


Slurry reactor, 279


Smart


functional


magnetic nanomaterials, 193


nanomaterials, 194, 203


magnetic


materials, 168, 203


nanomaterials, 193


nanoparticles, 203


materials, 191, 193


nanomaterial, 191, 193, 202, 203


Sodium citrate, 235


Soft


ferrite materials, 292


magnetic


composite (SMCs), 292–295, 301


materials, 296


properties, 293, 295


metallic materials, 292


Solar cells, 230, 248


Sol-gel, 275, 293


processing synthesis, 233


synthesis, 232, 233


Solvent


activation system, 277


evaporation, 255, 264, 267


Sorption capacity, 121


Sp-sp2
-sp3
 hybridization, 20, 102


Spark plasma sintering (SPS), 293, 294, 301


Spatial


arrangements, 203


nanostructures, 31


Specific


absorption rate, 212


thermal conductivity, 131


volume resistances, 114


Spectral calibration, 76


Spectrometer


chamber, 15, 19, 63, 66


resolution, 86


vacuum chamber, 86


Spectrum quantization, 24, 96, 132


Spin


magnetic moment, 14


relaxation of MNPs, 196


state, 14, 79, 85, 86, 91, 92


Spinel


ferrites, 291


type ferrite, 276


Spinneret, 251–254, 256, 267


Spontaneous magnetization, 172, 173


Spray pyrolysis technique, 239


Spun nanofibers, 251


Stable particles suspension, 202


Stain-repellent fabrics, 230


Stimulators, 111, 112, 146


Storage moduli, 201


Stress


augmented transverse magneto-anisot￾ropy, 182


relaxation, 259, 260


sensing resolution, 182


Strontium titanate, 170


Submicron diameter, 209


Sub-molecular structures orientation, 7


Substantial bending instability, 262


Subunitary values, 171

Index 325 
Superdispersed powders, 86


Supermolecules, 39


Super-paramagnetic, 192–194, 196, 207, 
229, 231, 244, 277, 278


behaviors, 277


effect, 247, 273


fillers, 184


nanoparticles (SPMNPs), 195, 198, 203, 
207, 216


functionalization, 216


nature, 207


properties, 209


state, 194


Supramolecular


arrays, 171


levels, 73


Surface


anisotropy, 181


charge, 29, 207, 213, 249, 252


energy


embryos, 127


macromolecule, 127


initiated polymerization method, 295


modification, 212


oxidation method, 293, 294


plasmon, 198


polaritons (SPPs), 198, 199


resonance (SPR), 198, 199, 203, 212


spin disorders, 197


tension, 249, 250, 252, 255, 256, 259–262, 
265


Surfactant molecules, 237


Synergetics, 2


Synthesis


electrospun magnetic composite nanofi￾bers, 277


nanostructures, 24, 73, 79, 89


sol-gel, 237


Synthetic fatty acid soaps, 64


Systemic drug administration, 212


T 
Tactile sensor unit prototype, 183


Targeted


drug transport, 153


magnetic application, 174


specific biomolecules, 214


therapy, 277


Taylor cone, 248, 249, 252, 255, 264, 265, 
281


Technical domains, 167, 169


Teflon, 236


Temperature


homogeneity, 211


processing, 171


Tensile strength, 154, 160, 269–271, 299


Terminal jet diameter, 250


Tetrabutylammonium (TBA), 242, 243


Tetracyanoquinodimethane, 170


Theranostics platforms, 205


Therapeutic


active substances, 116–118, 120


delivery (nucleic acids), 214


side effects, 208


techniques, 195


viruses, 206, 215, 216


Thermal


conductivity, 131, 132, 299


decomposition, 232–234


approach, 234


technique, 232–234


degradation, 268


study, 268


destruction, 114


oxidation method, 293


properties, 247, 267


resistance, 167


stability, 114, 136, 294


Thermochemical treatment, 70


Thermogravimetric, 36


Thermoplastic, 159, 168, 293


matrix composites, 168


polymers, 296


Thermoresponsive actuation, 183


Thermosetting polymers, 293


Thermo-strengthening, 152, 163


Three-dimensional (3D), 6, 29, 33, 34, 36, 
41, 67, 79, 85–87, 90, 126, 127, 237, 293


thermosetting plastics, 158


transition metals, 86


Titanium oxide, 170


Toxic chemicals-organic solvents, 234


Transducer applications, 172


Transfection efficiency, 216


Transient spontaneous magnetization, 173


Transition


electron microscopy (TEM), 51–53, 57, 
59, 98, 99, 106, 117, 231, 234, 235, 238


metal, 73, 75, 85, 87, 91, 170, 194


ligand systems, 79


nanoclusters, 87

326 
temperature, 185, 194, 268


Translational motion energy, 127


Transmission electron microscopy, 28, 34, 
36, 45, 75, 87


Transport


biological entities, 207


efficiency, 277


magnetic mesoparticle-linker-medicine, 116


Treatment


cancer, 208, 239, 240


optimal duration, 133


Triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs), 296


Trilayer mechanism, 301


Tumor tissue temperature, 211


Tunable


plasmonic hybrid nanostructures, 200


porosity, 247, 251


U 
Ultra-filtration, 279


Ultra-high-density data storage, 247, 273


Ultra-sonic mixing, 42


Ultra-sound


processing, 129


treatment, 6, 133


UMM-10 Armavir installation, 155


Uncompensated d electrons, 14, 79, 80, 82, 
87, 89–91


Uniform


bovine aortic endothelial overlay, 184


nanofiber formation, 260


Unpaired electron, 1, 3–5, 9, 35, 41, 47, 65, 
102, 103, 106, 107, 111, 112, 118, 139, 
145, 146, 172, 223–225


growth, 224


quantity, 9, 223, 224


Unsaturated bonds, 75, 224, 225


Urotropine, 116, 117, 119


UV-Visible spectrophotometer, 268


V


Vacuum


assisted filtration technique, 298


deposition, 210


Valence electrons, 17, 20, 73, 75–78


Van der Waals volume, 177


Index 
Vapor deposition process, 210


Vaseline oil, 28, 45


Vibrating


motion, 25, 39, 42


sample magnetometer (VSM), 294


velocity, 41, 42


Virus interventions, 216


Viscoelastic resistance, 262


Viscosity, 40, 201, 202, 255, 256, 259–261, 
267, 268


polymer solution, 260


resistance, 256


Volatile organic solvents, 266


Voltage balance equation, 249


W 
Waste water treatment arrangement, 279


Water-soluble MNPs, 234


Wearable electronic devices, 292, 296


Weldability, 168


Wet chemical preparation method, 233


Whipping, 250, 252, 255


Winslow effect, 201


X


Xerogel, 25–27


formation, 24


surface change, 26, 36


X-ray


diffraction, 117


electron spectroscopy, 71


photoelectron


3s spectra, 79


C1s spectra, 7, 18, 134


magnetic spectrometers, 15, 65


spectra, 3, 4, 54, 57, 66, 71, 105, 119


spectroscopic measurements, 65


spectroscopy (XPS), 3, 7, 13–15, 28, 
33, 35, 36, 49, 51, 52, 60, 63, 65, 66, 
71, 74–76, 78, 81, 83, 85–87, 92, 99, 
104, 116–118


study, 14, 76, 82


Y 
Yttrium ferrite, 153


Y-type hexaferrite, 297

Index 327 
Z 
Zapon lacquer, 65, 66 
Zero 
dimensional, 196 
remanence, 193 
Zinc 
oxide, 170, 294
substituted ferrite nanoparticles, 209
