MODULARIZATIONMODULARIZATION
THE FINE ART OF OFFSITE PREASSEMBLY 
FOR CAPITAL PROJECTS
MICHAEL KLUCK AND JIN OUK CHOICopyright © 2023 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as permitted under Section 
107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or 
authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood 
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com.Requests to 
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111 River 
Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. and/or its 
affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without written permission. All other trademarks 
are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor 
mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this 
book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this 
book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty 
may be created or extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained 
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Further, readers 
should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was 
written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial 
damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact our Customer 
Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 
572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available 
in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is applied for
Hardback ISBN: 9781119824718
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Images: © Photograph by Michael KluckMichael Kluck:
This book is dedicated to my patient and loving wife, Jeanette, who endured the invasion of her home office 
space during the business world’s Covid-19 transition from the office to the home––not only my day-to-day 
business activity and annoying online meetings that totally disrupted her schedule, but also all the late night 
and weekend hours when an idea or thought hit me and I felt the need to incorporate it immediately (for fear I 
might lose it. . .).
Jin Ouk Choi:
I dedicate this book to my wife, So Hyun Bae, my new baby, who was just born in Feb. 2022, Sooho Choi, 
and my parents, Bok-Gil Choi and Se Young An. There is no doubt in my mind that without their continual 
support and love, I could not have completed this book. Also, a special thanks to Yoon Jeong Choi and Kyle 
Shackleton for all their support and love.vii
CONTENTS
Preface ix
Acknowledgements xi
Introduction xiii
Chapter 1 What Is Modularization? 1
Chapter 2 Advantages and Challenges of Modularization 17
Chapter 3 Industry Status on Modularization 31
Chapter 4 What Is a Module? 45
Chapter 5 The Business Case for Modularization 63
Chapter 6 The Module Team and Execution Plan Differences 95
Chapter 7 Key Critical Success Factors for Modular Project Success 109
Chapter 8 The Fabrication Yard 119
Chapter 9 Module Considerations by Project Group 129
Chapter 10 A Practical Module Development Process 151
Chapter 11 Modularization Application Case Study Exercise 177
Chapter 12 Standardization 187
Chapter 13 Innovative Technologies for Modularization 197
Chapter 14 Moving Forward 207
Chapter 15 Key Literature and Resources on Modularization 213
Abbreviations 221
Contributors 223
Index 225i x
PREFACE
We would like to begin with a couple of remarks about 
the title of this book: Modularization: The Fine Art of 
Offsite Preassembly for Capital Projects.
What is in a title? We probably spent more time going 
back and forth on the title for this book than what was 
necessary. But it was the first thing you saw when you 
picked up the book, so a short explanation is probably 
due, assuming you even read this Preface. We wanted 
something catchy but, more importantly, descriptive and 
indicative of what the book is about.
Modularization is not new, and it is not revolutionary. It 
has been applied to industrial plants both onshore and 
offshore for over 50 years and incorporated into many 
major construction efforts. However, the problem has 
been that, in many cases, it was not correctly incorpo￾rated or implemented. More often than not, the result 
was a less than desirable project solution and a subse￾quent conclusion by the project team something along 
the lines of: “modularization was wrong for the project” or 
“modularization was a bad idea.” This (wrong) conclusion 
was then carried (along with the resulting bad reputation 
of the module concept) into the planning of the next sev￾eral projects the team tackles.
This is where the “art” in the title comes in and a quick side 
note about the two authors. We are engineers by back￾ground and probably are blessed with maybe only one or 
two artistic bones in our collective bodies. But, we both 
recognize a great work of art, the timelessness of a piece 
of classical music, and anything else truly great for that 
matter. We cannot tell you what makes these works great 
because, at face value, the inputs are the same––oils, 
brushes, and canvas for the painting or notes and words 
on a piece of paper for the musical score. So obviously, 
it is the way the tools and materials are combined and 
used.
A successful module project is quite similar. The modular 
project uses the same inputs as the stick-built project, 
but they must be “mixed up” in a complex combination 
of slightly different approaches and then implemented in 
a certain sequence to be successful. Unfortunately, this 
sequence is different in many aspects than that of the 
traditional stick-built construction project.
Fortunately, we do know and understand what makes a 
module job “great,” and we want all of you to also under￾stand what it takes. That is the aim of this book and why 
it was written. We are not so pompous or ostentatious to 
think the module planning identified in this book will ever 
be compared to the likes of a great work of art or a piece 
of classical music. But, after reading this book, we be￾lieve that you will have a better understanding of what it 
takes to make a module job successful to the point where 
you can successfully implement it on such a project.
So, it is hoped that the title and this short Preface stimu￾late your curiosity enough regarding this age-old alterna￾tive to the standard stick-built process for plant design 
and construction to continue reading.
Thanks for indulging us.
MPK & JOCx i
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Michael Kluck
First, to my co-author, who allowed me to continue my 
quirky way of writing, all the while patiently taking it in 
and then suggesting adjustments that made it sound 
so much better! For his writing and input into all the 
chapters (more than he will ever take credit for). For his 
attention to detail. And, just as importantly, for his help 
in the organization of this effort that very quickly got big￾ger than both of us ever imagined.
Finally, to all the folks associated with all the module pro￾jects I have ever been involved with. I know many of you 
forgot more than I ever was able to pick up, but I am 
thankful for the interactions, the trust placed in me, and 
the lessons learned, some very painfully. Without all of 
you collectively, this work would not have the depth it 
needed to really explain “the fine art of pre-assembly.”
Jin Ouk Choi
This book would not have been possible without the 
support from many individuals. I thank all the people 
involved in this book.
First, I really thank my co-author, Michael Kluck, who 
wrote this awesome book with me. Without Michael, this 
book really would not have been possible. I really enjoyed 
writing this book with him. With his great energy, passion, 
vision, and expertise on modularization, this book was 
possible.
Second, I appreciate the Project Management and Con￾struction Engineering Lab (PMCEL) members’ support. 
I would like to especially thank two PMCEL members: 
(1) Dr. Seungtaek Lee for supporting Chapter 3 Indus￾try Status on Modularization, and (2) Dr. Binit Shrestha 
for supporting Chapter  13  Innovative Technologies for 
Modularization.
Finally, I would like to thank my loving and supportive 
wife, So Hyun Bae, and my sister, Yoon Jeong Choi, for 
their advice, encouragement, and support. In particular, 
Yoon’s help and graphical advice on the figures were 
invaluable.xiii
INTRODUCTION
Why is there an entire book devoted to the “art” of modu￾larization? Simply stated, because the decision to mod￾ularize impacts every aspect of a project’s planning and 
execution. Even from the very beginning of a project, in 
the Opportunity Framing (pre-FEL-1 or FEL-0) phase, 
some basic but important decisions must be made to 
avoid inadvertently limiting the modular opportunities.
So, the book has been written as a guide of sorts, walk￾ing through what is necessary to perform a modular pro￾ject successfully, starting with some very basic “stuff.” 
The path and sequencing of the book make perfect 
sense to us . . . to others, perhaps not so much. And 
while there may be a temptation to skip over these early 
parts to find answers needed in the later chapters, it is 
recommended that you ground yourself with the basics 
provided by these first few chapters. This will help set 
you up for the detailed module planning effort––just like a 
quick review of the rules of any game you plan to play is 
recommended prior to launching into it.
This book combines research findings from the analyses 
of real case modular projects with industry examples to 
help tie any theories presented to real-life scenarios. Thus, 
we expect that not all chapters will be of equal value to 
you. We also expect you may not even agree with some 
of the ideas and concepts stated. But we do hope that 
you can see past our methods on the approach and over￾simplified examples to the reasoning and understand the 
conclusions from them.
So, consider this as a guide for your modular road trip. 
And, like a road trip, it’s the journey, not just the destina￾tion. To be effective, such a guide needs to point one 
in the right direction/provide a preparation plan/suggest 
basic supplies/identify support along the way/and offer 
an emergency kit for when things don’t go as planned. 
We hope the specific guidance in the format provided is 
helpful in implementing successful modular project plan￾ning, even if presented in a bit different format than you 
might have anticipated.
In order to help you better understand how the book has 
been written, the remainder of this introduction delves 
into a brief description of what each chapter is about, 
beginning with the basics of what modularization is.
Chapter 1: What Is Modularization?
Chapter 1 sets the basics in terms of what is needed 
from a ground-level or basic understanding of the con￾cepts and terms. While this may seem too elementary, 
it is critical because everyone has their own definition 
of what a module is (or what it is not) and, as a result, 
a pre-conceived notion of what is involved in its de￾velopment. It addresses the current state of industrial 
construction and why it continues to see productivity 
decline to the point where projects are becoming un￾sustainable with the traditional stick-built methodology. 
In addition, other sectors, such as manufacturing and 
shipbuilding, are examined in terms of how they have 
addressed their productivity issues and succeeded in a 
major turnaround in cost and schedule and how mod￾ularization offers a similar potential advance in both. 
Then, based on the foundation laid that “modulariza￾tion is this industry’s alternative,” details are explored 
around the variability of the optimal modular answer 
and how a one size does not fit all. Finally, the chap￾ter further grounds expectations by discussing “what 
modularization is not.”
Chapter 2: Advantages and Challenges 
of Modularization
Chapter 2 follows the basics described in Chapter 1 with 
further details on the modularization concept, including a 
high-level look at why the module fabrication yard is such 
an ideal place for module assembly. More details are pro￾vided in terms of the advantages of selecting this project 
approach and some of the disadvantages (or challenges) 
of this project execution method.xiv Introduction
Chapter 3: Industry Status 
on Modularization
Chapter 3 describes the industry status on modulariza￾tion through a compilation of 25 actual case projects 
in terms of observed advantages, cost and schedule 
savings compared to the stick-built approach, difficul￾ties, impediments, business case drivers for modulari￾zation, types of module units, module numbers, size, 
and weight, and characteristics of the job site and the 
modular fabrication shop, along with the subsequent 
editorial comments regarding some of the results them￾selves. This chapter validates the advantages and dis￾advantages which were initially identified in Chapter 2 
via this set of actual project case histories and sets the 
stage for the following chapters, which address how to 
properly set up and execute a modular project in more 
detail.
Chapter 4: What Is a Module?
Previous chapters defined modularization and module 
terms, mentioned the advantages and challenges, and 
spoke about WHY the industry needs to really embrace 
this alternative to stick-built execution, but they did not 
provide details on the modules themselves. Chapter 4 
explains the length and breadth (and height, no pun 
intended) of module variability. Modules are identified 
and described in terms of their more common types 
with the goal of providing a basis for understanding the 
magnitude and variability of options available when the 
term “modularization” is mentioned. Further, this chap￾ter dives into the “module considerations” necessary to 
develop a successful module project concentrating on 
those that are slightly different and unique to the module 
philosophy, such as:
• Plot Plan development
• Differences between the stick-built and module layout
• Optimal module size
• Typical module contents and those that might require 
special considerations
• Guidance on division of responsibility in terms of mate￾rial procurement.
Chapter 5: The Business Case 
for Modularization
Chapter  5 begins the discussion of the modularization 
business case, as a logical extension of the information 
provided by the previous four chapters that identified the 
basis of understanding what a module is, why modulariza￾tion is important, why implementation will be a challenge, 
and the potential options in terms of module configura￾tion. In addition, it explains what makes a project a good 
candidate for modularization, the factors to consider, the 
importance of timing in modularization considerations, 
the modular project execution planning steps by project 
phases, and describes how to conduct a business case 
analysis using the tool provided. It also provides guidance 
on how to approach the project module option in terms of 
developing the project-specific details necessary to iden￾tify the optimal module case for your specific project in 
terms of size, number, cost, schedule, etc. The three key 
contents addressed in this chapter are as follows:
• Important Business Case Considerations are identi￾fied and explained.
• The 13-step Business Case Model is explained in 
detail.
• A usable Business Case Financial Analysis Model
is provided.
Chapter 6: The Module Team and 
Execution Plan Differences
This chapter presents how to manage the project phi￾losophy shift to the modular approach via the Module 
Team, identifying key team members and their qualifi￾cations. The dynamics of the team are explained and 
contrasted against the typical stick-built project team. 
Examples are provided on team organization as well 
as how the team should be incorporated into the over￾all project management. Also, a deep dive is taken 
into explaining how the execution of the modular pro￾ject differs from the stick-built project. These major 
execution plan differences are identified in terms of 
what they are, when they should first be incorporated 
into the project execution, and their priority for imple￾mentation within each project phase. This detailed Introduction xv
listing is visually summarized in an activity table show￾ing the various execution plan differences by project 
phase and the priority of execution within each project 
phase.
Chapter 7: Key Critical Success Factors 
for Modular Project Success
Chapter  7 complements Chapter  6 because, when 
considered together, the two chapters provide the 
foundational basis for why the modular job is so dif￾ferent and why understanding these differences and 
success factors are so important to the success of a 
modular job. Chapter 7 explains the concept of critical 
success factors (CSFs), how they were developed, and 
their importance to the success or failure of a modular 
project. The 21 CSFs are equated to a listing of com￾mon mistakes identified on modular projects that failed 
or were only marginally successful. Later, the chapter 
examines the CSFs in terms of difficulty of accomplish￾ment, and identifies an ideal time for initial implementa￾tion and who has primary responsibility. Furthermore, it 
demonstrates the relationship between the CSFs and 
project performance. Finally, a somewhat whimsical 
exercise involving the Module “Perfect Storm” is pro￾vided, a hypothetical scenario of a module job where 
almost everything aligns in terms of the worst possible 
outcomes, and where we comment on the subsequent 
conclusions reached.
Chapter 8: The Fabrication Yard
Chapter  8 continues the explanation, initiated in 
Chapter 2, of the benefits a fabrication yard can pro￾vide in terms of the overall modular project execution. 
Specifics are explained in terms of location, physical 
size, and layout, and operational philosophy. Project 
guidelines for yard selection are suggested in terms 
of size, location, complexity, and number utilized. In 
addition, contracting strategies are discussed in terms 
of pros and cons as well as what seems to work best. 
Options on the division of responsibility regarding 
who provides what are addressed and suggestions 
provided.
Chapter 9: Module Considerations by 
Project Group
Chapter  9 takes everything provided in terms of basic 
“learning” in the first eight chapters and starts using this 
modular basis of understanding to look at and make deci￾sions on how to approach some of the different day-to-day 
aspects of the typical module project in terms of the vari￾ous groups involved. This chapter gets down to the “nuts 
and bolts” or, as some suggest, “gets into the weeds” of 
the modular analysis. It is where “the devil in the details” 
of the previous general modular statements is exposed. 
The chapter is filled with personal experiences—both 
good and not so good. But the content of these module￾supporting details is universal and provides an idea of the 
types of decisions one will face. Subjects include:
• Engineering considerations: module evolution, timing, 
discipline leads, fab yard coordination
• Fabrication considerations: structural members, weld￾ing vs. bolting, sub-assemblies, weight control
• Completion/testing/pre-commissioning: what is “com￾plete,” pre-commissioning, tradeoffs
• Shipping considerations: basic logistics, motion analy￾ses, grillage and sea-fastening
• Load-out: methods, design considerations
• Movement to site and hook-up: design considerations 
and the single weld hook-up (SWHU).
Chapter 10: A Practical Module 
Development Process
Chapter 10 is our “second most favorite chapter” (sic) 
of the book in terms of its development and the culmi￾nation of the previous nine chapters. Chapter  9 took 
all the basics from the previous chapters and used this 
information as a basis to help identify and resolve is￾sues that typically come up when planning and imple￾menting a module project from the technical standpoint. 
Chapter 10 takes a slightly different approach, still go￾ing all the way back to the left on the project timeline 
(to Opportunity Framing) but walking through potential 
interactions required during the early stages of project xvi Introduction
development. It also provides a detailed 5-step method 
for early module screening analysis that builds on the 
13-step business case discussed in Chapter 5. Other 
specific items covered include:
• Module tenets: common misunderstandings in terms of 
the modular philosophy
• Initial project analysis requirements and timing of 
required discussions and decisions
• Recovery options should the module decision be made 
late in the project life.
Chapter 11: Modularization Application 
Case Study Exercise
Chapter 11 is the development of a composite “made 
for this book” modular project case study exercise. 
The hypothetical case study exercise walks the reader 
through a modular project development, beginning with 
a summary of the project and proposed facilities. Each 
phase of the project is developed with information typi￾cally available at that time in the project development. 
The reader must take the information available and, 
based on what is known, make assumptions and de￾velop a plan forward, answering the questions at the 
end of the project phase. This effort is reiterated through 
each phase of the project—Opportunity Framing/
Assessment/Selection/Basic Design/Engineering, Pro￾curement, and Construction (EPC). To keep the exer￾cise on a consistent path, a primary solution has been 
developed that is used for “re-setting” the exercise for 
all, so there is a consistent approach at the beginning 
of each of the subsequent project phases. As a text￾book, this solution is not part of the printed version but 
available for instructors (not for students) as a separate 
supplement. Contact Dr. Choi for the solution file: choi.
jinouk@gmail.com
Chapter 12: Standardization: The Holy 
Grail of Pre-Assembly
Chapter 12 is the next step in the evolution of an effec￾tive implementation plan for the industrial capital pro￾ject: Standardization. It starts with a brief explanation of 
the potential in cost and schedule savings, referencing 
both the historical gains of the shipbuilding industry as 
well as the more recent CII UMM-01 research on stand￾ardization. It starts by describing the two different paths 
to integrating standardization with modularization and 
the benefits, tradeoffs, and basic economics of each. 
Later, it provides a road map in terms of identifying 
what makes a good candidate, when to start the evalu￾ation process, how to approach the evaluation effort, 
and some critical success factors associated with the 
standardization concept.
Chapter 13: Innovative Technologies 
for Modularization
Modularization techniques have recently evolved thanks 
to the advances in and incorporation of certain innova￾tive technologies. Chapter  13 examines the part that 
technology plays in modularization in terms of a few 
key emerging innovative technologies that can help the 
industry implement the modular technique more suc￾cessfully on more complex and sophisticated projects. 
Those technologies of interest are:
• visualization, information modeling, and simulation
• sensing and data analytics for construction
• robotics and automation.
Chapter 14: Moving Forward
Chapter 14 is dedicated to a semi-formal wrap-up of 
the book along with some “thought-provoking ideas” on 
what the future of our industry might be. It reiterates 
the authors’ goals and provides seven specific industry 
“Accelerators” that will make the future a more module￾friendly world, if implemented. Those “Accelerators” are:
1. Applied Knowledge
2. Different Academic Teaching Approach
3. Identify, Acknowledge, and Incorporate Required 
Paradigm Shifts
4. Friendly Contracting
5. Industry Re-branding
6. More Alliances and Research
7. Planning Techniques and Their Combinations.Introduction xvii
Chapter 15: Key Literature and Resources 
on Modularization
Chapter 15 provides a resource guide that can be used 
for further follow-up on the future actions suggested for 
our industry in Chapter  14. It lists reports, tools, and 
academic papers on modularization and standardization 
that may be considered beneficial in terms of a follow￾up study or research—many of which were referenced 
at one time or the other in the preceding chapters.chapter 1
1
This chapter starts by answering the question, “What 
is modularization?” and setting the basics in terms of 
what is needed from a ground-level/basic understanding 
of the concepts and terms. Starting with a definition of 
terms, including modularization, module, and percentage 
modularization, it then introduces an industry best prac￾tice, “Planning for Modularization,” and some basic 
modularization/pre-assembly philosophy. Next, it goes 
into the current state of industrial construction and dis￾covers why it continues to see productivity decline to 
the point where projects are becoming unsustainable 
with the traditional stick-built methodology. A descrip￾tion is given of how other industries, including manufac￾turing and shipbuilding, have addressed their productivity 
issues and succeeded in a major turnaround in cost and 
schedule and how modularization offers a similar poten￾tial advance in both. Then, based on the foundation laid 
that “modularization is an alternative,” details about the 
variability of the potential optimal modular projects and 
how one size does not fit all are explained. Depending on 
the project type and configuration, the analysis result can 
range from no reason to consider modularization to mod￾ularizing as much as possible. Finally, what is needed to 
get started with considering modularization as an option 
as well as “what modularization is not” are presented.
1.1 Definitions
1.1.1 Modularization
The authors define modularization as follows:
Modularization is the project business/execution strategy that 
involves the transfer of stick-build construction effort from the 
jobsite to one or more local or distant fabrication shops/yards, to 
exploit specific strategic advantages.
Very simply put, it is the fabrication, assembly, and test￾ing of a portion of a plant or manufacturing facility away 
from its final site placement. The key is a conscious shift 
in project execution strategy.
Our definition is aligned with (Tatum, Vanegas and 
Williams, 1987) and (Construction Industry Institute, 2013; 
O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2013).
• Modularization is used to describe a process in which 
the principal construction method is the use of off-site 
prefabricated, totally preassembled and pre-finished 
modules (Tatum et al. 1987).
What Is Modularization?2 What Is Modularization?
• Modularization entails the large-scale transfer of stick￾build construction effort from the job site to one or more 
local or distant fabrication shops/yards, to exploit any 
strategic advantages. Thus, modularization may be 
considered a form of project business/execution strat￾egy (Construction Industry Institute,  2013; O’Connor, 
O’Brien, and Choi, 2013).
Note that for the purposes of future reference and proper 
understanding, all pre-assembly efforts should be con￾sidered as part of the term modularization. This is a sim￾plifying assumption on the part of the authors in order 
to eliminate the typical discussion that ensues regarding 
how to define and separate the two terms or differentiate 
between them. ANYTHING done to move work off site 
will fall under the term modularization.
Unfortunately, not all modularization (or pre-assembly) 
solutions end up being beneficial. The very fact that this 
book is being written is due to numerous examples of how 
a modularization effort was not properly implemented 
and ended up not adding value to a project. Since these 
efforts also fell under the term “modularization,” the last 
clarifying phrase was included in the definition, “. . . to 
exploit specific strategic advantages.” Another way we 
sometimes clarified this caveat was “. . . that, when prop￾erly executed, provide best value for the project.”
So, what makes a project a modular project? Is it any 
amount of pre-assembly being performed or having at 
least one bona fide module in the mix? Is it exceeding a 
specific minimum percentage or a specific minimum ratio 
of modules to stick-build? Probably none of the above. 
As mentioned in the definition of modularization, it is a 
conscious shift in project execution strategy. So, a pro￾ject becomes a modular project when the project team 
makes the specific conscious changes in job planning 
and execution in order to facilitate a modular outcome.
It would be nice if a magic wand could be waved over all 
the modularization projects, and those which were not 
implemented properly could be magically called some￾thing else. This would eliminate all the bad press, wrong 
conclusions, and in general erroneous implementation 
efforts that resulted in giving this term and this concept 
the bad rap that it currently carries. We have no such 
magic wand, so education in the proper approach to 
modularization and its planning is the next best solution.
1.1.2 Module
So, what is a module?
A module is a “portion of plant fully fabricated, assembled, 
and tested away from the final site placement, in so far as is 
practical.”
(Construction Industry Institute, 2013; O’Connor, O’Brien, and 
Choi, 2013)
Again, the authors have taken some liberties in terms of 
this definition with some simplifying assumptions. The 
module can be very large or as small as a simple sub￾assembly of a skid. It can be fabricated and assembled 
halfway around the world in a sophisticated fabrication 
yard, or it can be put together on a plot of land immedi￾ately adjacent to the actual project site. There are benefits 
with both scenarios, and we do not want to limit what 
can be considered in terms of options for the alternative 
to stick-building by unintentionally limiting the definition of 
these terms.
1.1.3 Percentage Modularization
As one starts using modularization on projects, one of 
the first questions management has is: “What percentage 
of your project is being modularized?” In many cases, 
the answer received is incorrectly used by management. 
In  some cases, the assumption is that the higher the 
percentage of modularization, the more significant the 
schedule or cost savings a project has. In other cases, 
it may even be used to compare completely different 
projects by a similarly incorrect metric—the higher the 
percentage modularized, the more efficient the project 
execution.
While the above simplifications can occasionally be true, 
they frequently are not and instead become a slippery 
slope to start down. As we will explain in future chap￾ters, there are just too many factors that influence what 
determines the “optimal” percentage modularization for a 
specific project, many of which have nothing to do with 
the actual module itself but depend on the site location, 
type of equipment, labor, and material costs, etc.
So, we will just simplify and say it straight up: To sim￾ply make a direct relationship between percentage 1.2 “Planning for Modularization” as a Best Practice 3
modularization and project efficiency is wrong! There are 
just too many other factors that will impact the optimal 
solution. With the above preface, here is the definition:
Percentage modularization is the portion of original 
site-based work hours (excluding site preparation and demolition) 
exported to fabrication shops.
(Construction Industry Institute, 2013; O’Connor, O’Brien, and 
Choi, 2013)
We have attempted to qualify the definition to pertain 
to the actual erected plant or facility by removing vari￾ables associated with the differences in  site location, 
these being the potential demolition of existing facili￾ties or naturally occurring geographical impediments 
as well as the surface preparation required to make a 
site ready to physically support the proposed construc￾tion effort for the project. These efforts and costs are 
not to be ignored for the overall project economics, 
but it is important that such costs are not included in 
any metrics developed on modularization comparison 
as they could be so vastly different from one site to 
the next. With this basic understanding of a few of the 
terms that will be used throughout this book, we can 
now move forward on why modularization is important 
to our industry.
1.2 “Planning for Modularization” as a 
Best Practice
The Construction Industry Institute (CII) has identified 
17 construction best practices (Construction Industry 
Institute (CII), 2021). By definition,
Best practices improve performance not only in terms of cost, 
schedule, and safety, but they also increase the consistency 
and predictability of project performance. By improving the 
consistency of project delivery, a company will have a better 
chance of improving project performance over the long term. This 
combined benefit of best practice use will likely give companies a 
distinct competitive advantage.
(Construction Industry Institute (CII), 
2017)
Basically, to simplify this, a best practice is a method￾ology that is critical to the success of a project.
Below is a quote from the CII article publicizing the pro￾motion of Planning for Modularization as CII’s newest 
best practice back in 2015.
Planning for Modularization is not necessarily focused on 
promoting or marketing the concept of modularization, but 
rather on helping project teams better understand whether 
modularization is the right strategy for the project and, if so, 
how they can successfully implement the strategy to achieve 
improved outcomes in cost, schedule, safety, and quality 
while mitigating issues such as a lack of skilled craft labor or 
extreme weather.
(Construction Industry Institute, 2015)
Not only CII but many renowned agencies and institutes 
also highlighted the potential of modularization. Below 
are some quotes from them:
New trend, the reemergence of prefab & modularization tied to 
current influential construction trends, such as the increasing 
interest in lean construction, the rising use of BIM technologies 
and the growing influence of green construction.
(McGraw Hill Construction, 2011)
Modularization technology has evolved – more sophisticated and 
complex facilities are subject to its implementation.
(Modular Building Institute, 2010)
Over the next 20 years, its growing prevalence could significantly 
advance the productivity and competitiveness of the capital 
facilities sector of the U.S. construction industry.
(National Research Council, 2009)
Why do we bring up this best practice reference and 
other renowned institutes’ quotes here in our introductory 
remarks in Chapter 1? CII and many others have identified 
(Planning for) Modularization as having the potential to 
dramatically improve project outcomes. But, this planning 
needs to be simple and straightforward enough so it can 
be implemented. The problem is that this implementation 
path is not often very clear and oftentimes is neglected or 
badly carried out—hence the basis for the book.4 What Is Modularization?
1.3 Current State of the Construction 
Industry
The construction industry is in trouble. Current produc￾tivity rates are unacceptable, and the industry now as a 
whole is unsustainable. Labor costs have increased while 
actual skilled workers’ “time on tools” has decreased. 
Regulations (of all types) have further restricted how the 
average worker can function on the job.
Furthermore, the construction industry is losing its skilled 
workers. They are getting older, retiring, or with the in￾creasingly cyclic nature of the business, getting weary 
of the uncertainty of employment and moving to other 
professions. Making it worse, the industry is also not at￾tracting many new younger recruits. Part of the reason 
is that the construction industry, as currently viewed by 
many, is not considered “glamorous” or appealing to 
these new younger people coming of work age. With 
computer and tech jobs in the forefront and the over￾emphasis on a “college degree” as the only path to 
success, the typical construction industry job is often 
seen as a bit dirty, low-paid, difficult, and possibly even 
beneath their dignity. Trades, such as welding, pipe fitting, 
and instrumentation, which still pay handsomely and of￾fer increased mobility and salary, are no longer consid￾ered as noble a profession as they historically have been. 
So, some of the potential students of these trades shy 
away from considering these trades as acceptable alter￾natives to college. As a result, the construction industry 
continues to suffer in terms of recruiting and maintain￾ing an adequate skilled workforce necessary to support 
these project construction efforts.
With the recent trend of more large-scale mega capital 
projects (see Figure 1.1), not only in the number of pro￾jects but also in the greater share of investments in terms 
of dollars, these new megaprojects come with increased 
emphasis on holding both cost and schedule goals. 
However, unfortunately, “98 percent of megaprojects suf￾fer cost overruns of more than 30 percent; 77 percent are 
at least 40 percent late” (see Figure 1.2).
Owners continue to enforce these cost and schedule 
goals by shifting more and more of the cost and sched￾ule risk to the Engineering, Procurement, and Construc￾tion (EPC) contractors, who in turn push it down to their 
sub-contractors. With increased competition for the 
1Forecast assumes price of capital goods increases at same
rate as other goods and assumes no change in inventory.
2Project award date 2015 and beyond.
McKinsey&Company
Global infrastructure investment by industry1
Selected years, constant 2005 prices and exchange rates, $ trillion
12% by number of projects
77% by project value
Megaprojects’ share in the future2
1990
3
0
6
13
2012 2030
2
1
3
1
3
5
2
6
109%
Real estate
Transportation
Energy, utilities, and
social infrastructure
Figure 1.1 Global infrastructure investment by industry. Source: McKinsey Productivity Sciences Center (2015). Reproduced with permission of McKinsey & Company.1.3 Current State of the Construction Industry 5
fewer projects currently available in the market, the few 
successful EPC contractors must execute projects with 
razor-thin profit margins. Any deviation in labor pricing, 
material escalation, or schedule delays can spell finan￾cial disaster.
Modularization offers an alternative where the outcome 
is more predictable in terms of both cost and schedule, 
provided the required engineering and material inputs 
are provided in time. This is because the module fab￾rication yard operates more like a manufacturing facility 
650
260
150
110
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
–0.5 0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 4.0 6.0 7.0 9.0
60
59 12 56
7
9
6 11
1917 24 16
25
3
2
15
35 34
13
32 44
47
28
29
30
36
45
33
4
10
31
27
51
20
22 38 55 41
42
37
18
53
52
Average: 80%
Average: 20 months
63
50
57
54
40
39
61
21
48
46
26
Mining Oil and gas Infrastructure
49
43
58
5
1
8
14
23
Ninety-eight percent of megaprojects face cost overruns or delays.
Capital-expenditure overrun
(% of original quoted capital expenditure)
Delay with respect to original schedule, years
• 98% of projects incur cost overruns or delays.
• The average cost increase is 80% of original value.
• The average slippage is 20 months behind original schedule.
Figure 1.2 Megaprojects’ capital-expenditure cost and schedule overrun. Source: McKinsey Productivity Sciences Center (2015). Reproduced with permission of 
McKinsey & Company.
Globally, labor-productivity growth lags behind that of manufacturing and the total economy
Global productivity growth trends1 Construction Total economy Manufacturing
Real gross value added per hour worked
by persons engaged, 2005 $
Index: 100 = 1995
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
1995 2000 05 $25
1.0
10 2014 $37 $39
Compound annual growth rate,
1995–2014
%
Hourly rate
1 Based on a sample of 41 countries that generate 96% of global GDP.
2.7
3.6 +2.6
Figure 1.3 Global productivity growth trends. Source: McKinsey Global Institute (2017). Reproduced with permission of McKinsey & Company.6 What Is Modularization?
offering consistency in production. This will be further ex￾plained in Chapter 2 when we discuss the benefits and 
challenges.
1.3.1 How Did the Construction Industry End Up in 
Such a Sad State of Affairs?
To help answer this question, we need to go back into 
the past and look at the current trends in the industry, in 
particular the various sectors that make it up. Figure 1.3 
identifies the issue that has not changed. Over the 20-
year period shown above, there have been significant 
gains in the manufacturing sector, in some cases almost 
doubling productivity (as noted by the manufacturing line 
in Figure 1.3). In fact, the overall industry achieved a 50% 
increase over this same time period (as noted by the total 
economy line in Figure 1.3). However, during this same 
time frame, the construction sector at best was only mar￾ginally able to maintain constant productivity in terms of 
gross value added per hour worked (the construction line 
in Figure 1.3). While some may argue that the construc￾tion industry (Figure 1.4) has hit the ceiling in terms of how 
much of the typical stick-built efforts can be shipped off 
to shops for pre-assembly, there are major sub-sectors 
within the industry, e.g., automobile (Figure 1.5), or ship￾building, that have shown significant increases in produc￾tivity, even rivaling the gains made by manufacturing.
So, what was the difference they managed to make when 
the construction industry failed? Here is a bit more detail 
on the gains achieved by the manufacturing industry, how 
they managed to do it, and what the construction indus￾try is currently going through.
1.3.1.1 The Construction Industry Is 
Reluctant to Evolve
There are many reasons and factors that contribute to 
this downward trend, and an entirely separate study 
could be initiated to identify all the contributing fac￾tors, but for simplification purposes, in general, they 
all point to a reluctance by the construction industry to 
evolve. While manufacturing was embracing Lean and 
other processes that help optimize their efforts, and the 
shipbuilding industry was moving from stick-building to 
block-building to an Interim Product Database (in effect, 
a shopping catalog for interchangeable parts), the con￾struction industry was still mired in the same production 
techniques used in the 1970s. These can be unflatter￾ingly summarized as essentially gathering and moving a 
large number of skilled (or not so skilled) workers, who 
are unfamiliar with each other, to an unfamiliar construc￾tion site to work constructing a plant or process that 
many may not even be familiar with and perform a se￾ries of complex erection scenarios for those complicated 
plant processes.
In addition to the above, the construction workers have 
had to execute their jobs under circumstances that, as 
time progressed, require more and more requirements 
placed on them in terms of how they perform their work—
additional training in terms of working together—traffic 
safety, isolation, lock out—tag out, working at heights, 
wearing special clothing for some tasks, gear for fall pro￾tection, etc. While most of these are positive in terms of 
safety results—reduction in near misses, medical treat￾ments, lost time accidents (LTAs), and fatalities, they do Figure 1.4 Construction industry. Source: travenian/iStock/Getty Images.
Figure 1.5 Automobile industry. Source: xieyuliang/Shutterstock.com.1.3 Current State of the Construction Industry 7
take time to initiate, train, and implement. Add that to the 
current project unfamiliarity mentioned above, and this all 
adds to the reduction of the actual “time on tools” that 
the skilled worker needs to do the job.
1.3.1.2 The Waste Time in the 
Construction Industry
The manufacturing industry has effectively increased 
its percentage of the productive time versus waste, as 
shown in Figure  1.6, which is created using data from 
Diekmann et al. (2004).
According to Diekmann et  al. (2004), only 43% of the 
entire active time is productive (including “Value Added” 
and “Support” activities/time, which means 57% of the 
work time is wasted or not adding values in the construc￾tion industry. At the same time, the manufacturing indus￾try utilizes almost 74% of its work time productively. Of 
course, there has been significant improvement in both 
industries in recent decades, so the numbers are not 
the key point. The key message is that the construction 
industry needs to benchmark the manufacturing industry 
to improve its productivity. According to the same study 
(Diekmann et al., 2004), the main reasons for the waste 
time in the construction industry were:
• Defects
• Overproduction
• Waiting
• Non-used resources
• Transportation
• Inventory
• Motion
• Excess processing.
In detail, there are diverse waste activities in the con￾struction industry (Alarcon, 1997; Bhatla, Pradhan, and 
Choi, 2016):
1. Work not done
2. Unnecessary movement of materials
3. Re-work
4. Excessive vigilance
5. Unnecessary work
6. Extra supervision
7. Defects
8. Additional space
9. Stoppages
10. Delays in activities
11. Wastage of materials
12. Extra processing
13. Deterioration of materials
14. Clarifications
15. Unnecessary movement of labor
16. Abnormal wear and tear of equipment.
The sources of these wastes are (Alarcon, 1997; Bhatla, 
Pradhan, and Choi, 2016):
1. Unnecessary management requirement
2. Excessive control
3. Lack of control
4. Poor planning
5. Excessive red tape
6. Excessive quantity
7. Resource shortage
8. Misuse
Figure 1.6 Waste comparison between manufacturing industry vs. construction 
industry. Source: Adapted using source data from Diekmann et al. (2004).8 What Is Modularization?
9. Poor resource distribution
10. Poor quality
11. Resource availability
12. Theft
13. Unnecessary information
14. Defective information
15. Unclear information
16. Late information.
1.3.2 The Solution: Modularization
What if there was a way to identify all these “extra” wasted 
activities that limit the skilled worker s’ “time on tools” and 
somehow get a construction team that has all this train￾ing, is familiar with their job, familiar with their setting and 
co-workers, and ready to go to work?
The answer, of course, is the modular solution—building 
parts of your plant in a module fabrication (in short, fab) 
yard. The module fab yard is typically located in a more 
temperate climate where weather is not extreme and 
where there is an ample skilled workforce and craft. The 
module fab yard creates an environment where the job 
moves to the worker. So, instead of having to deal with 
unfamiliar work surroundings, equipment, and team mem￾bers, the worker is centrally located, and the jobs come 
to him/her in terms of “modules.” This provides a synergy 
in which the major variability is reduced to the actual work 
itself—the module. Because the workers have a more or 
less steady workload, they can concentrate on honing their 
skills and becoming more proficient with their tools. The 
steady workload also creates a more defined split between 
work and personal life as well as an ability for the worker to 
maintain a balance between both—something that results 
in a more well-rounded and productive individual.
So, essentially, the more construction work hours we can 
move from a uniquely special project site to a more stand￾ardized fabrication facility, the potentially better outcome 
you can have in terms of efficiency and speed. In conjunc￾tion with improved technologies, the project inefficiencies 
are driving the shift to prefabrication and modularization. 
This is the main reason for the current interest in the mod￾ular approach to project planning and execution.
1.3.2.1 Advanced Scheduling and Work Planning 
Techniques
The emergence of Advanced Work Packaging (AWP) from 
obscurity to an almost household phrase has revitalized, 
standardized, and propelled the age-old but good work 
practices of detailed solid project planning. Lean tech￾niques have always been used by fab yards with high 
production assembly line fabrication.
Advance Work Packaging (AWP) All the various 
terms within AWP (Work Face Planning/Engineering—
Construction—Installation—Procurement Work Pack￾ages) help one visualize the need for coordination 
throughout the project planning phases. This coordina￾tion to support the Path of Construction along with a 
continued confirmation that equipment and materials 
are on site prior to initiation of activities, are the basics 
of good project execution. Agencies like CII and others 
have been instrumental in providing both the research 
as well as the practical implementation guidance to help 
the construction industry understand how to properly 
plan. So, taking these basic project planning concepts 
and calling them something different (e.g., AWP) is a 
good thing if it helps bring better project planning to the 
forefront, even if the basic concepts are not new and 
have been practiced by some for a long time.
The module fab yard has always used good assembly 
planning techniques (the planning currently referred to as 
AWP). Their goal is similar to the assembly plants of the 
Ford Motor Company except perhaps on a grander scale. 
That goal is to get the maximum throughput (in terms of 
completed module tonnage) possible.
Lean Lean techniques have been used in manufactur￾ing processes for many years. But they are also used 
in the module fabrication yard, even if they have not 
historically been labeled as part of a Lean construction 
or planning technique. For example, pipe shops internal 
to the fab yard are in the business to optimize the sub￾assembly work of producing pipe spools. As such, they 
continue to optimize their approach to spool fabrication 1.3 Current State of the Construction Industry 9
in terms of steps saved and just-in-time material and 
assembly techniques. The spools are fabricated under 
a schedule that considers both the optimization of size 
and metallurgy within the assembly line as well as their 
eventual need for installation to come up with the most 
efficient plan and sequencing to get the fabrication com￾pleted. This is the essence of many of the Lean tech￾niques used in manufacturing.
1.3.3 Why Aren’t All Jobs Modular?
All the industries mentioned above have a history that 
points to the need for a basic transformation in our cur￾rent stick-built philosophy for industrial projects in order 
to get the substantial gains desired. So, why aren’t we 
seeing a major shift in the philosophical approach to 
many current industrial projects?
The biggest reason for the reluctance to change is the fact 
that the stick-built approach to project execution is the 
one that is most familiar to the majority of the EPC com￾panies and many of the client organizations. So, despite 
the trend of overruns on major EPC projects, the stick￾built execution plan is the one that is typically chosen. Part 
of this is because of the contracting strategy by owners/
clients. The stick-built approach allows for more decisions 
on detailed design to be shifted to the right (later in time), 
allowing these decisions to be made later in the project 
timeline. This fits well within an owner/client program 
where early funding may be an issue (e.g., it cannot be 
released until a financial investment decision, FID).
The stick-built method also allows for later engineering, 
later changes, and more flexibility on the job site. This bit 
of additional flexibility is welcomed by the EPC contrac￾tor, who may be contractually obligated to pay adverse 
financial penalties for late completion. The modular 
solution, in some cases, can put the contractor in an 
especially vulnerable position as its successful delivery 
depends on the accelerated design and material deliv￾eries to the fab yard. This creates more complexity and 
risk that typically are not contractually shared with the 
owner/client. Unfortunately, this type of later planning 
also pushes a much higher percentage of the work to 
the construction team on the site to complete—a more 
expensive solution in terms of the total project cost.
1.3.4 Are Module Jobs More Expensive?
Second, at face value, in terms of a simple comparison 
between the stick-built method and the modular method 
(and without an exhaustive review and evaluation of the 
potential benefits), the module job may also look like it 
might do the following:
• Cost more: extra materials in terms of steel costs, 
logistics of final module shipment, and costs to hook up 
the modules at site.
• Take longer: you have the additional shipping duration 
from fab yard to the job site, as well as time to set in 
place and hook up.
• Require additional and earlier engineering sup￾port: the module “box” must be designed early, extra 
transport analysis is required, and follow-up at the pro￾ject site for hook-up is needed.
• Demand additional management at the fab yard:
in terms of a “second” construction management team 
(CMT)—while this may reduce the size of the site team, 
it is not a complete one-for-one reduction.
• Need extra transport or shipping: extra considera￾tion in terms of vessel identification, transport loads 
on the structure, load-out, grillage and sea-fastening 
design for the ocean or land transportation, and, finally, 
special design for the setting of the final modules.
In fact, we will go further “out on a limb” to make a point 
and state that IF:
• you were able to provide all the required and quali￾fied craft personnel exactly when needed (and they 
were good at their jobs with no quality issues needing 
re-work), AND
• the craft personnel were not only well versed in their 
area of expertise but also familiar with how their work 
related to the other crafts to the point that they worked 
as a single team, AND
• you were able to provide craft supervision with the best 
project construction management, AND
• you have all equipment and materials arrived just in time 
for installation by construction equipment that was also 
mobilized and set up only when needed, AND10 What Is Modularization?
• you effectively utilize this equipment because all the 
project equipment was on the site and the piping 
prefabricated and ready to install (and then quickly 
de-mobilize), AND
• you have all your craft and supervision not only located 
and living just off the site but completely happy with 
their current wages and benefits and willing to work at 
100% until the last day, AND
• you have a local community in the vicinity of the project 
site that had no problem with all the temporary incon￾veniences they experienced due to the extra construc￾tion activity, AND
• all permitting posed no issues in terms of delays and 
problems, AND
• weather and seasonal changes played no part in any 
delays and shutdowns; in fact, you have no weather￾related delays.
Then, modularization would indeed probably take 
longer, be more expensive, and not be for your pro￾ject! However, coming to this conclusion is exactly the 
issue—we would again venture “out on a limb” here and 
also state that no project has ever had ALL of the above 
luxuries present in the context of a project. Of course, 
modularization does not provide all of them either, but in 
most cases, the module fab yard comes much closer to 
meeting most of them than the typical construction site 
they will be delivering to.
While many of the above-perceived disadvantages of 
the modular solution may seem to be insurmountable 
negatives, there are simple mitigation efforts that, when 
considered early enough, will more than offset all of the 
above negatives. As a teaser and while not wanting to 
give away the punch line of Chapters 2 and 5, one of 
the major modular benefits is the reduced cost primar￾ily driven by the large difference in productivity and labor 
cost between the module yard and the proposed project 
site. This delta cost difference not only offsets the above 
“negatives” but also provides substantial savings in both 
cost and schedule. The detailed benefits and challenges 
of the modular solution will be discussed in much more 
detail in Chapter  2, Advantages and Disadvantages of 
Modularization, and Chapter  5, The Business Case for 
Modularization.
1.4 Three Distinct Module Options (or 
Circumstances)
While there are definite advantages to the use of modu￾larization on all projects, the majority of the applications 
fall into three distinct options or circumstances (see 
Figure 1.7):
• very limited or no reason to consider;
• selective implementation through business case analysis;
• maximizing the full use of the module/pre-assembly 
concept.
1.4.1 Very Limited
The first category pertains to the type of projects that 
involve large earthworks, excavations, and/or in-situ 
concrete placements or pours. These types of projects 
primarily involve the movement or placement of large vol￾umes of material—typically earth or concrete. Examples 
include large earthen works such as dams and retaining 
walls, in-ground concrete storage tanks, and water treat￾ment facilities like the one in Figure 1.8. This does not 
mean that some of the supporting mechanical and struc￾tural parts, such as central piping supports and distribu￾tion arms, should not be considered, but the majority of 
the project’s efforts will be associated with the excavation 
and installation of structures that are not conducive to 
being built off the site.
1.4.2 Selective Implementation
This option is by far the most likely to be implemented, 
probably because it covers the widest range of possi￾bilities. This option runs the gamut from a single small 
pipe rack module to anything short of modularizing to the 
Figure 1.7 Three distinct module options or circumstances.1.4 Three Distinct Module Options (or Circumstances) 11
maximum extent possible. This option is another of the 
reasons for writing this book. Selective implementation 
is the “art” of figuring out the best value for your project 
money in terms of offsite fabrication. As we will cover in 
the subsequent chapters, identifying the optimal mod￾ule solution is not a simple flip of a coin or a 5-minute 
exercise. Finding the optimal solution depends on a 
determination on a multitude of interacting decisions and 
project-specific criteria. Yes, this sounds very vague and 
nebulous, but we will explain what is involved in iden￾tifying the optimal solution over the next few chapters. 
If we decided to explain how to do it here, we would end 
up with a Chapter 1 that might be over 100 pages long. 
Instead, we ask that you be patient with us for a bit as we 
get the basics of modularization established. Once com￾pleted, we will delve into this option in much more detail 
in Chapter 5, The Business Case for Modularization.
In terms of a typical process plant example, below 
are two versions of selective implementation. The first 
one (see Figure 1.9) is a minimal approach in terms of 
offsite prefabrication where everything is stick-built 
except some of the vertical vessels, which are “pre￾dressed” with insulation, heat tracing if applicable, and 
some instrumentation.
The second one (see Figures 1.10 and 1.11) is the same 
process plant except that the pipe rack has also been 
considered as well as some of the equipment that has 
been packaged as a skid-mounted unit (SMU), with both 
designed and prefabricated offsite for shipment to the 
project site.
Figure 1.8 Water treatment facility—very limited module opportunity. Source: 
Chalabala/iStock/Getty Images. Figure 1.9 Typical stick-built approach.
Figure 1.10 The same plant, but with pipe racks and skid-mounted units 
built offsite.
Figure 1.11 Photo example of same completed pipe rack. Source: Michael Kluck 
and Jin Ouk Choi12 What Is Modularization?
Neither option can be considered always right or always 
wrong. It depends on the project-specific factors that 
drove the project management to the decision.
1.4.3 Maximized Modularization
In some cases, the project’s best bet (i.e., optimal solu￾tion) is to maximize the modularization that can be 
accomplished. If you think about it a bit, you can eas￾ily come up with what these projects might look like, for 
example, building a processing unit in the Arctic (or, for 
that matter, in the middle of some reclaimed mangrove 
swamp in Nigeria). Both extremes require maximization 
of this option due to the extreme hardship (or cost) of 
mobilizing a workforce of sufficient size and quality and 
continuing to support them in terms of accommodations 
(housing and nourishment), tolerable working conditions, 
personal and job-related equipment, recreational alterna￾tives, and of course financial incentives for the duration 
of the project.
Using the same example project plant cross-section, the 
maximized modularization effort becomes one that not 
only takes the vessel and pre-dresses it but includes the 
pipe rack and piping as well as the equipment, all installed 
on a common skid and completely piped up, instrumented, 
and in some cases wired for power (see Figures  1.12 
and 1.13). Such a configuration has taken the maximum 
labor required at the site “off site” and sent it to a fabrica￾tion yard, leaving the hook-up of adjacent modules at the 
site as the only remaining labor requirement.
But you do not have to build your project in the Arctic 
Circle or the middle of the Sahara Desert to have this 
as a potential optimal module solution. As we will further 
explain in Chapter 5, there may be specific areas of even 
relatively “civilized” parts of the USA where, due to a com￾bination of one or more of the following, modularization is 
the better solution (O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2013):
• a lack of specific skilled crafts in a locale;
• a lack of infrastructure (for temporary accommodations);
• unresolvable issues with obtaining enough nearby 
temporary laydown area for the on-site construc￾tion support;
• problems with environmental restrictions (e.g., too 
much ambient light or noise, traffic, etc.);
• physical restrictions to and from project site due simply 
to baseline traffic loads on existing highways;
• the owner wants the project As Soon As Possi￾ble (ASAP).
For example, it does not take much in terms of losing an 
hour or so on both ends of a day due to a long commute 
along with having to staff the project site with inadequate 
quality and quantity of critical workforce to tip the eco￾nomic scales in favor of an offsite fabricated project.
Again, as mentioned above on the selective implementa￾tion, there is still a point even in this maximum modulari￾Figure. 1.12 Same plant—maximum modularization. zation option where you can modularize too much. We 
Figure 1.13 Example of maximized modularization.1.5 What Modularization Is “Not” 13
will go into details of this in Chapter 4, where we get into 
the philosophy of how to size a module, what goes into 
one, and what is best left out of one and shipped directly 
to the site.
1.5 What Modularization Is “Not”
Anyone keeping score in terms of “pro-module” (offsite 
fabrication) versus “anti-module” (stick-built) through 
the Introduction and up to this point in the first chapter 
will have the pro-module team totally annihilating the 
anti-module team to the point where some may begin 
to wonder:
• Why even have a book on this—just go do it!
Or
• If modularization is such a great thing, why is it not be￾ing used on every job?
While we discussed this briefly earlier in this chapter, more 
detail still needs to be provided to you in order to help 
put the module decision-making process into perspec￾tive. First, the traditional stick-built method of industrial 
project execution is still a very solid method to complete 
the “C” in EPC, as long as your project can get the nec￾essary number and quality of skilled workers to the pro￾ject site and keep them there until the job is completed 
and you have a management team that is excellent at 
working together and working to a completion plan. Sec￾ond, the traditional stick-built method of industrial project 
execution is still very well-known and understood in many 
areas of the world, and it is effective as long as there are 
foremen, supervisors, project leads, and leaders involved 
who can effectively do exactly that—“lead.” Third, there 
are certain things that modularization is not: “Panacea,” 
“Constant,” and “Easy.”
1.5.1 Panacea (a Solution for All Difficulties)
Modularization is not a panacea. Modularization will not 
overcome a poorly planned and/or poorly executed EPC 
project. It will not overcome an overpriced but under-bid 
project. Furthermore, it will not take a mismanaged sched￾uling effort and put it back on schedule. Modularization is 
not a miracle cure. In fact, there are many more examples 
of poorly run projects that, when incorrectly implementing 
modularization, managed to drive the project into real￾izing even more dismal results in terms of project costs 
and schedule than there have been results of those same 
projects benefitting from the positives of the poorly de￾veloped modularization decision and execution plan. This 
is because modularization is not a switch you turn on 
from off and everything suddenly happens. (Well, if that 
approach is taken, everything does indeed happen, but 
typically it just continues to “happen” to get much worse.)
Instead, the decision to modularize needs to be made 
early in the project life and with much forethought. One 
does not go into a project with a goal to modularize with￾out a dedicated analysis driving that conclusion. Further￾more, what happens when this proper analysis approach 
is taken with respect to how the modular decision was 
made, the project team may uncover by this analysis that 
the optimal module decision is very different from that 
originally thought or suggested, for any one or several 
important reasons.
As mentioned earlier, extra efforts in various areas of a 
project need to be identified and executed to obtain the 
desired modular result. While some of these extra efforts 
are common with all projects, others will vary in impor￾tance depending on project specifics. But in all cases, as 
these extra efforts are either missed or ignored, the resul￾ting opportunities for a beneficial module result diminish 
or may even disappear completely. Again, this may not 
provide the detail being sought, but much more detail will 
be provided in Chapter  7, Critical Success Factors for 
Modular Project Success.
1.5.2 Constant
The business drivers for modularization are not constant. 
They vary from project to project. For example, we previ￾ously talked about the obvious module efforts required 
for the areas of the world dominated by extremes in tem￾perature and lack of infrastructure. These make for an 
easy decision.
The difficult areas are where most projects occur—in 
temperate climates with some sort of craft availability and 
established infrastructure for access. In these areas, a 
closer look must be provided, and the pros and cons of 
offsite assembly examined in detail to identify the optimal 
approach. Again, this will be discussed in much more 14 What Is Modularization?
detail in Chapter 5, The Business Case for Modulariza￾tion, where we will go into how to approach the modulari￾zation decision in the more industrialized and populated 
areas of this world.
1.5.3 Easy
Modularization is not “easy.” What we mean is that it is 
not a decision or conclusion that is made quickly and 
without forethought. We are not indicating that this is a 
“hard” decision to make or that this is an “expensive” or 
“time-consuming” decision process. In fact, if this dis￾cussion about the possibility of an alternative to on-site 
stick-building were brought up in the very early phases 
of a project concept (e.g., Opportunity Framing or FEL 
0 or pre-pre-FEED), it can set the stage for opening up 
the project to the module alternative with little extra ef￾fort or cost. However, such a discussion must occur 
early enough.
For example, a major company has decided to build sev￾eral processing plants throughout the United States. The 
details on the number of plants and strategic locations 
are still being kicked around. Alternative site locations 
should be evaluated in terms of availability to a major 
roadway or navigable water access. Even if specific de￾tails of the process are not defined, there typically are 
high cost and/or schedule savings if the process can be 
built in large enough “blocks” to allow a significant level 
of pre-commissioning to be performed prior to shipment. 
If this option becomes one of the factors in the very early 
analysis of the multiple plant program, then more intel￾ligent decisions can be made in terms of potential pro￾ject sites. More of this type of discussion will be covered 
in Chapter  11, Modularization Application Case Study, 
where we discuss Standardization (the next step).
1.6 Summary
Chapter 1 touched on many parts of the philosophy of 
modularization, why the construction industry needs it, 
how it is beneficial, what potential issues there might be, 
how it might be improved, and more importantly, why it 
is not universally implemented. Hopefully, it has provided 
the nebulous term (modularization) some meaning and 
dimension and set some limits on what can be expected 
when pursuing this alternative project philosophy. The 
following chapters will cover all the above in more detail 
now that we have hopefully developed a common playing 
field with respect to what the terms are, what they mean, 
and how we are applying them.
References
Alarcon, L.F. (1997) Tools for the Identification and Reduction 
of Wastes in Construction Projects. In Alarcon, L. F. (Ed.) 
Lean Construction. Rotterdam: Balkema, pp. 365–377.
Bhatla, A., Pradhan, B. and Choi, J.O. (2016) Identifying 
Wastes in Construction Process and Implementing the 
Last Planner System in India. Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Project Management, 6(1), pp. 11–19. 
doi: 10.6106/JCEPM.2016.6.1.011.
Construction Industry Institute (2013) Industrial Modularization: 
Five Solution Elements. Austin, TX: The University of Texas 
at Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
Construction Industry Institute (2015) Planning for 
Modularization Becomes Next CII Best Practice. Available 
at: https://www.construction-institute.org/blog/2015/
planning-for-modularization-becomes-next-cii-best 
(Accessed: 31 December 2021).
Construction Industry Institute (2017) SP166-4 –CII Best 
Practices Handbook. Austin, TX: The University of Texas at 
Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
Construction Industry Institute (2021) Best Practices. Available 
at: https://www.construction-institute.org/resources/
knowledgebase/best-practices (Accessed: 31 
December 2021).
Diekmann, J.E. et al. (2004) Application of Lean 
Manufacturing Principles to Construction - RR191-11. 
Austin, TX: The University of Texas at Austin: Construction 
Industry Institute.
McGraw Hill Construction (2011) Prefabrication and 
Modularization: Increasing Productivity in the Construction 
Industry. SmartMarket Report.
McKinsey Global Institute (2017) Reinventing Construction: A 
Route to Higher Productivity. Available at: https://www
.mckinsey.com/~/media/McKinsey/Industries/Capital 
Projects and Infrastructure/Our Insights/Reinventing con￾struction through a productivity revolution/MGI-Reinventing￾Construction-Executive-summary.ashx.
McKinsey Productivity Sciences Center (2015) The 
Construction Productivity Imperative. Available at: https://References 15
www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/
our-insights/the-construction-productivity-imperative.
Modular Building Institute (MBI) (2010) Improving Construction 
Efficiency & Productivity with Modular Construction. 
Reston, VA: Modular Building Institute.
National Research Council (NRC) (2009) Advancing the 
Competitiveness and Efficiency of the U.S. Construction 
Industry. Edited by N. R. C. Committee on Advancing the 
Competitiveness and Productivity of the U.S. Construction 
Industry. Washington, D.C.: The National Academies 
Press, p. 122.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J. and Choi, J.O. (2013) Industrial 
Modularization: How to Optimize; How to Maximize. Austin, 
TX: The University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry 
Institute.
Tatum, C.B., Vanegas, J.A. and Williams, J.M. (1987) 
Constructability Improvement Using Prefabrication, 
Preassembly, and Modularization. Austin, TX: The University 
of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry Institute. Available 
at: https://www.construction-institute.org/resources/
knowledgebase/knowledge-areas/design-planning￾optimization/topics/rt-003/pubs/sd-25.chapter 2
17
In this chapter, we go into more detail about the advan￾tages and disadvantages of modularization. First, we 
look at the key characteristics of fabrication yards to 
better understand why they can bring advantages. And 
then, we go over the major advantages and challenges 
(or disadvantages) that should be included in the overall 
analysis of the module potential. In Chapter  3, we will 
describe the industry status of modularization, which will 
cover the advantages and challenges of modularization, 
again in detail with supporting case projects.
2.1 Why Do Fabrication Yards Have 
an Advantage?
2.1.1 Obvious Reasons
The obvious reasons are listed below and are the ones 
you would typically be presenting when trying to sell a 
modular approach.
• Temperate climate: Most fabrication facilities are in 
areas of the world that boast a long construction win￾dow in terms of weather. And even in the areas where 
weather may be a factor for part of the year, some 
have further added large fabrication buildings where 
segments or, in some cases, entire modules can be 
built indoors.
• Building at grade: The highest production efficiency 
is achieved when building on the ground (at grade) by 
a team who are familiar with the overall program as well 
as each of the other crafts and activities, so they work 
as a cohesive unit. This is why so much emphasis is 
placed on this.
• Supporting lift equipment: Because as much as pos￾sible is built at grade, all fab facilities come complete 
with lift equipment—multiple gantry cranes, crawler 
cranes, or jacking systems for lifting and setting upper 
decks on lower ones. These are set up in the assembly 
area to complement the specific method of assembly 
that the fab facility has chosen as its most efficient way 
to assemble.
• Concurrent/parallel fabrication and construction:
Multiple modules can be fabricated concurrently in one 
or multiple fabrication yards, but modules can also be 
fabricated concurrently with the site development. This 
feature really helps the project to reduce the overall pro￾ject duration.
2.1.2 Less Obvious Reasons
• Captive craft labor: Most competitive fabrication 
facilities/shops/yards are located near a large popula￾tion area where craft have a relatively short commute 
to work. The fab facility provides these craft with a con￾sistent and relatively constant workload, providing a 
reasonable work week and a sense of security that is 
usually not found in the construction industry that must 
travel from project to project.
While there is always a concern raised about a con￾struction site near a fab facility actually enticing workers 
away from the fab facility, the fab facility typically has 
no problem recruiting and maintaining qualified craft. 
Many skilled laborers in the construction industry are 
more than willing to give up a small percentage of the 
Advantages and Challenges 
of Modularization18 Advantages and Challenges of Modularization
wages that they might be able to make at a greenfield 
construction site in order to be guaranteed a standard 
workweek, benefits, a safe place to hone their skills, 
less commute time (and more time with family), and 
enough work to be challenging.
• Skilled craft: As mentioned above, because the fab 
yard has a constant influx of work, the craft has more 
opportunities to become “skilled” in a particular part 
of their craft. For example, stainless-steel welders can 
excel in alloy welding because there will always be 
enough alloy pipes to practice their craft on.
• Teamwork: Because the fab yard uses a standard 
manufacturing type process for the pipe spools and 
structural steel, which individually feed into a slightly dif￾ferent but also standard assembly line process for the 
modules, the relatively constant “core” craft workgroup 
and management know and understand the process 
of building the modules. As such, they can anticipate 
and offer support, working more as a team, each craft 
knowing what is expected of them and communicating 
what they expect to others.
• Safety culture: Most fab facilities have a combination 
of a manufacturing process—structural steel into plate 
girders, columns and beams and pipe and fittings into 
spools, as well as the assembly process of taking and 
moving these components into sub-areas that are fur￾ther consolidated into decks or pancakes, to be stacked 
upon completion to create the multi-level module. Both 
the manufacturing and the assembly processes are re￾petitive enough to be conducive to the application of 
techniques of continuous improvements, such as Lean. 
These are typically part of a larger subculture in terms of 
the desire to improve the entire fab facility organization. 
The successful results are clearly visible when visiting 
some of these large Far Eastern fabricators where the 
desire to improve quality and safety procedures actually 
spills over into the rest of the activities, from personal 
tool care to area housekeeping, resulting in notable re￾ductions in safety incident rates.
There is more to these reasons/advantages that needs 
to be brought out to further help in understanding them. 
Thus, we will go over some detailed basics about the 
“generic” fabrication yard separately later, including the 
benefits and characteristics, selecting the right fabrica￾tion yard, contracting strategy, and division of responsibil￾ity in Chapter 8 The Fabrication Yard.
2.2 Advantages of Modularization
There are many advantages (or benefits) of implementing 
modularization. The advantages are:
1. Reduced capital costs
2. Improved schedule performance
3. Increased productivity
4. Improved predictability (surety/reliability) or less variability
5. Increased safety performance
6. Increased quality performance
7. Increased sustainability performance (green benefits)
8. Site and site construction team benefits:
a. Longer duration for foundations and underground
b. Higher efficiency at the site
c. Completion of pre-commissioning efforts off the sit
d. Less impact on the site.
Note that most of these advantages are due to the 
abovementioned reasons. Now, we will explain these ad￾vantages in detail one by one.
2.2.1 Reduced Capital Costs
This is probably the number 1 reason for the application 
of modularization, followed quickly by questions on im￾proving the schedule. These two are the most frequently 
cited reasons for this alternate form of on-site stick-built 
approach. Typically, the conversation with an owner/client 
begins with how modularization of a specific area will be 
able to cut costs. This is often brought up where some 
of the project sites have limited craft availability, limited 
construction laydown areas, limited access to the site for 
a large number of employees, or some other combina￾tion where moving total craft work-hours off the site will 
make sense.
2.2.1.1 How Does Modularization Reduce Cost?
This topic is explained in much more detail in Chapter 5, 
The Business Case for Modularization, but the main 
driver is the comparison of the difference in the Relative 
Work-hour Costs (RWC; labor productivity factor times 2.2 Advantages of Modularization 19
craft labor cost ($/work-hour; typically quoted as All In 
Wage Rate [AIWR]) of the fabrication yard to that of the 
project construction site. In all cases, the RWC at the fab￾rication yard will be cheaper than the same work-hour at 
the construction site, or an Economic Productivity Ratio 
(EPR) of the project site to fab yard higher than 1. A simple 
example (see Figure 2.1) describes the RWC and the EPR.
In Figure 2.1, the project site has a lower labor productiv￾ity factor (2.5) than the fabrication yard (1.3, with 1.0 as 
the US Gulf Coast site (USGC) baseline). Note: Anything 
lower is more efficient while anything higher is less effi￾cient. At the same time, the cost of this craft labor (AIWR) 
at the project site ($135/work-hour) is much higher be￾cause, in this example, the construction site is located 
in a remote site where labor is scarce while the fabrica￾tion yard is located in SE Asia, where the cost of labor 
($45/work-hour) is much cheaper. The RWC at the pro￾ject site is $337.50 (= 2.5 x $135.00), which is higher than 
the RWC at the fab yard, which is $58.50 (1.3 x $45.00). 
As a result, the EPR of the project site to the fab yard is 
5.77 (= $337.50/$58.50). This means the module yard 
is more than 5.77 times as economically productive as 
the project site. Putting it another way, every craft work￾hour taken off the project site will support over 5.77 craft 
work-hours at the fabrication yard. As a result, the mod￾ule fabrication yard will expend only 17% (= 1.0/5.77) of 
the estimated site cost (for an equivalent scope). With this 
large difference, this project should strive to maximize the 
reduction of work-hours at the site by moving them to the 
module fabrication yard.
2.2.2 Improved Schedule Performance
And, like a one-two punch, as soon as cost benefits 
are provided, the owner/client immediately asks what 
the schedule improvement will be. Figure 2.2 shows the 
typical schedules of a stick-built project and its corre￾sponding modular option.
As you can see from Figure 2.2, which is the comparison 
between stick-built project schedule versus modular project 
schedule, a modular project can cut total project duration 
significantly compared to the traditional stick-built project. 
This schedule reduction is due in part to the ability to work 
concurrently at the construction site as well as at the mod￾ule fabrication yard. The engineering efforts, in either case, 
are about the same in terms of duration between the stick￾built and module project schedules, but some of the de￾liverables are internally adjusted to reflect support to the 
fabrication yard. This allows the project to either mobilize 
later at the site or mobilize as they would with the stick-built 
effort and take longer to get out of the ground in terms of 
the underground piping, electrical, and foundation efforts.
This schedule improvement can provide an opportunity 
for the owner/client to reduce turn-around time for oper￾ating facilities, deliver products faster to the market, and 
reduce financing liabilities. Also, the contractor can ben￾efit from this schedule improvement as it reduces the pro￾ject cycle times, financing liabilities, and work in progress.
2.2.2.1 Cost or Schedule Benefits?
So, with any analysis of benefits, these cost and sched￾ule benefits go hand in hand during early discussions and 
ought to be arranged together. As noted above, this advan￾tage quickly follows cost savings as a discussion point, so 
an early discussion must be initiated with respect to which 
one has priority. The client will be quick to say “Both!” This 
is not an acceptable answer because a cost-driven mod￾ule program could be different in its development than a 
schedule-driven module program. Since this is sometimes 
difficult for an owner/client to understand, we like to pose 
the following question regarding priorities: “Is it more im￾portant that you save $50 million or reduce schedule by 
2 months?” (use whatever numbers fit the specific project).
This line of questioning will hopefully force the owner/
client to go back to their project economics and fur￾ther evaluate the Net Present Value (NPV). The owner/
client knows the project particulars with respect to the 
profit and cash flow details that they may not wish to 
share with the EPC contractor. However, the module im￾plementation effort varies between the two drivers, so 
Figure 2.1 Economic productivity ratio example.20 Advantages and Challenges of Modularization
Figure 2.2 Stick-built project schedule vs. modular project schedule.
FEED
Stick build schedule
Materials & Delivery
EPC stick build basis at Site
Equipment
Module schedule
Materials & Delivery 
Engineering 
Engineering
Permitting 
1-10 months
123456789 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29
123456789
1-50 months
1-38 months
7-19 months
8-12 months
8-12 months
12-15 months
15-17 months
18-20 months
1-24 months
1-3 months
4-9 months
9-15 months
12-17 months
18-23 months
6 month
11 month
15 month
17 month
6 month
11 month
15 month
17 month
1 month
8 month
25-30 months
13-17 months
15-22 months
22-36 months
36-38 months
20-33 months
33-34 months
34-36 months
36 months
17 month
18 month
8-12 months
1-8 months
17-24 months
1 month
4 month
4-8 months
9-13 months
11-18 months
16-46 months
46 month
47-50 months
1-24 months
1-3 months
4-9 months
9-15 months
12-17 months
18-23 months
25-30 months
1-8 months
17-24 months
18 months
Estimate +/-10% 
Invitation to Bid (ITB) 
EPC Proposal
EPC Tech Commercial Evaluation
Financial Investment Decision
EPC Negiations and Award
Site Prep IFC
Piling IFC
Foundations & Underground IFC
Steel IFC
Piping lsos IFC
1st pipe MTO
2nd pipe MTO
Major steel delivery to site
Begin pipe spool delivery to site
Long Lead equipment order
Long lead equipment delivery
Equipment order
Equipment delivery to site
Equipment
Stick build parts of module job
Long Lead equipment order
Long lead equipment delivery
Equipment order
Equipment delivery to site
Mob to site
Site Prep
Piling
Foundations
Mechanical Erection
Mechanical Complete 
Pre-comm & Comm at site
Module Fab & Delivery to Site
Mob to site
Site Prep
Piling
Foundations
Stick build Mechanical Erection
Mechanical Complete
Stick build Pre-comm & Comm at site
Start cutting steel
Module fabrication & ship
Module Erection at Site
Tie-in & Hook up
Module Steel to Fab Yrad 
Site Prep IFC
Piling IFC
Foundations & Underground IFC
Steel IFC
Piping lsos IFC
1st pipe MTO 
2nd pipe MTO
Major steel delivery to site
Begin pipe spool delivery to site2.2 Advantages of Modularization 21
30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 7022 Advantages and Challenges of Modularization
it is important that the client performs this analysis and 
provides the results in terms of which one should take 
priority, so the EPC contractor can make the appropriate 
adjustments in terms of driver priority. The owner/client 
knows which one has a higher priority and can come to 
a decision on it but will need additional input from the 
EPC contractor on why. So, it is up to the EPC contrac￾tor proposing modularization to educate the owner/client 
on why this priority is vital to the project outcome. More 
discussion of this in Chapter 5 The Business Case for 
Modularization.
2.2.3 Increased Productivity
As already noted in cost and schedule benefit explana￾tions, the main driver for modularization is the increased 
productivity that comes with building off the site. This in￾crease is driven by the combination of lower labor rates 
along with greater productivity.
The labor rates are a function of the country or area of 
the world. Many of the module fabrication yards are lo￾cated in the Far East, SE Asia, and even the Middle East, 
where labor is less expensive than in the US or European 
countries. Of course, this benefit shrinks where the pro￾ject site is also located in an area of less expensive labor. 
So, we have to take a look at the labor productivity factor 
as part of the comparison, as explained at the beginning 
of this chapter.
Productivity is a function of the skill of the craft workers. 
It is also a function of the setting where they must work, 
the equipment provided, and any restrictions placed on 
them in terms of working in a specific location. All these 
factors impact their total time on tools. The workers must 
deal with weather, working at heights, and even working 
in “hot” (or energized) areas at the site. All of these require 
additional paperwork, additional clothing and safety gear, 
fire watches, and other extra supervision. All this limits 
the time that the craft actually gets to apply to the actual 
“building” of the plant.
The module fabrication yard has been specifically set up 
to optimize all the processes required to fabricate, as￾semble, and ship the module, from the orderly receiving 
of bulk materials, through the various steel, pipe, and 
vessel fabrication lines of production, over to the assem￾bly areas where these individual pieces are grouped into 
sub-assemblies or portions of decks, which are further 
combined into pancakes, and finally stacked into the 
multi-level modules.
As noted in the explanation above, a lot of this work is 
performed at grade, in areas specially set up in terms of 
utilities and other support needs for these different fabri￾cation efforts. They are free of any restrictions in terms of 
conflicting activities and often performed indoors, so free 
of delays from the weather. All of this allows the craft to 
spend more time actually doing the work.
2.2.4 Improved Predictability (Surety/Reliability) or 
Less Variability
One of the key benefits of modularization is predictabil￾ity (or surety and reliability) on schedule, cost, and qual￾ity. This benefit has been under-highlighted in the past. 
However, several leading global companies in modulari￾zation stated that project performance variability was less 
when the extent of modularization was high compared to 
the conventional stick-built project.
The module fab yard is a module-producing facility. Like 
any other manufacturing and assembly plant, its profit￾ability is based on getting engineering and materials in 
and fabricating, assembling, and shipping completed 
modules out either on (or ahead of) schedule and on (or 
under) the budget. The profit margin is tight, and any￾thing that delays this effort becomes very costly for the 
fabricator, as it not only delays the current jobs but it po￾tentially impacts the contractual start of the subsequent 
jobs. So, the fabricator will try to meet the schedule as 
it is in the fabricator’s best interest to stay on schedule. 
Furthermore, they will do so as long as the deliverables 
being provided by the owner/client or the EPC contractor 
are on time.
Therefore, any delays on the part of the owner/client or 
EPC contractor become very expensive for the project. 
When working a module job, it is critical in terms of both 
cost and schedule to make sure that the module fabrica￾tor has what they contractually need to assemble, build, 
and deliver. So, in the end, a module job will be on sched￾ule if the outside deliverables to the module fabricator are 
on schedule. If they are not provided on time, then the 
results can be much worse than the equivalent delays to 
a stick-built project.2.2 Advantages of Modularization 23
2.2.5 Increased Safety and Quality Performance
As noted above, with dedicated manufacturing lines as 
well as assembly areas, conflicting activities and work not 
related to the main production at hand are eliminated. 
Also eliminated is working at heights. With the proper lift￾ing and handling equipment, many of the potential strains 
and over-exertion issues associated with having to 
“horse” a piece of material or equipment into place are re￾moved. With groups of craft regularly working together, a 
team mentality develops where each knows what others 
can and will do. Fewer unexpected actions are encoun￾tered. In the fabrication yards, the safety equipment is 
standardized and regularly inspected. More importantly, it 
is associated with the work at hand.
Furthermore, the modular approach will lead to improved 
quality for the same reasons above. Better safety of the 
workers, better quality control, and a better environment 
with no or less dust and debris (many fab yards are paved 
or work on stabilized soils) all contribute to a better quality 
of modules and the project.
2.2.6 Increased Sustainability Performance 
(Green Benefits)
One of the best ways to reduce construction waste is 
modularization. This benefit has been under-estimated 
by the industry. However, increased interest in the en￾vironment, a Green and Lean philosophy has turned at￾tention to the advantage of modularization. The modular 
approach not only reduces pre- and post-construction 
waste but also reduces the actual materials used. 
Furthermore, it also reduces rework, overall energy con￾sumption, and greenhouse gases, which can all contrib￾ute to cost savings.
2.2.7 Site and Site Construction Team Benefits
In addition to the benefits of structuring equipment and 
piping into “modules” compared to the stick-built ar￾rangement, there are significant benefits to the site and 
construction team, including:
• longer duration for foundations and underground;
• higher efficiency at the site;
• completion of pre-commissioning efforts off the site;
• less impact on the site.
2.2.7.1 Longer Duration for Foundations and 
Underground
Because it takes longer in terms of the overall schedule 
to complete the module and get it ready to ship to the 
construction site, the module arrives later in terms of the 
overall project schedule when compared to similar ac￾tivities for a stick-built schedule. This allows more time to 
those workers at the site who must complete all the nec￾essary underground work on foundations, underground 
piping, utilities, drainage, water treatment facilities, and 
any major earthwork.
However, note that incomplete underground efforts, if 
not completed in time, are detrimental to the schedule 
and cost of projects, especially where work has to be 
“covered up” and then re-opened to provide delivery ac￾cess to parts of a plant. Furthermore, all the other un￾derground activities for module tie-in must be out of the 
ground prior to the module’s arrival. The modules, when 
they arrive, are essentially complete, requiring final hook￾up and any additional testing of the connections. This 
is performed by a much smaller crew than what would 
be required to assemble the module scope as a stick￾built endeavor.
2.2.7.2 Higher Efficiency at the Site
The benefits of a reduced workforce at the construction 
site go beyond the obvious replacement of higher costs 
and a less efficient site workforce with a less costly and 
potentially more efficient workforce. The smaller work￾force can move to and from the site more efficiently, work 
in a less crowded environment, and concentrate on the 
specific specialties of hook-up and commissioning.
2.2.7.3 Completion of Pre-Commissioning Efforts 
off the Site
The aim of modularization is to complete (as in 100%) the 
module scope. This typically includes much of the pre￾commissioning and checkout work on the equipment, 
electrical, instruments and control (E&I&C), as well as on 
all the piping. If this pre-commissioning (and potentially 
some commissioning) work are adequately planned and 
include the appropriate quality control and checks, as 
well as approval and sign-off by those who have the au￾thority to approve that level of cleanliness and complete￾ness, then there is no reason to re-work any of this effort 24 Advantages and Challenges of Modularization
on site. The result is a much shorter and faster commis￾sioning and start-up effort.
2.2.7.4 Less Impact on the Site
Exporting site-based work to the fab shop/yards also 
helps minimize the impact on the construction site. 
Compared to the traditional stick-built approach that 
generates extensive dust, noise, and air and water pol￾lution at the site, the modular approach greatly reduces 
those impacts (Choi, Chen, and Kim, 2019).
2.3 Challenges
Another word for barriers (disadvantages). Obviously, 
with all the good benefits that come with a modular ap￾proach, there will be some challenges. With the incorpo￾ration of modules into a project’s planning and execution, 
there are numerous barriers that have been hinted at 
and danced around but not specifically stated and ex￾plained. The challenges of modularization that we ad￾dress here are:
1. Critical path (reduction in flexibility)
2. Upfront cost (and pre-commitment)
3. Barriers to engineering
a. Design must support the fabricator’s planning and 
build methods
b. Earlier engineering efforts
c. Different dynamics in the engineering organization.
4. Acceleration of procurement
5. Owner and contractor capabilities
6. Module fabricator skills and capabilities
7. Extensive coordination
8. Logistics (module transportation)
9. Others
Overcoming these challenges is critical in setting up the 
project for success. Below, we explain these challenges. 
However, note that not all these challenges will necessar￾ily apply to all the modular projects. In some cases, these 
barriers will vary in their extent and impact with the type of 
contract, timing of decisions, cash flow, project approval, 
or responsibility matrix, to name a few.
2.3.1 Critical Path (Reduction in Flexibility)
Because of the need to design the module, purchase 
bulks and equipment, ship to an intermediate fabrication 
site, prefab materials, assemble, stack, load out and ship 
to site, the module typically lands on the project critical 
path. Further, because the delivery of the module is al￾ready later than the similar situation in a stick-built project, 
any further delays in the shipping and delivery compress 
the remaining schedule activities required for mechanical 
complete, commissioning, and ultimately start-up.
So, not only is it good business to make sure that the fab￾rication yard is supplied with everything it needs to deliver 
on schedule (to avoid extras and change orders from the 
fab yard), it is also necessary to avoid additional scope 
creep coming into the project site late in the project’s 
life due to carryover work. With the shortened remain￾ing time, the project cannot afford to add more scope at 
these late and critical phases. Thus, it is critical to freeze 
the scope and design early, which makes it unattractive 
to some owners/clients who like to continue to “tweak” 
the process or project details.
2.3.2 Upfront Cost (and Pre-Commitment)
One often hears that a module job will cost more than 
a stick-built job. We tend to agree BUT with one huge 
caveat––assuming all other factors between the two ex￾ecution strategies are the same. But, as previously men￾tioned in Chapter 1, the issue is that not all of the factors 
that make a successful job are available on site. Many 
more of these are available at the module fabrication 
yard, so the comparison is never accurate.
A better way of putting it is to restate the challenge, saying 
that a module job will require more upfront money to be 
successful. While it sounds counterintuitive, sit back and 
make a mental comparison of the stick-built and module 
execution plans. The stick-built plan designs, purchases, 
and ships all the pieces to the final project site to be 
set up and assembled there. The module execution plan 
requires that everything modular gets sent to an inter￾mediate project site (called a module fabrication facility) 
to be set up and assembled there. Once completed, it 2.3 Challenges 25
now must be shipped to the project site, where it is set in 
place and hooked up. However, this intermediate stop to 
assemble at the module fabrication facility requires addi￾tional time, the shipping of the completed module to site 
requires additional time, and the onsite connection and 
final hook-up after setting requires additional time. Even 
with the module being shipped later in the schedule than 
the individual pieces for the stick-built option, there are 
still enough slices of additional time needed to put the 
module on the project critical path.
To get the module off the critical path, some work must 
be started earlier to get the module chain of events go￾ing sooner. In many cases, this critical path runs through 
the structural steel design of the module. This structural 
steel design is based on an analysis of the equipment 
and loading on the members. As such, this equipment 
must be designed and a vendor selected in order to pur￾chase enough engineering details to determine where 
the loads will be placed and, in terms of rotating equip￾ment, where the appropriate bracing is needed to avoid 
excessive vibration and harmonics. The vendor is not go￾ing to provide such a design without contractual assur￾ances that, should the project go forward, they would be 
awarded the job.
If the client’s project approval procedures do not allow any 
money for pre-commitment on these critical equipment 
packages, then the structural steel cannot be designed 
and purchased. While this may be an oversimplification 
of the issue in some cases, it can be challenging to re￾solve for large and complex modules unless the client 
is willing to provide funds for early engineering of critical 
equipment.
2.3.3 Barriers to Engineering
The barriers in terms of engineering are numerous. Here, 
we address only the key barriers in engineering: (1) the 
design must support the fabricator’s planning and build 
methods; (2) earlier engineering efforts; and (3) different 
dynamics in the engineering organization.
2.3.3.1 The Design Must Support the Fabricator’s 
Planning and Build Methods
The design must support the fabricator’s planning 
and build methods. The module fabricator has a very 
well-defined production and assembly program that they 
follow. This program must be supplied with inputs on a 
definite schedule, starting with engineering design, pre￾liminary material takeoffs, approved construction draw￾ings and 3D model, equipment, etc. Delays in any of 
these activities run the risk of producing a much bigger 
delay in the module completion and delivery if, as a result, 
one or more of the sub-assembly lines at the fabrication 
yard cannot deliver.
This becomes even more critical as the modules become 
larger and more complex. Large rotating equipment and 
tall vessels provide a structural steel design challenge in 
terms of rotating dynamics and moments that must be 
resisted. All of this takes time to design and depends on 
the inputs from the equipment vendors. Late information 
results in late structural steel design, which results in late 
procurement and assembly, which ultimately results in 
an overall delay in module fabrication. It becomes crucial 
that as the module increases in size and complexity, the 
timing of developing all the supporting engineering needs 
to extend, requiring an earlier commitment from the suc￾cessful vendors and manufacturers.
Often, satisfying these needs directly opposes the own￾er’s/client’s contracting strategy and approval processes. 
When funding required for early engineering efforts is de￾layed due to the contractual stipulations that provide no 
funding until project approval or a Financial Investment 
Decision (FID), then project management is saddled with 
the tough decision on how to proceed. If no relief is pro￾vided in terms of pre-commitment of funds for certain 
critical design efforts, the EPC contractor is left with the 
only alternative of leaving this equipment out of the mod￾ule. This is a decision that can result in a module plan 
that is not optimal in terms of cost due to the funding 
schedule restraints. This affects both the owner/client as 
well as the EPC contractor.
2.3.3.2 Earlier Engineering Efforts
Not enough and not soon enough: The module job re￾quires earlier engineering efforts on most everything that 
defines and goes into a module. During the typical FEED 
(or FEL3) phase on a stick-built project, the level of detail 
required for structural steel is for the supporting piping on 
pipe racks. This is often not critical and does not get a 
detailed design until well into EPC.26 Advantages and Challenges of Modularization
For the module job, especially for the large integrated 
modules, there is a need to understand the equipment 
well enough to be able to design the primary steel and, 
in some cases, secondary steel if vibration reduction is 
necessary. To do this, engineering must have the process 
design complete enough to actually go out for bids on 
the equipment, receive the bids, evaluate them, and con￾ditionally award to the successful bidder, in order to get 
that bidder to provide the engineering effort of develop￾ing enough detailed design to provide the needed forces 
of the static equipment and the dynamics of the rotating 
machinery as input to the structural designer.
2.3.3.3 Different Dynamics in the Engineering 
Organization
What this creates is a different dynamic in the engineering 
organization. For the stick-built project, the piping and 
plot plan layout groups typically drive all the other disci￾plines since they are the recipient of all this information in 
order to develop the plot plan and layout and later route 
piping. For the modular job, it is the structural group that 
sets the schedule of what data are needed when from the 
following sectors:
• the equipment engineers—who must get it from vendors;
• procurement—who must work with equipment engi￾neers of the bidding and selection process;
• piping layout—who must work with the process 
engineers in terms of developing exactly how the 
equipment can be laid out in the three-dimensional 
module;
• piping engineering—who must develop pipe stresses 
that will need to be resisted by the module steel;
• and so on.
As a result, when the module schedules are laid out 
within the project schedule, the module fabricators 
identify when they need to have the bulk and shape 
steel delivered (which will be the basis for the module 
build), procurement determines the timing of purchase 
and the structural engineers set the due dates for all 
the inputs required into their steel design. The project 
schedule must ensure that everything needed for the 
steel design is being started in time to deliver. As a re￾sult, the “extra” time the engineering team had during a 
stick-built job to do the following is not available for the 
module job:
• work out equipment layout and supports (because they 
were sitting on massive concrete foundations);
• develop stress calculations (because they were sup￾ported by simple pipe racks);
• identify location and routing of piping (now in a module 
instead of on a pipe rack or finger rack);
• identify the need and location of the switchgear/
motor control center (MCC) or remote terminal unit (RTU) 
building (which now may reside in a module);
• identify many other smaller issues that must be resolved 
in time to develop the module structural steel design.
This sets up the structural engineering discipline as the 
driving discipline to meet the schedule. This can be an 
issue with project teams that are not familiar with this hi￾erarchy, with the result that the structural team does not 
get the inputs they need in time, and the entire module 
schedule suffers.
2.3.4 Acceleration of Procurement
Also involved in the acceleration of data required to get 
a proper design on the module structural steel is pro￾curement. As previously mentioned, this group must not 
only accelerate their efforts in terms of three bids and a 
buy (or whatever bidding process they use) in order to 
identify the final vendors. As part of this process, they 
must include contractual verbiage that provides the flex￾ibility to make an early purchase of a small percentage 
of the engineering required to perform the layouts, work 
the dynamics, develop the secondary support steel, 
etc., that is required to fully design this module struc￾tural steel.
This is not their standard operating procedure, and, if left 
to their own stick-built timing, they will not have vendors 
on board in time. Since much of this effort occurs prior to 
FID, these contracts must be set up differently to include 
limits in terms of total cost outlays, should the project not 
get funded.
The other obvious barrier to early procurement is the 
owner/client, who, after being shown the need to 2.3 Challenges 27
pre-invest in some of this early bidding as well as pur￾chase some of the early equipment engineering, decides 
they cannot provide such pre-investment funds. If such 
pre-investment money is not available to perform these 
pre-FID activities, then the EPC contactor is left with the 
option of either leaving long lead equipment out of 
the module, overdesigning to accommodate, or reduc￾ing the size of the modules to gain schedule advantage 
(assuming these smaller modules can be built faster than 
the larger modules). Again, the result is a less than opti￾mal module solution.
2.3.5 Owner and Contractor Capabilities
This is our favorite challenge. Because an owner/client 
and EPC contractor do not understand the wide-ranging 
impacts across all project groups by the decision to 
modularize, they sometimes naively assume that there 
is no need for a module coordinator or module team, 
considering it an unnecessary expense. On some pro￾jects, this belief is so strong that there is nothing you 
can do but try to get as far away from the project as you 
can. However, most project management has enough 
experience (including associations with one or more pre￾vious module jobs) that they will consider including the 
module team.
However, in either case, it is vital that the project team 
has members in management with past modular experi￾ence, and this experience should be from start to finish 
on that particular module project. There is too much inter￾action throughout the project, from the initial assessment 
of module options to the final on-site set-up, to assume 
one can get a complete understanding by working only 
on a part of it.
If the owner/client does not have a module subject mat￾ter expert, they should hire or “rent” one. The same thing 
goes for the EPC contractor. Furthermore, it is crucial that 
both the owner/client AND the EPC contractor have this 
experience and leadership on their respective teams. It 
does not help the overall project if the EPC contractor 
is the only one with modular experience. They will end 
up spending most of the time they need for coordinat￾ing, tied up trying to explain everything their company is 
trying to do differently or needs to be done differently. 
And often, as a result, this effort of “dragging the owner/
client kicking and screaming to the module learning table” 
will only end up obtaining some half-hearted concessions 
grudgingly made by the owner/client and with no strong 
support behind them.
The following works much better (and we have seen 
exactly such a scenario unfold). The owner/client rep￾resentative, typically the project manager or project di￾rector, calls all their company team as well as the EPC 
team members together to discuss the project, goals, 
and challenges. In this presentation, after explaining all 
the difficulties with building the project in the middle of 
their existing operating plant, including the disruption to 
production, delivery of products, and access, they tell 
the composite team sitting in front of them that while 
they are no experts on modularization, they realize it is 
the only answer to keep plant disruption to a minimum. 
A such, their company has contracted the module-savvy 
EPC team sitting with them. And, further to this, they 
expect all team members to accept this option and do 
everything in their power to make it successful. They 
conclude by saying that this will need to be a com￾plete team effort, so anyone who is not fully engaged 
and supportive of this project execution should excuse 
himself/herself from the team and leave through the door 
they came in.
There is just too much at stake and too many small 
changes in priorities required to have an undercurrent of 
opposition to the execution plan.
2.3.6 Module Fabricator Skills and Capabilities
Module fabricator skills must match the project needs. 
Module fabricators come in all shapes and sizes (and 
abilities). They range from a truly “mom and pop” opera￾tion set up on a vacant lot that essentially bolts together 
pre-fabbed structural steel and then sets pre-fabbed pipe 
in the resulting structure, to the fully integrated multina￾tional operations that not only own their own pipe and 
steel mills, where pipes and tubulars are rolled, and plate 
girders are fabricated, but also have complex assembly 
lines to support the constant supply of prefabricated steel 
and piping from these mills. They turn them into finished 
pipe spools and structural members that are provided 
simultaneously to numerous internal assembly site fab￾rication areas so that all can be outfitted with piping and 
equipment to be eventually joined, via stacking of these 
decks (or pancakes), to be finally skidded or rolled off 28 Advantages and Challenges of Modularization
massive module offloading facilities (MOF) and on to one 
or more of their own ocean-going vessels for shipment to 
the ultimate project site.
Bigger is not better when looking for a suitable fabrica￾tion facility. All that expertise and capability mentioned 
above in the fully integrated module production facility is 
costly and only warranted in special cases. The module 
job must fit the skills of the fabrication facility. If struc￾tural welders are scarce, then the suggested welded and 
painted module should be redesigned as a galvanized 
and bolted structure. If the best that the fabrication yard 
can do in terms of a MOF is a reinforced earthen ramp to 
the water, then the module scope should be in line with 
that capability for shipping.
On the other side of this issue, besides being overquali￾fied, large fabrication facilities need large complex mod￾ule jobs in order to support all the other parts of their 
organization—such as their procurement department, 
vessel design and fabrication groups, pipe mill, and logis￾tics groups. Besides the need for an extremely large open 
area for pipe rack fabrication, the simplicity of the assem￾bly does not utilize these additional departments and, as 
such, makes the simpler modules of no interest to these 
fabricators. In fact, if they accept the simpler modules as 
part of their scope, they may immediately subcontract 
the pipe racks out to a lower-cost fabricator with a yard 
suitable for the large acreage requirements of the pipe 
rack assembly.
In addition, the size of the fabricator is critical. The pro￾posed module scope needs to be in a range that is not 
above the fabricator’s maximum capacity but large enough 
not to be lost in the yard or ignored. It needs to be a large 
enough size to require a significant percentage or even a 
slight majority of the fabricator’s time, labor, and materials, 
so that they must pay attention to the project details.
Suitable fabrication facilities are reviewed and selected 
via a fabrication survey, a multi-page questionnaire re￾questing information from capabilities to the backlog to 
safety statistics. The responses are reviewed and, from 
this assessment, several are selected to receive the re￾quest for proposal (RFP).
2.3.7 Extensive Coordination
A module job requires coordination at all levels with all 
groups involved in the project. This can be a problem 
where the project is not set up to handle this coordination.
What does this coordination look like? It is essentially a 
small group of experts who have banded together based 
on their knowledge of what it takes to execute a modu￾lar job. The purpose of this group is to interact with all the 
other groups within that project to make sure that decisions 
made take into consideration the modular aspect and edu￾cate the other groups on what is expected and when it is 
expected. The details of this team can vary, but the location 
of the module team lead in the organization is critical. See 
Figure 2.3 A typical pre-FEED phase organization chart for modularization.2.3 Challenges 29
Figure 2.3. for typical pre-FEED phase modularization team 
organization and Figure 2.4. for FEED and EPC phases.
The module coordination team is composed of a module 
coordinator with representatives from each of the major 
groups within the project. It is more like a matrix arrange￾ment, as each appointed member for a group must also 
support the module team activities.
The module coordinator is set up in the organization to 
report to the project manager at the same level as the 
engineering and construction managers. This allows the 
module coordinator to keep the module activities on an 
equal basis with the engineering and construction activities 
and avoids any conflicts in priorities that might occur if the 
module coordinator was reporting to either the engineering 
manager or construction manager. The module coordina￾tor has a dotted line tie to both the project support groups 
as well as the engineering design groups and is, in effect, 
another input to these groups in terms of module decisions.
2.3.8 Logistics (Module Transportation)
This is such a big issue that it typically receives the early 
analysis that it should. As one of the very first actions in a 
module design development, the transportation/logistics/
route survey will identify the maximum size module that 
can be moved from one of several fabrication facilities to 
the project site. The larger the module, the more difficult 
it is to find a project site that will have an access route of 
sufficient clearance to accommodate it. Also, the larger 
the module, the more difficult it is to find adequate lift 
cranes (if self-propelled modular transporters [SPMTs] are 
not being used to set the module) as there is a worldwide 
shortage of mega lift cranes, which can be costly.
This only becomes a barrier or challenge if the module 
size changes, the route clearances change, or there is a 
bust on the route survey analysis. More commonly, pro￾jects decide to skip this survey because they do not think 
they will modularize; they had one performed recently; 
they do not think it is necessary; or they just do not think 
it is worth it. As a result, the “recent” survey (of 10 years 
ago) that is the basis of the project design was not new 
enough to catch the more recently installed electrical 
transmission lines. So, the route everyone thought was 
clear now has owner access restrictions or actual physi￾cal structures limiting dimensional access. Also, what 
few people understand is that a local area Heavy Haul 
Contactor knows much more about the project area than 
Figure 2.4 A typical FEED and EPC phases organization chart for modularization.30 Advantages and Challenges of Modularization
the project team and usually is able to provide transpor￾tation alternatives that were not even considered options 
by the project team.
2.3.9 Others
This is a big catch-all for everything else, most of which 
has been hinted at above:
• Management adjustments: the ability to learn what 
changes are needed and adjust as required.
• Planning: the ability to plan around the critical path, 
which is typically the module production and delivery.
• Hook-up tolerances: the need to fabricate and install to 
dimensional standards that will permit a single weld hook￾up (SWHU) when the two modules are mated on site.
• Special Quality Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC) 
procedures: at the fabrication yard involving the proper 
paperwork signed by the responsible parties signifying 
cleaning, tests, etc., have been adequately performed 
and do not need to be re-done at site.
2.4 Summary
This chapter explained the key characteristics of fabrica￾tion yards to better understand why they can offer ad￾vantages. Then we discussed the major advantages and 
challenges (or disadvantages) that should be included 
in the overall analysis of the module potential. Note that 
some advantages and challenges are adopted from 
(Choi, 2014).
References
Choi, J.O. (2014) Links between Modularization Critical 
Success Factors and Project Performance. Ph.D. disserta￾tion. The University of Texas at Austin. Available at: https://
repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/25030.
Choi, J.O., Chen, X.B., and Kim, T.W. (2019) Opportunities 
and Challenges of Modular Methods in Dense Urban 
Environment. International Journal of Construction 
Management, 19(2), pp. 93–105. doi:10.1080/15623599.2
017.1382093.chapter 3
31
This chapter describes the industry status of modular￾ization through a compilation of 25 actual case projects. 
As a quick reminder, Chapter 1 provided a basis for what 
modularization is (and what it is not) and where it might 
be applicable. In Chapter  2, the advantages and dis￾advantages of modularization were explained. This set 
the stage for Chapter 3 to describe the industry status 
on modularization, and this chapter validates the advan￾tages and impediments which were initially identified in 
Chapter 2 via this set of actual project case histories.
Incorporated into this chapter are some of the data and 
findings from Dr. Choi’s PhD dissertation (Choi, 2014) but 
reanalyzed, restructured, and summarized with a focus 
on the industry status of modularization rather than the 
original premise of Dr. Choi’s dissertation, which focused 
on identifying the correlations between modularization 
critical success factors and project performance.
In particular, this chapter reports on the findings from 
these 25 project case histories in terms of identifying the 
advantages of modularization, quantifying the schedule 
and cost savings compared to the alternative stick￾built project philosophy, recognizing the project diffi￾culties and impediments when approaching a modular 
project application, identifying some of the business 
case drivers for modularization, and presenting a quick 
overview of the metrics of the 25 projects studied—
the types of modules, the variability in number, size, 
and weight of the modules, and some characteristics 
of both the project job site and the module fabrication/
assembly shops.
We hope this chapter will be informative as well as 
thought-provoking. Remember, this is actual data from 
completed module projects, with responders providing 
the data from the point of looking back at the entire 
project. So, while it is accurate in terms of a post￾mortem review, it is still conceivably laced with some 
biases and preconceptions of the responder. As such, 
along with this presentation of the hard data and raw 
results, we reflect on and offer other plausible interpreta￾tions or alternative thoughts where these raw statistical 
results might be misleading.
At the end of the day, the data is only a snapshot—and 
should be taken as such.
3.1 Modular Projects Case Study
3.1.1 Case Study Methodologies
Descriptive research methodologies were applied to un￾derstand the characteristics and status of modularization. 
The collected data is graphically displayed via frequency 
distributions and bar graphs/histograms, along with cen￾tral tendency (mean, median, and mode) and variation 
(range and standard deviation) per item (Choi, 2014).
3.1.2 Sample Characteristics
In short, 25 sample projects were collected in 2013 from 
modular subject matter experts who had played a major 
role in the sample projects being surveyed. The average 
percentage modularization of the sample projects was 
Industry Status 
on Modularization32 Industry Status on Modularization
52%. The types of modular projects and locations of the 
project sites and fabrication/assembly shops are summa￾rized below.
3.1.2.1 Types of Sample Modular Projects
Figure 3.1 illustrates the variety of the collected industrial 
modular project information in terms of their diverse nature, 
with representation from mining, natural gas processing, 
chemical plants, consumer products manufacturing, oil 
refining, and power. The point of this illustration is to dem￾onstrate that the results crossed many project types and, 
as such, should be considered to be more or less univer￾sally applicable to all types of modularized projects.
3.1.2.2 Project Job Site and Fabrication/Assembly 
Shop Location(s)
The projects surveyed were truly worldwide, as shown in 
Figure 3.2, where the 25 projects were plotted in terms 
of their job site, module fabrication shop, and assembly 
shop (where different).
Project job site location and module fabrication and 
assembly shop locations for the collected industrial mod￾ular projects were assessed and grouped by major coun￾try or continent (see Figures 3.3 and 3.4).
As expected, the majority of the module fabrication as￾sembly is performed overseas––only 8% of the sample 
projects’ job sites were located in Asia, but approximately 
29% of these projects were contracted to module fabri￾cation and assembly shops located in Asia. Considering 
the timing of these surveys (2013) on projects completed 
Mining
Oil Gas Exploration/Production
Electrical (Generating)
Petro Chemical
Oil Sands
Chemical Manufacturing
Power
Oil Refining
Consumer Products Manufacturing
Natural Gas Processing
Frequency
01234 5
Figure 3.1 Types of collected industrial projects. Source: Choi (2014). Repro￾duced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.
Figure 3.2 Location of job site, module fab shop, and assembly shop. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.3.2 Results (Industry Status on Modularization) 33
by that time, this large percentage of fabrication effort in 
Asia was probably due to the potentially large cost sav￾ings that could be realized in terms of the all-in wage rates 
(AIWR) differences between the Far East craft workers 
and the US craft workers, where most of these projects 
were being built. Even the slightly lower difference in craft 
labor productivity between the two areas was not enough 
to offset the tremendous cost savings.
As a cautionary note, while there were potentially large 
differences in the AIWR between the Far East and the 
US, it should be understood that even within a given area, 
like the Far East, both the AIWR and craft productivity 
varied widely between different areas and in some cases 
even between shops within the same area. So, with over 
200 module fabrication shops worldwide, finding the best 
fit between the project and the fab yard is not just a simple 
selection of an area. As such, it can be a daunting effort 
that must be approached properly and examined ade￾quately. Later chapters go into this effort in more detail.
3.2 Results (Industry Status 
on Modularization)
3.2.1 Advantages of Modularization
One aim of this survey was to identify the main reasons 
why a project would decide to modularize. The survey 
respondents were requested to identify (from a list of po￾tential advantages) all that applied to their specific pro￾ject. Since the survey respondents were not limited to 
selecting the top 2 or 3, they provided a listing of all that 
applied, with over 100 responses to be tallied. Figure 3.5 
illustrates the frequency of selection of each of the sug￾gested benefits provided in the listing.
As expected, schedule and cost savings were the 
predominate reasons for modularization. This was fol￾lowed closely by increased safety and increased pro￾ductivity. The rest of the selected benefits seemed to 
be somewhat evenly divided in terms of percentage 
(1% or 4% or 6%) of times these projects identified this 
as a benefit.
So, what might this mean? It could mean that only a 
few project respondents felt that there were other pro￾ject benefits from modularization other than the top four 
Figure 3.3 Project job site locations. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with 
permission of Jin Ouk Choi.
Figure 3.4 Module fabrication and assembly shop locations. Source: Choi 
(2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.
Figure 3.5 Advantages from modularization application in industrial modular 
projects. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.34 Industry Status on Modularization
(schedule; cost; safety; productivity) listed above. It could 
also mean that the rest of these surveyed projects did 
not receive an actual benefit from the more subtle ben￾efits shown in the categories that received 6% or less. 
But, the fact that they are so evenly divided up probably 
means that only a few of the projects actually took the 
time to examine the entire modularization process and 
evaluate all the benefits that their project actually realized. 
The projects that did so were probably the larger projects 
in terms of size or cost where these more subtle benefits 
became glaringly obvious due to their physical size or 
impact of the project on the job site area.
From the study work on the benefits of modularization 
identified in the CII RT-283 research (O’Connor, O’Brien, 
and Choi, 2013) as well as the two authors’ experiences 
with modular projects, we know that some projects select 
modularization as a project philosophy even where the 
cost or schedule savings, at face value, maybe minimal 
to none when compared to the cost or schedule utilizing 
a stick-built execution philosophy. But, in many of these 
cases, such projects select modularization for one of the 
many other benefits. Examples include:
• Additions to an operating plant where the construction 
disruption would be extremely detrimental to maintain￾ing the current product production and sale.
• Getting a jump on the schedule with the ability to design, 
fabricate, and assemble parts of the plant prior to the 
approval of the on-site construction permit.
• The opportunity to progress a project faster than by 
using on-site labor where there is an inability to obtain 
or financially support sufficient craft labor on site.
• The ability to coexist harmoniously with local commu￾nities by reducing the increased congestion, noise, or 
immediate impact from the large influx of temporary 
workers required to completely stick-built the project.
All of these can become even more critical than the over￾all cost and schedule benefits, and, as a result, if these 
are not adequately addressed, they could jeopardize the 
entire project.
So, the modular philosophy provides all of the above 
advantages—it is just that some projects do not recog￾nize many of them because the benefit may not be critical 
(or even noticeable) to the success of the project. But 
for those projects that must meet one or more of these 
“lesser” benefits, the modularization philosophy offers the 
ability to have greater control over such issues. As such, 
many companies select modularization for reasons other 
than the cost and schedule savings compared to stick￾built. They recognize that these softer risks (obtaining 
permits, congestion, workforce availability, environmen￾tal impact, and reduced infrastructure) are indeed more 
controllable and reliable for the modular project than the 
stick-built alternative.Further analysis of the survey data 
was conducted based on what the project planners iden￾tified as the primary project driver between cost/schedule/
balanced drivers. Figure 3.6 illustrates the various project 
driver splits in terms of the identified modularization ad￾vantages when evaluated in terms of these three primary 
project drivers.
For the cost-driven projects, obviously, cost was of ma￾jor importance. As expected and illustrated in Figure 3.6, 
Figure 3.6 Advantages of modularization by primary project driver. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.3.2 Results (Industry Status on Modularization) 35
the most common advantages from modularization 
application on the cost-driven projects (N = 11) were over￾all lower cost and an emphasis on schedule (nearly 60%). 
But, to get this lower cost, both schedule and productiv￾ity were not emphasized as much as the schedule-driven 
project. Also, surprisingly, safety did not seem to be as 
predominant in terms of identified importance. What does 
this mean? The lower-cost job was apparently willing to 
accept a lower productivity from a cheaper labor force and 
take the anticipated schedule hit. Of course, we do not 
conclude that safety actually took a back seat in terms of 
these jobs. But we do see that the other factors played a 
more predominant role in the minds of the project planners.
For the schedule-driven project, obviously, the cost had 
to take a back seat. The most common advantages from 
the schedule-driven projects were schedule, increased 
productivity, and safety (N = 7). This makes sense 
because with an increased schedule emphasis comes a 
higher grade of craft labor to obtain a higher productivity 
(to get things done faster). Safety is much more impor￾tant because of the positive benefits of a happy and safe 
working workforce. But also conversely, because of the 
potential negative impact that a poor safety performance 
could have in terms of slowdowns, stand-downs, and 
other potential productivity impacts.
For the balanced project, we see that all of the proposed 
benefits must be juggled to maintain the fine line between 
a cost-efficient execution and an aggressive schedule. 
So, craft labor costs need to be watched as well as their 
productivity with efforts to maintain an efficient but not 
costly workforce. Same thing with quality, waste, and 
environment. All of these must be balanced to avoid ex￾cesses in terms of one or the other, which would then 
impact either cost or schedule, or both. Of course, this 
is the hardest of the three project drivers to maintain; but 
because it is so difficult, it is the best suited for a modular 
project execution philosophy. It requires the recognition 
and utilization of most of the benefits that the modular 
execution philosophy can provide.
3.2.2 Cost and Schedule Savings Compared 
to Stick-Built
The case study data were also reanalyzed in terms of 
the approximate percentage schedule and cost savings 
compared to stick-built. Figure 3.7 illustrates the percent￾age schedule and cost savings compared to stick-built. 
The average percentage schedule savings was 12.5%, 
and the average percentage cost savings was 19.2%. 
The median percentage schedule savings was 9%, and 
the median percentage cost savings was 20%.
These findings aligned with the other literature well, 
where cost savings were reported about 15% (Rogan, 
Lawson, and Bates-Brkljac, 2000; Post, 2010), including 
Figure 3.7 Percentage schedule and cost savings compared to stick-built. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.36 Industry Status on Modularization
18% savings from a modular gas-oil hydro-treater pro￾ject (Jameson, 2007) and savings of 15% from a solid 
fuel-fired facility modularization (Gotlieb, Stringfellow, 
and Rice, 2001). Furthermore, the recent McKinsey & 
Company report (Bertram et al., 2019) claimed that mod￾ular construction could cut costs by up to 20% and dura￾tion by as much as 50%.
3.2.3 Recognized Project Difficulties and Impedi￾ments to Modularization Application
To understand common project difficulties in industrial 
modular projects, the respondents were asked to report 
the project difficulties that they recognized as leading to 
adding cost or delay. Drawing from the literature review, a 
list of difficulties was drawn up and provided in the survey 
questionnaire with instructions to respondents to check 
all those that applied. Those difficulties were:
• contract terms
• weather (extreme)
• logistics challenges (transportation of modules)
• environmental impact
• organizational change
• scope change
• labor issues
• regulating impact
• external stakeholders
• material shortage
• major quality problems
• change in demand for product
• change in project profitability
• change in financing environment
• safety incident
• equipment delivery
• team turnover
• and others.
Figure 3.8 illustrates the frequency of project difficulties.
The four most common difficulties were logistics chal￾lenges, equipment delivery, extreme weather, and scope 
change. This makes sense. If you include in the definition 
Figure 3.8 Recognized project difficulties dur￾ing modular plants implementation. Source: 
Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of 
Jin Ouk Choi.3.2 Results (Industry Status on Modularization) 37
of logistics challenges all the issues associated with mod￾ule design (in terms of determining the size and ability to 
efficiently design the modules within the shipping con￾fines, dictated by the site location and path to it), along 
with the actual issues of the logistics directly associated 
with the transportation, movement, and final setting-up 
of these modules, there are a lot of potential issues that 
could and do crop up.
What is interesting about the other three is they are related 
and, as such, can probably be grouped together. Think 
about it. All three are associated with the delay or imped￾ance of the module fabrication effort. Equipment, in terms 
of delivery, setting, and fitting in the module. Weather in 
terms of fabrication slowdowns (but also could relate to 
the actual site weather issues). And, finally, and, most im￾portantly, scope changes—the second most damaging 
impact to a module fabricator and their cost and sched￾ule, only slightly less impactful than the actual late delivery 
of IFC (issued for construction) design documents or the 
late delivery of bulk steel and piping materials that the 
fabricator needs to get started.
The next three also share a camaraderie of sorts—quality 
problems/labor issues/contract terms. Quality issues are 
a result of poor materials/poor prefabrication efforts/poor 
assembly, all of which are related to either poor supervi￾sion or poor execution. The same can be said of labor 
issues—most seem to be associated with poor supervi￾sion or poor direction and sometimes can be traced back 
to a fabricator that is spread too thin and trying to work 
without sufficiently experienced first-line supervision.
The contract terms are associated with this group only 
because flexibility is lacking in the contract in terms of 
being able to address and rectify the other two issues. It 
may be due to an unequal sharing of risk or no contrac￾tual vehicle to adjust to unforeseen changes to the other 
two. In any case, with the module sitting in the fabrica￾tor’s yard, the owner and EPC contractor are not in the 
driver’s seat when it comes to any contractual coercion. 
The module fabricator has the upper hand in any contract 
dealings. As such, it is best if the project starts with a con￾tract that is a fair and balanced approach to the project 
for all sides.In addition to identifying the most common 
difficulties of applying modularization, respondents were 
also asked to review a list of project impediments and 
identify which ones pertained to their module project. The 
list of impediments provided to the respondents were:
• initial cost investment
• coordination
• anti-module-oriented design
• heavy lift
• owner capability/tendency,
• contractor capability
• fabricator capability
• logistics
• shipping limits
• design freeze
• transport restrictions
• others.
Figure  3.9 illustrates the frequency of reported impedi￾ments of modularization application.
The five most common impediments were
• owner capability/tendency
• lack of design freeze
• coordination
• shipping limits
• transport restrictions.
The first two were equally ranked—one refers to the 
owner and the other to the EPC contractor, with both of 
them referring to each other’s collective inability to per￾form. For the owner, it is typically a lack of being mod￾ule “savvy” and, therefore, sometimes being more of a 
detriment than a benefit when working on the project. 
For the EPC contractor, it is the lack of a timely design 
freeze, again, showing their collective lack of understand￾ing of the impacts on the module fabrication effort that 
late changes have and a lack of discipline in terms of a 
rigorous change management procedure. The third one 
is, interestingly enough, “Coordination.” This single word 
combines all of the failings of the owner and EPC con￾tractor previously noted above but is now compounded 38 Industry Status on Modularization
in terms of poor communication and lack of a unified ap￾proach to the project.
The next four are an interesting mix: shipping limits/
transport restrictions/fabricator capability/anti-module 
oriented design. Shipping limits and transport restric￾tions need to be identified very early. If not, they will 
continue to be a problem. Assuming these are resolved, 
a bad combination of project needs and fabricator ca￾pabilities can become a major problem if not identified 
in the fabricator reviews and solicitation efforts. Finally, 
a design team that is not in tune with how a module is 
fabricated and built will create problems not identified 
until at the fab yard. Another reason to get the mod￾ule fabricator involved early is to provide a “module￾friendly” design.
Other reported impediments for modularization were 
local labor requirements, materials management, ven￾dor data, and timely IFC documents from engineering, 
quality control, an EPC tendency to build it non-modular, 
and government regulations. One responder highlighted 
that global modularization is currently constrained by the 
various government regulations and restrictions, units, 
standards, shipping limits, and data transfer regulations.
3.2.4 Business Case Drivers for Modularization
Business case drivers for modularization are defined 
as factors that impact the business case of a project 
in terms of the project objectives and explain why the 
modular project philosophy might be required. These fac￾tors include:
• schedule
• labor cost
• labor productivity
• labor supply
• safety
• quality
• environmental issues
• regulatory issues
• legal issues
• site access
• site attributes
• security/confidentiality
• sustainability
• predictability/reliability
• disruption (Choi, Chen, and Kim, 2019).
Figure 3.10 plots the business case drivers in terms of the 
most often identified reason for implementing a modular 
philosophy on a project to the least often identified for this 
sample of 25 projects.
Figure 3.9 Impediments of modularization ap￾plication. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with 
permission of Jin Ouk Choi.3.2 Results (Industry Status on Modularization) 39
What is interesting about this list is that the schedule 
benefit is at the top! This seems to fly in the face of all 
those who espouse the opinion that a module philoso￾phy will result in a longer schedule. What typically is the 
confusion about schedule is that when looking at the 
engineering/design/module fabrication/shipping/setting 
linked tasks of a project and their duration, one can 
make a case for this set of tasks being slightly longer 
than the equivalent stick-built durations (due in part to 
the additional early study work as well as the duration 
of the completed module shipment). However, while this 
may be the case for this small string of activities, properly 
placing this segment of work within the total EPC pro￾ject schedule will result in an overall reduction in project 
duration. This is because the modules can be shipped 
later in the site construction duration, and in some cases, 
the site duration can be reduced due to less scope re￾quired to be completed at the site. The challenge is to 
avoid taking the typical stick-built schedule durations 
and sequencing and simply dumping the above module 
sequence into it. If this is done, then you gain no ad￾vantage of parallel work at the fab yard and site and do 
not benefit from the appropriate site duration reductions 
for the reduced scope of work at the site. In fact, you 
penalize both.
Labor supply, labor productivity, and labor cost are all 
related and pertain to the typical problems associated 
with the stick-built effort at the project site. Most projects 
continue to have to deal with a less than adequate labor 
supply, poorer than anticipated labor productivity, and a 
higher than planned labor cost. Add all of these up to￾gether, and this spells major cost and schedule implica￾tions, which in many cases were not anticipated (project 
management almost always likes to believe their project 
will be the exception rather than the rule when it comes 
to labor issues). Safety and quality are well known to be 
“better” at the module fab yard. While such safety and 
quality are also possible at the construction site, they are 
harder to achieve. Finally, site access and site attributes 
are typically brought up in terms of their restrictions at the 
chosen project site. Reducing the number of craft and 
personnel making that trip to the project site improves the 
project’s ability to meet its goals.
3.2.5 Types of Module Units
To determine the type and distribution of module sizes in 
the 25 projects surveyed, the survey respondents were 
asked to report all types of module units/sub-units that 
had been modularized based on the list provided:
• process equipment
• loaded pipe rack
• utility equipment
• structural modules
• dressed vessels
• buildings
Figure 3.10 Business case drivers for 
modularization in the industrial projects. Source: 
Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of 
Jin Ouk Choi.40 Industry Status on Modularization
• power distribution centers (PDC)
• remote instrument buildings (RIB)
• power generation equipment,
• others.
Figure 3.11 shows the results of this survey.
The five most common types of modularized units/
sub-units are, as expected: process equipment, loaded 
pipe racks, utility equipment, structural module, and 
dressed-up vessels. Of interest was the observation that 
while pipe racks are what have always been assumed to 
be the most universal and easiest type of modularization, 
for this case study, the equipment modularization was 
more prevalent. This may be due to the fact that most of 
the case projects were on larger and more complex pro￾jects where equipment was always planned to be modu￾larized. However, one would have expected pipe racks 
to also be included in every one of the 25 case studies. 
But, since the mix also includes manufacturing, the typi￾cal pipe rack may not have been specifically identified as 
a separate module type since piping is typically incorpo￾rated into some of the other building supports as part of 
an integrated on-site build.
Other miscellaneous reported modules were electrical 
sub-stations, conveyor towers and components, and 
major equipment with auxiliaries, such as power gen￾eration equipment sets. Some of the respondents men￾tioned that their most commonly modularized pieces of 
plant were the power distribution centers and dressed-up 
vessels. And it should be noted that since there are nu￾merous variations in the terminology for some of the more 
common pre-assemblies, the exact split of the units/
sub-units by category may vary depending on the type 
of project.
3.2.6 Number, Size, and Weight of Modules
In order to better understand the scope and variation of 
the projects represented by the case studies, we took 
a look at some of the physical metrics of the projects in 
terms of the total number of modules and total tonnage, 
as well as identifying both the largest and heaviest mod￾ule as well as the smallest and lightest. The results are 
shown in Figure 3.12.
The top left table and bar chart in Figure 3.12 show a 
variation in the total number of modules in the sample 
projects from 1 to 500 modules with a median of 37 mod￾ules. Of these, 33% of the projects were composed of 9 
or fewer modules, and 63% were less than 99. So, the 
smaller projects were well represented in this survey.
The top right table and bar chart in Figure 3.12 list infor￾mation on the total weight of all the modules in the project 
and ranged from a project with a total low of 10 metric 
tons to a high of 181,440 metric tons, with a median of 
3,895  metric tons (skewed by the few extremely large 
modular projects in the study). Of interest, once again, are 
the large number of smaller module projects that incor￾porated modularization into their project philosophy—
36% less than 1000 total metric tons and 64% less than 
Figure 3.11 Types of modularized elements/
units of industrial modular projects. Source: 
Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of 
Jin Ouk Choi.3.2 Results (Industry Status on Modularization) 41
10,000 total metric tons of the case studies providing de￾tails on this metric.
In terms of the largest size of module in each of the case 
study projects sampled (the bottom left table and bar 
chart in Figure 3.12), results ranged from 81 to 134,339 
cubic meters. To help put this volume into perspective, 
the 81 cubic meter module is a typical truckable module 
of 3 meters wide and high by 9 meters long. The largest 
module is in the range of 40 meters wide by 40 meters tall 
by 84 meters long. So, 46% of the projects surveyed were 
modularizing their project using truckable sized modules.
Finally, the last metric reviewed was the heaviest mod￾ule weight. Results are shown in the bottom right table 
and bar chart in Figure 3.12 and range from an individ￾ual module low weight of 10 metric tons to an individual 
module high weight of 7257 metric tons. Again, what is 
interesting is the lower summary range, where 70% of the 
projects utilized modules weighing less than 1000 metric 
tons. A further split of this lower range would show that 
the majority of these were on the lower end of this range, 
as indicated by the large number of smaller 99 cubic me￾ter modules identified in the bottom left table.
So, while the numbers are impressive in terms of the max￾imum number of modules, maximum size, and weight of 
individual modules, one must remember that the majority 
of the jobs used much fewer and smaller modules. The 
module philosophy being presented throughout this book 
applies regardless of the size and scope. The same ap￾proach is used in determining when to start the planning, 
what to modularize, and how to modularize. All of these 
details will be discussed further in the following chapters.
3.2.7 Characteristics of Job Site and Module 
Fabrication/­Assembly Shops
The survey also looked at the different characteristics 
of the job site and the module fabrication and assem￾bly shops. In particular, the difference in labor availabil￾ity, labor quality, expected labor productivity, and actual 
labor productivity between the job site and the modular 
fabrication/assembly shops. Figure  3.13 shows the re￾sults of this section of the survey.
As expected, most sample modular projects indicated 
that the labor supply was not adequate at the job site, 
whereas fabrication/assembly shops had an adequate 
14
11
472,144
33,724
58,879
181,429
10
181,440
3,895
Total Number of the Modules
Total # of the Modules
Frequency Frequency
Frequency Frequency
Cubic Meter
Metric Ton Metric Ton
Largest Size of Modules (Cubic Meter) Heaviest Module
Total Tonnage of the Modules (Approx.)
300< 100,000
10,000~99,999
1,000~9,999
0~1,000
200~299
100~199
10~99
0~9
20,000<
5,000~19,999
1,000~4,999
0~999
0 246 8 10 12 0 5 10 15
7,000<
3,000~6,999
1,000~2,999
0~1,000
0 2468 10 0123456
N
Missing
Total
Mean
Stand Dev.
Range
Min
Max
Median
N
Missing
Total
Mean
Stand Dev.
Range
Min
Max
Median
24
1
2,411
100
133
499
1
500
37
N
Missing
Total
Mean
Stand Dev.
Range
Min
Max
Median
24
1
368,091
15,337
35,292
134,258
81
134,339
1,372
N
Missing
Total
Mean
Stand Dev.
Range
Min
Max
Median
20
5
23,404
1,252
2,041
7,246
10
7,257
213
Figure 3.12 Total number of modules, the module total tonnage, the largest module, and the heaviest module. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of 
Jin Ouk Choi.42 Industry Status on Modularization
supply (the top and bottom left figures in Figure  3.13). 
This is to be expected since all the jobs being surveyed 
were module jobs and, as such, had already made the 
decision to modularize based on one or more key ingre￾dients missing at the job site, most notably an adequately 
sized or skilled workforce. Interestingly, most of the 
modular projects sampled indicated that their job site’s 
labor quality was adequate but either non-existent or not 
large enough to support the project construction efforts. 
In contrast, the fabrication/assembly shops had a suffi￾ciently high(er) quality than adequate (as shown in the top 
and bottom bar graphs in Figure 3.13).
In terms of a post-mortem on these sample projects, the 
project study responders reported that not only did they 
expect “worse” or “far worse” than average labor produc￾tivity at their job site, but they were further disappointed 
during the course of the project. A whopping 42% of 
them ended up with a job site labor force that was even 
worse than they had pessimistically assumed, as noted 
by the actual job site statistics shown. In contrast, only 
8% of the projects studied actually felt they had a job site 
workforce that was better than expected.
There was a mixed bag of results with respect to the 
expected and actual module fabrication site labor pro￾ductivity (Figure  3.14). While 50–60% of the surveyed 
projects felt that the expected and actual module fab yard 
productivity was average or better and met or exceeded 
expectations, there was a sizable percentage of surveyed 
projects that were disappointed in the module fabrication 
yard productivity. Approximately 37% (or 8 surveyed pro￾jects) expected a worse than average labor productivity 
going into the project, and the same number ended up 
with actual productivity that was below expectations. We 
are not sure if this was a coincidence, but as we further 
explore how to properly set up a module project execu￾tion, we will identify some of the issues that can make 
a module fab yard run late with lower than anticipated 
productivity. Most of these issues have to do with not 
providing the module fab yard with either a completed 
design or properly detailed and accurate material take￾off, late equipment, or late changes. The lack of detail in 
the survey makes such correlation difficult, so this metric 
is just left as one that needs to be identified, and the pro￾ject needs to make sure that the issues that might slow a 
fab yard down have been adequately addressed in time.
JOB SITE Labor Availability (N = 24) JOB SITE Labor Quality (N = 25)
FABRICATION Site(s) Labor Availability (N= 23) FABRICATION Site(s) Labor Quality (N = 25)
Excess Supply
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
12
10
8
6
4
2
20
15
10
5
0
0
Adequate Supply High Quality
High Quality
Adequate Quality
Adequate Quality
Low Quality
Low Quality
Inadequate or Non-existent
Supply
Excess Supply Adequate Supply Inadequate or Non￾existent Supply
Figure 3.13 Labor availability and quality at the job sites and fabrication shops. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.References 43
3.3 Summary
It is hoped that this brief alternative analysis of these 25 
project case studies in terms of their cost and schedule 
assumptions and expectations and their identified difficul￾ties and impediments, along with the subsequent edito￾rial comments regarding some of the results themselves, 
have provided a better understanding of these metrics. 
We hope this chapter has set the stage for the following 
chapters, which address how to properly set up and ex￾ecute a modular project in more detail.
Acknowledgments
The authors wish to thank all the people involved in this 
research and the experts who participated in the sur￾veys for sharing their time and expertise. In particular, 
the Construction Industry Institute (CII) Modularization 
Community for Business Advancement (MCBA) provided 
much of the support and leg work involved in chasing all 
these project case studies and gathering the raw data. 
The results reflect part of the case study findings from 
the Ph.D. dissertation by Jin Ouk Choi (Choi, 2014) at the 
University of Texas at Austin. To learn more about the study 
methodology and findings, please refer to (Choi, 2014).
References
Bertram, N. et al. (2019) Modular Construction: From Projects 
to Products. Available at: https://www.mckinsey.com/
business-functions/operations/our-insights/modular￾construction-from-projects-to-products (accessed: March 
16, *-2022).
Choi, J.O. (2014) Links between Modularization Critical 
Success Factors and Project Performance. Ph.D. disserta￾tion. The University of Texas at Austin. Available at: https://
repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/25030.
Choi, J.O., Chen, X.B. and Kim, T.W. (2019) 
Opportunities and Challenges of Modular Methods 
in Dense Urban Environment. International Journal of 
Construction Management, 19(2), pp. 93–105. doi: 
10.1080/15623599.2017.1382093.
EXPECTED JOB SITE Labor Productivity (N = 25) ACTUAL JOB SITE Labor Productivity (N = 24)
EXPECTED MOD Fabrication Site(s) Labor
Productivity (N= 22)
ACTUAL MOD Fabrication Site(s) Labor Productivity
(N = 21)
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
10
8
6
4
2
0
8
9
6
7
4
5
2
0
1
3
12
10
8
6
4
2
Far Better 0
than Average
Better than
Average
Average
(Company
Norms)
Worse than
Average
Far Worse
than Average
Don't Know
Far Better
than Average
Better than
Average
Average
(Company
Norms)
Worse than
Average
Far Worse
than Average
Don't Know
Far Above
than Average
Above
Expectation
Meets
Expectation
Below
Expectation
Far Below
Expectation
Don't Know
Far Above
than Average
Above
Expectation
Meets
Expectation
Below
Expectation
Far Below
Expectation
Don't Know
Figure 3.14 Expected/actual labor productivity at the job sites and fabrication shops. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.44 Industry Status on Modularization
Gotlieb, J., Stringfellow, T., and Rice, R. (2001) Power 
Plant Design Taking Full Advantage of Modularization. 
Power Engineering, 105, p. 31. Available at: http://
www.power-eng.com/articles/print/volume-105/issue-6/
features/power-plant-design-taking-full-advantage-of￾modularization.html.
Jameson, P. (2007) Is Modularization Right for Your Project? 
Hydrocarbon Processing, pp. 47–53. Available at: http://
content.epnet.com/ContentServer.asp?T=P& P=AN& 
K=27896838& EbscoContent=dGJyMNLe80Sep7A4v%2B
bwOLCmr0qeqLBSsa64SLaWxWXS&ContentCustomer=
dGJyMPGuslGvqbZRuePfgeyx%2BEu3q64A&D=a9h.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J. and Choi, J.O. (2013) Industrial 
Modularization: How to Optimize; How to Maximize. Austin, 
TX: The University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry 
Institute.
Post, N.M. (2010) Racking Up Big Points for Prefab. ENR, 
pp. 74–77.
Rogan, A.L., Lawson, R.M. and Bates-Brkljac, N. (2000) Value 
and Benefits Assessment of Modular Construction. Silwood 
Park, Ascot, Berkshire: The Steel Construction Institute.chapter 4
45
This chapter will introduce typical industrial module types 
and things to consider in their sizing. If you did not notice 
by now, we defined various key definitions in Chapter 1, 
including the term “module,” but we did little more than 
provide a very simplified and high-level definition of the 
term. Now that we have spent some time with you on the 
advantages/disadvantages of modularization as well as 
the industry status on its use, we probably ought to step 
back a couple of steps and further define this term, as it 
will help you navigate through the various conversations 
and reading materials that discuss them.
4.1 Common Terms
The term “module,” like the term “modularization,” has 
so much connotation and baggage that comes with it 
that we thought it best if we spent a bit more time on it. 
Perhaps a whole chapter may seem like a bit of overkill, 
but the subject deserves more than just a few lines in 
Chapter 1. Since the term “module” is so generic, let’s 
start with many of the terms used to further differentiate 
this general term.
First, we adopt the definitions of ‘module’ from Tatum, 
Vanegas, and Williams (1987); Construction Industry In￾stitute (2013); O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi (2013), which 
focus on industrial capital projects:
Portion of plant fully fabricated, assembled, and tested away from 
the final site placement, in so far as is practical.
(Construction Industry Institute, 2013; O’Connor, O’Brien, and 
Choi, 2013)
A module is a major section of plant resulting from a series 
of remote assembly operations and may include portions of 
many systems.
(Tatum, Vanegas, and Williams, 1987)
If you are from the building industry, when someone uses 
the term “module,” you immediately think of small mass￾produced sub/prefabricated parts/units that are basic 
building blocks of a manufacturing process. While the 
definition of “module” from the building sector theoretically 
also describes what we are calling a module in the indus￾trial application, we want to make sure that this very limited 
definition is not carried forward because it is so limiting.
In terms of definition development, it seems that the in￾dustry has developed a set of abbreviations or three-letter 
acronyms (TLAs) (i.e., PARs, PAUs, VAUs, and PASs) to 
help further describe the various types of modules. But 
before we start talking about TLAs, a short apology. We 
sometimes can get so wrapped up in our explanations 
that in an effort to get it all out and on paper or in a pres￾entation as quickly as we can, we fall back on the use of 
abbreviations, TLAs, or nicknames that are part of the 
industry vernacular we use on a daily basis. If you go to 
the back of this book, you will find we have dedicated an 
entire chapter to these abbreviations.
Why TLAs and nicknames? Because they are easy to use 
and every industry has them. The construction industry 
uses a bunch. Even worse than the construction indus￾try is the oilfield (where one of us came from). There is 
literally a TLA, nickname, or common name for almost 
What Is a Module?46 What Is a Module?
everything in the oilfield, from the well to the rig, from drill￾ing to the day-to-day operations. A few that immediately 
come to mind in terms of drilling are: monkey board, kelly, 
kelly bushing, rat hole, mouse hole, rotary table, casing 
tongs, top drive, shaker, mud, mud logger, mud engineer, 
blowout preventer (BOP), dog house, Vee door, dogleg, 
fish, kick, trip out of hole (TOOH), catwalk, and stand.
Why do we bring this up? It is easy to get caught up in 
their use and lose an audience. So, before we lose you, 
we need to identify some of the more common terms we 
will use to describe modules throughout the book, their 
TLAs, generic labels, and why they exist.
4.1.1 Pre-­Assembled Pipe Rack or Pre-­Assembled 
Rack (PAR)
A pre-assembled pipe rack or pre-assembled rack (PAR) 
is commonly called a “pipe rack module.” This type of 
module is the pre-assembled duplicate of the pipe racks 
you see in any petrochemical or process plant. It typically 
supports piping, power, electrical, and instrument cables 
in trays, becoming the linking bridge for all of these in a 
plant from within a process unit to other process units 
and eventually out to the product distribution areas.
The difference between the module version and the stick￾built version is that the PAR is designed to be built off 
the site and, as such, must have a rack structure that is 
rigid and stout enough to withstand the transportation 
forces or accelerations that might be imposed on it while 
in transport to the project site from the fab yard. Also, be￾cause it has been built as a single large unit, considera￾tions must be made with respect to its structural frame 
to provide structural support via the bottom girders, if the 
PAR is to be trailered or rolled into position, or from the 
top of the columns if the PAR is to be lifted and set into 
position via a crane.
4.1.2 Pre-­Assembled Units (PAU)
A set of pre-assembled units (PAU) is commonly called an 
“equipment module.” The relationship between the PAU 
and its stick-built counterpart is not as clear-cut. In fact, 
one of the biggest mistakes one can make when trying 
to modularize equipment areas is to assume that all you 
need to do is put a “box” around the stick-built portion 
of the plant, leaving the plant equipment layout as is. 
This is a very inefficient module solution. The stick-built 
plant does not have to worry about distances between 
equipment pieces, and as such, the plant layout is very 
spacious. In the module environment, space is critical as 
every extra foot or meter of the footprint will require ad￾ditional support steel for the PAU structural box. Also, 
because the equipment is configured in a shippable box, 
there is the third dimension (the height) of this box that 
can be used to support additional equipment above 
grade (since the structural steel is already there). As a 
result, the PAU equipment layout will not look exactly like 
the stick-built equipment layout, and the opportunity to 
use the height should not be lost when evaluating options 
on the process layout of equipment.
Again, a key takeaway on the PAU is that IT WILL NOT 
look like the equivalent stick-built equipment layout. That 
being said, the PAU basically contains an entire portion 
of a plant. It may be a sub-unit, unit, or even an entire 
process. The split is usually determined by the ability to 
include all the equipment associated with that portion 
of the plant along with the piping, electrical, and instru￾mentation to make that PAU more or less complete. The 
reason for trying to get an entire unit or part of a process 
within the single PAU is that one now can also include the 
electrical and instrumentation hook-up, pipe supports, 
control valve instrumentation, and all the cabling for the 
operation as well as low voltage power in the PAU during 
construction offsite.
In some of the larger PAUs, including a motor control 
center (MCC) or remote terminal unit (RTU) within the PAU 
structure is possible. Again, such an arrangement pro￾vides the opportunity to install, connect, and test many of 
these components off the site at the fab yard, removing 
additional labor from the project site. Everything is con￾tained within the structural framework of the module—
equipment, piping, pipe supports, valves, instruments, 
electrical components, and cabling. Additionally, as with 
the PARs, painting, heat tracing, insulation, and fireproof￾ing are applied as far as is practical.
Piping supports will be incorporated within the larger 
PAUs, depending on the equipment layout and needs. 
In some cases, these pipe supports can be as large as 
small independent PARs and incorporated along the out￾side edge of the PAU, combining both into a single unit 
and permitting more internal piping hook-ups (PAU to 4.2 Other Terms 47
PAR), leaving only a few main connections to be made 
between the modules when they arrive at the site.
4.1.3 Skid Mounted Unit (SMU) or Vendor Package 
Unit (VPU)
A skid mounted unit (SMU) or vendor package unit 
(VPU) is commonly referred to as “equipment skid” or 
“equipment package.” This is where the definitions be￾gin to deviate depending on who you are talking to. The 
differentiator is that the SMU or VPU is typically a piece 
of equipment/process that has been more or less mass￾produced and built on a skid to facilitate shipping. The 
SMU is typically designed and put together by a single 
“vendor.” This vendor controls all aspects of the design, 
procurement, fabrication, and assembly of this package. 
It contains components that the vendor will be engineer￾ing, designing, fabricating, and assembling as a module.
This SMU or VPU can be a direct off-the-shelf item, but 
typically these units end up having enough variability that 
they must be adjusted by the vendor with small variations 
to the equipment, piping, electrical, controls, and instru￾mentation. They are completely piped and electrically wired 
to skid edge and complete with access platforms, ladders, 
junction boxes, and electrical connections. However, for all 
the components to end up on a transportable frame, the 
vendor has typically pre-identified and developed one or 
more common skid sizes as a basis for design. Examples 
of SMUs include anything from simple mixing equipment, 
heater units, air compressor packages, all the way up 
to larger units combining rotating equipment drivers and 
compressors with their receivers or associated interstage 
dehydration and cooling equipment. Other examples are 
some of the larger MCCs, fired heaters, and boilers. So, 
the SMU or VPU is really a very small version of the PAU 
that is built to be complete and functional when shipped. 
Basically, ready to set, plug in, and turn on.
4.1.4 Vendor Assembled Unit (VAU)
A vendor assembled unit (VAU) is commonly called just 
that, a “vendor assembled unit.” It is an SMU or VPU 
that has so much more equipment from other third party 
companies and manufacturers that the VAU vendor must 
actually become a small engineering, procurement, and 
construction (EPC) contractor in terms of design, co￾ordination of procurement, and work with third parties 
that make the final VPU a much more unique piece of 
equipment.
We make this a separate module designation because 
this type of vendor has developed the additional com￾plexity within their organization to perform all these ad￾ditional “EPC-ish” activities. These require additional 
personnel for the much more complex design efforts and 
separate groups on the administrative end to interface 
with the client and their requirements and relay these to 
the manufacturing and assembly teams within the ven￾dor’s organization. In summary, this vendor has bridged 
the gap from a commodity skid supplier to a unique as￾sembly EPC company.
4.1.5 Pre-­Assembled Structure (PAS)
A pre-assembled structure (PAS) is commonly called 
a “structural module.” This is the last module type of 
module terminology that we consider commonly used. 
It is usually a module built entirely out of structural steel 
for the purposes of support or access to parts of other 
buildings or modules. Common examples include the 
stairway access platform units (and sometimes even el￾evator units) that are scabbed on the outside edges of a 
PAR or PAU.
A PAS is built as a separate unit, allowing it to be shipped 
separately on a much smaller transport or vessel and 
stacked or otherwise arranged to minimize the transpor￾tation footprint of the larger PAU it will be attached to. 
Also, because these units are typically identical, these 
PAS units can be fabricated and assembled in a separate 
part of the fabrication yard, using more of a manufactur￾ing technique for their assembly line construction. They 
can be designed to be stacked or packed for shipping, 
taking up much less space on the transport.
4.2 Other Terms
Beyond these major module definitions is a vast range of 
other terminology to further dissect or describe subsets 
in terms of their size, method of transport or setting, or 
function. These descriptions vary from area to area and 
project to project, so it is important only to identify that 
they exist and briefly describe why one or more might 
pop up in conversations.48 What Is a Module?
4.2.1 Small PAU/Medium PAU/Large PAU/Super 
PAU/Mega (or Small/Medium/Large/Very Large/
Mega Equipment Modules)
Some prefer to further dissect the definition based on the 
relative size of the final module. For the PAU, they may 
typically be further divided up, as noted above. The prob￾lem with such a set of definitions like these is that every￾one has a different concept of what “small,” “medium,” 
“large,” and even “very large” is. Still, many feel a need 
to further define modules by size to give the reader an 
idea of the mix of modules in a project. But, additional 
information on the mix of sizes can communicate better 
information for the planning in terms of fabrication, trans￾portation, setting, and hook-up. For example, a project 
consisting of 4 or 5 large PARs along with 8–10 large 
PAUs, is very different in configuration than that same 
project composed of 20–25 medium to small PARs and 
15–20  medium PAUs. The smaller modules are easier 
and faster to build and are impacted less by missing or 
late equipment than their larger counterparts. They may 
be able to be lifted into position rather than required to 
be rolled onto their foundations. However, this flexibil￾ity is offset by an increase in on-site hook-up and pre￾commissioning that must now be handled at the site 
rather than in the fab yard.
So, what are the typical split points for these very generic 
and subjective size ranges? We prefer to split them in 
terms of their transport and setting restrictions or char￾acteristics. Table 4.1 shows the typical size and weight 
ranges by module type. A detailed explanation of them 
can be found below.
4.2.1.1 Truckable PAU
A truckable PAU is an equipment module that has been 
limited in size to fit within the weight and height restriction 
of a country’s highway system (see Figure 4.1). For the 
US, this means the PAU is limited to an overall size of 14 
ft by 12 ft by 80 ft long and a weight of about 50 tons. 
These dimensions can be increased to special “permit” 
load designations where the specific route has been an￾alyzed, and State and Federal movement permits have 
been approved to utilize special load distribution trailers. 
Size and weight for this module type are driven primarily 
by the height limitations for bridges, the width limitations 
dictated by the roads or highway lane configurations, and 
the load distribution limitations on the highway pavement.
4.2.1.2 Small PAU
An equipment module that is larger than the truckable 
PAU in terms of width, height, and length must be moved 
by an escorted special transport vehicle (see Figure 4.2). 
These are typically multi-wheel lowboys, some with steer￾able rear assemblies for maneuvering around corners 
and tight turns. Tractor and trailer configurations vary 
Table 4.1 Typical size and weight ranges by equipment module type.
Equipment 
module type
Size (ft) Weight 
(short/US ton)
Truckable PAU 
(Equipment Module)
14 ft by 12 ft by 80 ft About 50 tons
Small PAU 
(Equipment Module)
12–24 ft wide by 15–20 ft 
high, and 80–120 ft long
About 80 tons
Medium PAU 
(Equipment Module)
24–50 ft wide, 30–40 ft 
high, and 75 ft up to a max 
of about 125 ft long
80 short tons 
to up to about 
250 short tons
Large PAU 
(Equipment Module)
70 ft wide and 125 ft 
long but up to 100 ft 
high (or more)
300–400 tons 
all the way up to 
1,500 tons
Very Large PAU 
(Equipment Module)
120 ft wide by 240 ft long 
by 120 ft high
1,500–6,500 US 
tons (or more in spe￾cial circumstances)
Mega PAU 
(Equipment Module)
140 ft wide by 100 ft high 
by up to 460 ft long
8,000–12,000 tons
Figure 4.1 Condensate stabilizer shipped horizontally as a truckable module. 
Source: Courtesy of S&B Fabrication Services.
Figure 4.2 Truckable module with permit load on specialized trailer. Source: 
Courtesy of S&B Fabrication Services.4.2 Other Terms 49
from company to company and trailer manufacturer, but 
all have the same goal in mind—provide a transport ve￾hicle and trailer with enough wheels and axles to limit in￾dividual weight per axle to something acceptable to both 
the State and Federal road standards. The small PAU can 
be considered anything in the range of 12–24 ft wide by 
15–20 ft high and 80–120 ft long. The module shown 
in Figure 4.2 was an oversize module requiring a special 
highway permit and a specialized trailer.
The small PAU shown in Figure  4.3 weighed approxi￾mately 80 short tons being moved with a 64-wheel trailer 
configuration and “push” tractor to overcome some of 
the mountainous grades in Idaho and Wyoming.
4.2.1.3 Medium PAU
A medium PAU is an equipment module that can accom￾modate a greater maximum height by careful route se￾lection, avoiding standard overpasses as well as lower 
hanging electrical and power lines of the area. A wider 
module width is realized via careful pre-planning and 
coordination with local and State highway authorities in 
order to obtain special permitting, allowing the module 
to be transported by using the entire roadway width (with 
the appropriate escort vehicles involved).
These medium PAUs are typically in the range of 24–50 ft 
wide and 30–40 ft tall, with their length varying from 75 ft 
up to a max of about 125 ft, primarily driven by a function 
of the road curve radius and corners they must negoti￾ate. The weight ranges for these medium PAUs can be 
as light as 80 short tons to up to about 250 short tons.
The medium PAU may require some re-routing of ca￾ble and secondary power lines as well as potentially 
some temporary road shoulder stabilization work in tight 
curves. Generally, the module is sized to minimize the 
impact (cost and permitting) requirements for making 
these temporary modifications. These modules’ weights 
can range from 80–250 short tons or more and typically 
require special multi-axle trailers that may or may not be 
self-propelled to move the module while properly distrib￾uting the weight.
4.2.1.4 Large PAU
A large PAU is an equipment module that must use a 
specially built heavy haul road or route as well as multi￾ple lines of self-propelled modular transporters (SPMTs) 
(Figures 4.4 and 4.5). This module will be similar in size 
in terms of the maximum width and length as the me￾dium PAU, but the height has been increased to about 
100 ft. This extra height allows for much larger vessels 
and equipment to be installed and hooked up within the 
module. In many cases, the taller process towers may 
even extend above the top supporting structural steel.
It is this increase in height that provides all the challenges 
in terms of transport, both from a vessel sea shipping 
Figure 4.3 Small pre-assembled unit being transported by 64-wheel rear￾steerable lowboy with push tractor. 
Figure 4.4 Completed large pre-assembled units being moved to roll on–roll off 
(RO-RO) vessel for load-out. 50 What Is a Module?
standpoint as well as a land-based transport, and this is 
why the large PAU is defined as a separate case. Mod￾ules of this height can be accommodated on many of 
the same roads as their smaller counterparts simply by 
adding more axles of support—thereby spreading the 
heavier load over a larger area of the roadbed. However, 
the height is such that these modules will not be able 
to get under major transmission power or over conven￾tional bridges. Re-routing overhead transmission lines 
is an option, but typically the expense, long lead plan￾ning, and other mitigation efforts make such an option a 
non-starter. But, with planning, such re-routing or burial 
of these overhead transmissions lines has successfully 
occurred. So the large PAU transport is limited to routes 
that can avoid these height restrictions both on land and 
even up navigable waterways. This makes most applica￾tions of such large modules limited to a project site on the 
coastline or near the coastline. The typical range in size 
for these modules is 70 ft wide and 125 ft long but up to 
100 ft high (or more) with a weight from 300–400 tons all 
the way up to 1,500 tons.
4.2.1.5 Very Large PAU
This equipment module range covers all land-based sizes 
above 1,500 tons. These are the King Kong or Godzilla 
of the land-based module spectrum. Typical very large 
PAUs can run as heavy as 6,500 tons and are typically 
used where extremely large equipment must be com￾bined on a single transportable frame in order to get the 
advantages of being able to combine all the equipment of 
a subsystem into a single module, as well as the power, 
electrical, and instrumentation needed to make this sub￾system or unit fully functional, or at least as close to ready 
to “plug and play” once it gets to the project site.
Remember, the concept of modularization is the same in 
all of these cases. The goal is to move as much of the con￾struction, hook-up, and pre-commissioning off the project 
site (where craft labor is expensive) to a fabrication yard 
(where craft labor is cheaper). To be able to include the 
electrical, instrumentation, and control systems (EI&C), all 
the equipment making up that sub-process must reside 
on that one module. So, obviously, if the equipment is very 
large, the overall module size, weight, and footprint will 
need to be very large to accommodate it.
In the case of these very large PAUs, the process sys￾tem it supports is made up of very large equipment and 
machinery, requiring that the module be large enough 
to accommodate it all. But, along with this increase in 
dimensions due to the large equipment, come all the 
challenges with transport and setting. Large seagoing 
transport vessels must be contracted. Not so much for 
their capacity or length, but to accommodate the width of 
these modules. On the receiving end of the journey, spe￾cial docks that can handle the width and weight of these 
modules must be available or specially built.
The road to the project site is no longer simply called a 
“road” but has attained the status of “heavy haul route” 
with its increased width and special-purpose load￾bearing across this width as well as, in some cases, an 
unrestricted height element.
Finally, there is realistically only one method of setting at 
the site, and that is to drive the numerous lines of SPMTs 
between the pre-set pier footings and then lower the 
massive module down onto them with the hydraulics of 
the vertically adjustable SPMTs.
All this makes the very large PAU a very specialized, com￾plex, and more expensive option without even consider￾ing the need for the utilization of tubular columns rather 
than conventional structural steel I and W shapes. In fact, 
these very large PAUs begin to resemble some of their 
big brother offshore counterparts.
Figure 4.5 Large pre-assembled units being prepped for load-out on multiple 
self-propelled module trailers.4.2 Other Terms 51
So, why do they exist as an option? As mentioned, they 
are especially suited for modularizing very large equipment 
in project locations where the labor (cost and availability or 
both) is not there. With that introduction and explanation, 
these modules are differentiated by their width, length, 
and height. They can range from 1,500 to 6,500 US tons 
(or more in special circumstances) with dimensions of 
120 ft wide by 240 ft long by 120 ft high (see Figure 4.6).
4.2.1.6 Mega PAU
As an aside, the authors have performed feasibility stud￾ies where mega PAUs have exceeded the dimensions and 
weights of even the very large PAUs discussed above. 
In these special situations of scarce craft labor coupled 
with a short construction window (in the northern regions 
of the world), these studies have further limited on-site 
work to the absolute minimum, produced mega PAUs 
where the entire process train might be on a very few 
modules. One such example study configured an en￾tire plant on four combination PAU–PAR configurations. 
These super PAUs were estimated at approximately 140 ft 
wide by 100 ft high by up to 460 ft long with a range in 
weight from 8,000 to 12,000 tons.
4.2.2 Small PAR/Medium PAR/Large/Very Large 
PAR (or Small/Medium/Large/Very Large Pipe 
Rack Modules)
The train of thought used in the above PAU is similarly 
followed for the pipe rack modules. These are divided in 
terms of size as well as composition (see Table 4.2) in an 
attempt to further differentiate them.
4.2.2.1 Small (or Truckable) PAR
This is the most common (and most commonly seen) 
module pipe rack. One can drive down the highway 
and see its identical brother, the stick-built pipe rack 
in any plant or process facility. The small PAR consists 
entirely of pipe being supported in a standard frame 
and is very similar in composition to its counterpart—
the stick-built pipe rack. In fact, if you do not examine 
either closely, you would be hard-pressed to determine 
if the pipe rack was stick-built on site or pre-assembled 
and brought in.
The difficulty in visually determining if the small PAR was 
stick-built or modular is because the structural steel con￾figuration of both is almost identical. The pipe rack bent 
(the individual “A” frame supporting the pipes) spacing 
is similar, as it is based on the ability to properly support 
the pipe span. Typically for everything but a very small 
diameter pipe, this spacing is set at 20 ft. For the very 
small diameter piping (such as 2 inches and 3 inches), 
an intermediate support is provided at 10 ft spacing. 
Vertical spacing between layers of piping is also con￾sistent between the stick-built and modular pipe racks 
at about 6–8 ft. The height is typically chosen to allow 
enough room to “roll” the pipe up on a 45 degree angle 
for branch connections on and off the main runs as well 
as loops for expansion. The difference is in the struc￾tural steel supports required on the bottom of the pipe 
rack, depending on if it is to be rolled into place or in the 
strength of the column steel if it is to be vertically lifted 
and set in place.
Figure 4.6 On-loading of a 4,500-metric ton module. Source: Courtesy of 
Mike Webb.
Table 4.2 Typical size and weight ranges by pipe rack module type.
Equipment 
module type
Size (ft) Weight 
(short/US ton)
Small (or 
truckable) PAR
15–24 ft wide x 13–29 ft high 
and length up to 100 ft
Up to 50 tons
Medium PAR 35 ft wide by 35 ft high (without 
legs) and 130 ft long
50–400 tons
Large PAR 35– 55 ft wide, 75 ft high (with￾out legs) and 120–170 ft long
500–1,200 tons
Very large PAR 55–120 ft wide, 75–100 ft high, 
and 170 ft to about 200 ft long
1,500–3,000 tons52 What Is a Module?
Since the pipe rack is designed for pipes full of liquid, but 
it is shipped empty, there is usually enough safety factor 
with the empty shipping configuration to accommodate 
any transportation accelerations. In addition, along the 
US Gulf Coast site (USGC), the requirements of hurricane 
and seismic considerations typically are more severe than 
the shipping forces. So, if these pipe racks are properly 
designed for the in-situ conditions, there may be no extra 
steel required for the modular design.
4.2.2.2 Medium PAR
This is a small or truckable PAR that is too big to be 
“truckable.” Perhaps a play on words, but just like the 
equipment PAUs, when a PAR becomes too big, it de￾mands a different mode of transport, typically moving 
from the trailer or multi-wheeled lowboy to the SPMTs.
These medium PARs can range in size from small sleeper 
(single-level) racks and truckable racks to multilevel pipe 
racks carrying the majority of the large process and utility 
piping down the center of a complex, and running 35 ft 
wide by 35 ft high (without legs) and 130 ft long or more. 
The benefit of the longer pipe rack is the ability to connect 
multiple 20 ft sections of pipe at the fab yard assembly in 
order to reduce welding connections at the site.
Since they are not extremely heavy or large, in many 
cases, they do not need specifically dedicated RO-RO 
vessels but can be transported via lift-on-lift off (LO-LO) 
self-geared ocean-going vessels.
4.2.2.3 Large PAR
The differentiator in this category is the aerial coolers (also 
called fin fan coolers) which are frequently installed on 
top of these pipe racks as they provide a great place for 
locating these induced or forced air draft coolers. At this 
higher elevation, they are able to move cooler air volumes 
through the coolers well above the equipment, where the 
resulting hotter air can dissipate without impacting tem￾peratures around the equipment.
This large PAR deviates from the small and medium 
PARs in that it does require more structural steel to 
support both the cooler weights (which can be up to 
about 1/3 of the total weight) as well as the sometimes￾extensive grated walkway under and around the coolers 
for maintenance access to the coolers and motors. In 
addition, there is more weight potentially added for a 
fireproofing coating on the primary support members 
where the heat from an ignited leak of these coolers’ 
contents might compromise the structural integrity of 
the entire structure. These factors make the structural 
steel design a bit more complex than the small and 
medium PARs.
Because these large PARs may be designed to support 
the banks of coolers, they are typically much wider than 
their small and medium PAR counterparts. Their widths 
can vary from 35 to 55 ft wide, with lengths as long as 
required to provide support for the entire bank of coolers 
manifolded together (from 120 to 170 ft), with a height 
of about 75 ft (without legs) and weight from 500  to 
1,200 short tons. Figure 4.7 shows a large PAR being 
fabricated at the yard (in line with several others) and 
later being moved via SPMTs into position for load-out 
(Figure 4.8).
4.2.2.4 Very Large PAR
This is a variation of the large PAR but with a much wider 
set of coolers, typically stacked two wide. Because of 
the size and width, as well as the installation of a com￾plete grating walk area (sometimes called a “dance floor”) 
under these coolers along with the associated access 
stairway structures, the structural steel requirements and 
piping arrangement require an even more complex de￾sign and support effort.
Figure 4.7 Large PAR being fabricated end to end at the fabrication yard. 4.3 Module Considerations 53
These very large PARs are much wider to support the 
double banks of coolers. Since the goal is maintaining 
these coolers in the general vicinity of the equipment, 
the width more than doubles to support this cooler con￾figuration, increasing from the typical 55 ft average of 
the large PAR to a 120 ft maximum. The length may 
also increase, but only slightly, going from the 170 ft of a 
large PAR to about 200 ft, depending on the number of 
coolers in the associated bank. The height may increase 
slightly due to the increased complexity and size of pip￾ing and the need to potentially add an additional level for 
non-associated piping, approaching 100 ft tall. All these 
increases result in the weight of the very large PAR ap￾proaching 1,500–3,000 short tons.
4.3 Module Considerations
We hinted at some of these in our explanations of the 
various types of modules, but let’s take a more structured 
look at some dos and don’ts.
4.3.1 Plot Plan Development
Earlier in our module definitions, we cautioned about fall￾ing into the design/layout trap of drawing “boxes” around 
groups of equipment in a stick-built plant and calling each 
a module. The initial reason for doing this may go some￾thing like: “this (stick-built) plant is a second- or third￾generation design and as such has been optimized as 
much as it can be.” That may be true in the context of 
the traditional two-dimensional stick-built layout, but re￾member, this stick-built layout did not optimize the areal 
extent of the plant’s footprint—at least not to the level 
that it needs to be optimized for a modular plant. Usually, 
there was little need to—space was not a premium, and 
in many cases, the more distance between pieces of 
equipment, the better. As such, the stick-built plant was 
laid out to provide access, ease of maintenance, and in 
some cases, separation where distance created a safety 
buffer. This works well for a two-dimensional plot plan 
layout that can easily spread equipment out to create 
these maintenance areas and safety buffers.
But, for a modular project, using a stick-built plot plan as 
an arbitrary guide in the development of the module limits 
fails to take into consideration two very important benefits 
provided by the module:
• the third dimension (available opportunity to 
“overlap” levels of piping and equipment with￾in the module): this has the potential to allow re￾orientation of equipment—providing opportunities to 
elevate equipment that will naturally need to flow down￾ward, potentially eliminating pumping as well as reduc￾ing the footprint of the equipment group—both of which 
ultimately reduce piping length.
• the available steel structure: this supports the 
equipment and provides access from the sides and 
from above this equipment and piping, creating ad￾ditional opportunities in terms of maintenance access 
from above or either side.
4.3.2 What Does Such an Exercise Look Like?
Figure 4.9 shows a stylized petro-chemical process plot 
plan layout of the six sub-process areas as a stick-built 
effort. The six areas represent the separate sub-process 
systems that made up the plant. As you can see, because 
there were only two dimensions to lay out the equipment, 
it was difficult to get all the equipment situated in close 
proximity to the other equipment within that sub-process. 
Figure 4.10 was the same process plant when each of 
these six sub-process areas was “modularized” by com￾bining like process components within the same module. 
Except for some rotating equipment that must be set on 
concrete foundations, all of the equipment has been op￾timized into these six modules. The typical pipe rack that 
runs like a backbone through the center of the stick-built 
Figure 4.8 Large PAR being moved into position for load-out by SPMTs. 54 What Is a Module?
plant still exists but now has been included as part of the 
three lower modules.
Note that these two plot plan areas are drawn to scale, 
so along with the movement of much of the same equip￾ment into proximity to each other, the overall process 
footprint was reduced. Because the overall footprint has 
been reduced, there is a knock-on effect of reducing the 
overall piping lengths (assuming the piping/fitting ratio re￾mains relatively the same). The result is an overall savings 
of piping materials.
In addition to the configuration of equipment and piping 
into sub-process-oriented modules, specific areas within 
the stick-built plant require varying degrees of craft sup￾port. Figure 4.11 is the same stick-built plant layout except 
that the plant equipment has been split into different areas 
depending on the craft work-hours required to complete 
and install pieces of equipment within that area of the 
plant. With such information on craft hours to assemble, 
set, and hook up individual pieces of equipment or areas, 
this breakdown can be used as an additional guide on 
how to prioritize what equipment gets modularized and 
what can be left off for eventual setting at the site.
4.3.3 Why Analyze the Process?
In the typical refinery, chemical, or processing plant layout, 
the final product is developed from a set of linked multi￾stage steps. That is, the process outputs from one sub￾section feed the inputs to the next sub-section, making 
them somewhat linear in terms of layout and equipment 
configuration. However, for various reasons, the actual 
equipment layout for the operating stick-built plant may 
not reflect the simple and seamless linear layout that one 
might expect from a process block diagram or process 
flow diagram (PFD) review. (The many reasons for such 
discontinuities are beyond the scope of this discussion.) 
Figure 4.9 Stick-built plot plan showing outlines of the six sub-process areas.
Figure 4.10 Equivalent module “6-pack” layout with each sub-process as a 
separate module.
Figure 4.11 Same plot plan example but sorted by construction site craft work￾hour density.
Figure 4.12 Process flow overlay of the stick-built plot plan.4.3 Module Considerations 55
Suffice to say, the result is that different pieces of equip￾ment supporting their common sub-processes are split 
and scattered throughout the entire area of the plot plan. 
This means an equipment re-arrangement is required for 
effective modularization.
4.3.4 Steps in Maximizing Module Efficiency
Initial discussions should begin regarding how the en￾tire process works and what equipment supports others 
within each sub-process. In every case, the first step in 
this analysis is the development of a process flow diagram 
overlay on the current operating plot plan (Figure 4.12).
This should be made as detailed as necessary to identify 
the various flows, where they come from and go to, major 
inputs, and product outputs. This becomes an “as-built” 
PFD re-oriented to reflect the process flows as they di￾rectionally occur in the operating plant. This provides the 
team a quick visual of the main process flows back and 
forth, the complexity of areas, and potential opportunities 
for consolidation of equipment to reduce nonessential 
back and forth piping runs.
Along with this visual process flow overlay on the operat￾ing plant is a separate exercise on this same plant with 
respect to the identification of all equipment supporting 
each of the sub-processes within the operating plant. If 
unfamiliar with the process, a good place to start is to 
look at how the PFDs are split up. They typically define 
and group equipment by subsystem and show the entire 
grouping on one or more sequential PFD pages. The pic￾torial example shown in Figure 4.12 is the stylized output 
of such a process grouping. With these two pictorial rep￾resentations of the process, the small team of a modular 
piping layout lead, a process engineer, and potentially 
a couple of construction and operations-oriented folks 
can begin the development of an ideal plant layout us￾ing the flexibility and opportunities provided by the three￾dimensional module envelope.
What is typically discovered during these initial discus￾sions is that while there was some discontinuity, there 
is still a lot of continuity in terms of equipment arrange￾ment and proximity. As such, it becomes relatively easy 
to highlight and show these equipment groupings as the 
six differently outlined areas identified in Figure 4.9. Where 
there were these discontinuities, the challenge then be￾comes to understand the process well enough to begin 
evaluation of trade-offs for combining all equipment within 
a sub-process in a contiguous area versus the reason(s) 
why some of these equipment pieces were separated in 
the first place.
Working with the PFDs, plot plan, and major piping flows, 
this piping plot plan team is able to re-configure the original 
operating plant two-dimensional layout. By vertically stack￾ing equipment above the equipment it directly served and 
including them in the proximity of their supporting taller tow￾ers, they are able to come up with the equivalent process in 
a modular configuration (previously shown in Figure 4.10).
The result is further developed by the module piping 
layout lead for a preliminary review by the entire project 
team. The aim of such a review is to get a consensus 
that the proposed layout will work: process engineers as￾sess impact to process and products; mechanical engi￾neers assess adjustment to pumps and other mechanical 
conveyance equipment now at elevation; structural engi￾neers assess the support of equipment and adjustments 
to accommodate; O&M assess access and operability; 
safety engineers assess fire risk and ergonomics; project 
managers control schedule and cost implications, and so 
on. The result then becomes a true team effort in terms 
of the modular design.
Again, why all this effort to re-group and consolidate? Re￾member, if one of the goals of modularization is to move 
as many craft labor work-hours off the project site and 
into a fabrication yard, this can only be maximized when 
each module is designed so as much as possible of the 
equipment and processes within that module can be fab￾ricated, assembled, tested, and pre-commissioned off 
the site in the fabrication yard. In many cases, like the 
example shown in Figures 4.13 and 4.14, the results can 
look extremely different.
Hopefully, this has provided an idea of a practical ap￾proach to initially set up and develop a modular layout 
from a stick-built plant process in order to obtain some 
of the benefits of modularization identified in Chapter 2. 
Details on how to evaluate these advantages will be fur￾ther explained in Chapter 5, where more information is 56 What Is a Module?
provided under the description of the business case for 
modularization.
4.3.5 Additional Module Considerations
While the two examples (Figures 4.13 and 4.14) are pretty 
impressive in terms of the considerable savings on the 
plot plan size and extensive use of the third dimension 
(height), there is much more to the exercise of modular 
development than simply “squishing” a two-dimensional 
equipment layout smaller and smaller until it goes vertical. 
Below are some additional considerations, in the approxi￾mate order they should be considered.
4.3.5.1 Maximum Module Size
One of the first questions to be resolved in a module 
project analysis is: What is the maximum size module 
that one can get to the project site?The maximum sizing 
is absolutely critical in the development of the most ef￾ficient modular plan. A preliminary transportation study 
should be kicked off very early in the project evaluation 
and development (even as early as opportunity fram￾ing or FEL-0) with the goal of determining what this 
maximum module sizing (or maximum shipping enve￾lope) could be.
This is important in terms of how almost everything else 
is analyzed for the project. For example, it will determine 
how much of the equipment has the potential to be mod￾ularized, how easy or difficult it will be to include enough 
of the related equipment to make the E&I&C hook-up and 
pre-commissioning efforts off the site beneficial and, as 
a result, what the work split will be between the module 
yard and the project site.
4.3.5.2 Optimum Module Size
Approaching the module sizing from a different direction 
(via a process optimization) will provide the optimal mod￾ule in terms of the equipment and configurations required 
to maintain the entirety of a sub-process or process within 
a module. However, when the piping layout team starts 
putting all the pieces together, they may find the resulting 
module is much bigger than the maximum shipping enve￾lope will accommodate. This is where the give and take be￾tween the module team members (process/mechanical/
civil and structural/piping layout) begins in earnest.
Evaluation of the difference between the current maxi￾mum shipping envelope and the desired module size in 
terms of the process will kick off additional studies per￾taining to a review of alternatives and their associated 
Figure 4.13 Originally proposed stick-built plant with different processes Source: Courtesy of KBR.4.3 Module Considerations 57
costs to modify one or the other. For example, the project 
may look at options to increase the clearances along the 
module travel route or, conversely, the impacts of the ex￾tra steel and labor to further divide the desired process 
modules into something smaller and the resulting impact 
in terms of additional craft labor and schedule time at 
the site to re-assemble. There will always be an optimal 
maximum size for a given project and location.
4.3.5.3 In or Out of a Module?
As the modules get smaller, either due to shipping re￾straints, fabrication yard limitations, or site setting re￾strictions, more and more “large” equipment will need 
to be left out. However, this is not the only reason that 
one should make a critical analysis of what goes in a 
module versus what comes out. Regardless of the size 
and shape of your module program, there should always 
be a critical evaluation of certain pieces of equipment to 
determine if it makes sense to “modularize” them. The 
following are some of the obvious initial analyses that 
should be made.
Large/Heavy/Tall Vessels The first analysis should 
be on anything very large, tall and/or very heavy, with 
relatively few and simple connections needed for hook￾up. In many cases, while the actual piping on the vessel 
may be complex, the piping to and from the vessel may 
be simple and relatively easy to install. If the vessel can 
be “dressed” (that is pre-outfitted prior to shipping or 
outfitted off site) prior to setting, then the only “extra” 
work required of the site construction team is the con￾necting of the “in” and “out” process piping.
The reason for this analysis is that a large/heavy/tall 
vessel can be a problem from a structural steel design 
standpoint. These vessels can impose some significant 
moments on the base, which must be resisted by the 
module steel design. This makes the module structure 
Figure 4.14 Equivalent four-module modularized plant. Source: Courtesy of KBR.58 What Is a Module?
more complex and increases the size of these support 
members. Besides taking up extra area on the module, 
all these additions add weight and cost to the module. 
Sometimes pouring a separate foundation adjacent to 
the module and setting the vessel separately on it at the 
site is a more economical choice.
Rotating Equipment Large rotating equipment is an￾other case that should be considered. Historically, this 
large equipment was required to be set above grade 
to position inlet and outlet compression piping below 
a compressor to avoid a deep excavation for this pip￾ing, as well as make it easier to service the compres￾sor since all discharge piping is below it. This, coupled 
with the dynamic forces developed when the rotating 
equipment was running, required a massive elevated 
concrete foundation (sometimes referred to as a “tab￾letop”). The tabletop is designed as a massive concrete 
structure to provide the necessary mass to dampen the 
dynamic forces being developed by the rotating equip￾ment to keep these forces (in terms of vibration) from 
being transmitted through the piping. Figure 4.15 is the 
inside of a completed compressor tabletop building and 
provides an idea of the magnitude of these massive 
structures and the equipment they support.
The alternative to this is, with enough engineering and 
design effort, this rotating equipment can be modu￾larized. However, the design is more complex as the 
structural steel, which does not have the mass that the 
traditional concrete has, must be designed and config￾ured properly to withstand and dampen any vibrations. 
In the past, this option has been limited to the smaller 
capacity equipment and better suited to turbine and 
turbine derivative-type machines where the dynamic 
forces are not as severe. However, companies such 
as MHI are successfully modularizing larger and larger 
compressor equipment (Figure  4.16). Where such al￾ternatives exist, an analysis of the costs (and project 
schedule time required) to perform the design and dy￾namic simulations for the module steel alternative must 
be “weighed” (no pun intended) against the costs and 
timing of pouring these massive above grade founda￾tions at the site.
Another solution to the tabletop requirement is to use 
compressors with inlet and outlet nozzles facing up. This 
allows the compressor to sit at grade, with all piping con￾nected to the top of it. The downside is that any compres￾sor work will now require that all this large, heavy piping 
be removed before one can access the compressor shell 
for major maintenance. However, with the increased relia￾bility and available run time between major work on some 
machines, this option may not be as demanding as one 
might imagine.
4.3.5.4 “Spacious” Equipment
In some cases, the equipment being considered may 
cover a lot of areas or be made up of very large “pieces.” 
An example is the large furnace or “heater” that is typi￾cally used to provide heat/steam for petrochemical 
plants. This furnace is actually an assembly of several pri￾mary pieces of equipment, including the radiant section, 
Figure 4.15 Completed tabletop with compressor and building installed. Source: 
Courtesy of MHI.
Figure 4.16 Structural steel modular alternative for compressors. Source: 
Courtesy of MHI.4.3 Module Considerations 59
convection boxes, inlet and outlet ducting, sulfur recov￾ery unit (SRU), and exhaust stack. Typically, the large 
radiant heating section can be further split up if vertical 
restrictions become a problem. Additional sectioning be￾yond this becomes problematic as it creates much more 
assembly work at the construction site than benefits from 
the partial assembly.
Other examples of equipment best brought in as pieces 
and assembled at the site are belt conveyor equipment 
used in mining, pelletizers (e.g., sulfur and other pellets 
produced in fertilizer processes) often set up under large 
building roofs, and delayed coker units (for handling pe￾troleum residual oil—thick bottoms from initial oil cracking 
process) where large vertical vessels sit on top of con￾crete structures so the produced coke can drop out the 
bottom via a “cutting” process and then be belt conveyed 
to large circular areas for storage.
In most cases, these are best shipped to the site to be 
assembled. If possible, trial fitting of the pre-assemblies 
makes sense as this ensures a proper fit and reduces 
work-hours required at the site.
4.3.5.5 Module Density and Mix
One interesting line of thought is related to the number, 
size, and/or type of modules in a process plant area. 
Because the method of setting the modules is limited to 
lifting into position (for the smaller ones) or rolling into po￾sition (for the larger ones), one can end up with a module 
setting nightmare if not coordinated with the construction 
team early in the module planning development.
There are several opposing trends that need to be con￾sidered when developing the module size and mix to en￾sure a path of construction that will be executable:
• A larger module takes longer to fabricate. This 
sounds like a “no-brainer” but can become very trou￾blesome when working through a tight schedule.
• A larger module is more apt to be delayed by its 
equipment. The same basic information is required in 
terms of up-front design details of the equipment and 
piping to properly design the structural steel as a small 
module. However, with more equipment and interac￾tions, the larger module has a greater chance of being 
impacted in some of this early design development by 
unforeseen delays of critical information on one or more 
pieces of equipment.
• Larger modules require specific setting paths.
While the smaller module can be set in place by crane 
with some flexibility on the location of this crane, the 
larger module is limited to being driven into position. 
The complex matrix of heavy haul routes and support￾ing piers dictates the setting sequence and direction. 
This creates a lack of flexibility in terms of setting op￾tions and timing.
When you have a local project site that will receive a vari￾ety of module sizes with different setting methods, there 
needs to be a concentrated coordination effort with many 
of the project groups to ensure there is adequate time to 
allow the critical path module, typically one of the larger 
modules, to mature from a design, procurement, fabrica￾tion, assembly, and testing standpoint in a manner that 
will support the overall schedule of setting all in the area.
4.3.5.6 Who Does What?
Or, more properly stated, what is the optimal division of 
responsibility? This question does not have a simple an￾swer and is not solved by a simple exercise. The best split 
depends on many factors, including the following:
• the complexity of the project or process (ratio of pro￾ject purchased tag items versus fabrication yard pur￾chased items);
• the sophistication of the module fabrication facility sup￾port systems (in terms of capabilities to purchase bulks 
and even fabricate piping and equipment);
• the competency of module fabrication facility (the level 
of module complexity that the fabrication yard is capa￾ble of executing);
• the comfort of the owner/EPC contractor in using fabri￾cation yard subcontracting and purchasing capabilities.
The decision on how responsibility is to be split for en￾gineering, purchase, fabrication, and even assembly, 
should be based on the strengths of the owner, EPC con￾tractor, and module fabrication yard with the aim of trying 
to minimize interfaces in the module building process.60 What Is a Module?
For example, a fabrication yard with ties to vessel manu￾facturing facilities, an internal pipe fabrication yard, and a 
joint working agreement with a deep water shipping com￾pany can potentially cut out several potentially delaying 
company and contractor interfaces, leaving the module 
fabrication facility with the sole responsibility to purchase 
bulk materials, fabricate pipes and structural steel, fabri￾cate vessels, assemble and test, load out, ship, poten￾tially offload, move to setting location, and set up the 
module. This removes many critical interfaces with the 
owner and EPC contractor and puts the entire scheduling 
and costing responsibility on the module fabricator.
Of course, this also places most of the responsibility for 
meeting the project cost and schedule on the module 
fabricator and limits their ability to come back to the 
owner and EPC contractor for delays and subsequent 
compensation. However, it also limits the owner and EPC 
contractor in terms of being able to provide assistance 
in expediting areas that are falling behind. The owner 
and EPC contractor are typically left with the only option 
available, that being providing additional or incremental 
funding to either get the module back on schedule or 
expedite it.
The division of responsibility needs to be fair and matched 
to the capabilities of the module fabricator, the strengths 
of the EPC contractor, and any desires of the owner. We 
will be addressing the contracting in a later chapter, but 
suffice it to say that the contracting (including the division 
of responsibility) needs to be fair and agreed to by every￾one upfront in terms of clarity and transparency. It does 
the project no good if the module fabricator is treated 
unfairly or the contract does not allow everyone to make 
an acceptable profit.
Problems with consistencies in terms of payment, ma￾terial delivery, and any other critical module manufac￾turing processes need to be addressed upfront and 
resolved quickly. With the module fabricator having 
possession of the module and the project equipment, 
they have the advantage. It is too easy to, in effect, 
“hold the module hostage” as the shipping date gets 
closer, either by not completing all the required as￾sembly and testing activities or just slowing down on 
them. This is not a usual occurrence, but it is one that 
is available to the fabricator regardless of the contrac￾tual terms and can be used to help coerce solutions to 
major inequities in terms of the differing contract un￾derstanding and execution.
The best approach is always to maintain a collaborative 
atmosphere and good working relationships throughout 
the module fabrication efforts to avoid getting into a po￾tential situation where major assets are at risk of being 
held up at a fabrication yard halfway around the world 
waiting on contract differences to be worked out. There 
is not much “pushing” an owner or contractor can do at 
that point.
4.4 Summary
We have spent a lot of time taking the simple module 
“term” and subdividing it into all of its various permuta￾tions and explaining why these various size and weight 
versions exist. We hope you have seen that this degree of 
differentiation is important because each specific size of 
PAR and PAU comes with its own advantages and disad￾vantages. Without a good understanding of the various 
options, deciding how many and how big is much more 
difficult. With this basic size and complexity understand￾ing, we worked through a simple module sizing exercise, 
starting with the first steps in the analysis and working 
through some of the options and trade-offs that need 
to be considered when trying to determine the optimal 
module size and composition. Finally, we offered some 
additional considerations in terms of how to further op￾timize the module solution, just in case you may have 
thought this simple exercise was all you would need to 
become a master at this sizing.
There is a lot more to learn. This is only Chapter  4. 
Hang on!References 61
References
Construction Industry Institute (2013) Industrial Modularization: 
Five Solution Elements. Austin, TX: The University of Texas 
at Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2013) Industrial 
Modularization: How to Optimize; How to Maximize. Austin, 
TX: The University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry 
Institute.
Tatum, C.B., Vanegas, J.A. and Williams, J.M. (1987) 
Constructability Improvement Using Prefabrication, Pre￾assembly, and Modularization. Austin, TX: The University of 
Texas at Austin: Construction Industry Institute. Available 
at: https://www.construction-institute.org/resources/
knowledgebase/knowledge-areas/design-planning￾optimization/topics/rt-003/pubs/sd-25.chapter 5
63
As mentioned in the Introduction, if you have been dili￾gent in the review of the previous four chapters, you will 
have developed a sound understanding of what a module 
is, why modularization is important, why implementation 
will be a challenge, and the potential options in terms of 
module configuration. With this grounding in the basics, 
we can now go into a discussion of the business case. 
This chapter will explain what makes a project a good 
candidate for modularization, the factors to consider, 
the importance of modularization consideration timings, 
laying out the modular project execution planning steps 
by project phases, and expound on how to conduct a 
business case analysis with one of our tools.
The business case provides answers to the following 
questions:
• Is modularization viable for my project?
• If so, what is the optimal amount of modularization?
• What is the timing for the module program set-up?
• How does the business case fit within the project 
development?
Unfortunately, while the business case model provides 
an analysis of whether a project should be modular￾ized and some ideas on the timing of it, it does not help 
lay out some of the practical implementation aspects 
needed to actually set up a module job, such as:
• How to set up a module program (Chapter 6).
• What needs to be adjusted in terms of project proce￾dures (Execution Plan Differences—Chapter 6).
• What it takes to make the module program successful 
(Critical Success Factors—Chapter 7).
• What additional efforts can be made to improve when 
producing multiples (Standardization—Chapter 11).
5.1 Fundamentals of the Business Case
5.1.1 What Makes a “Good” Module Candidate?
A project is a good module candidate if the benefits 
of modularization can benefit the project.
It is intuitively obvious, but the key to defining a “good” 
project module candidate is to understand everything
that a modular design and execution have to offer and 
compare these benefits to all the challenges that the pro￾posed project must overcome to see if there is a match. 
Some of the benefits to a project are obvious, as the 
example below illustrates.
The Business Case 
for Modularization64 The Business Case for Modularization
Unfortunately, the benefits from using an alternative pro￾ject execution approach to stick building (like modulari￾zation) for most projects are not as intuitively obvious 
or recognizable. It is for all these other projects that this 
chapter on business drivers has been written.
5.1.2 Every Project Has Some Amount 
of Modularization
We cannot think of a single project that we have worked 
on that would not have benefitted from at least some 
amount of modularization (or pre-assembly). In fact, we 
would go further out on a limb and say that every project 
you as the reader have worked on or will work on will 
have some amount of “modularization.”
Skeptical? Then consider the following—every plant is sup￾ported by utilities, including power generation, instrument 
air, nitrogen, or other gas production units, potable or non￾potable water systems, water treatment, and solids dis￾posal. All of these are processes that are made up of one or 
more skid units that have been pre-assembled off the site.
Why? Because most of these supplying companies are 
associated with the development and sale of a standard 
product or suite of products, or they have a product 
that they sell that has provided them the opportunity 
to design one and build many or, some other permuta￾tion of duplication, that made it profitable to provide a 
product that had some pre-engineering, pre-assembly, 
and testing. Even with very basic elements, like the typi￾cal American Petroleum Institute (API) or the American 
National Standards Institute (ANSI) pump, some mod￾ularization (pre-assembly) is involved. The pump and 
motor are set and shipped on their own stand or base 
with preliminary alignment pre-performed to make the 
installation of the pump easier and quicker. So, all the 
pre-assemblies mentioned above are in the literal sense 
of the term—small modules.
Of course, we are not proposing that any project with a 
pump in it be called a “modular” project. And, we are not 
asking you to consider the little pump skid in the same 
context as a 2,500 ton fully integrated process module. 
But we are suggesting that the same line of thinking used 
to develop the pump skid and the air compressor pack￾age be followed to expand the project thought process 
to include the much more complex set of equipment and 
piping for the purposes of moving from the traditional 
stick-built execution to a modular execution.
THE OBVIOUS EXAMPLE CASE
This project site, located in an area of the world that is extremely cold and inhospitable, needed additional oil-, gas-, and water￾processing facilities to increase the oil field’s gas handling facilities, boost oil reserves, and increase oil production. The remote 
location would not support a major on-site construction team, so the only option was to build and complete the facilities in a more 
temperate climate and ship the modules to the site. In addition, in order to get to the project site with any of the equipment and mate￾rials, it must access it via open water, and this method of delivery is limited to an 8-week period when the local access waterway was 
not frozen and ice-locked.
The answer to this dilemma was to design and build this as a modular facility, resulting in the design and production of 26 oil-, gas-, 
and water-processing modules, fabricated and shipped in two phases over a two-year duration (during the 8-week open water 
period). The construction phase of the project was set up in New Iberia, Louisiana, where the EPC company constructed the 26 mod￾ules totaling approximately 36,700 tons and successfully shipped from Louisiana, down through the Panama Canal, up the West 
Coast, through the Beaufort Sea (during the 8 weeks the sea was not ice-locked) to the project site in Prudhoe Bay, Alaska.
The details of this very successful project can be found by Googling the Fluor GHX-2 project for Arco. The project was executed 
in 1993–1994, and the modules were the largest of their kind ever shipped at that time (with the largest at 208 ft long x 93 ft wide 
x 122 ft high with individual weights of up to approximately 5,600 tons). The project used many cost- and schedule-saving tech￾niques along with this offsite assembly, including electronic badging, barcoding of materials and tools, high-volume flex core welding, 
assembly of pipe spools and equipment at ground level prior to installation, and extensive use of manlifts instead of scaffolding. In the 
end, the project was executed ahead of schedule and under budget and won several awards for its overall execution.5.2 Important Factors to Consider 65
Yes, the above opening thoughts also have a lot to do with 
“Standardization,” which will be addressed in Chapter 11. 
But for now, be open to considering the comparison in 
thought process between the simple skid package devel￾opment and the much more complex integrated mod￾ule solution.
5.1.3 Three Distinct Levels of Involvement
As we briefly explained in Chapter 1, Section 1.4 Three 
Distinct Module Options (or Circumstances), all module 
jobs can be sorted into one of the three options below.
1. Minimal. This level of modularization involves imple￾menting only the very obvious beneficial options, for 
example, the typical pipe rack and any equipment 
skid efforts already suggested by the vendor. The 
inclusion of this level of modularization is easy and 
requires a slight deviation from the standard stick￾built approach. It has little impact on the schedule 
because the only difference between the stick-built 
and module pipe rack is where it is being assembled. 
In many cases, the design can even be the same with 
some simple additions of base supports for shipping 
aids. However, this level of modularization offers few 
benefits in terms of cost or schedule savings.
2. Selective. This level of modularization covers eve￾rything from minimal to maximum and therefore is 
the largest category. It is determined by the criti￾cal use of the business case analysis presented in 
this chapter.
3. Maximum. This level involves the decision to modu￾larize as much as possible due to project constraints, 
such as weather, location, lack of infrastructure, high 
local labor cost, lack of local labor, etc. (as noted in 
the example at the beginning of this chapter). It is a 
“no-brainer” in terms of the actual decision to maxi￾mize but very difficult in terms of identifying exactly 
what the optimized maximum option looks like. This 
is difficult because the obvious “maximized” option 
is to build the entire process plant as a single huge 
module. That way, it could be pre-tested and com￾missioned, and it only requires a simple hook-up to 
the input feedstocks and the output delivery meth￾ods for the product. Unfortunately, such a huge single 
module would be extremely costly to build in terms 
of just the structural support steel alone, even if you 
could somehow find enough self-propelled modular 
transporters (SPMTs) with enough axles to move it 
and a vessel big enough to ship it.
5.1.4 Advantages and Challenges
In Chapter 2, we fully described the advantages and chal￾lenges of modularization in detail. They could be quickly 
summarized here, or what we think is a better option, 
we suggest you go back and review them yourself! But, 
after a bit of self-reflection on the “cheeky” suggestion of 
re-reading provided above, and thinking you might feel a 
bit abandoned, we came up with another way to describe 
and summarize both that may be a bit more memorable 
and came up with the following advantages and chal￾lenges “sound bites”:
1. Advantages. Modularization removes scope from 
the site to be executed in a fabrication facility with a 
cheaper labor force that is more efficient and possibly 
more qualified, resulting in cost and schedule benefits 
to the overall project.
2. Challenges (or Disadvantages). How to success￾fully identify and provide the needed technical details 
and materials required to support the module fabrica￾tor’s schedule from their first steel cut to their final 
module load-out for shipping. (Specifically, timely 
design development, material procurement, bulk pur￾chasing, structural steel and piping pre-fabrication, 
spool and equipment delivery, structural steel assem￾bly, piping and equipment installation, check out, pre￾commissioning, load-out, and shipping.)
5.2 Important Factors to Consider
Identifying what needs to be considered when evaluat￾ing a project in terms of whether it should be modu￾larized and then how much modularization should 
be performed on the project can be a complex and 
potentially convoluted process without a systematic 
approach. So, what we decided to provide is a typi￾cal approach. This is not the only way to approach this 
effort and definitely not a “one size fits all” in terms of 
suitability, but it will give you an idea of how to approach 
such a “business” analysis.66 The Business Case for Modularization
5.2.1 Universal Key Project Drivers
We have called this section “Universal” project drivers 
because many of these will have to be addressed in 
some form or fashion on every project, so it is vital that 
the project understands its implications to best accom￾modate them. Figure 5.1 provides some obvious clues 
regarding these universal project drivers. The size of the 
bubble in Figure  5.1 is proportional to the importance 
that the owner/client and the EPC contractor place on 
that particular universal project driver. The bold/normal 
font indicates who was primarily responsible for execut￾ing that driver, with bold being the owner/client and nor￾mal being the EPC contractor. These key project drivers 
will be explained below in the order of how these drivers 
happened to be systematically addressed in an opening 
discussion between the owner/client and the EPC con￾tractor regarding a project. So, how should this cryptic 
bubble listing in Figure 5.1 be interpreted?
5.2.1.1 Cost & Schedule
These are #1 and #2 or perhaps #2 and #1. In either 
case, they are difficult to separate and need to be dis￾cussed together. However, for the typical owner/client, 
while they are also very important, they are usually con￾sidered independent of each other. That is, they see 
no reason why they cannot work to reduce cost and 
then turn right around and incorporate all the recently 
agreed cost-reducing efforts into a new schedule that 
also shows a significant reduction. The problem with this 
approach is that the cost reductions being made have a 
negative schedule impact associated with them in many 
instances.
For example, purchasing a piece of equipment from the 
lowest cost vendor returning the bid solicitation package 
could provide a substantial cost saving. However, if this 
vendor is extremely busy (probably because they are so 
inexpensive), their proposed schedule for completing and 
shipping this equipment may be several months longer. 
Maybe not a critical issue on a stick-built job, but when 
that piece of equipment is part of a highly integrated 
module, that delay in delivery may force a hold on the 
module fabrication sequence (or at least complicate the 
assembly, causing extra work or re-work) until this piece 
can be received and installed.
There needs to be a serious discussion about both as a 
single topic. Specifically, which one—cost or schedule—
is more critical? Because of the mindset noted above, 
this may not be easy for the owner/client who does not 
fully understand the interrelationships of cost versus 
schedule in terms of module fabrication sequencing. 
Since the approach to a module job in terms of sizing and 
scope of work splits is impacted by which of these two 
Figure 5.1 Project drivers and their relationships.5.2 Important Factors to Consider 67
project drivers take a higher priority, it may be beneficial 
to overemphasize the magnitude of each when initially 
discussing to help everyone visualize and understand the 
situation.
So, it is suggested that the conversation center around 
a couple of assumptions that reflect a not-so-realistic, 
wildly high-cost delta along with a similarly huge schedule 
delta to make the point and get a decision made.
For example, what is more acceptable, saving $100M or 
reducing the overall schedule by 6 months? The key here 
is to make the delta differences very significant, but still 
within the realm of plausibility for that particular project 
(and owner/client) so that they are forced to consider 
the two options in their project net present value (NPV) 
analysis, which the EPC contractor never has access 
to or sees.
The costs deltas must be high enough to interest the 
owner/client’s capital project managers. The schedule 
deltas must cut enough time off the end completion date 
to force a re-evaluation of early product delivery and its 
impact on the project NPV. For some projects, such as 
oil production, the answer is obvious—in the depletion 
analysis, any production volume lost by a later scheduled 
start does not get produced until the end of the reser￾voir life (at a very highly discounted present value rate). 
Production of a manufactured product is not as easy to 
analyze, but the owner/client has it in their ability to per￾form these alternative options on NPV and rate of return 
(ROR). But, once this determination has been made, the 
module design and layout team can consider different 
configuration options that will serve to meet one or the 
other a bit better.
5.2.1.2 Project Execution
We are skipping project execution for the moment as 
a project driver, because the EPC contractor is prob￾ably more interested in it and it is probably more in their 
control, so we move on to pre-FID investment. Check 
Chapter 6 for details on the project execution.
5.2.1.3 Pre-FID (Financial Investment Decision) 
Investment
This is indicated (by the size of its bubble in Figure 5.1) 
as an intermediate project driver. This is because it can 
quickly become a major stumbling block in some module 
jobs in terms of the EPC execution planning.
In many cases, this is because most, if not all, owner/
client organizations follow some sort of project “stage￾gate” project approval process where a certain amount 
of project detail is required to advance through each 
“gate.” Since some of this stage-gate process is prior 
to FID (financial investment decision) or project “fund￾ing,” these efforts may run on a limited capital budget. 
This means there is little money to advance some of the 
detailed design/procurement of vendor design info, etc. in 
time. This is especially true of complex equipment located 
within a module or electrical or instrumentation equipment 
(e.g., motor control centers or remote instrument build￾ings) that rely on data that is later in the design sequence.
In order to meet the schedule, this long lead equipment 
must be either:
• accelerated during the procurement process once FID 
has been made; or,
• purchased prior to FID (and risk ending up with equip￾ment commitments and no sanctioned project).
However, there is a third option that provides the best of 
both worlds as a combination of both of the above:
• Identify the critical long-lead equipment where either 
design details will be required early to design the struc￾tural steel module framing or where the equipment itself 
will be late in delivery.
• For the equipment with a late delivery, work with the 
module fabricator to develop alternative assembly tech￾niques that will allow the late arrival with minimal impact 
to the module fabricator. For the equipment that needs 
enough specific design details to properly design the 
structural module steel, work with the owner/client in 
terms of developing a purchasing strategy that will ma￾ture the equipment bid and procurement cycle to iden￾tify and award the equipment purchase, but limit liability 
for payment of the equipment to some clearly identified 
early design deliverables that are required for the mod￾ule structural steel design.
This two-pronged approach limits the capital outlay 
required prior to FID and typically can be arranged by the 
owner/client if known early enough in the overall stage￾gate approval process.68 The Business Case for Modularization
5.2.1.4 HS&E (Health, Safety, and Environment)
These elements have been lumped together because 
they have similar attributes:
• These statistics are all important to the owner/client 
(but a matter of company life and death for the EPC 
contractor).
• It is hard to equate how money spent translates into 
benefits received: Efforts typically are made to identify 
these benefits in terms of results: low or zero accidents, 
a healthier and happier workforce.
• But poorly executed HSE programs can be disastrous 
in terms of consequences when there is a general fail￾ure to properly support them.
• The EPC contractor is judged especially hard in terms 
of a less than stellar HSE historical performance. In 
some cases, poor results in terms of lost time incidents 
(LTIs) or industry fines, or no clear plan of recovery, are 
prerequisites to dismissal from consideration for the 
proposed project and even future work.
• As such, the EPC contractor bears the brunt of the re￾sults of a poor HSE record with the owner/client apply￾ing pressure in terms of potential withholding of future 
work or even cancelation of current work if failure is se￾vere enough.
• It is up to the EPC contractor to “win” the owner/client 
over with an outstanding HSE record. One way to help 
this is to show their attempts to move work-hours from 
the relatively riskier stick-built activities to a more con￾trolled fabrication effort at a designated module facility, 
where more work is performed by higher-skilled individ￾uals in a more temperate climate (sometimes indoors) 
and working the majority of the time at grade.
• Of course, the owner/client will also have concerns to 
be addressed in terms of the environment, but these are 
typically trying to limit the temporary impacts of the con￾struction workforce in the area of the proposed project 
plant site. Again, modularization reduces the required 
temporary construction areas (typically 2 to 3 times as 
large as the final plant site footprint).
• When evaluating these three project drivers, the EPC 
contractor must understand what parts of the HSE pro￾gram for this project can improve community relations 
with the public, environmental impact on the immediate 
area, or perhaps simply covering a need to help the lo￾cal community in terms of infrastructure upgrades or 
additions of services, such as a new fire station and 
equipment or extension to the local hospital, etc.
5.2.1.5 Quality
This is the third leg of the project stool, where the other 
two—“cost” and “schedule”—have been previously 
addressed. It is often joked: “cost/schedule/quality—pick 
any two.” For example:
• You can have something fast and cheap, but the quality 
might suffer.
• You can get a high-quality product quickly, but it may 
cost you more.
• You can get something high-quality cheaply, but it may 
take a long time to get it.
The underlying assumption is you can get any two exactly 
how you want them but never all three. Unfortunately, this 
is not a joking manner when it comes up in the middle of 
the project execution as a result of misunderstood expec￾tations the owner/client has of the EPC contractor, or vice 
versa, due to miscommunication of the actual details of 
the final product being delivered by the EPC contractor.
So, what does this have to do with the modularization 
(or the price of eggs)? The issue with all these various 
discussions around the project management triangle/the 
triple constraint/or whatever you call this three-legged 
stool is that these discussions come about because the 
project drivers were not properly identified and prioritized 
at the beginning of the project.
Just as we discussed in the cost and schedule section 
of the project drivers, there needs to be a determination 
of which one is more important; so we have a similar 
issue with quality. While everyone will agree that quality is 
important, how important is it in terms of its relationship 
with the other two—cost and schedule for your project—
AND what are the appropriate tradeoffs in terms of the 
give and take among the three? At the end of the day (or, 
in this case, at the very beginning of the project concep￾tual discussions), there needs to be a consensus in terms 
of exactly how these three project drivers relate to each 5.2 Important Factors to Consider 69
other. Not only that, but there also needs to be a promise 
that the relationship among these three in terms of off￾setting importance needs to remain constant throughout 
the project. If there is a need to adjust the importance of 
one over the others, this should be met with an expecta￾tion from both sides that there will be some significant 
changes to the project outcome. Because changes 
mid-stream are especially dangerous and damaging in 
terms of both cost and schedule, especially when these 
changes are initiated during the module fabrication, it is 
important from a module fabrication project standpoint 
to make sure all project parties understand the implica￾tions of the “no changes” mandate early in the project 
development.
5.2.1.6 Local Content
As noted in Figure 5.1, this project driver seems to have 
a larger-than-life level of importance to the owner/client. 
That is to be expected, as this owner/client will need to 
“live” with the local area folks during the long-term dura￾tion of the plant operation. Getting off on the right footing 
with your potential “neighbors” is critical.
Of course, the first impressions in this relationship are 
made by the EPC contractor during construction at the 
project site. This is why the owner/client makes this rela￾tionship with the local area folks a priority through the 
EPC contractor. And what better way to help build a 
long-term positive relationship with the local folks than 
by providing as many as possible long-term, good￾paying permanent jobs working at the finished facility? Of 
course, the actual number of permanent facility workers 
is usually a relatively small percentage of the folks in the 
area, so the owner/client pushes the EPC contractor to 
find ways to use “local content” to help bridge this gap 
during the EPC construction effort where there are many 
times the number of temporary construction jobs than 
the resulting permanent facility jobs.
This local content effort is related to the skills of the local 
population and they are often quick to pick up the heavy 
civil functions, like earthmoving, concrete formwork, and 
rod busting. Later, as the project progresses, there may be 
opportunities to use some of the local machinery as well 
as the electrical and instrumentation talent. Because the 
EPC contractor has a much greater ability to influence ini￾tial local content, this can be a bargaining chip of the EPC 
contractor in their negotiations with the owner/client and 
should not be ignored when discussing this project driver.
5.2.1.7 Materials Offloading Facility (MOF)
The materials offloading facility (MOF) is typically considered 
a temporary construction facility for the purpose of dock￾ing vessels that need to unload bulk materials and prefab￾ricated modules. However, it has been given numerous 
labels, so let’s start with a very brief explanation of the terms 
often used interchangeably for a MOF—wharf, pier, quay, 
and jetty—in the hope that we can help you understand the 
subtle differences rather than be confused by them.
Port: A sheltered dip in the natural coastline that is large 
enough to allow vessels to come in (it could include a wharf, 
piers, docks, jetties, as well as warehouses, loading and 
unloading equipment, etc.).
Wharf: A constructed structure parallel to the shoreline with 
a deck supported by piers or piling with earth on one side and 
water on the other, allowing vessels to come up and dock. It may 
also have quays and piers extending from it as well as buildings 
for storage and ship servicing inland of it.
Quay: Quay is pronounced “Key.” It is similar to a wharf but 
built on fill with a solid wall that extends from the elevated 
platform down into the bed of the water, thus creating a solid 
face at the coastline, altered via reinforcements to allow a vessel 
to float up and dock parallel to it and against it.
Pier: A piled column and beam type structure (typically 
wooden) that protrudes perpendicularly from the coastline into 
deeper water, allowing the deeper draft vessels to disembark 
passengers or cargo.
Jetty: A long narrow earthen or rock-filled structure that 
protects a coastline from currents or tides.
Dock (or dry dock): This has nothing to do with any of the 
above as it is a container, either floating or built in the ground, 
and used to keep a vessel inside it moored at a constant height 
or high and dry for repairs.
Figure 5.2 illustrates the MOF.70 The Business Case for Modularization
Further variations between the terms:
Quay and jetty: A quay has earthen fill on one side and 
water on the other, a jetty also has fill, but the fill is internal to the 
jetty to allow water access on both sides.
Wharf and pier: Both are structural with piling, columns, 
and beams as opposed to earthen fill; the wharf is oriented 
between the water and land (and parallel to the coastline) while 
a pier has water on both sides and is typically perpendicular to 
the coastline.
Why do we bring all this up? Because your two authors 
have been misusing these terms “since forever,” and it 
is important that we fess up and try to set the record 
straight on these terms.
Sorry for the digression, but it is important to know that 
this “ship to shore” connection, known by a bunch of dif￾ferent names, some correct and some totally misleading, 
has the potential to require a substantial investment con￾sideration for the project where large modules need to be 
brought in from overseas via an ocean-going roll-on-roll￾off (RO-RO) or a lift-on-lift-off (LO-LO) vessel.
Because of the weight of these larger module configura￾tions, critical analyses are required of existing quays or 
wharves as well as the temporary MOF to ensure that a 
local failure of the quayside face does not occur. While 
this can be offset to a certain extent by using bridgework 
to span from the vessel over the critical quayside edge, 
at the end of the day, the wharf, quay, or pier and its tie￾backs into the bank need to be robust enough to with￾stand the localized loading of the SPMTs.
In addition to the actual cost and timing of building a 
project-suited MOF, in some areas of the world, there are 
all the permitting implications that go along with disturb￾ing the coastline in such a grand manner. So, while it may 
seem like “small potatoes” in terms of total installed cost 
(TIC) (typical MOF costs can range from $20  million to 
$60 million), the larger concerns come from any permit￾ting and environmental impacts that must be resolved. 
It is almost always more advantageous to use an exist￾ing facility.
In addition, there is the issue of the MOF or quayside 
depth in relation to the MOF deck height to contend with. 
The water depth at the quayside may become a limiting 
factor, with very large vessels not being able to ballast up 
(float) high enough to get adjacent to the quayside or vice 
versa, they may not be able to ballast down deep enough 
to line up with the top of the MOF deck.
5.2.1.8 Heavy Haul Route and Road and Weather/
Terrain/Climate
Skipping heavy haul (HH) route and road as well as 
weather/terrain/climate as both being more in the control 
of the EPC contractor, we move to the final driver in this 
high-level analysis, Underground. Check Chapter  8 for 
more on this topic.
5.2.1.9 Underground
This typically is not addressed by the owner/client as a 
concern and is left up to the EPC contractor to figure out 
how they will install and route all the various underground 
piping and electrical connections. However, we identi￾fied it as an owner/client interest because underground 
issues are prevalent in brownfield projects, and the owner 
is always interested in how any new work will impact their 
current operations.
The use of modules in the construction execution plan 
can provide additional time (duration) from the initial con￾struction site mobilization until the module arrival, thus 
providing additional time to perform this underground 
Figure 5.2 Depiction of the MOF.5.3 The Business Case Process 71
installation. This means that there will be more time on 
a project to perform underground surveys, and if unex￾pected lines or objects are found, more time to adjust or 
work around them.
5.2.2 Additional Project-­Specific Factors
Besides the universal project drivers mentioned, there are 
many other project-specific factors that need to be con￾sidered when developing the optimal module solution. 
These are varied and widespread in terms of topic and 
impact. We have listed a few, only to provide an example 
of other factors involved in the module decision.
• project-specific scope
• site data
• module fabrication yard data.
Check Chapter 8 for more on these factors.
5.3 The Business Case Process
There is a process that every owner/client goes through 
to develop a project from its first idea or concept all the 
way through to the construction and start-up of the com￾pleted facility. The process has typically from five to seven 
phases, where there are certain deliverables that must 
be met at the end of each phase to move on to the next 
phase. These phases are defined by the level of engi￾neering deliverables, the project estimate accuracy, or 
the project detail and management commitment.
Every company has some sort of business case analysis 
tool. It may vary in the number of phases, the detailed 
requirements within each phase, specific project delivera￾bles required, or may correspond to meeting an industry 
reference (e.g., Independent Project Analysis, IPA). It var￾ies from one company to the next and is called by differ￾ent names, but the goals are the same:
• to force the project to be evaluated in a consistent 
step by step;
• to make the project “pass” each phase before moving 
on and being evaluated in the next phase.
So, for example, for engineering, more detail is developed 
in terms of deliverables at each of these phases. Along 
with this additional detail comes the potential to produce 
higher accuracy in the overall project estimate. These 
additional details are included in a more defined project 
schedule. And the results of these efforts at each phase 
are presented to the company or corporate management 
(depending on the size of the project). The management 
will use this time to critically assess the project and details 
supporting it, ask questions, make comments, and in 
general provide a formal review (that should be not much 
more than a rubber stamp of all the previous informal 
interactions that the project management has had with 
company management—assuming project management 
was proactive in its efforts).
As mentioned, this analysis varies from company to com￾pany, but one consistent theme is that all companies 
have such a business case analysis procedure. Because 
there are so many versions of this business case analysis, 
it is important that everyone working with or discussing 
the attributes of a particular point in the business case 
analysis process must understand where the others are 
in the business case journey.
To support the reader’s understanding of this process, 
benchmarking (Construction Industry Institute, 2012; 
O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2013) and (O’Brien, O’Connor, 
and Choi, 2015), the authors developed a Rosetta Stone on 
modularization business case phases (see Figure 5.3).
The top row in Figure 5.3 shows the seven project phases, 
which industrial companies commonly use:
• Opportunity Framing
• Assessment
• Selection
• Basic Design
• EPC (Engineering, Procurement, and Construction)
• Commissioning & Start-up
• Operation
Because some readers may not be as familiar with these 
seven phases, we have aligned the phases with the 
Frames of Reference (the IPA reference = the third row 
in Figure 5.3), Project Designation (EPC contractor refer￾ence = fourth row in Figure 5.3), and Cost Estimate Accu￾racy (the bottom row in Figure 5.3) (Construction Industry 72 The Business Case for Modularization
Institute,  1986). This multi-level comparison approach 
is aimed to help someone figure out the maturity of a 
project by matching the definition for individual project 
maturity with one or more of these references and then 
moving vertically up to identify which of the seven phases 
that project was in. The reason for being so particular in 
this analysis matrix is that the proposed module business 
case analysis is going to be used at the end of each of 
these project phases. We bring this to your attention as 
this is the basis for much of our subsequent discussions 
and follow-up research work. It is vital that this basis be 
understood not only in terms of why it was set up this 
way but why it is essential to be analyzed in this man￾ner. Finally, before we go into the details of the module 
business case tool (or flowchart), which will be explained 
in the subsequent section, we want to provide a sneak 
peek at why we are so intent on breaking the project up 
into these seven phases.
The second row of Figure 5.3, “Potential Benefits,” illus￾trates why starting the module analysis early is so impor￾tant. We will be going over the reasons in much greater 
detail, but if you can keep in mind that the optimal time for 
making decisions is during the first two phases of a pro￾ject (Opportunity Framing and Assessment), the following 
explanations will make more sense. The large “band” of 
the Partial Benefits arrow that runs through the Selec￾tion (pre-FEED) and Basic Design (FEED) was drawn that 
way in order to try to include the entire range of mod￾ule potentials. For the very complex module solutions, 
the time to make module decisions that will result in an 
optimal solution will run through Assessment and then 
start dropping off sharply in Selection (pre-FEED). This is 
due to the decisions made in Opportunity Framing and 
Assessment that impact global aspects of a project, such 
as a project site location or the proximity to navigable 
water. Poor choices in location could eliminate the very 
large or very heavy module concepts before there is an 
opportunity to analyze them.
On the other hand, some projects may be able to still 
obtain maximum module benefits all the way through 
Selection (pre-FEED) or Basic Design (FEED). This is 
because the optimal module solution for that particular 
project is not sensitive to many of the typical decisions 
made during the project’s first two or three phases. For 
example, suppose the process is such that the maximum 
module size can be held within the typical permit load 
for roadway transportation. In that case, the flexibility of 
site selection and logistics is greatly enhanced, almost to 
the point where it may not be critical. This is why such a 
broad “band” is shown in the Partial Benefits area.
Two points to remember in all this:
• One can NEVER look at the module pre-assembly op￾tions TOO EARLY!
• It is NEVER detrimental to the project to assume the 
module execution philosophy first and later fall back to 
the conventional stick-built approach if the module ap￾proach is not suitable for project execution.
We could spend an entire additional chapter on why 
these two points are true, but to put it simply, the earlier 
analyses required in the assumption that the project will 
be modular WILL identify many project issues at a much 
earlier date or phase of the project. This is because the 
systematic nature of the module analysis will force the 
owner/client to analyze similar project variables much ear￾lier for the module job than would have been required for 
Figure 5.3 Rosetta Stone on modularization business case process phases.5.4 The Business Case Model 73
the stick-built job. In addition, by starting with the module 
option, the owner/client is forced to think about how to 
be creative in “packaging” all the equipment and piping 
into “boxes.” This develops a collective project think￾ing where there is a natural optimization of equipment/
piping/process configuration that will inherently save 
money simply because the spacing between equipment 
is optimized and reduced (to fit within the module con￾straints). Should the project decide to be conventionally 
stick-built, this optimization can be maintained or relaxed 
slightly to accommodate a more spread-out plot plan 
approach. In either case, the final product in moving from 
the initial module concepts to a conventional stick-built 
approach is still probably more efficient than if it had 
started out as a stick-built philosophy. More on this to 
come in the later chapters.
5.4 The Business Case Model
Before you can set up a properly functioning module 
project, you need to determine if the project should be 
modular and the extent of the modularization. There are 
numerous ways to do this analysis. But what we pro￾vide makes the most sense (in our opinion) because it 
walks the analyzer through a step-by-step process that 
is set up to use the responses from one step’s analysis 
to feed and build on the subsequent step. Also, just as 
the typical project is approved in phases, the business 
case flowchart (explained in detail in the subsequent sec￾tion) is set up to be iterative. By making it iterative, there 
is the opportunity to incorporate any information known 
(and any best guesses) into the analysis flowchart. More 
importantly, because we request that a project start using 
the analysis flowchart as early as Opportunity Framing, 
it gets the core project team thinking about the various 
aspects of the project in terms of a modular option.
The nice thing about analyzing an alternative project 
execution philosophy, like modularization, is that it does 
not significantly alter the basic efforts and deliverables in 
the early phases (Opportunity Framing and Assessment). 
What it does offer is an alternative second option on pro￾ject execution.
Consider how the modularization option opened up alter￾natives in the following project analysis.
Along with the early access considerations identified 
above, other potential benefits will automatically tag along 
when discussing the modular option (that may add to the 
benefits of the pre-assembly off the site). For example:
• Will a large percentage of pre-assembly help alleviate 
any issues with local craft labor in terms of quantity and 
quality that might prove beneficial in terms of overall 
project cost and or schedule?
• Will the fact that weather may preclude continuous con￾struction (e.g., during hurricane season) and an alterna￾tive can offer additional benefits in terms of schedule 
for offsite pre-assembly somewhere else in the US or 
the world?
PROJECT ANALYSIS
A company is considering a project along the US Gulf Coast 
site (USGC) to expand the current manufacture of a prod￾uct. They have three potential locations they are considering. 
Since it will be a similar process to their other plants and this 
is only a high-level analysis, most have assumed the project 
execution would also be like the previous plants.
Obviously, one of the criteria is product delivery and a means 
of easy access to the market. However, at this early stage in 
conceptual analysis considering only a stick-built approach, 
there may not be any consideration of opportunities in terms 
of supply of construction materials to the project site during 
construction (after all, they have always been able to find 
some way to get the large process vessels into the previous 
sites). Without a specific effort to evaluate alternative forms 
of this project execution, such details would be pushed to 
later in the analysis. But with the use of a simple modulariza￾tion option analysis, the three site options can be additionally 
considered in terms of the ability to bring large or heavy pre￾assembled parts of the plant to the project site.
This forces project management in the early opportunity 
framing phase to be inclusive in terms of other implementa￾tion options. More importantly, because it has identified some 
of the key concerns with pre-assembly, the decision on the 
best project site will have to include the potential impact of 
adequate versus inadequate transportation access to that 
site. Because of the potential size of the industrial mod￾ules, specific considerations must be made early to avoid a 
module-limiting decision on the site location.74 The Business Case for Modularization
• Is the physical configuration of the project process such 
that extensive work at elevations is required during con￾struction (along with all the inefficiencies with respect to 
work productivity and safety) which could be reduced 
by prefabrication at a fab yard that has the equipment 
and experience to build at grade?
These should be subsequent issues and conversations 
that should immediately follow this line of alternative pro￾ject execution thinking.
And, yes, this works both ways. Should, for some rea￾son, the project analysis during these early discussions 
run into issues with the further development of large 
plug-and-play modules, the core management team 
can immediately shift to an early evaluation of other pre￾assembly options. For example, parts of the complex 
process are very large in diameter and lightweight (e.g., 
a forced draft-fired heater). Typically, these are stick-built, 
but they can easily be adapted to varying forms of pre￾assembly, depending on the type of heater and potential 
shipping envelope to the site. So, while modularizing the 
entire fired heater may not be an option, there are numer￾ous ways to still pre-assembly parts offsite and ship them 
in, providing the project some benefits.
Again, such decisions are determined or “driven” by the 
project drivers mentioned earlier in this chapter. These 
must be identified and prioritized early in the project 
development. This business case flowchart helps surface 
and forces such evaluations in a proactive manner.
5.5 The 13-Step Business Case Flowchart
Step 1 Modularization Technical Feasibility
• Can you modularize or pre-fabricate and pre-assemble 
all or part of your project?
The answer should be a resounding “YES!” Even for the 
largest earthmoving or heavy excavation projects, there 
are always opportunities for some amount and type of 
pre-assembly.
Because we truly believe that there are opportunities for 
pre-assembly in every project, red flags should go up if 
the project core team says “NO” to any type of modu￾larization or its analysis. It could mean there is a lack of 
understanding of the philosophy of the modular option 
and why it should be considered. It could mean there 
is an unwillingness in the project core team to move out 
of their current stick-built comfort zone of how projects 
are currently implemented. Following a status quo project 
pathway in any shape or form in this competitive indus￾trial environment without evaluating alternatives, such 
as modularization, can be a harbinger of project disas￾ter. It also may reflect a less than total commitment to 
an optimal project solution. In any case, a more detailed 
explanation of the value of modularization is required to 
move forward.
However, we left it in the business case model as a deci￾sion point primarily for the one-off project that genu￾inely might be simple or unique enough not to have any 
THE 13-STEP BUSINESS CASE FLOWCHART
The Business Case Flowchart (see Figure 5.4) consists of the 
following 13 steps:
1. Modularization Technical Feasibility
2. Identify Module Drivers
3. Analyze Module Potential
4. Perform Options Analysis
5. Develop Module Scope
6. Develop Module Size
7. Produce Module Definition and Index
8. Develop Execution Strategy and Execution Plan
9. Produce a Definitive Cost Estimate
10. Produce a Definitive Schedule
11. Check Module Viability
12. Proceed with Modularization to the Next Pro￾ject Phase, or
13. Fall Back to Stick-Built
The following sections will further explain the 13 steps 
in detail. Keep this page referenced for ready access to 
the overview.5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 75
great pre-assembly options. But it is understood and 
expected that such a decision is critically analyzed and 
not taken lightly.
Step 2 Identify Module Drivers
• Identify module drivers, rate and rank them, and then 
determine what solution best satisfies each of them.
An initial determination of precisely what is “driving” a 
project is crucial to identifying the best approach to pro￾ject implementation. Earlier in this chapter, we examined 
several common and critical project drivers and explained 
why a modular or pre-assembly solution offers a better 
opportunity to satisfy that project driver. One thing that 
should be evident by this point in the analysis is that pro￾ject drivers vary from job to job. There will always be a few 
that come up on every project (e.g., cost & schedule). So 
Figure 5.4 Business case flowchart.76 The Business Case for Modularization
we tried to provide a basic understanding of these more 
common drivers in terms of how modularization will help 
meet these needs.
The important goal of all the previous discussion, expla￾nations and examples is not how to argue both sides of 
the cost vs. schedule issue, but to understand that to 
finally get to the optimal project solution in terms of its 
construction execution, is to be able to identify ALL of 
the project drivers—the drivers known only to the owner/
client and the ones known only to the EPC contractor. It 
is this complete picture that is required to make the best 
decisions.
From this flowchart standpoint, the discussions on project 
drivers should begin in Opportunity Framing as joint owner/
client, EPC, and supplier discussions. All core team mem￾bers should be willing to share what is driving the project 
from their personal standpoints. They should also be open 
to indicating which of their driver details are considered 
“off-limits” for the other project members. With regard to 
those, they should agree upfront to going back, internally 
analyzing these more confidential drivers, and committing 
to coming back to the group with results provided in a form 
that can be incorporated in terms of how they rate and rank 
with the other drivers. There should be enough transpar￾ency in how these results are supplied that the project team 
can take these driver analyses and seamlessly fold them 
into the rest, resulting in a complete project driver analysis.
Why such a push for completeness and transparency? 
The more “singleness of purpose” that a project can iden￾tify with, the more project energy will be channeled into 
that purpose. The more plugged in that the rank-and-file 
project members are, the more they can offer creative 
and innovative solutions. A project-wide understanding of 
what the project “goal” is and why it is being pursued a 
certain way will help ALL the project members understand 
how their piece of effort fits into the large picture. But to do 
this, the project needs a clear picture of what is driving it.
Step 3 Analyze Module Potential
• Complex analysis incorporating inputs from design/site/
fab yard/cost and schedule.
Module potential could be considered the “yang” to the 
project drivers’ “yin” (see Figure  5.5). Probably not the 
best analogy, but the symbol and the opposites it por￾trays fit nicely into how the two complement each other. 
The project drivers seemingly consist of all the project 
problems and challenges (negative and dark) of a project. 
The module potential consists of solutions and freedoms 
to these (positive and light).
The truth of the matter is that now that we have devel￾oped a comprehensive understanding of the project driv￾ers (in step #2), we need an equally complete picture of 
the module potential so that the two can be juxtaposed 
for the best fit. This is the basis for the next step in the 
module flowchart. From an overall philosophical stand￾point, as the business case is the heart of the modulari￾zation analysis, the module potential is the heart of the 
business case flowchart. To properly develop the mod￾ule potential, the following four major inputs need to be 
added to Analyze Module Potential (see Figure 5.6).
Step 3.1 Design Inputs
Depending on whether the project is greenfield (new) 
or brownfield (existing), the design and layout will be 
directly impacted.
Step  3.1.1  New/Greenfield Site A greenfield site 
provides a clean sheet of paper in terms of layout and 
process configuration. However, there is always the ten￾dency to make the layout exactly like or very similar to 
existing similar facilities with changes only due to loca￾tion and type of inputs into the site and the correspond￾ing product outputs.
Step  3.1.2 Existing/Brownfield Site A brownfield 
site is more challenging because, as part of the pro￾ject premise, there is the goal of somehow fitting the 
square peg of the facility layout into the round hole of 
Figure 5.5 Module potential and project drivers.5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 77
the brownfield location. This goal or restriction requires 
that the process layout be critically evaluated in terms of 
how to get all the pieces into the proposed location, and 
so adjustments to the past or similar design layouts are 
understood to be required.
However, in either case, when performing the design devel￾opment, do not fall into the trap of assuming that a stick￾built layout is efficient enough to simply put “boxes” around 
areas and turn them into de facto modules. The stick-built 
layout is driven by different criteria than the equivalent mod￾ular layout, and boxing the stick-built configuration in many 
cases will result in an inefficient module configuration. The 
layout should be unique for several reasons, including the 
opportunity to use the third dimension (module height) to 
provide an additional degree of freedom or the opportunity 
to re-arrange the equipment. The result is typically a sav￾ings of space and, along with that, a saving of materials.
Step 3.2 Configuration Inputs
These inputs refer to the actual project site (site attrib￾utes) and access (logistics) to it.
Step 3.2.1 Site Attributes During the discussion on 
the universal key project drivers earlier, several of those 
are driven by the actual site location. Those site attrib￾utes include, but are not limited to:
• location
• labor availability
• weather
• environmental restrictions
• permitting
• safety.
The identified project drivers should be used as a guide 
in analyzing the various project site locations. Table 5.1 
shows an example of module solutions for typical project 
drivers parameters.
Figure 5.6 Four major inputs for module potential analysis.
Table 5.1 Module solutions for typical project drivers.
Project driver Site parameter Module solution
Cost Limited workforce with 
good craft skills
Modularize—where labor 
is available
Schedule Difficult and time￾consuming site prep
Modules arrive later/more 
time for site prep
Logistics Hard or expensive to get 
workers to the site
Use less expensive fab 
yard craft workers offsite 
via modularization
Environment Pristine forests or frag￾ile ecosystem
Modules reduce construc￾tion footprint at the site
Weather Limited access part 
of the year
Build in temperate climate 
and ship to site78 The Business Case for Modularization
Step 3.2.2 Logistics The logistics details go hand in 
hand with the site attributes. Logistics are one of many 
site attributes, but since they encompass more than just 
the site and its vicinity, it is important that logistics be a 
separate consideration. These factors related to logis￾tics include:
• Wharf or quay (materials offloading facility, MOF)
• Heavy haul route
• Transport vessel
• Laydown area(s)
• Access to and on the site
• Route surveys
For a stick-built project, the logistics typically deal with 
the determination of a pioneer camp and dock (to get 
the first of the materials and workers to the site) followed 
by a more permanent project materials offloading facility 
(MOF) or a road and river infrastructure stout enough to 
support the literal tons of bulks being shipped to site as 
well as the few large pieces of equipment that must be 
brought in by special carriers.
For the module job, all the above also pertain, but in addi￾tion, there must be considerations for the movement of 
much larger modules. This involves further analysis of the 
methods of first getting the largest of them to the vicin￾ity of the site (by ocean-going transport or river barge), 
developing a much stouter MOF or wharf capable of 
receiving these in terms of weight and size, a heavy haul 
road with the load capacity and width to accommodate 
these large structures, and project equipment layout that 
will accommodate the movement of these large modules 
through the partially completed plant, and finally, a solid 
path of construction in terms of sequencing the delivery 
and setting of these large modules.
All this adds complexity to the analysis. It adds additional 
site constraints in terms of temporary access to and 
through the process units and a definite sequencing of 
construction that must be followed in order to be able to 
set all modules. This makes the site analysis a very early 
requirement in terms of even the initial site selection.
In short, any proposed site should have inherent access 
in terms of a proposed modular option as well as be able 
to internally accommodate a modular layout and delivery 
sequencing within the site boundaries.
Step 3.3 Fabrication Yard Inputs
The fabrication facility should match the project require￾ments in terms of project cost benefits as well as scope 
and capabilities. This is determined by a multi-faceted 
module yard survey with special emphasis on fabrication 
cost and productivity data.
Step  3.3.1  Module Yard Survey Data The data 
that need to be collected through the module yard sur￾vey include:
• location
• capability
• size
• management
• shipping information
• weather
• backlog
• safety
• political climate
• workforce skills
• facility covered assembly areas
• QA/QC
With fabrication facilities of all sizes and capabilities located 
in all parts of the world, the task of selecting the “best” 
in terms of a specific project can seem a bit daunting. 
Suppose you are a large EPC company with many years 
of experience. In that case, you probably can choose from 
a long list of previous projects that have worked with fab￾rication yards of various sizes over different parts of the 
world. However, this becomes more challenging if you are 
just starting out or your company does not have an offsite 
fabrication history. So, a couple of general guidelines in 
making a first cut on who or where to consider:
1. Size matters. There should be a good correlation 
between the total size of the module job (in terms of 
tons) and the capacity of the potential module yard. 5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 79
Strive to select fabrication yards that are large enough 
to be able to handle your proposed capacity and not 
be overwhelmed by the required delivery timing. But 
make sure that the yard is not so big that the fabrica￾tion yard management does not ignore your “small” 
job. In other words, “not too big and not too small, 
but just right.”
2. Complexity matters. Fabrication yards excel in dif￾ferent types and complexities of modules. Some are 
best suited because of their location and aerial ex￾tent for fabrication of the pipe rack modules that are 
relatively simple to assemble but require a large layout 
area for this assembly. On the other end of the fabrica￾tion spectrum, there are those highly sophisticated fab 
yards that have the capabilities to assemble the very 
complex modules and provide services in terms of 
equipment fabrication, procurement of bulks, detailed 
design, and plate girder and pipe spool fabrication. 
Often, these facilities are also located in areas where 
laydown space is a premium, so they are best suit￾ed for the fabrication of highly complex but compact 
large modules. The proposed size and complexity of a 
project’s modules should be similar to what a fabrica￾tion yard typically produces. Overly complex modules 
may strain the technical competence of some yards. 
Conversely, overly simple and expansive modules 
may take up too much precious space in other highly 
sophisticated fab yards. In both cases, the project will 
suffer in terms of schedule delays or increased costs.
3. Location matters. If your project has a domestic US 
site, there is a tradeoff between the cost savings of fab￾ricating overseas in the Middle East, SE Asia, or the Far 
East and the expense of the proper supervision or over￾sight at that fab yard in terms of the extra construction 
management team (CMT) plus the increased shipping 
costs from a fab yard halfway around the world. The 
module scope, along with the complexity mentioned 
above, will play a part in determining whether it makes 
more economic sense to spend a bit more in terms of 
module cost/ton and use a local yard that would mini￾mize CMT as well as transportation costs. This means 
developing a good idea of the potential range of module 
scope options there may exist in terms of the project.
We will discuss this in more detail in Chapter 8.
Step 3.3.2 Economic Productivity Ratio (EPR) This 
step determines the true fabrication cost delta between 
work at the site and the same work accomplished at the 
module fabrication yard. This potential for cost savings 
drives projects to modularize and fuels a project’s ability 
to spend more on a modular option in terms of engineer￾ing, materials, and shipping but end up with overall sav￾ings and benefits to the project. It is the simple concept 
of developing the relative work-hour cost for a certain 
amount of “production” in terms of a number that can 
be compared to the cost of other options that produce a 
similar amount of “production.” The ratio of the two rela￾tive work-hour costs developed is called the economic 
productivity ratio (see Figure 5.7, for example).
Before we explain Figure 5.7, let us explain the definitions 
of the terms used:
Labor Productivity Factor: This is a frequently used 
but, unfortunately, greatly misused factor in the industry. And, 
to make it more complicated, depending on who you talk to, the 
increase in this number can reflect either improving productivity 
or declining productivity. So, without going into all the details 
needed to successfully explain our way out of developing an 
entire chapter on construction labor productivity factor and how 
Figure 5.7 Economic productivity ratio example.80 The Business Case for Modularization
to calculate it, suffice it to say that some type of productivity 
measurement against a base case is required in order to be able 
to develop the EPR we are talking about.
In the case of the above example, we have assumed that the 
historical base productivity along the US Gulf Coast site (USGC) 
is 1.0. With the basis for this productivity in mind, we compared 
the anticipated productivity at the project site. We found that it 
takes almost 2.5 hours to produce or complete the same unit of 
“product” compared to 1 hour needed on the ideal USGC site. 
To the same extent, we found that it takes about 1.3 hours to 
produce or complete the same unit of “product” at the fab yard 
compared to the ideal USGC site.
All-In Wage Rate (AIWR): This is the total cost per work￾hour (sometimes known as the “all-in” wage rate). One must 
be careful about how this work-hour cost is defined, but for this 
comparison, we suggest that the “all-in” wage rate be used, as 
it will be more reflective of the true total craft labor costs. The 
“all-in” wage rate includes not only the rate paid to the worker, 
but also all the other costs associated with supporting the worker 
on site—things like indirect labor, taxes, mobilization (mob) & 
demobilization (demob), local transportation, small tools, camp 
costs, contractor’s field management, home office management, 
PPE, consumables, construction equipment, materials handling 
equipment, Quality Assurance & Quality Control (QA & QC), and 
contractor profit. As a side note, with all this added in, the “all-in” 
wage rate could be anywhere from 3 to 5 times the actual dollar 
amount the craft worker sees on their paycheck.
Relative Work-Hour Cost (RWC): This relative work￾hour cost can be calculated by multiplying the labor productivity 
factor and the all-in wage rate (AIWR). This is a real cost rate that 
is required to complete a similar unit of work.
Economic Productivity Ratio (EPR): The EPR can 
be calculated by comparing the RWC of the project site to the 
RWC counterparts of the current USGC or the RWC of the fab 
yard. For example, in Figure 5.7, the EPR of the project site 
to the current USGC is 2.3 (= $337.50/$147), which can be 
calculated by dividing the RWC of the project site ($337.50) by 
the RWC of the current USGC ($147). In the same way, the EPR 
of the project site to fab yard is 5.77 (= $337.50/$58.50).
The EPR of the project site to fab yard is a number that 
shows when the project site and module yard relative 
work-hour costs (RWC) are compared, how many times 
more efficient the module yard labor is than the labor at 
the construction site considering the AIWR difference. 
The authors would like to state that this EPR concept is 
adopted from the Construction Industry Institute (2012).
Now, let’s take a closer look at Figure 5.7. This exam￾ple assumes that the project site is located in a cold or 
remote area, where lengthy nonproductive commutes 
exist from the accommodation worker camps to and 
from the site and productivity reductions occur due to the 
adverse weather conditions (such as extreme cold). The 
second row in Figure 5.7 shows that the labor productiv￾ity factor (hours required to complete one unit of work, 
based on the ideal USGC = 1.0) at the project site, the 
current USGC, and the selected fab yard are 2.5, 1.4, 
and 1.3, respectively. The productivity numbers mean, by 
just looking at the labor productivity factor (hours required 
to complete one unit of work compared to the ideal 
USGC labor productivity (1.0)), the project site requires 
1.78 (= 2.5/1.4) times more work-hours than the current 
USGC site or the current USGC site will require only 56% 
(= 1.4/2.5) of work-hours compared to the project site. 
In the same way, we can find that the selected fab yard 
requires only 52% (= 1.3/2.5) of work-hours compared to 
the project site, or the fab yard is almost 1.92 (= 2.5/1.3) 
times more productive. On top of these labor productivity 
factor differences, there is the work-hour cost disparity 
between the “all-in” wage rate of the project-specific craft 
worker (at $135/work-hour) versus the typical all-in wage 
rate for some of the Far East fabrication yard craft (at 
$45/work-hour). As a result, this example case depicts 
a situation where the module fabrication yard is working 
almost twice as fast (2.5/1.3) with labor that is 3 times 
($135/$45) as cheap.
Now, we need to see the effect of the combination of 
these two factors (labor productivity factor and AIWR) by 
looking at the Economic Productivity Ratio (EPR).
In this example (see Figure  5.7), as we already cal￾culated, the EPR of the project site to fab yard is 5.77 
(= $337.50/$58.50). This means the module yard is more 
than 5.77 times as economically productive as the project 
site. Putting it another way, every craft work-hour taken 
off the project site will support over 5.77 craft work-hours 
at the fabrication yard. As a result, the module fabrication 
yard will expend only 17% (= 1.0/5.77) of the estimated 
site cost (for an equivalent scope). With this large differ￾ence, it looks like the project should strive to maximize 
the reduction of work-hours at the site by moving them 
to the module fabrication yard.5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 81
What else does this example show? The EPR of the project 
site to the current USGC is 2.3 (= $337.50/$147), which 
means the current USGC is 2.3 times more productive 
than the proposed project construction site. Also, note 
that the module yard is more than 2.51 (= $147/$58.50) 
times more productive than even the current USGC con￾struction site, which can be obtained by comparing the 
current USGC ($147) to the fab yard ($58.50).
Step 3.4 Cost & Schedule Inputs
These are typically worked together because, as previ￾ously mentioned, they are often discussed together. With 
these two project drivers as strong as they are, any mod￾ular analysis must develop some granularity on both of 
these as soon as possible.
Step  3.4.1 Cost Comparison In many cases, the 
initial cost estimates of a proposed plant are based 
on something historic—a previous plant or process or 
some other similar facility that is close enough to the 
desired project plant that it can be used. If the plant has 
older cost numbers, these can be updated and inflated 
to reflect present-day values.
With respect to assuming an estimated extent of modu￾larization, a very early effort should be made to quantify 
this. Since many of the details of the equipment, layout, 
piping configuration, etc. are unknown at this point in 
time, as a first pass, assumptions can be made in terms 
of possible percentage total modularization. These 
should be based on how the project driver analysis 
performed in Step #2 reflected potential benefits from 
the use of modularization analysis and results to date 
identified from the analysis being performed in this step. 
For example:
1. If the project drivers indicate that a modularization 
option could provide significant benefits, then the 
assumption should be that the project will strive to 
maximize the percentage of modularization. From a 
practical standpoint, this could result in the potential 
removal of between 40% and 70% of the total stick￾built scope (in terms of craft work-hours) from the site 
and sending it to a module fabrication yard.
2. If the drivers indicate no advantage (or very marginal 
advantage), we would suggest a quick review of the 
methods used in obtaining this conclusion as it could 
mean that the project driver analysis was not com￾prehensive in terms of evaluation of ALL the potential 
benefits. But if it truly was the case that modulariza￾tion did not provide an advantage, then the percent￾age modularization should be limited to no less than 
10% of total stick-built work-hours. Such an example 
would be a project that limited the pre-assemblies to 
the obvious efforts, such as building the motor con￾trol centers (MCCs) and remote instrument buildings 
(RIBs) offsite as well as some or most of the pipe 
racks. It is suggested that this be the absolute mini￾mum, as all of these are obvious choices and will al￾most always yield cost savings, just not great ones. 
Also, with this minimal approach, there would prob￾ably be little equipment optimization in terms of re￾arrangements, and the plant would have a layout very 
similar to its stick-built predecessor.
3. If the drivers indicate some advantage (as is the case 
with most of the projects analyzed), then the initial 
assumption should be that the project would strive 
for the removal of between 10% and 40% of the total 
stick-built craft work-hour from the project site and 
this scope to be moved to some type of offsite pre￾assembly. A typical example of such scope would in￾clude all the pre-assembly efforts mentioned above 
for the limited advantage option (MCCs, RIBs, pipe 
racks, typical skid-mounted equipment, vessel dress￾ing) plus some equipment skids and a couple of major 
process modules. As the modules are defined for the 
modular option, efforts should be made to re-define 
the go-by stick-built plant in terms of optimizing the 
equipment layouts to get more sub-systems into po￾tential modular groupings. This serves two great plan￾ning purposes:
• It begins the thought process of how to optimize the 
sub-process location of equipment in case there is 
a decision to make these group modules (which can 
still provide benefits in terms of the stick-built layout 
if the decision is not to modularize).
• It also begins the thought process of how the instal￾lation sequencing of these sub-process units might 
occur (which again can provide planning benefits 
whether you decide to modularize or stick-build).
The initial cost analysis for potential savings could 
be as simple as taking the anticipated percentage 82 The Business Case for Modularization
modularization  times the estimated savings in scope 
cost between the cost of craft work-hours needed 
to do it onsite versus the cost of performing the same 
scope offsite in a module yard. In subsequent phases of 
the project, as more definition of the project process is 
developed, the cost analysis would move from this total 
percentage modularization to begin identifying the spe￾cific modules by size and shape, along with a finer-tuned 
estimating process that looks at the varied composition 
of structural steel to piping to equipment within each of 
these proposed modules. These would be compared to 
the cost of their equivalent stick-built portion of this plant.
Of course, since specific details on exactly what is in each 
module in terms of piping, electrical, and instrumentation 
will not yet have been developed in the early phases, this 
effort would be limited to something along the lines of 
identification of the major equipment in each module. 
Initially, the piping layout group (in conjunction with the 
process group) would take the equipment and lay it out in 
three dimensions to come up with a set of sized modules. 
The size of each would provide an idea of the total weight 
of the module based on typical volumetric analyses. If no 
other information was available in terms of other materi￾als, this total module weight could be factored into how 
much was structural steel, piping, equipment, and to a 
lesser extent, the electrical, instrumentation, and con￾trols associated with this equipment. Again, this factor￾ing would be initially based on historical ratios of weights 
within the module—structural steel, equipment, and pip￾ing to the total module weight, structural steel to piping, 
piping to equipment, and other common ratios with all 
of these ratios varying depending on the type of mod￾ule being considered (pipe rack vs. equipment, truckable 
vs. mega).
Once calculated, the cost again would be analyzed in 
terms of a delta cost savings between the proposed 
module scope and its equivalent stick-built portion of the 
plant. (More to come on this method in Chapter 9.) As 
the project progresses into the next phases, the detail 
on design becomes clearer through the development of 
block flow diagrams (BFDs) and process flow diagrams 
(PFDs). Historical information may be available in terms of 
similar parts of previous plants where the current design 
may not have progressed. At the end of the day, all these 
details on equipment type, number, and sizes are com￾piled into what is referred to as the “sized equipment list.”
At this point in the project development, the plant process 
will have been defined to the level of detail that estimat￾ing programs such as the Aspen Capital Cost Estima￾torTM (ACCE) (aspentech, 2022) can be used to further 
refine the cost differences between stick-built and modu￾lar. Estimating tools like ACCE take the major equipment 
inputs from the sized equipment list and process infor￾mation from the PFDs, and develop bulk quantities and 
costs for the equipment, the structural steel supporting 
the equipment, the process piping connecting the equip￾ment, and the instrumentation, controls, and electrical 
required to start, operate, and control the equipment. 
What makes these tools particularly handy is that they 
develop imaginary volumes around the piece of equip￾ment (e.g., vessel, pump, compressor) and include all the 
structural, piping, electrical, instrumentation, and even 
fireproofing within this volume. Then, by “stacking” and 
adding these equipment volumes, one can get an idea of 
the total volume of that particular module based on the 
proposed equipment to be incorporated into it.
Of course, this volume is only as good as the information 
fed into the program to develop it. But it provides the next 
level of detail over the volumetric determination described 
in the previous estimating phase. This can provide a real￾ity check in terms of module size, which would adjust the 
cost estimate. And, with the additional cost and weight 
details on the steel, piping, and EI&C bulks provided by 
this estimating tool, potentially a more accurate descrip￾tion of the module can be developed.
Step 3.4.2 Schedule Comparison The schedule is 
typically developed initially by reviewing the schedule of 
a similar plant and making initial adjustments to it for the 
modular case. As a starting point, if no other schedule 
information is available in terms of an alternative to stick￾building, a good starting point for comparing the modu￾lar option is to assume a 10% or 2–4 months duration 
extension over the stick-built for the modular schedule.
There are a few reasons for assuming the first module 
schedule is a bit longer than the stick-built schedule.
1. Many companies have found that this is the case—
a module job just takes a bit longer than their best 
stick-built effort.
2. If the scheduled delivery of the equipment and materi￾als for the module job is similar to that of the stick-built 5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 83
job and everything else is essentially the same, there 
are still the additional duration differences on the 
module job that will make it longer (e.g., the shipping 
of the completed module to the site and the time to 
set it in place and hook it up).
3. In some cases, the owner/client approval process 
does not allow pre-investment in engineering, which 
may be required to get an early start on the module 
structural design. As a result, the module fabrication 
start may be delayed. Since the module fabrication is 
often on the project critical path, this becomes a day￾for-day schedule extension.
Of course, there are mitigating circumstances that can 
help offset each of these base assumptions. Still, as a first 
pass at a schedule comparison, the longer module sched￾ule will force the more careful analysis of the entire suite of 
module benefits should the project be schedule-driven.
If this initial extra duration assumption for the module 
schedule is sufficient to kill the module option, then addi￾tional analysis and conversations with both the site con￾struction team as well as the module fabricator should be 
initiated early to see what benefits from modularization 
have not been identified (e.g., a longer duration to work 
underground and foundations, module schedule surety, 
doubling up on module assembly and delivery, less dura￾tion for commissioning, more pre-commissioning at the 
fab yard, etc.). In addition, the owner/client needs to be 
brought into such a discussion to determine what can be 
done from their perspective to allow the EPC to start criti￾cal activities earlier (e.g., early approvals, pre-FID funding 
for critical path engineering design activities, etc.). This 
effort should result in a more module-friendly schedule.
Step 4 Perform Options Analysis
• Evaluate three or more module options.
With all the major details identified with respect to project 
drivers and module potential, some calculating (or analyz￾ing) needs to be performed to see if there is a particular 
percentage of modularization or type of modularization that 
provides the optimal achievement of the project drivers.
Typically, with little or no module details, this option anal￾ysis is initially limited to evaluating the cost deltas for a 
low or medium or high percentage of the project scope 
to be modularized. As a first pass, assumptions can be 
made in terms of the impact on the project cost and 
schedule, assuming a 10–20% effort or a 35–50% effort 
or a 60–75% effort in terms of modularization to total 
project scope.
In addition, several different module fabrication yards 
should be selected for analysis, depending on the project 
module scope and location of the project site. Typically, 
a good number to begin with is 3, with all being from dif￾ferent parts of the world and a mix of large and smaller 
fabrication yards. This will provide support for a poten￾tial options mix from lots of large modules to just a few 
smaller ones and everything in between. Remember, the 
aim in this step is to look at the major options in terms of 
number, size, and complexity.
THE MODULE BUSINESS CASE ANALYSIS TOOL
If you or your company are starting the module business case analysis entirely from scratch, there are two options:
1. If your company is a CII member, download the modularization toolkit from here: https://www.construction-institute.org/
resources/knowledgebase/knowledge-areas/modularization/topics/rt-283. This toolkit is only available to the CII members.
2. Others, including students and academics, can download one of the authors’ papers (Choi et al., 2019) entitled, “Modularization 
Business Case Analysis Model for Industrial Projects,” which is available here: https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-
5479.0000683
The modularization toolkit was developed by MCBA (https://www.construction-institute.org/groups/communities-for-business￾advancement/modularization), where both authors are leaders of the group and the lead tool developers. The first tool in the modu￾larization toolkit is the modularization business case analysis tool. One of the authors enhanced the tool and published an academic 84 The Business Case for Modularization
Most EPC companies have some type of cost analysis 
program that can be modified slightly to capture these 
delta costs. If not, there is commercial software, including 
the Aspen ACCE, which has a cost-estimating section 
specific to a module project.
The result of this analysis is a graphical representation of 
the potential savings that can be realized by that particu￾lar set of cost and productivity options, along with the 
summation of the values of all the soft issue benefits of 
going modular. The tool inputs are shown in Figure 5.8, 
and the outputs are shown in Figure 5.9 and Table 5.2 to 
give the readers an idea of the simplicity of the analysis.
The key to this analysis is to be able to place dollar values 
not only on the tangible differences, such as cheaper but 
more productive labor, additional engineering requirements, 
additional shipping costs, installation at site, but to be able 
to also identify a dollar value for all of the soft benefits, such 
as safety, quality, craft skills, working at grade, working in 
a temperate climate, schedule surety, etc. While it may not 
be politically correct to place a dollar value on safety or 
journal paper (Choi et al., 2019) in a renowned journal in the area of management in engineering. Thus, reading (Choi et al., 2019) will 
be sufficient to understand the tool. The following explains the tool briefly.
The modularization business case analysis tool is an Excel spreadsheet-based cost comparison tool to be used as a first pass at this 
option analysis. While not as sophisticated as many private EPC companies’ estimating tools, this tool was set up for first-time users 
and had the following attributes (Choi et al., 2019):
• It is focused on identifying the optimal level of craft work-hours to move offsite.
• It is based on (Construction Industry Institute, 2012; O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2013; Choi and O’Connor, 2015).
• It prompts the addition of data for major project drivers.
• It accepts additional details.
• It is iterative and recommended to be used in subsequent project phase analyses.
• It is flexible and can be adjusted to meet specific project or client requirements.
• It provides specific savings, not just indicative values.
• It provides an idea of the expected values, which can be derived by going deeper into the details, where the actual values can be 
calculated.
The tool prompts input based on the business case flowchart, requesting key data requirements (Choi and O’Connor, 2015; Choi 
et al., 2019), such as:
• project total installed cost (TIC)
• project schedule savings
• percentage of modularization
• relative work-hour costs
• labor productivity
• modularization drivers and benefits.5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 85
community relations, there is one, and there should be an 
effort to identify it because the sum of all the hard and soft 
benefits equals the actual cost delta of taking the module 
alternative. If you are interested in learning more about the 
tool in detail, please refer to (Choi et al., 2019).
Step 5 Develop Module Scope, and Step 6 Develop 
Module Size
• Identify the best option determined in Step #4 in terms 
of a definitive scope.
Step 5.1 Module Scope
This is where the early percentage option that provides 
the optimal project solution actually must be turned into a 
definitive reality. Typically, this takes the form of a plot plan 
or some other general layout where the module scope 
can be identified in terms of area and extent.
So, why are these two steps considered separate from 
each other and separate from the option analysis? This is 
necessary because running a calculation that shows the 
optimal cost benefit is, for example, 75% modularization 
and identifying all the equipment, labor, and materials 
required to do so and placing them into a module con￾figuration that will achieve this 75% modularization are 
two completely different activities. The challenge, espe￾cially when working to achieve the higher percentages 
of modularization, is finding the concentrated pockets of 
construction craft work-hour requirements for complet￾ing an area and then bringing these together in proxim￾ity to each other to permit them all to be incorporated 
into a module.
So, how is this done? During the early project phases, 
the project management must rely on the historical infor￾mation regarding craft work-hour requirements to com￾plete different areas of the project plant for this analysis. 
Then, working with the process experts (who understand 
what can be moved around with respect to the process 
flows) and the piping experts (who can lay out some 
alternatives in terms of connecting these areas together), 
one can start the evaluation of what arrangements in the 
sub-processes can be laid out that will be able to con￾centrate the craft requirements. This is critical since the 
aim is to transfer craft work-hours from the project site to 
an offsite area like the module fabrication yard.
The pictorial plot plan development example (Figures 5.10 
and 5.11) shows how the equipment within a sub-system 
can be located “all over the map” (Figure 5.10) and how 
the concentration of craft work-hours (site labor inten￾sity) also varies from one group of equipment to another 
(Figure 5.11). Figures 5.10, 5.11, and 5.12 are the same 
as Figures 4.9, 4.10, and 4.11. The exercise required is 
to find as many of the high labor intensity pieces of equip￾ment and areas as possible that can be gathered in the 
same proximity to help define a potential module.
By considering BOTH the site craft labor work-hour con￾centrations and the sub-process equipment groupings 
when combining into modules, the ideal result is sub￾process-specific modules that are able to incorporate the 
maximum site work-hours possible. The result in this styl￾ized example where these two goals are worked together 
is the arrangement of the six sub-systems into a geo￾graphically centralized area that was consolidated and 
realigned based on the craft labor density data into the 
final “six-pack” module configuration (see Figure  5.12). 
As an added benefit, it turns out that when you can con￾solidate and centralize the sub-processes and “stack” 
them on more than one level, the actual footprint of the 
plant is decreased, sometimes substantially, as noted in 
Figure 5.12, where the final module configuration and siz￾ing have been overlaid on the original stick-built plot area 
of Figures 5.10 and 5.11. This comes in handy where the 
plant site space is a premium.
Step 5.2 Module Size
For an unrestricted module shipping envelope, this is the 
direct result of the work done in concentrating the craft labor 
requirements and sub-processes into areas. However, a 
project seldom has an unrestricted shipping envelope. So, 86 The Business Case for Modularization
Figure 5.8 Modularization business case analysis tool example (input page).
while trying to group equipment into modules, one needs 
to remember the first criterion defined on a potential mod￾ule project was the size of the shipping envelope, or put 
another way, how “big a box can be shipped to site.”
So, in the above-described effort of defining module 
scope, in the back of everyone’s mind should have been 
how big one can make the modules. Because while a 
smaller shipping envelope does not necessarily kill a 
module project, it does make it more challenging because 
instead of the potential six large modules from the exam￾ple above, one must find a way to efficiently further sub￾divide each of these six sub-processes into several more 
modules to fit the shipping envelope without creating a 5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 87
Figure 5.8 (Continued)88 The Business Case for Modularization
large additional delta craft workforce requirement at the 
site to re-connect the module after it arrives.
To summarize, module size is important. Where larger 
equipment and complex systems are present, larger 
modules are preferred over smaller ones in order to 
get complete sub-systems into a single module, allow￾ing a higher completion percentage in the fab yard and 
reducing interface connections at the site. When the sub￾systems allow for potentially smaller options, the authors 
favor these, assuming an equivalent number of site craft 
hours can be transferred to the fab yard. Smaller modules 
are faster to assemble, easier to ship, and offer more flex￾ibility in terms of movement to site and setting at the site. 
If properly laid out, the additional interface connections at 
the site can be minimized.
250000000
200,000,000 195,461,250 194,397,50
200000000
150000000
100000000
50000000
50000000
Expected
Stick-built
Cost -
Module
Portion
Etc.
TAX
Etc.
TAX
Tran. Insurance
Cost
Tran. Insurance Cost
Import Duties
Cost
Import Duties Cost
Yard
Management
Cost
Yard Management
Cost
Engineering
Cost
Engineering Cost
Shipping Cost
Shipping Cost
Installation
Cost at Site
Installation Cost at
Site
Module
Assembly Cost
at Assembly
Yard
Module Assembly
Cost at Assembly
Yard
Fabrication
Cost at Fab
Yard (Mtl. &
Labor)
Fabrication Cost at
Fab Yard (Mtl. &
Labor)
Stick-built
Cost -
Common
Site Work
Stick-built Cost
- Common Site
Work
Stick-built Cost￾Common Site Work
after deducting
Modularization
Benefits
150000000
0
Stick Built
Project
Modular Modular with modularization benefits
110000 110000
115000 115000
120000 115000
120000
115000
170000
170000
5000000
5000000
26400000
26400000
13090000
13090000
300000
300000
41250
41250
150000000
149050800
Figure 5.9 Modularization business case analysis tool example (output page). Source: Choi et al. (2019). Reproduced with permission of American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE).5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 89
Step 7 Produce Module Definition and Index
• Develop the actual list of modules.
Once the module scope and module size have been 
identified, this effort becomes a high grading of the initial 
pass made at trying to fit everything in the module. As it 
turns out, there are some pieces of equipment that are 
very well suited for modularization, and there are others 
that need to be left out of the module. In this step, these 
details are evaluated, and decisions should be made with 
respect to the final module layouts.
Special considerations should be given to any piece of 
equipment that is extremely large, extremely heavy, or 
has rotating parts. Any of these can create inefficiencies 
in design with respect to the module. For example:
• Tall towers. These create large moments at their base 
due to wind and seismic loading. Massive concrete 
foundations typically resist these moments. But in the 
case of a module, these same moments must now 
be resisted by the module steel, requiring excessively 
large steel girders or massive trussing to withstand 
these loads. Often, if the connections and amount of 
“dressing” or finishing of these towers are not excessive, 
it is more efficient to plan to set these towers just outside 
the module limits using the more conventional concrete 
foundation for support and resistance to these forces.
• Heavy vessels. While not as critical as the tall towers 
since they will not experience the large moment forces 
from seismic and wind, they still require massive steel 
plate girders to support and bridge the weight over to 
the main module column foundations. Again, this is not 
a showstopper, but it may be worth a second look at 
how critical it is to have this large vessel in the module 
versus just outside the module limits. This decision is 
again driven by how much more hook-up is required 
at the site to connect the vessel back into the module 
equipment and piping.
• Rotating equipment. This is the most difficult of the 
three to analyze. While small pumps and other rotat￾ing machinery pose absolutely no issues on a module, 
as the piece of machinery gets larger and the rotating 
forces increase, at some point, there will need to be 
an analysis of the interaction of the rotating equipment 
Table 5.2 Modularization business case analysis results example.
Summary of cost results
Results Unit July 10, 2017
Estimated stick-built TIC $ 200,000,000.00
Target % modularization % 25
Common site work % 75
Technically feasible Y/N Y
Relative WH cost at site/WH $/
WH
275
Relative WH cost at assembly yard/WH $/
WH
66
Relative WH cost at fabrication yard/WH $/
WH
99
Stick-built cost—common site work $ 150,000,000.00
Expected stick-built cost—module portion $ 50,000,000.00
Module cost $ 45,461,250.00
• Installation cost at site $ 41,250.00
• Shipping cost $ 300,000.00
• Fabrication cost at fabrication yard $ 13,090,000.00
• (materials and labor)
• Module assembly cost at assembly yard $ 26,400,000.00
• Engineering cost $ 5,000,000.00
• Yard management cost $ 170,000.00
• Tax $ 115,000.00
• Import duties cost $ 120,000.00
• Transportation insurance cost $ 115,000.00
• Early investment cost (finance) $ 110,000.00
• Miscellaneous $ 110,000.00
Modularization benefits $ 1,849,200.00
Schedule saving benefit $ 900,000.00
Modularization benefits $ 949,200.00
• Safety benefit $ 150,000.00
• Quality benefit $ 150,000.00
• Benefits to local community $ 10,000.00
• Contingency benefit $ 20,000.00
• Site indirect benefit $ 150,000.00
• Risk benefit $ 369,200.00
• Other expected benefits $ 100,000.00
Estimated stick-built TIC $ 200,000,000.00
Estimated modular project TIC $ 193,612,050.00
Estimated total cost saving $ 6,387,950.00
Source: Choi et al. (2019). Reproduced with permission of American Society of 
Civil Engineers (ASCE).90 The Business Case for Modularization
Figure 5.10 Stylized stick-built plot plan outlin￾ing the six sub-process areas.
Figure 5.11 Same project plot plan but 
showing stick-built site craft work-hour 
concentrations.
Figure 5.12 Equivalent module “six-pack” 
layout with each sub-process as a sepa￾rate module.5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 91
with the structure in terms of vibration and damaging 
harmonics. Historically, very large compressors and 
other rotating machinery were set on massive foun￾dations attached with special plates or rails that were 
epoxy-grouted into place. The epoxy grout was strong 
enough as well as “flexible” enough to withstand the vi￾brations and maintain a crack-free connection between 
the piece of machinery and its concrete foundation. In 
some cases, where these large rotating machines or 
compressors needed to be elevated to allow piping 
to be connected below the machine, so these large 
concrete foundations were elevated on massive legs, 
forming a huge “tabletop.” The forming and pouring of 
these massive tabletop concrete structures comprise a 
very craft labor-intensive operation, so there has always 
been an interest in options that will provide an alterna￾tive to this site-intensive activity.
The module offers such an alternative; however, the 
dynamics of the machinery rotational forces must be 
accurately determined so that destructive vibration and 
harmonics do not develop. Besides the annoying vibra￾tion that could be transmitted throughout the module 
structure, there is the real concern of structural fatigue 
and premature fatigue of many of the minor connections 
on instruments and the wear and tear on the more deli￾cate instrumentation itself. Historically, this analysis has 
been difficult and a bit of a black box solution with no 
guaranteed satisfactory results. As a result, many clients 
and EPCs fall back on the tried-and-true use of large con￾crete masses to withstand these forces. However, with 
the higher speed aero-derivative (jet engine compressors 
and turbines) type drivers, the forces to be designed for 
are less, and the industry trend is toward the installation 
of larger and larger capacity rotating equipment on the 
modules. So, while we expect to be able to incorporate 
larger and larger machinery into a module, this is still 
something that must be evaluated early and thoroughly.
As all these considerations are identified and analyzed, 
the module definition and index (listing) continue to be 
developed and refined. While it is not expected that the 
first pass at this effort will result in the final and complete 
listing, it is expected that this must be completed as soon 
as possible because this index forms the basis for many 
different project initiatives involving these modules, such 
as fab yard analysis, shipping considerations, HH road, 
and logistics to the plant site, size and capacity of the 
MOF, and temporary module storage, to name but a few.
Step 8 Develop Execution Strategy and 
Execution Plan
• Draft the project execution plan incorporating modu￾lar concepts.
By the time one gets to this step in the 13-step business 
case flowchart, enough module-specific information has 
been identified to be incorporated into the project execu￾tion, which in many cases is still based on a stick-built 
strategy. Because of this need, we provide a definitive 
step in the flowchart specifically for this incorporation of 
module-specific information and the dedication of the 
time to critically identify the adjustments required to the 
project execution now that modules have become part of 
the process. With at least 107 execution plan differences 
(EPDs) identified by the CII RT-283 research (which will 
be further defined in Chapter 6), the development of the 
module execution strategy is no small task.
Initially, the project execution strategy should be critically 
reviewed in terms of the demands that the module effort has 
on the rest of the project continuity. For example, we know 
from the previous flowchart steps that we need to accom￾modate the modules in terms of earlier needs of the following:
• Size, as it pertains to early shipping and logistics 
requirements.
• Engineering, as it pertains to the early module struc￾ture and equipment layout.
• Materials, with respect to early bulk purchases, even￾tually required for initial module fabrication.
• Equipment design, where specific details are required 
to design supports and connection details on the struc￾tural steel.
• Fab yard analysis, where early identification of the 
proper fab yard is required for interaction on the design 
as well as initiating early contractual efforts required to 
develop a proper agreement.
• Logistics, where early efforts are required for the HH 
route right of way (ROW) as well as early contracting for 
the vessel shipments.92 The Business Case for Modularization
In the initial phases of the project, this execution strategy 
needs to have at least reviewed all 107 applicable “modu￾lar” execution aspects for incorporation into this strategy. 
As we will explain in more detail in Chapter 6, these EPDs 
cover 21 major topics spanning several project phases 
beginning in the opportunity framing phase and extend￾ing into the EPC phase. These 21 topics impacted by the 
module execution philosophy run the gamut from identi￾fying project objectives to final system testing, commis￾sioning, and start-up and are listed below to help frame 
the extent of the impacts (Construction Industry Insti￾tute, 2012; O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2013, 2016):
• Project Objectives
• Organization & Staffing
• Modularization Scoping, Layout Process, & Plot Plan
• Transport Route Study & Planning
• Planning & Cost Estimating
• Craft Labor Relations
• Contract Strategy
• HSSE & Social Impacts
• Risk Management
• Modularization Business Case Validation/Refinement
• Stakeholder Alignment and Reframing
• Fabricators, Contractors, & Subcontractors
• Procurement Strategy and Owner-Furnished Equipment
• Basic Design Standards, Models, & Deliverables
• Methods, Heavy Lifts, & Construction Facilities
• Procurement, Vendor Data, & Expediting
• Scope Freeze & Change Management
• Project Controls & Site Management
• Quality Assurance/Quality Control
• Detailed Design Deliverables
• System Testing, Commissioning, & Start-up
As mentioned, this incorporation is no small task. Its 
development should begin as early as the first pass at 
this 13-step process during the opportunity framing 
phase and continue until all details have been identified 
and resolved. While there was an attempt to arrange the 
list above in terms of “when” these items are initially iden￾tified and worked, there is no set or correct sequence 
for addressing or completing them. However, it is impor￾tant that as soon as one of the items comes up, it be 
addressed in whatever level of detail currently available, if 
for no other reason than to create a placeholder or “tickler 
file” for completing when more information is available.
Step 9 Produce a Definitive Cost Estimate
• Ensure the project cost estimate incorporates all 
things modular.
This is the point in the 13-step flowchart where the “offi￾cial” project cost estimate should be evaluated in terms 
of modular impacts. Yes, we performed a cost exercise in 
Step #3, but that effort was limited in scope and included 
as one of many areas reviewed at a high level to make 
an initial determination of the module potential. Step #3 
analysis was not meant to be the all-inclusive project cost 
estimate. It was meant to be a “quick and dirty” analysis, 
emphasizing the main contributors to the cost benefits of 
modularization with the limited information available.
So, somewhere in this 13-step business case flowchart, 
there needed to be a deeper dive into the project costs 
with respect to modularization. Because, along with all 
the obvious benefits of modularization, there are potential 
downsides in terms of the cost impacts. Items such as 
the following are not incorporated in the Step #3 high￾level cost study:
• Impact of early engineering costs for module design sup￾port (including risk or reward for these early expenditures).
• Impact of additional project risk in adopting a module 
philosophy (impact from late delivery due to module ex￾ecution plan).
• Additional costs associated with the module fab yard 
oversight (construction management).
So, the cost estimate associated with this step is to fur￾ther detail and complete the project cost estimate. In 
this step, the module team members should be plugged 
into the project cost estimate development to ensure 5.5 The 13-­Step Business Case Flowchart 93
that not only the obvious benefits and differences are 
included, but also the not so obvious ones. The differ￾ences between the cost estimate in Step #3 versus Step 
#9 are summarized below:
• The cost estimate in Step #3 is an internal analysis 
strictly limited to identifying the module potential.
• The cost estimate of Step #9 is the project cost esti￾mate, an emphasis on the module impacts and their 
interaction with the project estimate to ensure the pro￾ject estimating team includes everything modular into it.
Step 10 Produce a Definitive Schedule
• Ensure the project schedule incorporates all things 
modular.
Like the cost discussion in Step #9, the scheduling effort 
has the same approach and goals. The early scheduling 
efforts initially reviewed in Step #3 were strictly associ￾ated with how the change from a stick-built to a module 
execution philosophy would impact the overall project 
schedule. The details were not available and not fully 
addressed.
But with the project’s adoption of the modular philoso￾phy, the project team, with the input from the dedicated 
module team, needs to concentrate on the schedule to 
ensure that all things modular are included. With all the 
interrelationships between and among the various groups 
within the project, there needs to be a concerted effort 
at determining predecessors and successors in terms of 
the critical path schedule for developing a module ready 
design with purchase-ready materials that will meet 
the fabrication yard requirements. This means that the 
schedule development and review must be coordinated 
with leads that understand not only their needs but also 
how their deliverables impact the other groups.
Again, as with the cost step, the schedule effort in this 
step is more coordination of the schedule to ensure it 
truly is representative of the project schedule with a mod￾ular approach.
Step 11 Check Module Viability
• End of flowchart check on whether the module option 
is still viable.
There is not much to say about this step. But while it looks 
like a simple YES/NO toggle on the flowchart, it is more 
than that. It is a formal step set up to pause the business 
case analysis, re-evaluate all the work performed, and 
contemplate where this business case and the project are 
going. The reason for this step in the analysis is to deter￾mine if something is not working, either for a segment 
of the modularization scope or the entire project. This is 
when you officially say “stop”—this plan is not working for 
one reason or the other, and the project team needs to 
evaluate the concern officially and act on it.
Step 12 Proceed with Modularization to the Next 
Project Phase
• Team consensus to move with the current modulariza￾tion option into the next project phase.
This is the affirmation step where the project team takes 
the currently identified module scope for this project, 
confirms it is the optimal module scope and moves it 
into the next project phase of detailed development. It is 
understood that there may be some adjustments to this 
scope in the next project phases, but everyone agrees 
that it is currently the best option at this time.
Step 13 Fall Back to Stick-Built
• Team agreement that part or all of the modular effort 
needs to be adjusted or reverted back to the more tra￾ditional stick-built approach.
This is the alternative to moving forward with the pro￾posed optimal module solution. It is, in effect, saying that 
the project execution philosophy will be modified for the 
next project phase from what was considered the optimal 
modular solution to something else—typically less than 
what was currently being recommended.
So, how and why would this flowchart analysis need to 
revisit the conclusion identifying the optimal module solu￾tion for this project? It could be any one of a multitude of 
reasons, for example:
• The owner/client wants to accelerate the completion by 
building as the design is developed.
• The licensor is still developing the process and is ex￾pecting to continually make changes or adjustments 94 The Business Case for Modularization
to the process, causing major re-work throughout the 
execution phase.
• The site must be moved to another location with a more 
restrictive shipping envelope, precluding the previously 
optimized modules’ size, number, or weight.
Of course, a move to step #13 does not preclude modu￾larization in its entirety. The cause or causes that drove 
the project to say “no” to the optimal module solution do 
not eliminate the opportunity to suggest a smaller scope 
for pre-assembly. This step only opens the door to all 
the other alternatives to the current proposal. It is hoped 
that the reasons for deciding against the optimal mod￾ule solution identified by step #12 are critically reviewed 
to ensure they are legitimate and no workarounds exist. 
Then, it is suggested that all the alternatives to the opti￾mal module solution previously abandoned are equally 
thoroughly and critically reviewed in terms of their ben￾efits to the project.
5.6 How Often Should the Business Case 
Flowchart Be Utilized?
Ideally, it should be initially used as soon as a pro￾ject becomes an idea in the owner/client CEO’s head. 
While many details may not be available, the identified 
ones need to be vetted against a modular execution 
philosophy. So, it should be started in opportunity fram￾ing and then reviewed at least once during each of the 
subsequent project phases: assessment/selection/basic 
design and potentially taken even into EPC. Additionally, 
review updates should be made when something signifi￾cant occurs in the project execution planning that sug￾gests a change in the project deliverables.
5.7 Summary
It is hoped that by this time, you have reached the con￾clusion that some amount of modularization is not only 
possible but beneficial to every project. With the module 
potential identified, the next step is to determine what the 
optimal module solution might be. The 13-step Business 
Case provided here is the road map for this identifica￾tion. Its step-by-step approach provided not only a 
comprehensive guide identifying the major factors to 
be considered in this search for the ideal module scope 
but also the suggested order in which to consider them. 
Then, for additional support, links to the Modularization 
Toolkit (including the Business Case Analysis Tool) devel￾oped by the CII Modularization Community of Business 
Development (MCBA), as well as links to an advanced 
version of the tool (developed by one of the authors), have 
been provided. In either version, this Excel spreadsheet￾based cost comparison tool is suitable as a first pass at 
module option analysis. While not as sophisticated as 
many private EPC companies’ estimating tools, it is a 
good initial set-up for first-time users and easily adapt￾able to any particular project specifics.
References
aspentech (2022) Aspen Capital Cost EstimatorTM. Available 
at: https://www.aspentech.com/en/products/engineering/
aspen-capital-cost-estimator (Accessed: 3 January 2022).
Choi, J.O. and O’Connor, J.T. (2015) Modularization Business 
Case Analysis: Learning from Industry Practices Tool, 
In Al-Hussein, M. et al. (Eds.) 2015 Modular and Offsite 
Construction (MOC) Summit. Edmonton, Alberta, Canada: 
University of Alberta, pp. 69–76. doi:10.29173/mocs178.
Choi, J.O. et al. (2019) Modularization Business Case Analysis 
Model for Industrial Projects. Journal of Management 
in Engineering, 35(3), 04019004. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
ME.1943-5479.0000683.
Construction Industry Institute (1986) Control of Construction 
Project Scope. Austin, TX: The University of Texas at 
Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
Construction Industry Institute (2012) Industrial Modularization: 
How to Optimize; How to Maximize. Austin, TX: The 
University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
O’Brien, W.J., O’Connor, J.T., and Choi, J.O. (2015) 
Modularization Business Case: Process Flowchart and 
Major Considerations. In Al-Hussein, M. et al. (Eds.) 
2015 Modular and Offsite Construction (MOC) Summit. 
Edmonton, Canada: University of Alberta, pp. 60–67. 
doi:10.29173/mocs178.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2013) Industrial 
Modularization: How to Optimize; How to Maximize. Austin, 
TX: The University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry 
Institute.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2016) Industrial 
Project Execution Planning: Modularization versus 
Stick-Built. Practice Periodical on Structural Design and 
Construction, 21(1), 04015014. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
SC.1943-5576.0000270.chapter 6
95
So far, we have talked about what modularization is, what 
modules look like, and, in Chapter 5, how to determine 
the best mix of modules for a project. That is a lot of 
new information and additional work that is not typical in 
a stick-built project, so the two essential questions are: 
“Who is accountable for all these newly acquired project 
responsibilities, activities, and goals?” And then, “What is 
the difference between the stick-built project execution 
and the modular project execution philosophies?” In this 
chapter, we will begin working on answering these two 
essential questions in terms of the module team and the 
execution plan differences.
6.1 The Module Team
Since the modularization effort impacts all aspects of 
a project, typically, there is really no one team mem￾ber, group of people or single engineering discipline in 
the stick-built project execution philosophy that can be 
pointed to and assigned such an activity with the simple 
directive, “You! Handle it!” (Well, a project manager could 
delegate like this, but it might not work very well, even 
if accepted.) There is just too much background knowl￾edge to develop and too many interrelationships to un￾derstand and manage to simply assign the task to a new 
person or group naïve in the modular philosophy.
The best approach to managing a modular project is 
to set up a module team. The size can vary from a sin￾gle person (for the very small local project) to a multi￾disciplinary team of individuals (for the large international 
endeavor). Nevertheless, regardless of project size, 
several important common requirements of this module 
team need to be identified and incorporated.
6.1.1 A Module-Savvy Leader
The module team leader must have had past experience 
in coordinating one or more module projects. At the very 
minimum, they must have at least been associated in a 
management role of some sort on a module project and 
worked on that project from beginning to end (inception 
to start-up). Why? We have previously mentioned (and 
will go into more detail later in this chapter) the over 100 
execution plan differences between the stick-built and 
modular projects. Without the benefit of working on a 
module project from beginning to end, the proposed 
module lead would not have seen and would not appre￾ciate all the nuances in terms of project deliverables, their 
interactions, and timing, and how they must shift from 
a stick-built project basis in order to meet the needs of 
the module fabrication yard initially, and ultimately the site 
construction team and startup and commissioning.
Reading about it (even in this book) is not the same as 
living through it (on a project). There is nothing like work￾ing on the daily challenges of coordinating information, 
materials, contracts, etc., on a day-to-day basis. (And 
only realizing later, using your much more accurate 20-20 
hindsight, that you almost “screwed” it up.) But this first 
(or previous) module opportunity will have provided you 
insight into how you might handle things the next time. 
Speaking from experience, the second (and subsequent) 
module jobs went much smoother than the first because 
of these “learning” moments.
The Module Team and 
Execution Plan Differences96 The Module Team and Execution Plan Differences
Of course, it does the project no good if this module￾savvy leader cannot effectively communicate and truly 
lead the project into action based on project timing and 
sequencing they are unfamiliar with. So, this module￾savvy leader must also command some people skills, 
be good at getting the module team together, and ulti￾mately get the project moving in the right direction at the 
correct time.
6.1.2 The Module Team Members
Unless the module lead is a superhero and can work 
continuously and tirelessly, they will need a team. The 
team should be made up of “like-minded” individuals 
who either share the understanding of the modulariza￾tion concepts and timing or at least are open to learning 
about them. In addition, because this project philoso￾phy impacts every team and workgroup within the pro￾ject, the team should have a representative from each 
of these workgroups actively involved. It requires a spe￾cial person to be a team member––one willing to spend 
a bit of “extra” time above and beyond their “regular” 
job assignment to understand the modular philosophy, 
how it impacts the overall project, and in particular, 
how it impacts their specific workgroup. As the repre￾sentative for that workgroup in the module team, each 
team member, who is the link from their group to the 
module team and the interface within their discipline 
or workgroup, to first identify changes that will need 
to be made and then (almost like a “double agent”) re￾port back to the module team on progress or issues. 
While not as covert as characterized by the term, it is 
important that feedback both comes from and goes 
to each workgroup on module interactions in a much 
more collaborative nature than what most project mem￾bers are familiar with. So, each member of the module 
team ALSO needs to be a good communicator and a 
people person.
6.1.3 Critical Team Members
While everyone on the team has a part to play with re￾spect to industrial modularization projects, the following 
members representing the following fields are critical to 
its success. They, therefore, need a good understanding 
of their particular roles.
6.1.3.1 Civil/Structural
Since this discipline essentially “leads” the engineering 
disciplines in terms of design requirements and early tim￾ing, a member who will represent them must have strong 
leadership skills and a good understanding of the mod￾ule process.
6.1.3.2 Piping
This discipline has historically “led” the design team on 
stick-built projects. Again, with the shift on needs for 
the fabrication yard, a piping lead must also have strong 
leadership skills in order to be a member as they will have 
to help guide their discipline in “adjusting” to the slightly 
different requirements of a module project (and the need 
to support the civil/structural group).
6.1.3.3 Process
With the need to “move” equipment around to better fit 
within the confines of the modules, this team member 
needs to be open and flexible in terms of alternative ar￾rangements for their process equipment, understanding 
that in some cases, minor adjustments (e.g., pump head 
requirements, elevation changes, etc.) may be needed to 
result in the best module equipment layout. They need 
to be able to identify such minor changes and be open to 
accommodating them if the result is a greatly improved 
module equipment and piping arrangement and the pro￾cess is not compromised.
6.1.3.4 Construction
This group is always critical, as this group is the recipi￾ent of the design and fabrication efforts and, in effect, 
the project engineering “client.” But, on the other hand, 
construction needs to be flexible in developing the project 
schedule in order to accommodate a later delivery of the 
modules and be proactive in communicating its needs 
back to the other groups.
The construction group lead needs to understand the 
ramifications of the module schedule and its inherent 
inflexibility compared to the typical and historical stick￾built execution plan. As such, the construction group lead 
needs to follow a more collaborative approach between 6.1 The Module Team 97
construction and engineering where each group must rely 
on the other for communication and feedback. This will 
ensure the move away from the past, where a somewhat 
more transactional approach was sometimes employed 
by the construction team, with the goal of just getting the 
materials to the site and then figuring out how best to 
assemble them.
6.1.3.5 Procurement
This group must adapt to changes in the procurement 
strategy with respect to the newer needs for “partial engi￾neering deliverables” for early modular design.
6.1.3.6 Sub-Contracting
This group must deal with the additional segmented con￾tracting of the fabrication yard as well as the vessels re￾quired to ship the modules.
6.1.4 Integration into Project Management
It does the project no good if the module team has a 
great leader and a great people-oriented module pro￾gressive team but does not properly fit the module team 
into the organization. The module team is a unique group 
that supports project management but has ties directly 
to the rank and file of the various project groups. Since 
the team receives its input from various groups, it should 
report out at a management level above these groups. 
See Figure 6.1 for typical pre-front-end engineering de￾sign (FEED) module team integration. Figure  6.1 is the 
same as Figure 2.3.
Notice that the module coordinator is on the same level 
as the Engineering, Construction, and Project Sup￾port Services Managers, reporting directly to the pro￾ject manager. This structure funnels all module-related 
project information directly to project management and 
above any other group managers who may not be as 
proactive in making changes required for the modular 
philosophy. The dotted lines are the module team rep￾resentatives’ secondary ties to the module coordinator 
and module team.
6.1.5 Module Team Growth
As the project progresses into front-end engineering de￾sign (FEED), the module team and organization expand 
to reflect the additional team members now working on 
the modules themselves, but the reporting and relation￾ship in the project organization remain the same. See 
Figure 6.2 for a typical FEED and EPC module team inte￾gration. Figure 6.2 is the same as Figure 2.4.
Figure 6.1 Typical pre-FEED phase module team integration into organization chart.98 The Module Team and Execution Plan Differences
6.2 Execution Plan Differences (EPDs)
The second aspect of the modular philosophy we want 
to delve into in this chapter is how this philosophy is in￾corporated into the overall project planning. These are re￾ferred to as execution plan differences (EPDs). These are 
differences between the stick-built project execution and 
the modular project execution philosophies. These differ￾ences begin impacting the project as soon as the project 
has been identified (in opportunity framing) and continue 
through EPC with most of the major impacts in selec￾tion (pre-FEED) and basic design (FEED). During the re￾search development of CII RT-283 (Construction Industry 
Institute,  2013), these EPDs were identified along with 
their approximate timing in terms of a project phase. CII 
RT-283  identified 107 differences covering 21 different 
project topics. Later, O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi (2016) 
published them in an academic journal. See Table 6.1 for 
the 21 execution planning topics and the number of plan￾ning differences by each topic.
Rather than reiterate the information found in the references 
(Construction Industry Institute, 2013; O’Connor, O’Brien 
and Choi, 2016) under EPDs, we will focus on some of 
the more prominent differences in more detail. Furthermore, 
we have provided our thoughts in terms of the priority and 
timing of each of these EPDs below. There is nothing his￾torical or scientific in these comments, only our perception 
based on past modular jobs we have been associated with. 
Refer to (O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2016) for the full 
list of execution differences. The authors would like to note 
that many proposed EPDs below are earlier than the origi￾nal EPDs identified by the Construction Industry Institute 
(2013) and O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi (2016).
6.2.1 Guiding Principles
We based our “newer” ranking and earlier execution on a 
couple of guiding principles.
6.2.1.1 Planning Must Start Early
Even if you are not sure of the details or implementation 
approach, if the project can identify the need, it will go a 
long way in getting it addressed and solved. Most, if not 
Figure 6.2 Typical FEED and EPC phases organization chart for modularization.6.2 Execution Plan Differences (EPDs) 99
all, of these EPDs need to be initially addressed in ear￾lier project phases than shown in the original Execution 
Plan Differences identified by the Construction Industry 
Institute (2013) and O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi (2016).
6.2.1.2 Previous Module Job Experience
Because there are so many EPDs between the stick-built 
project and the modular project, the module project man￾agement must include the support of a module coordina￾tor and supporting team who have previous module job 
experience.
6.2.1.3 Project Management Support
Again, because of all the project execution differences, 
the project’s top management (for both the owner/client 
and the EPC contractor) must support the implementation 
of these EPDs. This is not just lip service in meetings but 
the actual hands-on approach to the day-to-day project 
activities. Project management needs to understand 
enough about the module execution to be able to ad￾dress how deviations might impact the overall project. If 
they are not well versed in these differences, then project 
management needs to make sure that they include the 
module coordinator and team as required to help iden￾tify and address the impacts of deviations in the project 
module plan brought on by the modularization decision.
6.2.2 Topics of Execution Plan Differences
The list below provides possible EPD topics for a modu￾lar project:
• Project Objectives
• Organization & Staffing
Table 6.1 The 21 execution planning topics and number of planning differences by topic.
Project phase Topic number Execution planning topic Number of planning 
items/differences
A. Plans for selection A-1 Project objectives 1
A-2 Organization and staffing 4
A-3 Health, safety, security, and environment and social impacts 3
A-4 Craft labor relations 1
A-5 Contract strategy 5
A-6 Procurement strategy and owner-furnished equipment 6
A-7 Planning and cost estimating 10
A-8 Transport route study and planning 5
A-9 Risk management 2
B. Plans for basic design B-1 Stakeholder alignment and refraining 4
B-2 Modularization scoping, layout process, and plot plan 12
B-3 Fabricators, contractors, and subcontractors 4
B-4 Methods, heavy lifts, and construction facilities 3
B-5 Procurement, vendor data, and expediting 6
B-6 Basic design standards, models, and deliverables 10
B-7 Modularization business case validation/refinement 2
B-8 Scope freeze and change management 5
C. Plans for engineering, procurement, 
and construction
C-1 Project controls and site management 7
C-2 Quality assurance/quality control 6
C-3 Detailed design deliverables 8
C-4 System testing, commissioning, and start-up 3
Source: O’Connor, O’Brien and Choi (2016). Reproduced with permission of American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).100 The Module Team and Execution Plan Differences
• Modularization Business Case Validation/Refinement
• Stakeholder Alignment and Reframing
• Modularization Scoping, Layout Process, & Plot Plan
• Procurement Strategy and Owner-Furnished Equipment
• Basic Design Standards, Models, & Deliverables
• Transport Route Study & Planning
• Fabricators, Contractors, & Subcontractors
• Planning & Cost Estimating
• Craft Labor Relations
• Contract Strategy
• HSSE & Social Impacts
• Risk Management
• Methods, Heavy Lifts, & Construction Facilities
• Procurement, Vendor Data, & Expediting
• Scope Freeze & Change Management
• Project Controls & Site Management
• Quality Assurance/Quality Control
• Detailed Design Deliverables
• System Testing, Commissioning, & Start-up
6.2.3 Detailed List of Execution Plan Differences
The list below provides additional details on the EPDs for a 
modular project. They have been listed in order of impor￾tance (in the authors’ opinion) within each project phase. 
They were organized in this manner to guide the project 
administrator or project supervisor when they are trying 
to determine how they should invest their available limited 
project planning time when hard choices on priorities will 
not allow every topic to be fully addressed. Also, it was 
assumed that, by placing the higher priority EPDs at the 
top, these should also receive more attention earlier in the 
project phases. Second, these are guidelines, not hard 
and fast rules. As such, there will be variations that are 
unique to each project. However, this should be consid￾ered a good solid starting point when determining where 
changes might need to occur within a project organization 
and its planning and when one might address them.
6.2.3.1 Opportunity Framing Phase
Project Objectives
• Objectives don’t change.
• Timing will.
Organization & Staffing
• Set up a module coordinator.
• Find someone with past experience in planning 
module jobs.
• They will report directly to the project manager.
Modularization Scoping, Layout Process, & Plot 
Plan
• Identify anticipated maximum module size.
• This is critical to project success.
• Use the business case flowchart for initial solution ideas.
Transport Route Study & Planning
• Identify the route.
• Identify the maximum module shipping envelope (as ac￾curately as you can).
Planning & Cost Estimating
• Planning: Incorporate gross benefits into the level 0 or 
1 schedule.
• Cost estimating: Build project module savings into total 
installed cost (TIC).
Craft Labor Relations
• Identify local craft resources (or lack thereof).
Contract Strategy
• Understand the potential impact of module fabrication 
on contracting.
• Consider the potential for pre-FID funding options.
Risk Management
• Set up risk pros and cons for the module option.6.2 Execution Plan Differences (EPDs) 101
6.2.3.2 Assessment Phase (FEL-1)
Project Objectives
• Basically complete (w/r/t module option).
Organization & Staffing
• Module team lead selected.
• Team preliminarily identified.
Modularization Business Case Validation/Refinement
• Update initial module analysis from opportunity framing 
business case.
• Confirm modules and cases still make sense.
Stakeholder Alignment and Reframing
• Present module business case to key stakeholders.
• Initiate initial module education of main project members.
Modularization Scoping, Layout Process, & Plot Plan
• Evaluate module options for each project option.
• Begin layout work of modules based on PFDs or exist￾ing plant information.
• Create new modules, do not “cut up and box” a similar 
stick-built plant.
Transport Route Study & Planning
• Commission transport feasibility study of options.
• Refine and finalize maximum transport envelope 
available.
Fabricators, Contractors, & Subcontractors
• Identify those that might be associated with modules.
• Identify potential fab yard candidates.
Planning & Cost Estimating
• Update planning benefits and incorporate impacts into 
the schedule.
• Ensure major module impacts (e.g., shipping, transport, 
and hook-up) are addressed.
• Update cost estimates to reflect the better definition of 
module scope and savings for each option.
• Determine if pre-FID funding of module design will 
be required.
Craft Labor Relations
• Identify local requirements.
• Investigate ability of local labor to support the project.
• Consider pros and cons of work scope move to offsite.
• Assess impacts on trade unions and local craft.
• Begin mitigation efforts on all.
Contract Strategy
• Identify contract options and impact to project mod￾ule options.
• Confirm ability to include pre-FID funding options.
• Understand that modularization may shift risk balance 
between owner and contractor.
• Begin evaluation of early fab yard and transport con￾tract options and strategies.
Health, Safety, Security & Environment (HSSE) & 
Social Impacts
• Module job provides benefits for both.
• Need to consider pros and cons of module decision 
and its impact on the local community.
Risk Management
• Identify benefits of better quality, craft skills, schedule 
surety, and lower costs.
• Compare to potential impacts due to delays from chang￾es, transportation, late arrival, and incomplete modules.
6.2.3.3 Selection Phase (Pre-FEED or FEL-2)
Organization & Staffing
• Module team staffing increases as the project grows.
• More formal module orientations begin for project 
members.102 The Module Team and Execution Plan Differences
Modularization Scoping, Layout Process, & Plot 
Plan
• Complete the modularization scoping plan.
• Plot plan, module scope, path of construction incorpo￾rated in the latest layout.
• Set module density and sizes.
• Confirm module sequencing and installation methods.
• Establish basic design philosophy for onboarding, 
transport, offloading, and setting.
• Ensure that construction and O&M inputs received and 
incorporated in design efforts,
• Installation aids considered and incorporated where 
appropriate.
• Module breaks incorporated into PFDs/P&IDs.
• Consider standardization where possible.
Stakeholder Alignment and Reframing
• All key stakeholders on board with module project 
philosophy.
• Extra efforts are required to educate new project mem￾bers on module concepts as the project team grows.
• Communications critical across all interfaces.
• Team building/alignment sessions increase in size and 
frequency.
Fabricators, Contractors, & Subcontractors
• Screen lists of these third party companies that will sup￾port module development.
• Pre-qualify main fab yard candidates.
• Begin matching fab yard needs to current engineering 
design priorities and adjust.
• Determine vendor timing and match against preliminary 
needs from the fab yard.
• Develop timing of bulk materials to match the needs of 
the fab yard.
• Compare fab yard capabilities in terms of steel, piping, 
equipment, and bulk purchase requirements as well as 
the ability to perform the pre-commissioning scope.
Contract Strategy
• Complete in terms of philosophy, risk sharing, collabo￾ration, etc.
• Maximum pre-FID funding identified for module 
design.
• Early fab yard and transport contract strategies are 
identified, and early commitments discussed.
Procurement Strategy and Owner-Furnished 
Equipment
• Strategy for module versus non-module vendors identi￾fied and options developed.
• Special inputs (e.g., extended warranties) worked into 
contracts.
• Special instructions developed for owner-furnished 
equipment.
• Special procedures (e.g., preventative maintenance 
and shipping procedures) included.
Basic Design Standards, Models, & Deliverables
• Coordination and adjustment of owner/client design 
standards required for a modular approach.
• O&M input solicited and included for selected pro￾ject options.
• Discuss timing of detailed design development and de￾sign freeze requirements.
• 3D model developed in assessment now incorporates 
selected process.
• 3D model grows in detail.
• Preliminary 3D model reviews begin (in terms of gross 
aspects of the module design).
Transport Route Study & Planning
• Complete transport route plan.
• Route selected and maximum size identified.
• Heavy haul contractor included as part of the 
project team.
• Heavy lift or roll-on-roll-off vessel contracting initiated, 
based on module scope numbers or sizes.6.2 Execution Plan Differences (EPDs) 103
Planning & Cost Estimating
• Complete planning.
• All benefits and challenges of the module option have 
been included in the project schedule.
• Backward pass of schedule performed to identify any 
problems with module deliverables.
• Ensure all module impacts (not previously identified) are 
built into schedule (e.g., scope carryover, logistics de￾lays, late engineering, changes) and are addressed.
• Complete cost estimating of base case.
• Update cost estimate to reflect all benefits (e.g., softer 
issues difficult to assign financial benefit to) as well as 
challenges in terms of coordination (e.g., customs clear￾ance, VAT) and adopt a better definition of module scope.
• Work specific needs for pre-FID funding of module 
design.
Craft Labor Relations
• Decisions on local labor/camps/off-site construction 
split completed.
• Work with local organized labor and craft resource av￾enues completed.
• Options on alternatives identified and vetted.
Health, Safety, Security & Environment (HSSE) & 
Social Impacts
• Complete HSSE impact assessment.
• Local community impacts identified and mitigated.
• Options to enhance local relations and interfacing set 
up for project and community.
• Communications protocol for continued two-way inter￾facing activated.
Risk Management
• Continue development of risk pros and cons for module 
option selected.
• Identify any black swan event that might apply to the 
project and determine if an additional examination is re￾quired from a module perspective.
• Create mitigation plans for all risks.
• Rank and follow up in next phase.
Methods, Heavy Lifts, & Construction Facilities
• Identify required heavy lifts, heavy transports within the 
proposed path of construction.
• Coordinate non-module equipment sets with module 
sequencing.
• Ensure space is available for on-site crane erection 
and access.
• Evaluate the need for special cranes (e.g., tower cranes) 
around modules.
• Ensure adequate heavy haul path through plot plan 
for modules.
Procurement, Vendor Data, & Expediting
• Identify purchase orders (POs) to be set up early for 
module needs.
• Split materials by individual module and site.
• Match delivery to module fab schedules.
• Inspections and expediting are required earlier for 
module scope.
• Identify instances of early purchase of engineering de￾tails for module steel design.
Scope Freeze & Change Management
• Understand the need for earlier issued for construction 
(IFC) documents of module design.
• Reinforce scope freeze philosophy mentioned in the as￾sessment phase.
• “No change” mindset adopted.
• “If it works, and is safe,” no change to be made.
• Strong change management program implementation 
required.
• Changes must pass rigorous schedule, and high pro￾ject cost (ROI or NPV) hurdles.
• On-site team with authority to take and administer deci￾sions on the spot.104 The Module Team and Execution Plan Differences
Project Controls & Site Management
• Continued evolution of previous cost and sched￾ule efforts.
• Materials and equipment tracking finalized by module 
and location.
• Module interfaces identified, to be confirmed in ba￾sic design.
• Confirm import and customs clearance regulations 
identified previously.
• Ensure construction team interfacing well with engi￾neering and procurement.
• Develop a plan for accommodating unanticipated mod￾ule scope “carryover.”
Quality Assurance/Quality Control
• Complete codes and standards compliance part of fab 
yard qualification effort.
• Produce a plan for QA/QC team as part of the con￾struction management team (CMT) at the fab yard.
• Develop a detailed plan for interface management and 
fabrication tolerance control.
• Develop vendor equipment inspection and preserva￾tion plans.
Detailed Design Deliverables
• Confirm module details, supporting fabrication, trans￾portation, lifting, and setting at site match fab yard and 
site capabilities.
• Confirm design and deliverables (steel design, piping 
isometrics, etc.) are scheduled to complete in time to 
meet the fab yard start date.
System Testing, Commissioning, & Start-up
• Develop PFDs and P&IDs that reflect the path of con￾struction as well as commissioning systems.
• Develop robust documentation procedure for sign-off 
of all completed pre-commissioning efforts at the fab￾rication yard.
• Identify and have full agreement from all parties on au￾thority required for system sign-off.
• Ensure path of construction incorporates the most ef￾fective and efficient commissioning and start-up pro￾gram possible.
6.2.3.4 Basic Design Phase (FEED or FEL-3)
Organization & Staffing
• Increase module team staffing to support the project 
as it grows.
• Ensure consistency of message.
Stakeholder Alignment and Reframing
• Complete stakeholder alignment and reframing.
• Project is working as a single team with respect to mod￾ule decisions.
• Owner/client is on board with the execution plan.
• All stakeholders on board with module project 
philosophy.
• Interaction between module team and project groups 
is seamless.
Scope Freeze & Change Management
• Finalize scope freeze and change management.
• “No change” mindset.
• “If it works, and is safe,” no change warranted.
• Strong change management program implemented.
• On-site team with authority to take and administer deci￾sions on the spot.
Procurement Strategy and Owner-Furnished 
Equipment
• Complete procurement strategy.
• Module versus non-module vendors identified and con￾tracting options firmed up.
• Special contracting language (e.g., extended warran￾ties) incorporated.
• Owner-furnished equipment adjustments made.
• Special procedures included.6.2 Execution Plan Differences (EPDs) 105
Fabricators, Contractors, & Subcontractors
• Contracting with third party companies supporting 
module development finalized.
• Fabrication yard selected and contracted.
• Continued fab yard and engineering coordination 
meetings.
• Resolve any issues with vendor equipment and 
materials.
• Work with fabrication yard on contingency plans for 
specific pieces of equipment that might be late.
• Execute design to support module fabrication.
Basic Design Standards, Models, & Deliverables
• Complete basic design standards, model, and 
deliverables.
• Design standards ready and in use.
• O&M input received and incorporated.
• 3D model under full development.
• Model reviews are scheduled on a regular basis.
Methods, Heavy Lifts, & Construction Facilities
• Complete review of methods, heavy lifts, and construc￾tion facilities.
• Contract of heavy lift with heavy transport compa￾nies in place.
• Path of construction confirmed; all equipment and 
modules to be set as planned.
• Space available to assemble and set everything is 
confirmed.
• Special cranes (e.g., tower cranes) to support final pip￾ing placement around modules after setting contracted.
• Heavy haul path details through plant completed.
Procurement, Vendor Data, & Expediting
• Complete review of procurement, vendor data, and 
expediting.
• Module purchase orders (POs) placed and prioritized.
• All materials and equipment identified by module and 
destination.
• Equipment delivery accommodates module fab 
schedules.
• Early module inspections and expediting identified 
and set up.
• Early vendor data requirements for module design in￾corporated into contracts.
Project Controls & Site Management
• Complete project controls and site management.
• Cost and schedule efforts finalized.
• Actively monitor materials and equipment tracking.
• Module interfaces confirmed.
• Import and customs clearance working smoothly.
• Construction team interfacing well with fabrication yard.
• Everyone monitoring progress to eliminate module 
scope “carryover” to site.
Quality Assurance/Quality Control
• Implementing inspections at equipment vendors.
• Working with fab yard to coordinate inspections when 
they begin fabrication.
• Working with all parties to complete sign-off procedures 
for pre-commissioning efforts at fab yard.
• Detailed plan for interface management and fabrication 
tolerance control in place.
• Finalized single weld hook-up (SWHU) procedures for 
piping between modules.
Detailed Design Deliverables
• Completed design of module details, supporting fabri￾cation, transportation, lifting, and setting criteria at site 
match requirements of fab yard and site capabilities.
• Completed in time to support fab yard start date.
System Testing, Commissioning, & Start-up
• Execute design based on systems identified on the 
PFDs and P&IDs that reflect path of construction and 
commissioning system requirements.
• Develop test packs for all pre-commissioning efforts to 
be completed at the fabrication yard and signed off.106 The Module Team and Execution Plan Differences
6.2.3.5 The EPC Phase
• Execute basic design package.
• Avoid changes.
• Monitor progress.
• Adjust as required.
6.2.4 Timing of Execution Plan Differences
The above-detailed listing of the EPDs is summarized in 
Table 6.2. As noted earlier, the key differences between 
the original EPDs identified by the Construction Industry 
Institute (2013) and O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi (2016) 
and the currently proposed EPDs shown in Table 6.2 are 
ones of timing, with most shifting to the left (to an earlier 
phase for both initiation as well as completion).
In considering the approach to these for a given project, 
examine them in terms of importance as well as timing. 
For each phase of the project, it is best to evaluate these 
EPDs in an orderly and logical sequence.
Not every EPD can be initiated in the earliest phases of a 
project, but every EPD needs to be considered as early 
as possible and especially when supporting information 
has become available. Just as the business case flow￾chart is an iterative process and the results from one it￾eration become the inputs to the subsequent iteration, 
a similar evolution occurs with the development of the 
EPDs. At the start of working on an activity in the early 
project phases, you probably will not have either all the 
information or knowledge needed to complete it, so the 
activity must mature over two or more project phases. As 
you can see in Table 6.2, initially, the lower priority items 
Table 6.2 Suggested implementing timing sequence of the execution plan topics.
Suggested optimal timing and sequencing
Modular execution plan topics Opportunity framing Assessment Selection Basic design EPC
Project Objectives 1 1-complete
Organization & Staffing 2 2-complete increase increase increase
Modularization Business Case Validation/Refinement 3 1 1-complete
Stakeholder Alignment and Reframing 4 3 2-complete
Modularization Scoping, Layout Process, & Plot Plan 3 5 2-complete
Procurement Strategy and Owner-Furnished Equipment 6 4-complete
Basic Design Standards, Models, & Deliverables 7 6-complete
Transport Route Study & Planning 4 6 8-complete confirm
Fabricators, Contractors, & Subcontractors 7 4 5-complete
Planning & Cost Estimating 5 8 9-complete update confirm
Craft Labor Relations 6 9 10-complete
Contract Strategy 7 10 5-complete
HSSE & Social Impacts 11 11-complete
Risk Management 8 12 12 13-complete
Methods, Heavy Lifts, & Construction Facilities 13 7-complete
Procurement, Vendor Data, & Expediting 14 8-complete
Scope Freeze & Change Management 15 3-complete
Project Controls & Site Management 16 9-complete
Quality Assurance/Quality Control 17 10-complete
Detailed Design Deliverables 18 11-complete
System Testing, Commissioning, & Start-up 19 12-complete
Notes: 1, 2, 3, etc. = priority within project phase; 1-complete = priority within project phase and activity completed.References 107
in one project phase become a higher priority in the next 
project phase, and as they are finally completed, they fall 
off the chart.
6.3 Summary
It is hoped that this chapter on the modular team and 
explanation of the EPDs will, at a minimum, provide a 
springboard for organizing your project if you are unfamil￾iar with module coordination and module execution differ￾ences, both obvious and subtle.
In terms of the modular team, it is critical that both the 
owner/client as well as the pre-FEED, FEED, and EPC 
contractors have module experience, that module teams 
have been identified, and they begin talking to each other 
at the earliest possible opportunity. One driving require￾ment for the success of a modular project execution is 
that the entire team moves along the same path to the 
same goals. This is best orchestrated as a defined team 
with that as its only goal.
For those readers with some previous module planning ex￾perience, you may disagree with some of the priorities as 
well as the timing. As mentioned, this listing will vary from 
one project to the next, and priorities will need to be ad￾justed to fit what is considered critical for that project. But 
even if you don’t agree with everything as listed in Table 6.2 
and the list of EPDs, it should provide a goal for implemen￾tation as well as a tickler file of potential activities to address. 
Use both to help flesh out details of your project when plan￾ning it. You can’t go wrong with too much planning.
References
Construction Industry Institute (2013) Industrial Modularization: 
Five Solution Elements. Austin, TX: The University of Texas 
at Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2016) Industrial 
Project Execution Planning: Modularization versus 
Stick-Built. Practice Periodical on Structural Design and 
Construction, 21(1), 04015014. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
SC.1943-5576.0000270.chapter 7
109
This chapter introduces the critical success factors 
(CSFs) that contribute the most to the modular project 
performances. CSFs are common key elements of suc￾cessful modular projects. Modular project job failures 
are directly linked to the failure to follow one or more of 
these CSFs. Conversely, modular project job successes 
address most, if not all, of these CSFs.
The authors, with multiple colleagues, have been inves￾tigating this topic for a long time. First, Construction 
Industry Institute (CII) RT-283 (Construction Industry 
Institute,  2013), where the authors participated as 
research members, identified 21 key CSFs and enablers 
for modular project success. CII (2013) provided the list 
of CSFs and the responsible party and the recommended 
timing of CSFs. Later, as these CSFs were mainly found 
based on the subject matter experts’ opinion, there was 
a need to further investigate these CSFs with actual 
modular projects. Thus, Choi (2014) identified links bet￾ween these CSFs and modular project performances 
and investigated the CSFs’ accomplishment status. 
Later, Choi, O’Connor, and Kim (2016) identified cost 
and schedule success recipes for modular plants.
This chapter would be lengthy if the authors repeated or 
included all the findings on modularization CSFs. Instead, 
the authors present only the essence of knowledge 
supported by multiple research studies (Construction 
Industry Institute, 2013; Choi, 2014; Choi and O’Connor, 
2014; O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi,  2014; Choi, 
O’Connor, and Kim, 2016; Choi et al., 2019).
First, this chapter introduces a complete list of 21 CSFs 
with their labels and description. Second, the authors 
provide the frequent module job mistakes and the least 
accomplished CSFs the industry needs to pay attention 
to. Third, responsible parties and recommended timings 
for each CSF are provided. The authors also highlight the 
most delayed CSFs in terms of accomplishment timing, 
which the industry needs to accomplish early. In addition, 
the authors explain the importance of implementing 
CSFs inclusively by showing associations between mod￾ularization CSFs and project performance and the rec￾ipes for cost and schedule success for modular industrial 
projects. Finally, the chapter concludes with a training 
exercise that challenges the reader through a plausible 
story, a module we like to call “the Perfect Storm.”
7.1 Modularization Critical Success 
Factors (CSFs)
To identify the key modularization CSFs, CII RT-283 (2013) 
identified 72 potential success factors and ranked them in 
terms of significance by using a survey of modularization 
subject matter experts. Consequently, 21 key modulari￾zation CSFs were selected, which were of higher signifi￾cance. The complete list of 72 potential success factors 
can be found in (O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2014).
7.1.1 CSF Labels and Descriptions
A complete list of the most significant 21 CSFs with 
their labels and descriptions are as follows (O’Connor, 
O’Brien, and Choi, 2014), reproduced with permission of 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE):
• CSF1 MODULE ENVELOPE LIMITATIONS: Preliminary 
transportation evaluation should result in understanding 
module envelope limitations.
Key Critical Success Factors 
for Modular Project Success110 Key Critical Success Factors for Modular Project Success
• CSF2 ALIGNMENT ON DRIVERS: Owner, consultants, 
and critical stakeholders should be aligned on impor￾tant project drivers as early as possible in order to es￾tablish the foundation for a modular approach.
• CSF3 OWNER’S PLANNING RESOURCES & PRO￾CESSES: As a potentially viable option to conventional 
stick-building, early modular feasibility analysis is sup￾ported by owner’s front-end planning and decision sup￾port systems, work processes, and team resources 
support. Owner’s ‘comfort zones’ are not limited to the 
stick-built approach.
• CSF4 TIMELY DESIGN FREEZE: Owner and contractor 
are disciplined enough to effectively implement timely 
staged design freezes so that modularization can pro￾ceed as planned.
• CSF5 EARLY COMPLETION RECOGNITION: Modulari￾zation business cases should recognize and incorpo￾rate the economic benefits from early project comple￾tion that result from modularization and those resulting 
from minimal site presence and reduction of risk of 
schedule overrun.
• CSF6 PRELIMINARY MODULE DEFINITION: Front￾end planners and designers need to know how to 
effectively define the scope of modules in a time￾ly fashion.
• CSF7 OWNER-FURNISHED/LONG-LEAD EQUIP￾MENT SPECIFICATION: Owner-furnished and long￾lead equipment (OFE) specification and delivery lead￾time should support a modular approach.
• CSF8 COST SAVINGS RECOGNITION: The modulari￾zation business case should incorporate all cost sav￾ings that can accrue from the modular approach. Pro￾ject teams should avoid the knee-jerk misperception 
that modularization always has a net cost increase.
• CSF9 CONTRACTOR LEADERSHIP: Front-end con￾tractor(s) should be proactive—supporting the modular 
approach on a timely basis and prompting owner sup￾port, when owner has yet to initiate.
• CSF10 CONTRACTOR EXPERIENCE: Contractors 
(supporting all phases) have sufficient previous project 
experience with the modular approach.
• CSF11  MODULE FABRICATOR CAPABILITY: Avail￾able, well-equipped module-fabricators have adequate 
craft, skilled in high-quality/tight-tolerance modular 
fabrication.
• CSF12 INVESTMENT IN STUDIES: In order to capture 
the full benefit, owner should be willing to invest in early 
studies into modularization opportunities.
• CSF13 HEAVY LIFT/SITE TRANSPORT CAPABILITIES: 
Necessary heavy lift/site transport equipment and as￾sociated planning/execution skills are available and 
cost-competitive.
• CSF14 VENDOR INVOLVEMENT: OEMs [original 
equipment manufacturers] and technology partners 
need to be integrated into the modularized solu￾tion process in order to maximize related beneficial 
opportunities.
• CSF15 OPERATIONS & MAINTENANCE (O&M) PRO￾VISIONS: Module detailed designs should incorporate 
and maintain established O&M space/access needs.
• CSF16 TRANSPORT INFRASTRUCTURE: Needed 
local transport infrastructure is available or can be 
upgraded/modified in a timely fashion while remaining 
cost-competitive.
• CSF17 OWNER DELAY AVOIDANCE: Owner has suffi￾cient resources and discipline to be able to avoid delays 
in commitments on commercial contracts, technical 
scope, and finance matters.
• CSF18  DATA FOR OPTIMIZATION: Owner and pre￾FEED/FEED contractor(s) need to have management 
tools/data to determine the optimal extent of modulariza￾tion, i.e., maximum net present value (NPV; that considers 
early revenue streams) vs. percentage modularization.
• CSF19 CONTINUITY THROUGH PROJECT PHASES: 
Disconnects should be avoided in any contractual tran￾sition between assessment, selection, basic design, or 
detailed design phases; their impacts can be amplified 
with modularization.
• CSF20  MANAGEMENT OF EXECUTION RISKS: Pro￾ject risk managers need to be prepared to deal with any 
risks shifted from the field to engineering/procurement 
functions.7.1 Modularization Critical Success Factors (CSFs) 111
• CSF21 TRANSPORT DELAY AVOIDANCE: Environ￾mental factors such as hurricanes, frozen seas, or lack 
of permafrost, in conjunction with fabrication shop 
schedules, do not result in any significant project delay.
A failure to follow these CSFs leads to a disastrous result 
and erroneous conclusion about modularization. The CII 
(2013) further provided CSF enablers that can facilitate 
the implementation of each CSF. The authors recommend 
the reader to check them out from (Construction Industry 
Institute, 2013) or (O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2014).
7.1.2 Frequent Module Job Mistakes
The authors have witnessed many mistakes (in other words, 
failure to implement CSFs) made in the actual modular pro￾jects. Here are some of the potential module job mistakes 
made. The number in brackets refers to the CSF list above.
• Incomplete Module Team (15)
• Construction––primary customer––not included
• O&M––ultimate customer––input too little or too late
• Poor planning (2, 3, 6)
• Module analysis too late
• Inadequate time to develop process and incorporate
• Failure to “do it differently”
• Failure to commit necessary (pre-financial investment 
decision, FID) funding (12, 17)
• Late engineering deliverables
• Missing critical equipment design data
• Poor module fabrication strategy
• Poor engineering execution (7, 14, 18)
• Engineering not started early enough––impacts deli￾verables––issued for construction (IFC) drawings
• Incomplete design provided to fab yard
• Assuming change flexibility “at the fab yard” is 
acceptable
• Failure to deliver bulks and equipment on time
• Starting fabrication too early (19, 20)
• Fab yard runs out of work
• Options: Expensive expediting or expensive fab 
yard delays
• Late engineering changes (4, 6)
• Disrupts fab yard sequence
• Requires extensive changes to completed structure
• Shipping module incomplete (21)
• Defeats decision to use fab yard
• Site not equipped to pick up extra scope
• Poor coordination between fab yard and site (9, 10, 11)
• Incomplete pre-commissioning & sign off
• Incomplete carry over documentation
• Incomplete. . . . . . . . . . . .period
In addition, according to (Choi, 2014), the actual modular 
projects had difficulty in terms of accomplishing the fol￾lowing CSF (Figure 7.1):
• CSF7. Owner-furnished/Long Lead Equipment
• CSF8. Cost Saving Recognition
• CSF12. Investment in Studies
• CSF15. O&M Provisions
• CSF18. Data for Optimization
The industry needs to be careful not to make mistakes 
and implement the CSFs above more. Check (Choi, 
2014) for the details.
7.1.3 Responsibility and Timing of CSFs
Acknowledging and implementing the 21  key CSFs by 
themselves do not guarantee a project’s success. There 
must be a correct timing of implementation by the ac￾knowledged lead party responsible for ensuring success. 
Table 7.1 lists the optimal implementation timing and re￾sponsible party for each CSF.
What is interesting about the 21 CSFs when they are ana￾lyzed in terms of who is responsible as well as when the 
CSF should be implemented are the following:
• More than half (57%) are the direct responsibility of the 
client or owner, not the EPC contractor.112 Key Critical Success Factors for Modular Project Success
100
80
60
40
20
0
CSF#1 CSF#2 CSF#3 CSF#4 CSF#5 CSF#6 CSF#7 CSF#8 CSF#9 CSF#10 CSF#11 CSF#12 CSF#13 CSF#14 CSF#15 CSF#16 CSF#17 CSF#18 CSF#19 CSF#20 CSF#21
DA (CSF Accomplishment Degree Score) (%)
N
Missing
%
Accomp.
17
8
88.24 76.47 62.50 62.50 62.50 82.35 53.33 35.29 62.50 87.50 88.24 46.15 94.12 62.50 46.67 76.47
Highest CSFs Lowest CSFs
66.67 53.33 80.00 86.67 86.67
899 9 8 10 899 8 12 8 9 10 8 10 10 10 10 10
17 16 16 16 17 15 17 16 16 17 13 17 16 15 17 15 15 15 15 15
Figure 7.1 Degree of CSFs accomplishment by each CSF. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.
Table 7.1 CSFs’ optimal timing and responsible party.
Optimal timing Responsibility
CSF#1 Starting in Assessment Owner
CSF#2 Opportunity Framing and each subsequent phase Owner
CSF#3 Opportunity Framing through Selection Owner
CSF#4 Mid-Basic Design through Early EPC Owner and Contractor
CSF#5 Assessment through Selection Owner
CSF#6 Starting in Assessment Owner or Contractor(s)
CSF#7 Starting in Assessment Owner
CSF#8 Starting in Assessment Owner
CSF#9 Starting in Assessment Contractor(s)
CSF#10 Assessment thru Detailed Design Contractors
CSF#11 Starting in Basic Design Owner and Contractor(s)
CSF#12 Assessment and Selection Owner
CSF#13 Basic Design EPC Contractor
CSF#14 Starting in Assessment Owner, Major Vendors, and Technology Licensor
CSF#15 Starting in Basic Design Owner Operations and Maintenance and Contractor(s)
CSF#16 Prior to Initiation through Assessment Owner
CSF#17 No later than Early Selection Owner
CSF#18 Early in Selection Owner and Contractor(s)
CSF#19 All Phases Owner
CSF#20 Starting in Basic Design All Parties
CSF#21 Starting in Basic Design Contractor(s)
Source: Adopted from O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).7.2 Association between Modularization CSF and Project Performance 113
• More than 1/3 (42%) require implementation by the 
Assessment Phase (FEL 1 or pre-pre-FEED).
• Over half (62%) must be implemented before Basic 
Design (FEL 3 or FEED).
Graphically, this information is shown in Figure 7.2.
7.1.4 Most Delayed CSFs in Terms of Accomplish￾ment Timing
Choi (2014) also investigated the status of modularization 
CSFs’ implementation in terms of timing compared to the 
Construction Industry Institute’s (2013) recommended 
timing. The most delayed CSFs in terms of accomplish￾ment timing include the following (see Figure 7.3):
• CSF14. Vendor Involvement
• CSF16. Transport Infrastructure
• CSF1. Module Envelope Limitations
• CSF5. Early Completion Recognition
• CSF6. Preliminary Module Definition
• CSF8. Cost Saving Recognition
The industry needs to pay attention to these six most de￾layed CSFs. These CSFs should be implemented earlier or on 
correct/recommended timing to ensure module project 
success.
7.2 Association between Modularization 
CSF and Project Performance
Choi (2014) identified correlations between modu￾larization CSFs and project performance from actual 
industrial modular projects to help the industry accom￾plish better modular project performance. This study 
confirmed that modular project performance is associ￾ated with modularization CSF accomplishment. In other 
words, the actual modular projects with a higher de￾gree of CSF accomplishment tend to have better cost, 
schedule, construction, and start-up performances. 
The relationship between the degree of modularization 
CSF accomplishment and cost performance is shown 
in Figure  7.4, the relationship between the degree of 
modularization CSF accomplishment and schedule 
performance is shown in Figure  7.5, the relationship 
between the degree of modularization CSF accom￾plishment and construction performance is shown in 
Figure  7.6, and the relationship between the degree 
of modularization CSF accomplishment and start-up 
performance is shown in Figure 7.7.
These research findings highlight the importance of 
implementing all the CSFs, as these CSFs can impact 
overall project performance, including cost, sched￾ule, construction, and start-up. Another study (Choi, 
O’Connor, and Kim, 2016) also found that modulari￾zation CSFs collectively affect modular project per￾formance. Thus, the authors recommend the reader/
industry should implement all the key CSFs for their 
modular project. If the reader feels that 21 CSFs are too 
many, the authors recommend paying attention to timely 
design freeze, owner furnished/long-lead equipment 
specification, vendor involvement, and management of 
execution risks, as these CSFs are critical for cost and 
schedule successes in industrial modular projects (Choi, 
O’Connor, and Kim, 2016).
Figure 7.2 CSFs distribution pie charts by responsible/lead party and implementation phase. Source: O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission 
of American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).114 Key Critical Success Factors for Modular Project Success
- CSF14. Vendor Involvement
Opportunity
Framing
Assessment Selection Basic Design EPC
Project Phase (TA = 33.33%)
Frequency of Projects
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
- CSF16. Transport Infrastructure
(TA = 55.00%)
Opportunity
Framing
Assessment Selection Basic Design EPC
Project Phase
Frequency of Projects
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
- CSF1. Module Envelope Limitations
(TA = 65.38%)
Opportunity
Framing
Assessment Selection Basic Design EPC
Project Phase
Frequency of Projects
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0 Opportunity
Framing
Assessment Selection Basic Design EPC
Project Phase
- CSF5. Early Completion Recognition
(TA = 72.22%)
Frequency of Projects
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
- CSF6. Preliminary Module Denition
(TA = 72.73%)
Opportunity
Framing
Assessment Selection Basic Design EPC
Project Phase
Frequency of Projects
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
- CSF8. Cost Saving Recognition
(TA = 73.68%)
Opportunity
Framing
Assessment Selection Basic Design EPC
Project Phase
Frequency of Projects
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Recommended Timing by CII RT283 One Phase Late More than One Phase Late
Figure 7.3 Most delayed CSFs in terms of accomplishment timing. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.7.3 Training Exercise 115
7.3 Training Exercise
We think it would be a much better explanation of what 
a CSF is if we could put it into the context of a plausi￾ble story, the module we like to call “the Perfect Storm.” 
While this short story is not taken from one particular pro￾ject, it is similar to many modular jobs that, for one rea￾son or another, did not end well. However, in this case, 
like the movie of 2000 with Mark Wahlberg and George 
Clooney, where three weather fronts converge to create 
the Perfect Storm, our example is where the failure to 
implement many of the critical success factors resulted in 
a modular project disaster of epic proportions.
7.3.1 Instructions for the Training Exercise
While reading the module “the Perfect Storm” story, the 
readers/students are asked: (1) to identify the failures to 
implement the critical success factors, and (2) to name 
the CSF number or label that should have been imple￾mented. Tip: Not all the paragraphs have failures to im￾plement the critical success factors, but many of them 
do include the failures. Some of the failures/stories may 
require multiple CSFs to be implemented.
7.3.1.1 The Module “the Perfect Storm”
1. The job is awarded. As always, when one wins a 
lump sum job, there is the nagging fear that you left 
something major out of your bid. Because times are 
tight and jobs are hard to get, the EPC company ac￾cepted the job knowing that the schedule (which is 
critical and tied to liquidated damages if missed) was 
too short.
2. The construction team immediately balked at ac￾celerating the schedule, providing all kinds of rea￾sons for not being able to compress their durations. 
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
Cost Performance Score
Exceeded
Expectations
Met
Expectations
Significantly
off Plan
DA (CSF Accomplishment Degree Score)
R2 = 0.5432
Figure 7.4 Association between modularization CSFs and cost performance. 
Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.
Schedule Performance Score
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
Exceeded
Expectations
Met
Expectations
Significantly
off Plan
DA (CSF Accomplishment Degree Score)
R2 = 0.6124
Figure 7.5 Association between modularization CSFs and schedule 
performance. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.
Construction Performance Score
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
Exceeded
Expectations
Met
Expectations
Significantly
off Plan
DA (CSF Accomplishment Degree Score)
R2 = 0.3508
Figure 7.6 Association between modularization CSFs and construction perfor￾mance. Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.
Startup Performance Score
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00
Exceeded
Expectations
Met
Expectations
Significantly
off Plan
DA (CSF Accomplishment Degree Score)
R2 = 0.3868
Figure 7.7 Association between modularization CSFs and start-up performance. 
Source: Choi (2014). Reproduced with permission of Jin Ouk Choi.116 Key Critical Success Factors for Modular Project Success
So, engineering was pushed to reduce BOTH their 
schedule and the work-hours needed to get the early 
engineering off to a good start.
3. With a less than stellar engineering effort, the equip￾ment vendors were pushed by engineering to provide 
details for the equipment designs without some of the 
process details finalized. As a result, the data provid￾ed by the equipment vendors was either incomplete 
or late (or both).
4. With details necessary for a good module fabrication 
bid missing, the scope of work (SOW) provided to the 
fabrication yard was incomplete with critical equip￾ment due dates identified by the vendors based on 
preliminary information and timing. The module fab￾rication yard bases its pricing and schedule on this 
optimistic delivery timing. As a result, the fabrication 
yard begins the module fabrication effort too early, re￾lying on incomplete design and layouts.
5. These are quickly followed by changes to the initial 
solicitation from more recent equipment vendor data. 
More changes occur as they are incorporated into the 
issued for construction (IFC) drawings. This is further 
compounded by the late delivery of the equipment 
and the wrong mix of early piping bulks, resulting in 
inefficiencies in the assembly and spooling efforts.
6. Since the module fabrication yard contract is defined 
by early (and inaccurate) equipment and piping de￾liveries, the module fab yard begins issuing change 
orders for the new work/re-work/demolition work re￾quired to correct the early efforts to match the new 
IFC drawings. This all creates more work for the fab 
yard, which is more costly, but, more importantly, ex￾tends the duration of the module completion effort by 
the fab yard.
7. However, because of the intense push to meet the 
schedule, the large ocean-going roll-on-roll-off (RO￾RO) vessels were contracted to arrive at the initially 
planned fab yard completion date. So, these large, 
expensive vessels arrive on time. Because these 
large vessels are contracted years in advance, they 
are dedicated to carrying specific modules. As a re￾sult, there are only two options––either (1) accept 
some charges for vessel contract cancelation and try 
to contract a second vessel that will not be available 
until many months or even years later, or (2) ship the 
incomplete module to the job site. Since the delay of 
months waiting for a new ocean-going vessel is not 
an acceptable option in terms of the liquidated dam￾age potential from the project contract, the decision 
is made to ship the incomplete module directly to the 
job site where it will be completed.
8. Unfortunately, the on-site workforce is not equipped 
with either the correct number or type of skilled work￾ers to take on this additional work. In addition, the 
actual amount of carryover work being shipped to the 
site is not accurately identified by the fab yard as this 
was still a work in progress.
9. In addition, the missing equipment, as well as piping, 
instrumentation, and electrical bulks currently at the 
fab yard are now required at the site, creating a logis￾tics challenge. The actual carryover work details have 
not been completed, so the actual carryover work 
scope is a bit of a mystery to the project site team. 
Also, there is a reluctance to ship anything to the pro￾ject site from the fab yard, as the fab yard is still in the 
midst of working the rest of the module pipe spools 
and EI&C. The result is that the project site crew is 
saddled with an increase in work scope, but without 
all of the materials to complete the carryover work.
10. When the equipment and bulks are finally shipped 
from the fab yard, they are installed late as out of se￾quence work: a very costly and prohibitive effort. Lat￾er, it was discovered that module detailed designs did 
not incorporate all the operations and maintenance 
(O&M) space and access needs, which led to re-work 
at the project site.
11. Also, the large amount of pre-commissioning that 
was to have occurred on these incomplete modules 
was not completed at the fab yard. This extra pre￾commissioning work must be added to the on-site 
construction team scope. AND, because the little bit 
of pre-commissioning that was completed at the fab 
yard was not properly documented and signed off, 
ALL of the pre-commissioning work completed at the 
fab yard is now re-worked at the site.
All during this, the schedule continues to slip to the right, 
and the cost overruns continue to pour in. The project 
site crew, which is much more expensive, must continue 
to increase to try to mitigate the schedule delays. The 
project management focuses on the module fab yard as 
the reason for the cost increases and delays since it is 
this fab yard that has been developing all the change or￾ders and cost deviation. The fab yard is also seen as the References 117
prime reason that the modules were late and incomplete. 
The second-guessing begins on what went wrong and 
what could have been done better, but with all the fo￾cus on the module fab yard, the inevitable conclusion is 
that: Modularization was a bad decision. This conclusion 
is carried on to the next several subsequent projects, and 
the benefits of modularization are lost on these also.
7.3.1.2 What They Got Right
Despite all the bad decisions and errors in judgment, 
there were a few critical success factors that “the Perfect 
Storm” project followed. Why is it important to separately 
note and identify the CSFs that were successfully incor￾porated in “the Perfect Storm” project? Because as in￾ferred in the more in-depth analysis of the CSFs above, 
at some point in the project, all the CSFs can be con￾sidered essential, so the goal is to make sure that the 
project understands, considers, and incorporates them 
all. Incorporating most of the CSFs may not be enough.
As shown by “the Perfect Storm” project, just getting a 
few incorporated into the project planning (even if sep￾arately, each one was considered important) was not 
nearly enough to make the project successful. By the 
same token, getting all but one of the CSFs incorporated 
may also still be a disaster. Does this sound a bit far￾fetched? Do not think that such a scenario might never 
happen. Unfortunately, both authors are familiar with 
practical examples of where these bad scenarios have 
actually occurred. So, hopefully, we have made the point 
with our simple project example and follow-up com￾ments that the best approach to module project success 
is to incorporate ALL the CSFs. Traveling down the pro￾ject planning paths that either incorporate most, but not 
all, or incorporate only a few of the seemingly important 
ones will most likely end up in a module project disas￾ter––maybe not of this epic proportion, but still one that 
will most likely be very unacceptable to all involved.
References
Choi, J.O. (2014) Links between Modularization Critical 
Success Factors and Project Performance. Ph.D. disserta￾tion. The University of Texas at Austin. Available at: https://
repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/25030.
Choi, J.O. and O’Connor, J.T. (2014) Modularization Critical 
Success Factors Accomplishment: Learning from Case 
Studies. In Construction Research Congress 2014. Atlanta, 
GA: American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 1636–1645. 
doi: 10.1061/9780784413517.167.
Choi, J.O., O’Connor, J.T., and Kim, T.W. (2016) Recipes 
for Cost and Schedule Successes in Industrial Modular 
Projects: Qualitative Comparative Analysis. Journal of 
Construction Engineering and Management, 142(10), 
04016055. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0001171.
Choi, J.O. et al. (2019) Calibrating CII RT283’s Modularization 
Critical Success Factor Accomplishments. In Al-Hussein, 
M. (Ed.) 2019 Modular and Offsite Construction (MOC)
Summit. Banff, Alberta, Canada: University of Alberta, pp. 
235–242. doi: 10.29173/MOCS99.
Construction Industry Institute (2013) Industrial Modularization: 
Five Solution Elements. Austin, TX: The University of Texas 
at Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2014) Critical 
Success Factors and Enablers for Optimum and Maximum 
Industrial Modularization. Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management, 140(6), 04014012. doi: 
10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000842.chapter 8
119
The fabrication yard is the central player in the modular 
project, and a lot of activity revolves around it. As this 
player is one of the key topics to understand modulariza￾tion, we have decided to cover this in a separate chapter. 
So, let’s go over some basics about the “generic” fab￾rication yard, including the benefits and characteristics, 
selecting the right fabrication yard, the contracting 
strategy, and the division of responsibility. Of course, we 
have already addressed many of the basics in the previous 
chapters, so we will initially fill in the gaps in this chapter.
8.1 Basic Benefits of the Fab Yard
In Chapter  1, we have already highlighted the reasons 
for moving work to a fabrication yard––a dedicated facil￾ity with ample crane capacity, located in a temperate cli￾mate, and populated with a motivated and highly skilled 
labor workforce that works efficiently together building 
these modules at grade for eventual stacking. But why is 
the typical fabrication yard so “good?” If you take a look 
at the fabrication yard business model, you will see a lot 
of similarities to a manufacturing plant. In fact, we like to 
compare the module fab yard to an automobile manu￾facturing facility, like Ford. (only because we are partial to 
cars and there is so much history in the development of 
the assembly line, including Deming philosophy and just￾in-time delivery concepts).
The typical fabrication yard has been designed to produce 
quickly and efficiently (and in volume). Whether it is ships, 
modules, or offshore platforms, it has been laid out with 
that end in mind. The fabrication yard develops its assem￾bly process based on its availability of lifting equipment. 
In many cases, the larger fabrication yards (in South Korea 
and China) have built their own specialized lifting equip￾ment (gantry cranes) to specifically support this assembly.
To support the delivery of the completed module, there is a 
purpose-built wharf and quayside. To connect the assem￾bly area(s) to the quayside is a reinforced wharf, sometimes 
further outfitted with a set of reinforced skid beams or skid￾ways providing preset paths that withstand very high bear￾ing pressures created by the movement of the extremely 
large structural offshore jackets. Most of the modules are 
designed to be supported by enough axle lines of rolling 
self-propelled modular transporters (SPMTs) that the typi￾cal wharf deck can handle the bearing pressures.
With this assembly line concept for the modules, two 
major remaining activities that need to be coordinated 
are the structural steel fabrication and the piping spool 
production. This is where the fabrication yard philosophy 
may deviate between the large fabrication yard and the 
smaller “assembly” yard. The large fabrication yard will 
set up “manufacturing” lines for the structural steel as 
well as the process piping. These areas are set up with an 
assembly line process in mind, with raw materials (plate 
steel, structural shapes or pipe and fittings) coming in at 
one end and stations set up for performing the cutting, 
rolling, tacking, bending, fit-up and welding, with the fin￾ished product coming out at the other end, to be moved 
to the blasting and protective coating or galvanizing ar￾eas. These areas are further divided to concentrate on 
small or large bore as well as carbon, stainless steel, or 
alloy piping. These can be as simple as an in-line process 
or as complicated as a multi-path assembly scheme, as 
shown in Figure 8.1.
The Fabrication Yard120 The Fabrication Yard
Figure 8.1 Module fabrication yard showing paths of construction. Source: Courtesy of PJOE fabrication yard.8.1 Basic Benefits of the Fab Yard 121122 The Fabrication Yard
8.2 Manufacturing and Construction 
Mixture
The typical fabrication yard is a combination of a manu￾facturing plant (structural steel and pipe spools) as well as 
a project site (where the steel, piping, equipment, electri￾cal and instrumentation and controls (E&I&C) are assem￾bled) similar to a small project job site. As a result, the 
fabrication yard can end up with a unique combination of 
planning features developed from both advanced work 
packaging (AWP) as well as Lean processes. This creates 
a problem for the owner/client and the engineering, pro￾curement, and construction (EPC) companies who want 
to be prescriptive in how progress and planning are being 
developed and monitored.
The fabrication yard (like the Ford Motor company’s 
assembly line example) has a system that works. They 
are not interested in modifying it just to match some pro￾gress measurement or planning tools (e.g., AWP) that 
one of these clients may have adopted. The best solu￾tion where these tools may not match is for the owner/
client and the EPC to discuss these issues with the fabri￾cation yard management to understand how they work. 
Then, with the fabrication yard, identify outputs from 
their manufacturing progression tools that can be down￾loaded for external input into the owner/client and EPC 
progress tools.
8.3 AWP and Module Fabrication
That being said, many fabrication yards have embraced 
the AWP philosophy that has recently become so popu￾lar. And with some slight nomenclature changes, the fab￾rication yards have developed project planning schemes 
that look very similar to and work well within the AWP 
context, as the examples shown below:
• The construction work area (CWA) is identical to a module.
• CWA = Module (or group of modules).
• The construction work package (CWP) is identical to 
the module fabrication work package (FWP).
• CWP = FWP.
• The site installation work package (IWP) must be split 
into: (1) a module installation work package (for prefab); 
and (2) an installation work packages (for assembly). 
This is because an efficient prefabrication priority is not 
identical to an efficient module assembly priority.
• IWP (assembly) does not equal IWP (prefab).
The pipe fabrication priority is based on manufacturing 
efficiencies such as size piping and similar metallurgy. 
Structural fabrication is also based on size and type of 
members, rolled versus flanged versus plate girders. The 
module assembly is based on a set sequence of the main 
structure, secondary structure, equipment, piping, instru￾mentation, and electrical by level.
8.4 Selecting a Fabrication Yard
So, how do you decide which fabrication yard to use?
We did a quick review of this topic back in Chapter 5 in 
Step #3 under the Analyze Module Potential of the Busi￾ness Case Model and talked about some guidelines for 
fabrication selection, suggesting that “size,” “number 
of yards utilized,” “location,” and “complexity” all matter 
and are critical to proper selection. Here is a bit more on 
these subjects.
8.4.1 Project Size
The proposed job needs to be big enough to be noticed 
but not so big that it overwhelms the fab yard’s capabili￾ties. A rule of thumb heard is that the proposed job should 
target about 60% of the nominal capacity of the fabrication 
yard. A job using most of the fabricator’s resources will 
command the attention and perhaps respect of that fab 
yard’s management. Remember, they are in the business 
of completing tonnage throughput. If your job uses most 
of their resources, they will have more trouble starting or 
continuing other jobs and will want to move yours out, if for 
no other reason than to line up the next job. Also, if there 
are multiple jobs in the fab yard, the larger one should get 
the “better” supervision and perhaps craft leads, since 
any slip-ups could impact production, which impacts their 
ability to get the job out on time (and the next one in).
8.4.2 Number of Yards Utilized
For very large projects, considerations are necessary in 
terms of the option of using multiple yards.8.4 Selecting a Fabrication Yard 123
• Advantages of using more than one yard:
• Being able to maintain a yard capacity closer to that 
target of 60% to avoid overwhelming the single yard.
• Using both smaller and larger yards or yards better 
suited for certain types of modules (pipe rack vs. 
equipment).
• Having the flexibility to divide the module up by com￾plexity or delivery sequence.
• Disadvantages include:
• Requiring a separate construction management team 
(CMT) at each fab yard.
• Additional complexity in procurement with materials 
split between several yards, plus the site.
8.4.3 Location of the Yard
A good visual of the global presence of many of the major 
fabrication yards is shown in Figure 8.2.
Even without the fabrication yards of South America, the 
Middle East, and some in Africa identified in Figure 8.2, 
it is obvious that a suitable fabrication yard can be found 
almost “anywhere in the world.” As such, the issue in 
optimizing the selection is not just finding one or more 
that suit the project but finding ones that are “conveni￾ent” in terms of cost, support, and shipping. A couple of 
considerations in terms of location:
• Construction Management Team (CMT). Remem￾ber, each fabrication yard will require some sort of 
CMT. Obviously, the simpler pipe rack scope of work 
will require less supervision than the multi-disciplinary 
procurement, expediting, and quality assurance/quality 
control (QA/QC) requirements of heavy equipment 
modules. With a CMT ranging in size from a minimum 
of 6–10 people for a local fab yard to over 100 (includ￾ing many ex-pats) for effective supervision in an interna￾tional yard, this is an important decision.
• Proximity to site or each other. Consider a yard 
mix that will optimize current project personnel. 
Figure 8.2 Locations of sample fabrication yards worldwide.124 The Fabrication Yard
For example, two yards close together or a yard “close” 
to the project site may allow one CMT to monitor both.
8.4.4 Complexity
Some modules will be easier and faster to fabricate and 
assemble, requiring fewer and less-skilled workers. Pipe 
rack modules are relatively simple and straightforward, 
with mainly steel and piping and (perhaps) a few control 
valves, instrumentation, cable trays, and sometimes an 
aerial cooler (fin fan). But these same simple pipe racks 
typically take up a lot of real estate in terms of their foot￾print when being assembled.
On the other hand, equipment modules can be sophisti￾cated, multi-disciplinary, multi-level structures that require 
a smaller fab yard footprint. Yards specializing in these 
are typically located in a more highly urbanized area, 
where land is less available, and costs are higher. These 
fab yards must get the most out of their infrastructure 
investment and are looking for craft workforce-intensive 
modules that occupy a smaller physical yard footprint.
So, the best fit for the pipe rack modules is fab yards with 
more assembly space and a workforce more suited to the 
assembly of structural steel and piping. Such yards are typ￾ically located more in the developing nations or outside of 
urban areas, where land is more available and craft is not as 
specialized. Conversely, the best fit for equipment modules 
is fab yards that have ample and skilled crafts available.
Why is this important? It does your project no good to try 
to fit a module type into a fab yard that is not suited (or 
not interested) in building that type of module. For exam￾ple, the Far East fabrication yards (e.g., HHI, SHI, Bomesc, 
COOEC, etc.) not only have the skilled craft required but 
also have a business model and infrastructure that sup￾port the procurement and design necessary to carry out 
the highly complex module assembly effort. On the other 
hand, some of the fab yards in SE Asia and the Middle East 
have more assembly space as well as a labor force more 
suited to the assembly of the less complex pipe racks. Both 
groups will provide a better project value if they are con￾tracted to work on modules complementing their strengths.
8.5 Contracting Strategy
Along with selecting the fabrication yard, there are con￾siderations concerning the contracting strategy. These 
can be broken down into two main considerations.
8.5.1 Type of Contract
Purchase order versus subcontract, which is better?
We have seen modules get built under both, but in terms 
of which one works better, it is the subcontract. The sub￾contract provides the project with the ability to maintain 
greater oversight during the execution, which allows the 
project more involvement in terms of a management team 
(construction, QA/QC, safety, engineering, etc.). Since the 
equipment and pipe rack module fabrication and erection 
are more aligned with site construction practices due to 
the higher labor work-hours, this fits more appropriately 
with the typical subcontract documents and templates.
The use of a purchase order (PO) would not provide the 
robust terms and conditions found in a subcontract for 
erection activities. The PO would not allow you to have 
the management team present during the execution and 
sometimes could be limited to simply a shop inspector. 
While POs are designed for equipment fabrication, when 
there is a combination of steel erection, pipe erection, 
equipment erection, installing cable trays, etc., the PO is 
not as efficient.
In summary, the erection execution would be the biggest 
factor in deciding to go with a subcontract––in this case, 
the module erection is like construction work, only off-site 
(in effect, a mini-project).
8.5.2 The Best Type of Subcontract
While the “best” subcontract from the project standpoint 
for a fabrication effort is a lump sum, typically, there is 
never a complete enough design effort at the time the 
fabrication bid is sent out to avoid all the “extras” that will 
crop up during the actual fabrication, as the engineering 
is completed and sent to the fab yard.8.6 Division of Responsibility 125
What seems to work best is a contract that ties down 
parts of the fabrication effort that can be confirmed but 
leaves the variable other parts flexible to allow changes 
without impacting the validity of the entire contract. So, 
typically, the contract is constructed to set the fab yard’s 
indirect costs (the ones that cover management, site use, 
office space, etc.) as a fixed cost based on the project 
size and details. Then, that contract sets the portion of 
the contract relating to the cost of materials as a direct 
pass-through with a percentage increase for administra￾tive support and the actual cost of the module fabrication 
and assembly based on a unit rate per quantity produced.
For example, the structural steel would be priced based 
on a price per ton, based on size (light, medium, heavy, 
extra heavy). The piping would be priced by diameter inch 
(dia. in.) of weld required. There would be other metrics 
in terms of electrical and instrumentation, with the aim to 
quantify as much of the variable costs into unit rates that 
would then be multiplied by the number of units produced.
The fab yard would be required by contract to honor these 
unit rates regardless of the quantity change or growth 
within a certain variability called a “dead band” that is also 
set by the contract. This “dead band” would be calculated 
as a ratio of the actual as-built quantities over the originally 
bid quantities. Typically this should be set as large as the 
fab yard would allow (e.g., variation of +/- 10% to +/- 20%). 
As long as the scope growth did not exceed this dead 
band, the fab yard would still need to support the module 
fabrication effort with the originally bid management and 
other indirect costs. Should the dead band be exceeded, 
then the contract would be subject to re-negotiations 
(because the scope had grown so much that there would 
need to be an increase in the fab yard management team, 
personnel, etc., to cover this larger scope).
Besides the contracting method, we acknowledge 
that implementing the principles and methods of an 
integrated project delivery (IPD) can be an ideal project 
delivery approach for industrial modular projects. The CII 
Research Team-341 highlighted “Preassembly or Modu￾lar Construction” as one of the 20 implementation meth￾ods of IPD (Construction Industry Institute, 2019). There 
is no study investigating the effect of IPD on industrial 
modular projects yet. But we share the vision that if IPD is 
executed appropriately, modular projects can also benefit 
from it by increasing collaboration and integration.
8.6 Division of Responsibility
Along with the increase in complexity that some fab yards 
can accommodate comes an entire set of support ser￾vices that these fab yards may also offer. These range 
from simple bulk materials procurement and expedit￾ing to detailed design, third party equipment purchase, 
design and fabrication of the specific equipment, and fab￾rication of structural members and process spool piping.
Because the larger fab yards have these material procure￾ment and expediting services already built into their organi￾zation, the fab yard has a strong desire to utilize them. This 
makes it important that the project begins discussions on 
the division of responsibility between what the project will 
be designing, purchasing, and fabricating and what can be 
assigned to the fab yard to handle. Having the fab yard han￾dle some or all of these scopes of work reduces interfaces 
between companies, which minimizes the potential for in￾efficiencies and change orders. The downside is that the 
owner/client and EPC must now follow up with the “extra” 
QA/QC efforts to ensure that the project is satisfied with the 
quality coming from these internal fab yard efforts. It also 
makes the owner/client and EPC rely on the fabrication 
yard to actually perform these activities in a timely manner.
So, early in the project, a division of responsibility docu￾ment should be developed, which outlines what scope 
will be handled by whom. It can be as simple as the ba￾sic commodity chart shown in Figure 8.3 or complicated 
and involved with detailed specifics on virtually every 
item to be purchased or built. And, since fab yards dif￾fer in their abilities, this division of responsibility will be 
unique for each fab yard being considered. Certain items 
in Figure 8.3 have been highlighted as examples of items 
that might be changed in terms of responsibility based 
on the fabricator’s abilities or the project’s desires for 
closer control.126 The Fabrication Yard
# Commodity (excludes major equipment)
Purchase/Provide
EPC 
Contractor Fab Yard
1 Structural Steel
1.01 Structural Steel Shapes X
1.02 Stairs, Handrail, Ladders, Cages, etc. X
1.03 Steel Fabrication X
1.04 Permanent Erection Bolts X
1.05 Shims X
1.06 Slide Plates X
1.07 Touch up Galvanizing Material X
1.08 Misc. Steel - Field Fab Material X
1.09 Fireproofing X
1.10 Seafastening & Grillage X
1.11 Temporary Bracing X
2 Above-Ground Pipe
2.01 Fabrication (Large Bore and Small Bore) X
2.02 Pipe Coatings X
2.03 Pipe, Fittings, Flanges X
2.04 Specialty Pipe, Fittings, Flanges X
2.05 Bolts & Gaskets X
2.06 Permanent Manual Valves X
2.07 Control Valves X
2.08 Cryogenic Valves X
2.09 Temporary / Testing Valves X
2.10 Vents / Drains for Hydrotest X
2.11 Temporary Erection Supports X
2.12 Temporary Pup Pieces X
2.13 Weld Rods and Consumables X
3 Piping Specialties
3.01 Strainers X
3.02 Safety Showers X
4 Engineered Supports
4.01 Spring Hangers X
4.02 Snubbers X
4.03 Cold Shoes X
5 Standard Supports (Field Fab),touch up &
testing
5.01 Touch-up Paint X
5.02 Thread Lubricants for Flange Bolts X
5.03 Tape and Thread Sealants for Threaded and
Coupled Pipe X
5.04 Initial End Cap Protection for Pipe and Valves X
5.05 Hydrotest Water X
6 Above-Ground Electrical
6.01 Breakers / Switchgear X
6.02 Transformers X
6.03 Substation/Powerhouse X
6.04 Motor Control Centers and Switchgears X
6.05 Cable / Wire X
6.06 Cable Tray / Raceway / Hardware X
6.07 Conduit and Hardware X
6.08 Electrical Panels X
6.09 Receptacle and Switches X
6.10 Termination Kits X
6.11 Splice Kits X
# Commodity (excludes major equipment)
Purchase/Provide
EPC 
Contractor Fab Yard
6.12 Lighting / Power Transformers X
6.14 Light Fixtures X
6.15 Flood Lights X
6.16 JBs / Bulks X
6.17 Support Stands X
6.18 Supports (Cable Tray and Conduit) X
6.19 Electric Tracing System X
6.20 A/G Grounding Connections X
6.21 Telecommunications X
6.22 Touch-up Paint X
7.0 Instrumentation
7.01 DCS X
7.02 Instruments X
7.03 Analyzers X
7.04 CVs X
7.05 RVs X
7.06 Transmitters X
7.07 Vortex Meters X
7.08 Level Gauges X
7.09 Pressure Gauges X
7.10 Temperature Indicators X
7.11 Thermo Couples X
7.12 Orifice Plates X
7.13 Fire & Gas Detection / Alarm Systems X
7.14 Cable / Wire X
7.15 Cable Tray / Raceway / Hardware X
7.16 Instrument Panels X
7.17 JBs / Bulks / Tubing X
7.18 Panel and Instrument Support Stands X
7.19 Touch-up Paint X
8 Insulation
8.01 Cold X
8.02 Hot X
8.03 Acoustical X
9 Equipment
9.01 Process X
9.02 Utility X
9.03 Bolts X
9.04 Permanent Gaskets X
9.05 Temporary Gaskets X
9.06 Touch-up Paint X
9.07 Shims X
9.08 Level Plates X
10 Loadout X
11 Center of Gravity X
12 Dimensional Control X
Legend
: potential scope kept by EPC contractor
: potential scope transferred to Module fabricator
Figure 8.3 Module commodity scope split.Reference 127
8.7 Summary
In this chapter, we went over some basics about the 
“generic” fabrication yard, including the benefits and 
characteristics, selecting the right fabrication yard, con￾tracting strategy, and division of responsibility.
Reference
Construction Industry Institute (2019) FR-341 – Integrated 
Project Delivery for Industrial Projects. Austin, TX: The 
University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry Institute. 
Available at: https://www.construction-institute.org/
resources/knowledgebase/knowledge-areas/project￾program-management/topics/rt-341/pubs/fr-341.chapter 9
129
This chapter will examine some of the finer points that 
can make a good module project great or, if not followed, 
can really make it painful. Many of the examples these 
points are based on are from large module jobs, either 
in terms of actual size or number, in some cases, with 
complex process designs. There is nothing unique about 
these big, complex module jobs or their challenges. It is 
just that when there is a failure to follow good module 
planning on such large projects, the consequences can 
be dramatic and memorable.
Another way to look at the differences between the 
traditional stick-built approach and the modular exe￾cution philosophy is by the major project group. There 
are subtle (and not so subtle) differences that must 
be adhered to in order to make the project function 
smoothly in the early planning phases. And, just as there 
was a continued development of project details in the 
13-step module feasibility flowchart in Chapter 5, there 
is also an evolution in the detailed approach by each 
of these groups as the project progresses, with initial 
guidance philosophy established early, followed by filling 
in the details to promote the timely accomplishment of 
the various tasks.
We will explain each of the different module consider￾ations in the project in terms of how the module aspect 
impacts them. The subjects included in the module con￾siderations are:
• Engineering
• Schedule
• Procurement
• Sub-Contract
• Fabrication
• Completion/Testing/Prep
• Load-out
• Module Movement
• Shipping,
• Construction.
We will walk through these considerations in the order 
they might typically surface on a module project. This 
will be a lot like the discussion on the Execution Plan 
Differences, but hopefully, illustrated with actual exam￾ples and details that will make more sense of the expla￾nation in Chapter 6.
9.1 Engineering Considerations
We start with Engineering due to all the big and little things 
that can create bumps along the road if not addressed at 
the right time.
9.1.1 Module Evolution
The “module” does not just spring out of the minds of 
the engineering group. While it can begin with a detailed 
3D model approach, it typically starts out as a simpler 
sketch or idea. The transition from the stick-built layout 
to a modular layout typically means moving equipment 
around, especially in the vertical third dimension. So, 
Module Considerations by 
Project Group130 Module Considerations by Project Group
whatever the development method, it needs to be versa￾tile and easy to adjust as the equipment moves.
The sketch or idea can be a two-dimensional sketch or 
an electronic version of the same drawing. Figure  9.1 
shows how one particular module was developed. 
Starting with the major equipment proposed for the mod￾ule, the equipment is laid out in terms of basic elevation 
and orientation (see Figure 9.1). Along with this effort, the 
next was some very early considerations regarding how 
the modules would be situated on a particular heavy haul 
transport vessel (Figure 9.2).
9.1.1.1 Path of Construction
Along with this early effort of module equipment develop￾ment is the “path of construction” effort that is evolving at 
the project site. In its earliest considerations, this path of 
construction becomes an attempt to determine how to 
get this module, along with all the others laid out on the 
plot plan, and develop a logical method to move them 
onto the site and into their final positions. The considera￾tions include ensuring that the sequencing will allow other 
site activities to progress to the point that the underground 
work would be completed before the module arrives. In 
fact, this is one of the benefits of modularization––it can 
Figure 9.1 Module preliminary equipment layout.
Figure 9.2 Preliminary module layout on RO-RO 
(Roll-On-Roll-Off) vessel.
.9.1 Engineering Considerations 131
provide additional time to perform the underground instal￾lations at the site. In addition, a well-laid-out plot plan 
would provide alternative “paths of construction,” giving 
the project more potential flexibility in their work activi￾ties should something unforeseen happen, like a delay of 
major equipment, site slowdown, labor issues, etc.
As the module design progresses, the simple two￾dimensional module becomes a 3D model, using any 
one of several commercial software programs. Because 
these are exact representations of the equipment, piping, 
and steel, there is a tremendous amount of engineering 
information that must be developed to be able to prop￾erly and accurately incorporate all the equipment, pip￾ing, steel, and electrical and instrumentation and controls 
(E&I&C) into the model.
The great benefit of the 3D model is that you have an 
exact “picture” of the module that, because of the infor￾mation it contains, you can actually build from it. The 
downside is that you must have all the engineering 
data to build the pieces and model accurately. Anything 
less and the model will not be useful in terms of a fully 
designed effort. This puts a burden of expectation on 
all the groups supporting the model development, from 
the early module layout piping designer (who must have 
the correct dimensional data on equipment as well as an 
owner-approved complete catalog of electronic piping 
components) to the structural engineer (who must have 
weight and size information on everything in the mod￾ule to properly size and locate all primary, secondary, 
and eventually tertiary structural steel) as well as overall 
weight information for a proper design of the foundations 
the module will rest on.
Besides the obvious benefit of having an exact represen￾tation of the final plant, some of the more subtle benefits 
of the 3D model are in the analysis of operations and 
maintenance (O&M) access and clash checking.
So, this same early module sketch shown in Figure 9.1 
now can be developed in a complete 3D model, with, 
for example, dimensional piping data that can be taken 
directly from the model for use in material take-offs as 
well as piping isos which will eventually be fabricated 
into piping spools by a pipe shop or fabrication yard 
(Figure 9.3).
9.1.2 Operations and Maintenance Input
O&M experts are very knowledgeable on how the plant 
needs to operate and how they need to access the 
various parts of the equipment. They can provide early 
identification of accessibility requirements as well as con￾firmation of the adequacy of paths already provided. By 
participating in O&M “virtual walks” through the model, 
the O&M experts can quickly identify any difficult or near 
impossible access to piping or equipment due to poorly 
placed structural steel and piping. To maintain the major 
equipment, human access routes should be identified. 
The routes are laid out in the 3D model as virtual “solid” 
volumes in the module that cannot be inadvertently pen￾etrated by piping or steel.
These O&M reviews are critical and should be scheduled 
as soon as there is a preliminary module layout. Failure 
to identify and address the operator’s concerns early 
enough typically results in re-work of the module itself. 
At the very least, it results in a very unhappy operator. On 
the positive side, these early “model reviews” can pro￾vide opportunities to consolidate, reduce costs, and opti￾mize equipment layout by understanding exactly what 
Figure 9.3 3D module model development. Source: Courtesy of KBR.132 Module Considerations by Project Group
is required from an O&M standpoint and providing extra 
considerations and accommodations only where they are 
necessary.
A good example is the optimization of the ladder access 
to the top of all tall vessels. Instead of adding expensive 
access on the exterior of every tower, the design process 
is optimized to only add access where required by O&M 
via interactive discussions. Rarely required access on the 
rest could be scheduled with other crane-required activi￾ties, reducing both initial capital costs as well as yearly 
maintenance costs.
The model reviews also typically incorporate “clash 
checking,” where the 3D model provides a listing of the 
places where the design has resulted in two or more 
“solid” objects (e.g., pipe & pipe/pipe & steel) occupy￾ing the same coordinates in the model, and in effect 
run through each other. See Figure 9.4 for examples of 
detecting design errors with 3D model from (Han and 
Leite, 2021). Timing and duration of these model reviews 
and clash checks depend on the module maturity, level of 
accuracy in the initial inputs, and complexity of the mod￾ule, but typically are scheduled on a regular basis to avoid 
too much re-work.
So, why all this emphasis on the engineering design 
development? As previously mentioned, these modules 
typically end up on the project’s critical path. As such, 
any delays in the 3D model development of each module 
could impact the fabrication, assembly, transportation, 
or setting and need to be eliminated. The 3D model of 
the module itself becomes a “mini-project” or a “project 
within the Project.”
9.1.3 Structural Engineering Is King
Essentially, everything on the module, from the design to 
the structural steel, equipment, piping, and all other mate￾rials, must meet the fabricator’s schedule or be acceler￾ated. At the very bottom of all this (literally) is the need 
to get the structural design correct. This means that all 
the details from equipment to piping, to operating pipe 
stresses, to supports for shipping and transport must be 
developed at least on a macro scale in time to complete 
the structural design and make the correct bulk steel pur￾chase. This also means that the overall dynamics of the 
engineering disciplines must change. With everything on 
the module being supported by the structural steel, and 
the structural steel purchase and fabrication being the first 
activity of the module fabrication yard, the entire module 
design is driven by the early engineering of the structural 
group. It is this group that dictates when information must 
be provided in order to have enough time to develop 
the design to the point needed to provide the necessary 
structural material take-offs (MTOs) to the fabrication yard 
so the steel can be ordered from the steel mills in time for 
a delivery and start of the structural steel fabrication.
This becomes a bit of an issue when working with the 
traditional project engineering hierarchy. For the typical 
stick-built project, the piping design discipline is the criti￾cal path, and, as such, they provide much of the input to 
the project timing needed to complete their design efforts. 
As noted above, with the module project, the structural 
steel design becomes a more critical need and, therefore, 
a higher priority. As such, the structural design group 
must drive much of the timing of the engineering disci￾pline approach, and this drives the equipment design, 
procurement, and delivery of early engineering details.
For the traditional engineering design team, this can be a 
bit of a transition problem and must be monitored carefully 
to ensure that early on, the structural design team takes 
this responsibility and is not relegated to the back of the 
engineering discipline pack when it comes to being pro￾vided their design needs. An engineering team that has 
previously worked on a module project will understand 
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Figure 9.4 Examples of detecting design errors with 3D model. Source: Han and 
Leite (2021). Reproduced with permission of American Society of Civil Engineers 
(ASCE).9.2 Scheduling Considerations 133
this slightly different emphasis and make the early engi￾neering efforts much more seamless.
With respect to coordinating with the fabrication yard, this 
is an important aspect of developing an efficient structural 
design. Early decisions on the use of plate girders and 
tubular columns as well as welded versus bolted struc￾tures impact the basic design and must be made at the 
outset of the structural design. We will cover this in a bit 
more detail in Section 9.5 on Fabrication Considerations.
9.2 Scheduling Considerations
One of the earliest module efforts is the development of 
a project schedule. This is not the original level 1 project 
schedule that shows the big picture items flowing from 
engineering, to procurement, construction, and start￾up. The schedule of interest is the subsequent ones that 
begin to look at the module concept in terms of the mod￾ules being a set of smaller EPC projects within the overall 
project. This version of the project schedule should begin 
to look at multiple small projects with interrelated comple￾tion dates to get each completed module on its transpor￾tation vessel and to the site in the correct sequence for 
installation. This is where the scheduling gets a bit more 
interesting.
Each module is composed of numerous pieces of equip￾ment, each with its own ties back into the engineering 
design effort, which goes even further back into the pro￾ject process concept phase, where equipment is being 
identified. One of the early considerations in the selection 
of one particular process over another in the assessment 
phase is the equipment itself, its overall complexity, and 
all the issues with the development of it. Of course, the 
ease of equipment development with respect to timing 
and module construction will never drive the process 
selection, but when going through the assessment pro￾cess, the timing of such equipment delivery should be 
considered in terms of how the equipment will interact 
with the module that it will be going into.
It’s really not much different than the stick-built sched￾ule approach where specific equipment, labeled “criti￾cal,” is identified early in terms of delivery to the site to 
determine what and how much “early” engineering and 
procurement effort must be made typically prior to the 
financial investment decision (FID), in order to ensure that 
this equipment will not hold up the construction phase 
of the project. However, with the modular project, this 
equipment may be needed much earlier in order to be 
installed in a module as opposed to having the luxury of 
being able to wait until required at site dates.
Why is this differentiation so important? There will be 
pieces of equipment that, for one reason or the other, just 
cannot be accelerated in the schedule to meet the mod￾ule assembly date. These pieces of equipment need to 
be given extra consideration in terms of how to efficiently 
develop the module plan (e.g., with or without them in a 
module) and what omitting them from the module will do 
to efficiencies and ability to move work-hours off the site.
For example, it may be that the simplicity of hook-up on 
a very large tower does not warrant the extra efforts and 
extra module steel to support it internally in the module, 
and setting later at the site on an adjacent concrete foun￾dation makes the most sense. The same thing could be 
said of large rotating equipment that produces vibration 
and harmonics that are difficult to design for in the mod￾ule. The best solution for these types of equipment may 
be to design to set adjacent to the supporting module 
and deliver directly to the site, providing more time to 
build that piece of equipment. These are the easier deci￾sions to make.
The more difficult situations are where a large num￾ber of work-hours are associated with this equipment 
hook-up at the site. Examples include the motor con￾trol center (MCC) or remote instrument unit (RTU) that 
requires extensive hook-up work-hours to other equip￾ment within the module, making it desirable to pre-install 
it in the module at the fab yard. However, completion of 
these complex units is almost always an issue because 
the E&I&C disciplines are the last engineering groups that 
complete their designs, in part due to the inputs needed 
in terms of motor and pump sizing, which depends on 
the completed design of all the sub-systems.
So, early discussions with the module fabrication are 
strongly suggested to determine how a module can be 
designed to allow for the late installation of such equip￾ment. This is why it is so important that the module defi￾nition be determined very early in the 13-step module 
flowchart of Chapter 5.134 Module Considerations by Project Group
9.3 Procurement Considerations
After the project has worked with scheduling to develop 
the plausible “path of the project” in terms of the selected 
number of modules, what they will look like and equip￾ment contained in them, and the probable sequencing of 
their shipment and installation, plans need to be devel￾oped on how to obtain all the specific engineering details 
in terms of equipment size, support, nozzles, and poten￾tial piping configuration to allow the structural team to 
develop the module steel design.
This is where the procurement contracting strategy 
becomes critical. Details on how the project will get 
approval from the owner/client in terms of equipment 
purchasing will dictate how the procurement group will 
approach each equipment vendor. Strict requirements for 
the typical “3 bids and a buy” might result in the need to 
push the engineering of this equipment earlier (to the left) 
so that this bidding activity can be started.
If the owner/client cannot approve an early purchase (as in 
pre-FID), options need to be discussed regarding the com￾mitment of some pre-FID funding to perform the required 
bidding activity along with the conditional award to the 
successful bidder. Such contracts stipulate that the pro￾ject is committing to the vendor that they will be awarded 
the contract IF the project is approved. But, in the mean￾time, the vendor is contractually obligated to start detailed 
design to meet schedule, understanding that if the project 
does not get funding, they will only be paid for the early 
engineering efforts defined. This will enable the completion 
of the necessary equipment design details to hand over to 
the structural group for the module steel design.
The owner/client must commit to enough pre-FID fund￾ing to reimburse all these critical equipment vendors for 
this early engineering. If pre-FID funding is not available 
(as with some Middle East projects), an analysis of the 
impact of this late design information on the module 
development must be made as it could impact size, con￾tent, and number of modules the project will be able to 
“fit” into the owner/client schedule.
9.3.1 Fabrication Yard Interfacing
Working with one or more fabrication yards is also an 
option to alleviate late equipment deliveries. The timing of 
this interaction should be concurrent with the start of the 
module design, as the type of module designed should 
complement the strengths of the fab yard’s capabilities in 
terms of assembly. At this same time, discussions should 
also be initiated with respect to possible options for late 
incorporation of delayed equipment to see if work-a￾rounds are available.
Remember, if the goal in a module project is to move 
work-hours from the construction site to somewhere 
where it is cheaper, the project needs to consider EVE￾RYTHING that can provide the opportunity to maximize 
this goal.
9.4 Sub-Contract Considerations
With the need to get fabrication yards involved early, 
it is important that the project puts in place an effec￾tive and efficient sub-contracting organization that can 
begin working on many of the potential sub-contract 
needs early.
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the sub-contract 
document provides more robust contract terms and con￾ditions for involving the fabrication yards and the other 
main players in the module project than the purchase 
order. This is because the sub-contract can provide 
the project management team with a greater oversight 
capability in terms of involvement (construction, QA/
QC, safety, engineering). Other activities that should be 
considered in sub-contracting beyond the typical sub￾contracts for a stick-built effort are as follows.
9.4.1 Heavy Haul (HH)
Typically involving a third party team from international 
transport companies, such as Mammoet or Fagioli, who 
can supply crews and equipment needed to weigh, move 
the modules to the quayside, load on transport vessels 
(tie-down and sea-fastening typically provided by the fab 
yard), offload, transport to location, and set up at the 
project site.
9.4.2 Vessel Transport
Typically involving one or more large roll-on-roll-off (RO￾RO) or self-geared vessels that have the crane capacity 9.5 Fabrication Considerations 135
to self-load. In either case, these companies perform var￾ious stability analyses as well as develop (or confirm) the 
grillage and sea-fastening design for attaching or tying 
down these modules to the ship’s deck.
9.4.3 Module Offloading Facility (MOF)
The module offloading facility (MOF) is much more than 
just the typical offloading dock for construction bulks. It 
will require additional design considerations in terms of 
size and capacity as well as how it will interact with the 
rest of the shipping activity (e.g., bulk materials, general 
cargo, and any proposed product shipments).
9.4.4 Heavy Lift (HL)
This sub-contract will need to be adjusted in terms of 
how the typical stick-built heavy lift equipment (e.g., 
cranes, cherry pickers, boom lifts) interact with the HH 
contractor bringing in the modules. The goal would be 
to minimize overlap without creating gaps in the cover￾age. Special tower cranes may need to be added in the 
proximity of the modules to assist in final hook-up needs.
9.4.5 Pipe Spools and Galvanized Structural Steel 
Fabrication
For the smaller module assembly yard that does not 
have either pipe spooling or structural steel fabrication 
capabilities, these two activities can end up also being 
sub-contracted. Both require a certain amount of inspec￾tion (dimensional and the quality of galvanized coating) 
and the interface in terms of fabrication priorities and 
shipping to the module yard, making them more fit for 
sub-contracting.
Early coordination of all of the above is critical to avoid 
gaps or overlaps in terms of responsibilities. For example, 
the fab yard typically owns some self-propelled modular 
transporters (SPMTs) or multi-axle trailers and may require 
the HH company to utilize these. With respect to module 
weight, the HH contractor has the ability to weigh the 
modules via the SPMT hydraulics. However, the need for 
accurate weight and the center of gravity is often required 
much earlier than final load-out as it provides early input 
to the vessel contractor for some of their stability analysis. 
This may mean bringing in a separate third party to weigh 
the modules.
In particular, coordination of other third party materials 
and fabrication support during the engineering effort must 
be done way before the start of fabrication to ensure the 
engineering team’s working priorities are consistent with 
the module fabricator.
9.5 Fabrication Considerations
One of the more critical decisions to be made very early 
in the module design has to do with the module struc￾ture itself––the type of steel members and their protec￾tive coating.
9.5.1 Bolted vs. Welded
Historically, the break between bolted structures and 
welded structures was related to the overall size of the 
module, with the larger modules being welded. Part of 
this had to do with the history of the module fab yard. 
Historically, the larger offshore decks were built in the Far 
East, where the use of welded plate girders was required 
due to the large size and weight of the offshore structures. 
In addition, tubulars were used for the major columns. 
These provide increased strength in all directions, and 
the tubular connecting points, while complicated to miter, 
were relatively easy to weld. The fab yards that built these 
offshore deck structures were very familiar with the tubular 
connections from the huge offshore jackets they also built.
As they evolved to more onshore modules, the higher 
efficiency of the tubular sections for vertical members 
and the large custom-made plate girders also made 
sense for these land modules. So, the Far East, Korean, 
and SE Asian yards continued with the welded structure 
(which dictated that they be blasted and coated with a 
multi-coat combination––typically of inorganic zinc and 
epoxy). The fab yards had extensive experience and a 
vast number of qualified welders to support this fabrica￾tion method.
In the US and along the United States Gulf Coast 
(USGC), the module fabrication business (with a couple 
of notable large fab yard exceptions) grew as an evolution 
from the stick-built project philosophy. This was based 
on pre-fabbed structural steel that was designed, fabri￾cated, and galvanized to be bolted together, very similar 
to what had been done in the stick-built projects. The 136 Module Considerations by Project Group
only difference was this effort was being handled offsite in 
a fabrication yard.
More recently, the differences have been blurred. Designers 
have developed very large (e.g., 1500 metric ton) galvanized 
and bolted modules that the Far East fab yards have effi￾ciently assembled. Other small yards have become efficient 
in welding. The cheap labor drove some yards that used 
welded connections (that were more cost-efficient) to work 
with bolted structures requiring a less skilled workforce.
9.5.1.1 Some Fabrication Misconceptions
Bolted and galvanized structures have always been the 
favorite of the USGC stick-built projects. They are easy 
to put up, and the galvanized coating can resist corrosion 
for 20+ years. But with the transition to a modular project 
approach, the welded vs. bolted options deserve closer 
scrutiny. A couple of misconceptions follow:
• A bolted structure is lighter––false. The structural mem￾bers are typically the same size, and the bolted con￾nections more than offset the extra weld materials of a 
welded structure.
• A bolted structure is cheaper––it depends on the con￾struction crew skill sets. In the large Far East fab yards 
where welding is historically king and labor is cheap, the 
welded module is very competitive and, in some cases, 
cheaper than the bolted structure due to all the handling 
required for galvanizing. For the smaller assembly yards 
where welding expertise is not as common or plentiful, 
the bolted structure is favored, with some fab yards not 
even able to quote a welded module.
• Bolted is easier and faster to assemble––it depends. The 
bolted structure requires much more laydown yard space. 
With a welded structure, typically, the structural members 
are cut to length with simple beveled or coped ends. The 
storage space required is minimal. With the bolted struc￾ture, the member fabrication is much more intensive, with 
welded clips, drilled plates, and all the interface issues of 
matching all the holes. Logistics is more complex than 
for a typical piece of steel. The complex fabricated piece 
must be packed up and shipped to the offsite galvanizing 
facility, then to the module assembly yard, where it is un￾packed, sorted, and staged before finally being installed. 
All this handling increases time and cost, which reduces 
any benefit of cheaper assembly labor.
• A bolted assembly is easier––it depends. With a weld￾ed module, there are more options with respect to as￾sembly. The completed deck level (or pancake) can be 
designed to be lifted and set on top of the lower com￾pleted module, as shown in Figures 9.5 and 9.6.
Bolted modules tend not to have this rigidity in only two 
dimensions, requiring they be assembled in place to 
complete a three-dimensional structural frame before 
moving, requiring more work at heights. Also, in some 
cases, the bolted structure requires more temporary 
internal bracing that limits through pipe access, as shown 
in Figure 9.7 versus a similarly designed welded structure 
of Figure 9.8.
Figure 9.5 Welded pancake deck construction.
Figure 9.6 Completed welded pancake deck structure lift and set.9.5 Fabrication Considerations 137
9.5.1.2 What Difference Does It Make?
• One obvious driver is module size. Members can only 
get so big before they become an issue with respect 
to the bolted connection size as well as the ability to 
fit them into a galvanizing vat. In addition, the large 
stresses potentially placed on the module while under 
construction and during movement make the welded 
connection stiffer and more resistant to slight differ￾ential movements that one might see with the bolted 
connection.
• The second driver is the workforce. A bolted and gal￾vanized module is not much more than a large Erector 
set and can be assembled by a less skilled workforce 
than the welded module. This provides more flexibility 
when evaluating the different fab yards and less reliance 
on the welding quality of the crew.
• The third driver is the owner/client. A bolted and gal￾vanized module is more similar to the existing plants 
in some areas like the USGC. The owner/client likes 
the idea of a structural member with a coating that is 
good for 20 or more years with no maintenance. Try￾ing to sell them on a welded and “painted” structure, 
requiring maintenance within 10 years, is difficult, if not 
impossible.
At the end of the day, the combination of module size/cli￾ent wishes/fab yard expertise must be considered when 
deciding on whether to weld and paint or bolt and galva￾nize the project modules.
9.5.2 Structural Shapes
A bit more on the nuances of best structural shapes. As 
mentioned above, large plate girders (in some cases up 
to 1.3  meters in depth) and column tubulars (in lieu of 
standard I or W sections) are used for the larger mod￾ules. Modules get larger as the equipment inside them 
increases in size, and it takes more square footage to 
be able to get a complete sub-system within module 
limits. This creates a need for larger access routes and 
maintenance routes to be able to get the equipment in 
and out of the module. Since you cannot always locate 
this equipment on the outside edge of a module, larger 
access ways become a requirement.
Figure 9.7 Required internal bracing on bolted structure.
Figure 9.8 Open access on welded structure.138 Module Considerations by Project Group
The solution: the tubular column and tubular bracing. With 
tubular columns and bracing, you can create longer and 
wider spans between these supports, opening up more 
vertical and horizontal access (see Figure 9.9). Contrast 
this with the traditional W-shape that must be oriented 
carefully to make sure its weaker axis is not overstressed. 
This becomes even more onerous where large bolting 
flanges must now be included for the module designed 
for bolting.
9.5.2.1 Weight Control and Center 
of Gravity (C of G)
Critical to the overall coordination of shipping and mod￾ule movement, as well as the design of the grillage and 
sea-fastening, is the weight control program. This effort 
should be kicked off as soon as the modules have been 
preliminarily sized and equipment within each one iden￾tified. With the advent of 3D modeling programs, this 
information is eventually incorporated into the model. 
However, during the early phases of the project, deci￾sions on weight and size must be made in terms of infor￾mation available since not all the detailed designs have 
been completed.
During the early phases of design, there are numerous 
ways to develop an approximate weight and an approxi￾mate C of G. For the typical pipe rack, it is fairly uniform in 
density, and the C of G is not too far from the geometric 
center of the pipe rack volumetric shape. Structural steel 
weight can be assumed from a similarly sized, previously 
built, stick-built pipe rack. Piping weight can be assumed 
from an average pipe size times the estimated total length 
of piping within the pipe rack.
The equipment module can be a bit more complicated. 
Again, piping can be assumed to be more or less uniform 
throughout the module by level and based on a similar 
average pipe size by total length estimated for that equip￾ment module. Structural weight can be initially estimated 
based on some typical beam sizes or from a historic 
module of a similar size previously built and also uniformly 
distributed. Early weight estimates for the major equip￾ment are then placed where each of their individual C 
of G’s hits.
Depending on the accuracy of these estimates, a slid￾ing contingency scale is added to piping, structural, and 
equipment. Contingency typically can start at 20–25% for 
the first pass during concept screening and is reduced in 
a stepwise manner based on the level of design devel￾opment all the way down to about 3% for the com￾pleted design.
The goal in any module weight tracking program is 
shown in the lift weight trend graph (Figure  9.10). The 
goal is to keep the top tracking module estimated weight 
line plus contingency weight always above, but eventu￾ally converging to the bottom weight line (actual weight of 
all components) but never crossing it. As such, by using 
the contingency weight for all your stability and transport 
analyses, you will always be on the high or safe side.
Figure 9.11 is a typical load cell used in the actual mod￾ule weighing when complete. The individual cells are 
placed under the module in enough points and hydrauli￾cally pressured to collectively “raise” the module off its 
fabrication supports. They are interconnected to provide 
a composite weight read-out. This module weight “final 
report” should be pretty close to any quantity survey 
results being tracked in the fab yard.
9.6 Completion/Testing/Prep 
Considerations
Just as in any project, the last 2% or 3% of project effort 
seems to take forever, and most projects do not get to 
100% without a lot of extra effort. The same is true for a 
poorly planned module job, except that in the case of the 
incomplete module, the ramifications are far worse and 
more financially painful.
Why? Because the module project schedule is set up 
to deliver a module that is 100% complete. There typi￾cally are no allowances for shipping late or shipping 
Figure 9.9 Tubular columns and bracing. Source: Courtesy of KBR.9.6 Completion/Testing/Prep Considerations 139
incomplete. The project site does not have the capac￾ity to handle the extra work. The site typically does not 
have the bulk materials to complete it either. Remember, 
the original reason for modularization was to try to maxi￾mize the work-hours that were moved off the project site! 
On-site work is much more expensive, harder to staff 
with quality craft, and as a result, will be more difficult to 
complete in the short amount of time left in the project 
schedule. Module carryover work only means extra site 
work and overtime.
So, it is important that the fabrication yard has a solid plan 
for this completion effort and that all the details regard￾ing testing, (hydro or other non-destructive examination. 
NDE) pre-commissioning (instrumentation and continuity 
checks, motor bumping, etc.), and final checkout and walk￾through have been agreed to and documented well before 
the first module is even being considered for shipment.
What does this effort involve? Typically, it is one or more 
early meetings with the owner/client, the fabrication yard 
management, the project site team, project engineering, 
and project management. With the original project goal 
of maximizing the number of site craft work-hours moved 
to the fab yard, it is important that some of these hours 
are not transferred back to the project site through poor 
planning, poor coordination, and most importantly, poor 
communication.
How can this happen?
Take the simple example of hydrotesting and cleaning. 
Hydrotesting is where water is used to fill the pipe and 
a pressure pump is used to pressure up the water to a 
pressure desired. The ideal project situation is where the 
piping is tested at the fab yard, and the only inspection 
at the site is the NDE of the “closure” weld between two 
15000
Month
Overall – Lift Weight Trend
Weight (MT)
FEED 05
Sep 05
Oct 05
Nov 05
Dec 05
Jan 05
Feb 05
Base Weight Contingency Weight Mar 05 Apr 06 May 06 Jun 06 Jul 06
Aug 06
Sep 06
Oct 06
Feb 07
16000
17000
18000
19000
20000
21000
22000
23000
24000
25000
16034
18880 18709 18709 19070
18564
19702 19713 19882 19882 19882 19756
19643
19845 19905
21465
22486
21382
21120 21129
22144
22324 22324 22324 22634 22830
21877
22491 22331 22201 22201
19333
Figure 9.10 Example of lift weight trend.
Figure 9.11 Weight cell set-up used in module weighing.140 Module Considerations by Project Group
sets of already hydrotested piping, confirming that the 
weld is sound. What could be simpler?
Unfortunately, there are too many instances of just the 
opposite happening. An incomplete plan for fab yard 
hydrotesting is floated out to an incomplete mix of the 
required stakeholders needed for approval of the process 
(perhaps even with management missing). As a result, 
the paperwork for the fab yard hydrotesting is either 
incomplete, not signed, or signed by personnel who are 
not recognized by the project site management. Because 
the “proper” authorities have not signed off on the testing, 
the resulting test documents from the fab yard team are 
not recognized at the site as something that the project 
could stand behind and support. As a result, it is decided 
to re-test all the piping again at the site.
So, the project pays twice––once at the fab yard for test￾ing, and, again, at the site to perform the same testing, 
but this time using extra craft paid at the premium costs 
of the at-site rates, as well as including a second round 
of cleaning and dewatering required to make the piping 
ready for process fluids.
A similar situation can occur with the closure weld phi￾losophy mentioned above. Instead of getting all parties to 
agree that two pieces of already tested piping can simply 
be welded together with some non-destructive examina￾tion, such as x-ray, gamma-ray, or ultrasonics, the project 
will start second-guessing the quality and proper sign-off 
of the work and decide that it should all be re-tested and 
re-cleaned at the site, wasting a tremendous amount of 
time and money.
How do you get around this dilemma? The entire mod￾ule completion/testing/and prep for shipping procedures 
should be agreed to by a project team consisting of BOTH:
• the technical representation of engineering and quality 
that can put their hands on their hearts and say with 
confidence that the proposed completion testing efforts 
will be adequate;
• and the project management from BOTH sides (EPC 
contractor and owner/client) who have the authority to 
collectively change the pre-commissioning and com￾missioning criteria to permit such work in the fab yard.
With the more complex modules becoming almost entire 
small sub-system units, complete with power, instrumen￾tation, and controls, the project should entertain creative 
ways to move beyond the typical pre-commissioning 
efforts of hydrotesting and moisture removal. Options for 
the actual introduction of process fluids into the modu￾lar units should be considered where substantial gains in 
completion can be achieved by doing so.
If, for example, a completed LNG liquefaction plant 
is required, and it cannot be assembled and pre￾commissioned on the site, it may be worthwhile to bring 
gas into the fab yard (in terms of LNG, a gasification unit) 
to produce gas that can then be run through the new 
LNG facility to confirm its ability to produce LNG before 
it gets to the site. (Sort of like test driving a car you plan 
to purchase.)
9.6.1 Shipping Incomplete
This will happen to you on your job. Maybe not on the 
first or second module project, but somewhere along the 
line, you will be faced with the decision to ship a module 
that has not been completed. This may have happened 
because of poor planning, but it might also happen 
because of an error in scheduling, a labor crisis, a couple 
of weeks of bad weather, etc. In any case, this part of the 
Module Perfect Storm will be yours to contend with.
So, at what point do you bite the bullet and ship incom￾plete? The decision will depend on a number of factors:
• What are the availability and flexibility of your module 
transportation?
• ocean-going vessel booked for the next sev￾eral months?
• readily available truck and trailer?
• Can the project schedule stand to have a module wait 
until the next vessel is available, or is it better to double 
up with craft labor at the site to complete the module?
• What makes more sense from a cost standpoint?
• Pay demurrage on the ocean-going vessel to stand by 
and wait for the module to be completed?
• Ship without a full cargo?9.7 Load-out Considerations 141
• Pay penalties to release the vessel from the contract 
and pick them up later?
• How is the late module going to impact the site “path 
of construction?”
• Can the on-site team absorb the extra scope?
• Will the extra work become the new project critical 
path?
Surprisingly, this should not be an issue that suddenly 
surfaces. Warning signals should have been everywhere 
and visible if someone on the team was paying attention. 
For example, a trend of ever-increasing missed interme￾diate completion dates and goals fails to get noticed. 
Or, craft productivity or even actual craft numbers have 
declined below scheduled requirements, but nothing is 
done about it.
Obviously, as soon as identified, discussions on alterna￾tives to get the project back on schedule should be ini￾tiated. In addition, assuming this may not be enough, 
further options should be developed on how to accelerate 
the current completion efforts ahead of the current project 
schedule, understanding that whatever remedial efforts are 
initiated, they will probably not be as successful as origi￾nally sold by the team. Then, the agreed plan as well as the 
acceleration alternatives should be contractually binding.
9.6.2 Ship Loose
Even with all the efforts above, there will still come a time 
in your module career where there is nothing more you 
can do (or, more accurately, there is no more time for you 
to do it!), and you must prepare for shipping incomplete.
A couple of thoughts on how to ease the pain at the project 
site where the team is receiving this incomplete module:
• Provide a detailed listing of what is still incomplete. 
Discuss it with the site project management and send it 
to them well ahead of the incomplete module.
• Provide all the materials, including extra lengths of pipe 
(for each size and grade to be worked on), bolts, gas￾kets, and any other materials needed to complete the 
work. Do not assume they have them at the site.
• Organize the materials and work into work packs that 
are cataloged.
• Place pipe spools in the area(s) they will be installed and 
lash them down (Figures 9.12 and 9.13).
• Consider using connex boxes for organization and 
packing, shipping these along with the incomplete 
modules (Figure 9.14).
• Assign an individual to this effort, whose sole responsi￾bility is to ensure all the above is handled properly.
9.7 Load-out Considerations
Load-out and shipping go hand in hand, but we will 
address them in the order that they actually happen, 
understanding that shipping design is addressed much 
Figure 9.12 Ship loose items lashed to the deck (1).
Figure 9.13 Ship loose items lashed to the deck (2).142 Module Considerations by Project Group
earlier in the project planning since these trip accelera￾tion forces must be incorporated into the early stages of 
modular structural steel design.
9.7.1 Land Load-out and Self-Propelled Modular 
Transporters (SPMTs)
Load-out for transport across the land via roads is a 
relatively straightforward process, utilizing cranes in 
most cases to lift the module and set it onto the trailer 
(Figure  9.15). Where the module is extremely large or 
heavy, the module is typically built on short vertical sup￾ports to make accommodations for the self-propelled 
modular transporters (SPMTs), a type of high capacity 
(large and heavy loads), highly maneuverable (360-degree 
pivot) self-propelled flat top vehicle, that simply drives 
under the module and hydraulically lifts its deck to pick 
the module off of these construction supports. These 
SPMTs are 4-axle or 6-axle units that can be mechani￾cally connected together end-to-end to form individual 
“lines” of the required length.
Figure 9.16 is a 14-axle line made up of 2–4 axle units 
and 1–6 axle units mechanically connected. These 
“lines” can then be connected side by side to form an 
any size length and width, integrated, moveable plat￾form required to support whatever size module needs to 
be moved. The entire set of integrated “lines” is maneu￾vered by a joystick-type computer console connected 
by cables to the SPMT power packs, which provides 
both locomotive and hydraulic power to the wheels. The 
Figure 9.14 Ship loose items organized in connex boxes.
Figure 9.15 Trailer truckable module being loaded at indoor fabrication facility.
Figure 9.16 Module moved with SPMTs (1).
Figure 9.17 Module moved with SPMTs (2).9.7 Load-out Considerations 143
console is typically strapped to an operator who walks 
alongside since the SPMT typically moves at walking 
speed (Figure  9.17). With the SPMT lines connected 
side to side, the multiple SPMTs can be operated as 
a single unit to transport wide loads (see Figure 9.18). 
Upon arrival at the site, the module is “set” on its foun￾dation piers by driving between the piers and lowering 
the SPMT decks hydraulically.
9.7.2 Marine Onloading and Offloading
Offloading can be as simple as pulling a barge up on a 
shallow spot in the wider part of a bayou or river and 
rolling the module across some timbers (Figure 9.19) to 
the much more detailed and massive efforts involved in 
the onloading of a very large equipment module across 
a module offloading facility, using multiple interlocking 
ramps and onto a specially built roll-on-roll-off (RO-RO) 
ocean-going vessel (Figure 9.20).
Onloading, transport, and offloading can also be handled 
by what is referred to as a “self-geared vessel,” the termi￾nology coming from the lift cranes that have been incor￾porated into the ship’s hull. Such a vessel is capable of 
taking a module from the trailers or SPMTs and “lifting” it 
onto the deck, transporting, and then setting the module 
back on another set of SPMTs for the remaining transport 
to the site. Such vessels are an alternative to the RO-RO 
where the modules are not excessively large or heavy (less 
than 500 metric tons+/-), and the vessel can be brought 
alongside the MOF. In all cases, there are some impor￾tant considerations that must be evaluated early in design 
to ensure a successful and seamless transition from the 
module fab yard to the transporting vessel and from the 
transporting vessel to another set of land transport trailers 
or SPMTs which will take the module to site.
9.7.3 Capacity of the Wharf or Quay
As mentioned in Chapter 5 under project drivers, the inter￾face between the module fab yard and the vessel can be 
challenging and should be analyzed as part of the fab yard 
review. There is a certain depth requirement at the wharf 
edge or quayside that must accommodate the ballasting 
of the RO-RO vessel deep enough to align the vessel deck 
with the wharf height. There are also slightly different clear￾ance requirements between the vessel propulsion screws 
Figure 9.18 A module moved with multiple lines of SPMTs.
Figure 9.19 Offloading barge-mounted module rolling onto earthen ramp 
and timbers.
Figure 9.20 Onloading from dedicated module offloading facility (MOF) onto 
RO-RO vessel.144 Module Considerations by Project Group
or thrusters and both the bottom and the vertical edge 
of the wharf or quay. Since the actual module load-out is 
not a very fast process, accommodation of the timing and 
magnitude of the local tidal range is required. Even though 
the load-out is typically scheduled between a rising and 
falling tide, the vessel must have the ballast capacity to 
accommodate this rising or falling tide. Such details can 
be quickly worked out between the vessel owner and the 
fab yard but need to be evaluated early to ensure no last￾minute additional ballast capacity or dredging is required.
9.8 Module Movement Considerations
At some point in time, every module will need to be 
moved––usually multiple times. It is important that the 
module be designed from the beginning for these moves. 
Typically, this is easily accomplished by providing a struc￾tural frame on the bottom of the equipment module or the 
lowest level of the pipe rack module. This will require that 
these bottom members be designed for the additional 
loads of the entire module weight and specifically designed 
for any local concentrations of the module weight in the 
areas of the actual support interface between module and 
transporter.
In addition to this design, early consideration is required 
in terms of exactly “how” the module will be secured to 
the transporters as well as how they will be secured to 
the vessel deck. Since the actual module support points 
on the deck must correspond to the internal framing of 
the vessel itself, this must be considered in the design 
and will be mentioned in more detail in Section  9.10, 
Shipping Considerations. But, even prior to this, the 
basic design of the module must provide access to both 
the lower structural members as well as potentially the 
outside of module’s major structural members to permit 
either tie-downs, chains, welded brackets, or a combi￾nation of them to be installed after the module is com￾pleted. This requires that the design identify these areas 
such that piping, equipment, or E&I&C are not installed 
in or around them.
9.9 Module Responsibility Matrix
There is also the issue of exactly where each transfer of 
custody occurs. This is important since there are several 
different contractors involved in what may seem on the 
surface to be a relatively contiguous operation. This mul￾tiple custody transfer must be identified and agreed to 
early in the fab yard and vessel contracting negotiations. 
Consider the following example of the different custody 
transfers:
• Equipment: The project purchased the material, and the 
equipment is shipped to the fab yard. When received, the 
fab yard typically takes responsibility of the equipment.
• Module movement: The fab yard will continue with 
responsibility for the movements within the yard while 
building the module. But, upon completion, they may 
work with a third party logistics company, requiring this 
third party logistics company use the fab yard trailers 
and SPMTs but turning custody over to the third party 
logistics company at that time.
• Module load-out: The third party logistics company 
will organize and move the module from the quayside 
onto the vessel, at which point the custody transfers 
to the ship. The actual point of custody transfer varies 
but is defined ahead of time. During the short interval 
between quayside and vessel, all interested parties play 
an active role in ensuring their piece of equipment or 
property (quayside capacity/dock plates across gaps 
to vessel/SPMT maintenance and operation/placement 
on the vessel deck/tie-down and sea-fastening) is func￾tional to make sure all goes smoothly.
• Module tie-down: Once on the vessel, the module 
custody transfers to the vessel owner, who has previ￾ously evaluated the proposed module placement on the 
deck in terms of vessel shipping stability as well as the 
specific hardware and method of tie-down to the deck. 
Typically this work goes back to the fab yard because 
the fab yard has the equipment (welding machines and 
materials) as well as the craft team (welders and fitters). 
A marine warranty surveyor and various insurance repre￾sentatives for the owner/client, as well as potentially the 
contractor, get involved in the review and supervision to 
confirm the load-out and tie-down are implemented as 
previously agreed.
• Transportation: The vessel owner or captain has cus￾tody of the module for the ocean-going trip, releasing 
this custody at the destination where the custody trans￾fers are reversed from the above load-out.
• Offloading and trip to the site: The third party logis￾tics company (typically the same one that performed 
the load-out at the fab yard) supplies the appropriate 9.10 Shipping Considerations 145
trailers or SPMTs and supervises or performs tie-down 
and preparations for movement to the site.
• Module set at the site: The third party logistics com￾pany maintains custody all the way to the point where 
the module is finally set on its foundation, at which time 
custody is turned over to the site construction team.
9.10 Shipping Considerations
Early in the module analysis, the subject of shipping (how 
you get the module from the fab yard to the site) should 
be discussed. Many early design decisions depend on 
how the module will be moved between the fab yard 
and the site. For example, the acceleration forces on the 
module during shipment will be influenced by the type of 
vessel and location of the module in relation to the ves￾sel’s metacenter, location fore or aft of center, and the 
height of the module itself.
• For sea transport (see Figure 9.21), it will be a function 
of which portions of the world’s oceans the module￾carrying vessel will cross.
• For land transport (see Figure  9.22), it will be the 
road width and configuration, as well as the speed of 
transport.
9.10.1 Tying or Fastening the Module
As mentioned in the load-out considerations, the method 
of tying the module to the vessel must be flexible in terms 
of where the module is tied to the deck since the deck is 
strongest at the points where the deck is supported by 
the vessel’s internal bracing.
Two terms are used when talking about how the module is 
“fastened” to the vessel deck: grillage and sea-fastening.
9.10.1.1 Grillage
This is the collective set of mats, timbers, stools, or par￾tial beams on which the module actually rests. The pur￾pose of the grillage is to maintain the space between the 
bottom module steel and the deck so that the trailers or 
SPMTs can be moved out after positioning the module 
on the vessel.
9.10.1.2 Sea-Fastening
This is the actual wire rope, chains, welded steel brack￾ets, etc., that physically tie the module to the vessel. In 
the case of smaller modules, lashing with wire rope or 
chains may be adequate. For the very large modules, the 
acceleration s forces must be resisted by more substan￾tial welded brackets and braces.
The design can be simple (Figure  9.23) or complex 
(Figures 9.24 (a) and 9.24 (b)), but in all cases must ade￾quately restrain the module on the deck and tie the parts 
of the module that will adequately transmit the module 
accelerations to the main vessel structural trusses.
So, very early in the design, sections of the module lower 
steel must be kept clear of any equipment, piping, electri￾cal, and instrumentation. In some cases, because of the 
need to place the sea-fastening and grillage on the deck, 
Figure 9.21 Sea transport, ready to ship. specifically at the strong internal trusses of the vessel, it is 
Figure 9.22 Land transport, Wyoming, USA.146 Module Considerations by Project Group
best to leave the entire lower module beam and the lower 
area around each column free of appurtenances, piping, 
and other things that might get in the way of the tie-down.
The more complex the grillage and sea-fastening, the 
more costly it is to fabricate and install. But, in addition 
to making both seaworthy, it is important that both be 
designed so they can be quickly installed and tied or 
welded down after rolling the module onto the deck as 
well as quickly removed once the vessel arrives at the 
wharf or quayside destination. A poorly designed com￾bination of grillage and sea-fastening can take longer to 
both install and later remove, lengthening the total time 
to load and unload. This is a potential concern where the 
loading or unloading has to deal with high tides. Also, if 
the vessel is delayed beyond the contractual duration(s) 
for loading and unloading, there are additional demurrage 
charges that can be expensive.
9.10.2 Movement to Site and Hook-­Up
9.10.2.1 Load-Out
Moving the module around the assembly yard and load￾ing it onto a truck or vessel for shipment are typically 
part of the fabricator’s scope of work and, as such, will 
be considered by them in their scope of work. But, it 
is important that this be discussed with the proposed 
fabricator, as it is one of the critical activities that the 
module fabricator must perform. They will have a spe￾cific scope and point of custody transfer that need to be 
identified and agreed upon. This is one of the standard 
negotiations with a fabricator and, as such, is not typi￾cally missed.
9.10.2.2 Offloading
However, the entire trip from the point where the module 
is offloaded from the vessel up to the project site is a 
part of the project to develop and can be problematic 
if not adequately planned. The module route will require 
much more coordination, from the destination MOF 
(which in many cases is a public / commercial wharf, 
with its own set of coordination requirements), along the 
public roads (with all of their restrictions from road width, 
utility, and power poles and lines, all the way down to 
fences, ditches, retaining walls, abutments, etc.), up to 
the site itself (with the appropriate road modifications or 
additions) and finally within the site (via a temporary, but 
purpose-built HH access path that is designed to provide 
a clear path to the multiple module setting area).
Figure 9.23 Sketch of simple timber grillage with chain sea-fastening.
Figure 9.24 (Top) Complex structural beam grillage; and (Bottom) tubular sea￾fastening combinations.9.10 Shipping Considerations 147
9.10.2.3 The Heavy Haul (HH) Route Survey
It is this part of the module effort that should be developed 
in the initial module transport analysis previously men￾tioned as one of the very first activities in the project plan￾ning of a module job––that being the determination of the 
maximum shipping envelope (from the receiving MOF to 
the proposed project site). The heavy haul route survey or 
study can be as simple as identification of a route and a few 
measurements indicating where potential pinch points are. 
But typically, as indicated above, the path from MOF to the 
site is complex enough that this survey or study becomes 
a formal multi-page analysis complete with routes, alterna￾tives, and annotated photos of each potential move restric￾tion (along with suggestions on how best to resolve them).
Critical to the success of the project is finding a knowl￾edgeable company to perform the HH route survey. 
Typically, a local company familiar with the area, roads, 
regulations, permitting, local authorities, etc., will provide 
the most complete route analysis and best option(s). 
However, for unique situations, very tall towers or heavy 
equipment, and very large modules, the contracting of a 
more international logistics company may be the better 
choice due to the company’s familiarity and experience 
with the more unique transport configurations and equip￾ment that might be required for these special long, wide, 
high or heavy loads. In most cases, these international 
logistics companies will have one or more local offices 
also employing local personnel who will be able to pro￾vide the specific transportation details regarding regula￾tions, permitting, and required approvals necessary to 
ensure the module movements will not be held up due 
to “paperwork.”
9.10.2.4 Logistics Coordination
It is advantageous to have the same logistics company 
coordinating BOTH the load-out from the fab yard as well 
as the offloading, movement to the site, and final module 
setting. Yes, this seems like it should be an obvious deci￾sion. But, when working with multiple module fabricators, 
numerous heavy equipment suppliers, as well as sepa￾rate structural steel and pipe spool fabrication contrac￾tors, all of which have their own ideas regarding how they 
can utilize their own equipment for movement and ship￾ping, single-point coordination of all these moving parts 
becomes important.
For example, with slightly different trailer heights and 
capabilities, it is important that the gap provided between 
the ground/deck and the lower structural steel load￾carrying beam will accommodate all of the trailer and 
SPMT types that are planned to be used in execution.
Most large EPC firms will have their own internal logistics 
group that is responsible for this overall project coordi￾nation. They will typically work with the vessel owners, 
heavy haul (HH) and heavy lift (HL) companies, setting 
the groundwork and rules on scope splits and responsi￾bilities to ensure that there are no gaps in the movement 
sequence from fab yard to final setting.
Also, many of the larger fabrication yards, as well as the 
shipping companies, provide integrated logistics ser￾vices. For example, the fab yard may also have HH and 
HL capabilities as well as ocean-going transport capabili￾ties. This provides additional revenue streams for these 
companies. For the project, it also provides an option of 
limiting the number of different sub-contractors involved 
in the module movement. Limiting the number of custody 
transfers limits the chances of having overlap or gaps 
in the module movement as well as limits the potential 
opportunity for miscommunications between contractors 
and the resulting opportunities for scope change, change 
orders, and their resulting additional costs. Anything that 
reduces the number of contractors and their coordina￾tion should be considered favorably in the early project 
coordination.
A fabrication yard that also has responsibility for ship￾ping will make sure that the vessel will be available when 
the module is ready to ship. Delays in module fabrication 
(assuming these are not caused by the project) will be the 
responsibility of the fabrication yard to correct. In general, 
combining these two scopes is desirable, assuming, of 
course, the project is OK with any perceived additional 
risk of awarding both fabrication and logistics to the 
same company.
9.10.2.5 On the Site
The final coordination will take place within the project 
site. While the HH contractor will work to move the mod￾ules and other equipment as scheduled to the site, they 
will not take responsibility for any problems with getting 
the modules to their respective setting locations due to 148 Module Considerations by Project Group
construction site activities. They will be relying on the on￾site construction management team to coordinate all the 
activity within the site (excavations, pile driving, and any 
early foundation and equipment setting) to ensure that the 
path to the respective module setting locations is clear.
This can become a challenge, especially when module 
equipment is late, the module itself is late, or there is a 
change in the path of construction or sequencing at the 
site. During the initial plot plan layout, the plot plan path 
of construction should be developed, providing as much 
flexibility in module setting as possible without creating 
excessive cost implications. For example, a site with the 
ability to install main pipe rack modules from either end 
offers opportunities to make adjustments in the rack set￾ting sequence that may benefit the adjacent site con￾struction hook-up.
9.10.2.6 Single Weld Hook-Up (SWHU)
Historically, when building a plant, due to small differ￾ences in the setting of major equipment, connecting pipe 
spools were designed with 3 degrees of freedom. When 
the equipment was set and the piping to be attached to 
it was in place, final measurements were taken between 
the equipment and the proposed connection, and these 
“tie-in” spools were fabricated for an exact fit. Besides 
requiring exact measurements, it also required two con￾nections be made––one at each end of the tie-in spool. 
For many of the industrial processes, this amounted to 
two welds/pipe.
With the advent of the 3D model, laser scanning, and dis￾tance measurements, the construction industry is techni￾cally capable of building a module to “exact” dimensions 
(Choi et al., 2020), even taking into account the impact 
to these dimensions from the thermal expansion of the 
piping due to temperature differences between the fabri￾cation yard and the project site. (We will explain in more 
detail in Chapter 12.) With this accuracy, the connection 
between two modules/a module and a piece of pipe-rack 
pipe/a module and a pipe connection to a tower can be 
made with one weld––resulting in a single weld hook￾up (SWHU). This capability provides the opportunity of 
designing these modules for SWHU (Figure 9.25).
So, what exactly is a SWHU? It is more than just the one 
weld that makes the connection between two modules 
or a module and a piece of equipment or piping. It is 
an entire philosophy of design, fabrication, testing, pre￾commissioning, and quality control to be able to use a 
single weld to connect two previously tested and quali￾fied areas of the project plant.
Why the interest in the SWHU? As mentioned, the typi￾cal connection between the module piping and site pip￾ing involves two connections (weld or flange) and a short 
piece of pipe. With some advance planning and use of 
the SWHU philosophy, this can be cut down to a single 
weld or flange. That is a 50% saving in labor and con￾sumables. While that may not seem like much, putting it 
into perspective, on a large project we were associated 
with, the total number of SWHU pipe welds (sometimes 
referred to as closure welds) was over 8,100! That meant 
that this was savings to the project of 8,100 extra welds! 
Because of the requirements in terms of design, plan￾ning, and procedure approvals, it is important that the 
decision to use the SWHU process is taken early in the 
design process.
9.10.2.7 SWHU and Owner and EPC Coordination
Of special importance is the approval of the proposed 
SWHU procedure by the owner and construction teams. 
This is important because the whole reason for using the 
SWHU is to be able to test the entire piping system on 
either side of the closure weld with the project standard 
NDE or hydrotest at the module fab yard. But, along with 
this testing, there must be all the paperwork (appropriately 
Figure 9.25 SWHU example alignment.References 149
signed) required to document that both sides of the pro￾posed closure weld piping have been tested and veri￾fied. Included in this documentation is confirmation that 
both pieces of piping are ready for the closure weld as 
well as the details for the actual closure weld and sub￾sequent NDE.
We really are making a big deal trying to explain the impor￾tance of developing procedures that have been approved 
by project management at a level that causes no second￾guessing. There have been too many projects where a 
half-baked SWHU procedure makes it all the way to the 
site, only to have a quality control or quality assurance 
representative disagree with the procedure and require 
re-testing, re-hydro, and all other sorts of re-work, not 
only negating the potential savings but creating additional 
costs and schedule impacts that were never there. In the 
end, the only way to be successful is to document––
document––document and get written approvals from a 
level of the project that is irrefutable.
9.11 Construction Considerations
The construction team needs to understand the module 
schedule and modules.
9.11.1 Understand the Schedule
This is different than a stick-built schedule. Construction 
does not have the typical latitude in approaching the site 
work any way they want to. There are specific activities 
that must be completed in a specific sequence to permit 
the modules to be moved into place.
9.11.2 Understand the Modules
The construction team must work with the module fab 
yard management to understand what will be sent to 
the site, how it will be sent, and what parts may still be 
unfinished.
For example, in the past, one construction manager com￾mented when one of the first modules arrived aboard the 
ocean-going vessel: “I had no idea they were that big!” 
Such surprise could have been avoided by agreeing to 
make the visit to the fab yard instead of declining it on 
several occasions. This comment was followed weeks 
later with a second acknowledgment upon seeing how 
easily the modules were set and how well they hooked 
up to the equipment and piping at the site: “I really wish 
more of this plant had been modularized!”
Sadly, unless the construction team has worked with 
modular construction before, they will not fully under￾stand the benefits these modules provide to their site. 
They will continue to try to run the site construction effort 
the way they ran a past stick-built job.
How to resolve? If you cannot get a module-savvy con￾struction team, do the next best thing––make sure that 
they are involved in all the upfront design, scheduling, 
and procurement developments. Only then do they have 
an opportunity to understand the benefits of prefabrica￾tion and the tight scheduling constraints that must be fol￾lowed to make the project a success.
9.12 Summary
In this chapter, we explained the different module con￾siderations by the project group. The subjects discussed 
were: Engineering, Schedule, Procurement, Sub-Contract, 
Fabrication, Completion/Testing/Prep, Load-out, Module 
Movement, Shipping, and Construction. These points will 
help companies to successfully implement modularization 
if they follow our recommendations.
References
Choi, J.O. et al. (2020) Innovative Technologies and 
Management Approaches for Facility Design 
Standardization and Modularization of Capital Projects. 
Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(5), 04020042. 
doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000805.
Han,B. and Leite, F. (2021) Measuring the Impact of 
Immersive Virtual Reality on Construction Design Review 
Applications: Head-Mounted Display versus Desktop 
Monitor. Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, 147(6), 04021042. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
CO.1943-7862.0002056.chapter 10
151
This chapter is where we, the authors, get to expound 
a bit on our learning experiences, even if many of these 
are the results of painful missteps, wrong turns taken 
down blind alleys, and too many chases down (dead 
end) rabbit holes. But this chapter is also interspersed 
with the information provided (sometimes almost as if by 
divine guidance) from a smarter and more experienced 
coworker, and one willing to take the time to extend 
a helping hand as we struggled while simultaneously 
implementing and learning. AND, by no means do we 
claim to know it all. In fact, the almost scary reality is 
that every new module job tackled comes with new 
learning experiences, nuances to project execution that 
get added to the collective knowledge we have (and try 
to remember), hopefully providing for the development 
of more complete and accurate responses to later 
related issues when asked (assuming, that is, we ever 
even get asked!).
Modularization is not “rocket science”—at least not in 
our opinion. As with most great concepts, it is based 
on some simple tenets, including planning, organization, 
teamwork, singleness of purpose, and commitment, 
just to name a few. Modularization is also like the over￾used Harley Davidson phrase—“it’s not the destination, 
but the journey . . .” It is not just knowing the facts and 
figures on how to do it correctly; it is the actual process 
of fusing a group of like-minded individuals into a team 
and then working together to figure out a way to get 
the project done. Only as a result of this collective effort 
or “journey” do we actually develop all the “neat little 
things” that help us make the journey or project easier 
and the final destination a true accomplishment.
So, a bit of advice before we get too far into this. Share 
the little nuances you know, learn, or may have been 
told. They are of little use by themselves (and don’t do 
any good stuck in your head, never to see the light of 
day). It is only in the context of the collective project that 
they provide benefits and can be built into and on top of 
the current experiences and knowledge to expand and 
progress the greater module good.
So much for “waxing eloquent” on the philosophy of 
sharing . . . Both of us have found the more we share 
what we thought was perhaps somewhat “unique or 
special,” the more we found out it was closer to common 
industry knowledge, with others already sharing how 
they had enhanced or modified it to fit their specific 
needs. Then, based on your knowledge of the subject, 
we will let you decide whether this is a “typical” or an 
“atypical” example.
10.1 Introduction
This chapter goes into more detail on some of the potential 
questions, early resistance, and opportunities to commu￾nicate the benefits of using modularization as an alterna￾tive to stick-built (before the opportunity is “submarined” 
by well-meaning management). Its target audience is the 
“maybe not so experienced” project engineer/manager 
who may end up being assigned as “module coordina￾tor.” Its goal is to try to identify and provide input in terms 
of responses, grounded in our experiences, to some of 
the questions that come up during early study work as 
well as once into the actual execution of a module job. 
A Practical Module 
Development Process152 A Practical Module Development Process
Much of our input is aimed at the reluctant management 
audience and module detractors, as it takes only a hand￾ful to create an environment where module project suc￾cess will be difficult, if not impossible. And while each 
project and set of managers are different, many of the 
issues are similar. So, it is hoped that this section will help 
highlight some of the more common stumbling blocks 
encountered on your way to the successful implementa￾tion of a module program.
Oh, yea, be forewarned—while we followed a logical 
sequence in the development of this book to explain the 
evolution of a module job up to this point, the writing in 
this chapter seems to have followed a bit more stream￾of-consciousness style than anticipated, as one thought 
and response feeds other related ones, all of which are 
important at different times. So, if you can accept the 
somewhat wandering thought process and keep an open 
mind, this chapter will provide answers to what many of 
you need when trying to get a module project started 
and moving.
10.2 Initial Project Analysis
How does all this start? Someone suggests a project be 
modular. Typically, this starts with a comment that the 
owner/client makes, or they simply ask, “Can you modu￾larize my project?” The obvious answer from your com￾pany business development representatives’ standpoint 
is “Yes!” But to make any project a modular success, a 
quick reality check should be made (just prior to respond￾ing with such enthusiasm).
10.2.1 Reality Check Questions
It is suggested that the following self-examination of both 
the owner/client motives and the project potential be 
initiated.
• Does the owner/client expect cost and schedule sav￾ings with modularization?
• Does the owner/client have an idea about how to modu￾larize the project (or are they simply asking a question)?
• How far along is the owner/client’s design? (Hint: Any￾thing more advanced than early pre-FEED should start 
raising red flags.)
• What is the owner/client’s experience with past module 
jobs? (Are any of them positive?)
• What is the owner/client’s attitude toward a different ap￾proach to the project planning efforts?
• How willing is the owner/client to provide additional 
funding prior to FID?
• How familiar is the owner/client’s team with participat￾ing in a modular project?
Notice something that all these reality check questions 
have in common? If not, take a closer look: they all 
involve the owner/client input. As we have mentioned 
in Chapter 7 on the critical success factor, the owner/
client is responsible for the majority of the critical deci￾sions on a module job. Reluctance, indecision, or resist￾ance to change are not a good initial sign—one that 
must be caught early, explored, and resolved through 
education.
Of course, it is assumed that you are not facing the 
same lack of (module) understanding within your EPC 
organization. But, if you are, the same approach (and 
questions) should be used within your organization! 
Of course, we suggest you approach your organization 
with a bit of tact since a poor approach and delivery to 
an overly sensitive upper manager could be a career￾limiting move for you as the younger member on the 
proposed project team.
If there are weaknesses in the owner/client knowledge 
base (or even in your own organization), it will be your 
first duty to figure out where these are and, based on 
that, how to address them. For this lack of understand￾ing or lack of commitment, a little bit more investigation 
is suggested to determine what part of “modular” they 
do not understand (along the lines of the similar familiar 
warning—what part of “no” do you not understand?—
but hopefully not so blunt!)
10.3 Early Discussions
Suggest the following thoughts/ideas (call them module 
tenets) be woven into subsequent conversations as soon 
as you identify the particular reason(s) for hesitation or 
a lack of understanding. The goal of these introductory 10.4 Module Tenets 153
and early follow-up discussions is to identify any com￾mon misconceptions held regarding modularization and 
replace them with facts and updated information (so 
the team can start with a more or less neutral opinion 
of module opportunities and benefits versus potential 
downsides).
These early discussions are important because, like the 
module “Perfect Storm” from Chapter 7, almost every￾one has a module horror story they will share with you 
first before sharing any good project module experiences 
(assuming they had ever even had some).
10.4 Module Tenets
Listed below are module tenets (commonly held views 
and beliefs on modularization). These are by no means all 
of them, but they are the ones that quickly popped into 
our minds as we asked ourselves the question:
What is it about modularization that EVERYONE should 
know?
10.4.1 Definitions
• Modularization and pre-assembly are essentially 
the same thing. Pre-assembly is just a simpler form of 
how to move craft work-hours off site. This combined 
concept definition is crucial as it opens up many op￾portunities for alternatives to the traditional stick-built 
execution plan.
• A module job consists of a mixture of big and little 
modules. Even the biggest module job will probably 
have several “small” (less than 100 ton) modules and 
numerous pre-assemblies.
• There is no “minimum distance” for moving off 
site. Moving work-hours off site can be as simple as 
pre-assembly on land directly adjacent to the project 
site. Anything that creates a way to build something 
“cheaper” is fair game. As an example, this can be 
building something at grade next door if this produces 
a finished product with the increased productivity of 
working at grade and by doing so allows more space 
for craft in the on-site more critical areas.
10.4.2 Boundaries and Limitations
• Not everything on a project can be modular￾ized, but every job can benefit from some sort of 
pre-assembly.
• Modules improve access. A properly designed module 
will IMPROVE access to equipment for O&M activities, 
not limit it. Think about it—most modules provide a third 
dimension (the vertical) in which to support equipment/
piping/E&I&C as well as maintenance appurtenances. 
By expanding the width to accommodate access ways, 
the combination provides improved overhead support 
opportunities as well as easier access horizontally.
• Modules reduce safety hazards. A properly designed 
module should minimize or eliminate safety hazards, not 
create additional ones. Again, the overhead features of 
a volumetric module provide opportunities for proper 
supports, proper access, and proper protection.
• Modules are not “cramped.” A properly designed 
module is not “cramped” in terms of spacing. There 
is no reason to make the land module overly constric￾tive. (Do not confuse onshore and offshore module re￾strictions—offshore modules are limited in size by the 
supporting footprint of the jacket, semi, etc. The land￾based module has no such restriction.)
10.4.3 Cost
• Early module planning does not cost more. Early 
module-based planning (the feasibility and selection 
phases) will cost the project no more than conventional 
stick-built planning. The actual work performed in a 
project’s assessment and selection phases is essen￾tially the same whether you have a modular or stick￾built execution plan in mind. The difference is that with a 
modular execution plan, you will need to start planning 
a lot of actions earlier. But early planning makes for a 
better end product, so what is the loss? Even if the pro￾ject decides against the module philosophy, the earlier 
planning efforts required will have provided an early kick 
start to that project and will typically leave the project 
better prepared for upcoming activities in later phases.
The complete modular job will increase the typical 6–8% 
engineering job portion of the total installed cost (TIC) 154 A Practical Module Development Process
project cost by approximately 5–10%. This varies from 
project to project but is typically due to the extra sup￾port costs primarily for the additional work associated 
with the module fabrication, shipping, and setting efforts 
and the extra coordination of these activities. But this is 
often offset by the benefits gained from the earlier plan￾ning in terms of design and procurement—more time to 
do it right (the first time) than do it over (at the last minute).
10.4.4 Impacts
• Execution Plan Differences. The module job im￾pacts “all” aspects of project planning and execution. 
Many are very subtle, but timing is critical. For example, 
everything on the module will need to be “completely 
engineered” before sending it to the module fabrica￾tor (to avoid expensive changes at the fabricator’s yard 
or carry over to the site). This means you cannot allow 
your favorite construction manager to “re-engineer” the 
on-site execution of the facility—there is much less flex￾ibility with respect to timing.
• Critical success factors (CSFs). These are actions 
that are critical to the success of the module job. They 
should be identified and embraced by the team. Hint: 
These CSFs are all really common-sense actions and 
attitudes that will make any job (stick-built or modular) 
more successful. The reason why these are so im￾portant with a modular execution plan is that there is 
much less latitude for variation during the construc￾tion sequence (the path of construction): timing is 
everything.
• Both of the above concepts and their impacts on the 
project design and execution need to be common 
knowledge for all members of the project team (and 
embraced by them).
10.4.5 Experience
• Every company needs a module “expert.” The con￾tractor and owner/client BOTH should have a module 
“expert” on the team – identified and available for early 
consultations. If no one has been identified, make sure 
one is found for each and make sure each organization 
brings one on. The time to bring these on is as early as 
you can because even in the opportunity framing phase 
(FEL-0), there are decisions to be made that impact po￾tential module outcomes.
• Every company needs to be module “savvy.” Con￾tractor and owner teams BOTH need to be module 
“savvy.” Inadequate technical background on either 
or both sides creates project delays while working to 
“educate” one or the other on why specific activities are 
warranted either earlier or in a different order than what 
they are used to.
10.4.6 Commitment
• Total commitment is required. Contractor and own￾er teams BOTH need to be completely committed to 
the module solution. A single detractor of the proposed 
module solution will seriously endanger the chances 
of success. The team’s energy needs to be spent on 
developing solutions, not debating who is correct or 
explaining and defending the approaches taken (which 
will, by definition, be slightly different).
• Flexibility is required. The owner/client needs to be 
willing to work with the slightly different priorities and 
sequencing of early work. This always goes smoother 
if BOTH teams have a module-savvy internal resource 
they can confide in and work with.
• Collaboration is required. Finally, is the owner/cli￾ent (as well as your own project management) work￾ing internally as well as externally with each other in a 
collaborative manner rather than taking a transactional 
approach? Remember, many activities that typically are 
performed a certain way will need to be adjusted a bit 
with a modular execution approach. The entire team 
will need to be flexible, strive to understand why these 
(execution plan) differences are necessary, and then ac￾cept and support them.
10.5 Project Drivers
After the preliminary alignment session(s) on module 
philosophy and a discussion (or two) on the above per￾tinent module tenets with the goal in mind of possibly 
leveling the module playing field discussions from “eve￾ryone’s worst nightmare” to “a concept that might have 
some potential,” the real reasons why the owner/client 
wants a modularized project should be ferreted out. After 
addressing (and dismissing) some of the more “univer￾sally shallow” reasons (e.g., “Modularization is something 
everyone is doing these days” or “It is something that is 10.5 Project Drivers 155
guaranteed to save us money” or even the more philan￾thropic view that “It is the right thing to do”), there needs 
to be a discussion on why this particular project should 
be modularized.
10.5.1 Cost versus Schedule
While there may be some “lip service” to better quality, 
safety, and more local content, the two big elephants 
in the room are always cost and schedule. The owner/
client will be quick to say that both are equally important. 
And while both are important, one will be more impor￾tant than the other for economic or scheduling reasons 
that the owner/client may not wish to share with the EPC 
contractor. In any case, it is important that the owner/
client be coached into at least identifying (in their own 
mind) which one is more critical to them in terms of net 
present value (NPV), rate of return (ROR), total installed 
cost (TIC), or whatever metric the owner/client equates 
project success with. Once the owner/client has done 
so, it is important that the owner/client communicate 
which of the two is more critical to the EPC contractors. 
The owner/client may not want to disclose or explain 
why one is more important than the other, but the owner/
client needs to clearly communicate which one is their 
priority, as there will be a slightly different approach to the 
module project planning depending on which is deemed 
more critical.
There are several ways to approach this conversation. 
We typically start with a plan to identify some signifi￾cantly unacceptable cost increase and compare it to an 
equally significant schedule increase and offer to help 
the owner/client walk through the exercise. At some 
point in the conversation, as you continue to adjust the 
two increases higher, one will become unacceptable (for 
internal budgeting/NPV/ROR or other reasons, maybe 
not shared). The owner/client will indicate which one 
cannot be tolerated. After a quick confirmation, you 
move forward with the choice provided.
You may get push back from the owner/client on why 
such a decision is required. We suggest the following 
line of reasoning for your potential response: A modular 
execution philosophy is developed as a team effort. The 
modules are typically on the project critical path. There 
are many different alternatives in terms of module con￾figuration—mixing and matching the equipment within 
the modules as well as varying the number of modules 
in the project. Some of these modules will be impacted 
by the equipment in them. So, it is important that they be 
examined based on the potential impact to either “cost” 
or “schedule” in terms of late or missing delivery to the 
fabrication yard. Knowing whether cost or schedule is 
more critical can influence whether you include that piece 
of equipment or kit on the module (in order to maximize 
work-hour removal from site and dollar savings) or leave 
it for separate shipping and setting at the site (increas￾ing the extra work-hours associated with a project site 
hook-up, but saving schedule by getting the now smaller 
module to site earlier).
After all of this, it is still very likely that the EPC contrac￾tor will not be told why which one will take precedence, 
but, in most cases, they can figure it out. However, if the 
true project economics are not shared with the EPC pro￾ject contractor, you now have the owner/client’s march￾ing orders, and you can effectively plan where there is a 
potential trade-off between cost versus schedule.
10.5.2 Other Drivers
After the cost vs. schedule decision—go ahead and 
breathe a sigh of relief but keep your celebrations short! 
You now need to continue to work on the identification 
of the rest of the project drivers from the owner/client’s 
perspective.
Many of these have been mentioned in Chapter 5, The 
Business Case for Modularization. Getting as complete a 
listing from the owner/client as possible becomes essen￾tial when evaluating module options and total percentage 
to modularize. Depending on importance, these other 
drivers may push the project to either more modulariza￾tion or less.
For example, limiting impact on local community or 
impact on nearby land would drive a modular solution 
that results in the movement of the most construction 
work-hours possible off site to reduce the workforce on 
site. Conversely, a local community that wants local craft 
employed will push for work they can do locally and may 
shift the total number or size of modules to accommo￾date the specific skills of the local craft. Both are correct 
answers but one is a better option for your particular pro￾ject and should be the goal.156 A Practical Module Development Process
Safety/quality are always on the list and are a given 
when it comes to project drivers. But what parts of 
past projects have the owner/client had issues with on 
either safety or quality? Poor welding quality/high reject 
rates on alloy materials may suggest that the project 
should maximize specific process units so these units 
could be built in an enclosed area of a fab yard where 
such alloy welding is their specialty. The same con￾cept could be applied to E&I&C if local craft quality 
were an issue.
Are there parts of a process that need to be designed and 
assembled in specific countries (or conversely, are there 
some countries that the owner/client wishes to avoid)? 
Do customs clearance and import duties have an impact 
on where the units get built?
All project drivers can impact the modularization scope 
and should be identified upfront to ensure the best fit in 
terms of the final modularization conclusion.
10.5.3 Owner-Furnished Equipment
Sometimes an owner/client can even be too helpful. This 
may seem counter-intuitive, as help from an owner/client 
in terms of taking the risk of purchasing critical equip￾ment seems like one less thing for the EPC contractor 
to worry about. But, what if the owner/client contracted 
the purchase of a major piece of equipment that requires 
extensive assembly at the site? What about the equip￾ment that has been purchased at a significantly reduced 
price (significant project savings) but with a delivery that 
will not meet the needs of the module fabricator for inclu￾sion in a specific module? Finally, what about equipment 
purchased with no accommodations in the contract for 
equipment support because no thought was given to the 
necessary long-term maintenance for the duration of the 
equipment just sitting in the module or even a third party 
representative at the module fab yard for assembly, pres￾ervation, and maintenance?
All such good intentions can be extremely challeng￾ing if the results do not fit the project module schedule 
or scope. Of course, in some cases, the damage has 
already been done by the time the owner/client brings 
you on board as the EPC contractor. In other cases, it 
may be your procurement group that continues to repro￾duce the same purchasing contract details that do not 
explore the options of pre-assembly or purchase of criti￾cal engineering earlier, or even options on early delivery or 
split delivery sites. In either case, it becomes very impor￾tant that these small details get addressed upfront and 
BEFORE they become bigger stumbling blocks when try￾ing to develop the module equipment compositions. This 
is an excellent segue into the next subject of discussion: 
the module team.
10.5.4 The Module Team
10.5.4.1 The Module Coordinator and the Business 
Development Team
The module team starts out as a single person: a mod￾ule “representative” or module coordinator. Very humble 
beginnings, so when should this single solitary module 
person be brought on board? At the very beginning of a 
prospect pursuit. The module coordinator should be at 
least a part-time representative on the business develop￾ment (BD) prospect pursuit team.
But this seldom happens. Why? Typically, either the BD or 
pursuit team management doesn’t understand or appre￾ciate the opportunities that can be identified via an early 
conversation with the owner/client on alternative project 
execution philosophies (e.g., modularization and pre￾assembly). Or, even more embarrassing and irritating, 
they assume it won’t come up or, if it does come up, they 
assume they have the background knowledge or ability 
to cover any such questions.
Many times, because of budget constraints, the BD 
team assumes this “extra” part-time module support is 
not necessary. Unfortunately, there are very few people, 
if any, in BD who really understand the ramifications of 
the decision to modularize. The only redeeming grace 
for the uninformed BD person is that they are “lucky” 
enough to be working with an equally uninformed 
owner/client.
Attempts by BD to “bluff” their way through a detailed 
discussion with an owner/client who happens to be 
knowledgeable in the subject will only lead to misunder￾standings at best and a disgruntled owner/client and a 
lost opportunity at the worst. It is best to make sure the 
prospective project is addressed with the appropriately 
correct module understandings.10.5 Project Drivers 157
Why are we so emphatic on getting module represen￾tation this early? First impressions are critical. Owners/
clients have become very sophisticated in terms of 
detailed knowledge on many fronts and can easily spot 
a weakness in technical ability. Companies have fig￾ured this out and usually bring their process experts to 
answer the technical questions, and their expert piping 
leads to respond to equipment layout questions. But 
what about the questions on construction, path of con￾struction, modularization, or standardization (and now 
even Advance Work Packaging or Lean concepts)? 
With most of the project costs part of the field execution, 
these topics should be addressed by someone who has 
actually been out on a project site more than just to see 
it. The goal of the BD pursuit team is to impress the 
client with their collective abilities in terms of the total 
job, including the module and other field expertise, as 
quickly as possible.
In addition, you do not want to spend the next several 
meetings with the prospective owner/client trying to 
politely explain why what the BD person said was “not 
exactly correct.” You know this is coming when you hear 
comments from BD such as: “Wish we had you here to 
answer this or that question” or “we didn’t realize that 
question was so involved.”
Why so much emphasis on the BD role and first impres￾sions? (Sorry, lots of skeletons in that closet.) Too many 
BD teams run on such a tight budget; they only have 
enough budget for a very few to be able to face the client, 
with everyone else “on-call.”
10.5.4.2 Prospect to Project: Module Team Growth
Somehow, the prospect pursuit was successful, and the 
company now has a brand-new project. The BD pursuit 
team has completed congratulating themselves and has 
now unceremoniously “handed” this project (along with 
all their overinflated promises to the client) to the project 
management team, who now must execute it. But, hope￾fully, by this time, project management understands the 
need for a module presence and expertise and has iden￾tified a module coordinator, or on a very large project, an 
entire module team, and set one up in the organization. 
The module lead/team and their importance were pre￾viously discussed in Chapter 6 (which the reader might 
want to review before going further).
But, just like the BD team efforts, it does the project a lit￾tle good if the module team lead is not included in all the 
early project planning and discussions with the owner/cli￾ent. Just as seemingly simple efforts by the owner/client 
to help in purchasing long-lead equipment can adversely 
impact the optimal module solution, so can an unin￾formed but well-meaning EPC management team make 
decisions that will cause additional problems in achieving 
the optimal module solution.
As a first step, the module team lead must quickly iden￾tify their counterpart on the owner/client side and begin 
early discussions with them to understand any strengths 
to be counted on or weaknesses to be understood and 
dealt with.
Such early engagement will go a long way in developing 
the mature respect and rapport that will be valuable later 
in the project when trying to get variations in the project 
planning (as a result of the module approach) approved. 
In addition, understanding any weaknesses or gaps in 
modular knowledge creates opportunities to “share” with 
your owner/client counterpart and provide any needed 
early heads up on what might be coming in terms of 
changes to the owner/client’s standard project protocols.
At the same time the module team lead is getting to know 
their owner/client counterpart, they must begin recruit￾ing “willing” individual representatives from each of the 
major groups within their side of the project. As previously 
mentioned, these will be the eyes and ears of the module 
team as they each work within their respective groups.
Why is it important that there are representatives from 
each of the major project groups in the module team? 
Remember the 107 execution plan differences that 
were summarized under 21 separate topics in Chap￾ter  6? These execution plan differences impact ALL of 
the project groups. Since the module team lead cannot 
be “everywhere—all the time,” the team leader must rely 
on members within each of these major project groups 
to keep an “ear” out for any project planning that might 
impact the module efforts, either positively or negatively.
Of course, with such an agenda for these module team 
members, there is usually one or more group managers 
who may get offended with your proposed attempt to 
get “one of their own” to, in effect, “spy” on their group. 158 A Practical Module Development Process
Think about it, you as a module team leader are request￾ing someone to work part-time for you, typically without 
chargeability, with the goal of “ratting out” the actions of 
their discipline or group leader for doing something not in 
line with the module agenda.
This is where the module team member’s great skills at 
“schmoozing” come in. Do you remember that course in 
college? It was the one that most engineers avoided like 
the plague because it involved personal interaction skill 
development, something most of us were not born with 
and had trouble even getting below average at. But seri￾ously, this is an important part of being a module team 
leader and should not be taken lightly. As mentioned, it 
is critical that the module job has everyone marching in 
the same direction and being enthusiastic about it. As 
the module team leader, in some cases, you may be the 
only one on the project that understands how the groups 
must adjust actions and deliverables to make the project 
a success.
So, with a unified module team, supported by each 
member’s discipline lead/group leader, we can now start 
talking about what needs to be done on the project itself, 
starting with the modules themselves.
10.5.5 How Many and How Big?
We started this chapter by warning you that the path 
from the first effort to the completed project may not be a 
straight arrow shot. In fact, for some projects, the expla￾nations and path we have provided thus far may have put 
the “cart before the horse.” By now, someone on the pro￾ject management team is probably asking: “Has anyone 
determined the number and size of the modules yet?”
Even if the project has been provided with a module list￾ing with some amount of detail, it is important that a real￾ity check be made on whether this listing of modules is 
indeed the optimal number and size.
Every EPC company that has performed module work in 
the past has developed a way to identify the best mod￾ule case scenario for a given project. However, at some 
distant time in the past, each of those companies had 
to start from scratch. So, for discussion purposes, we 
assume that the contractor has not made such an analy￾sis, and their company is not familiar with the necessary 
steps to develop such an analysis. So, what we provide is 
a five-step module method for such an analysis.
10.6 The Five-Step Module 
Development Process
The typical module development process includes 
numerous separate but related efforts that must be simul￾taneously developed or considered in order to produce a 
suggested module program that will be best suited for a 
specific project. Key among them are the following (in the 
authors’ humble opinion):
• A way to compare the various module size and shape 
options, from very small to very large, to find the size 
that is “just right.”
• A way to select the best fabrication facility from the wide 
range of fab yard sizes and types available worldwide, 
and further, to determine how each will impact the over￾all project cost.
• A way to initially define the various sizes and shapes of 
the individual modules within that optimal size range.
• A way to subsequently further optimize the module 
configuration.
• A way to incorporate them into the schedule.
• A way to ultimately compare their cost versus the tradi￾tional cost of stick-built construction.
With a bit of rearranging and consolidating, one can see 
this effort follows a basic five-step developmental pattern:
1. Determine optimal module size, specific to a project.
2. Develop specific modules around this base size.
3. Optimize individual modules based on further detailed 
analysis, path of construction, and other owner de￾sires and preferences.
4. Determine best schedule fit.
5. Develop cost comparison of this best fit set 
of modules.
So, how does such an analysis work when your company 
is working with module job Serial #1 (along with creating 
the first module they have ever looked at developing in 
lieu of stick-building)?10.6 The Five-­Step Module Development Process 159
Review the module project drivers previously mentioned 
in Chapter  5, The Business Case for Modularization, 
including the 13-step decision process. This is the the￾ory behind the practice and includes a brief description 
of the tools that can be found and used in this effort. 
Remember that in almost all cases, the main driver for 
modularization is the cost difference between what it 
takes to complete 1 unit of work at the project job site 
versus what it takes to complete that same unit of work 
at a module fabrication yard. This economic productiv￾ity ratio (or EPR), a phrase coined by CII in RT-283, has 
been included in a discussion in Chapter 5. It is the iden￾tification of this difference in cost between doing a unit of 
work on the project site versus performing it in an offsite 
fabrication yard that provides the necessary additional 
funds required to support all the little “extras” we see in 
a modular job, such as extra engineering engagement, 
extra structural materials, extra fab yard supervision, 
extra shipping costs, extra heavy haul transport, and 
extra setting and hook-up costs. And, if everything goes 
as planned, this EPR provides the extra cost savings 
by going with the modular solution, all of which comes 
along with schedule savings.
10.6.1 Step #1 The Stick-Built versus Module 
Comparison
10.6.1.1 Starting with Nothing?
The first goal of the 5-step module analysis is to deter￾mine just how much difference there might be between 
the conventional stick-built and the modular approach. 
As mentioned in Chapter 5, this can be approached in 
terms of three options:
• small (or low) percentage modularization
• medium (or average) percentage modularization
• large (or high) percentage modularization.
Good rules of thumb for what these percentages would 
look like are: 10–30% versus 30–50% versus 50–80% of 
on-site total direct field work hours being moved to the 
offsite fabrication yard.
To come up with an idea of the potential cost savings, 
the following simple comparison can be made. Typically, 
some idea of the total construction work-hours required 
for a specific project is available or has been developed. 
Along with this information is some determination of the 
cost of labor as well as the craft productivity factor for 
the project site. That covers the stick-built costing needs. 
The bits of information missing are the identical factors for 
the module fab yards of interest: the craft all-in wage rate 
and productivity factor.
Providing examples of both of these will do nothing but 
get the authors in trouble and date this publication. In 
addition, there are various publications (some available 
for a small fee) that will provide all these statistics by area, 
region, or whatever split is desired. But we think that 
there is some good benefit in at least providing some very 
general boundaries for each of the following: (1) cost of 
labor, (2) all-in wage rate, and (3) productivity so that the 
casual (or first-time) reader can at least get grounded in 
some currently realistic ranges in order to put all the other 
differences into context.
First, some definitions.
10.6.1.2 Craft Wage Rates
What the skilled worker actually gets paid. This can range 
from $10/hour or less in developing countries to $25–35/
hour in the US to even much higher in some places in 
Europe and Australia.
10.6.1.3 All-in Wage Rate (AIWR)
The sum of all the costs associated with paying the 
skilled worker the money they take home. It includes, 
not only the pay they see on their paycheck, but also 
all the other costs associated with being supported 
on site—things like: taxes/mob & demob costs/local 
transportation/small tools/camp costs/contractor’s field 
management/home office management/PPE/consuma￾bles/construction equipment/materials handling equip￾ment/QA & QC/and contractor profit.
Sometimes, in lieu of trying to detail all components of 
the “all-in wage rate,” one can estimate it by using a mul￾tiplying factor on the actual craft pay rate to get the total 
cost/work-hour. Such a factor could run anywhere from 
3 to 5 times the salary the craft worker is actually getting 
paid (i.e., what is actually seen on the check stub). So, 
the actual costs/work-hour of work (AIWR) can grow to 160 A Practical Module Development Process
totals of what some typically see when talking about the 
different areas of the world:
• USGC: $90–120/hour
• Europe: $80–100/hour
• Middle East/Africa: $30–40/hour
• SE Asia: $20–30/hour
• Far East: $40–60/hour
• Australia: $120–200/hour
10.6.1.4 Productivity Factor (PF)
This is a number used to compare the ability of different 
areas of the world to produce a similar unit of product to 
that of the USGC (which has been set up as the basis for 
comparison). So, a 1.0 PF means that the labor force in 
that area can build/work/produce at the same pace as 
the US guideline basis. If a particular labor force takes 
twice as long to produce a given unit of product, that 
labor force would be described as having a productivity 
factor of 2.0. With all that in mind, some typical produc￾tivity factors for the same areas listed above might run in 
the range of:
• USGC: 1.0–1.2 (note: we in the US no longer even meet 
our own basis of comparison)
• Europe: 1.2–1.5
• Middle East: 1.6–2.0
• Africa: 2.0–5.0
• SE Asia: 3.5–4.0
• Far East: 1.4–2.5
• Australia: 1.1–1.2
So, very simply, if you could identify the number of 
stick-built work-hours associated with a project, then 
assuming some low/medium/high module percentages, 
you can calculate a very high-level potential cost delta 
between the conventional stick-built approach and a 
modular approach.
EXAMPLE
(500,000 craft direct work-hours) x (45% modularization or removal of slightly less than ½ direct work-hours from site) x (delta AIWR) x 
(delta PF)
Site cost to build = (500,000 work-hour project) x (0.45 removed from site) x ($115 for US) x (1.0 PF) = $25.875M
Fabrication yard cost to build = (same 500,000 work-hours) x (.45) x ($30 for Far East fab yard) x (2.0 PF of fab yard) = $13.5M
A potential savings = $25.875M − $13.5M = $12.375M
Note: at the fab yard, the 500,000 x 0.45 has doubled in terms of fab yard work-hours, now requiring 1,000,000 work-hours. But, each fab 
yard work-hour is only $30 versus the $115 at site; hence the savings noted above.
10.6.1.5 Module versus Stick-Built Comparison
Of course, there is a lot more that goes into such an anal￾ysis, and this is where the sophistication of the company 
module analysis tool comes into play. To have a truly real￾istic analysis, as noted in the description of the CII costing 
tool in Chapter 5, the following factors should be consid￾ered and included if possible:
• Module type (each has a more or less unique ratio in 
terms of typical weight/cu. ft as well as weight percentage 
in terms of steel/piping/equipment/E&I&C/coatings/etc.)
• Module yard (location/craft rate/AIWR/etc.)
• Bulk material differences (specifically concrete and steel)
• Freight and transportation10.6 The Five-­Step Module Development Process 161
• Construction management team (CMT) at fab yard (an 
extra delta cost)
• Module-specific costs (setting/hook-up/carryover work/
scaffolding).
A basis for module cost must be identified. In some tools, 
it is based on the volumetric size. In others, it is the deck 
square footage. There are trends for both because if you 
think about it, as the module gets bigger, it has more 
deck space, and gets heavier. The trick is to determine 
an accurate volumetric or areal set of factors based on 
some historical basis of the typical module types one 
will be using.
The trick to setting up a good but simple comparison tool 
is to limit the comparisons to only those major items that 
are expected to change between the stick-built scope 
and the module scope. By analyzing only these differ￾ences, you simplify the comparison by forcing all the other 
factors to be equal and therefore canceling each other 
out of the final comparison. As a result, the suggested 
analysis reduces to an “easy” cost comparison—the dif￾ference between the module cost and the stick-built cost 
for identical scopes of work. Note that this type of com￾parison will not get you a total project cost. It will only 
provide a comparison of the portion of the project scope 
that was stick-built and has now turned to modular. (And, 
within this comparison, it will only be on the items that are 
materially different: the labor costs, some of the material 
costs like structural steel and concrete, and any special 
costs, like shipping, setting, and hook-up.)
What Is Similar So, for setting up this type of com￾parison, the following simplifying assumptions may want 
to be made:
• Equipment is identical for both the stick-built and 
module cases.
• Piping is also assumed to be identical for both cases. 
This will probably force the cost savings for modular to 
be a bit conservative since the module case will typical￾ly have less overall piping in terms of length. However, 
sometimes this shorter length is complicated by having 
more fittings and bends (to remain configured within the 
module); thus, the suggestion to assume the piping is 
equal is probably not that far off.
• E&I&C is also assumed to be identical. This is probably 
not always correct, and configurations change. But this 
cost is small when compared to the equipment, piping, 
and structural steel cost.
What Is Different
• Structural steel, however, is NOT identical. This signif￾icant difference needs to be considered and accounted 
for. The structural steel on a module will almost always 
be more than its stick-built equivalent. To help one un￾derstand why this increase is required, consider the 
configuration of a stick-built process area. Equipment is 
set on foundations, and piping is supported around it. 
For a module, there is a need to create a “bottom” for 
that module that will be used to support the equipment 
that was typically set on a separate concrete founda￾tion on the ground in the stick-built scenario. This mod￾ule “bottom” must also support the weight of the entire 
module frame and equipment as it ships on the ocean￾going vessels, provide connection integrity via grillage 
to the ship’s deck, and provide a flat base to sit on top 
of the trailers or SPMTs that will be used to move it to 
the vessel and from the vessel to the final setting lo￾cation. Thus, the module must have at least one extra 
level or layer of structural support steel.
• Concrete volumes will be different. This is a bit more 
subtle than the structural steel case but needs to be ad￾dressed. Because the module is made up of more steel 
tonnage, it must be supported by additional concrete, 
either in terms of more piling or more spread footers. 
This may be further defined in terms of cost/cubic yard 
of piling or spread footing. It may even offset some of the 
higher costs associated with finishing above-grade piers 
and other concrete supports. But, it is a difference, and 
an attempt should be made to capture the differences.
Module Size and Weight Correlations Depending 
on the size and type of module being used, there are 
direct correlations between the size and the delta weight 
difference over the similar stick-built scope. It is not an 
exact relationship because the experience of the equip￾ment and piping module layout person has a lot to do 
with how “big” or “little” they will make a module when 
trying to fit this set of equipment into the confines of 
the structural steel envelope of the module. However, 
different but equally competent piping layout designers 162 A Practical Module Development Process
should be reasonably consistent in developing the mod￾ule size, so the size/weight correlations should not be 
too far off when comparing one module at one project 
with a similarly sized one at another project, even if de￾veloped by different layout designers.
As an alternative to hiring a competent and experienced 
layout designer, there are industry estimating programs 
that will take the equipment list with the proper level of 
input details and develop the equipment size and cor￾responding connection space between it and other 
adjacent equipment, thus providing a sort of volumetric 
building block for each piece of equipment. By taking 
all the equipment developed this way, this set of volu￾metric building blocks can essentially be assembled and 
stacked or “pushed” together to develop an idea of the 
overall total module volume. One such program is ACCE 
(Aspen Capital Cost EstimatorTM). Of course, the big cau￾tion when using this as well as any other estimating tool 
is the universal tenet—GIGO, garbage in, garbage out. 
Rely on such tools only to the extent of the data used to 
populate them.
Other Non-Correlatable Costs Then there are wildly 
differing costs depending on the project site that prob￾ably should not be included as part of the standard 
module cost calculation tool but should be estimated 
and included separately. Examples include the cost of 
the material offloading facility (MOF) as well as the heavy 
haul transport road.
Freight Finally, we suggest that whatever tool you use 
or develop, that you go ahead and make the simplify￾ing assumption that the total material and equipment 
freight costs are similar between stick-built and module 
options (with the exception of the one true delta cost: 
the final shipping cost of the completed module to site).
With a truly worldwide procurement organization, it is 
too challenging to try to determine deltas for shipping to 
a module yard versus shipping directly to the site. So, 
we suggest that any comparing program keeps it simple 
and assumes that everything equals out in the end. Think 
about it, with much of the equipment being fabricated 
overseas, individual shipments from the vendor to the 
module fab yard may be much shorter and faster than 
shipments to the site. In some cases, the module fabri￾cation yard is its own equipment vendor, having internal 
fabrication capabilities to actually fabricate this equip￾ment on site.
But, as mentioned, the final completed module transport 
from the fab yard to the project site should be consid￾ered as a true delta cost associated with the modulariza￾tion effort.
10.6.1.6 Running the Various Module Scenarios
Based on the type of analysis tool you have available or 
the assumptions you have incorporated into the one you 
are building, begin evaluating the project based on mod￾ule size options. This is not exactly straightforward, so 
the following suggestions on trends may be helpful when 
trying to develop meaningful differentiators between the 
various sizes of modules.
Develop some module size standards that are uniquely 
different enough to provide measurable differing metrics 
that can be assigned to each size standard. We suggest 
the following ranges as an initial guide:
• Truckable—must meet most State highway clearance 
requirements.
• Oversize or permit load—extra wide and tall.
• Small equipment (PAU)—typical skid mounted self￾contained type equipment, moved by special multiple 
axled trailers (e.g., Cozad or Perimeter frame).
• Medium equipment (PAU)—larger, containing sev￾eral levels of equipment and requiring multiple lines of 
SPMT trailers.
• Large equipment (PAU)—largest, requiring even more 
lines of trailers and typically fully containing a sub￾process system.
• Small pipe rack (PAR)—typical one or two levels—no 
equipment.
• Medium pipe rack (PAR)—several levels—no equipment.
• Large pipe rack (PAR)—several levels and complex, 
potentially with fin-fan coolers and other equipment 
incorporated.
Each should be sized to reflect the full range of what your 
company expects to see and work with. Be careful not 
to constrain boundaries with little variation between the 10.6 The Five-­Step Module Development Process 163
options. They need to be robust enough to show signifi￾cant differences in the percentage steel increase, fabrica￾tion timing, shipping costs, etc.
Try to understand and evaluate the compromises 
that occur:
• Smaller modules use less steel but may not contain 
complete systems, so they require more connections 
within the module as well as more connections between 
modules when they arrive at the site. But they can be 
built faster and shipped on smaller vessels or even 
trucked to site.
• Large modules use more steel but can incorporate 
complete process systems, allowing for more extensive 
piping, E&I&C hook-ups, pre-commissioning, and test￾ing at the fab yard. However, they take longer to build 
and require more interaction with procurement and ven￾dors. They are required to be shipped on larger vessels 
that require earlier contractual commitments, which can 
become schedule critical if the vessel arrives on time, 
but the module is running late and is shipped incom￾plete. They require special MOFs, heavy haul routes, 
and extra allowances on the site in terms of heavy haul 
road width.
• All of the above are examples of cost deltas that should 
be identified and compared in order to determine opti￾mal initial module size.
And, if you have not noticed by now, these trade-offs 
impact the schedule, the number of craft at the site, and 
the duration. They also feed back into the scheduling and 
sequencing of the engineering and procurement activi￾ties. So, this comparison effort should not be performed 
in a vacuum.
10.6.2 Step #2 The Module Layout
Once you have determined the optimal size of the 
modules for your job (either based on true analysis as 
discussed above or simply because of shipping limita￾tions to the site), the next effort is turning a typical two￾dimensional stick-built layout into a three-dimensional set 
of modules. This is where the experienced piping layout 
person is your key to success. This is also why it is so 
important that when laying out a module job, you do not 
succumb to the temptation to just “draw boxes” around 
the equipment already in that stick-built configuration. 
Note, we provided examples in Chapter 4 of problems 
you can get into by simply “boxing” stick-built areas. 
The module layout was also discussed in some detail in 
Chapter 5, but a couple of additional points should be 
made with respect to performing these individual mod￾ule layouts.
10.6.2.1 Process and Piping
Work closely with the process and licensor engineering 
teams. They always have some “sacred cows” in terms 
of equipment arrangement or piping layout that are not 
to be messed with. Determine what is “sacred” about 
their process layout in terms of equipment, spatial rela￾tionships, configurations, etc., and strive to understand 
what makes these configurations special. If modifica￾tions are not to be made, strive to keep them that way. 
Remember, we are not offshore, and because of that, we 
have the capability of genuinely keeping these configura￾tions identical—if necessary.
For all other equipment, determine the best fit within the 
module. For example, if a vessel’s contents must grav￾ity flow into another vessel, consider setting this vessel 
on an elevated or second deck. If air-cooled equipment 
needs to be in an open area, consider setting them on 
top of the module. The goal is to use the third dimen￾sion (vertical) to your advantage (and continue to remind 
the process, licensor, and equipment designers of this 
increased flexibility and opportunity).
10.6.2.2 Piping Flow Diagrams (PFDs)
Use the piping flow diagrams (PFDs) as a guide for mod￾ule content. The PFDs are high-level simplified explana￾tions of the process. We may have oversimplified the 
process engineering’s work, but the PFD is typically 
drawn to show a more or less complete sub-process on 
a single page. So, look at how the PFDs are divided up, 
this may give you a clue as to how one might divide the 
proposed plant into separate modules. And, because 
each PFD page represents a more or less self-sufficient 
sub-process, a module encompassing all that equipment 
on that PFD page will also encompass all the E&I&C work 
needed to make it run. By designing in this manner, you 
will place the fabrication yard in a good position to be 
able to complete the module and perform a significant 164 A Practical Module Development Process
amount of pre-commissioning and testing of the corre￾sponding E&I&C work prior to shipping to the site.
10.6.2.3 Operations and Maintenance (O&M)
Remember to involve operations and maintenance 
(O&M). We like to think of the O&M team as the “ultimate 
and final customer.” As you develop the module configu￾ration, make sure that the O&M team who will actually be 
working daily on and in these modules are taken care of. 
Make sure they understand what the modules will look 
like and what they will be left to work with.
For example, O&M needs to understand that the first level 
may be as high as 4’ to 10’ above grade on a large land￾based module. THIS CAN BE A BIG DEAL! Do not under￾estimate the power of influence that O&M can bring to 
bear on the design, after all, they are the end-user. Make 
sure that the design not only covers their needs but does 
not cause heartache due to a failure to communicate.
On the positive side, involving them early can provide 
great insight into operations that may result in poten￾tial savings or a simpler way to configure. For example, 
discussions with the O&M team knowledgeable in the 
day-to-day running and maintenance of the plant may 
reveal opportunities to eliminate or reduce permanent 
access to places where daily, weekly, or monthly visits 
are not required.
In other cases, there may be a need for extra room to 
either charge a vessel or remove its contents. Such slight 
shifts (try to say that three times quickly) may provide a 
much easier, faster, and safer way to perform periodic 
operations such as routine catalyst change-outs or 
vessel work.
10.6.2.4 The Module Layout Designer
A key to this effort is a competent (experienced) piping 
layout person. It is the module layout designer’s job to 
take the typical two-dimensional (2D) stick-built process 
plot plan and convert it to the three-dimensional (3D) 
modular layout. The attributes of such a person are:
• the ability to understand the entire process in terms of 
pressure, pumps, flows, etc. (e.g., what needs head 
and what gravity flows);
• the ability to sit with the process engineer and work 
through options on equipment locations in three dimen￾sions (and critically propose options on equipment lay￾out that provide a well-shaped module). For example, 
pumps and compressors now have the option of being 
set on levels above ground level. Drums can now grav￾ity feed to lower levels.
• a good feel for the spacing requirements between 
equipment pieces that are identified on these PFDs to 
be placed in the module:
• based on an understanding and preconceived 
knowledge of how the piping and other “stuff” (not 
currently shown on the PFD) must eventually fit;
• understanding the maintenance and accessibility 
requirements of the equipment pieces;
• understanding E&I&C needs (and these accessibility 
requirements);
• providing for all the safety requirements—walkways/
access ways/exits/stairs/ladders.
• a vision of what the completed module should look 
like in terms of accurate dimensioning without running 
much, if any, piping.
Proper module sizing for the equipment is critical. Too 
much space between equipment will create a larger than 
necessary module size (and corresponding module cost). 
The opposite is just as bad, requiring a later rework to 
“expand” one or more modules due to congestion as the 
piping eventually is laid out. As this effort is developing, 
frequent reviews and updates should be provided to the 
entire team, again because of the interrelationship of all 
the players besides the obvious engineering interactions.
This brings us to the next subject, long lead equipment, 
before we get too far into the details of the module and 
its contents.
10.6.2.5 Long Lead Equipment (a Digression)
This is probably a good time to discuss the issue of long 
lead (LL) equipment. LL equipment is typically defined as 
all equipment that takes 12–18 months (or some other 
duration requiring advance commitments by the owner) 
to procure in order to meet schedule. This is usually a 
straightforward list to develop on a stick-built project.10.6 The Five-­Step Module Development Process 165
However, for the modular job, there may be other equip￾ment that may fall into the LL equipment category due 
to the early module fab yard timing requirements. These 
requirements include the need to be able to receive com￾plete structural steel design drawings to the level of detail 
that these can be used to actually begin fabrication of the 
steel: this level of detail is typically issued for construc￾tion (IFC) drawings. This means that all the equipment in 
the modules will need to have been designed, sent out 
for inquiry, reviewed, accepted, awarded, and early engi￾neering requirements, such as layout and configuration, 
be finalized so the structural steel can be detailed to pro￾vide accurate support. Beyond this, the actual fabrication 
of this equipment must be completed soon enough to be 
shipped to the module fabricator for installation on their 
appropriate module levels at the appropriate times. This 
becomes critical for equipment on the lowest levels of an 
equipment module as well as for any high alloy coolers 
required to be set on central pipe racks to be shipped 
early to the site.
Such a list is not obvious without either some prelimi￾nary module layout work, as performed in Step #2, where 
the proposed module has now been configured and the 
major equipment identified or at least some assumptions 
made on what might be modularized. Such an assumed 
list can “easily” be developed early in the project assess￾ment phase based on preliminary options analyses of the 
number and type of modules being considered. This list 
is typically developed early in the project planning on any 
project. To be safe, one should assume the max mod￾ule case to see what equipment might fall into the group 
with timing constraints based on the proposed engineer￾ing/procurement cycle. Whichever way this is worked, 
the goal is to identify equipment that must have some 
amount of engineering purchased prior to FID in order to 
meet schedule and then perform an analysis of benefits 
to either “leave on” versus “take off” the module depend￾ing on the project drivers.
There can also be an issue for any electrical or instru￾mentation buildings (or major equipment) that must be 
incorporated into the bottom areas of large complex 
equipment modules that are required at the fab yard early 
for installation. Fortunately, much of the equipment in a 
module is not overly complex or time-consuming to fabri￾cate, and it will allow for some flexibility in terms of a later 
than optimal purchasing effort.
10.6.2.6 The Three-Month Rule
One of the earliest scheduling efforts with respect to 
modules is a sanity check on the delivery timing of every 
piece of equipment destined to the fabrication yard. (The 
sanity check is to confirm that all will be at the fab yard 
within 3 months of the start of the structural steel fabrica￾tion efforts—the first steel cut.)
You probably won’t find this “3-month” delivery rule in 
many module commentaries. You may even find people 
who will argue with you about its validity. It is not a hard 
and fast rule that cannot be broken or bent and still meet 
schedule. It is more of a “guide” for those of us who have 
struggled with meeting a fab yard’s schedule. If followed 
religiously, the 3-month rule will cover a “multitude of 
sins” when it comes to procurement issues and meeting 
the fab yard’s needs.
Why 3 months? Because the average time in a fab yard 
(on a large module) from the first cut of steel to the point 
where there is enough steel to start assembly of a large 
deck is about 3 months. If all the equipment is on site 
within this 3-month window, the fab yard has complete 
flexibility in setting whatever/whenever/wherever in its 
efforts to assemble in the most efficient manner it can.
10.6.2.7 Equipment with Delivery Problems
As inevitably as fall follows spring and summer, equip￾ment will be delayed. There will always be the chal￾lenge of getting everything to the fab yard on time. So, 
what happens in the initial review of equipment deliver￾ies that you find a piece of equipment will not make the 
required delivery date with the module fab yard? There 
are essentially three options (if the original decision to 
send it to the module fab yard was based on sound 
reasoning):
• Remove the piece of equipment and ship it directly to 
the project site for installation (easiest decision—but 
potentially the worst option).
• Work with the fab yard on options to install it late (better 
decision—because it was sent to the fab yard in the 
first place due to the importance of installation off site).
• Design and purchase it early enough (maybe even get 
some engineering funding prior to FID) so that criti￾cal engineering deliverables and later the equipment 166 A Practical Module Development Process
itself can be purchased to support the fab yard delivery 
schedule (best decision—as this gets the equipment 
off site and to the module fab yard in time).
The final decision depends on the project drivers and 
options available to the project, keeping in mind that the 
final decision needs to be the one that will have the least 
impact on cost, schedule, and the site construction team, 
not necessarily in that order.
The next issues to be faced are the subsequent late 
equipment deliveries due to any one of a thousand delays 
no one can anticipate. The best solution for mitigation 
of these impacts is to closely monitor the progress of 
equipment fabrication and identify any potential delays as 
soon as possible. By doing so, you leave yourself with 
two options:
• Work with the fabrication yard on alternative installation 
schedules for a late delivery.
• Expedite the equipment vendor.
By catching delays early, there may be workarounds to 
accommodate the late delivery.
10.6.2.8 Module Equipment Exceptions
Prior to this review of the equipment that goes into a 
module, it is assumed that the following initial efforts at 
optimizing the module scope and content have been 
made. Some early analysis and decisions on what 
might not go into a module can be straightforward, 
for example:
• Large rotating equipment. Incorporating very large 
rotating equipment into an equipment module will re￾quire dynamic analyses. Depending on size and type, 
this may require complex vibration and/or harmonic 
analyses that may not be a risk that the project wants 
to accept.
• Large, heavy, or tall towers. Incorporating very large 
and heavy towers into a module may not make good 
project sense if the connections to/from the tower are 
relatively simple in terms of final tie-in to the rest of the 
plant (and the number of craft work-hours transferred 
from the site is minimal). Performing such work at the 
site may be more cost- and schedule-effective than 
designing the tower for the additional transportation 
loading and designing the module with all the additional 
structural supports required to withstand the one-time 
stresses of grueling sea transport in heavy seas.
• Tanks and other large or voluminous vessels.
Building a structural “box” to incorporate a thin-walled 
vessel or tank may not be the most efficient use of pro￾ject resources. Often, it does not make sense to modu￾larize a lot of “air.”
Now, back to the 5-step module analysis.
10.6.3 Step #3 Expand and Accept
As the modules are defined in Step #2 and sorted out 
on the plot plan, there will inevitably be concerns with 
access between, around, and or through the module 
complex requiring some sort of rearrangement.
Despite how thorough your early reviews were and how 
inclusive the attendee list was, it may be necessary to 
rearrange:
• equipment and piping within the module;
• equipment and piping between the modules and the 
stick-built portion of the plant;
• the modules themselves.
This may be driven by details, including maintenance/
safety/accessibility concerns that were previously not 
identified or discussed during the initial module configu￾ration discussions. It could be due to fire/blast concerns 
that may be newly identified after these detailed analy￾ses were performed. This may be due to the need for 
additional spacing for some of the underground utilities, 
the large motor control centers (MCCs), or other units. 
Whatever the reason, after the initial module arrangement 
has been developed, it is good to have a formal review 
with all stakeholders to make sure all concerns have been 
covered on their sizing and configuration.
While the essence of this third step did not take long to 
explain, this step can cause major re-work if early reviews 
are not complete, and as a result, significant changes are 
identified and required. In one such example, the owner/
client failed to identify the need to initially and then peri￾odically “bench test” all control valves that had been 
installed in the modules, some of which weighed several 10.6 The Five-­Step Module Development Process 167
tons. Because of the maturity of the module design, this 
required major re-work to several of the process mod￾ules, including the addition of structural steel for mono￾rails, davits, and other overhead methods of access to 
get to each control valve as well as redesigned and addi￾tionally reinforced walkways and access ways to support 
the larger capacity wheeled carts to take the valves to the 
edge of the module for retrieval or lowering to the ground 
from newly designed extended platforms.
Such last-minute design re-work can be minimized 
by ensuring that all project stakeholders have been 
“required” to attend the various 3D model reviews.
10.6.4 Step #4 Schedule
Scheduling is critical in any job, but because of the need 
for so many deliverables in the middle of the project dur￾ing engineering and procurement to support the fabrica￾tion yard, it becomes very important that the schedule 
supporting this fab yard (including all predecessors that 
snake back into these groups) have been identified and 
their interrelationships confirmed.
So, what does this mean, and how do you approach 
such an effort?
10.6.4.1 Scheduler
First, you need a scheduler. This is not just someone that 
is good at Primavera P6 or other software. This is some￾one who truly understands how the project groups inter￾act and can deftly walk anyone through the various parts, 
including primary and secondary critical paths. This per￾son needs to understand the differences in approach 
between the stick-built and modular projects.
10.6.4.2 The Stick-Built Schedule versus 
the Modular Schedule
A brief comparison follows of the stick-built schedule ver￾sus the modular schedule.
The Stick-Built Schedule Take the standard sched￾uling effort and look at what its goal is. Typically, its goal 
is to get everything to the construction site in time for 
field erection and assembly. Since everything will be 
assembled at the construction site, the main focus 
becomes ensuring the site path of construction is sup￾ported. But, in many cases, this site path of construction 
is somewhat flexible and offers alternative paths should 
parts be slightly delayed. Because of this, such a sched￾ule, that allows minor delays on some structural steel, 
equipment, and piping due to poor scheduling and in￾accurate ties, may be able to be tolerated because of 
the inherent flexibility of the site path of construction, 
allowing the project site team to shift priorities (at least 
to a certain extent).
Of course, we are not saying anything can be shipped at 
any time to the project site, and the construction team will 
be able to handle it (even if there still exist some construc￾tion managers who do boast this ability). But we are say￾ing that flexibility typically exists to accommodate some 
of these incongruities of scheduling and delivery.
The Modular Schedule Now, how does that compare 
to the modular project? As mentioned in Chapter 8, for 
the modular project, there will be a large portion of the 
engineering and procurement planning efforts as well as 
a large amount of structural steel, equipment, and piping 
that must now be accelerated in terms of detailed design 
to meet the intermediate goals of getting a completed de￾sign to the module fabrication yard. While the overall level 
1 schedule will still show the major deliverables in terms 
of steel and piping design in the relatively same month of 
delivery, the early planning efforts and details required to 
get these to an IFC quality for the modular job are much 
more complex.
For example, for structural steel, instead of designing for 
supporting major equipment on concrete foundations, 
there must now be enough early equipment design to be 
able to design the structural support steel for this equip￾ment. For piping, the stress analysis must be completed 
to the point that it can be incorporated into the structural 
steel design rather than allowing for a subsequent design 
follow-up effort that may accommodate stress needs 
outside the module.
Then, since some of these large modules may take as 
long as 12–18 months to complete, there will be a higher 
priority on making sure deliveries to the fabrication yard 
are timely. Late designs or changes to piping and equip￾ment will have a more significant negative impact on the 
module fabrication effort and the module schedule. And, 168 A Practical Module Development Process
unfortunately, because the module is a single compos￾ite piece of design work, the entire module (and all of 
its pieces) need to be designed to the point where the 
overall design of the module can be complete. To delay 
the module build in the middle of its assembly to wait 
on late equipment or to modify the structural steel on a 
completed module design in order to accommodate a 
size change essentially shuts the entire manufacturing 
process down. The fab yard is like a car assembly line—
the sequence of work is specific and crucial, for example, 
there is only one point in the car assembly process where 
the engine is installed. This is the same with the module 
build—there is a set sequence for the module build—later 
efforts depend on earlier completed work.
Compare that to the stick-built project, where parts of an 
area’s erection efforts may be able to be delayed while 
the missing piece is shipped or the design is completed.
• Is it an inconvenience? Yes.
• Does it have the potential to shut the entire construc￾tion site down like it did on the module example? 
Probably not.
A lot of words for a simple concept—the module project 
must support the fabrication yard schedule.
Backward Schedule Pass How do you do this? 
There are many ways to explain how this is done, but 
essentially it is developing a very complete backward 
pass of the schedule. Working with the end in mind—
that being the final completed project plant process—
in operation and running, the schedule is reviewed in 
terms of each set of predecessors required to meet the 
project schedule. But, the key to this backward pass, 
at whatever level of detail it is developed, is to confirm 
the scheduled durations are indeed realistic and not 
based on a best-case, perfect execution, or the one￾in-a-thousand chance that everything will work exactly 
as planned.
The point we do want to get across with respect to this 
backward pass is that it is meant to define pinch points in 
the schedule. Points where the sequence forward does 
not have sufficient time to complete all the predecessor 
tasks properly.
AIR COOLER PROCUREMENT EXAMPLE
For example, take the seemingly simple effort of scheduling some high alloy fin-fan coolers for setting on top of the main pipe rack to 
be modularized and shipped to the site (see Figure 10.1). If we walk through the schedule in the typical forward manner, we see no 
special concerns with respect to the air cooler delivery and installation on the pipe racks. The schedule in Figure 10.1 seems reason￾able in terms of durations for the pipe rack module material purchase, piping installation, and cooler setting.
It is only when we make the backward pass on this schedule that includes adding the durations for the bidding and purchase of these 
air coolers, that we see a completely different situation (see Figure 10.2).
It is discovered that the lead time for the actual fabrication of these specific coolers is so long that in order to have the equipment at 
the module pipe rack fabrication yard in time for its installation on the pipe racks (month 10½), the initial procurement process must 
be initiated prior to FID by at least 6 months. This is the only way to allocate enough time to complete all the preliminary purchasing 
activities (in terms of three bids and a buy) and conditionally award this package to the successful bidder in time to permit engineering 
and the vendor to work through the detailed design requirements by the time FID arrives. The reason for this extra early effort is the 
duration on the fabrication of these high alloy coolers:10 months from award.
Of course, this requires special contracting efforts, including conditional acceptance and limitation of initial scope that will allow award 
commitment and preliminary engineering to be performed prior to FID and prior to actual award of the fabrication.
At FID, when the project has been funded and the EPC contract awarded, the vendor can be directed to start the fabrication efforts, 
which will consume all of the time available to get the completed air coolers to the fabrication yard for a shipment and setting 
by month 14.10.6 The Five-­Step Module Development Process 169
Figure 10.1 Typical schedule forward pass.
Figure 10.2 Incorporation of “Reverse schedule” backward pass.170 A Practical Module Development Process
So, what sort of typical “Reverse” schedule chains need 
to be considered? Anything that has the potential to delay 
the delivery of information and/or materials to the module 
fabrication yard.
The following examples show some typical activity chains 
in reverse:
• Overall project (through module fabrication yard):
O&M/Start-up/Commissioning/Pre-commissioning/
Path of Construction/Module set sequence/Module de￾livery/Module completion/Module assembly & fabrica￾tion/Pre-assembly/Equipment delivery/Bulk material de￾livery/MTOs/Procurement/Engineering design/Process 
design/Project Execution Plan/Design Basis, etc.
• Overall project (through LL equipment): O&M/
Start-up/Commissioning/Pre-commissioning/Path of 
Construction/Long Lead equipment setting/Founda￾tions/Piling/Site Prep/Mob to Site/Construction sched￾ule/Rigging schedule/Underground schedule, etc.
• Overall project (through site development): O&M/
Start-up/Commissioning/Pre-commissioning/Path of 
Construction/Long Lead equipment setting/Module 
delivery/Site equipment delivery/Foundations/Piling/
Underground/Foundation design/Equipment details/
Site Prep/Mob to Site/Construction plan, etc.
Each of these steps may have additional internal back￾ward pass requirements, for example:
• Engineering (materials related): I&C design/Electrical 
design/Piping spool development/2nd pipe MTO/Steel 
IFC drawings/1st pipe MTO/initial steel MTOs/Founda￾tion and Underground IFCs/Piling IFCs/Site Prep IFCs/
Civil Design/Plot Plan layout/Project Execution Plan, etc.
• Engineering (model-related): Piping isos/3D Model 
Build/Stage III Model Review/Vendor Data/Stage II Model 
Review/Prelim Equip Info/Safety Reviews/P&IDs/PFDs.
• Procurement: Shipping/Equip Manufacture/Award/
Bid Evaluation/Request for Quote (RFQ)/Solicitation 
of Interest (SOI)/Engineering Technical Requisition/
Engineering Design/P&IDs/PFDs.
10.6.5 Step #5 Cost
This step is typically worked in multiple stages, from the 
initial +/- 40% to 50% accuracy to the final +/- 10% effort 
required on some projects to get management approval 
from both sides—the owner in terms of project approval 
and the contractor in terms of execution approval.
For our final step in the 5-step module estimating pro￾cess, the first effort is to agree on the cost basis, the 
cost inputs, and the necessary accuracy. Accuracy is of 
utmost importance as it drives how much time the project 
team is going to need to expend to develop engineering 
and design to the level to get to that accuracy. Typically, 
when it comes to a modular execution plan, the com￾parison number that many want is the difference in cost 
(as in project savings) for following a modular rather than 
a stick-built execution plan. So, if you have never per￾formed such an analysis and do not have metrics on the 
comparison, how should you proceed?
The first step proposed in the 5-step plan provides a 
method of making such a comparison. For all subsequent 
cost analysis efforts, this can be followed again, but with 
more details available. The goal in all of these iterations 
is to identify the major contributors to both the additional 
costs associated with the module decision as well as the 
additional savings resulting from this same decision. We 
have identified them in Step #1, but a high-level re-cap is 
worthwhile.
10.6.5.1 Module Savings
• Direct—Site labor. Defined by the comparison of eco￾nomic productivity ratios—Site versus fab yard, which 
is the combination of AIWR and productivity factors. 
Check the details of the economic productivity ratios 
in Chapter 5.
• Direct—Time to market. Module schedule reduc￾tion in some projects equates to improved NPV and 
reduced TIC.
• Other indirect or soft savings. Defined as the benefits 
to the project due to moving this portion of the pro￾ject to a place where it can be built in better weather 
conditions, at grade, with an experienced stable work￾force, thus reducing impact at site, in terms of tem￾porary construction laydown area, traffic, noise, con￾gestion, etc.
• The ability to pre-commission a higher percentage of 
this equipment and systems prior to arrival on site.10.7 Concerns to Watch Out For (Lessons Learned) 171
10.6.5.2 Module Costs
Engineering and materials related to the module configu￾ration, shipping, and final site placement, including the 
following:
• extra engineering efforts related to the module configu￾ration and coordination;
• extra structural steel;
• additional construction management team (CMT) at 
the fab yard;
• inspection/QA/QC/preventative maintenance—on 
equipment that now must sit longer at the fab yard (in￾stalled in modules) prior to being commissioned;
• the entire shipping effort of the completed module;
• the module movement from receiving MOF to the site, 
heavy haul route development, module final setting, 
and hook-up.
The goal in all of this is to identify in sufficient detail, all 
major cost impacts (both pluses and minuses), and then 
get everyone in the project team that might be familiar 
with costing them talking about the actual delta costs. 
This is best done in a group session rather than individu￾ally, as there is more synergy with several people thinking 
about ramifications rather than only one or two.
This effort is very similar in format to some of the more 
formal risk reviews that are set up throughout the pro￾ject duration.
10.6.6 Other Activities
At this point in this example “real-life” module analysis, all 
the major activities of the module “shaping” have been 
addressed (or should have been addressed), and along 
with them, many of the other activities identified and ana￾lyzed that are important in the development and support 
of the module effort, including:
• Fabrication yard—evaluation, selection, and award.
• Module logistics—really an extension of the equipment 
logistics all projects are familiar with, but on a grander 
scale in terms of vessel and route selection, as these 
have an impact on the module design for shipping 
accelerations.
• MOF and heavy haul—routes and coordination.
• Path of construction—to site to support a specific mod￾ule setting sequence.
10.7 Concerns to Watch Out 
For (Lessons Learned)
This is one of those subjects that can easily turn into 
another stream of consciousness dump from the experi￾ences of the two authors. Where do we go first to provide 
some cautionary comments and discussion, and how do 
we even try to link these comments and observations 
into some logical stepwise progression for the reader? 
This could be an entirely separate chapter or even an 
entire book.
They are challenges that seem to come up throughout 
the project execution effort. Since they seem to be able 
to be grouped into a few summary topics, a quick run￾through in terms of approximate chronological order or 
project sequence may be the best approach. Many of the 
finer points have been identified in Chapter 8, Modulari￾zation, but they deserve a second consideration because 
they offer extra and typically unwanted project complexity 
if not addressed and resolved early:
• Structural members and connections (other￾wise known as bolted versus welded modules):
Consider pros and cons, local labor preferences, fab 
yard capabilities, proximity to galvanizing, methods of 
assembly and erection, design and limitations, protec￾tive coating requirements, and durations.
• Module yard selection: From due diligence to prop￾erly identifying fab yards that can efficiently complete 
the proposed scope. Match modules to fab yard 
expertise and capacity, proximity to the site, CMT 
requirements.
• Static and dynamic analyses: Should be con￾sidered on all large modules, impacts both piping 
and equipment design, impacts how the module is 
prepped for shipment in terms of tie-downs and tem￾porary bracing.
• Grillage and sea-fastening: Try to develop a simple 
design, easy to install and easy to remove, flexible for 
module location on deck and reusable (if logistics allow).172 A Practical Module Development Process
• Logistics and transportation: First analysis of a mod￾ule job, contract an expert, look at all options, and you 
get what you pay for, so go with someone who knows 
the area, has the equipment options, and the experi￾ence in option evaluation.
• Pre-commissioning and commissioning: Make sure 
planning is complete, approval process is understood 
and accepted by all, paperwork is complete and gets 
to site in time, meaning of approval signature authority 
is known and understood by all, make team stand by 
decisions made in terms of sign-off.
• Setting and hook-up: Evaluate single weld hook-up 
concepts and scope, make sure design takes into ac￾count temperature and transport configurations, make 
sure path of construction allows removal of SPMTs af￾ter setting, consider long-term corrosion issues around 
foundation connections at grade.
10.8 The Inevitable Question
Finally, it would not be a complete “real-life” scenario 
if we do not address how to handle the option offered 
by many well-meaning owner/client organizations and 
even some EPC contractors: a late request for a module 
study option.
10.8.1 The Late Requested Module Study
This request is typically the result of the well-meaning 
application of some gross misinformation from various 
inaccurate sources on module planning and its subse￾quent implementation. The wrong conclusion resulting 
from this misinformation was that the module effort deci￾sion for analysis could be delayed until FEED or even into 
early EPC.
Of course, the well-intentioned contractor’s manage￾ment will accept the challenge and immediately come to 
you—the up-and-coming company module expert—for 
an answer and acceptable resolution. Telling your boss 
and the client that they have completely missed the boat in 
terms of modular opportunity is not in your company’s best 
interest and could be considered a career-limiting move for 
you, the up-and-coming module expert. In addition, there 
actually are some efforts that may result in some benefits, 
even at this late juncture in the project development.
So, we suggest the following option as an example of 
how one might respond to this challenge. Obviously, this 
is not a one-size-fits-all response, but it will identify some 
options that may be pursued with respect to such a late 
request (without telling your boss and the owner/client 
they have collectively lost their minds).
10.8.1.1 Why Is the Late Request Such a Problem?
First, let’s understand why this is such a problem in terms 
of actually developing a module solution. If such a sce￾nario is initially brought up this late in the project devel￾opment, obtaining any modular solution, much less an 
optimal one, becomes difficult due to work already per￾formed and decisions already made.
Consider the many module impacting decisions already 
made in the previous project phases. The site has been 
identified, the project equipment selected and arranged 
in a selected (stick-built) plot plan layout, the route to 
this site has been examined only in terms of supporting 
individual equipment shipments. Open water access 
may not have been considered, and as such is prob￾ably not available. If it is, the shoreline is probably not 
equipped with an MOF adequate to support offload￾ing of anything more than the previously mentioned 
equipment.
With respect to a project team to offer effective and timely 
consultation on the subject of modularization—there is 
none. With no module team identified or in place, there 
can be no consistent, uniform direction or support of any 
new modular goals or new project direction.
Plus, there may be little interest in developing any mod￾ule alternative among most of the contractor’s manage￾ment as well as probably all of the rank-and-file project 
members (due to potential re-work requirements with 
no accompanying relaxation of project due dates by the 
owner/client).
Any potential modular solution now being examined has 
potential ramifications to change everything designed 
and purchased to date, which could be significant. 
Changes to the current plot plan will impact everything 
civil/structural has done in terms of site design, grad￾ing, and undergrounds. This would bleed into the piping 
and equipment layout efforts to date, where the modular 10.8 The Inevitable Question 173
solution would require a re-work of any piping and equip￾ment layout work. And, even if all that could be magically 
changed with the snap of the fingers, there would still 
be the inevitable scheduling and early engineering design 
issues for most of the equipment that may now be des￾tined for a module.
10.8.1.2 Where Does a Project Start with Such 
a Late Request?
Go back to the basic steps for developing the modular 
solution that should have been identified and worked 
through in the opportunity framing, assessment, and 
selection phases of the project. The first step would be 
to commission a heavy haul route survey to be worked 
immediately to determine the maximum shipping enve￾lope to the site. (This is a must, as it does the project no 
good if any of the resulting modular options are too big 
or heavy to be moved to the site.) Then, specifically, as 
suggested in Chapter 5, follow up with initially identifying 
the project drivers that were the reason for bringing this 
modular alternative up, even if it was so late in the project 
development and what the potential benefits that might 
still be available as well as the efforts involved to achieve 
these benefits.
What-if assessments should be performed with key 
members of the entire project team: the owner/client and 
contractor management and all stakeholders who might 
be affected by this change in philosophy.
Each project driver should be discussed in terms of what 
the module alternative might provide. If one driver is cost, 
determine from a project cost standpoint, the potential 
maximum $ savings that could be realized in terms of 
the ideal solution of maximum modularization of the facili￾ties and the biggest differences in cost and productivities 
between site labor and fabrication yard capabilities. If it 
is schedule, take the same approach in terms of best 
schedule savings by maximizing the more efficient build￾ing off the site.
Then look at where the current design effort is. How 
much of the work to date would need to be scrapped 
and re-worked to facilitate the maximum module sce￾nario? How much can be salvaged and, with some modi￾fications, re-worked into the modular approach? What 
are the drawbacks?
The most likely initial knee-jerk reaction received from 
both sides in terms of the resulting module effort is that 
the cost savings would probably be minimal, and there 
is no way to recover on the resulting schedule delay. 
This is where some good pre-planned what-if scenarios 
and a competent scheduler come in handy. If the project 
management is honest with themselves in terms of the 
actual on-site labor cost and productivity, they will prob￾ably discover that the project end date (e.g., ready for 
startup, RFSU) extends farther out than what is currently 
shown in the schedule. The argument should be made 
that the maximum modularization of any part of the pro￾ject will provide a better “schedule surety,” and the dates 
promised by the fab yard will have a higher chance of 
being met, leaving less to chance with the smaller on-site 
workforce.
If this is the case, the exercise then becomes an engi￾neering discipline-by-discipline analysis of which efforts 
can be salvaged and what must be re-worked, and what 
can be used when moving the maximum scope of work 
to a module-based effort.
The goal of this analysis would be to identify something 
significant in terms of meeting one or more key project 
drivers. Anything less may render the maximum module 
option a non-starter since such a quick and high-level 
comparative analysis will have unidentified circumstances 
that will reduce the initial benefits identified in this analysis.
10.8.2 Less Ambitious Options
So, if the initial analysis is marginal at best, what next? 
This should not be the end of the road in terms of analysis 
of module potential. The subsequent analysis should be 
with a lesser percentage modularization, perhaps leaving 
out critical equipment and parts of the project plant that 
make the maximum module alternative a non-starter. For 
example, analyze a scenario that takes out large rotating 
equipment, tall, complex, and heavy vessels, and other 
equipment that is complex or long lead and assume they 
will be set on site. Work equipment modules around the 
equipment that is not complex, difficult to design and 
procure, and can be delivered in time to meet a fabri￾cation yard’s schedule. Combine this with an effort to 
match the resulting equipment module configurations to 
any limitation identified in terms of the shipping envelope 
to the site.174 A Practical Module Development Process
If further consideration of the above still results in a mar￾ginal benefit due to work already completed or sched￾ule concerns, evaluate the scenario where the very 
basic elements of the project are examined for potential 
modularization—the pipe racks and obvious parts of the 
process, like utilities, that can be packaged as skid units. 
The unique aspect of a pipe rack is it is simple in design 
and materials can be procured early. Converting a stick￾built pipe rack to a modular pipe rack is also relatively 
straightforward as the module version may not change 
much from the original stick-built version. In addition, 
these pipe racks can be adjusted in terms of overall length 
and width to accommodate existing road restrictions.
Utility sub-systems should also be considered. They have 
multiple equipment and complex piping arrangements 
and have been designed to work as a unit. Because of 
this, they can easily be packaged and, in some cases, 
have previously been partially packaged by their ven￾dors. It would not take much effort. Much of the effort to 
develop a package that could be assembled off site and 
shipped as a single or common skid could be worked by 
the equipment vendors, who would be eager to be able 
to provide a product with more mobility and utility.
10.9 A Couple of Observations 
from Experience
10.9.1 Underestimation
What will most assuredly happen is that the project will 
underestimate the benefits of even this late module rede￾sign, overestimate the amount of effort to convert, and 
also overestimate the construction site labor’s ability 
to meet both cost and schedule goals identified in the 
project schedule. As a result, the actual modular scope 
selected will probably be less than what would have been 
the project optimal scope based on circumstances.
10.9.2 Under-­Collaboration
To make such a late change really impactful on a project, 
there must be a high degree of honesty and openness 
in terms of the potential benefits to the owner/client in 
terms of project metrics (i.e., NPV). By the same token, 
the contractor will need to be willing to share actual 
costs, schedule issues, and risks in terms of execution 
with the owner. Both will need to come to an agreement 
on acceptable contractual modifications where the ben￾efits and risks are appropriately shared: the owner/client 
in terms of schedule and cost considerations, and the 
contractor in terms of a reduced downside risk due to 
the late re-work.
As a parting example, in a project where the FEED deliv￾erables were poorly developed requiring a re-work of the 
design basis, it was not until both owner/client and con￾tractor met and agreed there was a problem and contract 
terms were modified to more evenly distribute the risks to 
both parties, that the project was able to move forward 
efficiently. While many project team members were not 
intimately familiar with the contract detail changes, what 
was immediately evident, was that once this change was 
implemented, there was a much more open collabora￾tive effort between the major parties. Since any project 
optimization now benefitted both, project issues were 
evaluated in terms of impact to the cost/schedule/etc. 
rather than simply meeting to discuss the failure to meet 
contract obligations.
10.10 Conclusion
A couple of thoughts on our goals with respect to 
this chapter:
Identify an approach.
We offered an idea of how to approach the analysis for 
a project in terms of planning while at the same time try￾ing to communicate that any approach shown is not a 
“one-size-fits-all.” Fortunately, despite the variability on 
the different approaches and what to do, there are some 
basics as well as an orderly approach that is somewhat 
universal.
Provide an example.
So, rather than provide a bunch of lists and grouped ideas 
on what to look at in terms of the planning for modulariza￾tion, we felt that a “walk-through” of a “typical” project mod￾ule analysis might make more sense. Such an approach 
would be easier to read, more sequentially organized, and 
perhaps, a bit more entertaining. So, we walked through 10.10 Conclusion 175
a step-by-step process, offered some typical push-back 
scenarios that we have seen, and suggested how to 
approach some of the more common project variations 
during the duration of the early planning efforts. As such, 
we hope that our goal was met. Since this effort is not a 
be-all to end-all module planning example, we continue to 
encourage open and frank conversations within the pro￾ject as well as more personal research outside the project 
on ways to improve such a planning process.
As we mentioned earlier, planning for a modular job is 
not rocket science. Most of it is good common sense 
and utilization of practices and guides that have been 
around for a long time. But more collaboration is essen￾tial in improving such planning efforts, and we encour￾age making the effort to develop the relationships 
that improve this throughout the project organization 
and beyond.chapter 11
177
11.1 Oil and Gas (Downstream) LNG 
Modularization Project Scenario1
What follows is a hypothetical case project with activities 
for the reader to think about in terms of what they have 
read and understand up to this point about the process 
of modularization (Figure 11.1).
11.2 General Project Description 
and Background
Big Oil Ltd has recently awarded a large EPC firm an esti￾mated $10 billion contract for engineering, procurement 
and construction management (EPCM) of a liquefied 
natural gas (LNG) project (see Figure 11.1). The project 
was awarded to this large EPC firm after they success￾fully navigated through the various earlier phases of the 
project development, as explained in more detail below.
This large EPC firm will become Big Oil’s downstream 
engineering, procurement, and construction management 
contractor for this project. They were brought in early by 
Big Oil Ltd and have successfully maintained a creative 
edge with respect to their competition, maintaining a con￾sistent approach to the execution of this large project.
The large EPC firm will be executing and constructing 
the LNG facility on Opportunity Island, an island on the 
east coast of Africa, located on the relatively shallow 
and wide North Kenya Bank and the northernmost part 
of the Tanzania Zanzibar Archipelago (Figure 11.2). The 
closest major geographical landmark is Pemba island 
(a lower portion of the Tanzania Zanzibar Archipelago), 
located approximately 160 miles (260 kilometers) SSW of 
Opportunity Island.
The LNG facility will consist of two 5  million tons per 
annum (MTPA) LNG trains, gas processing and treatment 
facilities, product storage and offloading, complete off 
sites, utilities, and accommodations. Timing is critical for 
completing these facilities as it must coincide with the 
offshore drilling program and the initial gas well comple￾tion efforts.
Modularization Application 
Case Study Exercise
1
Disclaimer: This case study is not an actual or proposed pro￾ject. The location is imaginary—there is no specific Opportunity 
Island site on the east coast of Africa, so the characteristics as￾signed to this island are purely hypothetical and are not based 
on any actual or historical facts. The scenario has identified this 
specific area only to set a plausible background for the detailed 
examination of how a project might be progressed in terms of 
the module potential for a general remote facility and how such 
a facility might be supported worldwide. Any resemblance to 
facts about the area is unintentional and purely coincidental. Figure 11.1 A hypothetical case project. Source: Bim/E+/Getty Images.178 Modularization Application Case Study Exercise
11.3 Additional Project Site/Existing 
Facilities Information
The following is some additional basic information that 
the readers may find interesting in terms of background 
information for use in the analysis and development of the 
various project phases.
11.3.1 General Information
The proposed project’s scope includes the design of the 
LNG facility, consisting of two 5 MTPA LNG trains and a 
200TJ/d domestic gas plant. Big Oil has proposed that 
the early study efforts, as well as the FEED and sub￾sequent EPC execution, be conducted from their main 
offices. For the large EPC firms in contention, that would 
be out of their various operating centers in Houston, 
Texas, USA.
The successful EPC contractor will eventually set up 
project offices in Nairobi, Kenya. It is thought that the 
local construction office and craft worker camp will be 
set up on either Opportunity Island or the mainland, 
depending on the decision of where the LNG plant 
will be built.
The Big Oil downstream oversight team has its project 
office in Nairobi. This office will lead the project and house 
the project senior management as well as a number of 
technical and support service teams there.
The main construction management team (CMT) for the 
EPC contractor will be housed along with their local craft 
on site—again, location based on the outcome of the 
analysis of the various project site options.
11.3.2 Potential African Supply Bases
There are two main centralized supply bases in Eastern 
Africa. The Nairobi, Kenya, base will be set up for most 
land-based supplies. The special executive housing and 
project offices on the island will support the coordination 
of all the ocean-going freight.
11.3.3 Opportunity Island
Opportunity Island is located approximately 20  miles 
(32 kilometers) off the east coast of Kenya, Eastern Africa. 
It is the very upper and somewhat separated northern 
part of the Tanzania Zanzibar Archipelago. Opportunity 
Island is noted for its rich rainforests, pristine water, fabu￾lous coral reefs, and excellent sport fishing.
11.3.4 Asian Fabrication Yards
Several fabrication yards in the Middle East, Asia, and the 
Far East are being considered for fabricating modules, 
racks, units, and other structures for the LNG plant and 
associated facilities. These yards are based in Abu Dhabi 
and Dubai, UAE, South Korea, and China. There are oth￾ers of interest in Indonesia and Southeast (SE) Asia.
Figure 11.2 Location of the site.11.3 Additional Project Site/Existing Facilities Information 179
11.3.5 The Houston Engineering Offices
The detailed engineering design for the facilities will be led 
out of the successful bidder’s US corporate offices. It is 
anticipated that the successful bidder will also use one or 
more low-cost support offices out of either Mexico, India, 
or Indonesia.
11.3.6 Project Scope
The downstream scope of work for the project includes 
the construction of the two LNG trains and LNG storage 
and load-out facilities, including a jetty, the domestic gas 
plant, utilities, a material offloading facility (MOF), and a 
2000-construction worker camp-type village.
The design of the domestic gas plant facility features 
improvements in greenhouse gas emissions perfor￾mance, including improved waste heat recovery and the 
provision of facilities for the injection of reservoir pressure 
carbon dioxide deep into the sub-surface.
The design effort is to be a modular construction strategy 
to minimize the impact of the construction effort on the 
final site location and surrounding areas. It is anticipated 
to be conducted from the successful bidder’s main oper￾ating center located domestically in the US, with addi￾tional support from global engineering centers in Mexico, 
India, and/or Indonesia. The plan is to use one or more 
fabrication yards across Southeast Asia and the Far East 
to support the planned 120,000 tons of LNG modules.
11.3.7 Project Characteristics
• The expected total installed cost of the project: 
$10 billion with the estimated split of work is as follows:
• Design/engineering: 10%.
• Module fabrication & transportation: 25%.
• Major owner long-lead equipment (non-modular, 
non-EPC): 10%.
• Equipment and site construction: 55%.
• The target project duration: 4 years.
• Sector: Oil & gas (downstream).
• Location of:
• Owner engineering team: US, potentially Houston.
• Owner site management: Nairobi, Kenya, and 
Opportunity Island.
• Low-cost engineering center: potentially Mexico, 
India, and/ or Jakarta.
• Module design office: Houston.
• Module fabricator(s): depends on scope but esti￾mated to two main module fabricators.
• Site: Opportunity Island, offshore East Africa.
Availability of local infrastructure resources is as follows:
• Transportation infrastructure (inland):
• Truck (road/highway): Limited, two-lane paved or 
dirt roads.
• Rail: Limited.
• Transportation infrastructure (coastal):
• Ship (deep port): Adequate water depth but will require 
new purpose-built LNG load-out jetty.
• Barge: New purpose-built construction dock required 
for bulk materials.
• Jetty/port for module offload: Adequate water depth 
but new purpose-built MOF required.
• Power: Self-generated power for both housing and 
project site.
• Water: Potable water imported or generated via re￾verse osmosis.
• Sewage: Disposal of all required to be developed.
• Phone lines: Landlines to be installed by successful 
EPC bidder.
• Telecommunication: Satellite to be installed by Big Oil.
• Housing: Purpose-built by Big Oil (executive compound).
• Temporary housing facilities (aka, Man camp): Built 
by successful EPC bidder as part of early works 
prior to EPC.
Other local resources are limited:
• The quantity of the nearby labor market in Kenya is in￾adequate to completely support the project.180 Modularization Application Case Study Exercise
• The quality of the labor market in Kenya is inadequate to 
support all aspects of the project. Early civil works are 
an option for local craft utilization.
• The site laydown space: Limited to the mainland or the 
north part of Opportunity Island. Opportunity Island is 
too small to support a full stick-built project philosophy.
• The requirements for locally sourced labor: Site grading 
and civil works (100%).
• The requirements for locally sourced materials: Rock 
and paving materials available onshore. Island has no 
construction materials available.
• Main module fabricators and their awarded module scope:
• Train #1 (60,000 mt)—China.
• Train #2 (60,000 mt)—Southern China.
• Pipe racks and utilities—Abu Dhabi, UAE.
• Site labor productivity for Kenya craft relative to Gulf 
Coast: 5.0.
• Client-supplied or EPC-supplied (pre-issued) equip￾ment or materials:
• Engineered equipment: All.
• Steel: All except for module steel, which is provided 
by the fab yard.
• Piping: Alloy by EPC/carbon steel by both fab yard 
and EPC (depending on final destination).
• Bulks: EPC.
• Long-lead: Client initiated, novated to EPC at contract 
award.
• Project difficulties:
• Weather (extreme): The site is in a cyclone belt.
• Logistics challenges (transportation of modules): No 
infrastructure.
• Environmental impact: Much of the island is either 
tropical rainforest or surrounded by coral reefs.
• Labor issues: The site has local labor issues.
• Regulating impact: Must deal with both the local island 
government as well as the Kenya national government.
• Team turnover: Local craft are scarce and tend to 
have a high turnover of personnel, especially during 
the tourist season.
11.3.8 Project Stakeholders
• Big Oil Ltd is a leading company in the global oil and 
gas industry with proven technical and management 
skills for safe, efficient, and environmentally responsible 
development.
• The successful EPC contractor will be selected from 
one of several of the world’s premier engineering, pro￾curement, and construction companies. Most with a 
history of more than a century in the business, these 
companies have evolved into prominent players in the 
energy and petrochemicals sectors.
11.3.9 Modularization
• Company’s history of use of modularization: All the 
EPCs have good module experience.
• Quantity and quality of labor where the fabrication facili￾ties are located: All fab yards pre-qualified and selected 
have an adequate supply of qualified craft.
• Approximate maximum percentage modularization pos￾sible on the project (percentage of all site work-hours 
exported to any/all fabrication shops): 75%.
• Maximum possible direct manual site work-hours 
moved or expected to move to fabrication shops: Per￾centage total direct manual work-hours: approx. 75%.
• Indirect, non-manual site work-hours moved or expect￾ed to move to fab shops: About 20%.
• Business case drivers for modularization on this project:
• Schedule
• Labor cost
• Labor productivity
• Labor supply
• Environmental
• Site access
• Site availability
• Differences between labor in the jobsite and labor in the 
fabrication shop:
• Labor cost: Assume a local all-in wage rate (AIWR) of 
$35/hour. Assume imported craft (temporary housing 
facilities craft labor) AIWR at about $65/hour. Assume 
Far East (Korean) AIWR at about $65/hour. Assume 11.4 In-­Class Exercise 181
Middle East at AIWR of $35/hour. Assume China 
AIWR at about $45/hour.
• Labor productivity: Local labor productivity factor is 
5.0 versus USGC, which is the basis of comparison 
at 1.0, but in actuality is currently running between 
1.2 to 1.5.
• Korea and China have an assumed 1.5 and 1.3 pro￾ductivity factors, respectively. The Middle East has a 
2.0 productivity factor.
• Project design details requirements to facilitate 
modularization:
• Fabrication: The project should be specifically de￾signed to be modular.
• Transport: The project should be specifically designed 
for ocean-going transportation of the modules.
• Field installation: The module installation sequence 
should be incorporated into the path of construction, 
and therefore the initial design must be completed as 
noted in the schedule. This requires that early engi￾neering is completed on much of the equipment to 
be installed in the modules, especially any long lead 
procurement, like high alloy air coolers that sit on top 
of the main pipe racks.
• Total number of modules: 35 major modules and ap￾proximately 125 smaller PARs and PAUs.
• Sizes of the modules:
• Largest (by dimension): 30m H 70m L 30m W 4000 
metric ton.
• Smallest: 15m H 24m L 12m W 500 metric ton.
• Heaviest module: 6000 metric ton.
• Lightest module: 500 metric ton.
• Types of units/sub-units modularized:
• Process equipment
• Utility equipment
• Loaded pipe racks
• Units duplicated:
• The project has two trains. As such, numerous mod￾ules are duplicated.
11.4 In-Class Exercise
Each of the five project phases is discussed below, provid￾ing information that might be typical of the content and 
level of detail that one would expect to be available at the 
beginning of each project phase. The student/reader is 
requested to work through the business case for each of 
the five project phases. There is more than one potentially 
correct analysis, so discussions should be encouraged on 
the pros and cons of each option developed, comparing 
and analyzing for the best composite—if one can be found.
While there can be more than one “correct” answer, 
depending on what the student has assumed and how 
the student has incorporated the information provided into 
the overall phase planning, there is only one “best” answer. 
So, in order to make the exercise consistent through the 
project phases, we, as the authors, have identified “the pri￾mary solution” and, based on this, will re-set the exercise 
to reflect this solution for each of the next project phases. 
This will be accompanied by explanations of how and why 
the provided data was analyzed, any other information that 
may have been identified (or assumed), and potentially 
some actual data analysis from the phase work. Then, the 
student is requested to take this “primary solution” sce￾nario and use it as their base case for working through the 
analysis of the project in the next project phase.
For the purposes of this exercise, we will be following the 
efforts of one of the EPC contractors: Production Facili￾ties Incorporated (PFI). They are a major EPC contractor 
that has been around for over a century and are very well 
versed in modular fabrication. They have a main office in 
Houston and lower-cost engineering and project support 
offices in Mexico, Indonesia, and India. They have a solid 
module savvy organization and a management that is 
very proactive in terms of supporting the modular option.
At the end of this exercise, the reader will have a complete 
and consistent scenario of one option on how this project 
might have played out in real life. As a textbook, the solution 
is not part of the printed version but available for instruc￾tors (not for students) as a separate supplement. Contact 
Dr. Choi (choi.jinouk@gmail.com) for the solution file.
We now present a summary of the work performed to 
date by project phase.182 Modularization Application Case Study Exercise
11.4.1 Suggested Student Development Activities
The student/reader is requested to work through the busi￾ness case for this phase framed by the description above:
1. What was PFI’s main goal in this phase?
2. What particular items of the business case did PFI 
concentrate on in this analysis?
• Perform a very high-level comparison of the esti￾mated cost to build at the site versus what might be 
expected at a fabrication yard utilizing the economic 
productivity ratio.
• Run the CII PPOMF tool and present the result.
3. What are the major phase activities?
4. What are the major modularization goals?
5. What concerns should have been raised in this phase?
6. Were there any preliminary conclusions or results 
identified or developed?
7. Which execution plan differences are identified in 
this phase?
8. Which critical success factors should be involved for 
the first time in this phase?
9. What should PFI do in terms of owner feedback and 
continuity?
ASSESSMENT (FEL-1)
PFI’s work in FEL-0 reached the conclusion that the LNG facility was a viable option and that there was money to be saved by some 
amount of pre-assembly, along with an idea of the amount of modularization that would be optimal.
By careful examination of the project details, PFI correctly identified both the primary project driver as well as the very close secondary 
project driver. Because of Big Oil’s reluctance to put all of their eggs (and trust) into a single company, they continued to proceed with 
caution and began a campaign of soliciting information from other engineering sources on the best-suggested path to proceed (in 
more or less a competition of ideas).
PFI moved into FEL-1, understanding that they would have to compete with another engineering firm Big Oil had worked with in the 
past. This situation made the collaboration between Big Oil and PFI a bit strained and was somewhat counterproductive. However, 
PFI continued to move the analysis forward in as collaborative an atmosphere as possible.
In this phase, PFI began evaluating the alternatives, both in terms of the process itself and the overall project layout. They took into 
consideration the impact of all the costs associated with the various parts of the process and layout options.
PFI began a risk analysis of the project. The aim of this effort was to make sure that all options were at least identified, and risk ranked 
in more detail.
OPPORTUNITY FRAMING (FEL-0)
PFI began their study on the modularization potential in the Opportunity Framing (FEL-0) phase. PFI worked with Big Oil to identify the 
project drivers, cost implications, and revenue potential (with as much information as Big Oil would share on these details).
PFI immediately set forth to work overall options on these alternatives at a very high level to determine if any roadblocks or black 
swans were lurking in the analysis.
From the FEL-0 analysis, PFI evaluated both the land and island options as well as the option of a floating LNG production and 
storage system, which would keep the entire facility offshore. In conjunction with Big Oil, PFI ran early alternative options on LNG plant 
site location (island and mainland)/floating LNG or land-based plant/and further sub-options on several individual plant site locations 
for each of the island and mainland options.
PFI worked with the upstream planners from Big Oil in terms of options and timing.
PFI then ran some high-level scheduling options. The results provided PFI with the guidelines in terms of the potential module sizing 
and work-hour movement off the proposed project site (whichever one would be chosen).11.4 In-­Class Exercise 183
11.4.2 Suggested Student Development Activities
The student/reader is requested to work through the 
business case for this phase framed by the descrip￾tion above:
1. What was PFI’s main goal in this phase?
2. What particular items of the business case did PFI 
concentrate on in this analysis?
• Conduct the business case analysis using the 
business case analysis tool and present the result.
3. What are the major phase activities?
4. What are the major modularization goals?
5. What concerns should have been raised in this phase?
6. Were there any preliminary conclusions or results 
identified or developed?
7. Which execution plan differences are identified in 
this phase?
8. Which critical success factors should be involved for 
the first time in this phase?
9. What should PFI do in terms of owner feedback and 
continuity?
PFI also looked into the magnitude of the potential modularization options in terms of percentages of total site work-hours removed. 
As a result of these analyses, PFI determined (and confirmed Big Oil’s initial assessment of) the best site location for the LNG plant.
A summary of all these analyses that PFI developed was presented to Big Oil as a recommendation at the end of the assessment 
phase. There were still some outstanding options to resolve. However, at least by this time, PFI had cobbled together a plausible 
project execution strategy and juxtaposed the other alternatives in such a manner that it identified the various options along with their 
faults and benefits and pointed toward the better options.
Big Oil was impressed with PFI’s thorough approach and agreed to allow PFI to continue their study efforts into the project selection 
phase (or pre-FEED). Of course, PFI was ecstatic, but after a short celebration, they began to assimilate the larger group needed to 
develop the deliverables for pre-FEED.
SELECTION/PRE-FEED (OR FEL-2)
In this selection phase, PFI needed to review all the alternatives identified in the assessment phase with respect to all the potential 
project variations in terms of equipment, process, layout, delivery, cost, schedule, fab yards, etc., to reduce them down to the best 
options for each.
As PFI wrapped up their pre-FEED efforts, discussions began regarding the opportunity for Big Oil to reduce the project schedule by 
several months. This schedule savings could be realized if Big Oil continued with PFI into the FEED instead of competitively going out 
for bids on the FEED. So, PFI challenged Big Oil on the subject, arguing that not only was there a significant loss of continuity, but the 
time to develop the FEED bid package would eat up most if not all of the potential schedule to be saved.
Big Oil’s project leads, impressed by PFI’s work to date, were inclined to continue with PFI. However, Big Oil’s upper management 
resisted for various reasons, including not wanting to put “all their eggs in one basket,” still not trusting the concept that a single con￾tractor can provide the needed benefits, and a reluctance to deviate from a well-established but dated culture. Instead, they insisted 
on a design competition, where a second company (similar in size and experience to PFI) was brought in to perform a parallel detailed 
design effort. The aim of this design competition was to obtain an alternative package from the other engineering firm that, in the￾ory, would be substantially different, lower cost, with a faster schedule to completion. The unstated premise for Big Oil’s push of the 
design competition was that as a competition, it would force the two competitors into developing a better product than what either 
would have developed individually. While PFI disagreed with the competition and its basis, PFI knew that this bit of Big Oil culture 
would not be changed.184 Modularization Application Case Study Exercise
11.4.3 Suggested Student Development Activities
The student/reader is requested to work through the 
business case for this phase framed by the descrip￾tion above:
1. What was PFI’s main goal in this phase?
2. What particular items of the business case did PFI 
concentrate on in this analysis?
3. What are the major phase activities?
4. What are the major modularization goals?
5. What concerns should have been raised in this phase?
6. Were there any preliminary conclusions or results 
identified or developed?
7. Which execution plan differences are identified in 
this phase?
8. Which critical success factors should be involved for 
the first time in this phase?
9. What should PFI do in terms of owner feedback and 
continuity?
BASIC DESIGN (FEED) OR (FEL-3)
Knowing they were competing with a favorite third party EPC, PFI initiated discussions with the small Big Oil team that would be 
overseeing their efforts, ensuring that the Big Oil team would maintain the PFI information confidentiality during the FEED competition.
While assurances were provided that any technical or commercial advantages would not be automatically shared with their FEED 
competitor, there was still a certain level of distrust and reluctance for PFI to share every advantage they were considering. PFI agreed 
that while this was obviously not the best condition for developing the absolute best module project option, they would have to main￾tain a certain level of distance in terms of the real cutting-edge benefits they were planning to incorporate into their version of the 
FEED package.
Of course, the downside of this competition was the project schedule loss of 3 to 6 months in terms of the bidding, evaluation, 
and award, as well as the lack of continuity due to the incomplete “sharing” of PFI’s pre-FEED data to their competing engineer￾ing company.
Because of PFI’s extraordinary efforts to date, Big Oil offered PFI the option to become Big Oil’s third party project management team 
(PMT) to provide project management assistance to Big Oil on this design competition and later on during the next project phases. 
But, because this would eliminate PFI from participating in the design competition itself and ultimately the EPC portion of the proj￾ect, PFI declined. As such, PFI decided to let another third party assist with the project management support of Big Oil while they 
continued with the design competition in hopes of winning it and continuing into the EPC phase (which was where the big bucks 
could be made . . . or lost).
As was typical, Big Oil offered to pay both engineering companies a set price, a not to exceed amount of money to complete the 
design competition. This also limited creativity and innovation by both competing engineering teams as the budget forced hard 
choices on how far to go in maturing some of these value-improving ideas.
PFI felt that they had the upper hand in this competition. They had performed well in the assessment phase, and their team was 
cohesive and working as a single unit, all with the goal of making the module option a success. They also had subtle cost and sched￾ule saving ideas that would be incorporated into the design competition they had been working on that they were not required to 
share with their competitor and further decided not to share immediately with Big Oil. This was their competitive advantage, and they 
wanted to maintain it. Again, by nature, the design competition prevented both teams from working from the most optimal point of 
project reference.
Of course, like the decision to make this a competitive FEED, the decision of PFI to withhold some of the potential optimization ideas 
was not in the best interests of the project itself. However, PFI felt it was necessary to maintain a competitive advantage and this was 
driven by Big Oil’s initial reluctance to continue with PFI and their desire to create and support this design competition.11.4 In-­Class Exercise 185
11.4.4 Suggested Student Development Activities
The student/reader is requested to work through the 
business case for this phase framed by the descrip￾tion above:
1. What was PFI’s main goal in this phase?
2. What particular items of the business case did PFI 
concentrate on in this analysis?
3. What are the major phase activities?
4. What are the major modularization goals?
5. What concerns should have been raised in this phase?
6. Were there any preliminary conclusions or results 
identified or developed?
7. Which execution plan differences are identified in 
this phase?
8. Which critical success factors should be involved for 
the first time in this phase?
9. What should PFI do in terms of owner feedback and 
continuity?
As a side note: This was disappointing to PFI as all understood that the path to the absolute best option was to work in a completely 
collaborative manner between Big Oil and themselves. The current contracting structure made this very difficult, but PFI persevered 
and did their best to be as collaborative as they felt comfortable being in this situation.
So, with that internal understanding within the PFI organization, PFI began by proceeding in the early part of this phase to complete 
the development of the optimal option by identifying all remaining (major) outstanding decisions and developing a schedule and 
sequence for their resolution.
PFI confirmed that the specific optimal module case identified in the pre-FEED study work was the appropriate case to be taken for￾ward to Big Oil to be followed in the detailed design, procurement, and construction of the EPC phase.
PFI identified a possible schedule reducer and decided to follow this option through development with the intention of presenting it 
as a non-solicited alternative to Big Oil since the schedule was so important.
Also, PFI management took a chance and doubled down on their design efforts toward completion in order to get to a point where 
the design was essentially complete in terms of which alternatives would be selected. Thus, PFI produced a comprehensive FEED 
package by, in fact, including a few non-solicited scope items at PFI cost (in order to be better situated if awarded the EPC contract).
PFI presented their proposal to Big Oil, and the waiting game began. Big Oil had a few questions but did not seem overly impressed. 
PFI, sensing they were about to lose out to their FEED design competition competitor, pressed Big Oil on what Big Oil thought 
about the unsolicited schedule-saving alternative presented at the end of the proposal. They quickly went over the savings of several 
months it could provide.
Big Oil only told PFI that they would look into this. Unbeknownst to PFI, there were some internal e-mails back and forth within Big 
Oil chasing this alternative analysis down. (What PFI found out later was that apparently, this alternative execution plan had been 
dismissed by one of the Big Oil evaluation employees because it was unsolicited and, as such, did not meet the contracting bid 
requirements. The employee did not even evaluate the ramifications.)
After a few days of analysis and various reviews of the schedule-reducing option, Big Oil management formally returned to PFI, thank￾ing PFI for the alternative. It turned out that this option indeed provided a better fit for the initial exploitation of the gas field and initial 
LNG production.
PFI was thanked for their extra efforts in developing the earlier alternative.
Big Oil agreed that PFI was the type of EPC contractor they wanted on their team—a team player that had their best interests at 
heart and was willing to go beyond what was expected, anticipating issues, and solving them ahead of time and without prompting.
PFI was again ecstatic! They had taken a chance by not accepting the PM role on the field development and, as a result of some 
heads-up research, some collaboration, and some extra internal efforts in terms of evaluation of Big Oil’s unidentified needs, had won 
the praise of Big Oil and the opportunity to perform the entire EPC effort.186 Modularization Application Case Study Exercise
11.4.5 Suggested Student Development Activities
The student/reader is requested to work through the 
business case for this phase framed by the descrip￾tion above:
1. What was PFI’s main goal in this phase?
2. What particular items of the business case did PFI 
concentrate on in this analysis?
3. What are the major phase activities?
4. What are the major modularization goals?
5. What concerns should have been raised in this 
phase?
6. Were there any preliminary conclusions or results 
identified or developed?
7. Which execution plan differences are identified in 
this phase?
8. Which critical success factors should be involved for 
the first time in this phase?
9. What should PFI do in terms of owner feedback and 
continuity?
We repeat here: As a textbook, the solution to the 
exercise is not part of the printed version but available 
for instructors (not for students) as a separate supple￾ment. Contact Dr. Choi (choi.jinouk@gmail.com) for the 
solution file.
EPC (EXECUTION, DETAILED DESIGN, PROCUREMENT, AND CONSTRUCTION)
PFI had also taken a chance in the FEED development by including initial efforts on data management and organization. As such, 
they were now in an excellent position to kick off the EPC portion of the work when it was to be awarded and proceed on productive 
work much sooner (and with little re-work of previous efforts).
PFI’s was awarded the EPC portion of the job, and they began the main activities required to execute a proper EPC, including all the 
internal and external project group interfacing.
And the rest is history.chapter 12
187
The Holy Grail of Pre-Assembly
If the title doesn’t get your attention, we are not sure 
anything (in this book) will. Standardization is the ulti￾mate goal of everyone involved in modularization or 
offsite assembly, whether they currently know it or not! 
It is the next step in the evolution of the planning and 
development of a project’s offsite scope. So, what is 
standardization?
[It is] the development and use of consistent designs for 
regularity and repetition.
(Construction Industry Institute, 2019)
In short, “Design one, build many.”
Standardization is also the ultimate goal in terms of cost 
and schedule. Like modularization, the standardization 
analysis should be considered, regardless of the project 
scope or what you currently think the current potential is 
for standardization—just in case there is some potential. 
So, hopefully, by the end of this chapter, you will under￾stand why the analysis of the standardization poten￾tial of your next project should be one of your goals, 
along with the modularization planning you are currently 
undertaking (and be as excited as we are about it)! In 
addition, we will explain who is responsible, when such 
analysis should be started, what additional efforts one 
should expect in terms of developing a standardized 
program, and a couple of things to watch out for.
12.1 Why the Interest?
In addition to all the benefits derived from modularization 
mentioned to date, standardization provides even more.
12.1.1 Design Benefits
The obvious benefit is the “design one, build many” 
goal seen with most mass-produced products, from 
nuts and bolts to automobiles. Anytime you can avoid 
re-engineering, there is the potential of eliminating that 
percentage of your efforts on the subsequent projects.
12.1.2 Learning Curve Benefits
Along with eliminating the designing efforts on subsequent 
projects, all the associated “learning” benefits come with 
duplicating efforts. For example, for all subsequent projects, 
everyone associated with these projects has gone through 
the project development: from procurement to module 
fabrication, to installation and on-site construction to start￾up/operations/maintenance. The result is an optimization 
of everyone’s efforts and typically an increase in efficiency 
for the second and subsequent projects. Of course, this 
assumes that these subsequent projects are sequential 
enough to be able to maintain a continuity of workforce.
12.1.3 Procurement Benefits
Besides the benefits of having purchased equipment 
and materials before and understanding the associ￾ated issues, there is the ability to procure in bulk and 
Standardization188 Standardization
in advance, potentially realizing additional cost savings. 
This also translates to construction materials manage￾ment and ultimately to the equipment sparing philosophy, 
where a common set of “spares” can be used to support 
multiple facilities and their operations.
12.1.4 Cost and Schedule Benefits
All of the above results in an overall program cost and 
schedule benefits since multiple units can be designed 
and built faster and be less expensive and operated by 
an O&M team that understands them better (because 
they are identical or at least very similar). There are some 
“extra efforts” required to standardize, but they will make 
more sense after working through how the standardiza￾tion opportunity might present itself in the workplace.
12.1.5 Overall Value Captured
O’Connor et  al. (2009) demonstrated that four stand￾ardized low sulfur gasoline projects saved $56  million 
(approximately 12.7% of the total installed cost). The 
Construction Industry Institute (CII) (2019) reported that 
eight different standardization programs with 45 projects 
saved 10% of the total installed cost, 25% of the life 
cycle cost, and 15% of the schedule in their upstream 
and midstream case projects. These savings were gained 
due to the benefits of standardization such as “design 
once, reuse multiple times,” “design and procurement 
in advance,” “accelerated response to schedule needs,” 
learning curve benefits in fabrication, construction, com￾missioning and start-up, and operation and maintenance, 
“decommissioning cost savings,” to name but a few 
(Construction Industry Institute, 2019).
12.2 How Might It Impact You?
Whether you even think the suite of projects currently 
being managed by you has even the remotest oppor￾tunity to be “standardized,” you will eventually be con￾fronted with the situation below, in some form or fashion.
EXAMPLE
The project you are supervising is not a first of a kind but a variation that provides additional benefits in terms of carbon capture and 
reduction in greenhouse emissions. It is currently under construction in the field, and construction is going well. With all the past issues 
in the engineering development of this project, you are encouraged by the prospects of actually coming in on schedule and under 
budget. The boss is happy, the client is happy, and you are ecstatic and, more importantly, ready to move on. Your boss has been 
keeping upper management apprised of progress, and they also like what they see.
Late Friday, the client provides feedback through business development that they see the additional potential for this new technology and 
are interested in building three more similar plants. Note that they do not ask for “duplicate” plants since site conditions and meteorological 
conditions vary. The question from them was: “Can you standardize and how much additional $$ and time can be saved on the next ones?”
Of course, Business Development affirms: “Our company has the capability!” Upper management dictates: “Make it happen!” Your boss 
says: “Develop the proposal – after all, you have all weekend!”
And with that, your dreams of actually getting off this project anytime near term disappear, and you are tied to the prospect of doing 
something you had not done before—coming up with a way to build the subsequent plants at a reduced cost and schedule (to maintain the 
favorable impression your bosses have).
So, how do you approach the planning? What do you assume can be shortened? What can be duplicated? Where do you start? Where is 
a good guide when you need one?
So, you start your research—maybe a “Google” search—“Standardization Planning Guide.”
Good luck there—the search response received was “it looks like there aren’t many great matches for this search.”
In discussions with fellow workers who have applicable standardization experience, they indicate that it requires even more pre-planning 
than modularization. So, how do you start from scratch with nothing standardized on the first plant being supposedly duplicated?
So, back to the drawing board (and back to this book and particularly, this chapter).12.3 How to Implement Modularization with Standardization? 189
Fortunately, the problems are not as insurmountable as 
the above project scenario leads one to believe. But, let’s 
start from the beginning and assume you are working on 
serial #1 of multiple plants to be standardized, and the 
decision was to be made upfront. With that as a basis, 
we can then come back and tackle the late standardiza￾tion decision developed in the scenario above and how 
one might handle that.
12.3 How to Implement Modularization 
with Standardization?
12.3.1 The Two Methods of Combining 
Modularization and Standardization
The more traditional method is to take a plant and modu￾larize it. Then take the modules and standardize them. 
What you get are essentially “standard modules” that 
offer some of the benefits of both procedures, but not all.
The method we suggest is to take that same plant and 
first standardize it. That is developed such that many of 
its sub-parts are “standard” in design and manufacture. 
Then take this standardized plant, including all the small 
standard pieces and processes in it, and modularize the 
plant. The result is a standardized (or replicable) plant 
that has been further optimized to combine the standard 
pieces that work well together in terms of process into 
modules. These modules, composed of standard parts, 
now make up a Modular Standardized Plant or MSP 
(Figure 12.1).
The additional benefits received are from the efforts 
involved in first creating standard components that can 
then be assembled into the most optimal module solution 
for a project. It is this version of standardization that we 
recommend and assume will be part of any standardiza￾tion process.
12.3.2 Ten Factors to Determine Potential 
for Standardization
So, where does one start?
CII RT-UMM-01 Standardization research (Construction 
Industry Institute,  2019) provided 10  level-1 factors to 
be analyzed to determine the potential for standardiza￾tion. These are listed below in the order provided in the 
research documents:
1. Management Commitment to Standardization
2. Development Plan
3. Degree or Level of Standardization
4. Market Analysis
5. Standardization Process and Work Process
6. Economic Evaluation
7. Number of Standardized Projects/Units
8. Project Execution Plan
9. Technology Maturity
10. Marketing
12.3.3 Suggested Standardization Study Sequence
Below is a suggested initiation sequence for analyzing 
these 10 important standardization potential factors. 
While each project may differ, one cannot go wrong by 
using this sequencing as an initial basis for such an analy￾sis. Which of the above factors should be evaluated first? 
The market analysis, of course!
12.3.3.1 #1 The Market Analysis
The market survey identifies the world’s appetite for this 
product. It is the basis on which the entire standardization 
program is based, with the ultimate goal of satisfying the 
world’s appetite for the product being marketed.
Of course, it is unrealistic to assume that your plant or 
process, etc. can fulfill all the world’s needs. So, the effort 
becomes the vetting of the standardization potential of a 
given project in terms of your company’s capacities and 
goals. This effort becomes the process of identifying the 
optimal potential for standardization with respect to your 
Figure 12.1 The two methods of combining modularization and standardization. 
Source: O’Connor, O’Brien and Choi (2015). Reproduced with permission of 
American Society of Civil Engineers.190 Standardization
specific project, company appetite, capacity, long-term 
goals, etc. The market analysis becomes the stand￾ardization equivalent of what the business case 13-step 
analysis was for the optimal module scope. But the stand￾ardization market analysis looks completely different.
The goal of the modular business case analysis was to 
determine the optimal module configuration for a project. 
The market analysis’s goal is to determine how many similar 
units one can make and how close they can be to abso￾lute duplicates of the first or prototype. For, as you strive 
for higher and higher levels of duplication, some trade-offs 
must be made with respect to sizing, capacity, variability, 
uniqueness of design, and everything else that makes a 
plant “special and unique.” All the things that each customer 
typically expected in terms of an exact fit to what is wanted.
If the customer is not going to get exactly what they 
want, there must be enough benefits, such as cost 
and schedule savings, so that the customer is OK with 
accepting something slightly different than what they 
were asking for.
That is why the market survey is so critical. All this must 
be very carefully discovered during the market survey, 
or you run the risk of developing a product that can be 
duplicated but very few people, if anybody, will purchase 
and you are stuck with a very expensive and potentially 
unmarketable prototype.
The following is a list of the key ingredients of a mar￾ket survey (Construction Industry Institute,  2019; Choi, 
Shrestha, Shane, et al., 2020):
• How many?
• How much?
• Margin
• Timing
• Geographic location
• Market size
• Market share
• Market potential to grow
• Volatility
• Risk
• Long-term commodity price prediction
• Find out what you need to know about your custom￾er profile.
Note that the survey hinges on quantities/timing/poten￾tial customer base/growth/risk. And each of these items 
hinges on how well the duplicated product can be sold 
“as is” without changes. In effect, the “one-size-fits￾all” product.
The results of the market survey then feed the following 
other nine factors in the order shown (at least in the opin￾ions of the authors) to be considered in the standardiza￾tion analysis.
12.3.3.2 #2 The Development Plan
The development plan takes the data from the market 
survey and, based on the specifics of the parent com￾pany, determines how and when the product will be 
developed and taken to market and how similar each unit 
will be able to be produced. Many variables are involved 
in such planning, starting with capital availability, market 
share captured, impact to current project plans, impacts 
to existing resources, etc. These get bounced back and 
forth, hopefully with a resulting agreement on the best 
way forward.
12.3.3.3 #3 Degree or Level of Standardization
This is the result of taking the market analysis, which pro￾vides an idea of how much variation the customer can 
accept and determining how that resulting product (and 
any variability) best fit into the current organization in terms 
of development, production, and sales. The resulting two 
considerations evaluated concurrently: (1) market share 
loss with increased percentage duplication versus (2) loss 
of profitability with decreased duplication (increased cus￾tomization) will provide an idea of how much duplication 
versus customization will be required for the proposed 
program and, by default will define what gets standard￾ized. To put it simply:
1. the more you standardize (duplicate), the fewer cus￾tomers who will fully accept the product; BUT
2. the more you customize, the lower your potential 
profit from each unit.12.3 How to Implement Modularization with Standardization? 191
The degree of standardization is the optimal level that 
meets both considerations.
12.3.3.4 #4 Management Commitment 
to Standardization
This is your first upper management review. The high￾level analysis of the above three factors will provide the 
framework for a proposal to upper management. And 
this would probably be the best time to initially approach 
them. The management wants a good short story with a 
background on the level of market interest, market share, 
as well as impacts on current operations and capital fund￾ing. They want to understand the standardization “carrot” 
in terms of its impact on current company operations.
Further study into the development of more detail on 
the potential standardization program may be wasted if 
upper management is not interested in work and con￾clusion to date. However, if they show interest, now is 
also the time you casually mention some of the commit￾ment details that will come with such a standardization 
effort, such as organization support, incorporation into 
company culture, upper management champion, etc. (to 
confirm that the interest remains). If so, move to the next 
factors in order of importance.
12.3.3.5 #5 Economic Evaluation
There was an initial assumption made as part of the pres￾entation to upper management on #3 Degree of Level of 
Standardization. This needs to be bracketed in terms of 
standardizing a higher percentage of the product as well 
as a lower percentage based on the company operat￾ing specifics. The point of these alternative studies is to 
determine if there is a breakpoint in terms of company 
profit, market share, or some other limiting factor that 
would suggest backing off from that level of duplication 
or, conversely, moving up to the next level of complexity.
12.3.3.6 #6 Technology Maturity
This analysis should follow in quickstep with the Economic 
Evaluation since as the percentage of duplication and 
complexity increases, the potential for changes in the 
technology also increases, making the product more 
susceptible to going out of date or becoming obsolete. 
The analysis should hopefully confirm that the technology 
is sound but not so old that alternate technologies are 
already beginning to emerge that might impact the appli￾cability of the product.
These two efforts (#5 and #6) will provide the analysis to 
either confirm or adjust the standardization assumptions 
made and presented to upper management in terms of 
suitability and sustainability of the proposed product for 
the market share anticipated.
12.3.3.7 #7 Number of Standardized Units
This has been identified and analyzed in terms of eco￾nomics, impact to current company operations, capital 
requirements, etc. So, the next step is to take this scope 
and develop the plan to actually produce the quan￾tity required.
12.3.3.8 #8 Project Execution Plan
With the number of units, the previous research into the 
market, your share, impact on company business, etc., 
the Project Execution Plan can be developed.
12.3.3.9 #9 Standardization Process and 
Work Process
As part of this development, efforts will need to be made 
on determining what standardization work processes are 
currently available within the company as well as from the 
outside that can assist in identifying and supporting all 
the changes and up-front efforts involved in developing 
the standardization program. These resources will be crit￾ical in the development of the standardization program.
12.3.3.10 #10 Marketing
Somewhere in the above mix of the last three factors, the 
company needs to start actually marketing the product 
they will be manufacturing. All the correct market analy￾ses in the world will do no good if no one knows the 
standardized product is available from your company 
by a certain date. And along with this marketing comes 
the identification of the main customers and how best to 
make sure that they receive the best service as well as 
identify the future markets that will help fill in the gaps/
create new future capacity/or whatever the current busi￾ness case for this product entails.192 Standardization
If you are interested in learning more about these stand￾ardization decision-making factors, check (Construc￾tion Industry Institute, 2019) or (Choi, Shrestha, Shane, 
et al., 2020).
12.4 The Standardization Work Process
This process is divided into two parts: The design and 
development of the prototype (or first unit) and then 
the production of all the subsequent units. They will be 
discussed in this order and will help you understand 
the importance placed on the study sequence pre￾sented above.
12.4.1 The First Unit (or Prototype)
This unit is developed similarly to any regular custom-build 
project that will be modularized. All of the business case 
efforts associated with a modular approach to a project 
mentioned in the previous chapters of this book as well as 
the 13-step business case, will apply. But, in addition to 
the above, what is different with the standardized project 
is that there needs to be a concerted effort with respect 
to identifying the market for these potential identical units/
processes/widgets. This is the market analysis mentioned 
earlier. Of course, in addition to step #1, the market analy￾sis, are the other nine steps needed to turn the results of 
the market analysis into your company’s reality. This all 
happens in the very early opportunity framing and assess￾ment phases of a typical project. This additional effort 
makes these two project phases very important for the 
project since they identify the alternatives, not only the first 
project or unit but all subsequent projects or units in this 
standardization program (Figure 12.2).
The next phase—selection —is probably the most impor￾tant phase in terms of the standardization process as 
this is where all the alternatives get distilled down into 
the best option for standardization in terms of the prod￾uct being produced, timing, quantity, resulting in impacts 
on your company, potential impacts in the market, and 
its profitability. This is where the details are worked out 
in terms of the mechanics of procurement, engineering, 
modularization, site construction, and O&M. This sets the 
stage for how all the subsequent units will be produced. 
It also sets up a plan for going back and re-evaluating the 
standardization process in terms of any potential future 
impacts from design, technology, market, etc., that might 
appear in order to avoid a situation where the product 
being produced is no longer in demand. This is com￾monly called “lessons learned.”
This additional work in these first phases of the first or 
prototype product is one of the “extra efforts” mentioned 
earlier when evaluating the potential for standardization. 
It will take longer and be more expensive because of the 
involved market survey and additional analysis of how 
best to develop and market the product. But the nice 
thing about this is that it will be the only time you spend 
this extra effort on the program if done correctly.
12.4.2 All Subsequent Units
If the project tasks for the initial or prototype project are 
performed properly, the second and subsequent projects/
unit efforts begin with an abbreviated basic design or 
front end engineering design (FEED) phase (Figure 12.3). 
And even in this phase, the tasks have been essentially 
completed in terms of the project design. What typically 
remains for this basic design phase is the validation of 
the design criteria in terms of the specific location, feed 
inputs, soil conditions, etc., and perhaps some minor 
adjustments to how the unit or project interacts with its 
environment in terms of support, weather, etc.
Because the project phases required to take project #2 
and all subsequent projects or units have been abbreviated 
by the removal of opportunity framing, assessment, selec￾tion, and even parts of basic design, the engineering, plan￾ning and procurement phases can be completed much 
quicker and with less cost per project or unit. Construction 
Figure 12.2 Project phases for the first unit.12.5 THE STANDARDIZED APPROACH 193
and start-up also develop some efficiencies and typically 
are able to start and complete quicker. Finally, O&M has 
become familiar with the equipment and processes, so the 
commonality among all the units makes both the opera￾tions as well as any maintenance more “routine.”
12.4.3 Owner/Client Accountability
One other key difference between a standardized pro￾gram and other projects is the importance of the owner/
client in terms of responsibility. Similar to the modulariza￾tion case, where the owner plays a large part in the early 
decisions that make modularization a success, because 
the standardized approach is based on duplication, in 
many cases, this requires a super-concerted effort on 
the part of the owner/client to develop the market case 
for the units or products. And to ensure success, most 
of these important decisions must be made in the early 
project phases of the first prototype (opportunity framing, 
assessment, and selection).
The EPC contractor has their own set of responsibilities, 
but these pertain to ensuring that the team’s continuity 
and the approach are maintained throughout the program 
of production. This brings us back to the initial situational 
example presented at the beginning of the chapter— 
what to do when faced with the need to develop a stand￾ardized program after the fact.
12.5 The Standardized Approach: Critical 
Success Factors for Standardization
There are certain actions, similar to the critical success 
factors that we identified for implementing a modulari￾zation solution approach, that are critical to the stand￾ardization solution. These are not all-inclusive but are 
considered by the authors as important enough not to be 
ignored in this high-level summary discussion. Since the 
owner/client has already decided in terms of what is to 
be standardized, it falls on the EPC contractor to identify 
how best to maximize cost and scheduling (to provide 
the best solution for the client and be competitive in the 
marketplace).
12.5.1 Continuity
The first is continuity within the program being developed. 
As mentioned, standardization offers the benefits of 
developing learning curves for multiple groups and activi￾ties within each project of the program. But this works 
best when the “teams” can be maintained throughout 
the program. So, very early, the EPC contractor needs 
to identify how they will maintain this team essence or 
core that will be able to use and incorporate the learning 
throughout the program.
12.5.2 Alignment
Following the continuity is an overall general program/
project alignment from upper management down to 
the rank-and-file workers at the site. Everyone needs to 
understand the greater goal in terms of the program and 
their part in how to make it successful.
12.5.3 Discipline
This is a “standardized” program. That means it must 
remain duplicatable. Changes to the basic design and 
implementation are to be avoided “at all costs,” as the 
saying goes. This needs to be a strong attribute within all 
the teams to maintain this aversion to “change.”
So, for the average project manager who has been asked 
to develop a plan to build three more very similar plants, 
they must analyze their company’s ability to provide a 
team that will follow these attributes. A review of this sim￾plified approach may also trigger potential feedback to 
the owner/client in terms of optimization of the program. 
For example, if the owner/client can optimally time these 
Figure 12.3 Project phases for second and subsequent units.194 Standardization
subsequent developments, there may be incremental 
cost and schedule savings based on the planning and 
execution and learning curves developed.
12.6 Conclusion: You’re on Your Own
Going further into the various potential scenarios for this 
proposed example development is beyond this very ele￾mentary introduction to standardization. But it is hoped 
that this chapter has at least identified the potential ben￾efits of standardization, who is responsible, when such 
analysis should be started, what additional efforts one 
should expect in terms of developing a standardized pro￾gram, and a couple of things to watch out for.
For additional details on the facility standardization, we 
suggest that the reader check out the CII research: RT￾UMM-01 Facility Standardization for Program Success 
(Construction Industry Institute,  2019,  2020) or Dr. 
Choi’s academic papers on facility standardization 
(Choi et al., 2018, 2022; Construction Industry Institute, 
2019,  2020; Choi, Shrestha, Kwak, et  al., 2020; Choi, 
Shrestha, Shane, et  al., 2020; Shrestha et  al., 2020a, 
2020b; Choi et al., 2021a; Choi et al., 2021b; Shrestha 
et al., 2021). The articles include standardization topics 
on barriers and challenges (Choi et al., 2018), decision￾making model (Choi, Shrestha, Shane, et al., 2020), criti￾cal success factors (Choi, Shrestha, Kwak, et al., 2020; 
Shrestha et  al., 2020a), timing of critical success fac￾tors’ implementation (Shrestha et al., 2020b), recipes for 
standardized projects’ performance success (Shrestha 
et al., 2021), benefits and trade-offs (Choi et al., 2021b), 
work process and optimization (Choi et al., 2021a), and 
industry maximization enablers (Choi et al., 2022).
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge that some infor￾mation, ideas, and concepts in this chapter are adopted 
or duplicated from the reports (Construction Industry 
Institute,  2019,  2020) conducted by the Research 
Team (RT-UMM-01) Standardization, as both authors 
were members of the team. However, the readers may 
note that the authors introduced only the key or high￾level information in this book and interpreted the find￾ings from (Construction Industry Institute,  2019,  2020) 
based on their expertise and views. Thus, there is some 
discrepancy between what we presented here versus 
(Construction Industry Institute, 2019, 2020). We highly 
recommend that readers check the original CII reports 
(Construction Industry Institute, 2019, 2020) for details.
References
Choi, J.O. et al. (2018) Achieving Higher Levels of Facility 
Design Standardization in the Upstream, Midstream, 
and Mining Commodity Sector: Barriers and Challenges. 
In Construction Research Congress (CRC) 2018
pp. 278–287. Reston, VA: American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE). doi: 10.1061/9780784481301.028.
Choi, J.O. et al. (2021a) Facility Design Standardization 
Work Process and Optimization in Capital Projects. 
In Proceedings of the Canadian Society of Civil Engineering 
Annual Conference 2021 pp. 491–503. Surrey, British 
Columbia, Canada: Canadian Society of Civil Engineering.
Choi, J.O. et al. (2021b) Exploring the Benefits and Trade-Offs 
of Design Standardization in Capital Projects. Engineering, 
Construction and Architectural Management, 29 (3), 
pp. 1169–1193. doi: 10.1108/ECAM-08-2020-0661.
Choi, J.O. et al. (2022) Facility Design Standardization: Six 
Solution Pieces and Industry Maximization Enablers. 
In Jazizadeh, F., Shealy, T., and Garvin, M.J. (Eds.) 
Construction Research Congress (CRC) 2022, 
pp. 491–503. Reston, VA: American Society of Civil 
Engineers (ASCE). doi: 10.1061/9780784483978.073.
Choi, J.O., Shrestha, B.K., Kwak, Y.H., et al. (2020) Critical 
Success Factors and Enablers for Facility Design 
Standardization of Capital Projects. Journal of Management 
in Engineering, 36(5), 04020048. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
ME.1943-5479.0000788.
Choi, J.O., Shrestha, B.K., Shane, J.S., et al. (2020) 
Facility Design Standardization Decision-Making Model 
for Industrial Facilities and Capital Projects. Journal of 
Management in Engineering, 36(6), 04020077. doi: 
10.1061/(asce)me.1943-5479.0000842.
Construction Industry Institute (2019) Achieving Higher Levels 
of Facility Standardization in the Upstream, Midstream, 
and Mining (UMM) Commodity Market-Volume 1: Four 
Solution Pieces. Austin, TX: The University of Texas at 
Austin: Construction Industry Institute. Available at: https://
www.construction-institute.org/resources/knowledgebase/
knowledge-areas/project-program-management/topics/
rt-umm-01.References 195
Construction Industry Institute (2020a) Achieving Higher 
Levels of Facility Standardization in the Upstream, 
Midstream, and Mining (UMM) Commodity Market-Volume 
2: Business Case Analysis Model and Work Process. 
Austin, TX: The University of Texas at Austin: Construction 
Industry Institute. Available at: https://www.construction￾institute.org/resources/knowledgebase/knowledge-areas/
project-program-management/topics/rt-umm-01.
O’Connor, J.T. et al. (2009) Executing a Standard Plant Design 
Using the 4X Model, Hydrocarbon Processing, 88(12), 
pp. 47–53.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2015) 
Standardization Strategy for Modular Industrial 
Plants. Journal of Construction Engineering and 
Management, 141(9), 4015026. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
CO.1943-7862.0001001.
Shrestha, B.K. et al. (2020a) How Design Standardization 
CSFs Can Impact Project Performance of Capital Projects. 
Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(4), 06020003. 
doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000792.
Shrestha, B.K. et al. (2020b) Timings of Accomplishments 
for Facility Design Standardization Critical Success 
Factors in Capital Projects. In Construction Research 
Congress 2020: Project Management and Controls, 
Materials, and Contracts – Selected Papers from the 
Construction Research Congress 2020, pp. 898–906. doi: 
10.1061/9780784482889.095.
Shrestha, B.K. et al. (2021) Recipes for Standardized Capital 
Projects’ Performance Success. Journal of Management 
in Engineering, 37(4), 04021029. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)
ME.1943-5479.0000926.chapter 13
197
13.1 Introduction
The use of modern and innovative technologies in modu￾lar projects disrupts the conventional way of doing things 
by facilitating the reduction and eventual elimination of 
older techniques in preference to newer and more efficient 
ones, that can improve cost performance and allow for ex￾tended and improved productivity. When modularization 
is combined with innovative technologies, the potential 
result is a leveraging opportunity surpassing the benefits 
taken individually. However, there is a historic reluctance 
in the construction industry to adopt new and innovative 
technologies, and modular projects are no exception.
This chapter introduces some of the innovative technolo￾gies applicable to a modularization application, explains 
in which phases they can be implemented, and who the 
primary beneficiaries are. These technologies can be 
grouped into three areas: (1) visualization, information 
modeling, and simulation; (2) sensing and data analytics 
for construction; and (3) robotics and automation. The 
chapter concludes with a vision of how these could be 
combined and used.
13.2 Current List of Innovative 
Technologies for Modularization
There is great potential for implementing innovative 
technologies in the construction industry and an equally 
great need for their implementation. The construction in￾dustry has historically exhibited slow progress in terms 
of embracing and implementing such new and efficient 
technologies. Some of the challenges hindering such 
implementation have previously been discussed, but be￾cause the construction industry is falling behind in terms 
of the actual application of these technologies, they have 
been unable to reap the significant benefits that accom￾pany these applications. Counterpart industries, such as 
shipbuilding and manufacturing, have accepted the chal￾lenge, used modern technologies, and gained substantial 
benefits. So, why is the construction industry, particularly 
modular projects (where there is considerable potential to 
implement technologies), unable to do the same?
In an attempt to address this question, a recent study 
(Choi et  al.,  2020) investigated capital projects in the 
construction industry to identify potential innovative tech￾nologies that can help in achieving higher levels of modu￾larization. This research study identified 26  innovative 
technologies most impactful to modularization and most 
likely to occur in the next five years. These were identified 
via a detailed literature review as well as detailed discus￾sions and surveys among experienced subject matter ex￾perts on modularization and design standardization in the 
oil and gas sector.
The following lists the 26 identified potential technologies 
identified:
1. Facility design standardization
2. Industrial robots
3. 3D printing
4. Autonomous vehicles/autonomous construction
5. Light detection and ranging (LiDAR)/reality capture
6. Drones
Innovative Technologies 
for Modularization198 Innovative Technologies for Modularization
7. Building information modeling (BIM) design models
8. 5D BIM
9. Virtual reality (VR)
10. Augmented reality (AR)
11. Wearables
12. Smart glasses
13. Intelligent and automated data collection technology
14. Mobile user interface devices
15. Wireless networks for construction sites (WLAN)
16. Construction simulation technologies
17. Simulation-based virtual commissioning
18. Simulation-based operator training
19. Interim product database (IPD)
20. Automated design
21. Digitized commissioning and handover
22. Digital performance management
23. Capital portfolio management
24. Completion management system
25. Real-time field reporting
26. Materials logistics management.
While some of these technologies are very mature for 
modularization, others have some way to go. For exam￾ple, technologies such as building information modeling 
(BIM) and radio frequency identification (RFID) devices 
are both more mature and more common. As such, they 
have been widely used in the construction industry for 
some time. However, in spite of this, modularization ex￾perts believe they are not used as often as they should 
and should gain wider acceptance and utilization in the 
coming five years (Table 13.1). On the other hand, tech￾nologies such as virtual reality (VR), augmented reality 
(AR), artificial intelligence (AI), and laser scanning are still 
maturing and, as such, are not being implemented at 
high levels. As noted in Table 13.1, VR, in particular, is 
expected to come into greater use in the future as more 
explore the many uses and benefits of these technologies 
on construction projects. The survey result can be found 
in Table  13.1, which presents innovative technologies 
and their impact scores (out of a maximum score of 5) 
for modularization. Table 13.1 is sorted in terms of the 
likelihood of occurrence of these technologies in the next 
five years.
Table 13.1 Innovative technologies and their impact on modularization.
ID # Innovative technologies Modularization 
impact score
Likelihood of occur￾rence in 5 years
#14 Mobile user interface 
devices
3.63 4.36
#15 Wireless networks for con￾struction sites (WLAN)
3.51 4.22
#5 Light detection and ranging 
(LiDAR)/Reality Capture
3.37 4.14
#1 Standardization 4.19 4.1
#6 Drones 2.64 4.02
#16 Construction simulation 
technologies
3.7 3.88
#13 Intelligent and automated 
data collection technology
3.76 3.86
#26 Materials logistics 
management
3.93 3.85
#7 BIM design models 3.6 3.78
#18 Simulation-based operator 
training
3.07 3.6
#25 Real-time field reporting 3.3 3.6
#21 Digitized commissioning 
and handover
3.08 3.41
#22 Digital Performance 
Management
3.05 3.31
#20 Automated design 3.83 3.17
#9 Virtual reality (VR) 3.05 3.14
#17 Simulation-based virtual 
commissioning
3.28 3.12
#23 Capital portfolio 
management
2.69 3.08
#11 Wearables 2.41 3.02
#10 Augmented reality (AR) 2.99 2.95
#8 5D BIM 3.25 2.94
#19 Interim product database 
(IPD)
3.49 2.89
#24 Completion Manage￾ment System
2.52 2.88
#2 Industrial Robots 3 2.74
#12 Smart Glasses 2.38 2.63
#4 Autonomous Vehicles/ 
Automated Construction
2.55 2.51
#3 3D Printing 2.5 2.4
Source: Adopted from Choi et al. (2020). Reproduced with permission of 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).13.3 Technologies of Interest 199
In addition, autonomous/automated construction tech￾nologies, LiDAR, robotics, and intelligent automated data 
collection technologies are predicted to impact modulari￾zation significantly (Choi et al., 2020).
The use and effective implementation of such digital 
technologies and their incorporation can very much aid 
construction projects, especially modular projects, to en￾hance and improve productivity, cost, and schedule by 
helping to reduce errors in offsite construction, enhanc￾ing safety for onsite and offsite processes, and providing 
real-time progress status, and evaluating the quality of 
production in modular projects.
13.3 Technologies of Interest
The impact of the use of technologies to complement 
modularization is on the rise. More and more, different 
technologies are being considered for implementation 
in modular projects, including building information mod￾eling (BIM), 3D modeling, drones, digital twins, mobile 
user interface devices, construction simulation technolo￾gies, automation, and wireless networks for construc￾tion sites. In reviewing all the available technologies, we 
have selected the technologies that have a high impact 
on modularization but at the same time also have higher 
potential (Table 13.1) of being used in the future based 
on the research (Choi et  al.,  2020). For example, BIM, 
LiDAR, automation (robotics), virtual reality, construction 
simulation technologies all have a high impact potential 
for practical implementation in modularization in the near 
term. Other literature on technology also corroborates the 
importance of these selected technologies in the sector 
of construction (Chui and Mischke, 2019; Construction 
Users Roundtable, 2020; Ghimire et al., 2021). For fur￾ther discussion of these technologies, they have been 
grouped under three headings:
1. Visualization, information modeling, and simulation
2. Sensing and data analytics for construction
3. Robotics and automation.
13.3.1 Visualization, Information Modeling, and 
Simulation
The use of visualization, information modeling, and simu￾lation technologies such as digital twin in conjunction with 
AR/VR/MR/XR allows the owners and the stakeholders 
to better grasp the project benefits and tangibly estimate 
costs and schedules, promoting the implementation of 
modularization. Since these technologies enable the us￾ers to monitor the real-time progress of projects and sim￾ulate hypothetical and potential problems that the project 
might face, they encourage the owners and stakeholders 
to review the project in its entirety with tangible results 
in the early conception and project assessment phases.
Incorporation of digital twin and AR/VR/MR/XR in earlier 
phases have been observed to be especially useful since 
one of the major challenges for the implementation of 
modular construction is obtaining buy-in from the own￾ers and stakeholders in terms of modularization and its 
benefits on a project. This technology helps get all modu￾lar project participants (owners, different contractors, 
vendors, and engineers) on the same page in terms of 
understanding the goals and demands of the various pro￾ject phases, from conception and assessment, through 
design, construction, and commissioning. Its application 
should help the users (all stakeholders) better understand 
and define the scope of the modular projects earlier, in 
terms of the project phases.
13.3.1.1 Digital Twin
A digital twin is a virtual representation, a model, of the 
actual project, which allows for the collection of real￾world data and information (Goodman, 2019). The digital 
twin is developed through the use and incorporation of 
different technologies, for example, sensors. The use of 
drones, BIM, virtual 3D modeling and simulation, cloud 
computing, AR, and VR is fast becoming popular in col￾lecting information for digital twins. However, integrating 
different technologies to actually support the digital twin 
technology in construction has not matured in modulari￾zation and is not being implemented to the levels it should 
be. When implemented properly, such collected and 
sourced information allow the users, particularly owners 
and stakeholders and project team members, to become 
more involved, addressing potential construction issues 
before the construction even starts in a project.
Note that the digital twin is not software or a single entity 
that is to be used in projects. It is an amalgamation of 
different technologies, as mentioned previously. A digital 
twin can adopt information from multiple sources, improv￾ing by implementing machine learning, AI, and advanced 
analytics (Goodman, 2019). The result is that users can 200 Innovative Technologies for Modularization
better understand the real-time project progress. Further, 
it empowers users to run simulations of potential and hy￾pothetical situations that may occur in the project design 
and execution and help address such potential issues 
and failures.
13.3.1.2 Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality 
(AR), Mixed Reality (MR), and Extended Reality (XR)
VR is entirely digital or virtual, creating a virtual workplace 
that allows the users to be immersed completely in real-life 
workplace scenarios. VR creates a simulated digital world 
that the user can access using devices (e.g., smart glasses 
and VR gears). Augmented reality (AR) is a technology used 
in the construction industry that generates designs and in￾corporates them into the actual work sites and physical 
structures at the site. Mixed reality (MR) is a combination of 
virtual and real-life elements. It is a hybrid where the virtual 
and the actual can coincide and interact. Extended reality 
(XR) is a combination of VR, AR, and MR that incorporates 
all the characteristics of these technologies in one device. 
XR is still in the early phases of development and will require 
time to mature in its application in the construction industry.
AR/VR/MR/XR technology allows the users to interact 
and investigate with the construction sites and identify 
(potential) issues, keep track and visualize schedules, 
as well as enhance safety at construction sites. Its use, 
coupled with creating digital twins for existing projects 
or future projects, would exceptionally provide a highly 
immersive experience for the users by merging the real 
and virtual worlds. AR/VR/MR/XR technology has not 
matured to its fullest extent in the construction industry, 
especially in modular projects. In addition, these technol￾ogies, especially VR and AR, are often deployed too late 
in the EPC phase, when more value can be earned by 
deployment in earlier project phases.
The example use of VR technology in the rendering 
of a virtual model can be seen in Figure  13.1, which 
shows the generation process of the 4D schedule us￾ing the 3D model of a modular house project. As seen 
in Figure  13.1, a 4D BIM schedule can be generated 
by combining a baseline schedule with a 3D model. In 
addition, immersive virtual reality (IVR) can be used in 
modular projects to see a virtual representation of mod￾ules at different fabrication/construction stages. A 4D 
BIM schedule can help modular projects reduce risks, 
particularly in the initial planning and design phases in 
the modular projects. The detailed development process 
and the benefits of a 4D BIM schedule model with IVR 
are explained in (Ghimire et al., 2021).
Figure 13.1 Example of 4D BIM schedule model with IVR development process. 13.3 Technologies of Interest 201
13.3.2 Sensing and Data Analytics for Construction
Sensing and data analytics technologies enable partici￾pants of modular projects to do the following:
1. collect data (in real-time);
2. analyze the collected data;
3. understand the status of the project, modules, or 
materials;
4. document as-built;
5. help the users to make decisions.
These technologies should be used in combination dur￾ing the entire lifecycle of modular projects. They will help 
the owners understand the benefits of modular con￾struction in their projects and encourage them to bet￾ter understand the long-term gains in cost, schedule, 
quality, and safety in the projects. Using these tech￾nologies in the early phases of modular projects helps 
stakeholders gain more knowledge about the products 
from previously executed modular projects and designs, 
therefore helping them make optimal design decisions. 
Moreover, using these technologies together can pro￾vide for advanced data processing, analytics, and ma￾chine learning. The result is better project control along 
with instant and real-time use of field data and better 
clarity in project execution, quality control, and sched￾ule analysis.
13.3.2.1 Point Cloud Modeling
Geometric quality inspection of modules is critical. Poor 
geometric quality (alignment) can cause re-work and 
disrupt the schedule, especially for multiple prefabricated 
units that must be connected at the site. Such poor 
alignment can affect productivity in installation and other 
connection efforts at the site. Historically, a dimensional 
inspection of prefabricated units is performed by hand, 
for example, with measuring tapes. Accuracy becomes 
especially difficult and cumbersome if the dimensions of 
the prefabricated units are large, significantly off grade, 
and if there are multiple units to inspect. An advanced 
and technologically superior method is required instead 
of such manual inspections.
For modular construction, a coordinate system, also 
called 3D point cloud data modeling, can be used to 
define geometrical or spatial information, for instance, a 
prefabricated module unit. Point cloud-generated models 
not only can be used for quality inspection and as a trans￾portation aid but also can be used for planning, feasibility, 
predictive tests for failures and potential issues, and risk 
assessments. Data collection for point cloud modeling 
can be done using LiDAR, laser scanning, photogram￾metry, or videogrammetry. Laser scanning or LiDAR is 
the most accurate point cloud data collection method as 
it is automated and has high remarkable accuracy and 
resolution. Collecting 3D data when assembling modu￾lar units can help identify issues with the modules during 
fabrication and assemblies of the modules (Nahangi and 
Haas, 2016). Accurate 3D points are collected via photos 
and laser scanning of the modules and generate point 
cloud models (Nahangi and Haas,  2016). An example 
of such data collection from an actual “structural frame 
and pipe spools” module and the subsequent point cloud 
model generated from 3D data collected from laser scan￾ning is shown in Figures 13.2 (a) and (b).
(a) (b)
Figure 13.2 (a) An actual module of a structural frame and pipe spools; (b) the point cloud model generated. Source: Nahangi and Haas (2016). Reproduced with 
permission of Elsevier.202 Innovative Technologies for Modularization
Another example of developing point cloud models from 
3D data collected from LiDAR on modular house projects 
is presented in Figure 13.3.
Table 13.2 summarizes the comparison among five dif￾ferent data acquisition approaches to the 3D point cloud 
in terms of equipment costs, measurement accuracy, 
maximum measurement range, and example of equip￾ment. The users may select the appropriate approach 
depending on the budget, purpose of use, and size and 
complexity of modules. Obviously, the more accurate, the 
higher the cost.
13.3.2.2 Monitoring Sensors
A combination of different sensors can be used to aid mod￾ule lifting and transportation in projects. For example, such 
a monitoring system could include cameras and sensors 
(such as 360° high-resolution VR cameras), dash cam￾eras, impact recorders, and data loggers. These sensors 
will collect numerical and visual data. By combining sen￾sor use and locations, impact and damage during module 
lifting and transportation can be monitored. Figure  13.4 
shows an example of visual and numerical data collected 
by 360° high-resolution VR cameras, dash cameras, and 
impact recorders during module transportation and lifting.
13.3.3 Robotics and Automation
Robots are predominantly used in the manufactur￾ing sector, where the robot can be relatively stationary 
and the work brought to the robot. The use of robotics 
in such production has been proven to reduce costs, 
save time, improve quality, and reduce risks. Similar ben￾efits could be seen in the modular construction industry. 
Unfortunately, robotics is not implemented widely in the 
construction industry, mainly due to the challenges of 
getting the work to the robot and the general nature of 
the construction industry’s one-off uniqueness.
However, in modular construction, robotics can be used 
to produce, assemble, and install modules on a large 
Figure 13.3 Point cloud models generated from 3D data collected from LiDAR of 
modular house projects.
Table 13.2 Comparison between different point cloud data acquisition approaches.
Approach Equipment cose Measurement accuracy Maximum meas￾urement range
Examples of equipment
3D laser 
scanning (TLS)
50,000–100,000 USD 1–10 mm [57–60] 70–1000 m [57–60] FARO TLS [18, 20, 28, 30, 34, 61–65], 
Leica ScanStation [11, 12, 32, 66–71], 
Trimble GX [31, 72, 73], RIEGL TLS [74–77]
Photogrammetry 200–2000 USD Relatively 1–10% (usually 
10–100 mm) [78–84)
No specific maximum range, 
but usually within 50 m to 
ensure reasonable accuracy
Digital camera [78–80, Single-Lens Reflex 
camera such as Canon EOS 10D [81, 82], 
Nikon D-80 [83], Nikon D-800E [84], Rol￾lei 6006 [85]
Videogrammetry 200–2000 USD 5–60 mm [49, 86] No specific maximum range, 
but usually within 50 m to 
ensure reasonable accuracy
Stereo camera set with two Microsoft Lif￾eCam NX-6000 web cameras [49], Canon 
Vixia HF S100 [86]
RGB-D camera ~150 USD [87] Relatively 1–6%, absolutely 
7–36 mm [51]
4 m [88] Microsoft Kinect [50–53]
Stereo camera ~3500 USD [89] 1.25% of range [54] No specific maximum range, 
but usually within 50 m to 
ensure reasonable accuracy
Bumblebee® XB3 stereo vision system [54]
Source: Wang, Tan and Mei (2020). Reproduced with permission of Springer.13.3 Technologies of Interest 203
scale as more standardized designs and standardized 
modules are developed. In particular, robotics and auto￾mation technologies can
1. improve quality by reducing human errors;
2. substantially increase the speed of fabrication and as￾sembly of modules.
Automation needs to be incorporated into the design, 
data exchange, and interoperability between different 
phases in the lifecycle of the project, supply chain, and 
materials management to garner cost benefits, con￾tinuous and efficient exchange of information, and a 
streamlined supply of materials and finished products. 
For prefabricated modules, previously robotic arms have 
been used to fabricate concrete floors (Bock,  2004), 
produce prefabricated glass reinforced cement panels 
(Peñin et al., 1998; Pastor et al., 2001), and other items 
successfully. See Figure 13.5 for an example of robotic 
arms used for modular construction.
13.3.3.1 Cyber Computational-Physical Systems
One intriguing idea that can be implemented to sup￾port modular construction at the job site is the cyber 
computational-physical systems introduced by Yang, Pan, 
and Pan (2019). In an attempt to reduce labor at the job 
site, these authors proposed using cyber computational￾physical systems that implement automated robotic 
cranes, automatic guided vehicles, wireless charging 
systems, embedded sensor networks, patrol robots, di￾verse monitoring sensors, BIM, and cloud systems. This 
system can support lifting, transporting, and installing 
modules. Yang, Pan, and Pan (2019) claimed that these 
systems can improve safety, quality, schedule, and pro￾ductivity performance. An example of such a system is 
illustrated in Figure 13.6.
As noted, there is significant potential for improving mod￾ular projects via the utilization of modern and innovative 
technologies currently on the market. The challenge is 
in the creative way in which each of these technologies 
is identified, adjusted, and incorporated into the current 
conventional way of doing things. It is up to the current 
and next-generation industrial construction workforce to 
Figure 13.4 Example of visual and numerical data collected via sensors during module transportation.
Figure 13.5 Automation and robotics being used for modular construction. 
Source: Vasey et al. (2020) Reproduced with permission of Springer Nature 
/ CC BY 4.0.
Untitled-12 203 12/31/2022 6:10:42 AM204 Innovative Technologies for Modularization
accept the challenge and, in doing so, effectively leverage 
this technology for the improvement of our industry.
References
Bock, T. (2004) Construction Robotics and Automation: 
Past-Present-Future. In World Automation Congress, 
pp. 287–294. Available at: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/
stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=1438566&tag=1 
(Accessed: 20 March 2022).
Choi, J.O. et al. (2020) Innovative Technologies and 
Management Approaches for Facility Design 
Standardization and Modularization of Capital Projects. 
Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(5), 04020042. 
doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000805.
Chui, M. and Mischke, J. (2019) The Impact and Opportunities 
of Automation in Construction. | McKinsey. Voices on 
Infrastructure – McKinsey & Company. Available at: https://
www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our￾insights/the-impact-and-opportunities-of-automation-in￾construction (Accessed: 20 March 2022).
Construction Users Roundtable (CURT) (2020) Top 
Construction Trends for 2020. Available at: https://www
.curt.org/2020/01/07/top-construction-trends-for-2020/ 
(Accessed: 20 March 2022).
Ghimire, R. et al. (2021) Combined Application of 4D BIM 
Schedule and an Immersive Virtual Reality on a Modular 
Project: UNLV Solar Decathlon Case. International 
Journal of Industrialized Construction, 2(1), pp. 1–14. doi: 
10.29173/IJIC236.
Goodman, J. (2019) Tech 101: Digital Twins. Construction 
Dive. Available at: https://www.constructiondive.com/
news/tech-101-digital-twins/561117/ (Accessed: 
20 March 2022).
Nahangi, M. and Haas, C.T. (2016) Skeleton-Based 
Discrepancy Feedback for Automated Realignment of 
Industrial Assemblies. Automation in Construction, 61, 
pp. 147–161. doi: 10.1016/J.AUTCON.2015.10.014.
Pastor, J.M. et al. (2001) Computer-Aided Architectural Design 
Oriented to Robotized Facade Panels Manufacturing. 
Computer-Aided Civil and Infrastructure Engineering, 16(3), 
pp. 216–227. doi: 10.1111/0885-9507.00227.
Peñin, L.F. et al. (1998) Robotized Spraying of Prefabricated 
Panels. IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine, 5(3), 
pp. 18–28. doi: 10.1109/100.728220.
Snide, T.A., Harriman, M., and Schneider, E. (2019) Digital Twin 
Concept as Applied to Industrial Automation. In 
industrial ethernet book. Available at: https://iebmedia.com/
technology/industrial-ethernet/digital-twin-concept-as￾applied-to-industrial-automation/ (Accessed: 
20 March 2022).
Vasey, L. et al. (2020) Physically Distributed Multi-Robot 
Coordination and Collaboration in Construction. 
Construction Robotics, 4(1), pp. 3–18. doi: 10.1007/
S41693-020-00031-Y.
Figure 13.6 Cyber computational-physical system for modular construction. Source: Yang et al. (2019) / Reproduced with permission of Elsevier.
Untitled-12 204 12/31/2022 6:10:42 AMReferences 205
Wang, Q., Tan, Y., and Mei, Z. (2020) Computational Methods 
of Acquisition and Processing of 3D Point Cloud Data 
for Construction Applications. Archives of Computational 
Methods in Engineering, 27(2), pp. 479–499. doi: 10.1007/
S11831-019-09320-4/TABLES/6.
Yang, Y., Pan, M., and Pan, W. (2019) “Co-Evolution Through 
Interaction” of Innovative Building Technologies: The 
Case of Modular Integrated Construction and Robotics. 
Automation in Construction, 107, 102932. doi: 10.1016/J.
AUTCON.2019.102932.chapter 14
207
14.1 What’s Next?
Hopefully, you got to the end of this publication and im￾mediately started looking for the sequel. But, in case that 
was not your first thoughts, this chapter is dedicated to a 
semi-formal wrap-up of the philosophy driving the book 
along with some “thought-provoking thoughts” on where 
we as an industry might spend our time and energy in 
pursuit of a better tomorrow.
With respect to the specific topics covered on industrial 
modularization, the path and sequencing of the book 
made perfect sense to us . . . for some of you, perhaps 
not so much. We tried to walk the thin line of covering 
basic concepts as well as providing a logical path forward 
supported by results from research-oriented studies, and 
all the while “waxing eloquent” on industry-specific initia￾tives that we found potentially promising.
14.2 So, What Did We Get Out of This?
Besides the not-so-important fact that we (the two au￾thors) proved we could develop such a body of knowl￾edge, we both also actually grew in our understanding 
of our subject. After all, it is hard to write this much 
about a subject we have lived with over a large portion 
of our working careers and not re-examine personal ex￾periences in the light of both the projects themselves 
and the historical context in which these projects were 
implemented. The obvious result of this project-by￾project re-hash of information was a lot of “20/20 hind￾sight” and “armchair quarterbacking” (second-guessing) 
on how they might have been executed “better.” The 
result (we hope) provided some effective and useful pro￾ject guidance developed by combining industry research 
results with personal experiences derived from “boots on 
the ground.” Our aim was that this combination would 
provide at least one potential path of least resistance for 
how a project team might navigate through the numer￾ous alternatives presented by the modular option as the 
various project phases developed.
14.3 What Did You Get Out of This?
Besides a long-winded, somewhat twisted approach to 
some of the topics and potentially a stiff neck and eye 
strain if you tried reading too much at one sitting, we 
hope our discussions and examples provided a logical 
journey of sorts – from basic module definitions, to early 
analysis tools and concepts, to actual steps and exam￾ples, of how to approach and execute a module project.
We expect that not all chapters were of equal value to 
you. We also expect you did not agree with some of the 
ideas and concepts stated. But we do hope that you 
were able to see past our methods on the approach and 
over-simplified examples to the reasons and conclusions 
behind them.
Much of the book can be summed up as an exhaustive 
explanation of what “good and proper project planning” 
should be. As such, we hope it has provided some guid￾ance on the proper planning of a modular study or modu￾lar project.
Moving Forward208 Moving Forward
14.4 Suggested Future Actions: 
Our Seven Industrial Modularization 
Accelerators
We would be remiss if we did not provide our vision of 
the future. And, like the lessons learned by Scrooge in 
Charles Dickens’ A Christmas Carol, our industry is tied 
to the past, but its future depends on the choices we 
make now. We cannot change the past, but we can learn 
from it, save the better parts for re-use, and make sure 
that we do not repeat the rest.
So here are our Seven Industrial Modularization 
Accelerators, which, if implemented, are what we think 
will make the future a more module-friendly world:
1. Applied knowledge
2. A different academic teaching approach
3. Identify, acknowledge, and incorporate required para￾digm shifts
4. Friendly contracting
5. Industry re-branding (or making the industry sexy, 
again)
6. More alliances and research
7. Planning techniques and their combinations.
14.4.1 Applied Knowledge
Considered by us to be the most important “success 
factor.” Out of all the critical success factors mentioned 
throughout these discussions (e.g., module envelope 
limitation, alignment on drivers, timely design freeze, 
module fabricator and/or contractor’s capability, etc.), 
understanding (all) the differences in planning 
and execution for modular construction compared 
to the traditional stick-built approach is the biggest. It 
sounds simple and obvious, but as always, the devil 
is in the details. As referenced by the first line of this 
book’s introduction, there are so many aspects of a 
modular project that need to be planned and executed 
differently that without a thorough understanding of 
them all, failure is more likely than not. This is evi￾denced by the many poorly executed modular projects 
that lie strewn about the historical industrial construc￾tion landscape.
So, how does one develop and implement such an 
“understanding?”
Read our book, commit it to memory, and execute as 
described. OK, a bit pompous on our part, but consider 
that one only gets really good at something that one puts 
a lot of effort into in terms of research, study, and practi￾cal application. The same is true of executing the modu￾lar philosophy. One gets out of it what one puts into it. 
Further, to take this philosophy and actually incorporate 
it into a modular project, a group (team) of like-minded 
individuals is required. And for this group to function as a 
cohesive team, they all must be truly interested in pursu￾ing and reaching the same common goal––in this case, 
alternative concepts to stick-building.
This will require a little extra effort from all team members 
that may not be achieved by simply working “9 to 5.” Each 
should be interested in achieving the goal to the point that 
it becomes a driving force that compels them to inquire/
study/practice/play/critique/improve and repeat. But that 
alone is not enough. It becomes very important that this 
team be provided the tools needed in terms of back￾ground knowledge, not only of the modular philosophy 
itself, but also of all the peripheral supporting roles and 
technical support required to make it a success. In addi￾tion, it is important that there are identified leaders within 
company management (champions of the process) who 
will embrace the philosophy strongly enough to support 
these teams and technical experts, both in terms of ac￾knowledgments as well as required company resources.
The result, hopefully, is a highly motivated team sup￾ported by a company management that will consider 
and help modify current paradigms and company pro￾cedures to make these necessary adjustments to project 
implementation.
14.4.2 A Different Academic Teaching Approach
Training for the generation of individuals who will make 
such quantum changes like modularization and stand￾ardization must start early. It begins where youth are en￾couraged to be inquisitive, work for a common goal, be 
team-oriented, open-minded, willing to try something dif￾ferent, and willing to accept failure as a necessary part of 
learning. These ideals must be further reinforced in early 
schooling, where students are encouraged and even 14.4 SUGGESTED FUTURE ACTIONS: OUR SEVEN INDUSTRIAL MODULARIZATION 209
challenged to consider alternative solutions while concur￾rently being taught to understand the basics.
This alternative “out of the box” thinking should become 
an integral part of their psyche, to the point that by the 
time they reach high school and college, they are search￾ing for specific educational challenges from whatever 
fields of interest the students are involved with. In this 
case, we would hope it would be something to do with 
modular and standardization philosophy. But such chal￾lenges will only take form and continue in an educational 
environment that combines the standard historic aca￾demic teaching with an up-to-date, hands-on approach 
to learning provided by industry.
Academia must strive to provide more practical applica￾tions for the students. This means incorporating more 
industry experts into the teaching process who have 
actually worked day-to-day in these sectors. It means 
bringing the teaching “to life” and making it real.
14.4.3 Identify, Acknowledge, and Incorporate 
Required Paradigm Shifts
These are critical in so many aspects of our industry on 
so many levels. An industry either adapts or dies. Change 
is critical to success. For example, consider a few of the 
following changes with respect to our industry:
• Stick-built to Modular to Standardized to Modular 
Standardized Project (MSP)
• Analog to Digital
• Sketches to Drawings to Photos to Point Cloud repre￾sentations to Digital Twin
• 2D schematics to 3D models to 4D (time) to 5D (cost) to 
6D (lifecycle) to NextD?
• Individual databases to Blockchain.
And the list goes on. But, as we have lamented, our 
particular industry has not kept up with our buddies in 
manufacturing and other related industries in terms of 
incorporating true technology breakthroughs. This was 
mentioned in Chapter  1, where we briefly touched on 
the automobile, aircraft, and shipbuilding industries and 
how they reacted to difficulties in their industry and trans￾formed themselves to grow. Our industry must follow a 
similar transition to survive.
14.4.3.1 Stick-Built to Modular to Standardized
As an example, it should start with a shift in the initial 
approach to industrial project development. Just like the 
current concept shift that is occurring from developing a 
project based on a stick-built philosophy to one that is 
based on a modular philosophy, the industry now needs 
to make the next shift from customization as a base case 
to the use of the standardization planning as the base 
case. And, only when the avenues for standardization 
have been exhausted, should a project fall back on the 
current modus operandi of customization for everything, 
just as only when all avenues for modularization have 
been exhausted should the project drop back to a stick￾built philosophy.
There are corporate constraints with adopting such an 
approach. It will take a strong management lead from the 
owner/client initially to make this shift in project philoso￾phy a reality. And, with many EPC firms’ profits tied to 
the simple sale of engineering and other project execu￾tion work-hours, this philosophy shift may directly impact 
profits. So, for this industry shift to truly be incorporated 
and take hold, the direct tie of profits to work-hours sold 
must be broken, and the hole created by these lost prof￾its be filled by the benefits derived from creative contract￾ing, profit and risk sharing, liability waivers, etc., to keep 
these companies whole while advancing our industry to￾ward this next step-change. This brings us to the next 
accelerator.
14.4.4 Friendly Contracting
Sounds a bit like a paradox or oxymoron. But, as the au￾thors have seen, some of the best examples of success￾ful projects are where extra steps were taken to move 
away from the traditional “he said/she said” language of a 
transactional driven contract to a more inclusive sharing 
of both risk and reward.
CII RT-341 (Construction Industry Institute,  2019) and 
(Barutha et  al.,  2021) provide a great pathway on this 
topic. The research paper by the CII shows a comparison 
of where our industry currently is (bi-lateral contracts, risk 
transfer, hierarchical decision-making, win-lose approach, 
and “best for me” culture) to where the best future exists 
(relational contracting, multi-party agreements, shared 
risk/reward, equitable decision-making, lean methods 
and tools, liabilities waiver, and “best for project” culture) 210 Moving Forward
(Construction Industry Institute, 2019). Through extensive 
research, they found that the performance certainty of in￾dustrial projects is improved by a higher degree of collab￾oration and integration and demonstrated that industrial 
projects could also benefit from a more integrated project 
delivery (IPD) method (Barutha et al., 2021).
Friendly contracting is not just a simple contracting strat￾egy re-vamp. It involves shifting from a “me” world to a 
“we” world, from win-lose to equitable treatment to all, 
from risk transfer to risk sharing. This goes beyond a 
simple contract document, requiring an overall company 
program shift and from there to an overall industry shift.
14.4.5 Industry Re-branding (or Making the 
Industry Sexy, Again)
If there is one constant about this industry, it is the fact 
that it is cyclical and ever-changing. The industry has 
fallen in and out of favor numerous times, several just 
in our lifetime. Pick any 5- to 10-year period, and one 
can find both periods of high craft demands for heavy 
(industrial) construction and the accompanying increased 
activity within the oil and chemicals industries followed by 
periods where very few major capital projects were being 
pursued, resulting in the mass exodus of craft labor from 
the industry.
As we move into the future, the concern is that it seems to 
be getting harder to ramp back up after each downturn. 
Skilled craft labor (welders, pipefitters, etc.) has been and 
continues to be in demand and is immediately incorpo￾rated into the industry as it becomes available. This is 
good in terms of providing challenges to those who want 
to make a career in the industry through a skilled craft. 
But, this craft has also become more specialized, mak￾ing it more difficult to replace any experience that leaves 
through retirement or reduction in force. In addition, the 
industry seems to be seeing fewer young people actually 
choosing these crafts as a profession.
So, what can be done?
14.4.5.1 Education and Learning
First, properly support and encourage the education in 
and learning of these craft skills. We are starting to see 
renewed efforts, not only from our industry but by the 
technical crafts themselves, to publicize the benefits of 
the craft ladder as a profession and a good alternative 
to the academic university and college route. This should 
continue to be stressed. These skills have been and will 
continue to be in high demand. We need to make sure 
that they are not trivialized by the glamor of the college 
degree, which for many individuals ends up being no 
more than trying to fit the expensive square peg of learn￾ing into the round hole of a useful application.
14.4.5.2 Innovative Technologies
Second, technology applications supporting these large 
industry projects need to be emphasized and pushed. 
Concepts like Blockchain or Digital Twins or Generative 
Design or Machine Learning are now realities. It takes 
only a second to see the success in terms of sales in 
the multitude of gaming platforms developed around the 
themes of “building” anything and everything and the 
interest that younger people have in them. Why can’t 
these same successful gaming concepts be combined 
and incorporated into the industry technology? What if 
we could make the development of the industrial 3D and 
4D models as exciting for the users as these games? We 
have already seen major plant modeling go from repre￾sentations of two-dimensional piping drawings as hand￾made plastic modules, to various levels of complexity in 
electronic 3D modeling, to where we can now merge the 
3D model with the on-site plant via point clouds of dimen￾sional data with an accuracy that allows tie-in spools to 
be designed and fabricated. So, what about similar step 
changes in other areas?
Sure, some of this developing technology is currently 
ongoing in colleges and universities, e.g., see Choi’s 
example efforts here (Choi, 2018; Ghimire et al., 2021; 
Kithas and Choi, 2022). But, as mentioned in the train￾ing enabler, such concept development thinking should 
be started much earlier, for example, in the elementary, 
junior high, and high school curriculums. The key to this is 
simple––make the subject interesting and entertaining to 
the students and then turn them loose to go and create.
Same thing with industry workers. It can start with a truly 
engaged workforce (that may or may not be college￾trained or prepped) who have the ability to combine 
BOTH an idea of what is possible with an accurate un￾derstanding of how the industry is currently operating and 
the freedom provided by their management to challenge 
the status quo.14.4 SUGGESTED FUTURE ACTIONS: OUR SEVEN INDUSTRIAL MODULARIZATION 211
14.4.5.3 More Diverse and Inclusive Environments
As we move into the future, the construction industry 
needs to put more effort into creating more diverse and 
inclusive environments. The industry is suffering from la￾bor shortage problems and experiencing challenges in 
recruiting and retaining skilled craft laborers. In particular, 
compared to other industries, the construction indus￾try has low interest and participation from underrepre￾sented demographic groups, including women (Choi 
et al., 2018; Manesh et al., 2020; Shrestha et al., 2020). 
Modularization can help the industry attract a more di￾verse workforce. As we explained in Chapter 2, the typical 
module fabrication shop provides an attractive alternative 
to the historical site work regimen. Workers are provided 
with a more standard work week, job security, set ben￾efits, a safe place to work and hone their skills, and less 
commuting time (resulting in more time with family and a 
healthier work/lifestyle split of their time).
However, such enticements may still not be enough. The 
industry needs to create more diverse and inclusive en￾vironments, including removing discrimination, inequality, 
inequity, bias, segregation, and barriers in workplaces 
(Choi, Shane, and Chih, 2022). Additional information 
can be found in Dr. Choi’s papers on enhancing diver￾sity and inclusion in the engineering-construction industry 
(Choi et al., 2018; Manesh et al., 2020; Manesh, Choi, 
and Shrestha, 2020; Shrestha et al., 2020; Choi, Shane, 
and Chih, 2022).
The potential of combining cutting-edge technology with 
a craft skill that one can hone via the relatively constant 
workload provided by the module fabrication facility, pro￾vides a great opportunity for the craft worker, regardless 
of their physical size, ethnicity, or background. These op￾portunities should be promoted at all levels of education 
as well as in-house industry training programs.
14.4.6 More Alliances and Research
Alliances between academia and industry must be further 
identified, developed, and pursued. Like those of years 
past, the groups from private industry and academic in￾stitutions must continue to work together to solve prob￾lems greater than both by combining evolving research 
with existing industry know-how. Academia can provide 
cutting-edge research but needs direction on where and 
how such research can be implemented to provide the 
greatest impact. Industry can identify issues, what is 
needed, and where it would be best received but may 
lack the resources to develop research study efforts in￾dividually and resolve them. Together, however, they can 
identify the need and find solutions for industry problems 
that will be useful and practical enough to be incorpo￾rated into the current working mechanisms of the indi￾vidual corporate company’s business model.
While our universities still receive “grants” and other finan￾cial support to perform some of this cutting-edge devel￾opment, they really need to get back to the more historic 
alliances developed between industry and research or 
industry and government or designers and application 
experts, etc. These were historically very successful be￾cause such alliances had the dual goal of developing 
state-of-the-art technologies that were designed to cor￾rect or fix a specific industry problem or challenge. The 
result was an answer to an industry-wide problem that no 
individual company had the resources to address or fix.
To get this moving, it needs the corporate heads of indus￾try to embrace it. To do so, our industry needs to get back 
into a position where all companies have what the typi￾cal family would have called “disposable income.” Income 
that is available to research, teach, train, try, retry, fail, but 
eventually succeed on either developing or at least incor￾porating this new and cutting-edge technology. Our indus￾try needs to get back to the higher level of research efforts 
they previously supported, both internally and externally.
14.4.7 Planning Techniques and Their 
Combinations
The aim of this accelerator is to move away from the tra￾ditional methods of planning where older tools used are 
selected based on their historic use in the industry and 
where newer tools are implemented based on how they 
are perceived to function without proper practical testing, 
with both efforts resulting in planning tools that must be 
forced into a planning situation where they may not fit.
By developing a better understanding of the bases for 
all the various planning concepts, there is a potential op￾portunity of creating new or unique planning concepts 
form-fitted to our industry, perhaps as simple as selecting 
“pieces” of each of several tools and combining them to 
meet specific needs.212 Moving Forward
There are so many variations on the planning theme 
(Collaborative / Interactive/Effective Interfacing/LEAN/Path 
of Construction/Path of Engineering Design/Last Planner/
Bag & Tag/Advanced Work Packaging (AWP) and all its 
derivatives) that trying to select a single specific planning 
tool or effort that is best for a project could be a mind￾boggling effort. And just as the shipping industry ended 
up developing the unique Interim Product Database con￾cept as an answer to their specific industry issues on how 
they would mix and match large pieces of pre-designed 
vessel parts, our industry may also need to examine what 
the issues are in terms of cost and planning and see if 
there needs to be a planning technique that might be a 
unique fit for it. But, in order to develop such a custom￾fitted solution, there must be wider knowledge in terms of 
understanding the bases of all of these concepts at a level 
where the owner/clients and EPC companies can begin 
considering a solution that may mix and match parts of 
them to come up with such a better planning tool.
We will not try to predict what such a composite plan￾ning tool might look like for this industry (our crystal ball is 
not that good)! It may be something completely new, or 
it may simply introduce a unique addition to an existing 
planning tool to produce this step change. Who knows? 
But it cannot move forward until a broader effort is made 
at understanding what the planning issues are and what 
is out there as a resource.
14.5 The End or the Beginning?
This is the end of our prepared thoughts. But hopefully, 
this will be the beginning of yours.
Thanks for the opportunity to allow us to try to influence 
you.
References
Barutha, P.J. et al. (2021) Evaluation of the Impact of 
Collaboration and Integration on Performance of Industrial 
Projects. Journal of Management in Engineering, 37(4), 
04021037. doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000921.
Choi, J.O. (2018) A New Graduate Course on Modular 
Construction: University of Nevada, Las Vegas. In 
2018 Modular and Offsite Construction (MOC) Summit. 
Hollywood, FL, p. 8.
Choi, J.O. et al. (2018) An Investigation of Construction 
Workforce Inequalities and Biases in the Architecture, 
Engineering, and Construction (AEC) Industry. In 
Construction Research Congress (CRC) 2018. Reston, VA: 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE).
Choi, J.O., Shane, J.S. and Chih, Y.Y. (2022) Diversity and 
Inclusion in the Engineering-Construction Industry. Journal 
of Management in Engineering, 38(2), 02021002. doi: 
10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0001005.
Construction Industry Institute (2019) FR-341 – Integrated 
Project Delivery for Industrial Projects. Austin, TX: The 
University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry 
Institute. Available at: https://www.construction-institute
.org/resources/knowledgebase/knowledge-areas/
project-program-management/topics/rt-341/pubs/fr-341.
Ghimire, R. et al. (2021) Combined Application of 4D BIM 
Schedule and an Immersive Virtual Reality on a Modular 
Project: UNLV Solar Decathlon Case. International 
Journal of Industrialized Construction, 2(1), 1–14. doi: 
10.29173/IJIC236.
Kithas, K.A. and Choi, J.O. (2022) Hands-on Education 
Module for Modular Construction, 3D Design, and 4D 
Schedule. In International Conference on Construction 
Engineering and Project Management (ICCEPM) 2022. Las 
Vegas, NV, p. 8.
Manesh, S.N. et al. (2020) Spatial Analysis of the Gender 
Wage Gap in Architecture, Civil Engineering, and 
Construction Occupations in the United States. Journal 
of Management in Engineering, 36(4), 04020023. doi: 
10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000780.
Manesh, S.N., Choi, J.O., and Shrestha, P. (2020) Critical 
Literature Review on the Diversity and Inclusion of Women 
and Ethnic Minorities in Construction and Civil Engineering 
Industry and Education. In Construction Research 
Congress 2020: Safety, Workforce, and Education – 
Selected Papers from the Construction Research Congress 
2020, pp. 175–184. doi: 10.1061/9780784482872.020.
Shrestha, B.K. et al. (2020) Employment and Wage Distribution 
Investigation in the Construction Industry by Gender. 
Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(4), 06020001. 
doi: 10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000778.chapter 15
213
As a follow-up to the future actions discussed in Chapter 
14, this chapter recommends some useful reports, tools, 
and academic papers on modularization and design stan￾dardization––many of which were referenced at one time 
or the other in the preceding chapters.
15.1 Key Literature from Construction 
Industry Institute (CII) and Dr. Choi
The Construction Industry Institute (CII), “based at the 
University of Texas at Austin, is a consortium of more 
than 140  leading owner, engineering-contractor, and 
supplier firms from both the public and private arenas” 
(Construction Industry Institute, 2022). CII has been a 
leader in improving the construction industry through 
research and many initiatives. There have been five 
core research teams focused on modularization in the 
past. After Research Team (RT-283), Dr. Choi and the 
Modularization Community for Business Advancement 
(MCBA) further developed tools and conducted stud￾ies on modularization. In 2022, a new research team 
on modularization (RT-396) was established to develop 
a new Business Case Analysis Guide for Industrial 
Modularization. We have briefly introduced or summa￾rized those key literature and resources below.
15.1.1 The Constructability Task Force 83-3
The first research report on modularization was published 
in 1987 (Tatum, Vanegas and Williams, 1987), which was 
supported by CII.
Tatum, C.B., Vanegas, J.A., and Williams, J.M. (1987) 
Constructability Improvement Using Prefabrication, Preassembly, 
and Modularization. Austin, TX: The University of Texas at Austin: 
Construction Industry Institute.
This report is one of the important and key resources as 
they established the foundation of the body of knowledge 
on modularization. They have: (1) provided many key def￾initions, including prefabrication, pre-assembly, module, 
and modularization; (2) described the practices of pre￾fabrication, pre-assembly, and modularization in both 
industrial and building sectors; (3) identified key advan￾tages and barriers through multiple case projects; and 
(4) provided recommendations for effective implemen￾tation of modularization. As they set the first stone, not 
only the authors of this book but also many succeeding 
research teams adopted many of their key findings and 
definitions and referenced them. Several findings from the 
case projects are outdated as the study was conducted 
over 35 years ago, but there is still much valuable knowl￾edge that is still useful, such as key definitions.
15.1.2 Research Team 29
The second research team on modularization supported by 
CII is the following (Construction Industry Institute, 1992):
Construction Industry Institute (1992) MODEX: Automated 
Decision Support System for Modular Construction. Austin, TX: 
The University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
Key Literature and Resources 
on Modularization214 Key Literature and Resources on Modularization
The research team (RT-29) developed a tool to support 
the decision on modularization in the early phases of a 
project. However, this report is not recommended as a 
reference as the report has been archived and super￾seded by later publications, which are described below.
15.1.3 Research Team 171
The third research team (RT-171) developed a decision 
framework and an Excel judgment-based tool that help 
identify a project’s suitability for implementing modulari￾zation (Construction Industry Institute, 2002).
Construction Industry Institute (2002) Implementing the 
Prefabrication, Preassembly, Modularization, and Offsite 
Fabrication Decision Framework: Guide and Tool. Austin, TX: The 
University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
Later, the academics (Song et al., 2005) from the research 
team published a journal paper based on this research:
Song, J., Fagerlund, W.R., Haas, C.T., Tatum, C.B., and Vanegas, 
J.A. (2005) Considering Prework on Industrial Projects. 
Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 131(6), 
pp. 723–733.
The tool included a set of questions that, if responded 
to honestly, would indicate whether a particular project 
should be modular or conventional stick-built. Also, 
they were the first ones to introduce the term “PPMOF,” 
which is Prefabrication, Pre-assembly, Modularization, 
and Offsite Fabrication. The term PPMOF and their tool 
have been used and loved by the industry for a long time. 
However, there has been a complaint by the practitioners 
that the tool, including the factors and the examples in the 
tool, is outdated as it was published almost 20 years ago.
15.1.4 Research Teams 232 and 255
The fourth (RT-232; Construction Industry Institute, 2007) 
and fifth (RT-255; Construction Industry Institute, 2011) 
research teams investigated the shipbuilding industry.
Construction Industry Institute (2007) Examination of the 
Shipbuilding Industry. Austin, TX: The University of Texas at 
Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
Construction Industry Institute (2011) Transforming Modular 
Construction for the Competitive Advantage through 
the Adaptation of Shipbuilding Production Processes to 
Construction. Austin, TX: The University of Texas at Austin: 
Construction Industry Institute.
Their main recommendations to the construction in￾dustry, based on the investigation of the shipbuild￾ing industry, are transitioning from a “stick-built” to a 
“product-oriented” philosophy by implementing modu￾larization, design standardization, and the interim prod￾uct database (IPD).
15.1.5 Research Team 283
The newest CII research team was RT-283 (Construction 
Industry Institute, 2013; O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2013).
Construction Industry Institute (2013) Industrial Modularization: 
Five Solution Elements. Austin, TX: The University of Texas at 
Austin: Construction Industry Institute.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2013) Industrial 
Modularization: How to Optimize; How to Maximize. Austin, 
TX: The University of Texas at Austin: Construction Industry 
Institute.
Beyond RT-171 research, RT-283 developed 5 Solution 
Elements critical to modularization:
1. Business Case Process
2. Execution Plan Differences
3. Critical Success Factors
4. Standardization Strategy
5. Maximization Enablers.
As we mentioned in the previous chapters, the authors 
of this book were part of this research team, thus, we 
might be biased! But we believe the resulting reports and 
conclusions from CII RT-283 are the most useful in terms 
of up-to-date knowledge on industrial modularization. 
That is why we adopted and borrowed some knowl￾edge and key learnings from these reports for inclusion 
in this book:15.1 Key Literature from Construction Industry Institute (CII) and Dr. Choi 215
• Chapter  5 (The Business Case for Modularization) 
shows the influences of Solution Element #1. Business 
Case Process.
• Chapter  6 (Universal Modularization Requirements) 
shows the influences of Solution Element #2. Execution 
Plan Differences.
• Chapter  7 (Key Critical Success Factors for Modu￾lar Project Success) shows the influences of Solution 
Element #3. Critical Success Factors.
• Chapter  11 (Standardization) shows the influences of 
Solution Element #4. Standardization Strategy.
• Chapter  13 (Moving Forward: Future Actions) shows 
the influences of Solution Element #5. Maximization 
Enablers.
For practitioners, we highly recommend the reports from 
RT-283, which are available at <https://www.construction￾institute.org/resources/knowledgebase/best-practices/
planning-for-modularization/topics/rt-283 >
Later, the academics, including one of the book authors, 
published multiple academic papers (Choi and O’Connor, 
2014, 2015; O’Connor, O’Brien, and Choi, 2014, 2015, 
2016, 2017; O’Brien, O’Connor, and Choi, 2015; Choi 
et al., 2019).
Choi, J.O., and O’Connor, J.T. (2014) Modularization Critical 
Success Factors Accomplishment: Learning from Case Studies. 
In Construction Research Congress 2014, pp. 1636–1645. 
https://doi.org/10.1061/9780784413517.167.
Choi, J.O., and O’Connor, J.T. (2015) Modularization Business 
Case Analysis: Learning from Industry Practices Tool. In M. Al￾Hussein, O. Moselhi, S. Kim, and R.E. Smith (Eds.), 2015 Modular 
and Offsite Construction (MOC) Summit and 1st International 
Conference on the Industrialization of Construction (ICIC). 
Edmonton, Alberta: Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering. 
University of Alberta, pp. 69–76.
Choi, J.O., O’Connor, J.T., Kwak, Y.H., and Shrestha, B.K. 
(2019) Modularization Business Case Analysis Model for 
Industrial Projects. Journal of Management in Engineering, 
35(3), 04019004. https://doi.org/10.1061/ (ASCE)
ME.1943-5479.0000683.
O’Brien, W.J., O’Connor, J.T., and Choi, J.O. (2015) 
Modularization Business Case: Process Flowchart and Major 
Considerations. In M. Al-Hussein, O. Moselhi, S. Kim, and R.E. 
Smith (Eds.), 2015 Modular and Offsite Construction (MOC) 
Summit and 1st International Conference on the Industrialization 
of Construction (ICIC), pp. 60–67. Edmonton, Alberta: Dept. of 
Civil and Environmental Engineering. University of Alberta.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2014) Critical 
Success Factors and Enablers for Optimum and Maximum 
Industrial Modularization. Journal of Construction Engineering 
and Management, 140(6), 04014012. https://doi.org/10.1061/
(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0000842.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2015) 
Standardization Strategy for Modular Industrial Plants. Journal of 
Construction Engineering and Management, 141(9), 4015026. 
https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0001001.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2016) Industrial 
Project Execution Planning: Modularization versus Stick-Built. 
Practice Periodical on Structural Design and Construction, 
21(1), 04015014. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)
SC.1943-5576.0000270.
O’Connor, J.T., O’Brien, W.J., and Choi, J.O. (2017) 
Industry-Wide Maximization Enablers for Higher Levels 
of Modularization. In Hosin “David” Lee (Ed.), The First 
International Conference on Maintenance and Rehabilitation 
of Constructed Infrastructure Facilities (MAIREINFRA1), 
pp. 1–6. International Society for Maintenance and 
Rehabilitation of Transport Infrastructures.
These academic journal papers and conference papers 
cover in-depth literature reviews, research methodology, 
improved models and frameworks, detailed findings, 
and discussions beyond what was presented in the re￾ports. For those interested in the details, refer to the 
above papers. These papers will complement the book.
15.1.6 Dr. Choi’s Dissertation and the Follow￾up Research
After CII RT-283 research, there was a need from the 
industry to better understand the relative significance of 
modularization critical success factors (CSFs) identified 
by RT-283 and their association with performances of a 
modular project. To address this need, Dr. Choi identified 
the correlations between the CSFs’ accomplishments 
and project performance (Choi, 2014).
Choi, J.O. (2014) Links between Modularization Critical Success 
Factors and Project Performance. Ph.D. dissertation. The 
University of Texas at Austin.216 Key Literature and Resources on Modularization
After his dissertation research, Dr. Choi, with his col￾leagues, further identified the recipes for cost and sched￾ule success in modular projects (Choi, O’Connor, and 
Kim, 2016) and calibrated CII RT-283’s recommendation 
timings for CSFs (Choi et al., 2019).
Choi, J.O., O’Connor, J.T., and Kim, T.W. (2016) Recipes for 
Cost and Schedule Successes in Industrial Modular Projects: 
Qualitative Comparative Analysis. Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management, 142(10), 04016055. https://doi
.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0001171.
Choi, J.O., O’Connor, J.T., Kwak, Y.H., and Ghimire, R. (2019) 
Calibrating CII RT-283’s Modularization Critical Success 
Factor Accomplishments. Modular and Offsite Construction 
(MOC) Summit Proceedings, pp. 235–242. https://doi
.org/10.29173/MOCS99.
15.1.7 CII Modularization Community for Business 
Advancement (MCBA) Toolkit
The Modularization Community for Business Advance￾ment (MCBA) is a formal venue for the exchange of 
knowledge that is useful in planning, designing, and 
executing modularization of varying complexity on capital 
facility projects (Construction Industry Institute, 2022a). 
The authors have been supporting this group since 2013 
as chairperson or academic advisor. In 2015, MCBA, 
led by the authors, developed a toolkit that consists of 
four tools:
• Tool #1: Modularization Business Case Analysis 
Tool (.xlsx)
• Tool #2: Modular Project Execution Planning Guide (.pdf)
• Tool #3A: Intro to Modularization – Why Modularize (.ppt)
• Tool #3B: Intro to Modularization  – How to Optimize 
(RT-283 Overview) (.ppt)
• Tool #4: Critical Success Factor (CSF) Accomplishment 
Tracking Tool (.xlsx).
Their goal was to develop some practical applications of 
the research that the industry would be able to pick up and 
use. Tool #1 is an Excel-based tool that helps practitioners 
conduct module economics analysis; Tool #2, which is in￾tended as a handy reference, identifies key activities and 
considerations by project phase; Tool #3 summarizes and 
navigates RT-283 reports; and Tool #4 is an Excel score 
sheet to benchmark application of CFS. Tool #1 was ex￾plained in detail in Chapter 5. If your company is a CII mem￾ber, you can download the modularization toolkit from 
here: https://www.construction-institute.org/resources/
knowledgebase/knowledge-areas/modularization/
topics/rt-283.
15.1.8 (Ongoing) Research Team 396
Most recently, in 2022, CII launched a new research team 
(RT-396) to develop a new Business Case Analysis Guide 
for Industrial Modularization. This new research team is 
expected to develop not only: (1) a new tool that can 
determine whether a project should modularize defini￾tively and determine the optimal extent of modulariza￾tion for a given project considering new business drivers, 
but also (2) an Advanced Modularization Planning Guide 
(Construction Industry Institute, 2022b). The authors 
are also participating in this research team as Primary 
Investigator (PI) and lead. Readers are recommended to 
check the CII website for future publications from this re￾search team.
15.2 Key Research Articles on 
Modularization and Standardization 
by Dr. Choi
Dr. Choi has published over 30 publications on modu￾larization and standardization in the past 10 years, not 
only in the industrial sector but also in the building and 
civil sectors. Other than the publications listed above, we 
share the rest of the key papers for those who are inter￾ested by topic. The focus topics include:
1. New technologies and approaches for modularization 
(Lee et al., n.d.; Choi and Kim, 2019; Choi, Shrestha, 
Kwak, et  al., 2020b; Khodabandelu et  al., 2020; 
Ghimire et  al., 2021; Lee, Choi, and Song, 2022; 
Song, Choi, and Lee, 2022).
2. Modular construction in the building sector (Choi, 
Chen, and Kim, 2019; Paliwal et  al., 2021; Prestia 
et al., 2021; Choi, Lee, and Weber, 2022).
3. Modular construction for post-disaster reconstruction 
(Ghannad, Lee, and Choi, 2019, 2020, 2021; Collet￾ta, Lim, and Choi, 2021; Harris et al., 2022).15.2 KEY RESEARCH ARTICLES ON MODULARIZATION AND STANDARDIZATION 217
4. Education for modularization (Choi, 2018; Kithas and 
Choi, 2022).
5. Accelerated bridge construction (Sakhakarmi, Choi, 
and Park, 2018; Prajapati and Choi, 2019).
6. Facility standardization (Choi, Shane, et  al., 2018; 
Construction Industry Institute, 2019a, 2020; Choi, 
Shrestha, Kwak, et  al., 2020a; Choi, Shrestha, 
Shane, et  al., 2020; Shrestha, Choi, Kwak, et  al., 
2020a; Shrestha, Choi, Kwak, et  al., 2020b; Choi, 
Shrestha, Kwak et al., 2021a; 2021b; Shrestha et al., 
2021; Choi et al., 2022).
The full list of publications by topic can be found below.
15.2.1 New Technologies and Approaches 
for Modularization
Choi, J.O., and Kim, D.B. (2019) A New UAV-Based Module 
Lifting and Transporting Method: Advantages and Challenges. 
In Proceedings of the 36th International Symposium on 
Automation and Robotics in Construction, ISARC 2019, 
pp. 645–650. https://doi.org/10.22260/isarc2019/0086.
Choi, J.O., Kwak, Y.H., Shane, J.S., and Shrestha, B.K. 
(2019) Identifying Potential Innovative Technologies and 
Management Approaches for Design Standardization. 
In Computing in Civil Engineering 2019: Visualization, 
Information Modeling, and Simulation – Selected Papers 
from the ASCE International Conference on Computing in 
Civil Engineering 2019, pp. 256–263. https://doi
.org/10.1061/9780784482421.033.
Choi, J.O., Shrestha, B.K., Kwak, Y.H., and Shane, J.S. (2020) 
Innovative Technologies and Management Approaches 
for Facility Design Standardization and Modularization of 
Capital Projects. Journal of Management in Engineering, 
36(5), 04020042. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)
ME.1943-5479.0000805.
Ghimire, R., Lee, S., Choi, J.O., Lee, J.-Y., and Lee, Y.-C. 
(2021) Combined Application of 4D BIM Schedule and 
an Immersive Virtual Reality on a Modular Project: UNLV 
Solar Decathlon Case. International Journal of 
Industrialized Construction, 2(1), 1–14. https://doi
.org/10.29173/IJIC236.
Khodabandelu, A., Choi, J.O., Park, J., and Sanei, M. (2020) 
Developing a Simulation Model for Lifting a Modular House. 
In Construction Research Congress 2020: Computer 
Applications: Selected Papers from the Construction 
Research Congress 2020, pp. 145–152. https://doi
.org/10.1061/9780784482865.016.
Lee, D., Wen, L., Choi, J., and Lee, S. (2023) Sensor Integrated 
Hybrid Blockchain System for Supply Chain Coordination 
in Volumetric Modular Construction. ASCE Journal of 
Construction Engineering and Management,149(1). https://
doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CO.1943-7862.0002427.
Lee, S., Choi, J.O., and Song, S. (2022) Cutting-Edge 
Technologies to Achieve a Higher Level of Modular 
Construction: Literature Review. In Proceedings of 
International Conference on Construction Engineering and 
Project Management (ICCEPM) 2022, pp. 536–542.
Song, S., Choi, J.O., and Lee, S. (2022) The Current State 
and Future Directions of Industrial Robotic Arms in Modular 
Construction. In Proceedings of International Conference 
on Construction Engineering and Project Management 
(ICCEPM) 2022, pp. 336–343.
15.2.2 Modular Construction in the Building Sector
Choi, J.O., Chen, X.B., and Kim, T.W. (2019) Opportunities and 
Challenges of Modular Methods in Dense Urban Environment. 
International Journal of Construction Management, 19(2), 
pp. 93–105. https://doi.org/10.1080/15623599
.2017.1382093.
Choi, J.O., Lee, S., and Weber, E. (2022) Lessons Learned 
during the Early Phases of a Modular Project: A Case Study 
of UNLV’s Solar Decathlon 2020 Project. In Proceedings of 
International Conference on Construction Engineering and 
Project Management (ICCEPM) 2022, pp. 543–550.
Paliwal, S., Choi, J.O., Bristow, J., Chatfield, H.K., and Lee, S. 
(2021) Construction Stakeholders’ Perceived Benefits and 
Barriers for Environment-Friendly Modular Construction 
in a Hospitality Centric Environment. International Journal 
of Industrialized Construction, 2(1), pp.15–29. https://doi
.org/10.29173/IJIC252.
Prestia, J., Choi, J.O., Lee, S., and James, D. (2021) Lessons 
Learned from UNLV’s Solar Decathlon 2017 Competition 
Experience: Design and Construction of a Modular House. 
In Proceedings of the Canadian Society of Civil Engineering 
Annual Conference 2021, pp. 565–575.
15.2.3 Modular Construction for Post-­Disaster 
Reconstruction
Colletta, A., Lim, J., and Choi, J.O. (2021) Review of 
Infrastructure Resiliency Policy for Natural Disasters. In 
Proceedings of the Canadian Society of Civil Engineering 
Annual Conference 2021, pp. 637–648.
Ghannad, P., Lee, Y.-C., and Choi, J.O. (2019) Investigating 
Stakeholders’ Perceptions of Feasibility and Implications 218 Key Literature and Resources on Modularization
of Modular Construction-Based Post-Disaster 
Reconstruction. In Modular and Offsite Construction 
(MOC) Summit Proceedings, pp. 504–513. https://doi
.org/10.29173/MOCS132.
Ghannad, P., Lee, Y.-C., and Choi, J.O. (2020) Feasibility 
and Implications of the Modular Construction Approach 
for Rapid Post-Disaster Recovery. International Journal of 
Industrialized Construction, 1(1), pp. 64–75. https://doi
.org/10.29173/IJIC220.
Ghannad, P., Lee, Y.-C., and Choi, J.O. (2021) Prioritizing 
Postdisaster Recovery of Transportation Infrastructure 
Systems Using Multiagent Reinforcement Learning. Journal 
of Management in Engineering, 37(1), 04020100. https://
doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000868.
Harris, W., Choi, J.O., Lim, J., and Lee, Y.-C. (2022) Long￾Term Wildfire Reconstruction: In Need of Focused 
and Dedicated Pre-Planning Efforts. In Proceedings of 
International Conference on Construction Engineering and 
Project Management (ICCEPM) 2022, pp. 923–928.
15.2.4 Education for Modularization
Choi, J.O. (2018) A New Graduate Course on Modular 
Construction: University of Nevada, Las Vegas. In 
Proceedings of the 2018 Modular and Offsite Construction 
Summit, pp. 125–132. https://doi.org/10.29173/mocs48.
Kithas, K.A., and Choi, J.O. (2022) LEGO Education Module for 
Modular Construction and 4D Scheduling. In Proceedings of 
International Conference on Construction Engineering and 
Project Management (ICCEPM) 2022, pp. 484–491.
15.2.5 Accelerated Bridge Construction
Prajapati, E., and Choi, J.O. (2019) A Pilot Study of 
Identifying Execution Plan Differences for Accelerated 
Bridge Construction. In Modular and Offsite Construction 
(MOC) Summit Proceedings, pp. 198–205. https://doi
.org/10.29173/MOCS94.
Sakhakarmi, S., Choi, J.O., and Park, J. (2018) Business 
Case Process for Accelerated Bridge Construction. In 
Proceedings of International Road Federation Global R2T 
Conference and Expo, pp. 705–711.
15.2.6 Facility Standardization
Choi, J.O., Shane, J.S., Kwak, Y., and Shrestha, B. (2018) 
Achieving Higher Levels of Facility Design Standardization in 
the Upstream, Midstream, and Mining Commodity Sector: 
Barriers and Challenges. In Proceedings of Construction 
Research Congress (CRC) 2018, pp. 278–287.
Choi, J.O., Shrestha, B.K., Kwak, Y.H., and Shane, J.S. (2020) 
Critical Success Factors and Enablers for Facility Design 
Standardization of Capital Projects. Journal of Management 
in Engineering, 36(5), 04020048. https://doi
.org/10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000788.
Choi, J.O., Shrestha, B.K., Kwak, Y.H., and Shane, J. 
(2021a) Exploring the Benefits and Trade-Offs of Design 
Standardization in Capital Projects. Engineering, Construction 
and Architectural Management, 29(3), pp. 1169–1193. 
https://doi.org/10.1108/ECAM-08-2020-0661.
Choi, J.O., Shrestha, B.K., Kwak, Y.H., and Shane, J. 
(2021b) Facility Design Standardization Work Process and 
Optimization in Capital Projects. In Proceedings of the 
Canadian Society of Civil Engineering Annual Conference 
2021, pp. 491–503.
Choi, J.O., Shrestha, B.K., Shane, J.S., and Kwak, Y.H. (2020) 
Facility Design Standardization Decision-Making Model 
for Industrial Facilities and Capital Projects. Journal of 
Management in Engineering, 36(6), 04020077. https://doi.
org/10.1061/(asce)me.1943-5479.0000842.
Choi, J.O, Shrestha, B.K., Song, S., Shane, J.S, and Kwak, 
Y.H. (2022) Facility Design Standardization: Six Solution 
Pieces and Industry Maximization Enablers. In Proceedings 
of Construction Research Congress (CRC) 2022, 
pp. 715–723.
Construction Industry Institute (2019) Achieving Higher Levels 
of Facility Standardization in the Upstream, Midstream, 
and Mining (UMM) Commodity Market. Volume 1: Four 
Solution Pieces. https://www.construction-institute
.org/resources/knowledgebase/knowledge-areas/
project-program-management/topics/rt-umm-01.
Construction Industry Institute (2020) Achieving Higher Levels 
of Facility Standardization in the Upstream, Midstream, and 
Mining (UMM) Commodity Market. Volume 2: Business 
Case Analysis Model and Work Process. https://www
.construction-institute.org/resources/knowledgebase/
knowledge-areas/project-program-management/topics/
rt-umm-01.
Shrestha, B.K., Choi, J.O., Kwak, Y.H., and Shane, 
J.S. (2020a) Timings of Accomplishments for Facility 
Design Standardization Critical Success Factors in 
Capital Projects. In Construction Research Congress 
2020: Project Management and Controls, Materials, 
and Contracts: Selected Papers from the Construction 
Research Congress 2020, pp. 898–906. https://doi
.org/10.1061/9780784482889.095.Shrestha, B.K., Choi, J.O., Kwak, Y.H., and Shane, J.S. 
(2020b) How Design Standardization CSFs Can Impact 
Project Performance of Capital Projects. Journal of 
Management in Engineering, 36(4), 06020003. https://doi
.org/10.1061/(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000792.
Shrestha, B.K., Choi, J.O., Kwak, Y.H., and Shane, 
J.S. (2021) Recipes for Standardized Capital Projects’ 
Performance Success. Journal of Management in 
Engineering, 37(4), 04021029. https://doi.org/10.1061/
(ASCE)ME.1943-5479.0000926.
15.2 KEY RESEARCH ARTICLES ON MODULARIZATION AND STANDARDIZATION 219221
ABBREVIATIONS
Abbreviations 
and Acronyms Full Form
3D three-dimensional
ACCE Aspen Capital Cost Estimator
AI artificial intelligence
AIWR all-in wage rate
ANSI American National 
Standards Institute
API American Petroleum Institute
AR augmented reality
AWP advanced work packaging
BD business development
BFD block flow diagram
BIM building information modeling
BOP blowout preventer
CII construction industry institute
CMT construction management team
COG/C of G center of gravity
Comm commissioning
connex box container (express) box
COOEC China Offshore Oil 
Engineering Co., Ltd.
CSF critical success factor
CWA construction work area
CWP construction work package
d day
Demob demobilization
E&I&C electrical and instrumentation 
and controls
Engr engineering
EPC engineering, procurement, and 
construction
EPCM engineering, procurement and 
construction management
EPD execution plan differences
EPR economic productivity ratio
eval evaluation
Fab fabrication
FEED front end engineering design
FEL front-end loading
FID financial investment decision
FWP fabrication work package
H x L x W height x length x width
HH heavy haul
HHI Hyundai Heavy Industries
HL heavy lift
hrs hours
HSE/HS&E health, safety, and environment
HSSE health, safety, security and 
environment
IFC issued for construction
IPA independent project analysis
IPD interim product database
IPD integrated project delivery
ISO International Organization for 
Standardization
IT information technology
ITB invitation to bid
IVR immersive virtual reality
IWP installation work package
Lic. licensor
LiDAR light detection and ranging
LL long lead
LNG liquefied natural gas
LO-LO lift-on-lift-off
LTA lost time accident
Ltd. limited company
LTI lost time incidents
MBI Modular Building Institute
MCBA Modularization Community for 
Business Advancement
MCC motor control center
Mob mobilization
MOD modularization
MOF module offloading facility
MR mixed reality
MSP modular standardized plant
MTL material
MTO material take-off
MTPA million tons per annum
Abbreviations 
and Acronyms Full Form222 Abbreviations
NDE non-destructive examination
NPV net present value
O&M operations and maintenance
OEMs original equipment manufacturers
OFE owner furnished equipment
P/R pipe rack
PAR pre-assembled rack
PAS pre-assembled structure
PAU pre-assembled units
PF productivity factor
PFD process flow diagram
PFI Production Facilities Incorporated
PMT project management team
PO purchase order
PPE personal protective equipment
PPMOF prefabrication, preassembly, 
modularization, and off-site 
fabrication
Pre-comm pre-commissioning
Prefab prefabrication
Prep preparation
QA/QC quality assurance/quality control
RFID radio frequency identification
RFQ request for quote
RFSU ready for startup
RIR recordable incident rate
RO reverse osmosis
ROR rate of return
RO-RO roll-on-roll-off
ROW right of way
RT research team
RTU remote terminal unit
RWC relative work-hour cost
SHI Samsung Heavy Industries
SIIR serious injury incident rate
SMU skid mounted unit
SOI solicitation of interest
SOW scope of work
SPMT self-propelled modular transporter
SRU sulfur recovery unit
SWHU single weld hook-up
TIC total installed cost
TJ terajoule
TLA three-letter acronyms
TOOH trip out of hole
Tran transportation
UMM upstream, midstream, and mining
USGC US Gulf Coast
VAU vendor assembled unit
VPU vendor package unit
VR virtual reality
WH work-hour
w/r/t with regard to
XR extended reality
Abbreviations 
and Acronyms Full Form
Abbreviations 
and Acronyms Full Form223
CONTRIBUTORS
Seungtaek Lee, Ph.D., postdoctoral scholar, Depart￾ment of Civil and Environmental Engineering and 
Construction, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, 4505 S. 
Maryland Parkway, Las Vegas, NV 89154, USA.
Binit Shrestha, Ph.D., Department of Civil and 
Environmental Engineering and Construction, University 
of Nevada, Las Vegas, 4505 S. Maryland Parkway, Las 
Vegas, NV 89154, USA.225
INDEX
3D data, collection, 202f
3D model, usage, 132f
3D module model development, 131f
4D BIM schedule model, IVR development process 
(impact), 200f
A
Academic teaching approach. See Modularization
Accelerators. See Modularization
Advanced Work Packaging (AWP), 157, 212
module fabrication, relationship, 122
planning features, 122
usage, 8
Air cooler procurement, example, 168
All In Wage Rate (AIWR), 19, 33, 80, 159–160
Analysis results/tool. See Modularization
Applied knowledge, impact, 208
Artificial intelligence (AI), 198, 199
Augmented reality (AR), 200
Automation, usage, 202–204, 203f
B
Backward schedule pass, 168–170, 169f
Barge-mounted module, offloading, 143f
Best practices, 3
Block flow diagram (BFD), 82
Bolted structures
internal bracing, requirement, 137f
welded structures, contrast, 135–137
Brownfield site, 70, 76–77
Building at grade, impact, 17
Building information modeling (BIM), 3, 198, 199, 203
schedule model, 200, 200f
Business case
analysis tool, 83–84
flowchart
steps, 74, 75f
usage, 94
fundamentals, 63–65
process, 71–73
Business development (BD) development 
team, 156–157
C
Capital costs, reduction, 18–22
Captive craft labor, presence, 16–17
Center of gravity (C of G), 135
weight control, relationship, 138
Clash checking, usage, 132
Collected industrial modular projects, 32f
Concrete volumes, differences, 161
Concurrent/parallel fabrication/construction, usage, 17
Condensate stabilizer, shipping, 48f
Construction, 186
considerations, 149
flexibility, 96–97
path, 130–131
performance, modularization CSFs (association), 114f
sensing/data analytics, 201–202
Construction industry
evolution, reluctance, 6–7
large-scale mega capital projects, trend, 4
manufacturing industry, waste comparison, 7f
problems, reasons, 6–8
skilled workers, loss, 4
status, 4–10
Construction industry waste
reasons, 7
sources, 7–8
time, 7–8
Construction management team (CMT)
allowance, 124
requirement, 123
Construction work area (CWA), module 
(equivalence), 122
Construction work package (CWP), module FWP 
(equivalence), 122
Contracting
friendliness, 209–210
strategy, 124–125
Coordination, extensiveness, 24, 28–29
Cost
benefits, 188
performance, modularization CSFs (association), 114f
Craft wage rates, 159226 Index
Critical path (flexibility reduction), 24
Critical success factors (CSFs), 63, 109, 154, 193–194
delay, 113, 114f
distribution pie charts, 113f
identification, 117
labels/descriptions, 109–111
responsibility/timing, 111, 113
Critical team members, 96–97
Cyber computational-physical systems, usage, 
203–204, 204f
D
Design benefits, 187
Digital twin, 199–200
Dock (dry dock), 69
Drivers. See Modularization
E
Economic Productivity Ratio (EPR), 19, 19f, 79–81, 
79f, 159, 170
Electrical and instrumentation and controls (E&I&C), 122, 
131, 156, 161
Engineering
barriers, 24, 25–26
considerations, 129–133
organization, dynamics (differences), 26
Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC), 186
phase organization chart, 29f, 98f
projects, 133
overruns, 9
SWHU/owner coordination, 148–149
Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) 
contractors
control, 37–38
experience/leadership, 27
risk, 4–5
Equipment
delivery problems, 165–166
design, 91
module type, size/weight ranges, 48t
spaciousness, 58–59
Equivalent four-module modularized plant, 57f
Equivalent module six-pack layout, 54f, 90f
Execution plan differences (EPDs), 63, 91, 95, 154
assessment phase, 101
design phase, 104
list, 100–106
opportunity framing phase, 100
selection phase, 101–104
timing, 106–107
topics, 99–100
timing sequence, implementation, 106t
Extended reality (XR), 199–200
F
Fabrication
considerations, 135–138
misconceptions, 136
Fabrication shops
expected/actual labor productivity, 43f
labor availability/quality, 42f
Fabrication work package (FWP), CWP 
(equivalence), 122
Fabrication yards
advantages, reasons, 17–18
analysis, 91
benefits, 119
contracting strategy, 124–125
inputs, 78–81
interfacing, 134
location, 123–124, 123f
module fabrication yards, construction paths 
(display), 120f–121f
number, usage, 122–123
responsibility, division, 125
selection, 122–124
Fabricator planning/build methods, design support, 25
Financial investment decision (FID), usage, 9, 25, 26
Foundations, durations (lengthening), 23
Front end engineering design (FEED), 72, 192
Front end engineering design (FEED) phase, 25
organization chart, 29f, 98f
G
Global infrastructure investment, 4f
Global productivity growth trends, 5f
Green and Lean philosophy, 23
Greenfield site, 76
Grillage, 145, 171
examples, 146f
H
Health, Safety, and Environment (HS&E), 68
Health, Safety, Security and Environment (HSSE), 92
execution plan differences, topics, 100, 101, 
103, 106Index 227
Heavy haul (HH), 134
route, 70, 78
survey, 147
Heavy lift (HL), 135
Hook-up, 172
tolerances, 30
I
Indoor fabrication facility, trailer truckable module 
(loading), 142f
Industrial modular projects
modularization, advantages, 33f
modularized elements/units, types, 40f
Industry re-branding, 210–211
Information modeling, 199–200
Initial project analysis, 152
Innovative technologies. See Modularization
impact, 198t, 210
Installation work package (IWP), division, 122
Integrated project delivery (IPD), usage, 125, 210
Interim Product Database (IPD), usage, 6, 198, 212
Internal bracing, requirement, 137f
Issued for construction (IFC) drawings, 116
J
Jetty, 69, 70
Job modularity, absence (reasons), 9
Job site
characteristics, 41–42
expected/actual labor productivity, 43f
labor availability/quality, 42f
L
Labor
productivity factor, 79–80
rates, country function, 22
supply/productivity/cost, stick-built effort 
(relationship), 39
Land load-out, SPMTs (relationship), 142–143
Land transport, example, 145f
Large PAR, 51, 52, 52f, 53f, 162
Large PAU, 48, 49–50, 50f, 162
Large-scale mega capital projects, trend, 4
Late requested module study, 172–173
Lean, embracing, 6, 8–9, 212
Learning curve, benefits, 187
Lift equipment, usage, 17
Lift-on-lift-off (LO-LO) vessel, 70
Lift weight trend, 139f
Load-out, 146
considerations, 141–144
roll on-roll off (RO-RO) vessel, 49f
Logistics, 78, 91, 172
coordination, 147
module transportation, 24, 29–30
Long lead equipment, 20f–21f, 27, 67, 110–111, 113, 
157, 164–165, 170, 173
Lost time accidents (LTAs), reduction, 6
Lost time incidents (LTIs), 68
M
Manufacturing industry/construction industry, waste 
comparison, 7f
Marine onloading/offloading, 143
Marketing, impact, 191–192
Materials offloading facility (MOF), 69–70, 70f, 78
Material take-offs (MTOs), providing, 132
Maximized modularization, 10, 12–13, 12f
Medium PAR, 51, 52, 162
Medium PAU, 48, 49, 162
Mega PAU, 48, 51
Megaprojects, capital-expenditure cost/schedule 
overrun, 5f
Mixed reality (MR), 200
Modularization
academic teaching approach, 208–209
accelerators, 208–212
advantages, 17, 18–24, 33–35, 33f, 65
primary project driver basis, 34f
alternative, 1, 5
application
case study, 177
project difficulties/impediments, 36–38, 38f
business case, 63
analysis results, 89f
analysis tool, 86f–88f
drivers, 38–39, 39f
process phases, 72f
capabilities, absence, 13–14
challenges, 17, 24–30, 65
critical success factors (CSFs), 109–113
associations, 114f
project performance, association, 31, 
109, 113
definitions, 1–2, 13–14
disadvantages, 9–10228 Index
future actions, 207–212
implementation, standardization (usage), 189–192
in-class exercise, 181–185
industry status, 31
innovative technologies, 197–199
impact, 198t
maximized modularization, 10, 12–13
paradigm shifts, 209
planning
best practice, 3
techniques, 211–212
pre-assembly, comparison, 153
requirements, 2
solutions, 8–9
standardization, combination, 189–192, 189f
student development activities, 182–186
technical feasibility, 74–75
Modularized elements/units, types, 40f
Modular plants implementation, project 
difficulties, 36f
Modular projects
case study, 31–33
characteristics, 2
success, critical success factors, 109
types, 32
Modular schedule, stick-built schedule (contrast), 
167–168, 170
Modular Standardized Project (MSP), 209
Module, 2
analysis, stick-built analysis (comparison), 
160–161
boundaries/limitations, 153
business case analysis tool, 83–84
candidate, attraction, 63–64
commitment, 154
commodity scope split, 126f
complexity, 124
concerns, 171–172
configuration inputs, 77–78
considerations, 53–60, 129
construction considerations, 149
coordinator, impact, 156–157
cost, 153–154, 171
estimate, 92–93
inputs, 81–83
decision-making process, perspective, 13
definition/index, production, 89–91
definitions/terms, 45–53
density/mix, 59
design
errors (detection), 3D model (usage), 132f
inputs, 76–77
development process, 151, 158–171
drivers, identification, 75–76
efficiency, maximization (steps), 55–56
equipment, exceptions, 166–167
evolution, 129–131
exclusion, 57–58
execution
planning topics, 99t
strategy/plan, development, 91–92
experience, 154
fabrication/assembly shops
characteristics, 41–42
locations, 33f
fabrication, AWP (relationship), 122
fabrication yards
construction paths, display, 
120f–121f
inputs, 78–81
fabricator skills/capabilities, 24, 27–28
guiding principles, 98–99
impacts, 154
involvement, levels, 65
jobs, 153
expense, comparison, 9
mistakes, 111
previous experience, 99
layout, 163
designer, 164
leader, 95–96
logistics, 78
movement
considerations, 144
SPMTs, usage, 142f
number/size/weight, 40–41, 41f
on-loading, 51f
options analysis, performing, 83–85
options/circumstances, 10–13, 10f
planning, early start, 98–99
potential, analysis, 76–83
potential/project drivers, 76f
preliminary equipment layout, 130f
process, analysis, 54–55
procurement considerations, 134
Modularization (Continued)Index 229
responsibility
division, 59–60
matrix, 144–145
savings, 170
scenarios, 162–163
schedule
comparison, 82–83
inputs, 81–83
production, 93
scheduling, considerations, 133
scope/size, development, 86, 88
size
driver, 137
maximum, 56
optimum, 56–57
size/weight correlations, 161–162
team
differences, 95–97
growth, 97, 157–158
members, 96
tenets, 153–154
total number/tonnage, 41f
tying/fastening, 145
understanding, 149
units, types, 39–40
viability, checking, 93
weighting, weight cell set-up, 139f
yard
selection, 171
survey data, 78–79
Module offloading facilities (MOF), 69–70, 91, 135, 
143, 163, 172
costs, 162, 171
depiction, 69f
heavy haul (HH) route survey, 147
logistic, 78
offloading, 146
onloading, 143f
usage, 28, 135
Monitoring sensors, usage, 202
Motor control center (MCC), 26, 46, 67, 81, 133, 166
need/location, identification, 26
N
Net Present Value (NPV), 155
evaluation, 19, 22
Non-correlatable costs, 162
Non-destructive examination (NDE), 139–140
O
Offloading, 146
Off-site prefabricated modules, usage, 1
Operations and maintenance (O&M), 55, 102, 105, 
110–111, 116, 153, 164, 170
input, 131–132
standardization work process, 192–193
Opportunity Framing, 14, 182
Opportunity Island, location, 178
Oversize/permit load module, 162
Owner/client
accountability, 193
driver, 137
Owner/contractor capabilities, 24, 27
Owner/EPC/SWHU coordination, 148–149
Owner-furnished equipment, 156
P
Paradigm shifts, 209
Percentage modularization, 2–3
Percentage schedule/cost savings, 
comparison, 35f
Phase (timing)
assessment (FEL-1), 71, 72, 72f, 73, 94, 101, 106t, 
110, 112, 113, 114f, 133, 153, 165, 173, 192, 
192f, 193, 199
execution plan differences, 101
basic design (FEED, FEL-3), 20f–21f, 25, 71, 72, 72f, 
73, 94, 98, 99, 104, 106t, 110, 112, 113, 114f, 
172, 192, 192f, 193f
execution plan differences, 104–105
modularization, organization chart, 28f
business case process, 71–73
Rosetta stone, 72f
commissioning, 71, 72f, 192, 192f, 193f
Engineering, Procurement, and Construction 
(EPC) (Execution), 25, 71, 72, 72f, 73, 91, 
94, 98, 99, 106, 106t, 112, 114f, 172, 192, 
192f, 193, 193f
modularization, organization chart, 28f
execution planning topics, 99t
implementation timing, 106t
implementing timing, suggestion, 106
most delayed CSFs, 114f
Opportunity Framing, 14, 56, 71, 72, 72f, 73, 76, 91, 
92, 94, 98, 100–101, 106t, 112, 114f, 154, 173, 
192, 192f, 193
execution plan differences, 100–101230 Index
Selection (pre-FEED, FEL-2), 71, 72, 72f, 73, 94, 98, 
99, 101, 106t, 110, 112, 114f, 152, 153, 173, 
192, 192f, 193
execution plan differences, 101–102
modularization, organization chart, 28f
standardization work process, 192–193, 192f, 193r
start-up, 71, 72f, 192, 192f, 193f
Pier, 69, 70
Pipe racks
module, 46
usage, 11
Pipe spools, actual module, 201f
Piping flow diagrams (PFDs), 163–164
Piping lead, leadership skills, 96
Plot plan development, 53
exercise, 53–54
Plot plan example, sorting, 54f
Point cloud data acquisition approaches, 
comparison, 202t
Point cloud modeling, 201–202, 201f, 202f
Port, 69
Power distribution centers (PDCs), 40
Pre-assembled pipe rack, 46
Pre-assembled rack (PAR), 46, 51–53, 51f
Pre-assembled structure (PAS), 47
Pre-assembled unit (PAU), 46–47, 48–51, 48f
Pre-assembly, 187
modularization, comparison, 153
performing, 2
Pre-commissioning efforts, completion, 23–24
Predictability, improvement, 18, 22
Pre-FEED, 72
Pre-FEED phase
module team integration, 97f
organization chart, 28f
Pre-FID, 134
activities, performing, 27
investment, 67
Process equipment, arrangements, 96
Process flow diagram (PFD), 82
review, 54
Process flow overlay, 54f
Process phases. See Modularization
Procurement, 186
acceleration, 24, 26–27
benefits, 187–188
changes, adaptation, 97
considerations, 134
Productivity factor (PF), 160
Productivity, increase, 18, 22
Project
analysis, 73
initial project analysis, 152
benefits, underestimation/under-collaboration, 174
completion/testing/preparation 
considerations, 138–141
cost, schedule (contrast), 155
difficulties, frequency, 36f
discussions, 152–153
drivers, 154–158
module solutions, 77t
relationships, 66f
evaluation, factors, 65–71
execution, 67
plan, 191
group, module considerations, 129
impact, 188–189
load-out considerations, 141–144
local content, 69
management
integration, 97
support, 99
performance, modularization CSF (association), 31, 
109, 113, 115
phases, standardization work process, 192f, 193f
quality, 68–69
reality check questions, 152
ship loose, 141
shipping incomplete, 140–141
site, example, 64
size, consideration, 122
Project-specific factors, 71
Q
Quality Assurance/Quality Control (QA/QC) procedures, 
30, 78, 123, 134
Quality performance, increase, 18, 23
Quay, 69, 70, 78
capacity, 143–144
R
Rate of return (ROR), 155
Ready for startup (RFSU), 173
Relative Work-hour Costs (RWC), 18–19, 80
Remote instrument buildings (RIBs), 40, 67, 81
Remote terminal unit (RTU), 46, 133
need/location, identification, 26
Phase (timing) (Continued)Index 231
Request for proposal (RFP), receiving, 28
Reverse schedule backward pass, 169f
Robotics, usage, 202–204, 203f
Roll on-roll off (RO-RO) vessel, 49f, 70, 116, 
134–135
module offloading facility (MOF), 
onloading, 143f
preliminary module layout, 130f
Rotating equipment, 58
special consideration, 25–26, 53, 58, 89–91, 
133, 166, 173
S
Safety culture, usage, 18
Safety hazards (reduction), modules 
(impact), 153
Safety performance, increase, 18, 23
Schedule
benefits, 188
forward pass, 169f
schedule-driven project, cost importance 
(reduction), 35
understanding, 149
Schedule performance
improvement, 18, 19, 22
modularization CSFs, association, 114f
Scheduler, requirement, 167
Scheduling
techniques, 8–9
three-month rule, 165
Sea-fastening, 145–146, 171
Sea transport, readiness, 145f
Selective implementation module options, 
10–12
Self-propelled modular transporters (SPMTs), 49–50, 
49f–50f, 52, 53f, 65, 119, 135, 142–145, 147, 
161, 162, 172
land load-out, relationship, 142
marine onloading/offloading, 143
module movement considerations, 144
usage, 142f, 143f
absence, 29
Ship loose, 141
items, connex box organization, 142f
Shipping, considerations, 145–149
Shipping incomplete, 140–141
Simulation, 199–200
Single weld hookup (SWHU), 30, 105, 148
owner/EPC coordination, 148–149
Site
attributes, 77
construction team benefits, 18, 23–24
efficiency, increase, 23
impact, reduction, 24
movement/hook-up, 146–149
Skid-mounted units (SMUs), usage, 11f, 47
Skilled craft, opportunities, 18
Small PAU, 48–49, 49f, 162
Small/truckable PAR, 51–52, 162
Standardization, 187
critical success factors (CSFs), 193–194
degree/level, 190–191
determination, factors, 189
development plan, 190
economic evaluation, 191
management commitment, 191
market analysis, 189–190
modularization, combination, 189–192, 189f
process, 191
study sequence, 189–192
usage, 189–192
work process, 192–193
Standardized units, number, 191
Start-up performance, modularization CSFs 
(association), 114f
Static/dynamic analyses, usage, 171
Stick-build construction, large-scale transfer, 2
Stick-build project schedule, modular project schedule 
(contrast), 20f–21f
Stick-built analysis, module analysis 
(comparison), 159–163
Stick-built approach/method/philosophy, 9, 10f, 
13, 73, 93–94
Stick-built plot plan, 54f
process flow overlay, 54f
sub-process areas, 90f
Stick-built project, cost/schedule savings, 35–36, 35f
Stick-built schedule, 82–83
modular schedule, contrast, 167–168, 170
Stick-built site work-hour concentrations, 90f
Structural beam grillage, 146f
Structural engineering, importance, 132–133
Structural frame, actual module, 201f
Structural members/connections, 171
Structural shapes, 137–138
Structural steel, differences, 161
Structural steel modular, compressor 
alternative, 58f232 Index
Sub-contract, considerations, 134–135
Sub-contracting, impact, 97
Subcontracts, types, 124–125
Sulfur recovery unit (SRU), 59
Sustainability performance, increase, 18, 23
T
Tabletop, compressor/building (installation), 58f
Tall towers, special considerations, 49, 55, 89, 
133, 147, 166
Teamwork, impact, 18
Technical feasbility. See Modularization
Technology
identification, 197–198
maturity, 191
usage, 199–204
Temperature climate, impact, 17
Timber grillage, chain sea-fastening (usage), 146
Total commitment, requirement, 154
Total installed cost (TIC), 70, 155
Total project duration, reduction, 19
Trailer truckable module, loading, 142f
Training exercise, 115–117
Transport vessel, 78
Truckable module, 48f, 162
Truckable PAU, 48
Tubular columns/bracing, 138f
Tubular sea fastening, 146f
U
Underground, 70–71
durations, lengthening, 23
Universal key project drivers, 66–71
Upfront cost (pre-commitment), 24–25
V
Value, capture, 188
Variability, reduction, 18, 22
Vendor assembled unit (VAU), 47
Vendor package unit (VPU), 47
Very large PAR, 51, 52–53
Very large PAU, 48, 50–51
Very limited module options, 10
Vessels
large (or heavey/voluminous/tall), special 
considerations, 49, 57, 73, 89, 166, 173
size, 57
transport, 134–135
Virtual reality (VR), 200
Visualization, 199–200
Visual/numerical data, collection, 203f
W
Waste time, 7–8
Water treatment facility, very limited module 
opportunity, 11f
Weather/terrain/climate, impact, 70
Weight cell set-up, 139f
Weight control, center of gravity 
(relationship), 138
Welded pancake deck construction, 136f
Welded structures
bolted structures, contrast, 135–137
open access, 137f
Wharf, 69, 70, 78
capacity, 143–144
Workforce, driver, 137
Work planning techniques, 8–9
Work process, 191, 192–193WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
