Molds, Mushrooms, and MedicinesMolds, 
Mushrooms, 
and 
Medicines
Our Lifelong 
Relationship 
with Fungi
Nicholas P. Money
prince ton university press
prince ton & oxfordCopyright © 2024 by Nicholas P. Money
Princeton University Press is committed to the protection of copyright and the 
intellectual property our authors entrust to us. Copyright promotes the progress 
and integrity of knowledge. Thank you for supporting free speech and the global 
exchange of ideas by purchasing an authorized edition of this book. If you wish to 
reproduce or distribute any part of it in any form, please obtain permission.
Requests for permission to reproduce material from this work 
should be sent to permissions@press.princeton.edu
Published by Princeton University Press
41 William Street, Princeton, New Jersey 08540
99 Banbury Road, Oxford OX2 6JX
press.princeton.edu
All Rights Reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Money, Nicholas P., author.
Title: Molds, mushrooms, and medicines : our lifelong relationship with fungi / 
Nicholas P. Money.
Description: Princeton : Princeton University Press, [2024] | Includes 
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2023030612 (print) | LCCN 2023030613 (ebook) | 
ISBN 9780691236308 (hardback) | ISBN 9780691236315 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Fungi. | Materia medica, Vegetable. | Molds (Fungi). | BISAC: 
SCIENCE / Life Sciences / Mycology | NATURE / Plants / Mushrooms
Classification: LCC QK603 .M58 2024 (print) | LCC QK603 (ebook) | 
DDC 579.5—dc23/eng/20230908
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023030612
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2023030613
British Library Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available
Editorial: Alison Kalett, Hallie Schaeffer
Jacket: Heather Hansen
Production: Jacqueline Poirier
Publicity: Matthew Taylor (US), Kate Farquhar-Thomson (UK)
Copyeditor: Susan Campbell
Jacket Credit: Jacket images (clockwise): Nataliya Hora / Alamy Stock Photo; Eye of 
Science / Science Source; BSIP SA / Alamy Stock Photo; Guido Blokker / Unsplash
This book has been composed in Arno Pro and URW DIN Arabic.
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1v
Contents
Acknowledgments vii
1 Interacting: Encounters with Fungi from Birth to Death 1
PART I Inward
2 Touching: Fungi on the Skin 23
3 Breathing: Spores in the Lungs 40
4 Spreading: Opportunists in the Brain 57
5 Digestion: Yeasts in the Gut 73
PART II Outward
6 Nourishing: Molds and Mushrooms in Our Diets 93
7 Treating: Medicines from Fungi 110
8 Poisoning: Toxins in Mushrooms and Molds 125vi Contents
9 Dreaming: Using Mushrooms to Treat Depression 142
10 Recycling: The Global Mycobiome 159
Appendix: Ghost Gut Fungi 175
Notes 179
List of Illustrations 225
Index 227vii
Acknowledgments
i would like to thank my agent, Deborah Grosvenor, and my editor, 
Alison Kalett, for making this book happen. Andor Kiss helped me 
to untangle the studies on ghost gut fungi, Michael Klabunde assisted 
with Latinisms, and my wife, Diana Davis, proofread the developing 
manuscript.1
1
Interacting
ENCOUNT ERS W IT H F UNGI 
FROM BIRTH TO DEATH
Sing, heavenly Muse . . .
What in them is dark
Illumine, what is low raise and support;
That to the height of this great argument
I may assert eternal providence,
And justify the ways of mushrooms to men.
—john milton, paradise lost (1667), 
book i, lines 6, 22–26, a m ended 2 chapter 1
fungal spores cast a shadow over my childhood and almost killed 
me. One day in 1967, my five-year-old body began to run out of oxygen 
as my lungs shut down with inflammation, turning my skin blue be￾fore the ambulance arrived. I was born in the Thames Valley of south￾ern England, which is a lovely place unless you are an asthmatic. Tree 
pollen and fungal spores fill the Oxfordshire air in summer and turn 
paradise into hell. There had been a thunderstorm that afternoon, 
which whipped clouds of these noxious particles into the sky. They 
filtered into my chest with each breath, causing my little airways to 
narrow and flood with mucus. A severe asthma attack feels like death. 
The nurses put me in an oxygen tent and gave me big orange tablets 
that were difficult to swallow, but after a day or two these antibiotics 
combined with a steroidal medicine reopened my lungs. More than 
fifty years later I can still see myself struggling to breathe under that 
clear plastic canopy, and I wonder how much this trauma led to my 
career as a mycologist and immersion in research on the spores of the 
fungi that put me there.
The fact that a boy plagued by spores became a scientist who has 
spent his adult life studying fungi, teaching students about their biology, 
and serving as an expert witness in lawsuits related to mold exposure is 
one of those serendipitous outcomes that define so many lives. The con￾nections between my childhood and my profession did not occur to 
me until my brief experience as the patient of a therapist. He was a 
gentle, bearded man who asked insightful questions as he sought to help 
me understand why I was wrestling with thanatophobia, or death anxi￾ety, which was distracting me from enjoying not being dead. Early in 
our conversations, I told him that I was an expert on fungi, a mycologist, 
then explained a little about what a fungus is and what a fungus does. 
We talked about many other things—my health, marriage, and the chal￾lenges of parenting teenagers—before he circled back one day and 
asked: “Have you ever wondered why you are obsessed with death 
and with the microbes that you have described as the great decompos￾ers?” We both laughed. It seems plausible that my asthma attacks were 
the foundation of it all: thanatophobia and what some would view as a 
morbid fascination with fungi that may have developed as a subliminal Interacting 3
attempt at therapy, like the hypochondriac who becomes a doctor. On 
the other hand, maybe I just liked mushrooms.
What intrigues me now, and is the subject of this book, is the science 
of the human-fungus symbiosis, both the intimate and the extended 
relationship between fungi and our species. This relationship runs all 
the way from yeasts that grow on the skin and inside the gut to our uses 
of fungi as food and sources of medicines and, ultimately, to the mush￾room colonies in soil that make life on land possible. Our closest physi￾cal ties with the fungi are invisible because the ones that live on the 
body are microscopic. These species grow amid the more numerous 
bacteria and viruses and are critical players in human health. Together, 
these microbes form the human microbiome, and we identify the fungal 
part of this intimate ecosystem as the mycobiome. (The prefix, myco-, 
from the Greek mykes, refers to all things fungal.)
The growth of immense numbers of fungi on the skin and inside the 
body is an unexpected and startling fact of science. Fungi are a vital part 
of the immense ecosystem of the human body, which operates as a part￾nership between trillions of human and microbial cells. We cannot live 
without these fungi. Touch the creased skin behind one of your ears or 
run your hands through your hair. You will not see them, of course, but 
fungal cells will cling to your fingertips afterward and every other time 
you rub, scratch, pick, or caress. They are essential partners, lodgers on 
all of us. Most of the fungi of the mycobiome are helpful, but some can 
turn on us when our immune defenses are weakened and cause terrifi￾cally damaging infections. Fungi that normally grow on plants, rotting 
wood, compost heaps, and bird droppings can also settle on the body 
and attack our tissues if we are vulnerable. Human diseases caused by 
fungi are called mycoses, and these range from the irritation of athlete’s 
foot to life-threatening brain infections.
But our relationship with fungi does not end with the species found 
on the body. It widens to our conscious interactions with these mi￾crobes through their roles in our diet and as a source of powerful medi￾cines. Science has been advancing in all of these areas of mycological 
inquiry, from studies that reveal the diversity of yeasts that grow on the 
skin to research on the use of psychedelic mushrooms in the treatment 4 chapter 1
of depression. Once we expand our view of the give-and-take between 
humans and fungi to these deliberate uses of fungi, we discover a 
broader relationship, a human-fungus symbiosis that is a defining feature 
of our biology and culture. The term “symbiosis” is used in its original 
and most liberal sense in this book to describe helpful and harmful re￾lationships between species. This is a perfect reflection of the incredible 
range of interactions between humans and fungi.
WHAT IS A FUNGUS?
Not plant, not animal, more animal than plant, and treated as the most 
mysterious kingdom of life in popular culture, fungi come in many 
shapes and sizes.1 The fungi we see most often seem too big to be cat￾egorized as microbes. These are mushrooms, which include the fairy￾tale fly agaric, with its red cap spotted with white scales; shelf fungi, as 
big as dinner plates, that grow on decomposing logs; and slices of white 
button mushrooms on pizzas. The reason we call these species micro￾organisms is that the fungus that forms the mushroom is microscopic. 
For almost all of their lives, these organisms exist as spidery colonies of 
tiny threads called hyphae. Each thread, or hypha, is ten times thinner 
than a human hair. These filaments elongate and branch as they feed in 
soil and go about the process of rotting wood. The colony of branching 
hyphae is a mycelium. When this mycelium has grown over a large area 
and absorbed enough food, it reverses direction and flows to the sur￾face, where the threads merge to form mushrooms. Mushrooms with 
gills are the fruit bodies or sex organs of fungi that mist the air with spores. 
As the urge to reproduce becomes an imperative, the fungus moves 
from belowground to aboveground, changing its role from feeding to 
fruiting in the wondrous cycle of its life.
But most fungi never form a mushroom and are microscopic through￾out their feeding and reproductive stages. These include aquatic fungi 
that swim in ponds, with tailed cells that resemble animal sperm; molds 
with stalks hung with sparkling spores that look like miniature chande￾liers; and 1,500 species of yeasts. Yeasts include the species used in brew￾ing and baking, whose Latin name is Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Interacting 5
another fungus, called Candida albicans, that lives on everyone and is 
best known, unfortunately, for its irritating nature as the vaginal yeast.2
(Latin names are kept to a bare minimum in this book, but some of the 
fungi are best known through their Latin names, and others are so ob￾scure that they have never been given a common name.) Unlike fungi 
that grow as thin threads, which we call molds, yeasts develop as single 
rounded cells and produce buds, or daughter cells, on their surface.
MAKING SENSE OF THE MYCOBIOME
The entire human body is affected by fungi. Yeasts populate the skin and 
crowd around the hair follicles on the scalp; other species live in the ear 
canals, nasal passages, and mouth; and fungi swarm in the digestive and 
reproductive systems. The fungi are as small as the cells of our tissues 
and only become visible when they grow in such profusion that they 
form patches and pastes on the surface of the skin. But at this moment, 
and throughout our lives, fungal cells are feeding on the scalp and grow￾ing in the gut, consuming the mucus and dead cells that we discharge 
every day, and helping to control the bacteria. This microbial commu￾nity is in constant flux—and so much of it was completely unknown 
until recently.
Fungi have been sidelined at meetings of microbiologists by studies 
on bacteria and viruses during my career and have been an afterthought 
in medicine. Earlier generations of mycologists misunderstood the 
fungi that they found on the body, regarding most of them as germs that 
damaged hospital patients and overlooking the significance of the yeasts 
growing peacefully on everyone else. Even when molecular genetic 
techniques began to reveal the incredible diversity and number of mi￾crobes in the gut, the fungi were missed because the methods were 
limited to identifying the DNA sequences of bacteria. This picture is 
changing at last, and new investigative methods are exposing the 
yeasts and molds—the blobs and filaments—multiplying from scalp to 
toes on the outside of the body and from mouth to anus on the inside. 
As this examination of the fungi has proceeded, the vision of the micro￾biome as a mostly bacterial territory has shifted to an appreciation of 6 chapter 1
the diverse communities of fungi that fight and cooperate with bacte￾ria through webs of chemical interactions to make a living on the body.3
Through these innovations we are beginning to fathom the extraordi￾nary influence of the mycobiome on our health and well-being.
Even with this knowledge, the invisibility of the human mycobiome 
makes it difficult to comprehend. This is life-changing science in the 
sense that it permits a new view of the body, but it takes some imagina￾tion too. There is nothing cellular and microbiological about the way we 
look and feel. We picture ourselves as semisolid individuals, singular 
beings constructed with varying degrees of smoothness and raggedness, 
pert here, drooping there, and hanging together across the decades, but 
this half-truth belies our biological nature. For a more enlightened sense 
of self, we have to close our eyes to picture the body as a galaxy of cells, 
to say, and to believe, “I am a trinity, born from one cell, copied in tril￾lions, and filled with other forms of life.”
Microbes that grow naturally on the body belong to the healthy mi￾crobiome. Dif­ferent microbes populate dif­ferent locations on the body, 
including the skin, ear canals, nasal passages, lungs, teeth, digestive tract, 
and reproductive system. In each place, the body supports intermingled 
communities of bacteria, viruses, and fungi that form the bacteriome, 
virome, and mycobiome. The term mycobiome was used first to de￾scribe the fungi associated with plants in a salt marsh on the Eastern 
Shore of Virginia and now applies to the communities of fungi found in 
any location.4 For example, cultivated pineapples harbor forty-nine spe￾cies of fungi, tropical corals host a jumble of marine fungi, and the gut 
of the largest living lemur, called the indri, is heaving with microbes 
acquired from its vegan diet and supplemented with fungi from the 
soil.5 Every animal, plant, and seaweed is crawling with fungi.
We see hints of the ancestral human mycobiome in monkeys and 
other apes, whose gut fungi vary among species.6 The community of 
fungi that is distinctively human has been remodeled from earlier mix￾tures of the fungi that grew on our hominid ancestors. This has involved 
losses and replacements of fungi as the mycobiome has adapted to 
changes in our diet and behavior. These evolutionary modifications 
have unfolded over the course of millions of years, but fungi have also Interacting 7
come and gone on much shorter historical timescales. The communities 
of fungi on the body were rejiggered when we emigrated from our birth￾place in Africa to other climatic zones and began fabricating clothing 
and footwear. Clothes and shoes affected the fungi on the skin, and the 
gut fungi were modified as we exchanged hunting and gathering for life 
in agricultural settlements.
WHAT THE FUNGI ARE DOING ON THE BODY
Fungi grow on humans because fungi grow everywhere they find food, 
and we are stuffed with energy. A pound of flesh has the same number 
of calories as a pound of ice cream, for an average of more than one 
hundred thousand calories per body.7 Colonies of yeasts consume a 
snippet of this when they digest the natural oils on the scalp. Other 
fungi live by breaking down bacteria and food particles as they are 
squeezed along the 1.5-meter-long tube of the colon. We are the uncon￾scious hosts of a 24/7 buffet.
Although we are unaware of these fungi unless they cause inflamma￾tion and tissue damage, the immune system is policing them through￾out the day. This defense mechanism is a marvel of natural engineering. 
White blood cells are the biggest players in immunology. These color￾less cells flow in the blood alongside the more plentiful red blood cells. 
Red blood cells outnumber white blood cells by six hundred to one, and 
all of these red blood cells do exactly the same thing: they pick up oxy￾gen from the fresh air entering the lungs when we inhale and carry it 
around the body; on the return path, the red blood cells release the 
carbon dioxide that we exhale. White blood cells have nothing to do 
with this import and export of gases and are more diverse in their roles. 
Following their own genetic programming, white blood cells called 
phagocytes move around the body, stretching themselves forward and 
retracting behind, just like amoebas that live in soil and water. Some of 
them spread from the bloodstream into the surrounding tissues and 
crawl into the linings of the lungs and the outer layers of the skin. Wher￾ever they encounter microorganisms, they decide whether to kill them 
or give them a pass. White blood cells also rid the body of human cells 8 chapter 1
that are damaged or start to grow in a way that can lead to the develop￾ment of tumors. We would not last for very long at all without these 
defenders of the immune system.
The immune system manages the whole ecosystem of human tissues 
and embedded microorganisms. It allows specialized fungi to feed on 
the dead cells on the skin surface and the fatty secretions on the scalp 
and other fungi to multiply in the mucus linings of the digestive and 
respiratory systems. Turning to its more aggressive role, the immune 
system works continuously to eliminate insurgents, including the fungal 
pathogens that threaten to choke the whole enterprise. The resulting 
mixtures of fungi that live on an individual body are unique.8 The types 
of fungi differ in each location, and their numbers change as some grow 
and reproduce and others deteriorate and die. Our age and gender affect 
the numbers and kinds of microbes on the body too, and there is 
some evidence that hormonal differences between the sexes may stimu￾late the growth of distinctive groups of fungi. Sweating stimulates the 
skin residents to proliferate, sun exposure kills others; gardeners pick 
up fungi from the soil and from plants; children transfer fungi to their 
parents and vice versa; and lovers swap fungi in bed. The number and 
identity of the spores flowing through the nose and into the lungs vary 
as we breathe, and the fungi in the mouth and digestive system are agi￾tated with each meal.
Geography is another variable, because fungi are not distributed 
evenly across the planet. This means that there is a regional character to 
the mycobiome, with people in Africa partnering with dif­ferent fungi 
than Asian populations. Diet has a dominating effect on the kinds of 
fungi and their abundance in the gut, with major differences between 
vegetarians, meat eaters, and consumers of lots of processed foods.9
Many illnesses affect the types and abundance of fungi, especially those 
in the gut, and traumatic injuries including severe skin burns enable 
fungi to penetrate deep into our tissues. The catalog of these sundry 
influences on the composition of the fungal communities on the body 
is endless.
The significance of human-fungal interactions is surprising, at first, 
when we consider the scarcity of the fungi compared with the bacteria Interacting 9
in the microbiome. There are only 40 billion fungal cells in the human 
gut, compared with 40 trillion bacterial cells, a thousand bacteria to 
each fungus.10 Heaped together, the bacteria weigh as much as a cup of 
sugar, and spread in a single line, they would encircle Earth. The less 
numerous but far larger fungal cells weigh no more than a raisin, but 
their combined surface area is impressive—equivalent to an eight￾person dining table. The interior lining of the large intestine covers a 
similar area, and even though many of the fungi are buried in the dis￾solving food and developing feces, these calculations reveal that the 
fungi offer a lot of real estate for chemical interactions with the body. 
The molecule-by-molecule transactions between the immense surface 
presented by the fungi and the immune system go a long way toward 
explaining how such tiny organisms can have such a profound effect on 
our health.
The impact of the fungi on the health of the gut is a controversial 
subject among microbiome experts. Some view the fungi as critical 
players in the internal ecosystem, while others believe that their activi￾ties are eclipsed by the overwhelming number of bacteria.11 These dif￾fering viewpoints have arisen because the science of the mycobiome is 
moving at lightning speed, and conclusions about the influence of 
the fungi on some health conditions swerve from study to study. But the 
truth is unfolding, and this book will share consensus views when they 
are available and highlight other areas of mycobiome research where we 
remain puzzled.
Uncertainties come from many sources. The first and most formi￾dable of these is the question of cause versus effect.12 If we find differ￾ences in the abundance of fungi in people suffering from a particular 
illness, it can be very difficult to determine whether the fungi are re￾sponsible for the illness or whether the change in their number is a 
consequence of another issue with the patient’s health. Either way, treat￾ing the fungus may be effective at alleviating some of the most distress￾ing symptoms of the complaint. Examples of these conditions that do 
not seem to be caused by fungi but are associated with shifts in the 
onboard populations of fungi are explored in the chapters that follow. 
The second diagnostic problem comes from the awesome power of the 10 chapter 1
modern genetic techniques that allow us to detect the dead cells of fungi 
that are passing through the intestine and may have entered the body in 
our food. This makes it difficult to identify the living species that are 
long-term residents in the gut, which are more important in the health 
of the digestive system than the remains of dietary migrants.
While the relevance of the fungi in understanding some aspects of 
healthy gut function is debatable, a substantial body of research has 
proven that fungi belong to communities of microorganisms in other 
parts of the body where they are crucial in health and disease. There is 
no question about the importance of the fungi on the body surface, 
where they support skin health and can also cause allergic responses 
and unsightly infections. Similarly, we know that fungal spores are 
powerful triggers of asthma and other allergic illnesses in the respiratory 
system. Lastly, it is important to recognize the connections between the 
mycobiome in dif­ferent parts of the body. The effects of the gut fungi 
on the immune system can influence the development of health condi￾tions elsewhere, and fungi can also move physically from one location to 
another—from skin to gut and vice versa. With so much attention to the 
effects of fungi on human health, this is the perfect time to explore this 
phenomenal symbiosis.
WHEN THINGS GO WRONG
Everyone is damaged by fungi at some time in their lives. Hundreds of 
millions of people suffer from allergies caused by fungal spores, and 
fungal infections range from skin irritation and toenail disintegration to 
the foulest flesh-melting diseases ever pictured in a pathology textbook. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) prioritized the surveillance of 
serious fungal infections in 2022 with the publication of a list of nine￾teen species that pose the greatest threat to public health.13 This was 
in response to the rising numbers of fungal infections and difficulties in 
diagnosing and treating these serious illnesses. Mycoses kill 1.5 million 
people every year, and the threat of the severest infections is growing 
with the emergence of strains of yeasts that are resistant to antifungal Interacting 11
medicines. The burden of these illnesses is heightened in the developing 
world, where access to adequate medical care is limited, and in more 
affluent countries with aging populations that are more vulnerable to 
infection. Poisoning is another hazard of our relationship with the fungi, 
resulting from the mistaken identification of wild mushrooms by forag￾ers and by consuming the toxins produced by molds that grow on har￾vested grain. These harmful interactions complete the picture of our 
relationship with the fungi, which runs from beauty to the beast, the yin 
and the yang of the human-fungus symbiosis.
It is easy to disregard the fungi that support our health because they 
are invisible, and we can live in blissful ignorance of the dark side of 
mycology if we are fortunate to avoid infections. But wisdom comes 
from familiarity with this subject. The types of fungi that live on the 
body and their levels of activity vary according to where we live, what 
we eat, and whether we work indoors or outdoors. Changes in our 
health, drugs that we are prescribed, and the use of consumer prod￾ucts including toothpaste, shampoos, and body lotions modify our 
closest relationship with fungi too. No amount of grooming will leave 
us unfungal, which is a good thing because we would be in bad shape 
if we abolished our partners. A body without fungi would be as barren 
as a forest without mushrooms. Equipped with this self-knowledge, 
we can seek opportunities for correcting imbalances in this intimate 
relationship.
BEYOND THE BODY: THE EXTENDED SYMBIOSIS
Beyond the body, fungi inhabit our pets, are active in damp places in 
our homes, and flourish on fruits and vegetables in the kitchen. Pet dogs 
and cats are covered with yeasts, bathrooms are mycological play￾grounds, and we consume fungi clinging to salad ingredients without 
giving them a thought—until the tomatoes sprout hairs. Physical con￾tact with these fungi is certain, continuous, and consequential. There is 
a historical character to these passive interactions with the fungi in the 
environment, which has changed over thousands of years and continues 12 chapter 1
to shift in the modern world. The transition from hunter-gatherer and 
nomadic lifestyles to agricultural settlements around ten thousand years 
ago had a profound effect on our interactions with fungi, by exposing 
us to masses of fungal spores emanating from moldy grain stores and to 
toxins in food made from these spoiled cereals. Asthma and other aller￾gies to fungal spores were born from changes in farming over the mil￾lennia, and the crowding of populations in cities promoted the spread 
of skin infections by ringworm fungi. The human-fungus relationship 
has also operated on a more conscious level with the incorporation of 
fungi into our diet, from foraging for wild mushrooms and cultivating 
an increasing selection of species, to the growing popularity of nuggets 
of fungal protein or mycoprotein manufactured in bioreactors. The uses 
of fungi for food have also multiplied through cheesemaking, leavening 
bread, brewing beer, and making wine. By domesticating the fungi that 
enrich our diet, we have folded the natural environmental actions of 
these microbes into human culture and driven changes in civilization 
over thousands of years. All of the uses of the microscopic yeasts and 
molds for food are extensions of the human-fungus symbiosis.
Human interactions with fungi reach further through the biotechno￾logical manipulation of fungi in drug manufacture. Fungal medicines 
include antibiotics to treat bacterial infections; cyclosporin, which pre￾vents the rejection of transplanted organs; and “human” insulin and 
vaccines produced by genetically modified yeast. On the subject of fun￾gal medicines, there is a lucrative global market for medicinal mush￾rooms with reputed life-enhancing and lifesaving benefits. Consumers 
spend tens of billions of dollars per year on mushroom extracts in the 
belief that they are effective at treating illnesses through their effects on 
the immune system. Few of the claims made by marketers have been 
tested, yet there is some hopeful news on this front with investments 
in clinical trials on mushroom products as anticancer agents. Drawing 
on stronger scientific evidence, “magic” mushrooms have outgrown 
their countercultural associations to be embraced as a promising treat￾ment for clinical depression and post-traumatic stress. Through these 
ancient and modern cultural practices, we have amplified the positive 
influence of the fungi on our lives.Interacting 13
FROM WOMB TO TOMB: THE FUNGUS IS WITH YOU
Some years ago, when I gave seminars on the so-called toxic molds 
found in buildings, I would say, “We inhale their spores from first breath 
to last gasp.” This was true, but more recent findings show that the 
phrase provides an incomplete picture of our interactions with fungi, 
which begin before birth and extend into the grave. The bookends must 
be extended because the fungi are with us from womb to tomb.
The view of the womb as a perfectly sterile incubator for the fetus has 
been consigned to medical history today.14 Our interaction with bacte￾ria and fungi before birth is evident from genetic analysis of the meco￾nium, which is the tarry liquid expelled by the newborn that develops 
in the fetal bowel. It is the initial deposit that comes to light in the first 
few days after birth and presages a lifetime per capita unloading of 
twelve tons of feces. Fungi that live within the mother’s vagina, particu￾larly the Candida yeasts, are the commonest species detected in the 
meconium, which suggests that they colonize the amniotic fluid that 
surrounds the fetus and make their way into the gut of the baby when 
it swallows a little of the fluid before birth.15 Whether the traces of fungi 
found in the meconium affect the developing fetus is unclear, although 
we do know that the risk of premature birth increases as the number of 
microbes within the amniotic sac rises.16 Fungi may also spread all the 
way from the mother’s skin to the fetus through her bloodstream. Mi￾crobes are normally excluded from the blood, but when the tissue bar￾riers are weakened, and leakage occurs, the bloodstream becomes a 
distribution system for bacteria and fungi. Inflammation of the gums or 
gingivitis, which develops into more serious forms of gum disease, 
or periodontitis, is one way that this can happen, raising the importance 
of oral hygiene and dental care for pregnant mothers.
Birth propels the baby into the microbial world, where it will be 
coated with fungi, filled with bacteria, infected by viruses, and 
breathe air brimming with all manner of irritating particles. As a fetus 
we receive sips of foreign proteins through the placenta and encounter 
the tiny populations of microbes in the amniotic fluid. Outside the 
womb we are deluged with microbes. Natural selection shaped Earth as 14 chapter 1
a jungle of hospitable and hostile microbes over billions of years and 
each of us is forced to adjust to this carnival. The only possibility for 
survival resides with our guardian angel—the immune system—which 
allows us to explore this melee safely, cultivating microbes on the body 
that keep us healthy and warding off the germs that are more likely 
to kill us.
The deeper relationship with the microscopic starts after birth and 
depends on how we are born. If we surface via the natural route, the 
rupture of the amniotic sac leaves us squeezing through the vagina, 
where we receive a coating of bacteria and fungi from our mothers. The 
elastic fit of the birth canal around the baby ensures that the whole sur￾face of the newborn receives this treatment. This is why the same strains 
of Candida yeast that grow in the mother’s vagina are found on the skin 
of infants born in this manner. Babies born by C-section become colo￾nized by Candida from their mothers too, but by dif­ferent strains of the 
yeasts that are more abundant on the surface of the mother’s skin. Dif￾ficulties in identifying fungal species make these studies challenging, 
but the overall pattern of vaginal microbes for vaginal deliveries and skin 
microbes for the C-section babies seems to be true. Our birthday is the 
first day of intensive schooling for the immune system that has been 
preparing for a microbiological hurricane for nine months.
Fungi are also conveyed through intimate contact with the mother 
and handling by others after delivery, and breastfeeding furnishes the 
infant with a dif­ferent mix of species. According to recent experiments 
that took precautions to avoid contamination from the nipple surface, 
there are a lot of fungi in breastmilk. These studies show that a slurping 
infant absorbs more than two hundred million fungal cells a day, along 
with a similar number of bacteria.17 The majority of the fungi are yeasts, 
although there are traces of molds whose spores drift in from the air. It 
seems likely that fungi found in the milk get there through the blood￾stream, like the ones that cross the placenta. Cells in the immune system 
may also pick up fungi from the nasal passages, lungs, and gut and carry 
them to the breast tissue where they are released into the milk. The 
couriers that perform this proposed role are the dendritic cells that 
prowl the body looking for microorganisms.Interacting 15
The transmission of microorganisms from mothers to their offspring 
is a widespread phenomenon in nature.18 The ubiquity of this seemingly 
deliberate donation of foreign organisms from mother to child suggests 
that some of them are critical for the vitality of the newborns of all ani￾mals. Most of these microbes appear to be beneficial, although some 
pathogens can also be relayed in this manner. Harmful microbes that 
pass from the human mother to child include the parasite that causes 
toxoplasmosis, the syphilis bacterium, and the human immunodefi￾ciency virus (HIV). The fact that some pathogens take advantage of this 
intimacy is an inevitable drawback to the elementary processes that sup￾port the next generation. Natural selection has fostered microbe trans￾fer because the advantages of readying the immune system for the out￾side world outweigh the disadvantages. The proof is evident in the 
success of the human reproductive mechanism and the fact that most 
infants do not succumb to microbial infection. Evolution is blind to a 
small proportion of casualties.
The split personality of the fungi as beauty and beast is exactly what 
we would predict from nature. The idea of some grand harmony among 
organisms is pure fantasy. Like every other scrap of life, fungi are en￾gaged in a continuous struggle for existence. They collaborate with 
other organisms when there is mutual benefit, fight when their partners 
act too aggressively, and set up shop elsewhere by dispersing spores. 
Others have no time for collaboration and live by damaging host tis￾sues from the moment they arrive. When we think about the beneficial 
fungi on the body and inside the gut, there is a tendency to ascribe in￾tention to the relationship. This is wishful thinking. The fungi that grow 
on us fulfill a role that they have crafted, occupying a niche on the 
body—the scalp for example—where no other microbes do it better. 
During their evolutionary history, these fungi have developed the 
mechanisms for living on the dryness of the head, feeding on fats, and 
keeping the bacteria in check. As long as they do not irritate the skin, 
they are left in peace. When the environment between the hairs be￾comes unbalanced in some way, the fungi get unruly, and accumulate in 
unusual numbers. This causes the skin to flake, and the immune system 
is alerted that something is amiss. Swings and roundabouts, day in and 16 chapter 1
day out, ups and downs, and the same goes for the digestive system, 
vagina, and everywhere else that the fungi blossom on the body.
Fungi that adapt themselves to living in these dif­ferent locations in 
the human ecosystem are the ones that need to be recognized as part￾ners by the immune system and left alone. Much about this process of 
acceptance remains unknown, but the immune system of the baby 
seems to be tutored inside the uterus, during birth, and via breastfeed￾ing, priming the newborn for a lifetime of encounters with microbes. 
Learning to work with some of the commonest kinds of fungi on the 
skin seems like a very good lesson. By acknowledging these harmless 
species and avoiding conflict, their growth may limit the ability of bac￾teria to coat the skin. We know that yeasts engage in chemical warfare 
with bacteria, and as long as these fungi do not proliferate to the point 
of becoming a nuisance themselves, they remain part of the healthy 
microbiome.
The newborn immune system is very fragile, with a small population 
of mobile cells to police the lungs and other tissues, but the number of 
these caretaker cells skyrockets to adult levels within the first days 
of life. This period of vulnerability to infection is one of the character￾istics of infants that resulted in such a high level of historical mortality. 
Before the twentieth century, more than 25 percent of babies died in the 
first year of life, and half of all children died before they reached the end 
of puberty. Oral Candida infections, or thrush, which spread to other 
parts of the body were a significant cause of infant deaths.19 A combina￾tion of better nutrition and hygiene, and the development of vaccines, 
antibiotics, and other drugs in the twentieth century transformed this 
picture, and today’s infant mortality rates range from 5 percent in some 
African countries to less than 1 percent in Europe.
Considering these statistics, it is difficult to find fault with modern 
medical practices, but we have introduced new hazards by increasing 
the number of births by C-section and avoiding breastfeeding.20
Breastfeeding follows a disturbing pattern, with few countries meeting 
the WHO and UNICEF targets for infants.21 These regional differ￾ences are affected by ethnicity and culture as much as economic pros￾perity. They are alarming from a mycological perspective because the Interacting 17
use of milk formula is linked to a greater risk of asthma and other aller￾gies to fungi. The immune system needs to be introduced to grubbiness 
of the natural world from the get-go, and if this lesson fails, we may 
face a lifetime of struggle, responding to each fleck of fungus as if we 
are under attack. There is some evidence that this poor formatting of 
the immune system in childhood can also lead to autoimmune diseases 
later in life.22
The drama of the mycobiome does not end with infancy, and our 
interactions with fungi change as the years pass. The mycobiome in the 
digestive system is adjusted in response to the shift to solid food and 
later as we pursue more omnivorous, carnivorous, or vegetarian diets. 
The mycobiome is modified in adulthood, wobbling this way and that 
as we gain and lose weight, become pregnant, undergo cosmetic surgery 
and dental procedures, take antibiotics, are injured, and develop short￾term (acute) or long-term (chronic) illnesses. We can pick up fungal 
infections at any time, although the likelihood of developing these my￾coses increases among the elderly. Fungal infections increase with age 
as we develop illnesses that damage the immune system or require us 
to undergo therapies that lower these defenses to maintain transplanted 
organs or to treat cancer.
Moving to the tomb, we are the latest additions to the menu of meat 
dishes available to fungi that have been in the recycling business for 
hundreds of millions of years. Bacteria take care of a lot of the soft 
tissues in the human cadaver, leaving the keratin protein in hair and 
nails for a variety of specialized molds.23 Bones are infiltrated by fun￾gal hyphae too, assisting their disintegration. These are the slowest 
processes of decomposition, but the disappearance of the hair, nails, 
hooves, horns, and antlers of dead animals in nature demonstrates the 
power of the fungi. We are sustained by this planetary-scale nutrient 
cycling, together with the breakdown of plant debris, because we rely 
on the forests, grasslands, and agricultural ecosystems fertilized by the 
fungi. We would not be here without them. Mycorrhizal partnerships 
with living plants are another essential part of this broader relationship. 
We need fungi to work with plants as much as we need fungi to work 
with our bodies.18 chapter 1
THE PAGES AHEAD
In the chapters that follow, we will explore the communities of fungi 
that live in every place on the body, pursue the historical and con￾temporary uses of fungi as food and medicine, and look at the ecological 
roles of the fungi beyond the body that function as an invisible life￾support system. This book is a revelation of the human relationship 
with the fungi, the human-fungus symbiosis, from the fungi growing 
around the roots of our hairs to the colonies of mushrooms wrapped 
around the roots of forest trees. The chapters are organized into two 
sections that speak to the direction of the inquiry: part I, “Inward,” and 
part II, “Outward.”
Part I, Inward. Starting with the fungi on the skin surface (chap￾ter 2), we slip inside the body with the spores that enter the lungs 
(chapter 3), and dive deeper with the yeasts and filaments that infect 
our internal organs (chapter 4). All tissues in the body can become colo￾nized by fungi, which expands the activities of the restless mycobiome 
to the lungs, liver, kidneys, brain, and gut. Fungi in the gut are also part 
of the healthy digestive system, until this part of the mycobiome is dis￾rupted and a whole range of illnesses related to immune dysfunction 
develop (chapter 5).
Part II, Outward. In the second set of chapters, we look at our in￾teractions with fungi that grow outside the body, beginning with their 
importance in our diet, both as wild and cultivated mushrooms, and in 
the development of mycoprotein meat substitutes that are energizing 
the food industry (chapter 6). This concept of the extended symbiosis 
incorporates the modern use of drugs produced by genetically modified 
fungi in conventional medicine and the controversial marketing of 
mushroom extracts in alternative or naturopathic medicine (chapter 7). 
From medicines we move to poisons and the dangers of consuming the 
wrong mushrooms and the spoilage of grains by molds that produce 
mycotoxins (chapter 8). Magic mushrooms and their use in the treat￾ment of clinical depression and other serious mental health issues fol￾lows (chapter 9). Proposed links between the use of magic mushrooms 
and the origins of Christianity and other religions have been dismissed Interacting 19
by theologists, but there is room to reconcile these viewpoints with a 
fresh and objective analysis of the evidence. In the final chapter we ex￾amine the ultimate extension of the human relationship with the fungi 
through our dependence on their wider ecological roles (chapter 10). 
We discover the body as an ecosystem flavored with fungi—a pulsing 
city or mycopolis—dependent on the fungi that support plants, create 
soil, filter rainwater, and spin the carbon cycle.
This is the story of people and fungi, the human-fungus symbiosis that 
spans the local to the global, revealing how our lives are influenced 
through rich relationships with these extraordinary microorganisms.PART I
Inward23
2
Touching
FUNGI ON THE SKIN
although we may be exposed to fungi in the womb, the coating of 
yeasts that forms when we are born marks the real beginning of the life￾long human-fungus symbiosis. Fungi enter the lungs and the digestive 
system as soon as we start breathing and breast- or bottle-feeding, but 
the skin remains the biggest territory for the fungi throughout life, the 
place where they dominate our microbiology. The skin is considered the 
largest human organ, and the fungi grow all over it, consuming natural 
oils and dead cells, supporting and irritating the folds and furrows of 
the external tissue or epithelium. They grow in the greatest numbers 
on the scalp, where one hundred thousand to one million yeasts can 24 chapter 2
huddle in the space of a postage stamp.1 If humans were squeezed to￾gether at this density, all eight billion of us would fit into a city the size 
of Los Angeles.2 When we look in the mirror and brush our hair, we 
have no sense of this congestion, but the fungi are in full swing, stirring 
the chemistry of the skin, bossing the tinier bacterial residents around, 
and causing the tissues to redden and flake when their routines are dis￾turbed by a new soap, shampoo, or lotion.
Most of our modesty can be concealed with a bath towel, but the skin 
surface available for microbial growth is more extensive, matching the 
area of thirty towels if we perform the thought experiment of flattening 
out the nooks and crannies of the five million hair follicles.3 The popula￾tions of fungi on this landscape are adjusted from birth to death, with 
yeasts and filamentous species coming and going according to rules that 
we are only beginning to understand. The numbers and kinds of fungi 
that grow from head to toes have also changed throughout history as we 
have wrapped ourselves with clothes, slipped on shoes, and doctored 
the environment with cosmetics and drug treatments. Going back even 
farther, the skin mycobiome has been making and remaking itself since 
modern humans emerged from the Rift Valley of Africa.
The skin is not the most inviting place for microorganisms, because 
food and water can be scarce. These challenges have led fungi that live 
on the scalp to specialize in feeding on the waxy sebum secreted from 
sebaceous glands and others to become very good at breaking down the 
keratin protein in the outermost layers of the skin. Perspiration provides 
salty water, and some of the residents overcome the aridity by produc￾ing their own water as they digest the fats in the sebum. Through these 
measures, yeasts and molds luxuriate on the skin. There are even more 
bacteria on the surface of the body, but this is where the dimensions of 
the fungal cells become pivotal. Although there are ten bacteria for 
every fungus on the skin, the fungi outweigh the bacteria by a factor 
of ten.4 This difference in size explains why the fungi are so important 
to the ecology of the skin. Fungi also abound in the gut, as we will see 
in chapter 5, but they do not fare quite as well as the bacteria. One of the 
reasons for this is that fungi like to be flushed with oxygen, which is 
quite limited in the intestines. Many of the gut bacteria are more flexible Touching 25
in their oxygen requirements, which explains their growth in the 
trillions.5
Understanding what fungi do on the skin surface is a work in pro￾gress for experts on the microbiology of the skin, with more questions 
than answers, and a lot of conflicting information about the identity of 
the fungi that support the clearest complexions, most luxurious hair, 
and healthiest nails. The importance of quite subtle changes in the skin 
mycobiome is illustrated by a complaint known as sensitive skin syn￾drome. This skin condition is very common, affecting more than half of 
all people, if we include very mild cases. Symptoms are subjective, mak￾ing it difficult to diagnose, and include stinging, burning, and tingling 
sensations that follow the use of cosmetics and exposure to everyday 
irritants. There are no visible signs of sensitive skin in most patients, but 
when reddened patches appear we call this erythema. The mycobiome 
was implicated in sensitive skin in a study from South Korea that found 
a greater diversity of fungi in skin swabs taken from women with the 
syndrome relative to control subjects.6 Malassezia yeasts were the most 
frequent fungi swabbed from the cheeks of all the women, but in the 
patients with sensitive skin, this yeast was diluted by a surge in the growth 
of other kinds of fungi, including a mold called Mucor. The mycobiome 
differed from case to case, with little uniformity between the communi￾ties of fungi that developed. Fungal involvement in the chronic skin 
inflammation in sufferers of psoriasis follows the same pattern as sensi￾tive skin syndrome, with a greater diversity of fungal species found in 
the patches of damaged skin compared with the intervening areas of 
healthy skin.7
This research shows that these skin conditions are associated with 
disruptions to the normal mycobiome. Dysbiosis is the term used to 
describe instances of microbial disturbance, whether they are associated 
with disease or not. Turbulent mycobiomes and microbiomes more 
generally are part of the normal pandemonium of nature, which makes 
it doubly difficult to determine when the appearance of an unusual fun￾gus means that something is amiss. Although skin inflammation can be 
a direct response to the growth of a particular fungal species, we do not 
refer to complaints like sensitive skin syndrome as infections. Diagnosis 26 chapter 2
of a fungal infection, or mycosis, requires a greater level of tissue dam￾age, but we are dealing with a continuum of symptoms associated with 
fungi on the skin rather than a clear distinction between an unsettled 
mycobiome and more problematic disease.
At both ends of the spectrum of fungal development on the skin, the 
behavior of the mycobiome is affected by the response of the immune 
system. The immune system has a definite role in shaping the mycobi￾ome, by permitting some fungi to grow and eradicating others. For its 
part, the mycobiome trains the immune system to recognize harmless 
and harmful adjustments in numbers and species. When we look at the 
most serious mycoses, we often find that they develop after damage to 
the immune defenses. Infections of our internal organs are featured in 
later chapters, but the mycoses of the skin arise from our continuous 
interactions with fungi in the environment and happen to people with 
perfectly healthy immune systems.
RINGWORM, ROBERT REMAK, AND RADIATION
Greek and Roman physicians were familiar with ringworm, which they 
lumped together with other scalp conditions and called porrigo.8 Public 
bathing in ancient Greece and Rome and the practice of pouring olive 
oil onto the skin and removing it with a curved blade or strigil was a 
surefire remedy against skin parasites.9 But the oiled skin was an invita￾tion for the growth of fungi, and ringworm was a common complaint 
in Rome. The first emperor, Caesar Augustus, was blemished with “a 
number of hard dry patches resembling ringworm, caused by vigorous 
use of the scraper on an itching skin,” and the affliction may have fac￾tored in the suicide of Roman senator Festus, who was desperately 
ashamed by “the deformity of a Ringworme in his face.”10
Ringworm is a general term for fungal infections that can take hold 
on any area of the skin. Early references to “rynge-worme” appear in the 
1400s, and toward the end of the seventeenth century John Aubrey, 
the writer and pioneering archaeologist, noted the resemblance of the 
skin lesions to the fairy rings produced by mushrooms in his Natural 
History of Wiltshire: “As to the green circles on the downes, vulgarly Touching 27
called faiery circles (dances), I presume they are generated from the 
breathing out of a fertile subterraneous vapour. (The ring-worme on a 
man’s flesh is circular. Excogitate a paralolisme between the cordial heat 
and ye subterranean heat, to elucidate this phenomenon.)”11 In other 
words, if we believe that fairy rings arise from the release of poisonous 
fumes from the earth, we might get at the root cause of ringworm by 
examining the humors of blood (air), phlegm (water), black bile (earth), 
and yellow bile (fire), on which the medicine of Aubrey’s day depended. 
This kind of deductive logic is the reason that Aristotle is such a poor 
guide to the workings of nature, although a few classical scholars may 
disagree with this brusque assessment. In any case, while Aubrey’s ob￾servations did not lead to any treatments for ringworm, he was spot-on 
about the similarities between fairy rings and the skin disease. In both 
cases, the hyphae of filamentous fungi start growing from single spores, 
striking outward in all directions at once to produce circular colonies.
More intentional investigations on disease-causing or pathogenic 
fungi began in the nineteenth century. Richard Owen, the famous anat￾omist, stirred interest in fungal infections when he discovered “a green 
vegetable mould or mucor” in the lungs of a flamingo during the dissec￾tion of a bird that had died in the London Zoo.12 Owen concluded that 
the fungus was a parasite that had been growing in the bird before its 
death. His study was one of a scattering of early descriptions of the my￾cosis called aspergillosis, which also occurs in humans, but the first 
proof that a fungus was responsible for human disease came from re￾search on ringworm. In 1842, twenty-seven-year-old medical researcher 
Robert Remak conducted a remarkable and unpleasant experiment by 
lifting a scab from the scalp of a patient suffering from ringworm and 
taping it to his own forearm.13 After two weeks, he noticed “a strong 
itching . . . [and] found a dark red spot the size of a vest button” at the 
inoculation site. Removing the crusty spot, he found the fungus embed￾ded in his skin, proving that it was responsible for ringworm.
Remak’s exploration of ringworm belongs to a tradition of profes￾sional commitment by medical researchers that includes deliberate self￾infection with the bacteria and viruses that cause stomach ulcers, yellow 
fever, relapsing fever, and venereal diseases, as well as the consumption of 28 chapter 2
radioactive dyes and self-catheterization of the heart.14 Some experiments 
in this vein led to Nobel Prizes, but the ethics of self-experimentation 
are problematic, may contravene the Hippocratic oath, and are assuredly 
at odds with modern guidelines for good clinical practices. Although 
his experimental approach was questionable, Remak clearly established 
that a fungus could cause an infection, and, remarkably, he had made 
this breakthrough twenty years before Louis Pasteur linked microbes 
to disease in his germ theory. Remak cared very little about scientific 
honors—the glittering prizes revered by most members of the academy. 
He was an unusually humble scientist who refused to take credit for his 
ringworm discovery, insisting, instead, that an older colleague had made 
the crucial insights. Today, he is recognized as one of the pioneers of 
medical mycology, which is the study of fungal infections and their 
treatment.
Fungi that cause ringworm feed in the outermost layers of the skin, 
where older cells are pushed to the surface by the underlying tissues. 
These cells are stuffed with fibrous keratin protein and become embed￾ded in a fatty matrix as they die. This structure has been likened to a 
brick-and-mortar wall. It forms a shield against dehydration from the 
inside and infection from the outside and is constantly renewed as 
the oldest cells are shed into the environment. Hyphae of the ringworm 
fungi invade this skin layer, releasing enzymes, digesting the protein and 
the fat, and expanding into their fairy rings. Hair and nails are also fash￾ioned from keratin and can become infected with ringworm fungi. In 
scalp ringworm, the fungi dive into the hair follicles and invade the hair 
shafts, feeding on the keratin until the hairs become brittle, fracture, and 
fall out, leaving bare spots on the scalp.
Ringworm fungi belong to the ascomycete group, which includes 
species of Penicillium that produce antibiotics, and Aspergillus that cause 
the lung infection found by Owen when he dissected the flamingo.15
Ringworm infections are dubbed with Latin names according to the 
sites where they grow and other distinguishing characteristics—tinea 
capitis for the scalp, tinea pedis for the foot, tinea unguium for the toe￾nails, and so on. Other skin infections come under the umbrella of tinea 
corporis, which includes a mycosis that spreads between young wrestlers Touching 29
and judo students that has been given the splendid name tinea corporis 
gladiatorum.16 Tinea corporis gladiatorum! If dermatologists pursued 
more of this kind of creative nomenclature, their patients might feel a 
modest elevation upon their diagnoses: “athlete’s foot” is a bit deflating, 
so, how about tinea pedis-athletarum, -gymnasticorum, or -victorum? Just 
an idea.
Ringworm infections are the commonest type of mycoses, affecting 
one billion or more of us at any time.17 Ringworm is an affliction of 
childhood, and the number of cases falls abruptly after puberty. This 
suggests that the fungi are rebuffed by the hormonal hurricane that al￾ters the chemistry of the skin secretions, reconditions the immune sys￾tem, and leaves most of us feeling quite unsettled for a while. Ringworm 
infections remain prevalent in sub-Saharan Africa, where a Kenyan 
study found that 81 percent of children from an “informal settlement,” 
or slum, in Nairobi suffered from tinea capitis—the scalp infection.18 A 
separate survey in rural Nigeria showed that almost half of the children 
in the ethnic Nok community were infected.19 The common name for 
tinea capitis used by the Nok is translated as “spider web,” which refers 
to the belief that spiders urinate on the heads of children, lay their eggs, 
and create the ringworm patterns of concentric rings when they spin 
their webs. At the time of the study, published in 2016, the local barber 
was shaving the heads of the children with the worst cases of ringworm. 
He sterilized his clippers between shearings by dousing the blades with 
denatured alcohol and igniting them with a cigarette lighter.
Poverty and poor hygiene have always been a magnet for ringworm 
infections, and they were very widespread in Europe when Robert 
Remak showed that they were caused by fungi. Compared with the 
early treatments recommended by Western experts, the Nigerian bar￾ber’s remedy seems very gentle. Complete hair removal was a common 
treatment, which involved plastering the scalp with molten tar or resin. 
This paste was left to harden into a solid cap that was ripped away, carry￾ing infected and uninfected hairs as well as skin tissue and, I imagine, 
leaving the poor child blinking in horror and traumatized for life.20 This 
seems to have been a popular remedy in the nineteenth century. Doses 
of thallium acetate, or rat poison, produced the same effect, although 30 chapter 2
the drawback of prescribing an oral medication whose “therapeutic 
dose is so near the limit of the lethal dose” could not be ignored when 
children started dying.21
Ringworm spreads from person to person via infected skin cells, and 
outbreaks became common during the industrial revolution among 
children living in the “rookeries” or slums of London and other over￾crowded cities. Orphanages and boarding schools—think Nicholas 
Nickleby—were breeding grounds for fungi, and then, in the 1890s, 
there was a medical breakthrough in the treatment of ringworm: X-ray 
epilation. Hair loss was observed in people treated with X-rays for other 
skin conditions, so the application of the technology for deliberate hair 
removal seemed an obvious step. The effectiveness of the method was 
undeniable. What could possibly go wrong? The Lancet published a let￾ter in 1896 suggesting that gentlemen should zap their chin hairs with 
X-rays for a few minutes every evening to save the effort of shaving the 
next morning.22 This practice failed to catch on, but women visited 
“Tricho” salons where cosmetic X-ray machines were used for removing 
unwanted hair until 1929.
The danger of the procedure was evident from the fact that the inven￾tor of these appliances went on to have his left hand amputated to stop the 
spread of cancer and experienced the loss of his right hand to ulcer￾ation.23 But enthusiasm for curing ringworm with radiation continued 
in the 1930s, when a distinguished London radiologist wrote, “Even if, 
through some error in technique, an overdose is given, the worst that 
can happen is an X-ray burn.”24 This reckless attitude persisted for 
decades, and hundreds of thousands of children were treated before 
the therapy fizzled out in the 1960s. Radiation exposures varied, and the 
redirection of the beams toward dif­ferent parts of the head during a 
treatment session reduced the damage to any single spot. Nevertheless, 
there is no doubt that children received X-ray dosages that we reserve for 
the treatment of brain tumors today, and which, tragically, may have 
caused brain tumors in an untold number of these patients in later life.
The frequent repetition of the word “may” in this book (and other 
expressions of possibility rather than certainty) is demanded by the sci￾ence. In the ringworm X-ray story, we are not sure that the treatment Touching 31
resulted in the development of cancer in adulthood. It is very difficult 
to tie individual cases of cancer to a particular exposure to radiation, 
and so we pursue epidemiological studies in which we gather informa￾tion on as many ringworm patients as possible and see what happened 
to them in later life. If there is a clear spike in brain tumors in these 
patients compared with untreated controls, we edge closer to scientific 
certainty. If the number of cancer cases is no greater, or not much 
greater, than the background, we are left with an unresolved problem. 
Some of the studies on ringworm patients suggest that there is a link 
between the use of radiation and cancer, while others do not.25 It is pos￾sible that we will never know for sure. Besides the fear of a cancer diag￾nosis, some Israeli girls treated with X-rays suffered from permanent 
hair loss that left them with lifelong cosmetic and psychiatric chal￾lenges.26 However we look at it, this ringworm treatment was a low 
point in medical mycology.
Most ringworm fungi provoke a relatively mild response from the 
immune system, and some children with disfiguring skin infections are 
spared from intense itching and other symptoms of inflammation. This 
blessing is a feature of the limitation of fungal growth to the layers of 
dead skin cells and separation from the deeper tissues patrolled by the 
active cells of the immune system. The ringworm fungi also use various 
tricks to camouflage themselves while they feed on the skin. One of 
these mechanisms allows the fungus to conceal molecules on the sur￾face of its hyphal filaments that otherwise serve as alarm bells for the 
immune defenses. This invisibility cloak evolved over tens of millions 
of years, as soil fungi adapted themselves for growing on the skin of dif￾ferent kinds of animals. Relatives of the human ringworm fungi colonize 
other mammals without causing any obvious harm, but they can dam￾age our skin if they are transferred from farm animals or pets. Infections 
that come from other animals are called zoonoses, and they are a good 
reason for avoiding contact with hedgehogs. Intimacy with hedgehogs 
does not concern most of us, but cases of ringworm infections among 
lovers of these spiny animals are surprisingly common. Dogs and cats 
are more common sources of human ringworm, and the ubiquity of 
these pets makes these zoonotic infections inevitable.27 Islamic 32 chapter 2
prohibitions against keeping dogs in the home seem entirely reasonable 
from a mycological viewpoint.
Fortunately, the development of antifungal medicines means that 
ringworm infections can be cured today without recourse to violent 
epilation, rat poison, or X-rays. Griseofulvin was discovered in the 
1930s, and its use for treating ringworm began in the 1950s. It is made 
naturally by a species of Penicillium that causes blue mold on harvested 
apples and is a close relative of the fungi that produce the penicillin 
antibiotics. Griseofulvin is taken as an oral medication and kills the 
ringworm fungi from the inside out, making its way to the skin sur￾face where it infiltrates the hair follicles and destroys the hyphae from 
the bottom of the hair shafts toward the tips. It works by disrupting the 
division of nuclei inside the hyphae. Other antifungal drugs effective 
against ringworm include terbinafine and azole antifungals that disrupt 
fungal membranes. Apple cider vinegar, tea tree oil, and raw honey are 
some of the natural products promoted as alternative treatments for 
ringworm. (We look at antifungal drugs in more detail in chapter 4.)
DANDRUFF
Outbreaks of scalp ringworm in children are uncommon in more pros￾perous countries today, and the drug treatments are effective in treating 
individual cases when they develop. This does not mean that the scalp 
has become a microbiological desert. Far from it. It is a hive of fungal 
activity throughout our lives, no matter how many times we wash our 
hair. Most of the fungi that grow on the skin do so as yeasts rather than 
molds, as blobs rather than webs. This is a good thing, because yeasts 
stay on surfaces, whereas molds, or filamentous fungi, are fashioned for 
penetrating tissues, and nothing good comes from skin invasion by 
fungi. Species of Malassezia yeasts are the dominant fungi on the scalp. 
They are named for a French anatomist, Louis-Charles Malassez, who 
found them growing in skin flakes scraped from patients suffering from 
seborrheic dermatitis. Seborrheic dermatitis is an extreme form of dan￾druff, sharing many of its characteristics with the snowiness of hair that 
afflicts a good chunk of humanity to varying degrees. Both complaints Touching 33
involve the multiplication of Malassezia in the sebum exuded from the 
sebaceous glands. The mouths of these microscopic glands open into 
the hair follicles wherever we are hairy, and directly on the skin surface 
in places where we are not. Sweat glands are separate things that release 
more watery secretions whose evaporation is key to controlling body 
temperature.
Sebum is marvelously complicated stuff that contains a mélange of 
fats and oils and is produced in varying amounts according to age and 
sex—more in men than women—and serves as the dietary staple for 
the yeasts that live on the skin. These fungi are so perfectly adapted to 
life on the skin that they have lost the ability to produce their own fatty 
acids like other organisms and draw everything they need from the 
sebum. We consume fats, of course, but our ability to manufacture fatty 
acids from sugars in the diet is essential for constructing membranes and 
performing all kinds of other metabolic tasks. By surrendering this al￾most universal biochemical capability, the evolving yeast saved a great 
deal of energy and bonded itself to the skin for the rest of forever.28
Malassezia belongs to the basidiomycete group of fungi rather than the 
ascomycetes that include the molds that cause ringworm. Fungi that 
form gilled mushrooms are classified as basidiomycetes, but the closest 
relative of the dandruff yeast is a fungus that causes a crop disease called 
corn or maize smut. (The infected ears become filled with blackened 
spores that are used as an ingredient in Mexican cooking called huitlaco￾che.) Both of these fungi—dandruff yeast and corn smut—are special￾ized organisms that have become completely dependent on their hosts.
Dandruff is an inflammatory condition that develops as the yeast 
works its way into the skin, feeding on the sebum and releasing irritating 
compounds onto the scalp. This disturbance to the skin chemistry alerts 
the immune system, which responds by mobilizing macrophages and 
killer cells against the fungus. Itching and skin flaking are symptoms of 
the unfolding turmoil on the scalp. Malassezia lives on everyone, so the 
reason that some of us are spared dandruff and others itch, scratch, and 
flake is a bit of a mystery. What we do know, however, is how to treat it.
Early in my research career, I worked at Yale University with a visiting 
scientist from the Soviet Bloc who was very careful with money, saving 34 chapter 2
as much as he could from his salary to keep him in relative comfort 
when he went home. To this end, he collected sachets of ketchup and 
mayonnaise from fast-food restaurants rather than purchasing these 
condiments from the grocery store. Dandruff was a significant problem 
for this expert on fungal physiology, and rather than wasting money on 
the medicated shampoo that I recommended, he set off to find some 
stinging nettles, which, he explained, are a natural balm for all scalp 
problems. Finding a patch of nettles behind our lab building, he boiled 
the leaves, mixed them with vegetable oil, and before long his hair shone 
like Samson’s mane. An alternative remedy chosen by more than one 
billion dandruff sufferers comes in plastic squeeze bottles filled with 
the best-selling shampoo in the world, namely, Head & Shoulders, 
manufactured by the Procter & Gamble Company. This lucrative prod￾uct has been on the market since the 1960s.
Dandruff shampoos kill the dandruff fungus with various formula￾tions containing pyrithione zinc, selenium sulfide, and piroctone ola￾mine. I am detailing the names of these chemicals so that you can look 
at the small print on your shampoo bottles and see which ones you are 
lathering into your hair. They kill the fungus by messing up its mem￾branes, which either starves or poisons the cell.29 The control of dan￾druff is a triumph of Western science. Not as spectacular as antibiotics 
or vaccines, but something to smile about when you grab the shampoo 
in the drugstore. I have begun to wonder, however, if there may be a 
downside to this pharmacological battle against the yeasts that have 
lived peacefully on the human scalp for millennia.
If we use the guesstimate of two hundred thousand years for the ori￾gin of our species, the natural symbiosis between humans and the scalp 
yeasts endured for 99.97 percent of our partnership before we began 
killing them with shampoo. If a single species of Malassezia was the sole 
occupant of the skin microbiome and we struck it down with shampoo 
in the pursuit of lustrous unflaked hair, there would be little else to say. 
But the scalp is a more complex ecosystem, where multiple kinds of 
yeasts are found, filamentous fungi show up with some regularity, and 
both kinds of fungi share the neighborhood with bacteria.30 These mi￾croorganisms work with one another, and against each other, rising and Touching 35
falling in numbers as the bearer of the scalp moves from childhood to 
adolescence and onward to adulthood and old age. The daily use of 
antidandruff shampoos does not seem to cause any side effects, and we 
certainly feel blessed by the absence of itching and flaking if we have 
experienced the alternative. But another fungus that grows on the skin 
has made me think a little deeper about the consequences of manipulat￾ing the mycobiome.
AN EMERGING AND DANGEROUS YEAST
In 2009, a new kind of yeast was discovered in the ear canal of a seventy￾year-old woman in a Tokyo hospital. The DNA signature of this fungus 
was sufficiently dif­ferent from other species that it was given a new 
name: Candida auris. Since then, this yeast has become a global 
plague—plague may be a term too fearsome, although it is infecting and 
killing hospital patients across the world and is resistant to every type 
of antifungal medicine. Candida auris grows on the skin of patients who 
pick up the fungus in hospitals where it has already made itself at home 
on other patients and sticks to the surfaces of medical devices.31 As long 
as it remains on the skin it does not do any harm. The problems unfold 
when the yeast makes its way into the bloodstream through catheters 
inserted into veins to deliver fluids or drugs. Once inside the body, it 
multiplies by shedding buds from its cell surface and spreads to the 
kidneys, heart, brain, and other organs, causing fever, breathing prob￾lems, and fluid retention. The mortality rate for the worst infections 
approaches 60 percent. In the same year that this new species was de￾scribed in Japan, reports of hospital infections caused by the yeast came 
from South Africa and India, and then, in the following year, in Kenya. 
Soon, the fungus was spreading across dozens of countries.32
Genetic analysis has shown that there are four distinctive popula￾tions of Candida auris and that this fungus evolved very recently in bio￾logical terms.33 The estimated timeline for this evolutionary process 
comes from changes in the DNA sequences of yeasts belonging to the 
dif­ferent populations. The kinds of genetic variations identified in these 
studies develop at a relatively constant rate, and so the number of 36 chapter 2
alterations in the DNA sequences serve as a molecular clock for re￾searchers. This clock suggests that the oldest population of Candida 
auris emerged in the middle of the seventeenth century—around the 
time of the Great Plague and Great Fire of London, and that the strains 
of the fungus that cause the most aggressive infections developed as 
recently as the 1980s. Using the incredible power of whole genome se￾quencing, we can follow the pulse of the DNA of this pathogen across 
four centuries and witness its appearance as a major threat to human 
health. This is a remarkable piece of work. A second discovery shows 
that the yeast is not completely dependent on human skin, because it 
has been found in sediment samples from a salt marsh and a sandy 
beach on the Andaman Islands in India.34 How and why it began killing 
humans is not known, but there are some clues.
One provocative suggestion is that global warming has led to the evo￾lution of hyperaggressive yeast strains that can thrive in the warmth of 
the human body.35 This seems unlikely, because the increase in average 
global temperatures has been too small to push the fungi beyond their 
existing comfort zones. The majority of fungi, which we call mesophiles, 
grow fastest at 25°C–30°C (77°F–86°F), but many of them can keep 
growing until the temperature approaches 40°C (104°F). Our body tem￾perature is challenging for these fungi rather than crushing. On the other 
hand, shifting weather patterns related to global warming may have a 
significant effect on the distribution of hotspots for fungal asthma (see 
chapter 3) and outbreaks of life-threatening mycoses (see chapter 4).
Setting aside its temperature tolerance, other alterations to the eco￾logical experience of Candida auris may be more significant in its recent 
development as a pathogen. We know that the use of antifungal drugs 
introduced in the 1980s has driven the emergence of resistant strains of 
other species of Candida, and this process might apply to Candida 
auris.36 These medicines, which include ketoconazole and fluconazole, 
are examples of the azole antifungals that continue to be used to treat all 
kinds of fungal infections. Azoles and other antifungal agents are also 
used to control fungal diseases of crop plants, and their presence in the 
environment is likely to drive the emergence of resistant strains of fungi 
that could attack our food supply and our bodies.37Touching 37
The use of dandruff shampoo is so pervasive that we do not think of 
it as an antifungal agent, but many of us use this as a daily mycobiome 
disrupter. Malassezia is the unchallenged monarch of the skin until it is 
drowned with toxins when we stand in the shower and lather our hair. 
The antifungal agents in these hair products cause monumental changes 
in the ecology of the skin, and a fungus that can rise to the challenge by 
surviving the shampoo will prosper in the vacuum left by Queen Malas￾sezia. This is natural selection pure and simple. Precisely the same thing 
happens when an antibiotic is used to treat bacterial infections: a strain 
of the bacteria that develops resistance takes over from its defenseless 
relatives, offering the classic example of evolution by natural selection. 
This process explains the emergence of lethal bacterial infections that 
do not respond to antibiotic treatment. So, along with the proliferation 
of antifungal medicines and agricultural fungicides, the popularity of 
dandruff shampoo should be considered as a global invitation for the 
evolution of worrisome strains of fungi that can interact with the human 
body. We do not know why Candida auris became a problem in the 
1980s, but the answer may lie somewhere in the growing use of antifun￾gal products.
ATHLETE’S FOOT: THE DOWNSIDE OF SHOES
We have remained at the head end of the human-fungus symbiosis for 
most of this chapter, and now we move to the feet for the climax. To find 
the earliest case of fungal infection caused by an otherwise life￾enhancing invention, we have to look deeply into human history and 
examine a 5,500-year-old shoe discovered in an Armenian cave.38 The 
shoe was made from a single piece of animal hide, which was wrapped 
around the foot and laced together on top. This is the oldest known 
closed shoe, and the essence of the design is responsible for athlete’s 
foot. The Armenian shoemaker was embarking on an unconscious my￾cological experiment with a wearable consumer product, much like the 
later inventors of contact lenses, which come with their own fungal 
complications.39 While a closed leather shoe provides warmth in tem￾perate climates, protects the wearer from sharp objects on the ground, 38 chapter 2
and, let’s face it, looks very stylish, it can create a hot and humid cham￾ber that is as close to perfection for cultivating fungi as a throbbing 
stainless-steel incubator in a mycology lab. The result, for susceptible 
individuals, is ringworm of the foot, tinea pedis, which may be the most 
widespread fungal infection of our species.
The Romans we met earlier who developed spots of ringworm on the 
rest of their oiled bodies avoided the foot complaint by wearing open 
sandals. Sandals also protected Latin wearers from a dreadful fungal 
infection called mycetoma that is acquired by stepping on thorns bear￾ing the fungus. Forced into the tissues, this terrible fungus bores inter￾connected channels or galleries throughout the foot that open onto the 
skin surface and discharge a watery fluid infiltrated with infectious 
grains.40 Evidence of the disease has been found in the skeleton of a 
Roman who died in his late forties or early fifties in the second or third 
century AD. The bones of both of his feet have the moth-eaten look that 
is characteristic of this mycosis.41 Mycetoma is a subtropical disease 
whose distribution suggests that he might have acquired the infection 
when he served in one of the North African provinces. Perhaps he took 
off his sandals to play the Roman ball game harpastum with the locals. 
The infection is also known as Madura foot, after the district of Madurai 
in South India, where cases caught the attention of colonial doctors in 
the nineteenth century. (Carrying bundles of wood on the head or 
shoulders leads to rare cases of Madura head. An image search for this 
awful disease should be avoided before bedtime.42) Sporotrichosis 
caused by the fungus Sporothrix is another infection that can begin with 
a thorn prick and is called rose handler’s disease.43
Returning to the mycological perils of wearing closed shoes, the typi￾cal cause of athlete’s foot is the fungus Trichophyton rubrum, which 
evolved in Africa. We know that this fungus arose in Africa because this 
is where the species harbors its greatest genetic diversity today.44
This pattern of maximal genetic variation exists in the homelands of 
most species of all organisms for the simple reason that the process 
of mutation—which is the source of variation—occurs continuously 
and has more time to increase the diversity of a species where it origi￾nates than in locations where it arrives as smaller populations of Touching 39
migrants later in its history. The greatest genetic diversity in our species 
is found in Africa, the same continent as Trichophyton, and it seems 
certain that we left there together, fungus on foot, and spread across the 
planet. Ringworm may have been a minor problem before the exodus, 
growing on dead skin cells without moving any deeper. Closed shoes 
provided the opportunity for more luxuriant growth of the fungus, and 
some strains became more virulent as they encountered stronger 
resistance from the immune defenses. The same fungus is one of the 
species that infects toenails causing onychomycosis, although poor cir￾culation in older patients is a major risk factor rather than simply wear￾ing closed shoes.
Powders and creams for treating athlete’s foot have a global market 
value approaching $1.7 billion.45 This is not surprising, given the shelf 
space occupied by these products in pharmacies. Medicated shampoos 
are worth more than $12 billion, and dandruff is the most prevalent 
health complaint caused by fungi, although the fact that it is caused by 
a fungus is a detail that escapes most sufferers. The overgrowth of vagi￾nal yeast, which we address in chapter 5, is a comparable problem in
terms of the number of cases and far worse when we consider the 
symptoms. And, again, many sufferers may not think of yeasts as fungi. 
On the other hand, everyone knows that athlete’s foot is caused by a 
fungus, which means that the space between our toes, the web space, is 
the most familiar interface between the human body and the mycologi￾cal world. The discomfort caused by this everlasting pandemic is one of 
the most obvious expressions of our deep and evolving relationship 
with the fungi. More problematic, although less visible than reddened 
and peeling skin between the toes, is the inhalation of fungal spores that 
accompanies every breath. This is the subject of chapter 3.40
3
Breathing
SPORES IN THE LUNGS
i am obsessed with spores and have invested a sizable chunk of my 
professional life in understanding how they get into the air.1 This ad￾mission is more likely to attract pity than interest until you consider 
the beauty of the dispersal mechanisms used by fungi. Start by lying 
on the grass next to a mushroom at night and using your phone flash￾light to illuminate the underside of the fruit body. Move the light 
around until you see the smoke that pours and swirls from the cap. That Breathing 41
smoke is composed of hundreds of thousands of spores, which are pro￾pelled from the gills by little drops of water. There is grandeur in this 
view of life.
Mushrooms are one of the sources of airborne particles that join the 
clouds of spores released by the molds that grow on plants and every 
other surface in nature. The air is filled with spores, and we inhale them 
with every breath. These microscopic specks are destroyed after they 
stick to the mucus in our airways, but they carry irritating proteins 
called allergens that are as damaging to asthmatic lungs as birds sucked 
into jet engines. Asthma and other illnesses that result from the inhala￾tion of spores are the subject of this chapter.
Air seems to coagulate during an asthma attack, with each inhalation 
urgently demanding conscious attention. Suffering from a severe bout 
of asthma in England in July 1969, I spent hours bath-robed in front of 
the television, watching the coverage of the Apollo 11 mission on the 
BBC. As Armstrong and Aldrin explored the lunar surface, the pauses 
in their conversations with Mission Control in Houston seemed to syn￾chronize with the laborious rhythm of my breaths, so that I began to 
imagine that I was with them on the Moon. It was an oxygen-deprived 
hallucination. Looking at the night sky after Armstrong’s step and the 
flag planting, it seemed that the Moon belonged to America. This evi￾dence of the power of science convinced me that America was the place 
to be, not this chilly island with its stifling air supply, but the land that 
made all things seem possible.
Hamlet was struggling with ennui rather than breathing when he 
described the air as “a foul and pestilent congregation of vapors,” but 
this is a perfect assessment of the atmosphere for an asthmatic. An 
English physician, John Floyer, described the feeling of an asthma at￾tack in his classic study of the illness, A Treatise of the Asthma, pub￾lished in 1698: “The asthma is a laborious respiration, with lifting up of 
the shoulders, and wheezing, from the compression, obstruction, and 
coarctation [narrowing] of some branches of the bronchia, and some 
lobes and bladders of the lungs.”2 Anyone who has experienced asthma 
will recognize the “lifting up of the shoulders,” which is an automatic 
reaction to restricted airflow. Sit in a chair, keep your mouth closed, 42 chapter 3
pinch your nostrils until they start to flare on their own, and you will 
feel your shoulders rise after a few restricted breaths. Asthma reduces 
the space inside the lungs, and assuming a more upright position and 
raising the shoulders are subconscious strategies to force the airways 
open, to create more space. Doctor Floyer wrote from personal experi￾ence: “I have suffered,” he wrote, “under the tyranny of the asthma at 
least thirty years.”
Fungal spores are responsible for much of the tyranny of asthma. 
When we vacuum air though a filter and examine the harvest on its sur￾face with a microscope, we find particles that look like tiny shards of 
broken glass, minute globes and ellipsoidal eggs, broken strands, 
fallen missiles, and juggler’s clubs—a toy chest of the insane. These are 
the spores of fungi, made visible with the low power of the micro￾scope, along with the larger pollen grains from plants. Bacterial rods 
and blobs appear at higher magnification, while the viruses remain 
invisible until we view the finest air filters with an electron micro￾scope. We live in this soup.
Soup is an imperfect metaphor, because air is so thin and spores are 
so vanishingly small.3 One hundred thousand spores per cubic meter is 
considered a very high concentration by experts on air quality; 10,000 
spores is a moderate number, and 1,000 spores is very low. At rest, we 
take an average of twelve breaths per minute and inhale and exhale 
around six liters of air. This means that one spore is drawn into the lungs 
with every other breath when there are 1,000 spores suspended in each 
cubic meter of the surrounding air, five spores per breath at 10,000 
spores per cubic meter, and so on. Some of the spores are immediately 
expelled when we exhale, others stick to the mucus in the lungs. Over a 
lifetime, this equates to lung contact with more than one billion spores, 
which is a lot of spores, but amounts to no more than the weight of a 
pea.4 How on earth, one may ask, can so slight an interaction result in 
decades of suffering for an asthmatic? The answer is found by grasping 
what the immune system is programmed to do and why the hairsprings 
of this intricate machine respond to unwanted triggers.
The immune system is active every moment of our lives, working flat 
out to keep us alive when we are in serious trouble and scanning the Breathing 43
body the rest of the time, alert to microbial intruders and all manner of 
irritating materials from the environment. The defenses are also alarmed 
by our own cells that become cancerous and purge them from the body 
before they do any harm. We distinguish between two arms of the im￾mune system, although they work together.5 The innate immune system 
is the first line of defense that is mobilized when immune cells recognize 
the chemical signatures of broad categories of invaders, namely, viruses, 
bacteria, amoebas, and fungi. There is very little specificity here. The 
body senses that it is under attack and throws the kitchen sink at these 
intruders. Cells that detect the unwelcome arrivals release little proteins 
called cytokines that summon multiple kinds of immune cells to de￾stroy them. More bespoke defenses against specific pathogens are 
furnished by the adaptive immune system, which uses antibodies to 
neutralize infectious microorganisms.
Fungal allergies and fungal infections are very dif­ferent illnesses. Fun￾gal asthma and other allergies happen when the body is responding to 
mere contact with spores rather than trying to stop a fungus from grow￾ing in our tissues. The symptoms of allergy are produced by the adaptive 
immune system.6 Many of the spores flowing through the nostrils get 
trapped on the nose hairs and in the mucus that lines the upper air￾ways. Those that escape these obstacles float all the way down into the 
lungs. Proteins attached to the surface of the spores dissolve in the lung 
mucus. These proteins are the allergens recognized by the bodies of 
people sensitized to the spores, meaning that they bind immediately to 
the surface of cells of the immune system called mast cells and baso￾phils. This is a chemical reaction, like a key fitting in a lock—the lock 
installed on the mast cells and basophils—which is perfectly shaped to 
receive the protein key carried by the fungus. When the key is turned, 
the immune cells release histamine and other molecules that cause 
blood vessels to dilate and the airways in the lung to constrict and fill 
with mucus. This is what we mean by inflammation of the lungs. Asthma 
is an allergy that can be caused by sensitivity to many irritants including 
pollen grains, dust mites, and pet dander, in addition to fungal spores. 
Hay fever or allergic rhinitis is another type of allergy that can be caused 
by spores.44 chapter 3
FUNGI AS ONE OF THE PRINCIPAL CAUSES OF ASTHMA
Asthma was an inexplicable ailment until the twentieth century. The 
confusion in the Victorian era is evident in a booklet titled Spasmodic 
Asthma, published in 1879, which suggested that “atmospheric electric￾ity” was a significant cause of asthma, along with a variety of “vegetable 
emanations . . . also the smell of certain animals . . . [and] dust of all 
sorts.”7 This was written by William Steavenson, a London physician 
and asthma sufferer, who discussed an assortment of treatments, includ￾ing tobacco, hallucinogenic plants, and amyl nitrite (known in recre￾ational settings today as “poppers”), and concluded, “I hardly want any 
other remedy so long as I have my syringe and solution of morphia.” 
With unlimited access to his chosen narcotic, he eschewed the therapy 
recommended by a German professor, “who relieves his attacks by plac￾ing himself on a stool with glass legs and connecting himself with an 
electric machine which is worked until he is able to emit sparks from 
the ends of his fingers.” Reading Steavenson, one gets the impression of 
an asthma enthusiast, someone who reveled in the study of his condi￾tion, although it is worth mentioning that lung inflammation killed him 
at the age of forty-one.8
Proof that fungi cause allergies comes from tests in which extracts 
from spores are pricked into the skin, and irritated mast cells release his￾tamine causing inflammation. This immune response produces a pale 
bump surrounded by reddened skin and is known as the wheal-and-flare 
reaction. What happens on the skin is an imperfect guide to the types of 
allergens responsible for inflammation of the lungs, but this test is the 
next best thing, when inhaling dif­ferent dusts to see which ones elicit an 
asthma attack carries the risk of death. Although self-experimentation 
with allergens is a dangerous venture, this was the approach taken by 
Charles Blackley, a Manchester physician, who provoked his own symp￾toms of hay fever by deliberately inhaling spores from moldy straw in the 
1870s.9 Blackley showed that spores or something else in the decompos￾ing straw produced an allergic response. The difference between hay 
fever and asthma, or hay asthma, was unclear in his time, and some physi￾cians used the terms interchangeably. Today, hay fever is the popular Breathing 45
term for allergic rhinitis, which is the nasal allergy caused by pollen re￾leased from crop plants and by fungal spores.
There are three lines of evidence that the inhalation of fungal spores 
is one of the principal causes of asthma.10 First, studies have shown high 
rates of fungal sensitivity in skin tests among children with severe 
asthma, compared, of course, with non-asthmatic controls. Next, 
asthma attacks and asthma deaths increase on days when airborne spore 
counts rise above one thousand spores per cubic meter; and third, hos￾pital admissions for asthma increase after a thunderstorm. Thunder￾storm asthma is a complicated business. It has been assumed that spore 
numbers increase because heavy rainfall soaks the surface of plants and 
stimulates the growth of microscopic yeasts and molds, and the accom￾panying wind gusts drive the spores of these active fungi into the air. 
This is the grow and blow model of dispersal.11 But when we compare 
detailed meteorological records with spore counts, it appears that there 
is a sharp increase in the number of spores in the hours just before a 
storm.12 This is affirmed by many asthmatics who say that they can fore￾cast thunderstorms from a surge in their breathing difficulties, which 
suggests that there is more to this dispersal mechanism than high wind￾speeds. Adapting the famous aphorism of H. L. Mencken about answers 
to human problems, we can agree, “There is always a well-known solu￾tion to every [mycological] question—neat, plausible, and wrong.”
Despite this evidence, fungi seem to be an afterthought for many 
specialists in the study and treatment of asthma. Barring the recruit￾ment of volunteers to sit in spore-filled wind tunnels and waiting for the 
asthmatics to start gasping for breath, there is nothing else that can be 
done to convince the skeptics. Asthma is certainly caused by other ir￾ritants, but with millions of tons of fungal spores flying around the 
planet, the case is pretty tight. Pollen and hay fever are united in popular 
thinking, but mold spores and asthma remain separated. Spores are not 
even mentioned in Asthma: The Biography, authored by Mark Jackson 
in 2009, which is an equivalent omission to ignoring bullets in a book 
about gunshot wounds, or cigarettes in a study of lung cancer.13 Jackson 
is not alone in the omission of the fungal connection in asthma. Even 
some pulmonologists (lung specialists) show little interest in the 46 chapter 3
evidence that mold spores are a serious problem for many asthmatics. 
They have one foot in the twenty-first century and the other in the nine￾teenth. Clinical studies on asthma ignore the fungi, and too many physi￾cians continue to endorse the long-standing claim that it is a psychoso￾matic condition, which it is not. This notion is a holdover from the era 
when allergies became associated with the educated classes, or “persons 
of cultivation,” as one Harley Street physician put it in the 1880s, before 
he added that these afflictions were “proof of our [British] superiority 
to other races.”14 In the following century, a German doctor pronounced 
that the typical allergic patient was a delicate, “lower middle class” child, 
“ill-equipped for life and . . . liable to maladjustment.”15 So, asthma was, 
simultaneously, a badge of refinement and of ruination!
Some of the studies that have identified psychiatric contributions to 
asthma have ignored the challenge of disentangling cause from effect.16
If asthmatics display anxiety-related disorders more frequently than 
non-asthmatics, this could be explained by the stress caused by their 
experiences of the illness and the resulting fearfulness of the invisible 
“carpet monsters,” as I put it in an earlier book, that cause their lungs to 
shut down.17 It is possible, too, that genes that increase susceptibility 
to asthma are linked to other stress responses. If, for example, asthma pa￾tients were more likely to develop depressive disorders, this would not 
relegate asthma to the lower status of a psychiatric rather than a physical 
illness, which is, of course, a false and damaging distinction in the first 
place. The tendency to dismiss idiopathic conditions—those without a 
known cause—as merely psychological in origin is quite widespread. 
Epilepsy, fibromyalgia, irritable bowel syndrome, and long COVID and 
other chronic illnesses following viral infections are examples of health 
conditions for which we have been unable to pinpoint a physical cause 
and have tended therefore to dismiss as psychosomatic.18
Marcel Proust, the most famous asthmatic, was frustrated by his 
father, who regarded his son’s breathlessness as a big pretense that was 
“due to his insecure, sensitive, and dependent personality.”19 Proust cap￾tured the tragic nature of this interaction between family and invalid: 
“the poor suffocating patient who, through eyes filled with tears, smiles 
at the people who are sympathizing without being able to help him.”Breathing 47
WHY DOES FUNGAL ASTHMA EXIST?
Allergies are caused by an oversensitivity to substances that the body 
treats as a threat to survival, when, in fact, the real danger lies in the 
symptoms of the allergy rather than the irritant itself. The trouble￾some proteins on the fungal spores are part of their structure and in￾clude enzymes that the fungus uses to grow in the soil and on plant 
surfaces.20 They are harmless unless we react to them, which begs a 
question: Why is anyone allergic to fungal spores?
Compelling answers come from the perspective of evolutionary 
medicine, which maintains that many illnesses are rooted in the deep 
ancestry of Homo sapiens as well as the more recent history of our spe￾cies. My favorite idea comes from the suggestion that the allergic re￾sponse in the lungs evolved as a protective mechanism to limit exposure 
to noxious chemicals and to fungi that can cause lethal infections.21 By 
narrowing the airways and reducing lung capacity, symptoms of asthma 
certainly reduce the volume of inhaled air, which would be a good thing 
if this was not accompanied by suffocation. But as long as the symptoms 
of inflammation are short-lived, the cost of decreased respiration may 
be worthwhile. Evolution is blind to suffering if the organism lives long 
enough to send its genes down the great stream of time. We have no idea 
how often our allergic reactions to fungal spores save us from serious 
infections. Many of the spores that reach the lungs belong to fungi that 
are very unlikely to grow in our tissues, although some show this capa￾bility in patients with impaired immune systems, as we will see later in 
this chapter. It is certainly possible that asthma and asymptomatic reac￾tions to spores are lifesavers.
The risk of inhaling spores that can cause an infection has always 
been around because we live on a very fungal planet. The situation wors￾ened when we abandoned our ancient hunter-gatherer and nomadic 
lifestyles in favor of living in agricultural settlements. Cereal agriculture 
demands grain storage, and stored grain is easily spoiled by molds, 
whose spores can become airborne in huge numbers.22 We see the same 
phenomenon in cattle barns, where molds proliferate on animal feed 
and bedding materials and create clouds of millions of spores per cubic 48 chapter 3
meter of air when they are disturbed by the livestock or farm workers. 
This agricultural explanation of asthma suggests that a symptomless 
reaction to spores and pollen that we possessed earlier in human history 
ramped up when we began to be exposed to masses of spores on farms. 
As long as the children of farmers were not debilitated by asthma and 
became parents themselves, the genes that controlled these relatively 
mild reactions to spores would have spread. The perpetuation of these 
forms of allergy as a protection against infection would have outweighed 
the costs.
The jump from relatively innocuous immune responses to spores to 
severe asthma may have occurred when families migrated from smaller 
agricultural settlements to cities, where interactions with fungi and other 
allergens were limited by the relative cleanliness of their homes. This 
seems counterintuitive, because urban life separated us from the muck 
of the farm, but the cleaner air meant that the immune systems of 
children in cities was not conditioned properly. In the first weeks of life, 
the infant body was not taught to ignore, or to react very gently, to the 
moldiness that had been unavoidable on farms. This led to asthma at￾tacks when children with this exaggerated sensitivity were exposed to 
high levels of spores outdoors at certain times of the year. The problem 
has become heightened among children in the modern indoor environ￾ment, where severe asthma is an epidemic in some cities.23 This explana￾tion for asthma and other allergies is known as the hygiene hypothesis. 
Children who live with pet dogs and cats seem to gain some protection 
against allergies from the early exposure to their dander, which supports 
the overall virtue of training the immune system as soon as possible to 
deal with the rest of nature. The hygiene hypothesis remains controver￾sial, and childhood asthma is complicated by genetic predisposition and 
may be worsened by bacterial and viral infections early in life.24
Asthmatic or not, there is no escaping the fungi. All homes are moldy. 
Some are very moldy. Molds grow on indoor plants and damp plant 
pots, and spoil fruits and vegetables in kitchens. The numbers of spores 
produced by fungi can become hazardous in the perpetual dampness of 
some older houses and in any building that is soaked by a plumbing 
leak, damaged roof, or flooding.25 Encouraged by warm weather and Breathing 49
poor airflow, fungi will feed on the natural plant-based materials in car￾peting, in furniture, and on the paper that covers drywall (or plaster as 
it is known in the United Kingdom). The walls of some flooded homes 
are blackened with spores, and the chairs and couches become covered 
with a thick felt of spores. In the worst cases, the numbers of spores rise 
well above the threshold of ten thousand spores per cubic meter of air 
that can be very problematic for asthmatics. Even the cleanest homes 
blossom with mold colonies and brim with their spores. There is even 
some evidence that a greater variety of molds grow in homes that have 
been scrubbed with cleaning products that kill bacteria, which mirrors 
the overgrowth of yeasts on the body when we take antibiotics.26
There is a lot of overlap between the fungi that cause asthma in the 
urban environment and the most prevalent species on farms. These 
are the typical species that grow on all kinds of plant materials and in￾clude Aspergillus, Alternaria, Penicillium, and Cladosporium—it is very 
likely that you have been inhaling some of these spores since you began 
reading this chapter. They are, as I have said, everywhere. A few of these 
fungi are capable of producing harmful compounds called mycotoxins, 
but there is no evidence that they can reach the lungs in sufficient quan￾tities to cause tissue damage (we examine mycotoxins in chapter 8). The 
problem with indoor molds is the same as outdoor molds and lies 
with allergy.
TREATING ASTHMA
Reducing exposure to allergens may be the best way to prevent asthma 
attacks, but this is difficult or impossible if we are unsure about the 
identity of the irritants. Vacuuming bedrooms and covering mattresses 
have been recommended to reduce the inhalation of proteins present 
in the feces of dust mites, but these methods do not turn out to be very 
helpful.27 The ubiquity of face masks during the COVID pandemic pro￾vided a global test for their effectiveness in limiting asthma symptoms, 
but we missed the opportunity to gather data from patients. There was 
also some resistance among asthmatics to wearing face masks because 
some types produce a small dip in oxygen levels in the bloodstream, 50 chapter 3
which is problematic for patients whose lung function is already im￾paired. Moderate improvements in asthma control have been reported 
in Japanese children who wear masks during sleep, whereas almost half 
of the American adults with asthma who responded to an online survey 
said that masks increased their breathing difficulties.28 There is an op￾portunity here for the invention of a mask that traps fungal spores with￾out reducing oxygen levels, but this may require a motorized pump to 
increase the airflow through the filter. With the discomfort and social 
stigma associated with wearing the simplest cloth masks, a rubbery hel￾met that makes a whirring sound is not going to cut it. Pending techno￾logical advances, asthmatics might consider experimenting with con￾ventional masks during the moldiest times of the year.
Treatments for asthma symptoms are the same whether fungal spores 
are the trigger or pollen grains, pet dander, or dust mites. These range 
from drugs that counter the effects of the allergens by dilating the airways 
in the lungs to steroids that dampen the activity of the immune system 
and asthma-specific drugs that block the explosive response of mast cells 
when they latch on to the troublesome allergens.29 The first of the tar￾geted treatments was discovered by Roger Altounyan, a Syrian-born Brit￾ish physician and pharmacologist who suffered from severe eczema and 
asthma.30 In the 1960s, Altounyan studied the effects of drugs based on a 
chemical isolated from a plant called bishop’s weed that had been used as 
a folk medicine to treat asthma for thousands of years in the Mediterra￾nean. His colleagues at a drug company had manufactured hundreds of 
dif­ferent compounds related to the medicine from the plant, and Altou￾nyan adopted the role of the laboratory guinea pig, inducing his own 
asthma attacks by inhaling dust particles and seeing which of the chemi￾cals alleviated his breathlessness. He carried out three thousand tests over 
eight years. On some occasions, Roger reduced his lung capacity by 
90 percent and had to inject himself with an emergency medicine to avoid 
asphyxiation. (It takes an asthmatic to appreciate his bravery.)
Following a eureka moment in 1963, Roger singled out a compound 
called cromolyn as the miracle cure. This was marketed as an inhalable 
medicine in 1968, in time to rescue me from a bedridden childhood. 
Altounyan also devised the “spinhaler” that was used to deliver the drug. Breathing 51
The spinhaler was fitted with a propeller that began spinning when the 
user drew air through the intake by inhaling. Airflow through the spin￾haler distributed cromolyn powder from a disposable capsule. It is still 
in use today. Inspiration for the propeller came from Roger’s service as 
a flight instructor in the Royal Air Force during the Second World War. 
Roger was motivated by his own asthma, balking at the prevailing medi￾cal opinion that his illness was a sign of emotional inadequacy. He died 
in 1987 at the age of sixty-five from an asthma attack. He is my hero.
Asthma medicines have diversified and strengthened in recent 
decades. This is a very good thing because more than 300 million 
people suffer from asthma, and the number is expected to exceed 
400 million within the next few years.31 These statistics are based on 
physician-diagnosed cases, and the number of asthmatics doubles to 
almost 700 million when we consider online responses from people 
who say that they have experienced wheezing. In individual countries, 
the asthma rates range from a low of one in fifty people in China to one 
in three in Australia. There is a general trend toward higher case num￾bers in wealthier countries, but there are plenty of exceptions. Despite 
their twofold difference in per capita GDP, New Zealand and Costa 
Rica have the highest rates of asthma in the world. Variations in the 
distribution of particularly irksome fungi could explain the geography 
of asthma, although many other factors could also influence the preva￾lence of the illness. By whatever mechanism, moving to a dif­ferent 
region can prove a matchless remedy for some asthmatics. This worked 
for me, with relief from my breathlessness found by crossing the Atlantic, 
and its resumption on return visits to Oxfordshire. Mine is a compelling 
experiment with a sample size of me, but the geographical escape 
mechanism seems to be a common experience for voluntary and invol￾untary migrants.32
Allergic rhinitis affects as many people as asthma and has the same 
underlying immunological mechanism involving histamine release 
from mast cells.33 Inflammation of the nasal passages can spread to 
the lower airways, and asthmatics are often plagued by both conditions. 
Inhalation of fungal spores can also cause a dif­ferent illness called hy￾persensitivity pneumonitis. Symptoms of pneumonitis include breathing 52 chapter 3
difficulties, coughing, and fatigue, in the chronic form of the illness, and 
flu-like symptoms in an acute response to inhaling huge numbers of 
spores or other irritants. The immune response is quite dif­ferent from 
the inflammation of asthma and is similar to the process that underlies 
rheumatoid arthritis. Farm workers are frequent victims, which is not 
surprising, and musicians who play bagpipes and other wind instru￾ments are also vulnerable to this condition.34 Spores are a hazard on 
farms when they overwhelm the lungs of a worker moving rotting grain 
or animal feed and bedding, and become a problem in bagpipes, trom￾bones, saxophones, and tenor horns when moisture and phlegm from 
the players combine with the interior coatings of the instruments to 
create a matchless breeding ground for fungi. Mushroom workers are 
also prone to hypersensitivity pneumonitis for the more obvious reason 
that their livelihood depends on cultivating millions of natural spore 
fountains in enclosed spaces.
The need for research on fungal allergies and the development of 
effective medicines for alleviating the worst symptoms is growing 
because climate change is likely to increase the number of spores in 
the air. Regions that experience warmer and wetter weather will be￾come especially moldy as fungi flourishing on plant debris generate 
more spores. This asthmatic future is developing already, with a major 
study from the San Francisco Bay Area showing that the mold and pol￾len seasons have been extended every year since 2002, increasing the 
number of days when asthmatics are inhaling lots of spores and pol￾len.35 Long-term trends in spore counts are very difficult to predict and 
will respond to regional differences in weather patterns and changes in 
land use, including the clearing of grasslands and forests for cereal cul￾tivation. Fellow asthmatics: keep your inhalers ready.
FROM ALLERGY TO INFECTION
Fungi that cause asthma and other allergic illnesses are visitors to the 
human body, fly-by-nights rather than long-term residents of the myco￾biome. Some of the spores that carry allergens can also germinate in the 
nasal passages and the lungs and develop into mycoses, but the healthy 
body sheds these along with every other spore and irritating dust Breathing 53
particle using mucus as a trap. With each inhalation, air is vacuumed 
through the 12-millimeter-wide windpipe, which divides into the pair 
of bronchi, and onward into the narrower airways that branch more 
than twenty times until they feed into the alveoli. The alveoli are at￾tached to the tiniest branches in the lungs and look like bunches of 
grapes. This glistening labyrinth has a surface area of 100 square meters, 
which is three or four times larger than the skin and its hair follicles. 
Spores and bacteria and other particles stick to the mucus that lines 
the breathing apparatus, and this viscous fluid is swept upward by tril￾lions of cilia attached to the cells lining the tubing that lash around ten 
times per second.36 This motion clears the mucus from the microscopic 
alveoli, all the way up to the trachea, or windpipe, between the vocal 
cords, and into the back of the throat. Mucus reaching the throat is swal￾lowed and dissolves in the acid bath of the stomach. This mucus con￾veyor belt runs continuously, transporting fluid all the way from the 
alveoli to the throat in about six hours. Coughing accelerates the waste￾removal system by forcing gobbets of mucus from the lungs into the 
throat and spraying thousands of droplets into the air at a speed of 60 
miles per hour (100 kilometers per hour). Sneezes are even more vio￾lent, discharging one hundred thousand drops of mucus at twice the 
speed of a cough.
We are unconscious of this brilliant machine until it gets clogged, and 
fungal infections tend to develop when this happens. Cystic fibrosis 
is an illness that messes with the conveyer belt by thickening the mucus. 
This means that fungal spores and bacteria are not cleared as swiftly as 
normal, and the condition leaves patients open to infection than those 
with sufficient fortune to be born with runnier mucus. Spores of Asper￾gillus species are the most problematic because they are everywhere and 
can germinate if they are not cleared from the lungs. This can lead to 
allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA), which is an illness 
that worsens mucus buildup and obstruction of the airways in cystic 
fibrosis patients.37 ABPA also occurs in asthmatics whose illness does 
not respond to the usual medicines. Fungi can also colonize the lungs 
and develop into serious infections. Antifungal drugs can be effective at 
eliminating these fungi in the short term, but this does not reduce the 
risk of a later infection. Any of the health conditions that diminish lung 54 chapter 3
function increase the likelihood that fungi will settle in the recesses of 
our airways and implant themselves in our tissues.
Aspergillus species and other fungi get stuck in the nasal sinuses too 
and can expand into a clump of filaments called a fungus ball that 
presses on the surrounding tissues. Symptoms range from headaches 
to pain and tenderness in the area of the sinuses above and below the 
eyes and on to changes in vision and proptosis, when the eyeballs 
protrude from their sockets. Long before most patients get to this stage, 
surgery is performed to remove these hideous fungal excrescences. Be￾sides aspergillosis, the most prevalent fungal lung infections are histo￾plasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidioidomycosis, whose names refer 
to the fungi that cause them.38 Fungal growth in the lungs is countered 
by the cells of the innate immune system that hang around in the lungs, 
primed for action. These are macrophages and neutrophils that gobble 
up the germinating spores and release inflammatory chemicals to re￾cruit more cells to the battle. Neutrophils are the most abundant type 
of white blood cell, with twenty billion or so circulating in the blood￾stream, which equates to fifty thousand in a pinpricked drop. Predatory 
neutrophils are larger than the spores that they consume, but the feat 
of engulfing one is comparable to a human swallowing a Halloween 
pumpkin. Neutrophils also deploy chemical weapons that work as 
disinfectants and bleaching agents to destroy fungi without having to 
eat them.
When the number of neutrophils drops below a critical threshold, 
the fungi overcome these defenses and penetrate the walls of the lungs 
and move into surrounding tissues. Fungi can also make their way into 
the bloodstream and become distributed all over the body in dissemi￾nated infections. This explains why illnesses that reduce neutrophil 
counts, including leukemia, anemia, and HIV/AIDS, are associated 
with aspergillosis and other lung infections.39 The risk of serious myco￾ses also increases when the immune system is upset by steroid medi￾cines used to support patients after organ transplantation and to treat 
allergies and autoimmune diseases.40 Cases of aspergillosis increased 
during the COVID pandemic when patients who developed pneumo￾nia were treated with these drugs to control lung inflammation.41Breathing 55
Aspergillosis is a global infection, whereas the fungi responsible for 
histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and coccidioidomycosis are confined to 
particular regions.42 Histoplasmosis, caused by Histoplasma, lives in the 
central United States. This mycosis is also known as Ohio Valley disease. 
The fungus thrives in bird and bat feces, and so its spores are concentrated 
in chicken coops, caves, and abandoned buildings. Everyone in this re￾gion is exposed to the fungus, but its growth in the body is stopped in 
its tracks by a functioning immune system. The distribution of Blasto￾myces, which causes blastomycosis, overlaps with Histoplasma, and ex￾tends northward around the Great Lakes and southward to the Gulf 
Coast. It is a soil fungus and is destroyed by macrophages and neutro￾phils in the lungs. Coccidioidomycosis, or San Joaquin Valley fever, is 
caused by Coccidioides, which grows in the southwestern United States 
and northern Mexico and is also established in parts of South America. 
It is a soil fungus whose spores are lifted into the air in dust storms. Like 
the other mycoses, few people show any symptoms of infection by this 
unpronounceable fungus before it is squelched by the immune system. 
Dogs are also susceptible to this fungus and suffer from higher rates of 
infection and more frequent complications.43 Related species of fungi 
are responsible for an African version of histoplasmosis and South 
American variety of coccidioidomycosis in humans.
None of these mycoses that begin as lung illnesses are common 
compared with the burden of viral infections. Aspergillosis affects 
300,000 people globally every year; the American and African species 
of Histoplasma cause 100,000 annual infections; 25,000 patients develop 
coccidioidomycosis; and blastomycosis is the rarest of the quartet, 
limited to 3,000 infections in the eastern United States.44 Regional out￾breaks of these diseases occur every year. Wisconsin is a hotspot for 
blastomycosis, where humans and dogs are attacked by the fungus that 
grows in soils along riverbanks and rotting vegetation. In the adjoining 
state of Michigan, more than ninety workers developed the illness in a 
paper mill in 2023.45 These disease clusters attract media attention and 
encourage the impression that fungal lung infections are becoming 
more common, but the evidence is equivocal. Either way, the most serious 
symptoms of fungal infection develop when the immune system is in very 56 chapter 3
bad shape. Antifungal drugs can be effective at halting the growth of the 
fungi or eliminating them completely in some patients, but the loss of 
those neutrophils means that the infections are liable to reboot from 
residues of the fungi in the body or from fresh spores arriving in the 
lungs. The mortality rate for these pulmonary mycoses soars in older 
patients whose immune systems have collapsed.
All of these lung infections begin with the inhalation of spores that are 
floating in the air. One infectious fungus behaves very differently. This is 
Pneumocystis, a yeast that does not produce spores at all. Pneumocystis
is found in the lungs without causing any illness, but develops into a full￾blown, life-threatening form of pneumonia in HIV-positive patients when 
they develop AIDS.46 The incidence of Pneumocystis pneumonia, or PCP, 
follows the number of AIDS cases, so it is not surprising that this mycosis 
is common in Nigeria and other African countries which have the highest 
rates of HIV infection. PCP also develops in transplant patients. There are 
many unanswered questions about Pneumocystis because it cannot be 
grown in the laboratory in culture dishes. We are not even sure how it gets 
into the lungs, although outbreaks of the infection in hospitals suggest 
that the yeast cells of the fungus are transmitted from person to person in 
droplets of lung mucus expelled by coughing or normal breathing. No 
other fungus seems to be dispersed in this viral fashion.
Our breathing apparatus is a glorious contraption when it works per￾fectly. Hindus believe that we are allotted a predetermined number of 
breaths for our lifetime, which approaches five hundred million ins and 
outs for the global average life expectancy of seventy-three years. With 
half a billion flushes of gas over the 100 square meters of tubing and air 
sacs in our bodies, this is the region of greatest contact with the fungi 
and affords the greatest prospects for infection. Allergies to spores and 
the opportunities for fungi to take root in the lungs fall into the category 
of unpleasant interactions with the mycological world. There is a lot of 
uplifting news to come in this book, but next we will look at how bad 
things can get when fungi spread around the body. Even Proust would 
agree that these deep-seated mycoses make an asthma attack seem like 
une promenade de santé.57
4
Spreading
OPPORTUNISTS IN THE BRAIN
in 1997, fifteen-year-old tennis player Sasha Elterman was thrown into 
the polluted water of the Yarkon River in Israel when a footbridge con￾structed for the Maccabiah Games collapsed. The Maccabiah Games are 
held every four years and are often referred to as the Jewish Olympics. 
Sasha was a member of the Australian athletics team, which had been 
crossing the bridge when the support beams broke. Struggling to keep her 
head above the surface, she swallowed and snorted the filthy water before 58 chapter 4
she was dragged to the muddy bank. One athlete died at the scene, and 
sixty-seven team members were taken to local hospitals. None of the in￾juries seemed to be life-threatening at first, but within hours many of the 
victims, including Sasha, developed breathing difficulties. Three more 
athletes died over the next few weeks. Early on, it was thought that they 
were poisoned by chemical pollutants in the river, which included oil, 
solvents, and toxic heavy metals. These ideas were scrapped a few days 
later when analysis of lung tissue from one of the autopsies revealed some￾thing else: the threads of a fungus called Scedosporium.
Sasha was flown to a hospital in Sydney after treatment in Israel and 
remained in critical condition for months. She continued to be upbeat 
during this ordeal, but the development of a brain infection by the fungus 
worsened her prognosis. As the illness progressed, she endured multiple 
surgeries to remove infected tissue from her damaged lungs and brain.1
All the while, the fungus resisted a battery of drug treatments. It kept com￾ing back. Running out of options, her doctors decided to try a new medi￾cine called voriconazole, developed by Pfizer in the United Kingdom. 
As this potent compound suffused the infected tissues, the microbe began 
to lose the fight, disappearing in one location, then another, until, at last, 
the ghastly fungus was gone. Three years later, after intensive rehabilitation, 
Sasha was well enough to carry the Olympic torch in the relay at the Open￾ing Ceremony of the 2000 Summer Olympic Games in Sydney.
Sasha’s story tells us something about a very dif­ferent kind of rela￾tionship between humans and fungi from the lifelong interactions 
between the body and the resident mycobiome. Most of the serious 
mycoses are caused by fungi that we encounter in the environment 
every day but that cause infections only when the immune system is 
debilitated. Sasha’s fungus was an oddity that was forced into her body 
by her accident and battered its way through her intact immune de￾fenses. To understand this case history, we need to look at the fungus 
from the Yarkon River more carefully. Like most of the fungi in this 
book, Scedosporium has never been given a common name. We are stuck 
with the Latin, which refers to seeds or spores. This fails to conjure up 
a distinctive image of the microbe, so imagine looking through a micro￾scope: within the bright circle, the fungus comes into sharp focus as a Spreading 59
gossamer of cylindrical filaments, plumped with internal droplets of oil 
and bristling with stubby side branches bearing oval spores. The fungus 
is beautiful in its simplicity when it is grown in a culture dish in an in￾cubator; sinister when highlighted with purple stain in a thin slice of 
brain tissue taken from a refrigerated cadaver in the morgue.
Fungal brain infections in people who come close to drowning are 
rare and very difficult to treat when they are diagnosed. A case of Scedo￾sporium infection in Germany involved a forty-one-year-old woman in 
an automobile accident who was thrown from her car into muddy water. 
She was resuscitated at the scene but developed several brain abscesses 
over the next five days. These appeared as white spots on her MRI scans, 
some as big as grapes, and the fungus was identified as the culprit from 
DNA extracted from samples of brain tissue. The woman experienced 
a range of distressing neurological problems including epileptic convul￾sions as her doctors exhausted the catalog of antifungal drugs. Her con￾dition improved, eventually, and her case history was published after 
ten years of treatment.2 At that time, she had been in a stable condition 
for two years, which speaks to remarkable resilience. A study of more 
than a hundred cases of infection by this fungus revealed a median sur￾vival time of just four months.
The mechanism that Scedosporium uses to invade the brain has not 
been solved, but the central nervous system is an attractive sanctuary 
from the point of view of the fungus. Tipping the scales at an average 
of 1.3 kilograms, the brain contains more calories than a large roast 
chicken.3 Getting in there is difficult. The hard skull is an obstacle for 
animal predators, which explains why lions and other carnivores go 
for the more accessible organs slithering from the abdomen when they 
rip into their prey. Microbes make their way into the brain via blood 
vessels that snake through perforations in the skull called foramina and 
fissures. This gets them into the head, but before they can reach the 
squishy nerve tissue, they have to overcome the blood-brain barrier, 
which is a formidable challenge. This is formed by a layer of cells that 
lines the interior of the blood vessels feeding the brain. These cells are 
wedged together, side to side, preventing large molecules and any mi￾croorganisms circulating in the bloodstream from passing into the brain. 60 chapter 4
Fungi use a number of dif­ferent mechanisms for crossing this hurdle. 
Some mount a chemical attack, releasing enzymes that weaken the pro￾tective cell layer. Others use a Trojan horse strategy, hiding inside white 
blood cells that move across the barrier as part of the natural operation 
of the immune system and spilling out on the other side. Once they find 
themselves brain-side, the fungal cells multiply, forming the abscesses 
that show up as islands of damaged tissue on CT and MRI scans. The 
immune defenses are concentrated in the outermost tissues of the brain, 
where they resist invaders. Once inside the brain, the fungus is free to 
do its worst.
The association between brain infection and traumatic incidents of 
near drowning suggest that the blood-brain barrier is weakened by 
the pressure of the water forced into the nasal passages. Carried with the 
water, the fungus responds by trying to hang on, doing everything it can 
to survive. In Sasha’s case, and the German patient, the fungus found 
food, grew itself in knots, and spotted the brain with abscesses. This 
species does not seem to be especially adapted to growing in brain tis￾sue, but it does a lot of damage when it finds itself there.
Scedosporium does not confine itself to victims of near drowning. It 
also multiplies in patients whose immune systems have been weakened 
by HIV infection or cancer, and in those whose defenses are lowered by 
drug treatments following organ transplantation.4 The loss of immune 
function makes it more likely for a fungus to spread into the bloodstream. 
Scedosporium is widely distributed in nature and seems to be particularly 
prevalent in water contaminated with sewage from humans or farm ani￾mals. Industrial farms create a perfect habitat for this fungus in the form 
of the abundance of animal waste dammed in ponds lined with black 
plastic and weighted down with tractor tires around the rim. One spec￾tacularly unpleasant case history involved a young man in Brazil who 
died from a brain infection caused by the fungus three months after he 
fell into one of these reservoirs of swine sewage.5 Scedosporium also lives 
in lake water and has been found in the soil of potted plants in hospitals. 
The fact that so few people become infected with this fungus says every￾thing about the power of the immune system to protect us, as long as we 
avoid a rare accident and nearly drown in water that it calls home.Spreading 61
OPPORTUNISTS
The fungus that sickened Sasha Elterman is one of thirty or more spe￾cies that have been identified in brain infections, and these are a subset 
of the three hundred kinds of pathogenic fungi that cause disease all over 
the body. Given that there are more than seventy thousand species of 
fungi, and some experts think there may be more than one million, the 
nasty ones belong to a tiny minority—less than 1 percent of the total 
number of species that have been described by scientists and given a 
Latin name.6 The pathogens represent a splinter group from the great 
fungal kingdom, whose principal concern over hundreds of millions of 
years has been with decomposing dead plants and partnering with live 
ones or attacking them. Doing the same things with animals—rotting, 
cohabiting, and infecting—is a secondary profession for the mycologi￾cal world. Next to these long-standing activities, making our lives a 
misery is a very recent specialty. Because humans have such a short 
evolutionary history, the fungi that invade human tissues were occupied 
with other tasks long before they found themselves inside our bodies. 
This explains why, by and large, they are not very good at making their 
own way from the outside environment into our tissues. Even though 
they are total losers as pathogens compared with viruses, they still cause 
a lot of trouble, killing more than 1.5 million people every year. This is 
an astonishing toll when we consider that only four hundred thousand 
people die from malaria.7
Mortality figures for fungal illnesses, meaning how many infected 
people die, match those for tuberculosis, which is caused by a bacte￾rium. Many of the deaths due to tuberculosis and to fungal disease 
occur in AIDS patients whose immune defenses have been over￾whelmed by HIV infection. Physicians who treated AIDS cases in the 
early 1980s, before the virus was identified as the cause of the illness, 
were alarmed by a surge of fungal infections seen in young men. Patients 
displayed a form of fungal pneumonia as their immune systems failed 
and fungal brain infections became another sign that someone had de￾veloped full-blown AIDS.8 Serious fungal infections are much less fre￾quent in HIV-positive patients today if they are receiving the excellent 62 chapter 4
drug therapies that control the virus, but proper treatments are scarce 
in parts of sub-Saharan Africa and Southeast Asia.9
Research on the link between AIDS and fungal infections has helped 
to explain how the functioning immune system keeps the body free 
from these diseases. The greatest damage from the virus comes from its 
destruction of a specific type of white blood cell that is a key player in 
the seek-and-destroy mission of the immune system. These are the 
helper T cells. This also explains why certain forms of leukemia that 
deplete these cells are associated with the same mycoses. A similar re￾duction in white blood cell count is seen in patients treated for cancer 
by chemotherapy or radiation therapy, as well as in transplant recipients 
who take drugs to prevent organ rejection. When the shield of T cells 
fails, the onboard mycobiome becomes restless, mottling the skin, plug￾ging the nasal sinuses, whitening the tongue, and fouling the throat be￾fore spreading from the lungs and the gut to the liver, kidneys, and 
brain. These harmless symbionts that turn bad are joined by airborne 
spores that land on the defenseless body, and we are taken apart piece 
by piece. The fungi that drop anchor after immunological damage or 
injury are called opportunists or opportunistic pathogens. All of the 
fungi that cause serious infections in humans are opportunists. Al￾though only a few hundred species of fungi have been associated with 
tissue damage, it is possible that thousands of fungal species can harm 
us if they find themselves in a defenseless body. It has even been sug￾gested that the ability to cause disease in humans is a defining charac￾teristic of the kingdom.10
This concept of universal pathogenicity seems ridiculous when we 
think about mushrooms that grow in the woods, but colonies of these 
fungi that form fruit bodies do cause lethal infections.11 Human tissues 
are not the preferred food for mushroom mycelia, but these fungi make 
do when they find themselves in an unprotected body. Consider the 
case of a six-year-old girl with kidney cancer who developed a swelling 
on her head that split open and discharged pus. When samples from the 
wound were transferred to a culture dish, the pathologists were shocked 
by the growth of a mycelium of an ink cap mushroom that lives on ani￾mal dung in the wild.12 The girl was treated successfully by surgery to Spreading 63
remove the infected tissue and a course of antifungal medicines. This 
was a bizarre infection, although the same mushroom has been found 
in lung tissue and can damage heart valves after cardiac surgery. Authors 
of a case history from the Mayo clinic involving a seventy-seven-year￾old woman with clots on her replacement mitral valve titled their report, 
“Truffle’s Revenge: A Pig-Eating Fungus.”13 The ink cap mushroom had 
grown over the “bioprosthetic” valves, which had come from a pig.
Appearing less menacing than any mushroom—indeed, as harmless 
as a loaf of bread—Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the yeast used for raising 
dough and brewing beer, causes lethal infections in exceptional in￾stances when it passes into blood vessels through a catheter. The idea 
that the fungus purchased as a freeze-dried powder in the grocery store 
can kill seems absurd. But it can, and, like the ink cap, baker’s yeast is a 
perfect example of an opportunist.14 It is important to recognize that 
these are extreme curiosities in the literature of infectious disease 
that should not discourage mushroom hunting or alarm any bakers or 
brewers. These freakish infections are astonishingly rare.
The best way to think about opportunistic pathogens is that they sit 
along a whole spectrum of behavior, with varying degrees of prepared￾ness and capabilities for messing up our lives.15 Fungi that cause athlete’s 
foot and toenail infections are examples of more purposed pathogens 
than the ink cap mushroom because they are so well adapted to growing 
on skin and nails. These fungi live parallel lives in soil, where they con￾sume scraps of animal protein and other organic materials, but they 
are accomplished at making themselves comfortable when we pick 
them up by walking barefoot over their territory. Contact with these 
fungi does not necessarily lead to an infection, however, because some 
people are affected by athlete’s foot throughout their lives and others 
are not.
Returning to the fungi that grow in the brain, they share some char￾acteristics that are fitted to this loathsome business.16 The ability to 
grow at the elevated temperature inside the body is an obvious prereq￾uisite for a fungus that causes brain infections. This is not asking much 
of microorganisms that thrive in the summer temperatures experienced 
over much of the planet, but it does discount species adapted to cooler 64 chapter 4
climates. Fungal pathogens must also be equipped to outwit the remain￾ing strength of the immune system in weakened hosts. A lot of the brain 
pathogens appear to benefit from the presence of melanin within the 
walls of their cells that gives them a black or brown color.17 This fungal 
version of melanin is a dif­ferent pigment from the chemical that colors 
human skin, and it acts as a chemical mop that neutralizes some of the 
natural disinfectants produced by the immune system. Pigmentation 
may also help the fungus in other ways, by stabilizing its cells at higher 
temperatures and furnishing protection against ultraviolet light. Despite 
these features that help some fungi grow inside the body, the prevailing 
view of experts in medical mycology is that these opportunists do not 
want to be there in the first place.
To understand this reasoning, we need to think about evolution. Vi￾ruses and bacteria that cause infectious diseases multiply in our tissues 
and move from person to person in droplets released by breathing, 
sneezing, or coughing, via skin contact and through sexual behavior. 
Insects and other animals act as vectors that transmit viruses and bac￾teria, and mothers can pass infections to their developing babies 
through the placenta and in breast milk after birth. This list of infection 
pathways covers most of the ways that microbes spread between 
humans. Fungi that grow deep inside the body have no mechanism for 
escaping.18 This means that a fungus that forms colonies in the brain is 
doomed. It will die with its host. If the corpse decomposes in soil, the 
fungus may seep into the dirt as the tissues dissolve and go on to repro￾duce in the environment, but there is nothing about lingering in the 
host that made the passage worthwhile. Infecting humans is a dead end 
for fungi, which explains why they are no good at causing pandemics 
like viruses. Molds that cause athlete’s foot are an exception to this rule, 
and the yeast Candida auris, which is causing serious infections in hos￾pital patients, does not threaten the general population (see chapter 2).19
Most fungi are happy in the soil, and we would be happier if they stayed 
there. Fungal infections of humans, or mycoses, are part of the noise of 
biology that present no advantages to the pathogen or the host. These 
mutually harmful relationships have been termed synnecroses.20Spreading 65
Even though it is content growing outside the human body, another 
fungus called Cryptococcus neoformans is remarkably good at causing brain 
damage. It has attracted the attention of medical mycologists since it was 
identified as the agent of brain infections in AIDS patients. Since then, cryp￾tococcosis has become a disease of global proportions that is responsible 
for more than half a million deaths per year in the developing world. The 
fungus spreads through the brain, damaging nerve cells and forming cysts 
in dif­ferent regions. The membranes, or meninges, that surround the 
brain become inflamed, and this results in brain swelling. As the infection 
develops, symptoms include persistent headaches, neck pain, and drowsi￾ness, and these can progress to disorientation, difficulty finding words, 
nausea and vomiting, leg paralysis, convulsions, strokes, and death. Al￾though rare infections by this fungus occur in otherwise healthy patients, 
most cases of cryptococcosis are associated with weakened immune de￾fenses, which explains why the disease is more common in countries with 
high rates of HIV infection.21
Cryptococcus is a soil fungus whose growth is energized by bird drop￾pings. Utopia for this fungus is a chicken coop or pigeon roost, and it 
does not need to waste any time inside human beings. Getting into us as 
an airborne spore is a misstep. Most fungal spores that we inhale are 
swept from the narrowest airways to join the conveyer belt of mucus that 
moves upward to the throat and drops down into the stomach where the 
daily dose of microbes goes to die. Cryptococcus is one of the few organ￾isms that can dodge this fate when conditions are ripe, cross into the 
bloodstream from the lungs, and move through the barrier into the brain.
The ability to outwit the immune system, especially if it is weakened, 
is probably a consequence of the natural behavior of the fungus in the 
soil where it grows as a form of budding yeast. These cells are preyed on 
by amoebas, which consume all kinds of microbes in the soil and digest 
them in food vacuoles within their cells. Certain strains of Cryptococcus
avoid this fate and manage to stay alive inside the vacuoles, and the same 
trick allows the fungus to survive when it is engulfed by the macro￾phages of the immune system that feed like amoebas. (Strains are like 
breeds rather than separate species.) They stay inside the food vacuoles 66 chapter 4
of the macrophages, hitchhiking until they are vomited, unharmed.22
Cell biologists call this mechanism vomocytosis, so I am not being 
overly poetic here. The bad stuff unfolds when a macrophage with stow￾away Cryptococcus crosses the blood-brain barrier and releases its cargo. 
The life of this fungus will end when the patient dies, but, in the mean￾time, it feeds and reproduces by forming buds, and the brain abscesses 
multiply with each CT scan.
Treatment options for cryptococcosis are very limited. The handful of 
drugs used to combat this infection have serious side effects and have not 
been updated since the 1990s.23 Amphotericin B is a natural product iso￾lated from a soil bacterium. It disrupts the cell membrane of the fungus 
but also damages the kidneys. A second medicine, flucytosine, interferes 
with the formation of DNA and proteins in the fungus. The problem with 
this one is that it causes liver damage. Fluconazole is the third antifungal 
drug used to treat cryptococcosis. This belongs to the azole family of an￾tifungal agents that also target the cell membranes of fungi. It has fewer 
side effects than the other medicines, but its drawback is that it limits the 
growth of the fungus without killing it. For this reason, it is used for 
“maintenance therapy,” to keep patients in a stable condition. It cannot rid 
them of the infection. Someone with a strong immune system who contracts 
the disease can be cured with a combination of these drugs, whereas the 
long-term outlook for a patient with weakened defenses is not as reassur￾ing. The mortality rate for cryptococcosis for HIV-positive patients ap￾proaches 80 percent within one year of diagnosis in some developing 
countries. These disheartening statistics and the inadequate treatment 
options led the World Health Organization to rank Cryptococcus in the 
Critical Priority Group of pathogens that require urgent interventions, 
including the development of new drug therapies.24
THE HORROR OF MUCORMYCOSIS
Few people have ever seen Cryptococcus for themselves, or any of the 
other pathogenic fungi that I have described, for that matter. This would 
take a microscope and access to samples of infected tissue. You would need 
to have taken a microbiology course in medical mycology to have enjoyed Spreading 67
this honor, and these are very few and far between. Surprisingly, how￾ever, there is one type of fungus that can disfigure faces and destroy 
brain tissue that almost everyone has seen without a microscope. These 
are the black bread molds, which are so common on spoiled tomatoes 
and other fruit that we do not give them a second look before relegating 
the rotting food to the compost heap. The mycelia of these species of 
Rhizopus and Mucor feed on our groceries before forming millimeter￾tall translucent stalks tipped with blackened bulbs. Each of these bulbs 
contains hundreds or thousands of microscopic spores that are dis￾persed by air currents and start new colonies when they land in our fruit 
bowls. The stalks are quite beautiful when they are magnified with a 
hand lens, appearing as a miniature forest of crystalline stems bearing 
their tiny, blackened globes. It is difficult to reconcile this prettiness 
with the photographs of swollen, reddened, and sometimes noseless 
and eyeless faces of the victims of “mucormycosis” on the internet. But 
this is what these fungi can do.
The first thing to make clear is that there is nothing that we can do to 
avoid this infection, and that with an estimated two cases of mucormy￾cosis per million people per year, you are more likely to be attacked by 
a moose than a bread mold.25 The reason that the infection is unavoid￾able is that the spores of these fungi are floating around indoors and 
outdoors in huge numbers and they get trapped in our nostrils every 
day. The rarity of the infection is more difficult to explain, but there are 
some pointers. Many patients who develop mucormycosis have preex￾isting illnesses including cancer and uncontrolled diabetes or have been 
severely burned. Others are taking medicines that interfere with their 
immune systems. Cases also occur in patients after surgery, and in pre￾mature babies.
The bread molds show no subtlety in the biological mechanism 
of their attacks. There is none of the Trojan horse behavior seen with 
Cryptococcus, which allows the fungus to slip unnoticed into the brain 
hiding in a macrophage. In mucormycosis, the spores germinate in the 
mucus in the nasal passages, send their filaments into the soft tissues, 
and wangle their way into the brain by growing along the walls of the 
blood vessels. The disease is a classic example of an opportunistic 68 chapter 4
infection. It has maintained a stubborn mortality rate above 50 percent 
for decades because surgery is the only treatment and involves carving 
away the infected tissues. This is the reason that some patients lose an 
eye to the disease or, worse, are left with a large opening in the middle 
of their face. This is as horrible an infection as one can imagine. It is the 
stuff of nightmares, and none of the antifungal drugs seem at all effective 
in controlling this beast once it takes hold.
Mark Tatum, a forty-four-year-old from Kentucky, suffered a horrific 
encounter with one of these fungi in 2000 that destroyed much of his 
face. To save his life, surgeons removed his eyes, nose, upper jaw, and 
masses of surrounding soft tissue and cheekbone. To counter the pain 
following this butchery, he was placed in a drug-induced coma for two 
months. His wife, Nancy, said, “His doctors told me it was one of the 
most extensive surgeries they’d ever performed on a person’s face.”26
She continued, “When I went into the critical-care unit . . . they ex￾pected me to faint, but when I looked at my husband, I just saw Mark. . . .
I looked into the cavity on his face. . . . I saw the lining of his brain and 
the top of his tongue, but I know Mark is more than his face. He is my 
husband, the man who gave me everything I had ever wanted.” Some￾thing of his original appearance was restored with a removable pros￾thetic mask that was attached to a frame with magnets. His story was 
broadcast on television, and his bravery and good humor inspired 
people all over the world: “I didn’t do nothing noble,” Mark said, “I just 
did what was necessary.” He and Nancy pursued their lives with aston￾ishing grace until his death in 2005.
Mark Tatum’s infection may have been triggered by his use of steroids 
to treat back pain. Corticosteroid drugs work by dampening the inflam￾matory response that is one of the foundations of our immune defenses, 
meaning that they can make us more likely to become infected by fungi. 
This is the reason for the epidemic of mucormycosis in India during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. More than four thousand “black fungus” deaths 
were reported by the summer of 2021 in patients treated with cortico￾steroids to mitigate the hyperimmune reaction to the virus known as 
the cytokine storm.27 (This storm of inflammatory compounds dam￾ages the lungs and other organs and was a leading cause of death from Spreading 69
COVID-19.) On the plus side, steroid treatment was a lifesaver for many 
patients who were critically ill with COVID-19, and the number of fungal 
infections remains vanishingly small among the hundreds of millions of 
people treated with steroids for other illnesses.
Another forceful illustration of the link between steroid use and fun￾gal infections comes from an outbreak of a dif­ferent mycosis in patients 
given spinal injections with a corticosteroid for pain control in 2012. 
Across the United States, there were more than seven hundred cases of 
meningitis and spinal infections, and sixty-three patients died. An in￾vestigation by the Centers for Disease Control determined that the in￾fections were caused by a fungus called Exserohilum, which normally 
grows on grasses.28 Batches of the drug preparation were contaminated 
with the fungus. It would be difficult to think of a more powerful dem￾onstration of the connection between the immune system and develop￾ment of fungal disease. The injection of the fungus into the spine along 
with a drug designed to muzzle the immune system guaranteed disaster. 
This tragic accident illustrates how modern medical practices can make 
us vulnerable to the oddest kinds of fungal disease.
THE BRAIN MYCOBIOME
Even though the chain of events leading to most serious fungal infections 
is rarely as clear as the meningitis cases caused by the contaminated spi￾nal injections, we can find answers by examining the medical records of 
patients before their infections, identifying the fungi growing in their 
tissues, and tracking the progression of their illnesses. Sometimes we can 
develop a pretty good picture of what happened, but other case histories 
remain baffling. Why one person in a million with an apparently healthy 
immune system develops an incurable infection by a fungus that seems 
to be present in just about every soil or water sample on the planet is 
beyond our comprehension. Whether a physician knows how their pa￾tient became infected, or has no idea, the options for treating the illness 
are the same and remain too limited for comfort.
This sense of uncertainty in the field of medical mycology has grown 
with the highly controversial claim that fungi may be involved in 70 chapter 4
Alzheimer’s disease and other neurological conditions. This idea has been 
spurred by the identification of fungal DNA in brain tissue from Alzhei￾mer’s patients sampled at autopsy.29 The DNA comes from a range of 
species, and the work is backed up with microscopic images of yeast cells 
and filaments in samples from dif­ferent regions of the brain. Alzheimer’s 
disease is associated with the presence of specks of misfolded proteins in 
the brain known as amyloid plaques. Plaques are important because they 
are part of the inflammatory response that is characteristic of Alzheimer’s 
disease and are linked to the death of nerve cells. They may develop when 
the body’s immune system begins to attack the tissues that it is supposed 
to protect. This is the autoimmune model for the disease. A second idea 
is that the inflammation and formation of plaques is a response to an 
infection.30 This is supported by experiments on mice infected with 
Candida yeast, whose brains become damaged with plaque proteins.
The work on fungi in the brain is so new that no definitive conclu￾sions can be drawn yet, and the problem for scientists is the stubborn 
challenge of separating cause from effect. It is possible that Alzheimer’s 
has an underlying cause that has nothing to do with infection and that 
the fungi and other microbes arrive once the brain is already damaged. 
If the fungal connection is supported by other experiments, the next 
thing we need to figure out is whether the fungi migrate to the brain from 
elsewhere in the body or whether they come from the environment. Are 
brain fungi long-term residents or recent immigrants?
Some investigators have reached beyond the available data to suggest 
that fungi are part of a cryptic microbiome that lives inside the brain 
before the development of any neurological disease. In a very limited 
study, they have found bacteria clustered around star-shaped cells called 
astrocytes in samples of healthy brain tissue taken from fresh cadavers.31
In addition to bacteria, traces of fungal DNA have been detected in 
these brains. Fusarium is the most frequent type of fungus that has been 
identified. Many investigators remain skeptical about these findings, 
and it is possible that the brain samples in these studies were contami￾nated after the death of their owners.
Inflammation of brain tissue features in other neurological diseases, 
raising interest in the possibility of a widespread fungal connection in Spreading 71
many neurological conditions whose mechanisms have always seemed 
puzzling. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the dreadful disease 
that afflicted the physicist Steven Hawking. It is also known as Lou Geh￾rig’s disease, after the famous baseball player who died in 1941. In a 
speech at Yankee Stadium on July 4, 1939, Gehrig described his illness 
as a “bad break” and went on to describe himself as “the luckiest man 
on the face of the earth,” which makes me think of the bravery of Mark 
Tatum. Nerve cells that control voluntary muscles are destroyed in ALS, 
meaning that patients lose control of their conscious movements. Can￾dida and other fungi have been found in the brains of ALS patients, but 
the question of cause or effect remains.32 Genetics seem to be a factor 
in 5–10 percent of ALS cases, but the majority are described as sporadic, 
in the sense that they develop without any clear predisposing factor 
(spontaneous or idiopathic are better terms). This pattern of illness is 
consistent with the influence of some unidentified environmental 
factor, such as an infectious agent.
The brains of people who die from Parkinson’s disease are also colo￾nized by fungi.33 DNA and cells of Candida and Fusarium show up 
again, along with the scalp yeast Malassezia, and Botrytis—a fungus that 
is a common pest of fruits and flowers. After the Canadian American 
actor Michael J. Fox was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease in the 1990s, 
there was a lot of interest in the phenomenon of disease clustering in 
ostensibly noninfectious illnesses. Fox’s case had the unusual attribute 
of being one of four diagnoses of Parkinson’s disease among the cast and 
crew of a television series that had been filmed in British Columbia in 
the late 1970s.34 There are many possible explanations for a disease pat￾tern of this kind, but exposure to a particular microorganism could play 
some undiscovered role in these life-changing and life-ending illnesses. 
We seem to be a long way from a definitive answer. The reports of fungi 
in brain tissue have survived the rigors of peer review to appear in excel￾lent journals, but most of the work has come from a single group of 
scientists and deserves a lot more attention.
The body is such an intricate machine that its endurance, day in and 
day out, can seem miraculous. After all, there are so many things that 
can go wrong with a creature that depends on an infinitude of fine-spun 72 chapter 4
biological mechanisms. On the other hand, we are the recent products 
of a successful evolutionary history that has compelled our twenty 
thousand genes and trillions of cells to work together for at least as long 
as it takes for us to reproduce. This much is self-evident. We would not 
be here at all if we were really as fragile as many of us fear. The body 
develops as a comfortable home for herds of microbes, and rather than 
surviving as individuals, we have already seen in this book how we teem 
with invisible life—fungal and otherwise. Far from immaculate, the 
body prevails as a mobile ecosystem harmonized by the brilliance of 
the immune system. While any fungi that live in a healthy brain seem 
to be rare, we find a very dif­ferent situation in the digestive system, to 
whose more prosperous mycobiome we turn now.73
5
Digestion
YEASTS IN THE GUT
How would you rate your digestive system? Does it operate like a 
well-oiled machine or a malodorous trash compactor? Most of us would 
probably say, “Somewhere in between,” and add that its performance 
varies from day to day. An uneventful and ignorable intestine is the gold 
standard gut, but even the best of bowels are rattled by an ill-chosen 
meal. The trillions of bacteria in the microbiome of the digestive system 74 chapter 5
have received a lot of attention, whereas the fungi that wax and wane in 
their midst have played second fiddle or been ignored—until now. New 
species of fungi are introduced to the body on fresh fruits and vegeta￾bles, and others are long-term residents in the gut. Some of the new￾comers die in the stomach acid, and others survive downstream to make 
war and peace with the existing microbes in the intestine or ride within 
the waste until they escape from the body. The fungi are there for the 
whole journey from mouth to esophagus to stomach and onward to 
the small intestine, large intestine, rectum, and beyond. This is the rich￾est and most mysterious part of the human-fungus symbiosis.
Until recently, the study of the fungi that affected human health was 
limited to the fungi that cause ringworm on the skin and life-threatening 
infections of our internal organs. This constituted the study of medical 
mycology in the twentieth century. In hospitals, mycologists who were 
brought in to look at cases of serious disease examined the fungi seen in 
microscope preparations of tissue samples and grew the fungi isolated 
from patients in culture dishes. These techniques enabled them to identify 
the fungi and advise physicians on treatment methods. Although mycolo￾gists were aware that some fungi grew in the gut, these yeasts were barely 
mentioned. They did not seem to be doing anything significant. The ap￾plication of methods to amplify the DNA of microorganisms from samples 
of feces did not make much difference, at least initially, because the tech￾niques were perfected for identifying bacteria (mentioned in chapter 1). 
This led to the treatment of the gut microbiome as a giant onboard bacte￾riome. Untangling the fungi from this assortment remains difficult.
Fungal genomes are ten times bigger than bacterial genomes, and we 
need to read longer stretches of fungal DNA to stand any chance of identify￾ing species. This is happening now with the aid of advances in DNA se￾quencing that allow faster and more accurate reads of longer strings of As, 
Ts, Gs, and Cs, along with the development of more sophisticated com￾puter programs for analyzing the information gathered from fecal samples. 
Mycobiome research has also benefited from the efforts of investigators 
who have begun to discriminate between traces of fungi that are introduced 
with our food and the dominant species that actually run the active myco￾biome (see the discussion of ghost gut fungi in the appendix).Digestion 75
Another obstacle to a more inclusive view of the gut microbiome is 
the relative scarcity of the fungi. With trillions of bacteria in the gut and 
only billions of fungi, fungi have been treated by bacteriologists as a 
minority group overseen by the ruling prokaryotes. This mathematical 
imbalance appears to discount the significance of the fungi in the chem￾istry of the gut until we factor in the relative bulk of the fungal cell. 
Revisiting the facts from chapter 1, the yeast cells that live in the gut are 
one hundred times bigger than the bacteria and present a huge collec￾tive surface area for interactions with the body. This more myco-centric 
view of the gut is changing the ecological description of the body and 
has significant implications for our health and well-being. As reliable 
information begins to emerge from mycobiome research, we are discov￾ering that the fungi are game changers in gastroenterology.
GEOGRAPHY AND THE MYCOBIOME
A revealing study from China compared the gut mycobiomes of Hong 
Kong residents with people of dif­ferent ethnicities from Yunnan.1 Yun￾nan Province is in Southwest China and is home to twenty-five ethnic 
groups that speak multiple languages and consume a glorious range of 
traditional foods including bitter fruits and vegetables, flowers, pickles, 
yak jerky, and insects. Fungi are attached to all of these foods, and people 
in Yunnan add more fungi to their diet by cooking the wild mushrooms 
that grow in abundance in this region. Wild food consumption in￾creases the diversity of the fungal DNA sequences detected in the fecal 
samples from Yunnan, but, crucially, this does not mean that more kinds 
of fungi actually live in the gut. The molecular techniques are so sensitive 
that we can amplify traces of rare organisms passing through the gut that 
have no influence on health at all. For this reason, it is essential to apply 
a data filter that excludes the weakest signals so that we can concentrate 
on the fungi that matter. When we do this, we find some interesting pat￾terns among rural and urban populations in China.
An overwhelming difference between the gut fungi in Yunnan and 
Hong Kong is seen in the abundance of two species of yeasts: Saccharo￾myces cerevisiae, the food yeast, and a species of Candida.2 The study 76 chapter 5
shows plenty of Saccharomyces in the Hong Kong population and very 
little Candida; the reverse is true for the rural residents of Yunnan. The 
difference arises from life in the city, because we find that people from 
the various ethnic groups that migrate to Hong Kong lose their Candida
and gain Saccharomyces. The plot deepens when we examine the health 
of the rural population. Analysis of blood samples reveals that the urban 
residents have better indications of liver function than the rural Chi￾nese. This benefit seems to be related to the prevalence of the food yeast 
in the gut rather than abstinence from alcohol. The growth of Candida in 
the rural population seems to have some positive effects too, because 
more of this yeast was associated with higher levels of good cholesterol 
and lower levels of obesity. So, each fungus comes with its own benefits. 
The food yeast, Saccharomyces, in the Hong Kongers comes from baked 
goods and processed foods and may not be active as it passes through 
the gut, but this makes no difference in the mycobiome. Even if they are 
dead, the cells of fungi carried with food can change the chemistry of 
the gut if there are plenty of them, stimulate the growth of bacteria, and 
activate the immune system.3
Moving westward, Sardinia is designated as a Blue Zone country, 
where people enjoy unusually long and active lives. There are ten times 
more centenarians per capita on this Italian island than in the United 
States. Diet, genetics, daily exercise, and social cohesion are some of the 
presumed explanations for the longevity of these people, and indeed, 
the liveliness of the older Sardinians compares rather favorably with 
their contemporaries shuffling around the American Midwest. But what 
about their mycobiomes? Saccharomyces shows up in the Sardinians 
of all ages, along with Penicillium.4 Penicillium is a distinctive member of 
the gut mycobiome that usually grows as branching filaments rather 
than budding yeast cells. It seems likely that this is another food import, 
because it is critical in cheese fermentation and Sardinians eat a lot of 
cheese made from sheep and goat milk. Many other fungi rise and fall 
alongside the species carried in the food, but it is not clear whether any 
of them are associated with longevity.
When we look at the fungi in fecal samples of Americans, we find the 
same fungi or close relatives of the Chinese and Sardinian species, with Digestion 77
the addition of Malassezia yeast that we encountered as a skin resident 
in chapter 3.5 Geographical differences in the gut fungi found in South 
Africans appear to be related to diet, but these are ancillary to the uni￾versal gut yeasts.6 Taken together, these studies leave us with a picture 
of a core mycobiome within the gut that is assembled from a small num￾ber of fungal species that show up all over the world, whatever food we 
eat. Regional diets add or subtract from this microbial foundation, af￾fecting the relative number of cells of dif­ferent species, but Candida and 
a few of its compatriots are always there. The gut fungi seem to be very 
resilient and adapt to the continuous changes in the quantity and quali￾ties of the food processed in the gut after each meal. These onboard 
yeasts act as buffers against the wholesale dissolution of the mycobiome 
even in cases of severe gastrointestinal illnesses. This reboot of the core 
mycobiome is accomplished by the rapid multiplication of the survivors 
after a population crash.
The discovery of a core mycobiome is very useful because this com￾munity of the commonest fungi found in the healthy gut can be compared 
with the mixtures of fungi that develop in various diseases. Recent re￾search on the mycobiome has improved on the earlier surveys of the 
kinds of fungi found in the gut and is beginning to show which ones 
are present in the largest numbers and how they are interacting with 
the bacteria and the immune system. Through these studies, it has be￾come clear that something is amiss with the mycology of the gut in 
many of the illnesses associated with diet and the function of the GI 
tract. A growing body of evidence suggests that fungi are involved in 
obesity, inflammatory bowel diseases, and even in the development of 
cancer. This has convinced some specialists that the fungi are a missing 
link in medicine.
OBESITY
This inquiry into the role of the gut fungi in disease begins with obesity, 
which affects more than one in ten adults, reduces mobility, and in￾creases the risk of developing manifold illnesses. A lot of research on 
obesity involves fattening mice with a carbohydrate-rich diet. As the 78 chapter 5
mice get heavier, they show metabolic changes, including fat buildup 
in the liver and accompanying alterations in the populations of fungi in 
their guts.7 Even though some fungi increase and others decrease as the 
mice become fatter, the mycobiome does not wobble in a predictable 
fashion. The only thing we can say for certain is that the mycobiome is 
sensitive to rich diets and the resulting increase in weight. Even without 
any fattening, mice fed an “exotic” fungus that grows in yogurt pro￾duces an immediate disturbance to the resident fungi and bacteria in 
the gut.8These experiments highlight the sensitivity of the gut mycobi￾ome to diet, with changes to the core communities of microbes result￾ing from a short-term or continuing change in diet or even from a single 
unusual meal.
Studies on human obesity have revealed some interesting changes in 
our onboard fungi, although there is nothing in these findings that offers 
any immediate help in the search for new approaches to weight loss. Al￾though the fungal DNA from fecal samples indicates that there are dif￾ferent mixtures of yeasts in obese and non-obese people, these are quite 
modest. What we hope to find in a comparison of this kind is some￾thing that distinguishes the two groups of participants—a red flag of a 
microbe that shouts Weight-Loss Fungus! This germ does not appear to 
exist, although a study from Spain found that species of Mucor, the bread 
mold, were present in non-obese participants and rare in the obese co￾hort.9 They went on to show that the absent molds began to appear in 
the obese participants when they followed a weight-loss diet and that the 
signals from a variety of Mucor species became more frequent as the pa￾tients lost weight. The activities of these fungi in the gut are unknown, 
but their responsiveness to the metabolism of the host parallels the reac￾tions of other kinds of fungi in the mouse mycobiome studies.
The ebb and flow of Mucor and other fungi in the mycobiome as we 
gain or lose weight could be passive fluctuations in which the fungi play 
no active role. Mucor, for example, may be a commensal fungus, mean￾ing that it lives in the guts of lean individuals without helping or harm￾ing them. It is also possible that some of the fungi reinforce the status 
quo by releasing chemical compounds that assist in the digestion of 
food in a way that serves as a buffer against weight gain. Other fungi may Digestion 79
work to bolster the obese state, making it more difficult to lose weight 
even when the number of calories is reduced in a new diet. We need to 
know a lot more about the chemical communications between the fungi 
and the body before we can take this idea of a supervisory relationship 
for the gut mycobiome any further, but this is a distinct possibility.
GASTROINTESTINAL DISEASE MYCOLOGY
The handful of species of Candida that serve as the core of the gut my￾cobiome are part of the standard equipment of the human body—true 
symbionts, rather than transients, and we would probably be in trouble 
without them.10 I say probably, because we do not know what would 
happen if these fungi were completely eliminated from the digestive 
system. Candida yeasts are a constant throughout life. Other fungi come 
and go as we get older and change our diets, but Candida is with us for 
the long haul. Problems develop when the number of these yeasts snow￾balls, which is what happens in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD).11
IBD is an umbrella term for chronic inflammation of the bowel that can 
be manifested as Crohn’s disease in the small intestine and ulcerative 
colitis in the colon and rectum.
The symptoms of IBD and the growth of Candida flare up in tandem, 
suggesting a causal relationship in which the illness simulates the fun￾gus, and the fungus worsens the disease symptoms. This model of IBD 
is exciting from a therapeutic point of view. In a more straightforward 
fungal infection, we try to eliminate the fungus to resolve the tissue 
damage. In a chronic condition like IBD, the fungus is part of the healthy 
body, and the symptoms of the illness might be alleviated by repressing 
the fungus rather than ridding it entirely. This gentler approach to treat￾ment could be achieved, at least in principle, by modifying the diet—if 
we could agree on the foods that pacify Candida, or by finding an effec￾tive supplement. We will look at dietary intervention at the end of this 
chapter, but there is another more direct strategy for revamping the 
fungi in the gut: fecal transplantation.
Fecal transplantation is a controversial treatment for digestive disor￾ders in which small samples of feces (equal to three tablespoons) from 80 chapter 5
healthy donors are implanted in the intestine of sedated recipients using 
a colonoscope. In an Australian study of patients with colitis, the trans￾plants by colonoscopy were followed by repeated transfers by enemas 
administered by the patients themselves for eight weeks.12 This inten￾sive therapy produced remarkable results, with a decrease in ulceration 
in one-third of the patients and complete remission from their IBD 
symptoms. The strongest signal from the mycobiome was a decrease in 
the levels of Candida after fecal transplantation, and this was accompa￾nied by an increase in the diversity of the bacteria. The mycobiome and 
the bacteriome—the fungi and the bacteria in the microbiome—were 
exchanging their footings in the gut. The greatest success was enjoyed 
by patients who showed the highest levels of Candida relative to other 
fungi before treatment. One interpretation of this finding is that there 
was so much of the yeast in the IBD patients that it was crowding out 
the healthy bacteria. Fecal transplantation seems to work by resetting the 
populations of microbes, which results in a decrease in inflammation 
that allows the intestine to heal. We certainly need more research on 
this surprising therapy.
Inflammation is the first line of defense against harmful germs, and we 
would be ruined without it. But when inflammation comes on too strong, 
the body is overwhelmed by the mobilization of immune cells and release 
of irritating chemicals, swelling of blood vessels, sensation of heat, and 
other symptoms. Too much stimulation can be lethal. Too little is deadly 
too. This is the Goldilocks principle of immunology. In a healthy digestive 
system, the immune system is responsive to any signs that fungi and bac￾teria are infiltrating the tissue of the gut wall, and our cells are probably 
patching and repairing tiny nicks and leaks all the time. This tempo is just 
right. Colitis and other illnesses develop when the inflammation spreads 
over larger areas of the gut wall and the tissue damage overwhelms the 
repair mechanisms. Continuous or chronic inflammation is a disastrous 
instance of unconscious self-injury. We should think about this when we 
see advertisements about health foods or herbal medicines that promote 
optimal health by stimulating the immune system.13
The immune system is alerted to the presence of fungi by the distinc￾tive nature of the molecules on their cell surface. These trademark Digestion 81
compounds include enzymes and other proteins decorated with sugars 
that we call mannoproteins. The immune system is programmed to 
react to these flags from the time we are born and the mycobiome be￾gins to develop on the skin and inside the digestive system. One of the 
puzzles about the mycobiome is why the fungi that start growing on 
the body in infancy begin to damage the gut wall in some adults. The 
answer lies in a combination of factors, including other health condi￾tions that may weaken the tissue barriers and allow the fungi to over￾come the normal obstacles to infection. This vulnerability may have a 
genetic foundation and increase with aging or it may follow a viral infec￾tion. A very provocative study from China revealed a surge in the num￾ber of Candida cells in the guts of patients hospitalized with COVID-19 
or with influenza.14These changes to the mycobiome have the potential 
to upset the immune system, trigger inflammation, and even increase 
the likelihood of fungal infection. It sems that viruses can impact the 
ecology of the whole body by agitating the fungi and bacteria in the gut.
Fungal infections can spread from the digestive system to other parts 
of the body when the immune system is damaged, and Candida reveals 
itself as a lethal enemy in these cases of disseminated disease. Candida
does this by switching from growth as a budding yeast to extending as 
filamentous hyphae that pierce the gut wall and reach the interior of 
blood vessels. The fungus switches from yeasts to filaments to move 
beyond the bowel, back into yeasts to tumble in the bloodstream, and 
then again into invasive filaments when it is delivered to solid tissues by 
the capillaries. This flipping between growth forms occurs whenever 
Candida escapes from its settled life as a benign resident in the body, 
where it is kept in check by other fungi, its bacterial neighbors, and the 
immune system, and engages in a population explosion. We are the un￾fortunate hosts for this ecological exercise. The temperamental behavior 
of the fungi is as clear in the gut as we have seen elsewhere in the body.15
The disruption of the mycobiome in irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 
is very similar to the dysbiosis measured in IBD, with an overall drop in 
the diversity of the fungi and an increase in Candida. A study on fungi 
and IBS from the Netherlands also found an increase in Saccharomy￾ces.16 IBS is usually treated as a less serious complaint than IBD because 82 chapter 5
it is not accompanied with continuous intestinal inflammation. Even so, 
the symptoms of these illnesses overlap, and IBS can be debilitating. 
Some doctors believe that IBD and IBS are manifestations of the same 
illness with dif­ferent degrees of inflammation. Anxiety and depression 
are described as comorbidities for both conditions, meaning that pa￾tients diagnosed with IBD and IBS are more likely to suffer from these 
mood disorders. This is reminiscent of the claims about asthma and 
anxiety discussed in chapter 3 and the impossibility of separating cause 
from consequence.
FUNGI AND CANCER
Inflammation is a big player in the development of tumors, which raises 
the possibility that the mycobiome may be involved in some cancers.17
Early diagnosis of IBD, before age thirty, is a risk factor for colorectal 
cancer, suggesting a progression from severe inflammation of the gut 
wall to the formation of noncancerous polyps called adenomas, and the 
later transformation of these growths into malignant tumors. The my￾cobiome changes as the health of the gut declines, with shifting ratios 
of dif­ferent groups of fungi, but we do not see a universal pattern. One 
study showed a rise in the level of Malassezia yeasts, rather than Can￾dida, and analysis of polyps revealed other fungi related to Malassezia
that tend to be better represented on the skin. But the absence of a com￾mon denominator among the revolving populations of fungi indicates 
that the gut fungi are responding to inflammation in IBD rather than 
causing the illness. This does not mean that the fungi are irrelevant—far 
from it, because the chaotic mycobiome may exacerbate the tissue dam￾age resulting from the tumors developing in the wall of the intestine.
The active participation of the mycobiome in the progression of can￾cer is supported by recent studies in which fungi have been detected 
along with bacteria inside tumors in the intestine, pancreas, lungs, and 
other body sites.18 DNA from Candida and Saccharomyces yeasts is 
found in the tumors in all of these tissues, with Candida predominating 
in most places. We know that this DNA has not strayed from outside 
the tumors because microscopic images show fungal cells inside cancer Digestion 83
cells and macrophages. Live cells of the fungi have even been isolated 
from tumors of the colon and grown in culture dishes. These findings 
show that there is nothing passive about the fungi within tumors. They 
are growing within the cancerous tissues, insinuating themselves between 
the cancer cells, and some are being consumed by the macrophages 
of the immune system. Fungal DNA is also found in the bloodstream of 
patients with late-stage metastatic cancer. This suggests that the fungi 
are leaking through the weakened capillary walls that also allow the 
cancer cells to migrate to other parts of the body.
The investigators involved in this research believe that the destabili￾zation of the mycobiome and the entry of fungal cells into tissues can 
be used as new markers for the development of cancer. This means that 
the identification of fungal DNA in a blood test or a biopsy sample 
could be useful in determining the developmental stage of a tumor and 
helping patients and doctors decide how to proceed with treatment. 
Whether the fungi are misbehaving in tissues damaged by the growth 
of a tumor (consequence) or stimulating its development in some way 
(cause) remains to be seen.
MYCOLOGICAL MIGRATIONS: 
ORAL AND GENITAL FUNGI
Although dif­ferent mixtures of fungi are found in the gut mycobiome 
and the skin mycobiome, yeasts spread from one to the other at the 
beginning and end of the digestive system. Skin fungi settle into the mouth 
and gut fungi seep into the vagina. We begin with the mouth. A peck on 
the cheek transfers fungi from person to person, and more intimate con￾tact via lips and tongue adds to the oral broth. Spores are vacuumed 
from the air as we breathe, and the mouth is smeared with fungi clinging 
to food and floating in drinks. Few of these nomads survive, but the 
strongest yeasts join the populations swarming along the gumline and 
coating the tongue and palate. A founding dollop of a few hundred yeast 
cells swells into the millions in a few hours if the conditions are perfect, 
but the mouth is a demanding place. Beyond the attentions of the im￾mune defenses, fungi must cope with the climatic swings of the mouth 84 chapter 5
as we clear our throats and speak, flood the oral cavity with hot and 
cold liquids, and attack the biofilms with a toothbrush, until, at last, we 
leave the mycobiome alone and embrace the sandman. As we snooze, 
the fungi are at work, feeding and reproducing, poisoning some bacteria, 
cooperating with others, and preparing for sunrise and the first cup 
of coffee.
Preparation on the part of a fungus sounds fantastical, but the sensi￾tivity of fungi to their surroundings is well established, and experiments 
show that they possess the rudiments of memory that enable them to 
ready themselves for a stressful change in conditions.19 This behavioral 
complexity is demonstrated by the fungal response to salt exposure. 
When the salt concentration in a culture is increased, yeasts respond 
with a flurry of biochemical changes to resist dehydration, and the mis￾treated cells respond more swiftly when they are aggravated a second 
time. We say that they are primed, and this protects the cells against 
other harmful treatments including heat shocks and flushing with hy￾drogen peroxide (which acts as a damaging oxidizing agent). It follows 
that this simple response could allow the fungi of the oral mycobiome 
to buffer themselves against the morning espresso bath. Coffee is a 
problem for fungi because it damages their DNA, and some yeasts have 
a transport system that expels caffeine if it gets into the cell. By antici￾pating the morning brew, these fungi have an opportunity to fortify 
their membranes before the sun rises to keep the bitterness at bay. Fun￾gal sensitivity and consciousness are revisited in chapter 10.
Most of the fungi that live in the mouth are the familiar residents of 
the mycobiome found in other locations. Yeasts are prominent, and 
Candida and Malassezia dominate a pair of microbial communities that 
we call mycotypes.20 When Malassezia is the most abundant fungus, it 
is associated with a rich mixture of bacteria and other fungi. This myco￾type is found in healthy mouths. In smokers with active tooth decay and 
other indications of poor oral hygiene, the Candida ecotype emerges, 
in which the diversity of other fungi and bacteria falls. The healthy Mal￾assezia mycotype is replaced by the unhealthy Candida mycotype.21 The 
rise of the second population of yeasts is a reliable sign of dental prob￾lems and is found in children with tooth decay and in older people who Digestion 85
have lost their teeth and wear dentures. Rather than causing tooth loss, 
Candida may reinforce a wider decline in oral health by reducing the 
growth of protective fungi and bacteria and resisting natural repair 
mechanisms.
The problems multiply with the formation of resistant coatings or 
biofilms of bacteria and fungi on the tooth surface. These layers of mi￾croorganisms thicken and become acidic when sugars stimulate the 
growth of Candida that nestles alongside the bacteria. Biofilms are in￾volved in tooth decay, and the stimulatory effect of sugars may explain 
why children who overload with candy are prone to cavities. Studies on 
elderly patients also support the link between diet and changes in the 
oral mycobiome that may accelerate tooth decay: much higher levels of 
Candida were found in saliva from patients in Japan and the Nether￾lands who wore dentures compared with their peers with natural 
teeth.22 Interestingly, levels of Candida also tend to be higher in older 
people who live in nursing homes compared with those who live in their 
own homes. Diet may be a less significant factor here, with the presence 
of other health problems in people who move into nursing homes hav￾ing a knock-on effect on the oral mycobiome.
Moving to the vagina, Candida is the biggest player in this ecosystem. 
The commonest species is Candida albicans, which is detected in at least 
20 percent of women and is responsible for vulvovaginal candidiasis, 
with symptoms of itching, burning, and discharge. Some antibiotics 
stimulate the overgrowth of this yeast by eliminating the bacteria that 
help manage the fungi in the normal community of microbes on the 
body. Recurrent candidiasis, which is defined as four or more episodes 
per year, affects hundreds of millions of women.23 This can be a debili￾tating condition. There is no cure, and treatment relies on suppressing 
the growth of the fungus with antifungal medicines. Annual medical 
spending on this complaint soars into billions of dollars in the United 
States alone. In the limited studies of the vaginal mycobiome, all of the 
fungi identified on this part of the body surface are species of Candida. 
Healthy populations of Candida have a protective effect against the 
development of intrauterine adhesions by modulating the growth of 
bacteria and less common fungi in the cervical canal and middle vagina 86 chapter 5
that can damage these sensitive tissues.24 Men are also affected by this 
yeast, albeit rarely, when candidiasis develops on the surface of the 
penis following contact with a partner with the vaginal form.
When we consider the importance of Candida in the oral mycobi￾ome, its dominance of the vagina, prevalence in the gut, and presence 
on the skin, this yeast materializes as the most important fungus in 
human health. We have seen the power of many other fungi in support￾ing and collapsing our health, but in terms of the overall operation of 
the human ecosystem, this yeast is unchallenged as the fungus at the 
heart of the human being. We are human yeasts, Homo mycosapiens or 
Homo fermentalis.
RIPPLE EFFECTS OF THE GUT FUNGI
With mycobiome research in the early stages of sorting fact from fiction, 
or facts with an impact on health from those without, the case for a link 
between gut fungi and illnesses whose symptoms are expressed in other 
parts of the body is building. Some of these claims seem unlikely at first, 
but the revelations about the fungi that live in our bodies are so surpris￾ing that we should keep an open mind. If my mycology professor had 
told me when I first looked at fungal spores through a microscope in the 
1980s that some of these tiny grains belonged to fungi that could be 
found in the colon, I would have thought him batty.
Vaginal delivery and breastfeeding have a protective effect against the 
development of asthma in children and are associated with dif­ferent gut 
microbes than the ones found in C-sectioned and bottle-fed babies (see 
chapter 1). Problems in the development of the immune system in asth￾matic children offer a hypothetical link to the gut microbiome and shifts 
in the numbers and kinds of yeasts that are seen in asthmatic children.25
Early treatment with antibiotics is another risk factor for asthma, which 
strengthens the fungal connection according to the following chain of 
logic: fungi can be highly allergenic → fungi grow in the infant gut →
gut fungi are disturbed by antibiotics → infants that receive antibiotics 
are at greater risk of developing asthma ⇒ [ergo] disturbing the myco￾biome can lead to asthma.Digestion 87
An obvious obstacle to embracing the idea that fungal unrest or dys￾biosis in the gut can provoke asthma is the physical separation of the 
digestive and respiratory systems. Eating does not affect breathing in 
any noticeable way, and breathing dust does not cause intestinal dis￾tress. This segregation of organs is an essential element of the way that 
medical students learn about human anatomy, lungs this week, kidneys 
next, although the connections should be emphasized as often as pos￾sible. For example, the immunological systems that protect the gut and 
the lung are coupled through the blood and lymph vessels, and we rec￾ognize this intimacy with the term gut-lung axis.26
Similar ripple effects between the gut mycobiome and illnesses 
presented in other parts of the body have been proposed for other con￾ditions that seem unrelated to gut function. The number of budding 
Candida cells soars in type 1 and type 2 diabetes, and multiple species 
of Candida appear in the guts of children with type 1 insulin-dependent 
diabetes. The overall diversity of fungi in the gut mycobiome also seems 
to increase in some liver diseases and decrease in others. Candida flares 
are seen in hepatitis, cirrhosis of the liver, and a disease called primary 
sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) that damages the bile duct.27 PSC is also 
known as Walter Payton’s disease, after the famous American football 
player who died in 1999 from bile duct cancer caused by this condition. 
Multiple sclerosis is the most controversial of these putative correla￾tions, with dif­ferent patterns of fungal abundance seen in patients with 
this chronic autoimmune disease.28 In the absence of a consensus in the 
mycobiome experiments, it seems most likely that the fungi are re￾sponding to the gut inflammation that develops in multiple sclerosis 
patients rather than playing any causal role.
OPTIMIZING THE GUT MYCOBIOME
There is a tendency to view the body as a temple ruined by modernity. 
This viewpoint is entirely reasonable when we consider the frightful 
nature of processed foods saturated with sugar and salt, lacking all traces 
of fiber, and delivering the calories required for weight maintenance by 
a sasquatch rather than a slothful human. Those with sufficient tenacity 88 chapter 5
and affluence to eat a more balanced diet that emphasizes plants and get 
some exercise can feel happier in the twenty-first century and reflect on 
the likelihood that they are likely to live longer than most representa￾tives of our species throughout history.
So, what can we do to promote a balanced mycobiome in the gut that 
may support our overall health? The fungible concept of the healthy 
mycobiome makes me wary of any dietary recommendations, and my 
fungible waistline is unlikely to inspire confidence in my readers. Other 
commentators on the mycobiome are bullish enough to recommend 
food and behavioral choices to improve the mycobiome, attain digestive 
wellness, and lose weight. Mahmoud Ghannoum, a distinguished medi￾cal mycologist at the University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center, is 
the most prominent advocate of mycobiome manipulation, which he 
explains in his book Total Gut Balance: Fix Your Mycobiome Fast for 
Complete Digestive Wellness (2019).29 Eve Adamson, an award-winning 
author on dieting, is credited as a cowriter, and the book includes sixty 
“Mycobiome Diet” recipes. There is a lot of useful information on fungi 
in Total Gut Balance, and Ghannoum explains that Candida is a harmless 
resident until dysbiosis sets in and the fungus reveals its darker side. The 
science is leavened with advice about smoking cessation, yoga, and 
meditation, which is very reasonable but strays from the mycobiome. 
The recipes look very appetizing in the photographs, but the only study 
on the impact of the Mycobiome Diet on the mycobiome was published 
by Ghannoum himself in the Journal of Probiotics and Health.30
Pending advances in mycobiome research, there is little dietary ad￾vice supported by scientific evidence that will guarantee a healthy my￾cobiome. Healthy people tend to have healthy mycobiomes, and a great 
range of illnesses are accompanied by unhealthy mixtures of fungi and 
bacteria. There is a frustrating circularity to this relationship and few 
ways to intervene and use the onboard microorganisms to treat disease. 
Candida is the obviously problematic fungus in many debilitating con￾ditions that involve the mycobiome, and dampening this yeast when it 
grows to the exclusion of everything else could be helpful. The effective 
treatments for vaginal yeast contain low doses of antifungal drugs and 
are applied as topical agents. Use of the same medicines to treat CandidaDigestion 89
in the gut has the unwelcome effect of damaging the other fungi whose 
growth we want to support. We do not want to eliminate any organism 
that might be an essential partner in the healthy human ecosystem. Co￾conut oil, undecylenic acid (from castor oil), and oregano leaf extract 
are dietary supplements that are advertised as treatments for yeast over￾growth. Coconut oil, which is recommended in the Mycobiome Diet, 
has a proven effect on the mycobiome of mice, reducing Candida over￾growth and restoring the healthy mixture of fungal species.31 This is not 
much to go on, but with few side effects, coconut oil is worth trying as 
a dietary remedy. Reducing Candida through dietary changes seems 
unlikely to resolve any serious condition like IBD, but any relief from 
the crippling symptoms would be marvelous.
The key to a healthy mycobiome may lie in preventing an unhealthy 
one from developing in the first place, and the most direct way to satisfy 
the needs of our fungi is to feed them properly. While the Mycobiome 
Diet totters on a weak scientific foundation, the recipes and other ad￾vice offered by Mahmoud Ghannoum push readers in the right direc￾tion, away from processed foods and toward a sensible diet that tastes 
good and emphasizes plants. If your digestive system operates like a 
well-oiled machine, pay attention to what you are eating and keep doing 
so. If it misbehaves, interrogate someone with a happier gut and find out 
what they have been eating. Clearer advice about optimizing the myco￾biome will come as this scientific inquiry moves on from naming the 
fungi in the gut to figuring out what they are doing in there. This will be 
expensive and time-consuming and require collaborations among 
specialists in gastroenterology who know the intestine, bioinformatics 
experts who read DNA for a living, immunologists who understand 
immunology, and mycologists infatuated with fungi.
From this inward examination, in part I, of the fungi that live on the 
body for better or worse, supporting and damaging our health, we move 
outward, in part II, looking at the ways that we interact with fungi out￾side the body. We begin with chapter 6, on mushrooms, molds, and 
yeasts in the diet.PART II
Outward93
6
Nourishing
MOL DS A ND MUSHROOMS IN 
OUR DIETS
milk curds are stiffened and blue-veined in the coolness of caves; 
sausages are bloomed with white powder as they hang drying on strings; 
beans and cereals dissolve into soy sauce and jellify into tempeh; bread 
dough rises; and grains and grapes are transformed into beer and wine. 
Humans crafted these foods for millennia without any idea that micro￾scopic fungi were threading through cheese and bubbling in vats. All 
they knew was that their diets were invigorated by experimenting with 
raw foods, and they marveled at the handiwork of their gods. Biotech￾nology began as this monkish pursuit. In our time we are applying the 94 chapter 6
same genetic techniques that have identified the fungi that grow on the 
body to understand the ecology of food. Who would have guessed that a 
cheese wedge is one of the wonders of the microbial world? In this chap￾ter we explore the foodie extension of the human-fungus symbiosis that 
takes us from the body to the farm and to fermentation towers brim￾ming with mycelia that make chicken nuggets without chickens.
Penicillium is the cheesemaker. The name of this mold, which means 
brush, refers to its bristly stalks topped with chains of spores that re￾semble tiny dreadlocks.1 In nature, these spores are blown into the air 
or catch on the hairs of passing insects, and each particle of fungus car￾ries the genes for making a mycelium in a new location. Most spores 
land in places without food and water, where they shrivel and die, but a 
small proportion survive and go on to craft the next generation of 
spores. And so it goes, and has gone on, from spore to spore for millions 
of years, conveying the instructions for making this fungus.2 Cheese￾makers circumvent the wild dispersal mechanism and add the spores of 
the fungus directly to their milk curds.
Penicillium is the first Latin name or genus of hundreds of fungal spe￾cies that grow everywhere and feed on everything, spoil food, make 
toxins and antibiotics, and flavor cheeses and preserved meats. Another 
genus, Aspergillus, is equally influential on agriculture, medicine, and 
food. Penicillium and Aspergillus are filamentous fungi that do not pro￾duce mushrooms or any macroscopic fruit bodies at all. They are the 
iconic molds, or “moulds,” in British spelling. Along with the brewing 
and baking yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, these microbes occupy the 
top spots in the human-fungus symbiosis: not in terms of the mycobi￾ome and human health—Candida takes that award—but as prizewin￾ners for supporting civilization.
BREWING AND CHEESEMAKING: 
THE FIRST FERMENTATIONS
To understand the best-partner nomination for Penicillium, we begin with 
a visit to a salt mine in Austria and look at the feces left by an Iron Age 
miner more than 2,600 years ago. This archaeological treasure was left in Nourishing 95
a mineshaft in the mountains that tower above the beautiful alpine village 
of Hallstatt. People were digging here for thousands of years before the 
miner took his historic bathroom break, and this amazing mine remains 
active today. The sample of paleofeces is the size of a grape, and it was 
preserved by the saltiness of the mine. It is very fibrous in structure, which 
is consistent with a high-fiber diet that included barley and other culti￾vated cereals whose remnants are visible under the microscope. The 
miner had also eaten apples paired with Roquefort cheese and quenched 
his thirst with beer. He was a proto-gourmand whose repast would not be 
amiss in a fashionable bistro today. There are no physical traces of the 
cheese and beer, of course, but analysis of DNA in the paleofeces by a 
team of researchers led by Frank Maixner at the Institute for Mummy 
Studies in Italy identified the cheesemaking fungus, Penicillium roqueforti, 
and brewer’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae.3 Both fungi had become part 
of the salt miner’s gut mycobiome, in the same way that every fungus that 
we eat flows through the digestive system, interacting with the intestinal 
bacteria, triggering immune reactions, and affecting our health. Maixner’s 
study provides a snapshot of the unfolding relationship between 
humans and fungi in Europe before the Roman conquest—the way that 
the diets of laborers were enriched by fungal fermentation.
Our collaboration with fungi began with the transformation of sugars 
into alcohol by yeast, symbolized as C6
H12O2 → CH3
CH2
OH, which is 
the most consequential chemical reaction in human history.4 My hunch 
is that palm wine was the archetypal brew in tropical Africa, where people 
found that the sweet sap drained from palm trees fermented spontaneously 
in the sun. This idea is supported by the discovery of fractured starch grains 
from wine palms and sorghum on the surface of 105,000-year-old stone 
grinding tools in a cave in Mozambique. It is tempting to think that the 
early humans were processing palm stems and grass seeds to make 
the kinds of artisanal brews that remain popular in Africa today.
The oldest clear evidence of brewing comes from the analysis of pot￾tery remains showing that rice wine was fermented in Chinese villages 
nine thousand years ago.5 Wherever it began, brewing was the first 
deliberate application of the chemical wizardry of the fungi. This was 
deliberate in the sense that the brewers learned to prepare their 96 chapter 6
ingredients in a way that stimulated fermentation, although they obvi￾ously had no concept of the invisible yeasts and molds that performed 
this alchemy. Indeed, early brewers interpreted the formation of alcohol 
through their religions and showed their appreciation by worshipping 
festive deities that included the Daoist god Yidi in China, the Sumerian 
beer goddess Ninkasi, and the Yoruba spirit Ogoun in Africa.
The extension of human-fungus symbiosis from brewing with yeasts to 
cheesemaking with molds was the next technological breakthrough that 
bears the stamp of serendipity. Cattle and other mammals were originally 
domesticated to furnish settlements with a reliable supply of meat. Milking 
was a later inspiration. Milk is rich in fat and protein, but genetic research 
shows that the early herders belonged to lactose intolerant populations and 
would have found fresh milk unpalatable.6 Butter was one of the early solu￾tions to the lactose problem, which concentrates the milk fat and allows a 
good deal of the lactose sugar to drain away in the buttermilk. Cheesemak￾ing works in a dif­ferent way, by separating the fats in the curds and express￾ing a lot of the sugar in the whey. By churning butter and fermenting 
cheeses, herders produced palatable and nutritious foods that took up less 
space than gallons of milk and lasted a lot longer before spoiling.
Yogurt was another early dairy product that is fermented by microbes. 
Residues in Neolithic pottery show that yogurt drinks were fermented 
from mare’s milk in Central Asia and that cheeses were made from cow’s 
milk in northern Europe at least seven thousand years ago. In his Histories, 
written around 430 BC, Herodotus described the Scythian use of 
mare’s milk to make kumis, which is a mildly alcoholic drink that remains 
popular in Russia and other countries. Lactic acid bacteria dominate yo￾gurts, and yeasts are unwelcome because they spoil the taste. Yeasts are 
more amiable in kumis, where they produce alcohol and create the frothi￾ness of this drink, which has been called the champagne of the steppes.
BLUE CHEESES
By the time the armies of Julius Caesar conquered Gaul in 50 BC, cheese 
had become a widespread part of the Western European diet. In the first 
century AD, Pliny described a range of cheeses imported to Rome from Nourishing 97
its empire in his Naturalis Historia, and Petronius detailed a soft wine￾soaked cheese served at the end of a banquet in his Satyricon.7 Pliny 
praised the cheeses from southern France without specifying Roquefort 
(as some promoters have claimed), but blue cheeses were produced long 
before then, as the salt miner testified through his ancient deposition.
According to legend, Roquefort cheese was discovered by a French 
shepherd who put his bread and cheese in a cave for safekeeping when 
he ran off in pursuit of a young maiden. Months later, he returned to the 
cave and found his cheese metamorphosed into a blue-marbled delicacy. 
There have been, no doubt, many distracted shepherds, but science 
has shown that the Roquefort legend is a crock. Contrary to long-standing 
ideas about this Penicillium evolving as a cave dweller, it is a domesti￾cated variety of a fungus that rots vegetation and thrives on farm silage 
stored as winter feed for livestock.8 The only reason that it grows in 
caves is because its spores are taken into them by cheesemakers in the 
commune of Roquefort-sur-Soulzon in southern France and added to 
curds clotted from ewes’ milk. Here, the curds are shaped into wheels 
and allowed to drain before salting and spiking with needles to aerate 
the cheese. This stimulates the growth of the mold, along with comple￾mentary bacteria. Afterward, the cheeses mature in caves for at least 
three months as the fungus performs its sorcery in the cool humid air. 
As the wheels age, their veins are colored by the blue-green spores of 
the fungus.
By transferring cultures of the fungi that produced the most success￾ful batches of Roquefort onto chunks of moldy bread, early cheesemak￾ers selected a strain of Penicillium with the strongest combination of 
characteristics. They wanted one that grew slowly to ensure a steady 
maturation process and produced plenty of spores that would serve as 
a vigorous starter for fresh batches of cheese. These artisans were en￾gaged in the practice of artificial selection that we usually associate with 
the domestication of plants and animals. And as the fungus got better 
at making the blue-veined cheese in the caves, our amorous shepherd 
was contributing to the Roquefort story by choosing lambs from ewes 
of the Lacaune sheep with the richest milk and puppies from sheep￾dogs that were the best at herding them. Across the centuries, selective 98 chapter 6
breeding worked its magic on the molds, sheep, and dogs to craft the 
perfect cheese.
Penicillium and other fungi work in combination with bacteria to cre￾ate masterpieces like Roquefort. Bacteria break down the lactose in 
milk, and the accompanying acidification promotes coagulation. Fungi 
added to the resulting curds feed on the milk fat, which controls the 
consistency of the cheese, and they are also responsible for producing 
the distinctive aroma and taste during the maturation process. The 
strain of the fungus that makes Roquefort in the eponymous French 
township is maintained in laboratories today to ensure its unwavering 
behavior when it is added to the curds. Other strains of Penicillium 
roqueforti create the sweet, nutty crumbliness of Stilton from England 
and subtler creaminess of Danish Blue from cow’s milk. Cashel Blue 
from Ireland is another win for this species of fungus, but milder 
blue cheeses, including Gorgonzola and Blue d’Auvergne are made by 
a relation called Penicillium glaucum.
Another mold, Penicillium camemberti, makes the soft white crusts of 
Camembert and Brie.9 These creamy cheeses originated in northern 
France. Brie was produced in the Middle Ages, and its crust had a blue￾gray color until the twentieth century, before cheesemakers selected for 
strains that form a pure white surface. The growth of the mold is con￾trolled by refrigeration, and the crusts are flattened by their wrappers, 
which stifle the slow expansion of the fungus. When the wrapper is re￾moved, its folds are left as impressions in the white fungus that has 
grown along the seams, seeking opportunities to escape. If the un￾wrapped cheese is left at room temperature, it can turn fluffy. This is 
nurtured in some cheese varieties, like the firmer and hazel-nutty Saint￾Nectaire, which becomes covered with poil de chat, or cat’s hair. The 
fungi that grow the hairs and darken the cheese surface are species of 
Mucor, extending the activities of these versatile species of fungi from 
the gut mycobiome, where they are common occupants, to the micro￾bial communities of the cheese and back again when we eat them.
Saint-Nectaire, which comes from Auvergne in the middle of France, 
is fermented and ripened by an exceptionally complicated succession 
of fungi and accompanying bacteria.10 Multiple species of yeasts start Nourishing 99
by growing in the milk curds, breaking down the milk fat and reducing 
the acidity, which allows bacteria to multiply; molds join the fray as 
latecomers to firm and fluff the crust. Ten billion microbes can grow in 
a gram of cheese.11 The populations of dif­ferent fungi and bacteria rise 
and fall as the cheese ages, reflecting changes in the availability of nutri￾ents and the give and take between microbes that ranges from coopera￾tion to chemical warfare. The intricacy of some of these interactions is 
astonishing. One mind-bending study on Saint-Nectaire shows that 
bacteria use the fungal hyphae as physical guides, like miniature railroad 
lines, for high-speed travel through the rind.12 This collaboration is 
limited to certain types of bacteria, which has the effect of controlling 
the mixture of microbes in the maturing cheese. Other microbial 
performances, most of them unknown, animate—or, to be more pre￾cise, fungate—the taste, smell, color, and texture of every cheese, whose 
brilliance arises from their dalliance with death, edging so close to de￾composition yet brimming with life. A cheese is, as American author 
Clifton Fadiman wrote, “milk’s leap toward immortality.”13
The removal of lactose and production of a compact and spoilage￾resistant food explains why cheesemaking began in the Neolithic. The 
availability of this high-calorie dairy product must have been a godsend 
during the winter months in northern latitudes when fresh meat and 
vegetables were scarce. Cheese has another great advantage over raw 
milk in its safety. The Listeria bacterium that grows in raw milk is inhib￾ited by the activity of the preferred bacteria and yeasts in cheeses. Arti￾san cheeses made from unpasteurized milk are not immune from this 
dangerous form of spoilage, but cheesemaking has become such an 
exacting business that cases of listeriosis from cheese are extremely rare. 
If we accept the minuscule risk of listeriosis from these raw milk prod￾ucts, we access new dimensions in the cheese universe, hundreds of 
sensational varieties that may have the additional benefit of contribut￾ing to a healthy digestive system when samples of cheese microbes 
merge with the gut microbiome.14
None of these prehistoric advantages of cheese explain why we are at￾tracted to the strong flavors of blue cheese. To understand the pleasures 
of Roquefort and its rivals, we need to think about the evolution of our 100 chapter 6
sense of smell. The fungi in blue cheeses produce volatile compounds 
that belong to the groups of chemicals that perfumiers mix in their fra￾grances. We find these alluring for the same reasons that we are attracted 
to zesty citrusy odors, whose underlying appeal evolved as a stimulus 
for finding wild fruits. Fungi are not interested in attracting us with 
these smells and seem to make these volatile chemicals to repel other 
microorganisms.15 The explanation for turophilia (cheese-loving) be￾comes more complicated when we consider the popularity of washed￾rind cheeses, whose aromas are produced by bacteria. Consider the 
shockingly sudoriferous Limburger from Belgium, whose smell is pro￾duced by a bacterium that is a culprit in foot odor. The taste for Lim￾burger and other maximally pungent cheeses, like Stinking Bishop and 
Époisses, probably lies somewhere in our sexual attraction to certain 
body odors and pheromones. The bewitching power of this mephitic 
matter on other animals is illustrated by the effectiveness of Limburger 
as bait for trapping malarial mosquitoes that are programmed to respond 
to the same signals in human sweat.16
FERMENTED MEAT, FISH, CEREALS, AND BEANS
Moving from la fromagerie to la charcuterie, we find more evidence of 
the culinary skills of Penicillium in the whitish bloom on the skins of the 
dry-cured meats hanging from strings. Some meat producers inoculate 
their sausages by dipping them in a starter culture of spores before they 
are placed in drying rooms to mature. Others allow their sausages to 
become colonized by fungi without any human interference. Either way, 
the fungi change the taste of the sausages as they feed on the fats and 
proteins in the meat and contribute to the characteristic aromas of these 
regional delicacies. The fungi also absorb water from the raw meat, 
which accelerates the drying process. They also fend off other molds 
that cause spoilage, including species that produce toxins. Penicillium 
nalgiovense is the commonest fungus used to cure meats and is used by 
the major manufacturers.17 This fungus is joined by Penicillium salamii
on Italian salami, soppressata, and capocollo, whose spores float around 
in the rooms where the raw meat is packed into casings.18 The same Nourishing 101
fungus is obviously an expert in meat curing because it also grows on 
air-dried ham in Slovenia.
Because fungi and their spores are everywhere on the lookout for 
food, and because they are so skilled in decomposing the rest of nature, 
they colonize every kind of raw food that we harvest and compete with 
us for all of the available calories. The resulting spoilage is terrifically 
harmful from the perspective of the farmer and consumer, but this is 
balanced by the protection afforded by the elite group of food fungi 
whose growth we have encouraged for thousands of years. All of the 
uses of fungi to protect and modify raw foods must have been discov￾ered by accident and perfected by experimentation. This is exactly what 
happened with brewing and cheesemaking, where nothing is left to 
chance today.
Regional loyalties to some fermentations are more difficult to com￾prehend than others. Fungi and bacteria that ferment Greenland shark 
meat make it safe to eat without making it appealing to eat. The resulting 
chewy snack, which is an Icelandic treat called hákarl, has a memorable 
bouquet of stale urine. It is one of the wonders of the culinary world, 
rejected by the palates of most tourists who try a cube of the stuff during 
a visit to the volcanic island. The preparation of hákarl has not changed 
in any fundamental way since the Viking Age because it is crafted auto￾matically by microbes that are ready to pounce on the flesh as soon as 
it is exposed to the air. Icelanders ferment the shark flesh in tubs with 
perforated bottoms that allow the fluid to drain away for up to six weeks. 
After this preparatory relaxation, hákarl is left dangling in drying sheds 
for a few months before it is eaten. The raw shark meat is poisonous and 
is detoxified during this lengthy polishing, which is an undeniably good 
thing. When a sample of the final product is spiked with a toothpick, it 
might be mistaken for a piece of cheese until one is distracted by the 
sense that somewhere close by, a cat with a bladder infection has re￾lieved itself with great enthusiasm. This impression of feline inconti￾nence is replaced by much ghastlier scenarios if you proceed to put it in 
your mouth. Hoping that this book will sell well in Iceland, I should add 
that these comments are based on online reviews rather than personal 
experience. Every country has its culinary quirks, and I am sure that 102 chapter 6
plenty of Icelanders who enjoy hákarl are revolted by Marmite, the salty 
black paste that is revered in my birthplace. Marmite also has its place 
in this chapter, as a fungal product that is formulated from yeast cells 
exhausted from the labor of crafting beer.
Hákarl is fermented by a chaotic mixture of bacteria, yeasts, and 
molds, and this ensemble of microorganisms—the hákarl microbiome—
differs in every sample of the snack sold in stores.19 This is a change from 
the microbiomes of blue cheeses, in which one fungus steps up to over￾rule the others in every batch. An anaerobic bacterium (meaning that it 
is suffocated by oxygen) is found in all of the hákarl that has been tested, 
and a yeast is there too, but the rest of the fungi are all over the place, with 
a salmagundi of yeasts and molds chewing away in the chunks of flesh. And 
yet, this is a form of fermentation that is controlled, to some extent, by 
the draining and drying, which makes me wonder how much worse 
shark flesh could taste if it decomposed without any management?
Traveling east of Iceland, continuing this foray through the world of 
rotten fish, we could taste herring, or surströmming, in Sweden, which 
smells like an open sewer; various species of fish dried, salted, and resur￾rected as momone in Ghana; fesikh from Egypt; and onward to an exten￾sive menu of fish and fish sauces in Asia.20 Bacteria and fungi collabo￾rate in the preparation of all of these foods. Some, like hákarl, ferment 
spontaneously; others are inoculated with starters of grains colonized 
by fungi maintained for this purpose. The resulting foods add flavor to 
diets, notwithstanding the revulsion experienced by nonnatives, and 
preserve them from the automatic decomposition that poisons and liq￾uefies fish in the open air. Each of these ethnic foods is a tribute to the 
resilience and ingenuity of local human populations that strengthened 
their symbioses with the fungi.
A sauce fermented from fish intestines called garum was a staple in 
the Roman Empire. It was as popular as tomato ketchup and was manu￾factured outside cities to spare urban residents from its awful smell. 
Worcestershire sauce includes anchovies and tamarind fruit in its secret 
recipe and may hint at the glories of garum that disappeared with the 
empire.21 The history of Worcestershire sauce is as murky as the genesis 
of the other foods in this chapter, with a tale about a colonist returning Nourishing 103
from India with a fever for a chutney deflating when a former employee 
of Lea & Perrins—the British manufacturer—discovered that the gen￾tlemen named by the company had never set foot in the country. With 
or without any culinary espionage, the recipe for this Indian-inspired 
sauce was developed in the city of Worcester by two chemists, John 
Wheeley Lea and William Perrins, and has been sold since the succes￾sion of Queen Victoria (1837). Yeasts and bacteria complete the exacting 
eighteen-month cultivation process, which is a trade secret.
Soy sauce has a clearer pedigree, with scholarly sources converging 
on its beginnings in China and later introduction to Japan in the thir￾teenth century by a Zen monk returning from a pilgrimage. The oldest 
techniques for fermenting soy sauce were probably adapted from 
recipes for fish sauce to align with Buddhist sutras advocating vegetari￾anism. Soy sauce is made from a mixture of soybeans and wheat by kōji, 
which is the term for the Aspergillus mold that breaks down the proteins 
in these ingredients and produces glutamate, which gives the sauce its 
umami or savory taste. Brine is added to the brew for a second-stage 
fermentation, in which bacteria produce lactic acid and yeasts flavor 
the sauce as they digest sugars.22 The Japanese company Kikkoman is the 
largest producer of soy sauce, which traces its origins to the seventeenth 
century. Soy sauce has also been produced in Korea for centuries, where 
other fungi and bacteria engage in a lengthy preparation of seasoned 
cabbage to create the glorious staple kimchi. Fungal foods are powerful 
emblems of national and regional identity, and their manufacture in 
other countries has invited claims of cultural appropriation. Producers 
have engaged in fierce battles over trademarks, and protections have 
been instituted in many places including the French appellation d’origine 
contrôlée for cheeses and other agricultural products.
As Europeans embraced Penicillium as their chief cheese fungus, 
people in Asia worked with Mucor and related bread molds to craft solid 
foods from beans and cereals, including sufu in China, idli in India, and 
oncom and tempeh in Indonesia.23 The consistency of these products 
ranges from the spreadable sufu, which has been compared with cream 
cheese, to the firm slabs of tempeh. Each of these products is the cre￾ation of a complex community of fungi and bacteria that performs a 104 chapter 6
controlled breakdown of proteins and complex carbohydrates to create 
a more digestible food and adds flavors that range from bland to the 
demonic. Tempeh has the widest global distribution and is the most 
overtly fungal of these fermentations in taste and appearance, with 
whole soybeans glued together by wefts of white mycelium, producing 
something like an inverted Camembert cheese. It is a popular meat 
substitute that is especially good when it is cooked after marinating in 
barbecue sauce and is also served as crispy fritters in East Java called 
tempeh kemul. The reference to ferments with a demonic flavor applies 
to regional versions of Chinese sufu that have been ranked at the far end 
of a disturbing continuum of tastes that runs from floral to cadaverous 
and fecal.
The continental differences between the mold species used in the fun￾gal technologies of Europe and Asia are striking and seem to have arisen 
from the type of food that was fermented rather than the geographical 
patterns of fungal distribution. All of the fungi were busy with other jobs 
before domestication: Penicillium spores wafting from rotting vegetation 
were tempted by milk curds in the cool air of France, and other molds 
growing on animal dung leapt at the opportunity to ferment fresh soy￾beans in the tropics of Java.24 The Aspergillus recruited to make soy sauce 
in China was also doing its own thing in nature, feeding on wild grasses 
for millions of years before its employment by humans. In each case, a 
combination of local agricultural produce, climate, and human ingenuity 
produced new kinds of food. There is a fine line between the spoilage 
and improvement of foods by fungi. Any mold that produced toxins 
when it started growing on milk curds or sausage skins was sure to be 
discarded: nobody was going to use it as a starter for the next batch of 
cheese or cured meat. But when harmless molds showed up with unusual 
smells they were in with a chance. Some artisans threw them out, but 
others must have found them sufficiently interesting to give them a try, 
which is why we have blue cheese in France and salami in Italy. Hákarl
and surströmming must have been born from desperate hunger.
Region by region, over the millennia, the human-fungus symbiosis 
flourished as people discovered that certain manifestations of moldi￾ness preserved and improved food rather than reducing it to a putrid Nourishing 105
sludge. Greater control over the outcome of these fermentations was 
achieved by cultivating fungi on starters that could be mixed into the 
raw foodstuffs. This stopped other molds from taking hold and spoiling 
the fermentation. Starters included funky bread for cheesemaking in 
caves and moldy rice added to cooked soybeans to forge the blocks of 
tempeh. As the centuries passed, the human-fungus symbiosis deep￾ened, and the technologies were refined long before anyone understood 
the nature of the strange partners that cobwebbed our food and clouded 
our drinks.
THE QUORNIAN AGE
Solutions to the mysteries of fermentation began in the nineteenth 
century, when Louis Pasteur and his contemporaries proved that the 
bacteria and fungi seen with microscopes were the living agents of food 
spoilage and brewing. This spurred the deliberate application of mi￾crobes in the production of foods and medicines that we call biotech￾nology. With considerable hubris, a blue road sign declares South San 
Francisco “The Birthplace of Biotechnology.” This claim rests on the 
accomplishments of the biotech giant, Genentech, which was born 
there in 1976, but it is worth considering that the Pasteur Institute in 
Paris was established in 1887, twenty years before South San Francisco 
was a city. There are, after all, plenty of hotspots in the history of bio￾technology. With considerable bias, and no road sign, I argue that Cin￾cinnati is the real birthplace of American biotechnology because this 
was the site of the first yeast factory after the Civil War.25 And what 
about the village of Marlow Bottom in Buckinghamshire? In 1967, a 
team of food researchers began scouring the planet in search of a mold 
that would convert starch into protein. Some of the fungi did not grow 
very well, others grew fine but produced toxins, and then, on April 1, 
1968, a species of Fusarium was isolated from a compost heap in the vil￾lage that became the source of the superlative meat substitute trade￾marked as Quorn.26 The superlative fungus had been growing under the 
noses of the investigators, a half-hour walk from their laboratory 
headquarters.106 chapter 6
Today, the Quorn fungus is cultivated in 50-meter-tall fermentation 
towers, where it is circulated by a column of rising air bubbles and fed 
with corn syrup, ammonia, and minerals. Energized by the glucose in 
the syrup, the filaments of this mold reach out and branch into mini￾mycelia and concentrate as crumbles of the cholesterol-free foodstuff 
called mycoprotein. Beginning with one gram of the fungus, each fer￾mentation cycle produces 1,500 tons of Quorn. This is processed into 
meatless nuggets, sausages, and burgers that are sold in frozen food sec￾tions of grocery stores around the world.
Quorn is a very successful product that is enjoyed by those of us who 
have reduced or eliminated meat-eating and miss the texture of cooked 
flesh. Tempeh has a similar meat-like structure, but Quorn is a less am￾bitious food that does not raise any suspicions. Tempeh always makes 
me think about what I am eating, whereas there is nothing moldy about 
Quorn at all. It is so good as a breaded nugget that it should, logically, 
end the torture of broiler chickens. It is ironic that the development of 
mycoprotein as a tasty substitute for chicken has happened at the same 
time that chicken breeders and processors have been working toward 
increasingly tasteless lumps of meat so that the fungus and the animal 
are practically indistinguishable.
If, however, the urge to eat Quorn derives from the idea that it is 
environmentally sustainable, we need to think again, because it isn’t, or 
isn’t very. And this is the problem with all manufactured fungal protein 
products and all nonedible fungal products like packaging materials 
made from mushrooms: they are very energy intensive. Plants are sus￾tainable because they make their own food. Fungi, like animals, must 
feed on other organisms or their remains. If the Quorn fungus was con￾tent eating agricultural waste, that would be a more environmentally 
benign proposition. It would be decomposing something we cannot 
digest and turning it into artificial chicken nuggets. But Quorn is raised 
on corn syrup, which is trucked to the manufacturing plants in heated 
tanks, and the fungus is propelled around its fermenter stacks using 
powerful electric motors, fertilized with ammonia, and on, and on. Car￾bon dioxide billows into the air at every stage of the fermentation 
process, as it does whenever we make things. We can judge that Quorn Nourishing 107
is better for the environment than meat or fish, but carbon neutrality is 
as elusive as the battery-powered car whose only emission is water.27
Like the other food molds described in this chapter, the Quorn Fu￾sarium is related to fungi that destroy crops, spoil harvested grains, and 
infect humans. Fusarium is a huge genus that encompasses as many as a 
thousand species, including fungi that live in soil, plant pathogens that 
attack wheat and barley, and another species that is driving the com￾mercial banana toward extinction. This presents a marketing challenge, 
which is why we refer to mycoprotein rather than fungus protein, mold 
nuggets, or mildew meals. Some Fusarium species produce toxins (see 
chapter 8), but the Quorn Fusarium has never caused any problems as 
it swirls in its colossal fermenters.28 Other molds are also being raised 
on an industrial scale to produce enzymes that flavor and color fruit 
juices, tenderize meat, process cereals for animal feed, and prepare in￾gredients for baking and brewing. Fungal enzymes remove lactose from 
milk, modify milk formulas for infants, and are used to coagulate milk 
without using rennet that comes from calf stomachs. Enzymes from fila￾mentous fungi are also used to turn cornstarch into the corn syrup that 
sweetens sodas, breakfast cereals, candies, cookies, and most of the rest 
of the inventory of prepackaged junk foods. Incidentally, the syrup used 
to raise Quorn is produced from cornstarch using Aspergillus enzymes, 
and yeast is grown on the same stuff to manufacture bioethanol.
Fungal biotechnology, which began with palm wine and fermented 
milk, has evolved into a global industrial partnership between humans 
and fungi. Fungi have crept into the modern diet, one box, bottle, and 
aluminum can at a time, until we cannot live a day without them. The 
economic value of this symbiosis to the economy of the United States 
exceeds $1 trillion, which is comparable to the annual revenue from the 
automotive industry.29
BACK TO THE WOODS
Fermentation comes from the Latin fermentare, which means to leaven 
or make bread dough rise, and its meaning had been extended to de￾scribe bubbling, effervescing, and alcoholic fermentation by the 1600s. 108 chapter 6
Yeast is breaking down sugars in all these processes. It is doing what 
comes naturally to every fungus and defines the kingdom—namely, 
decomposition. So, fermentation describes forms of disassembly, de￾composition, or decay that we have learned to control to ensure the 
formation of useful rather than useless breakdown products. Once we 
recognize that some form of decomposition drives all of the industrial 
applications of fungi, the repulsive smell of some fermented foods 
makes complete sense. Although we do not tend to think about wood 
rotting as an example of fermentation, the fungi that do this in nature 
are performing the same kind of chemical transformations as the fungi 
in blue cheese, soy sauce, and tempeh. For this reason, we might expect 
mushrooms to be as nutritious as Roquefort cheese or mycoprotein 
burgers, but we would be wrong. Although the structure of a Quorn 
nugget is similar to the internal anatomy of a mushroom, Quorn is 
packed with protein, whereas a mushroom is composed of indigestible 
fiber and pumped-up with water. Mushrooms are very light on calories 
because their colonies or mycelia feed on plant debris. Mycelia may 
come across some scraps of animal protein from time to time and grab 
some snacks from tree roots if they belong to a mycorrhizal fungus, but 
the developing mushroom is never going to be flooded with sugars like 
a mold in an industrial fermenter.
The fruit body arises from the mycelium as a platform for releasing 
spores. Over the span of 150 million years, the fungi that produce these 
umbrella-shaped sex organs found ways to make sensibly sturdy struc￾tures that support the gills using the bare minimum of energy. This econ￾omy was achieved by absorbing water like a sponge to stay upright rather 
than developing stiffening tissues like the fibers in a plant. With their 
watery interior, mushrooms are a poor food source for animals. Gram 
for gram, mycelia have the same energetic value as cheese, whereas gilled 
mushrooms that grow from them have no more calories than a lettuce. 
Truffles are a luxurious exception to this rule because they evolved to 
attract animals for dispersal and are as fattening as Roquefort.30
Nobody ever got fat eating mushrooms. Oysters, portobellos, por￾cini, and other above-ground mushrooms contain a healthy mix of min￾erals, but nothing that we do not consume in larger quantities in a Nourishing 109
serving of fruit or a bowl of breakfast cereal. Mushrooms are eaten for 
pleasure, not for survival. They add texture to recipes and some of them 
pack spectacular flavors. They are also served in weight-loss diets, in￾cluding the M-Plan, promoted by several celebrities, which recom￾mends replacing one daily meal with a plate of mushrooms cooked in 
as little oil as possible. This is a straightforward approach to reducing 
calories and is no more or less effective than substituting a salad without 
any dressing for a richer meal. It is also difficult to stick with, and the 
body tends to oppose the loss of calories in the mushroom dish by 
stimulating greater food intake in the meal that follows. Part of the ap￾peal of the M-Plan and other diets that emphasize mushrooms comes 
from the widespread belief that fungi have almost magical powers—
always unspecified—that can help reshape the body more than vegetables. 
This illusion is also part of the allure of medicinal mushrooms, which is 
the topic of chapter 7.110
7
Treating
MEDICINES FROM FUNGI
a german couple hiking in the mountainous border between Italy 
and Austria in 1991 came across a corpse, half frozen in a glacier and 
slumped, face down, in a slurry of melting ice. They had discovered the 
mummified body of a forty-four-year-old man who had died more than 
five thousand years ago. We call him the Iceman, or Ötzi, which is a 
reference to the Ötzal Alps where he was found. An arrowhead was 
lodged in his shoulder blade, and the Iceman’s body bore other scars 
of combat including a head wound. He may have bled to death or died 
from hypothermia before snow and ice preserved his slender body and 
belongings. A pair of smooth white cuttings from the flesh of a shelf Treating 111
fungus were threaded on ribbons of leather, and a little pouch con￾tained fragments of another fungus that served as a firelighter.1 Ötzi 
was a Neolithic mycologist.
The white trinkets came from a fungus called the birch conk or 
polypore. Ötzi would have had no trouble finding this mushroom. It is 
a common parasite of older birch trees, which rots the trunk of the tree 
before bursting through the papery bark to form a squidgy clod that 
expands into the shape of a horse hoof. As the fruit body matures, a 
layer of tiny vertical tubes develops on the bottom of the hoof that 
opens into thousands of tiny holes—poly-pores. Pursuing a circadian 
rhythm, with maximum activity during the nighttime, the fungus drops 
millions of spores per hour from these pores. It grows best on trees 
weakened by drought or stressed by overcrowding, and the birches are 
left so frail that they topple with a little shove.
In 1998, an Italian anthropologist studying the mummy proposed 
that Ötzi had used “measured doses” of the fungus to induce “strong 
though short-lived bouts of diarrhea.”2 This was a remedy, he said, for 
internal parasites, whose eggs were identified in Ötzi’s mummified rec￾tum. Treatments for intestinal worms would certainly have been valu￾able in Ötzi’s time, when the human gut was a more festive arena than 
today’s plumbing system, with (to the tune of “My Favorite Things”) 
Roundworms in most guts and hookworms in plenty / Segmented tape￾worms that make you feel empty / Many amoebas and pinworms like strings
/ These were a few of our nightmarish things. Ötzi had one of the com￾monest parasites, the human whipworm, which is a roundworm or 
nematode that causes painful bowel movements and loss of appetite in 
heavy infections.3 Few readers will have encountered this parasite, but 
everyone in Ötzi’s tribe would have known them.
But the case for Ötzi’s use of the birch polypore as a worm treatment 
is very flimsy. Diarrhea is a symptom of worm infestation rather than a 
treatment, although temporary relief might come from emptying the 
bowel. There is no evidence, in any case, that the birch polypore works 
as a laxative, nor that the Iceman measured his doses of the fungus. 
However, these baseless ideas were published in a top-tier medical journal, 
The Lancet, and attracted a lot of media attention. With the imprimatur 112 chapter 7
of this periodical, few readers questioned the credibility of the medici￾nal claim, and Ötzi became idolized as an aboriginal apothecary who 
trudged through the snow to bear witness, in mummified form, to the 
ancient wisdom that we have lost.
Misrepresentation afflicts the whole field of research on medicinal 
mushrooms, making it difficult to tease out fact from fiction, but this is 
the brief of this chapter. Although the birch fungus does not seem to have 
been used by anyone as a worm remedy, it was adopted as a medicine to 
treat other conditions. It appears in the literature on traditional medical 
practices in Russia and Central Europe as an antiseptic and styptic (to 
stop bleeding). The birch fungus is also mentioned as an anti￾inflammatory and anticancer agent and, more specifically, as a veterinary 
cure for vaginal tumors in dogs.4 Mushroom poultices have certainly 
been useful for treating minor wounds, but I bet that Ötzi kept the conk 
for a dif­ferent purpose. A polypore species that grows on willows was 
carried by Blackfoot people, or Niitsitapi, and members of other nations 
of the Northern Plains in the same way as the Iceman, who carved white 
beads from the fruit bodies and hung them on rawhide thongs.5 Museum 
collections in Alberta, Canada, include Blackfoot charms made from 
human scalps decorated with these white beads. They were also sewn 
onto sacred robes and worn on necklaces. One archival photograph from 
the early twentieth century shows a chain of the fruit bodies around the 
neck of a horse, looking like the modern rhythm beads familiar to eques￾trians. Native Americans seem to have imbued their fungus with spiritual 
significance, and Ötzi may have revered the birch polypore for similar 
reasons. This is a more logical interpretation than creating a story about 
the deworming properties of a fungus from thin air.
MUSHROOM THERAPIES
Illustrations of mushrooms in Neolithic petroglyphs are expressions of 
the earliest conscious relationships between humans and fungi. We do 
not know the significance of fungi to these people, but the psychoactive 
properties of some species suggest that they would have featured in animist 
religions (this is discussed further in chapter 9). Wherever mushrooms Treating 113
were plentiful, people would also have learned to avoid the poisonous 
kinds, cook the tastiest ones, and gather a few special fruit bodies as 
medicines. Although the practical uses of the fungi diversified, they 
never escaped their association with the supernatural. This blurring of 
the distinction between medicine and magic continues today and is the 
foundation of the multibillion-dollar market for mushroom extracts.6
The medicinal mushroom business depends on fewer than a dozen 
fungi that are advertised as therapeutic stars. Reishi or lingzhi is a 
bracket fungus with a polished red surface; shiitake is an unassuming 
brownish umbrella with gills; maitake, or hen-of-the-woods, grows at 
the base of old trees as an outpouring of crowded gray flaps; and turkey 
tail erupts from decomposing logs as thin fans patterned with vivid 
stripes. Three more will cover the “medicinal seven”: cordyceps fruits 
from dead caterpillars as a firm pencil-sized stalk; chaga erupts from 
wounded birch trees (same as Ötzi’s conk) before splitting and drying 
into a charcoaled lump; and lastly, lion’s mane matures as a rounded 
wodge of pure white spines that looks like a frozen waterfall.7
All of these fungi are described as medicinal mushrooms, and none 
of them have proven medicinal effects. Devotees of medicinal mush￾rooms will disagree with this statement, so it is worth restating: many 
people believe that mushrooms are useful for treating illnesses, and 
some of these claims may be true, but they are not backed up by de￾pendable scientific evidence. Mushrooms and mushroom extracts are 
not like other drugs, because they are treated as foods rather than medi￾cines in the United States and are sold as dietary supplements and herbal 
remedies. This means that they escape the stringent testing and regula￾tion applied to over-the-counter medicines, including painkillers and 
cough treatments and the drugs prescribed by doctors. The absence of 
regulation may seem refreshing for people tired of government interfer￾ence in their lives, but this leaves us at the mercy of the businesses that 
market medicinal mushrooms. For all their faults, the major pharma￾ceutical companies are forced to follow some rules and are self￾disciplined by the continuous threat of lawsuits by consumers.
Medicinal mushrooms are sold as slices of dried fruit bodies and 
powders and, with no requirement for the manufacturers to identify the 114 chapter 7
active ingredients, we cannot assess the potency of one product line 
relative to another. Imagine buying a bottle of aspirin and learning that 
the pills contained nothing but chalk. We would be reasonably upset, 
yet a shameless company could fill capsules with cornstarch mixed with 
a pinch of anything mushroomy and sell them as cordyceps supplement 
with no legal repercussions. This is not an exaggeration: there are no 
industry-wide standards for assessing the ingredients in medicinal 
mushroom products.
Web postings proclaim medicinal mushrooms as wellsprings of 
“health-boosting vitamins, minerals, and antioxidants” and “nutrients 
that support the body’s natural immune functions and balance.”8 The 
term “well-being” tends to crop up a lot and is as difficult to define as 
“nutraceutical,” with which it is often associated. The language of the 
industry is demeaning to anyone with a modicum of intelligence, but 
most of us are predisposed to wishful thinking when it comes to health 
issues. It is easy to feel aloof when we are feeling tiptop, not so much 
when we are, indeed, drifting into the arena of the unwell. As long as the 
consumer does not favor mushrooms to the exclusion of life-saving pre￾scription drugs, these potions are harmless, and the remarkable power 
of the placebo effect can be worth the purchase price.
LION’S MANE AND BETA-GLUCANS
The lion’s mane mushroom, or hedgehog fungus, offers a useful case 
study for a particular species. The mycelium of this fungus feeds on dead 
trees and can keep fruiting for decades from the same log until the wood 
dissolves into the forest floor. The mushroom is a naked spore factory 
that operates as an inside-out polypore by discharging spores from the 
surface of its spines. Its medicinal status rests on the experimental effect 
of extracts from the fruit bodies on the growth of isolated nerve cells in 
culture dishes. Rats fed the powdered mushroom have also shown in￾creased levels of nerve growth factor (NGF), which is a chemical mes￾senger that contributes to the maintenance of the nervous system.9 The 
chemicals in lion’s mane that are responsible for these effects are called 
hericenones and erinacines, referring to the Latin name of the fungus, Treating 115
Hericium erinaceus, meaning hedgehog-hedgehog. In addition to the 
research on cultured nerve cells and rats, a human study from Japan 
examined the effect of daily doses of powdered lion’s mane on patients 
diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment.10 After sixteen weeks of 
treatment, patients given mushroom capsules improved their scores on 
a standard screening test for dementia relative to controls.
These investigations are an interesting starting point for more re￾search, not for marketing a mushroom as a medicine with proven curative 
powers. Tero Isokauppila, author of Healing Mushrooms, is less cautious. 
He says that lion’s mane “can potentially reverse the cognitive deteriora￾tion that creeps up on all of us as we age,” which is supported by the 
Japanese study, and goes on to describe the successful use of the mush￾room in healing brain damage.11 Paul Stamets, founder of FungiPerfecti, 
“Makers of Host Defense® Mushrooms,” is similarly excited about this 
species. His website says that a daily dose of the fungus, in the form of 
capsules, “optimizes nervous and immune system health.”12 In business 
since 1980, FungiPerfecti adds the following caveat to its endorsements 
of nutritional supplements: “This product is not intended to diagnose, 
treat, cure or prevent any disease.”
Less restrained promoters of medicinal mushrooms declare that 
lion’s mane “prevents neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer’s and 
Parkinson’s”; is a treatment for depression and anxiety, digestive ul￾cers, and cancer; reduces the risk of heart disease; and helps manage 
diabetes. According to some websites, lion’s mane cures erectile dys￾function, while contrary sources of online wisdom declare that the 
mushroom reduces libido.13 The truths and fabrications about lion’s 
mane illustrate the way that a scattering of scientific experiments sup￾porting the pharmacological effects of a fungus become stretched into 
fantastical declarations about mushrooms as the universal panacea—
the discovery of the philosophers’ stone that eluded the alchemists of 
the Middle Ages.
The nerve agents isolated from lion’s mane have not been found in 
other mushrooms, whereas another group of medicinal compounds are 
common as muck, loaded into the cell walls of every fungus. These are the 
beta-glucans, which are components of the hyphae that form mycelia 116 chapter 7
and the squishy flesh of mushrooms. Beta-glucans also come from oats 
and barley. Glucans are polymers of sugars or polysaccharides. Cellulose, 
which is made by plants, is another polysaccharide. Molecules of cellu￾lose are assembled as thin strands, which are packed lengthwise to form 
fatter threads, like the wires inside electrical cables. Cellulose passes 
through the gut intact, where it serves as the bulk of the indigestible fiber 
in our diet. The sugars that form beta-glucan molecules are connected in 
a dif­ferent fashion, which allows the smaller ones to dissolve in water, 
making them part of the soluble fiber in the diet. These smaller mole￾cules bind to the surface of macrophages and other cells involved in the 
innate immune defenses that are stationed in the wall of the intestine.14
Beta-glucans are recognized by the immune systems of all animals 
from butterflies to bison on dry land and crabs to cetaceans at sea. Even 
the sponge ancestors of the whole animal kingdom are irritated by beta￾glucans.15 This universal response to beta-glucans speaks to the sup￾portive relationships that have been forged between fungi and animals 
from the evolutionary get-go, as well as the mortal threat posed by fun￾gal infections. The human immune system recognizes beta-glucans as a 
measure of the status of the fungi on the body along this spectrum of 
interactions. It is attentive to beta-glucans released from yeasts and 
other fungi passing harmlessly along the gut without provoking an in￾flammatory reaction. A more aggressive response is mounted when 
larger pulses of beta-glucans are detected from a fungus that is damag￾ing our tissues.
From the foundation of beta-glucan science, followers of alternative 
medicine have turned these sugary strings into the mycological equiva￾lent of ass gelatin—a traditional Chinese balm, also known as donkey￾hide glue, which is a miracle treatment for cancer. Ass gelatin does not, 
of course, cure any forms of cancer, but that has not interfered with its 
traditional uses. The positive thing about beta-glucans is that they do 
have proven effects on the immune system, which is one of the few reli￾able facts that can be established about medicinal mushrooms. This 
immune activity has led investigators to pay serious attention to beta￾glucans, and there have been several controlled trials to see if they might 
prove useful as cancer therapies.Treating 117
The traditional applications of mushrooms for treating cancer are 
provocative, but the immunological logic is very weak. Why should a 
chemical compound that stimulates the immune system to combat 
fungi turn our defenses against our own cells that have become cancer￾ous? The most hopeful answer is that an immune system aroused by any 
stimulus might be better at recognizing and clearing cancer cells than a 
weakened immune system. Slender support for this idea comes from 
the effect of beta-glucans as adjuvants—compounds that increase the 
action of another medicine. Lentinan, which is a preparation of beta￾glucans from shiitake mushrooms, has been used in the treatment of 
stomach cancer in Japan for many years.16 Coupling conventional che￾motherapy with lentinan injections appears to increase the survival time 
of patients for an average of four months, and similarly supportive ef￾fects have been reported for the treatment of lung cancer in China.17
There is some hope here.
Like the work on lion’s mane, the preliminary studies on lentinan from 
shiitake encourage further research. But they do not justify the astound￾ing successes of medicinal mushrooms imagined by their disciples, ac￾cording to whom, beta-glucans are “considered the best immune modu￾lators globally,” and are well on their way to being acclaimed as “a 
21st Century Miracle.”18 If beta-glucans turn out to be beneficial, this 
would reinforce the regular consumption of mushrooms as part of any 
healthy diet. Mushrooms certainly add flavor and texture to our meals 
without many calories (see chapter 6), but grocers have refrained, so far, 
from advertising jars of sliced buttons or fresh portobellos as the secrets 
to longevity. Dr. Djibril Ba, from the College of Medicine at Penn State, 
is more bullish, suggesting that eating the fruit bodies of any fungus 
lowers the odds of dying from any cause.19 His evidence comes from a 
cohort study in which participants answered questionnaires between 
1988 and 1994, and their fate—dead or alive—was assessed twenty years 
later. The survivors were more likely than their unfortunate peers to have 
reported eating some kind of mushroom in any quantity and in any form 
in the twenty-four hours before they were questioned. In principle, this 
means that someone who ate a bowl of mushroom soup on the day be￾fore they filled out a questionnaire, or said that they did so, tended to live 118 chapter 7
longer than someone who did not, or did not remember doing so. The 
proposed effect was modest, meaning that mushroom eaters were 
14 percent less likely to die from all causes, which would include mortal 
illnesses and, one imagines, falling off ladders, gunshot wounds, suicide, 
and shark attacks. The figures from this study suggest that one in five 
fifty-year-old men who ate mushrooms at the beginning of the study died 
before age seventy, compared with one in four who did not eat mush￾rooms. Dr. Ba has also scoured through epidemiological data and found 
that mushroom consumption is associated with a lower risk of develop￾ing cancer and suffering from depression.20
If eating fruit bodies is as beneficial as Dr. Ba claims, he will receive 
a Nobel Prize, and mushrooms and every food containing fungi will be 
marketed as the elixirs of life, which, come to think of it, is exactly what 
purveyors of medicinals have been doing for years. However, what the 
cohort studies actually show is that there seems to be a weak relation￾ship between eating mushrooms and staying alive, but this does not 
mean that eating them has any direct effect on longevity or happiness. 
Something about the lifestyles of the mushroom eaters influenced their 
survival, or something about the people who did not eat mushrooms 
influenced their demise. Regarding the proposed antidepressive effect 
of eating mushrooms, a Polish investigator, Piotr Rzymski, suggested 
that the enjoyment of foraging for wild mushrooms might explain the 
promotion of mental health in Ba’s study.21 This seems unlikely, given 
the rarity of mushrooming among Americans, but it points to the con￾founding variables in a study of this kind and the need for caution in 
interpreting cohort studies. If mycophobes rode motorcycles more than 
mycophiles, this would explain the protective effect of the fungi. Pick 
other less risky variables in human behavior and we might find faint 
statistical signals of well-being among people who do crossword puzzles 
or keep goldfish.
Students of medicine and journalism would benefit from reviewing 
and discussing cohort studies like this as lessons in critical thinking and 
scientific objectivity. Something interesting could come from Dr. Ba’s 
investigations on mushroom eating, but to accept the notion that mush￾rooms cure cancer would be an act of naivete comparable to belief in the Treating 119
Easter Bunny. For an example of good practices in mushroom medicine, 
students should consult an authoritative review published in the Ameri￾can Journal of Medicine in 2021.22 The authors of this study analyzed almost 
1,500 published studies on the effects of mushrooms on cardiovascular 
health and concluded that only seven of them, or 0.5 percent, were suf￾ficiently reliable to recommend further investigation.
OBJECTIVITY AND OPTIMISM
A few years ago, I published an article titled “Are Mushrooms Medici￾nal?” in the journal Fungal Biology, which was downloaded more than 
any previous paper in the history of the periodical.23 Supportive emails 
arrived from fellow scientists, but a much larger number of messages 
questioned my intelligence and motives. One critic asked, “Did you even 
do a lit review on the topic before you wrote this paper?” and continued, 
“It just seems like you’re being willfully ignorant, intentionally mislead￾ing, or have an interesting criteria [sic] for what constitutes validity.” My 
criteria [sic] is, show me the evidence, which is codified in Hitchens’s 
razor, or epistemological rule, authored by the late journalist Christo￾pher Hitchens: “What can be asserted without evidence can also be dis￾missed without evidence.”24 Another correspondent was perplexed by 
my judgment and suggested that I read their patent applications.
Here is the first sentence from my contrarian essay: “Despite the 
longstanding use of dried mushrooms and mushroom extracts in tradi￾tional Chinese medicine, there is no scientific evidence to support the 
effectiveness of these preparations in the treatment of human disease.” 
And here is the last: “It is time to treat anti-aging tonics made from 
mushrooms as a sad phase in the history of mycology and proceed with 
the exploration of novel compounds with the potential to change the 
course of our modern plagues.”
The importance of mushrooms in Chinese medicine is a good argu￾ment in favor of their usefulness in some applications. If there is no evi￾dence for their value in treating illnesses, why would they have been 
endorsed by practitioners for so long? Part of the difficulty in answering 
this question lies in the philosophical gulf between Chinese and 120 chapter 7
Western medicine. We know that shiitake mushrooms have been culti￾vated on logs in China for centuries and have been prescribed for re￾plenishing qi, which is translated as the vital energy that flows through 
the body. This concept overlaps with the humors of the Greek physi￾cians, which held sway in European medicine for two thousand years 
and were mentioned in chapter 2. Now we demand evidence of changes 
in blood sugar if a drug is used to treat diabetes, or a drop in blood pres￾sure after swallowing an antihypertensive medicine.
The continuing claims made for the uses of mushrooms should 
stretch anyone’s credulity. To illustrate, I will search for “shiitake” com￾bined separately with each of the following illnesses and health condi￾tions starting with the letter a: acne, AIDS, Alzheimer’s disease, anthrax, 
arthritis, asthma, and autism. Shiitake is endorsed as a treatment for 
all of them.25 Pick a dif­ferent letter and see for yourself. Inspired by 
Mr. Hitchens, I offer my own razor:
A cure alleged for everything is an effective treatment for nothing.
By deifying shiitake and other species of fungi, the medicinal mush￾room magicians—the champions of champignons—betray themselves 
as con artists to anyone willing to ask a few questions. Some of these 
latter-day shamans are deliberate scammers, others know no better, and 
I am aware that I am howling at the moon. Belief in the baseless powers 
of medicinal mushrooms may also be strengthened by the widespread 
skepticism toward medical authority.
All of this is unfortunate for the study of mycology because mush￾rooms are probably brimming with undiscovered medicines that might 
be developed using modern pharmacological methods. Why then, one 
might ask, has there been such a rich history of drug discovery in plants, 
while most of the woodland fungi have been ignored? Aspirin, ephed￾rine, opiates, and quinine were used by herbalists in the form of unre￾fined preparations from plants for thousands of years before any attempts 
at purification. The historical success of these plant extracts in medicine 
argues for a similar impact of mushrooms, but confusion about their 
nature (“these bastard plants, or excrescences”) and toxicity (“some are 
very venomous and full of poison”) meant that they were neglected by Treating 121
the great herbalists of Europe. The quotes come from the English herb￾alist John Gerard (1545–1612), who endorsed the attitude of the Roman 
poet Horace toward fungi: “Pratensibus optima fungis natura est [mush￾rooms from the meadows are best]; aliis male creditur [others are not to 
be trusted].”26 This advice comes from his Satires, which served as a 
Roman self-help guide to a life of contentment and reflected the danger 
of misidentifying mushrooms. Chinese healers were more adventurous 
and became experts in identifying the wild mushrooms that they used 
to treat illnesses. But without the Western transition from herbalism to 
pharmacology, practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine made no 
attempt to purify individual compounds from fungi. They saw no need 
to do so, and the disjunction between traditional and Western medicine 
endures today.
These are some of the factors that explain the absence of pharmaco￾logical interest in the fungi until the twentieth century. This means that 
we are playing catch-up and is why we need to apply the most up-to￾date methods to explore this natural pharmacopeia.27 The theoretical 
argument for drug prospecting from fungal fruit bodies—namely, that 
they are likely to be there—is bolstered by the plethora of powerful 
medicines that have already come from fungi. The first antibiotic, peni￾cillin, from an English strain of Penicillium, was discovered in the 1920s; 
a second antibiotic called cephalosporin was isolated from a Sardinian 
mold in the 1940s; and cyclosporin, which prevents organ rejection after 
transplants, came from a Norwegian fungus in the 1970s. Lovastatin, a 
cholesterol-lowering drug isolated from an Aspergillus species, entered 
clinical trials in the 1980s, and a variety of antifungal agents isolated 
from one fungus to treat infections caused by another fungus are also 
synthesized by molds. The oldest fungal medicine is ergotamine, which 
is produced by the ergot fungus that infects cereals and has been pre￾scribed as a treatment for migraines for more than a century. (Ergot 
poisoning is featured in chapter 8.)
All of these medicines come from the feeding colonies of molds 
rather than mushrooms, although some of them are manufactured in 
the lab today without any participation by a living fungus. Lovastatin 
from Aspergillus has also been found in oyster mushrooms, but at levels 122 chapter 7
that are too low to have any effect on cholesterol levels in the blood￾stream. The search for mushroom medicines is complicated by differ￾ences in chemical activity between the fruit bodies and their supporting 
mycelia.28These develop because the fungi balance their metabolic pro￾cesses between the feeding mycelium and the reproductive mushroom 
to sustain both phases of the life cycle without wasting energy. The way 
forward in the search for medicines from mushroom-forming fungi—
from their fruit bodies or supporting mycelia—lies in the study of ge￾nomics. By sequencing and manipulating whole genomes of fungi, we 
can search for the genes that control the formation of useful chemical 
compounds. If we want to find new sources of antibiotics that belong 
to classes of chemicals that are already known to destroy bacteria, we 
can unearth them by analyzing little pieces of a mushroom. Even if the 
mushroom does not make any of the antibiotics, the fruit body will 
contain the genes for doing so if its mycelium is chugging them out in 
the soil.
Finding the instructions is difficult because they are buried within 
the tens of billions of As, Ts, Gs, and Cs in the fungal DNA. The work￾around involves breaking up the genome into hundreds of scraps called 
artificial chromosomes and seeing what each segment of DNA can do 
on its own.29 This technology is known as genome mining. It allows 
investigators to pore over the DNA of a fungus, strand by strand, like 
pirates pulling necklaces from a treasure chest. Rather than selecting 
mushrooms randomly, researchers can be guided by information on the 
traditional uses of mushrooms.30 If Eastern Europeans have been using 
a particular bracket fungus to treat rheumatism for centuries, this is a 
good candidate for drug prospecting. Even if chemists have failed to find 
active chemicals in earlier studies, the fungus may be worth a second 
look because its DNA may harbor the instructions for making some￾thing useful. Genome mining has the power to transform the medicinal 
uses of mushrooms into a science.
While mushroom medicine has gone nowhere, the yeast used for 
brewing and baking has transformed the pharmaceutical industry as an 
infinitely pliable platform for drug production. Ordered to make human 
insulin using the human gene, yeast complies and produces half of the Treating 123
global supply of injectable insulin to combat diabetes. Modified with a 
DNA sequence from the human papilloma virus (HPV), yeast trans￾lates this into copies of the protein that forms the shell of the viral par￾ticle. Separated from the yeast, this protein is injected as a vaccine 
against HPV, which has the potential to eliminate the form of cervical 
cancer linked to this infection.31 Another medicine from genetically 
modified yeast is used to treat an age-related eye condition, and there is 
a lot of research on using yeast cells to synthesize painkillers. When we 
consider antibiotics from molds and all these drugs manufactured by 
yeast, it is evident that fungi are an indispensable source of modern 
medicines. To add new compounds from fungi to the pharmacy, we 
need to bring the chemistry of mushrooms into the mainstream.
FROM THE NEOLITHIC TO THE ANTHROPOCENE
Ötzi’s world was filled with mythology and mycology. The Iceman’s 
woods and meadows were a mycological wonderland, and his child￾hood would have been filled with stories about toadstools, and witches, 
and wood spirits. We will never know why Ötzi carried the birch conks, 
whether they were charms, or if he valued them as medicinals. As a 
plentiful and diverse resource, people would have put fungi to use in 
one way or another, even if they learned to steer clear of most of them 
for fear of poisoning. All we can say with any confidence is that some 
mushrooms were handy first aids for treating wounds and that others 
were sought for their hallucinogenic properties (which are described in 
chapter 9). The challenge in the twenty-first century is to reengage with 
the therapeutic possibilities of mushrooms without resorting to super￾stition in treating disease. Science needs to work alongside a sense of 
mycological curiosity to find the pharmaceutical riches in the woods.
My confidence in the abundance of undiscovered mycological medi￾cines is increased by the chemical makeup of some of the least conspic￾uous mushrooms. Smaller than thumbnails, beautiful as any flower, 
bird’s nest fungi sit on broken twigs waiting for raindrops. Drops falling 
into the cups flick the spore-chocked eggs into the air. Each discharged 
egg drags a sticky harness—think tiny chameleon tongue—that wraps 124 chapter 7
around a grass stalk, bringing the fungus to a halt after a one-second 
flight.32 The discovery of antibiotics in these acrobatic species began 
with a chance observation made by Alex Olchowecki, a graduate stu￾dent at the University of Alberta in the 1960s.33 Alex noticed that bac￾teria contaminating a culture of one of these fungi were wiped out from 
the region closest to the growing hyphae. A similar bacterium-free halo 
was observed around hyphae of Penicillium notatum by another Alex, 
Alexander Fleming, in 1928. Fleming’s discovery of penicillin led to a 
Nobel Prize in 1945, shared with Howard Florey and Ernst Chain, who 
did the hard work in antibiotic development. Olchowecki did not re￾ceive any prizes for discovering the antibiotic from the bird’s nest fun￾gus, called cyathin, but went on to enjoy a distinguished career at the 
University of Manitoba.
Work on the chemistry of the bird’s nest fungi has continued, and a 
whole class of antibiotics belonging to the “cyathane diterpenes” has 
been found in these pretty little mushrooms. None are as powerful as 
penicillin at killing bacteria, but some of these molecules stimulate the 
growth of nerve cells, like the drugs isolated from lion’s mane.34 Cyathanes 
purified from bird’s nests also work against cultures of cancer cells. The 
detection of antibiotics in the bird’s nest fungi increases the odds that 
some useful molecules are hiding in fairy bonnets and eyelash cups, 
pinwheels, violet corals, orange jellies, bleeding mycenas, and the rest 
of the woodland fungi. Now is the time for investigators and investors 
to get serious: carpe boletum, as Horace would have said, if he had de￾veloped a more favorable opinion of mushrooms. On the other hand, 
the search for medicines in fruit bodies is likely to reveal as many toxins 
as treatments, and we consider the ruinous nature of some of the pret￾tiest mushrooms in chapter 8.125
8
Poisoning
TOX INS IN MUSHROOMS 
AND MOLDS
like other facets of the relationship between humans and fungi, 
the presence of fungi in the diet and the uses of medicinal mushrooms 
are mixtures of conscious and unconscious interactions. We have seen 
how fungi are front and center in the fermentation of cheeses and sta￾ple foods in Asian cuisine, and that molds have become the “meat” of 126 chapter 8
mycoprotein nuggets. Beer brewing, winemaking, and bread leavening 
by yeast are other obvious examples of the hidden role of fungi in our 
diet. But eating mushrooms, whether for food or medicine, is the most 
conspicuous part of human mycophagy and has assumed such signifi￾cance in human culture that it is the first thing that most people con￾sider in our associations with fungi. In this chapter we look at mush￾room poisoning and our equally unintentional exposure to the toxins 
produced by molds.
On Easter weekend in 2020, Dr. Anna Whitehead, a physician in 
New Zealand, picked some mushrooms beneath an oak tree and cooked 
them with fresh fish for lunch. She said that she had planned to check 
what they were but became distracted by work and sautéed slices of the 
fruit bodies without thinking. She awoke early the next morning and 
began vomiting green liquid. Suspecting what might have happened, she 
staggered upstairs and searched for images of poisonous mushrooms on 
her computer. “Immediately, a picture of death cap mushroom[s] 
flashed up. I recognized it instantly as the type of mushroom I had picked 
and eaten.”1 She rang for an ambulance. After a day in hospital hooked 
to an IV in her arm to keep her hydrated, the symptoms subsided, and 
she went home. Disaster averted? Not quite.
A few hours later the nausea returned, worse now. The classic honey￾moon period associated with death cap poisoning was over, and she re￾turned to the hospital. Toxins from the fungus had been circulating in her 
bloodstream, killing cells in her liver. The pain in her abdomen was ago￾nizing. She seemed to be dying. But her doctors and nurses pulled a Hail 
Mary by resuming IV support, and after two days in a critical care unit her 
liver began to recover. Dr. Whitehead had dodged the reaper. In inter￾views she said, “I have never ever felt so terrible,” far worse than the side 
effects of the chemotherapy she had received to treat cancer long before 
the poisoning. She also remembered the strong flavor of the pale green 
caps, which she had thought was the way wild mushrooms are supposed 
to taste. Other survivors of poisoning have said that the death cap is the 
most delicious mushroom they have ever eaten. If a physician like 
Dr. Whitehead can make an almost fatal error, what hope is there for the 
rest of us?Poisoning 127
A GUIDE TO EDIBILITY
Poisonous mushrooms, sometimes distinguished from the harmless 
species with the name toadstool, seem a very remote threat in the 
twenty-first century. They are more likely to be associated with fairy 
tales about witches in the woods than part of a liberal education. But 
with a renaissance in interest in foraging for wild food, anyone who 
plans to eat wild mushrooms needs to pay attention.2 The death cap, 
Amanita phalloides, deserves special notice because it is an invasive spe￾cies that has spread from Europe across the world and is poisoning 
people who mistake it for native species that are edible.3 We must think 
carefully before eating any fruit body that we find in the wild. My rec￾ommendation for safe mushrooming is to limit foraging to a selection 
of the tastiest species—to become intimate with their appearance and 
leave the rest of them to get on with the job of being mushrooms.
When the weather has been warm and wet at the end of the sum￾mer, the “savory seven” in the midwestern United States, overlapping 
with the “medicinal seven” in chapter 7, begins with oyster mush￾rooms, jutting from logs like shellfish from rocks, but with the taste 
of a delicately perfumed version of a white button mushroom rather 
than the briny minerality of a fresh bivalve.4 This subtle oyster￾mushroomy flavor is easily lost by overcooking, but nobody would 
eat them raw. Lion’s mane, the medicinal mushroom, tastes much the 
same. Young puffballs with pure white innards are gill-less buttons 
with nothing to offer the epicure besides the surprise of serving them 
as cooked discs on a pizza, or in any other dish where cultivated 
mushrooms are expected to appear. Chicken of the woods and mai￾take are a nudge more interesting in the kitchen: firmer than oysters, 
they carry a fruity or woodsy fragrance that works well in soups and 
stews. And, more flavorful than their peers, fruity chanterelles and earthy￾nutty porcini rise above the butter and garlic absorbed by their flesh 
if they are not overcooked. There is an obvious seasonality to this list, 
with morel species replacing these edibles in the spring, but it is dif￾ficult, though not impossible, to confuse any of these mushrooms 
with poisonous species.128 chapter 8
This pedestrian advice will dismay more adventurous mushroomers 
who lionize false morels, Gyromitra species, which contain a toxin that 
is converted into rocket propellant unless it is boiled away before eating; 
edible webcaps that are difficult to distinguish from deadly poisonous 
ones; and even a few kinds of benign amanitas—grisettes and blushers—
whose doppelgängers include death caps and the aptly named fool’s 
mushrooms and destroying angels.5 Serious mushroomers are so deeply 
invested in identifying fungi that they are unlikely to make mistakes, but 
the rest of us should be very careful. By flagging the minority of truly 
deadly mushrooms with skull and crossbones symbols, guidebooks and 
websites can leave the naive mushroomer with the impression that most 
of the other mushrooms are edible. Although this is tru-ish, edibility 
does not equate with palatability. The delicious ones are as scarce as the 
poisonous, and the taste of most mushrooms varies from chewy￾cardboardy to soggy-cardboardy. Safety lies in highlighting the appetiz￾ing and unmistakably harmless mushrooms, rather than encouraging 
people to abandon themselves to the carnival of fruit bodies of varying 
shapes, sizes, colors, smells, and edibility. Fish are like mushrooms: a 
few are delicious, some are poisonous, and most make dismal meals and 
should be allowed to get on with being fish.
The savory seven is adjustable for other regions, although errors 
occur when a favored mushroom happens to resemble a lethal species 
like the death cap. None of my midwestern treats look like anything 
toxic, but the situation is different in Asia, where an assortment of 
mushrooms collected from the surrounding forests are sold in local 
markets. These delicacies in southeast Asia include species of Amanita
with pale yellow caps and cream caps. Other than these subtle differ￾ences in color, these fungi have all the hallmarks of the mushrooms 
called destroying angels—white gills, ring flopping down the top of the 
stem, and the bottom of the stem stuck in a cup. This explains why un￾wary foragers familiar with the edible amanitas in Asia are tricked by 
poisonous ones in North America.6 California mushroomers have 
made similar errors in confusing death caps for Pacific amanitas, known 
as coccora or coccoli, which have a fishy smell and can be substituted 
for seafood in ceviche.7Poisoning 129
ALPHA-AMANITIN
The deliberate substitution of lethal for edible amanitas is chronicled in 
the story of the assassination of Emperor Claudius by his wife, Agrip￾pina, in AD 54. The most satisfying version of the plot begins with 
Caesar’s mushroom, which is an edible amanita. This orange-capped 
mushroom is eaten in its egg form, known as ovolo buono in Italy, before 
the fruit body emerges and expands like an umbrella. Claudius adored 
this mushroom, which made death caps the perfect murder weapon. 
There are other readings of his death, but this one provides the most 
satisfying end to this disgraceful tyrant.8 Caesar’s mushroom is a rare 
example of a mushroom that tastes best raw, served in thick slices 
dressed with a little olive oil and lemon juice, and is so sought after that 
it has been given protected status to prevent over-collecting.9
While most poisonings result from failures in mushroom identification, 
the medical literature includes a few cases in which people have knowingly 
eaten death caps in suicide attempts. A sad case in Italy involved a young 
woman who had learned a lot about mushrooms from her father, who was 
a keen amateur mycologist, collected three large death caps and made sure 
that she ate a lethal quantity.10 She would have died but was rushed by her 
parents to the hospital, where she was saved with a liver transplant. A 
stranger story of mushroom poisoning involves a bizarre case of experi￾mentation by a Turkish man who ate two death caps to determine whether 
they were safe: “He told the household that if nothing happened to him, 
they could eat the remaining mushrooms together the next day.”11 Hours 
after his meal he developed severe symptoms of gastrointestinal distress 
and, after some resistance, was taken to the emergency room by his family. 
Once in the hospital he responded to rehydration and recovered after a few 
days. This was a remarkable comeback because he had consumed three 
times the fatal dose of death caps.
After the flesh of a death cap dissolves in the stomach, its toxins are 
absorbed from the gut and circulate around the body.12 The worst of 
the poisons is alpha-amanitin. Amanitin interferes with an indispensable 
enzyme that ratchets itself along DNA strands, reading and transcribing 
the genetic code in the first step of protein synthesis. Cells exposed to 130 chapter 8
amanitin shut down without a continuous supply of proteins, and the liver 
is wrecked as it concentrates the toxin from the bloodstream. Amanitin can 
be mopped up by drinking a jet-black slurry of activated charcoal immedi￾ately after eating the mushrooms. This remedy is useless after the toxin 
reaches the small intestine and the poisoning symptoms proceed. Once 
this happens, the best treatment is intravenous therapy to maintain hydra￾tion and give the body a fighting chance to flush the toxin away in the urine. 
Poison that is not filtered by the kidneys is returned to the bloodstream, 
where it recirculates and pummels the liver afresh. Amanitin is one thou￾sand times deadlier than aspirin.13 Experimental treatments include dialy￾sis to assist the natural action of the kidneys. Some physicians also suggest 
draining the bile duct, which conveys the toxin from the liver and gall blad￾der into the small intestine, to help eliminate the poison. Evidence for the 
effectiveness of these treatments is limited. The same uncertainty applies 
to the use of high doses of penicillin to increase the excretion of amanitin 
in the urine, and to silymarin, a drug extracted from milk thistle plants that 
offers some protection to liver cells.
Decades of alcoholism do not come close to matching the acute liver 
damage resulting from eating a single death cap mushroom, and an 
organ transplant is the only option when the liver does not rebound. 
Transplantation is followed by lifetime support to prevent rejection and 
this, ironically, can be provided by two drugs that come from molds: 
cyclosporin produced by a soil fungus (see chapter 7), and myophenolic 
acid (MPA) from a Penicillium. The Penicillium that produces MPA 
grows on mudflats, sand, stored fruit, wood, and the surface of decom￾posing mushrooms. This offers a circular mycological meditation, from 
a disastrous woodland foray to a liver transplant and on to a life￾sustaining treatment with a medicine produced by a mold that grows 
on mushrooms: from fungal illness to fungal cure.
While the death cap is an expert in liver damage, Smith’s amanita 
attacks the kidneys. This renal specialist grows in the Pacific Northwest, 
which presents a problem because it is mistaken for the delicious mat￾sutakes, which have a cult following in the region.14 Most victims recover 
kidney function a few weeks after their encounter with this species, but 
this poisoning syndrome is another reason to be wary about eating any Poisoning 131
mushroom wearing a ring and sitting in a cup. This does not mean, un￾fortunately, that the cupless and ringless mushrooms are safe. Far from 
it. Amanitin is also produced by the autumn skullcap, which is a little 
brown mushroom.15 This is a species of Galerina that decomposes wood 
and produces clusters of fruit bodies and has been eaten by unwary 
shroomers who think they have found psychotropic psilocybes. Skull￾caps are cupless mushrooms that can come with or without a thin ring 
on the upper part of the stem, making a mockery of any simple rules for 
recognizing toxic fungi.
ALL MUSHROOMS ARE POISONISH
Although alpha-amanitin causes most of the serious poisonings, the 
list of problematic mushrooms goes way beyond fruit bodies contain￾ing this compound.16 Thirty or more species of webcaps contain orel￾lanine, which is a toxin that targets the kidneys. The symptoms of web￾cap poisoning can be obscured by a honeymoon period, like the delay 
after eating death caps, but continuing for weeks before the injuries 
become evident. In other mushroom poisonings, the toxins have not 
been identified. Yellow knight poisoning is the best example of this 
kind of cryptic toxicity, in which something in the fruit bodies causes 
muscle damage. The yellow knight is a flat-capped mushroom that 
grows in coniferous forests and has been eaten in many European 
countries for centuries. It has been fried, boiled, and pickled, listed as 
a favorite in mushroom guides and cookbooks, and was celebrated as a 
wild food without any concern for its safety until clusters of poisonings 
were reported from France, Poland, Lithuania, and Germany. The first 
dozen cases were admitted to French hospitals between 1992 and 
2000.17 Creatine kinase levels in the bloodstream of the patients soared, 
which was a marker for muscle breakdown, and their urine darkened with 
proteins and blood cells. Patients felt nauseous, sweated profusely, and 
experienced leg weakness that left some of them unable to walk. Most 
recovered within a couple of weeks, but three of the patients died.
What happened here? Yellow knight has a lot of look-alikes, so it is 
possible that the poisoning was caused by a different species of 132 chapter 8
mushroom. But there is an alternative idea that says more about our 
dietary relationship with the fungi. Cases of yellow knight poisoning 
reported from Lithuania in a 2016 study included a fifty-six-year-old 
man who had eaten generous helpings of the mushroom three times a 
day for a week.18 Other comparably fanatical patients had consumed 
the fungus daily for a week or more, which raises the crucial issue of 
dosage and the adage attributed to Paracelsus, the Renaissance physi￾cian: dosis sola venenum facit, the dose makes the poison. The same rule 
applies to everything we eat. Potatoes, for example, contain the toxic 
alkaloid solanine, although one would have to eat a sack of tubers at a 
sitting to be poisoned by them.19 What if yellow knight and every other 
mushroom contains toxins, and dosage is the deciding factor in the de￾velopment of poisoning symptoms?
Rodents fed huge quantities of a variety of powdered mushrooms 
show the same spikes in creatine levels found in humans poisoned with 
yellow knights.20 The mushrooms in these unpleasant studies included 
shiitake and chanterelles, and other indications of tissue damage were 
observed in mice fed masses of white button mushrooms. The doses 
imposed on the mice were staggering, equivalent to force-feeding a 
human fifty portobello mushrooms per day. The value of these experi￾ments, which did not identify any toxins in the mushrooms, lies in their 
implication that any mushroom that is safe in moderation might be 
harmful in excess. Almost every species seems capable of upsetting 
the digestive system, so we need to avoid eating any mushroom by the 
bucket.21 On the other hand, people who enjoy collecting and cooking 
a few fresh yellow knights from time to time should continue doing so. 
This does not mean, of course, that anyone should flavor their omelets 
with a little diced death cap.
THE PRETTIEST POISONOUS MUSHROOM
One of the prettiest mushrooms in all creation sits at the ruinous end of 
the toxicity scale. This fungus is the poison fire coral, whose scarlet fingers 
emerge from leaves littering the woodlands of Asia and Oceana and shed 
spores from their silky surface. Fire coral bears a passing resemblance to Poisoning 133
the medicinal mushroom reishi, which is why it is sometimes picked in 
error and steeped in hot water to make tea. This snafu replaces the mush￾room of immortality, which is the nickname for reishi, with the mushroom 
of skin and hair loss, blood disorders, and brain damage.22 The fire coral 
contains potent poisons called satratoxins, and a pea-sized piece of the 
fungus has proven lethal. Bizarre symptoms of acral skin peeling on the 
palms of the hands and soles of the feet, and alopecia, distinguish poison￾ing by fire coral from every other mushroom. Damage to the brain and 
bone marrow are also unique to the fire coral.
Corals or club fungi fruit as colorful spikes that range from fine wires 
that stand tall and straight, like dried spaghetti, to fatter stubs, and 
branched forms that resemble antlers, menorahs, and tiny painted cau￾liflowers.23 A few species are popular edibles, including multiple species 
of chunky corals known as escobetas, or scrubbing brushes, in Mexico.24
More than one thousand species of coral fungi have been described, and 
a good number cause nausea and intestinal turbulence. The following 
entry in a guidebook illustrates the difficulties in foraging for edible 
ones: “Ramaria flava is reported to be edible but of only moderate qual￾ity; however, it could easily be confused with Ramaria formosa, which 
is seriously poisonous, causing stomach pains and diarrhea if eaten. 
There is another reason why this coral fungus should not be collected 
in Britain: it is a very rare find.”25 Anyone who seeks coral fungi must 
be a very serious mycophile. These daredevils look at all mushrooms as 
potential edibles, evaporating the toxins from some of the dangerous 
species by cooking and reveling in nature with something akin to the 
attitude of big wave surfers or free climbers.
My reversal of their behavior—treating all mushrooms outside a gro￾cery store with suspicion—will seem farcical to these experimental 
mycophagists, who may counter with “no one gets out of here alive,” as 
Jim Morrison, of the Doors, and many others, have opined. They are 
modern McIlvainians, whose forebear, Captain Charles McIlvaine 
(1840–1909), tasted every mushroom he found to enrich the descriptions 
in his doorstopper of a book, One Thousand American Fungi, published 
in 1900.26 Commenting on a group of mushrooms known for their laxative 
properties, this indomitable veteran of the Civil War wrote, “Wherever 134 chapter 8
and however they grow, Hypholomas are safe. I have eaten them indis￾criminately since 1881.”
To go beyond the obviously noxious mushrooms tarred by millennia 
of poisonings, the McIlvaine method is the only way to widen the list 
of harmful and harmless fungi. With the nickname Old Ironguts, McIl￾vaine did not offer the most trustworthy advice on safety, but as the 
sample size of consumers has increased, printed and virtual mushroom 
guides offer a wealth of information for foragers committed to a little 
research.
WHY SOME MUSHROOMS ARE VERY POISONOUS
Larger animals expend more energy chewing and digesting fruit bodies 
than they get back in calories, which suggests that the chemical path￾ways that manufacture toxins in mushrooms probably evolved to repel 
insects and other tiny animals like nematode worms.27 These smaller 
invertebrates have the opportunity to avoid the watery filaments that 
make up most of the fruit body and eat spores and other specialized 
cells in the mushroom that pack storage fats. This nutritional reward is 
enough to power the growth of insect grubs because we find some of 
the poisonous fruit bodies riddled with larvae. These insects are obvi￾ously impervious to the toxins.
When mushrooms decided to become poisonous, in an unconscious 
evolutionary sense, they opted to make chemicals that attacked the fun￾damental workings of their insect enemies as well as their unintended 
human targets. Making chemicals with this kind of generalized hostility 
toward life carries the occupational hazard of self-poisoning, but mush￾rooms have reengineered their proteins to be less sensitive to them.28
They also benefit from operating as immobile platforms. Unlike a poi￾sonous snake, which slides around with onboard venom sacs, the ma￾ture fruit body does not need to maintain an active metabolism and can 
poison the tissues of its stem and cap without any consequences. All 
the mushroom must do is stay upright and avoid damaging the cells on the 
gill surfaces until they finish producing the spores. The extreme toxicity 
of mushrooms like the death cap probably developed as a defense Poisoning 135
against their enemies as they gained resistance via a form of evolution￾ary arms race.
WITCHCRAFT AND WISDOM
In countries like Germany and Poland, where collecting wild mush￾rooms is an important part of the national culture, skills in fungal iden￾tification have been passed from generation to generation.29 This basic 
mycological wisdom triumphed over long-standing superstitions about 
mushrooms among these mycophilic people and allowed them to avoid 
death caps while harvesting chanterelles. Poisonings still happened, of 
course, but there was no point blaming the local witch when it was obvi￾ous that someone had picked the wrong species. Outbreaks of fungal 
poisoning in medieval Europe that slew whole communities were a dif￾ferent matter. These epidemics were mystifying, because the toxin came 
from a tiny fungus that sprouted on rye and other cereals and was 
ground into the flour to make bread. Nobody demonstrated a solid link 
between this fungus and the plague that became known as ergotism in 
the seventeenth century, and supernatural explanations prospered 
in the knowledge vacuum of the Dark Ages.
Ergotism erupted after rainy summers, striking villagers with nausea, 
headaches, and vomiting; they lost the feeling in their fingers and toes, 
suffered convulsions and tetanus-like cramps, became unable to speak, 
and bit through their own tongues.30 This was exactly what one would 
wish upon one’s worst enemies. Maddened by their afflictions, some 
sufferers felt that insects were crawling beneath their skin, which is a 
symptom called formication, and others were consumed by feelings of 
intense heat. The burning sensation was described as ignis sacer, or holy 
fire, and seen as a punishment from God. Gangrene set into limbs 
starved of blood, fingers and toes turned black and broke off at the 
joints, and arms and legs were lost in the most extreme cases. These 
were the wages of sin.
Gangrenous symptoms predominated in some outbreaks, convulsions 
in others. The fungus, Claviceps, produces ergot alkaloids that interfere 
with the flow of nerve impulses and muscle contraction, wreaking havoc 136 chapter 8
throughout the body. The ergot poisons are examples of mycotoxins, 
which is a term reserved for the toxins produced by molds rather than 
mushrooms.31 In addition to narrowing blood vessels and making muscles 
seize, some mixtures of the ergot alkaloids produce behavioral changes 
and hallucinations. This diversity of disorders reflects the chemical vir￾tuosity of the ergot fungus. It is a one-stop bioweapons center, whose 
real aim in life is to eat cereals without any competition from other 
microorganisms or from animals. After infecting the rye plant, the fun￾gus takes possession of one or more of the flowers, growing in the place 
of healthy grains and protruding from the ears as firm black pellets, 
curved like bananas. These are the ergots, whose name comes from a 
word in Old French for a cock’s spur, which is a perfect simile. The toxic 
alkaloids are mixed into the flour when the ergots are milled along with 
the healthy rye grains.
Ergotism was recognized in the ancient world, with a plausible men￾tion on an Assyrian tablet, but the earliest undisputed descriptions come 
from the Christian era, when rye bread became a staple in Western 
Europe. Ergotism became known as St. Anthony’s fire, after the relics of 
the eponymous desert father became associated with miraculous cures 
for the scourge. Spontaneous abortion was another of the shocking effects 
of ergotism, which led to the deliberate use of raw ergots to assist with 
labor and to induce abortions in unwanted pregnancies. Purified ergo￾metrine, which is one of the alkaloids, was introduced as a drug to prevent 
hemorrhage after childbirth in the 1930s and played a significant role in 
the reduction of the maternal death rate.32 Ergometrine is also used to 
induce the delivery of the placenta. Another alkaloid, ergotamine, is used 
to treat migraine headaches, and a variety of synthetic drugs based on the 
structures of the ergot chemicals have other uses in medicine. This is an 
example of healing with poisons in Western medicine, which was a central 
principle of Chinese medicine more than a thousand years ago.33
Lysergic acid is a precursor for the ergot alkaloids, forming a chemical 
skeleton that the fungus decorates and prunes to craft a whole family of 
toxins.34 This was isolated from ergot and used to produce LSD by Albert 
Hoffman, the famous Swiss chemist who discovered its psychedelic 
properties through self-experimentation in the 1940s. Hoffman went on Poisoning 137
to isolate another fungal alkaloid from mushrooms rather than ergots. 
This was psilocybin, which stars in chapter 9.
Lysergic acid and closely related compounds in the fungus are pre￾sumed responsible for the frightening hallucinations experienced by 
victims of ergotism in the Middle Ages and must have added to the 
sense among the villagers that they were dealing with the occult. Divine 
punishment was a popular interpretation of these dreadful visitations, 
along with witchcraft and demonic possession. The psychedelic horror 
of ergotism is thought to have inspired the nightmarish figures in the 
triptych The Temptation of Saint Anthony, painted on hinged wooden 
panels by Hieronymus Bosch in 1501, or thereabouts.35 Flying fish circle 
the sky, and a winged demon carries Saint Anthony to a ghastly forum 
occupied by a man with the face of a pig and other monstrosities. An￾thony gestures toward Christ, who stands in a grotto separated from the 
anarchy, and symbols of ergotism include a severed foot and a village 
burning in the background.
Ergotism may have caused the outbreak of delirium and seizures 
among girls in colonial Massachusetts in the 1690s, but the court in the 
infamous Salem witch trials favored a supernatural source. Nineteen 
villagers were hung for witchcraft, and a twentieth martyr, a man, was 
crushed to death under a plank weighted with rocks in an attempt to 
obtain a confession.36 Although ergotism may have been at the root of 
this debacle, other causes have been suggested, and the arousal of mass 
psychogenic illness or hysteria within a community of religious extrem￾ists seems likelier than the fungus.
MYCOTOXINS FROM MOLDS
The fearful poisonings caused by fungi have led to mycological explana￾tions for other events in world history, including the Plague of Ath￾ens, the Black Death, the rise of Calvinism, and the Great Fear at the 
start of the French Revolution.37 The evidence for these connections 
varies from weak to nonexistent, but the idea that we can apply modern 
science to decipher ancient mysteries is often more appealing than the 
truth that some historical riddles are unsolvable. Facts can be fitted to 138 chapter 8
theories, and even when the original musings are dismissed by objective 
scholarship they persist in the popular imagination. The Athenian 
Plague, described by Thucydides in the History of the Peloponnesian 
Wars, is an interesting case study. Many of the symptoms of the plague 
described by Thucydides, including burning sensations, violent spasms, 
and the loss of fingers and toes, dovetail with ergotism, and this connec￾tion was first proposed by a German toxicologist in the nineteenth 
century. Later experts on ergotism pointed out that the fungus could 
not have caused the deaths of thousands of Athenians in 430 BC because 
they did not eat rye, but the tie-in to fungi was resurrected with the sug￾gestion that the ancient Greeks could have been wasted by toxins 
produced by a dif­ferent mold growing on stored wheat, which was a 
staple.38 This keeps fungi on the list of possible causes of the Athenian 
Plague, although an infectious bacterium or virus is a safer bet.
Outbreaks of food poisonings are obviously limited to the direct con￾sumption of the toxin, but they can resemble the impact of an infectious 
disease when a large enough population is compelled to eat a lot of the 
same thing under conditions of famine. The Athenians might have been 
forced to eat moldy grain during the interminable siege of their city by 
the Spartans. A more convincing case of mold poisoning played out in 
the region of Orenburg on the Russian steppes in the 1940s.39 Severe 
food shortages during and after the Second World War led people to eat 
fallen grain. Lying under the winter snow, a species of Fusarium began 
to rot the unharvested crop, permeating the cereal with poisonous 
trichothecenes. The syndrome produced by consuming these chemicals 
is described as alimentary toxic aleukia, or ATA. ATA begins with nau￾sea, vomiting, and diarrhea, like some mushroom poisonings, and is 
followed by widespread hemorrhaging of blood vessels that can pro￾gress to organ failure. The loss of blood flow to the skin results in infec￾tions by bacteria that accumulate in disfiguring facial wounds. Estimates 
suggest that one in ten people in the region were sickened with ATA; 
the number of deaths is unknown. This disaster was as diabolical as one 
of the historical outbreaks of ergotism, with the difference that there 
was no question about the cause: no witch trials, no need for self￾flagellation, just suffering caused by a mold.Poisoning 139
Ergotism and ATA are a distant threat now, but we absorb traces of 
mycotoxins from our food every day.40 They are an unavoidable part of 
the diet, because molds contaminate the entire food chain from cereals 
to fruits, vegetables, dairy products, and meat. Even farmed fish carry 
traces of mycotoxins from the feeds used in aquaculture. Mycotoxins 
flow in our blood whatever we choose to eat, which is another illustra￾tion of the way that the threads of the human relationship with the fungi 
permeate every facet of our lives.41
Aflatoxins are the most widespread and troubling mycotoxins in the 
modern diet. They are made by species of Aspergillus and tuck them￾selves into our DNA, where they cause mutations that can increase the 
lifetime risk of liver cancer.42 Aflatoxins also damage the gut and cramp 
the immune system, making us more susceptible to viral infections. At 
high doses they can cause birth defects, and later in life they are impli￾cated in neurodegenerative diseases. This is a pretty damning rap sheet. 
Aflatoxins pose the greatest risks in developing countries, where hot 
and humid climates stimulate the growth of the molds on corn, pea￾nuts, and other staple foods. Kenya is considered a hotspot for aflatoxin 
poisoning.43
In the United States, the USDA monitors the level of aflatoxins in 
peanuts, almonds, and pistachio nuts. Even with this surveillance, it is 
impossible to shield these commodities from mold growth, and the 
USDA permits low levels of aflatoxins in peanut butter and other foods. 
Public interest in this issue has forced the manufacturers of peanut but￾ter to address the presence of traces of these natural toxins in the iconic 
American sandwich spread at a time when they are also dealing with 
more widespread concerns about peanut allergies in children. Interest 
in aflatoxins has supported a premium price for Valencia peanuts from 
New Mexico, where the dry climate reduces mold growth on the crop 
before and after harvesting. Cats and dogs are also affected by aflatoxins 
and are highly susceptible to poisoning because their diet is so uniform. 
This has led to regulations on mycotoxin levels in pet foods.
Most of our interactions with mycotoxins occur when we absorb 
these foodborne contaminants from the gut, but the lungs are a second 
sponge for toxins. Agricultural workers are most at risk if they inhale 140 chapter 8
dust from contaminated grains. Cultures of lung cells treated with afla￾toxins lose some of their ciliary strength, meaning that the hairs that 
normally move mucus in the lung beat more slowly when the cells ab￾sorb the toxins.44 This adds to the problems of allergic illness in workers 
who inhale spores from moldy grain in silo operations without state-of￾the-art air purifiers and dust masks (see chapter 3). Occupants of homes 
and buildings that become blackened with mold spores after flooding 
may also be exposed to mycotoxins, but the available evidence suggests 
that the dosages would be too low to cause any harm.45
“Blackened” is the operative word here because a mold named 
Stachybotrys, vilified as the “toxic black mold,” became a public health 
pariah when it was linked to lung bleeding and infant deaths in Cleve￾land, Ohio, in the 1990s.46 This fungus grows on the thick paper that 
covers the surface of drywall or gypsum board when it becomes soaked 
with water and produces a whole gamut of mycotoxins. It is a nasty 
piece of work, but its role in the Cleveland tragedy is unproven. The 
spores of the black mold are sticky and are not blown into the air very 
easily. This limits the number of spores that anyone is likely to inhale 
and means that the dose of the toxin carried on these particles is vanish￾ingly small. Under conditions of massive mold growth, however, the 
jury is still out. The developing lungs of infants are likely to be very 
sensitive to mycotoxins, and this mold may be dangerous when it grows 
in dense patches on nursery walls. It has also been suggested that vola￾tile chemicals that evaporate from the mold colonies may become toxic 
in confined spaces.47 The funky smells of damp houses, wet clothing, 
and spoiled food are produced by some of these compounds. While we 
cannot detect most of these gases, dogs have been trained to sniff out 
areas of mold contamination in buildings by following these scents. Put￾ting aside the potential risks of mycotoxins and volatile compounds in 
homes, fungal asthma is an incontrovertible menace to children, which 
means that excessive mold exposure is always a serious problem for 
public health.
Mycotoxins are the natural chemical weapons used by fungi in their 
internecine wars of mold against mold, driven by the ceaseless competi￾tion for food.48 Millions of tons of spores circulate in the atmosphere, Poisoning 141
drizzling every surface, softly, invisibly, always. As each spore germi￾nates, its hyphal threads nudge against other tiny mycelia and the battles 
commence with the exchange of poisons between combatants. Some 
mold strains collapse, others neutralize the incoming mycotoxins and 
counter with their own antifungal cocktails. This biological warfare has 
been fought by the fungi across hundreds of millions of years.49
In addition to fighting other fungi, ergot has extended its repertoire 
of specialized alkaloids to strike bacteria, nematode worms, and insects. 
This wholesale violence is needed because the ergots would be con￾sumed by these soil organisms when they fall to the ground at the end 
of the growing season. The fungus must ward off these pests to get 
through the winter before its spores can infect the next cereal crop in 
the spring. Our vulnerability to poisoning by this fungus is a gruesome 
by-product of the conflict between the fungus and its insect enemies 
with whom we share the same types of nerve and muscle cells. The 
human body is equipped with some impressive detoxification systems, 
but the ergot alkaloids and many other mycotoxins have retained their 
virulence against us.
We have enjoyed much greater success in handling the widespread 
mycotoxin that is made by yeast to disable other microbes when they 
begin to grow in the sweetness of grape must and beer wort. The physi￾ological adaptation of the body to yeast alcohol has been refined over 
hundreds of thousands of years, and our cultural relationship with this 
mycotoxin is part of the story of the rise of modern civilization.50
Through its effects on the nervous system, alcohol ranks as a potent 
psychoactive drug, although it is rarely described in this manner. This 
special designation belongs to a subset of fungal metabolites that as￾sume control of the brain and whose action is considered in chapter 9.142
9
Dreaming
USING MUSHROOMS TO 
TREAT DEPRESSION
magic mushrooms light up the brain like fireflies in a meadow. Waves 
of nerve activity rise, crest, and dissolve from spot to spot across the brain, 
with islands of impulses crackling here, dampening there, as conscious￾ness is disconnected from the usual flow of information. The brainwaves 
on mushrooms are similar to those in intense dreaming, with the twist Dreaming 143
that the temporary uncoupling from everyday thinking via the mushroom 
can have a lasting effect on our mindset when we reconnect. Anxiety and 
depression can lose some of their bite; life can seem less brutish. A mush￾room dream is like a vacation to a tropical island or a canoeing trip along 
a pristine river, with the surprising benefit that the peace found during the 
break stays with you when it is over.
Exceptional dreams and dreamlike states that have been described as 
visions share many of the characteristics of a mushroom trip. In the 
Hebrew Bible, the prophet Ezekiel recalled a series of divine apparitions 
that he witnessed in Babylonia: “And I saw the creatures, and look, one 
wheel was on the ground by the creature on its four sides. The look of 
their wheels was like chrysolite [green gemstones], and a single likeness 
the faces of them had, and their look and their fashioning as when a 
wheel is within a wheel.”1 I have been haunted by a similar vision since 
a luminous dream in which the night sky, powdered with stars, began 
to swirl, with pools of light revolving in the blackness. And as I looked, 
each wheel opened into more wheels, galaxies spinning inside galaxies 
and particles within atoms in a spectacle of infinite regress. For one 
glorious moment it seemed that nature was unveiling itself, the revela￾tion increasing in magnification toward the germ of it all. Then I awoke, 
filled with wonder, and trying to hold on to the picture. The night sky 
has not danced in my unconscious since then. Like Caliban,
The clouds methought would open and show riches
Ready to drop upon me, that when I waked
I cried to dream again
(shakespeare, the tempest, act 3, scene 2)
The details of the ancient prophecy and my dream were products of 
their time. Ezekiel was stirred by Mesopotamian imagery of fiery chari￾ots and four-faced gods; my vision was drawn from reading popular 
books on cosmology, yet the sense of an epiphany seems similar. I can￾not speak with authority for Ezekiel, but my fireflies came drug-free.
Magic mushrooms containing the psychedelic compound psilocybin 
provoke the same sense of transcendence over the commonplace 144 chapter 9
perception of life. The brain on mushrooms produces some of the hall￾marks of the rapid eye movement or REM stage of sleep but is height￾ened by the preservation of consciousness. The user is introduced to a 
form of lucid dreaming—dreaming while awake.2 A straightforward 
mechanistic explanation of this process is elusive, which is not surpris￾ing in light of our bewilderment about how any of our emotions unfold 
in the nervous system. We know that love is made in the brain but have 
no notion of how it is encoded, accessed, augmented, or lost.
HOW PSILOCYBIN RATTLES THE BRAIN
After decades of scientific neglect, psilocybin has become a subject of 
intensive research, and some broad consensus is emerging on some of 
the neurological processes that govern the mushroom dream. Electrical 
impulses are conveyed along neurons through the movement of charged 
atoms or ions across their membranes. When these signals reach the 
end of the cells, they cause the release of chemical neurotransmitters 
that stimulate or block the generation of fresh impulses in the next neu￾rons in the circuit. Serotonin is one of the neurotransmitters that per￾form this slower relay of sparks from cell to cell. When we consume 
psilocybin, a chemical group projecting from the ring structure of this 
little molecule is trimmed away in the liver, producing psilocin. The 
structure of the psilocin molecule is so similar to serotonin that it un￾does the normal transmission of nerve impulses between cells.3 Sero￾tonin performs multiple roles in human physiology, ranging from the 
control of the unconscious process of digestion to the conscious emo￾tion of happiness. If too much is released in the nervous system, the 
body responds with agitation and muscle cramping; too little and we 
lose motivation and can descend into depression.
To get a sense of the consequences of psilocybin consumption (psi￾locybin that is converted into psilocin), it is helpful to consider the com￾plexity of the brain, which operates as an immense network of switches 
that turn on and off, relaying and blocking signals. Both ends of each 
nerve cell branch like fibrous tree roots to create as many as ten thou￾sand connections between each of the hundred billion neurons in the Dreaming 145
brain, amplifying the signals through a circuit of one quadrillion (1015) 
living transistors.4 Comparisons with computers are fraught with dif￾ficulties, but the processing power of the brain matches a petascale su￾percomputer capable of one quadrillion computations per second.5
With this complexity comes vulnerability, which explains the potency 
of the magic mushroom. Serotonin receptors are found throughout the 
nervous system but are particularly concentrated in the frontal cortex, 
which is the center of consciousness—our experience of life. As sero￾tonin’s twisted sister, psilocin activates some cortical circuits and stifles 
others, satirizing the world that we take for granted.
PHYSICAL AND EMOTIONAL SYMPTOMS 
OF PSILOCYBIN USE
Physical symptoms produced by the use of psilocybin result from the 
stimulation and repression of neural networks that normally respond 
to serotonin and include increases in heart rate and blood pressure, 
sweating, muscle twitching, facial numbness, nausea, lack of coordina￾tion, and headaches. These begin about twenty minutes after eating the 
mushrooms, differ greatly from person to person, and are usually mild. 
If we did not favor the uplifting psychological effects of psilocybin, 
these reactions would be seen as expressions of mushroom poisoning. 
Not on a par with the death cap, of course, but poisoning nevertheless, 
which is why many mushroom guides place a skull and crossbones sym￾bol next to entries for Psilocybe species that contain the drug.
The psychological effects of psilocybin are similarly diverse. Some 
brain circuits are aroused and become overloaded with information 
while other parts of the brain are pushed into a dreamlike state. These 
changes in brain activity are visualized in patients who lie with their head 
inside the giant donut of a magnetic resonance imaging or MRI machine 
after they have consumed purified psilocybin. MRI experiments show 
cross-talk between parts of the brain that normally work in isolation, a 
reduction in blood flow to areas involved in logical thinking, and an 
increase in nervous activity in the deeper parts of the brain that control 
our emotions.6 Sound and vision become tangled in some of these 146 chapter 9
excursions, so that music is viewed as a kaleidoscope of colors. This de￾segregation of the brain is called synesthesia. More frequently, our sense 
of individuality or ego dissolves, which leads to impressions of harmony 
and kinship with the rest of nature.7 This is henosis and is the root of the 
encounters with God described by some psilocybin users.
Ego is lost when psilocin interferes with a brain circuit called the 
default mode network, or DMN. The DMN is concentrated in the pre￾frontal cortex and connects with hubs of neurons nestled farther back 
and deeper in the brain. Our sense of self is maintained in the DMN, 
and this is where the mushroom subverts our narcissistic programming. 
Imagine you are a passenger on a cruise ship that strikes an iceberg. In 
the seconds following the collision, normal activity in your DMN is 
suspended while other parts of the brain gather the information needed 
to figure out what has happened and plan a response. You are too frantic 
at that moment to be aware that you have raced onto the deck wrapped 
in a towel and wearing a shower cap. Ego has departed, albeit temporar￾ily. Later, when it has become clear that the ship is sinking and that the 
lifeboats have left without you, the DMN has the last word as you re￾sume contact with your sense of self, remove the shower cap, and are 
flooded with anxiety. Any feeling of positivity would be welcome in this 
hopeless situation, and this is where mushrooms can become our sav￾iors. If you had swallowed a baggie of them when the ship’s hull was 
ripped open, the psilocin would have disengaged the DMN from the 
alarming messages flowing from elsewhere in the brain, pushing you 
into a dreamlike state and leaving you more philosophical about the 
prospect of the frigid water.8
The soothing effect of magic mushrooms on passengers on a sink￾ing ship is a matter of conjecture, but there is plenty of evidence that 
psilocybin can reduce our fearfulness in less dramatic situations. Mul￾tiple studies have shown that psilocybin is a useful treatment for clini￾cal depression and can even foster a sense of well-being in patients 
with terminal illnesses.9 In a trial conducted at Johns Hopkins Uni￾versity in 2016, patients with life-threatening cancer diagnoses re￾ported feelings of greater life satisfaction after receiving high dosages of 
the drug. These improvements in attitude were sustained in 80 percent Dreaming 147
of the participants six months after their treatment. Follow-up inter￾views with surviving patients in 2020 revealed that the majority re￾mained enthusiastic about their treatment, rating it personally mean￾ingful and spiritually significant. Reflecting on the psilocybin 
treatment, one of the patients in the longer study wrote, “It’s hard to 
explain. . . . Something in me softened, and I realized that everyone is 
just trying (mostly) to do the best they can. Even me. And that matters, 
since we are all connected.” Another said, simply, “I have a greater ap￾preciation and sense of gratitude for being alive.”10 These profoundly 
positive changes in outlook are astounding. Given the choice, how 
many of us would choose intimacy with psilocybin rather than raw 
cognition on the last lap?
Psilocybin has also proven useful in the treatment of PTSD and al￾coholism, and researchers are studying whether the drug can be used to 
treat anorexia nervosa.11 In addition to affecting the function of the 
existing circuitry in the brain, studies on mice show that psilocybin use 
can boost the number of connections between neurons.12 The possibil￾ity, however slim, that a single dose can stimulate long-term rewiring of 
the brain has far-reaching implications for treating a host of health con￾ditions. With depression and other mental illnesses afflicting hundreds 
of millions of people worldwide, psilocybin has already attained the 
status of a miracle drug in the opinion of some health-care profession￾als. With international attention to this unfolding research, pharmaceu￾tical companies big and small are looking at magic mushrooms as a 
once-in-a-lifetime investment opportunity.13 One of the challenges to 
this new industry is the long-standing illegality of growing mushrooms 
to produce psilocybin, but the mycological laws are evolving swiftly.
NORMALIZING PSILOCYBIN USE
In the U.S. elections in November 2020, Oregon voters passed Ballot 
Measure 109, legalizing the use of psilocybin for therapeutic purposes, 
by a comfortable margin. Measure 109 charged the Oregon Health Au￾thority with developing the regulations for licensing growers to produce 
magic mushrooms and for licensed “facilitators” to provide “psilocybin 148 chapter 9
services” in specialized clinics.14 The authors of the measure pointed to 
the prevalence of mental illnesses in the region and crafted the legisla￾tion to “improve the physical, mental, and social well-being of all people 
in this state.” Many health-care professionals objected; they wanted to 
see further studies and were concerned about the unspecified creden￾tials of the facilitators who would counsel patients and shepherd them 
during their sessions. Unmoved by these arguments, the majority of 
voters looked forward to a happier future and scheduled the first clinics 
to open in 2023.
The most compelling case in favor of Measure 109 was made by 
people who said that their lives had been transformed by psilocybin. 
Mara McGraw was one of the brave proponents of the measure who 
shared her story with the media. Mara had undergone surgery, radia￾tion, and chemotherapy for a rare form of neuroendocrine cancer for 
three years before she faced the necessity of making her end-of-life deci￾sions. “After chemo failed, I went to a pretty dark place,” she said.15 Pre￾scription antidepressants proved useless. Hearing about psilocybin 
treatment in Canada, she decided to give it a try. The psychoactive drug 
changed everything: “I felt an immediate release from the fear,” she said 
in a video news conference. “I just felt fine and I felt like I rejoined 
everything in the universe.” Her despair melted as the drug from the 
magic mushroom lit up her brain.
The evident benefits of psilocybin therapy outweigh the mild physical 
side effects of the drug, but there are concerns about the harmful psy￾chological responses in a minority of patients. In a survey of almost two 
thousand patients, 84 percent said that they believed that they had ben￾efited from psilocybin, which aligns with the results of many other stud￾ies.16 Other respondents experienced a negative impact, with 3 percent 
saying that they had behaved aggressively or violently after consuming 
mushrooms and 8 percent seeking psychiatric treatment that they as￾sociated with the use of the drug. There have also been cases of self-harm 
and suicide attempts among psilocybin users, which speaks to the im￾portance of taking the drug under some kind of supervision.
Some of the challenges to accepting psilocybin as a useful medicine are 
related to its popularity as a recreational drug, which began in the 1960s. Dreaming 149
The negative image of psilocybin includes an enduring myth about an 
epidemic of magic mushroom and LSD users throwing themselves from 
buildings. Antipathy toward magic mushrooms is reinforced by the lu￾dicrous claims of contemporary popularizers of mycology about the 
cosmic mysteries unveiled by psilocybin. Plenty of attention has been 
given to the historical players in the psilocybin story in other books, so 
a précis will suffice here: ethnomycologist Gordon Wasson and his wife, 
Valentina, excited millions of American magazine readers with their 
stories about the use of hallucinogenic mushrooms in Mexico in the 
1950s.17 Wasson collected hallucinogenic mushrooms in Mexico with 
Roger Heim, a French botanist, and Albert Hofmann, a Swiss chemist, 
who isolated psilocybin from cultures grown from these fruit bodies in 
1958. Research on the effects of psilocybin was conducted by Timothy 
Leary at Harvard University in the 1960s, and Terence McKenna took 
“heroic doses” of psilocybin and published a guide to growing magic 
mushrooms in the 1970s.18
McKenna became a counterculture hero, and his increasingly de￾ranged pronouncements discouraged more rational thinking about 
psychedelic mushrooms. One of his baseless claims centered on the 
chemical structure of psilocybin. McKenna declared that this was so un￾usual that it must have originated elsewhere in the galaxy. He went on to 
postulate that psilocybin mushrooms were a higher form of intelligence 
that had arrived from outer space and shaped the evolution of the human 
brain. Although he faces some stiff competition, McKenna’s alien mush￾room theory is one of the least enlightening things ever written about 
fungi. Returning to terrestrial mycology, recent genetic research has re￾vealed a lot about the actual origins of magic mushrooms.
HOW MUSHROOMS MAKE PSYCHEDELICS
Psilocybin is produced by three hundred species of Psilocybe mush￾rooms and by other fungi belonging to three distantly related groups of 
fungi. Psilocybe cubensis, which grows on cow dung in nature, is culti￾vated indoors to furnish plentiful, year-round, and largely illegal sources of 
the drug. With interest in the therapeutic value of psilocybin overtaking 150 chapter 9
its recreational use, researchers are investigating the industrial produc￾tion of the drug in bacteria and yeast transformed with fungal genes.19
The advantage of these microbes over the mushrooms is that they could 
produce huge quantities of pure psilocybin without any of the difficul￾ties of raising and harvesting fruit bodies for drug extraction. This is a 
complicated project, with some similarities to the creation of the genet￾ically modified (GM) microbes that produce insulin. If this is successful, 
psychedelic Frankenyeast will manufacture the drug in industrial fer￾menters in psilocybin breweries.
Psilocybin synthesis involves four enzymes that restructure the start￾ing material, which is an amino acid called tryptophan, into psilocybin 
in the tissues of the mushroom.20 The genes that encode these enzymes 
are clustered on a single chromosome in some of the fungi; in other spe￾cies they are strung out and separated by genes that perform other func￾tions.21 Genetic comparisons between the species of magic mushrooms 
suggest that psilocybin synthesis evolved in one group of fungi and 
spread to other families by the process of horizontal gene transfer.22
Most genes are transferred vertically, by inheritance from parent to off￾spring, but horizontal gene transfer between organisms in the same 
generation is common in some groups of microbes. It appears that psi￾locybin genes spread in this sideways manner from the mycelium of 
a magic species to the mycelium of an unmagical fungus and cast a spell 
on any animal that ate it. However this gene migration happened, psi￾locybin synthesis has prospered as a transferable skill in the fungi, which 
suggests that it must be doing something useful for them.
WHY MUSHROOMS MAKE PSYCHEDELICS
Insect attraction seems the best reason for a mushroom to make psychedel￾ics, though the evidence for this is slim. Experiments suggest that flies, like 
humans, experience mood elevation on psilocybin. This is demonstrated 
by dropping flies in water and timing how long they continue to struggle 
to climb out.23 Flies that have been fed psilocybin remain more active and 
keep trying to escape even when the situation seems hopeless. This seems 
a little like the patients in the human psilocybin study diagnosed with a Dreaming 151
terminal illness. Rather than providing a free antidepressant for the insects, 
the mushroom must profit from this interaction. Spore dispersal is the 
most important service provided for fungi by insects.24 Flies called fungus 
gnats are hatched from eggs laid in psilocybes and could carry spores from 
their nurseries when they take to the wing as adults.25
This is all very speculative. However, the ability of a mushroom to 
attract flies by agitating their nervous systems aligns perfectly with the 
management of insect behavior by other kinds of microscopic fungi. 
Zombie ants, infected by tropical species of the fungus Ophiocordyceps, 
climb into the canopy of trees and bite down on leaf veins before the 
stalks of the fungus explode through their heads and spray spores into 
the air. This climbing behavior positions the fungus in the optimal loca￾tion for the dispersal of its spores in wind. Other fungi as well as viruses 
and parasitic worms compel insects to behave in the same way. The uni￾formity of this response to infection suggests that the dif­ferent parasites 
are exploiting the normal climbing behavior in insects for the purpose 
of dispersal.26 Psilocybin has not been detected in these fungi, but it is 
produced by another fungus that infects cicadas and turns their abdom￾inal tissues into masses of powdery spores.27 Not content with steriliz￾ing the insect, this parasite causes infected male cicadas to waggle their 
wings like females, attracting other males who receive a dose of spores 
when they mount their moldy mates. Compared with these astonishing 
feats of mind control, the mood-enhancing effect of psilocybin on in￾sects and humans seems quite modest.
The colors of some mushrooms may be related to insect attraction, 
but this is an inconsistent trait among the hallucinogenic species. Psi￾locybes are inconspicuous brown mushrooms that seem unlikely to act 
as visual beacons for insects, although they do turn blue when they are 
bruised or broken.28 The spotted caps of the fly agaric mushrooms offer 
a stronger visual cue that may lure insects. Pieces of these fruit bodies 
steeped in milk have been used as fly traps in Europe for centuries.29 The 
polka dot pattern is destroyed when the mushroom is broken into 
the milk, so the fungus must also create a smell that attracts flies. Despite 
the use of the fungus as a fly trap, its name seems to refer to the devil, the 
lord of the flies, not to the insects.30152 chapter 9
Fly agarics produce muscimol, which impersonates the neurotrans￾mitter gamma-aminobutyric acid, or GABA, rather than serotonin. 
Neurons sensitive to muscimol have an inhibitory effect on the nervous 
system, reducing the transmission of impulses and acting as a sedative. 
There are more than a dozen dif­ferent types of GABA receptor in the 
human brain, and muscimol binds more tightly to some than to others. 
This is the reason for the range of symptoms of fly agaric ingestion, 
including euphoria, lucid dreaming, changes in size perception, and 
feelings of weightlessness. These are described as the Alice in Wonder￾land syndrome, which is also recognized in patients suffering from viral 
infections, migraines, epilepsy, and brain damage.31 The synesthesia 
provoked by psilocybin also comes with muscimol, but with its proper￾ties as a psychedelic “downer,” this compound is an unlikely candidate 
for treating depression. (Other sedatives may be useful as antidepres￾sants, including the synthetic drug ketamine, which binds to a different 
receptor than muscimol.32) Like psilocybes, fly agarics can cause seri￾ous poisonings in people who consume large doses of the mushroom 
or are unusually sensitive to the chemistry of this fungus.33
Human interactions are not part of the evolutionary programming 
of any of the magic mushrooms. We arrived too recently in their 
150-million-year history to dictate the modification of the chemistry of 
these mushrooms by natural selection and, in any case, the huge num￾bers of prehistoric insects are bound to have been better at dispersing 
spores than humans and our ancestors. We get high on psilocybin and 
muscimol for the simple reason that we have the same brain chemistry 
as flies. Nevertheless, magic mushrooms may have exerted a supreme 
influence on civilization through religion, which is the most surprising 
extension of the human-fungus symbiosis.
MUSHROOMS AND THE CROSS
Familiarity with the contemporary human attraction to magic mush￾rooms, coupled with archaeological evidence and ethnographic studies, 
suggests that we have consumed fruit bodies containing psilocybin and 
other hallucinogenic compounds for millennia.34 Rock carvings in Dreaming 153
North Africa featuring bizarre figures holding and sprouting mush￾rooms bolster ideas about the ritual use of fungi in the Neolithic, al￾though we know nothing about the beliefs of the artists. The oldest clear 
evidence of mushroom worship comes from Mesoamerica and includes 
pre-Columbian stone carvings and pottery with fruit-body shapes, 
paintings of Mixtec gods offering mushrooms, and descriptions of the 
ceremonial consumption of mushrooms by Aztecs. Uninformed by 
neuroscience, our ancestors were bound to have interpreted the as￾tounding effects of psychotropic fungi in supernatural terms. Minutes 
after receiving these mycological sacraments, their gods would have 
materialized in the form of dazzling creatures and mushroom men bear￾ing prophesies from the sky. Ezekiel seems to have seen something like 
this following his vision of the psychedelic chariot, with “the look of fire 
with radiance all round. Like the look of a rainbow . . . the likeness of 
the glory of the Lord.”35 It is not surprising that there has been a good 
deal of speculation about Ezekiel’s experimentation with mushrooms.
Author Robert Graves recognized Ezekiel’s description in his own 
experience of an orchard paradise after eating psilocybes.36 Graves had 
been in Mexico at the time with his friend Gordon Wasson. Beginning 
with the shamanistic use of fly agarics in Russia, which had been re￾ported by European explorers in the nineteenth century, Wasson pur￾sued evidence of the ritualistic use of mushrooms in other parts of the 
world. In his book, Soma: Divine Mushroom of Immortality (1968), Was￾son identified the fly agaric as the vital ingredient in the ritual drink 
described in the Vedic Sanskrit text, the Rigveda.37 A decade later he 
argued that LSD-like alkaloids from the ergot fungus stimulated the 
visions in ancient Greek ceremonies known as the Eleusinian Mysteries. 
But despite his enthusiasm for mycological explanations for religious 
practices, he was unmoved by the possible roots of Christianity in the 
worship of the fly agaric. This idea was developed by John Allegro, an 
English archeologist, who wrote The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross
(1970).38 Allegro was convinced that he had discovered a Sumerian 
code hidden in the Greek text of the gospels, which revealed the beliefs 
of a fertility cult whose rituals included the consumption of hallucino￾genic mushrooms.154 chapter 9
Allegro’s bizarre translation of the Bible was rejected by myriad 
scholars, and the book was mocked in reviews. An eminent theologian 
writing in The Times of London spoke for many when he dismissed his 
psychedelic fertility cult as “a sensationalist lunatic theory.”39 Allegro’s 
book included a photograph of a wall painting of Adam and Eve in 
Plaincourault Chapel in France, which features the serpent coiled 
around the Tree of Knowledge holding the forbidden fruit in its mouth 
toward Eve. Following the descriptions of earlier authors, Allegro be￾lieved that the thirteenth-century artist had pictured a giant mushroom 
tree bearing the spotty caps of fly agarics. Wasson favored the more 
conventional interpretation of the tree as a stylized Italian pine and 
rejected Allegro’s translation of the Bible. This is interesting, given Was￾son’s credulity when it came to other ambiguous instances of mycologi￾cal symbolism. It has been argued that financial ties with the Vatican 
through his banking career with J. P. Morgan & Co. may have swayed 
his opinion when it came to Christianity.
Whether or not the Plaincourault painting shows a mushroom or a 
pine tree, very credible mushrooms appear in other medieval artworks, 
including wall paintings in other churches in France and in Turkey, 
stained glass windows in Chartres Cathedral, a German tapestry, and 
the famous Great Canterbury Psalter.40 Some of these compositions are 
mushroom-shaped objects rather than fungi, but an objective review of 
the surprising variety of images suggests that mushrooms were accepted 
as important religious symbols in the early church. Why else would they 
have been displayed in these commissions? Although his translations of 
scripture are fanciful, it seems that Allegro had recognized a genuine 
trace of mycology in Christianity.
Superstition and religion seem hard-baked into human nature. 
The scientific impulse is innate too: at our best we live by logic and 
conduct simple experiments when we have the opportunity to test our 
ideas. But in our age of scientific fruits and failures, the sky gods persist 
as invisible helpmates and moral judges across the planet. Faith in most 
gods would have developed without psilocybin and muscimol, but it is 
easy to imagine that their psychedelic power led to the ritual use of 
magic mushrooms and the invention of priesthoods. Without claiming Dreaming 155
that the Bible is a coded message from a fertility cult, perhaps mush￾rooms did play a role in the origins of Judeo-Christian practices. Wall 
paintings in churches do not lead this inquiry very far, but they do show 
that mushrooms are intertwined with the ancestry of monotheism. If 
we had never swallowed the fruit bodies, human cultures might have 
evolved along very dif­ferent agnostic trajectories.
We can take this mycological exploration of faith a step further to 
question the reality of any god. Mystical feelings of various kinds are a 
common response to psilocybin use in controlled experiments.41 Two￾thirds of the respondents in one study who said that they were atheists 
before using psilocybin changed their minds after consuming magic 
mushrooms and believed that they had encountered some form of 
“ultimate reality.”42 The faithful changed their minds too. Those who 
identified themselves as monotheists before taking psilocybin tended 
to lose this belief in favor of a broader idea of a benevolent intelligence 
in the universe. So rather than placing us closer to some holy spirit or 
demon who was waiting in the wings, it seems more logical to conclude 
from these studies that the alkaloid in these fungi conjured the gods via 
an avalanche of nerve impulses. There is a god-producer in the brain 
rather than a god-receptor.43
PSILOCYBIN AND THE ENTROPIC BRAIN
What do the effects of psilocybin say about the quotidian experience 
of life, that users feel so elevated and rank the effects among their 
most profound adventures? Aldous Huxley (1894–1963) was the most 
eloquent champion of the idea that psychedelic drugs overcome the 
“reducing valve” of the brain, which filters a surfeit of sensations gath￾ered by our senses and feeds the conscious brain with slivers of informa￾tion needed to stay alive.44 In The Doors of Perception (1954), Huxley 
recounted his experiments with mescaline extracted from the peyote 
cactus. Mescaline is a serotonin agonist, like psilocybin and LSD, and 
produces similar psychedelic effects. High on the drug, Huxley looked 
at a flower arrangement and glimpsed “what Adam had seen on the 
morning of his creation—the miracle, moment by moment, of naked 156 chapter 9
existence.” Without psychedelic drugs, Huxley wrote that our aware￾ness is limited to “the ruts of ordinary perception.” In his earlier novel, 
Brave New World (1932), he had imagined a global palliative called soma, 
after the Vedic libation, which soothed and pacified the citizens of the 
World State.45
The opening of the reducing valve has been described as an increase 
in neural entropy.46 This is entropy in a metaphorical sense rather than 
an authentic measurement of physical disorder. In the normal conscious 
state, we access information via a small subset of the available pathways. 
When mushrooms are added to the nervous system, the entropy of the 
brain increases as the connections between nerve cells spread across 
multiple regions, producing synesthesia, the loss of ego, and other ex￾pressions of enhanced networking. Obsessive-compulsive behavior is a 
good example of the kind of rigid thinking or low-entropy brain activity 
that can be relieved with psilocybin. Clinical depression is another. Caf￾feine has a comparably uplifting entropic effect. Coffee has no proven 
use in treating any mental illness, but the modest increase in connectiv￾ity and entropy probably explains the boost in creativity that is a bless￾ing of the first cup in the morning—the fleeting sense of genius that is 
replaced by the lesser wit of the day. REM sleep has some similarities to 
this high-entropy state too. At the extremities of brain entropy, way be￾yond the normal effect of psilocybin, the psychotic brain illustrates the 
disastrous outcome of a surfeit of connectivity or disorder. McKenna 
may have found his way to these extremities of brain entropy with his 
heroic doses of the drug. To each their own.
In the search for relief from depression and anxiety, it is useful to 
consider why deep unhappiness is so prevalent. As imperfect products 
of evolution, there must be a natural imperative at work. Psychologists 
have wrestled with this question for decades, and although there is no 
completely satisfying answer, depression seems to emerge from a com￾bination of bad wiring and the cryptic advantages of wariness, self-doubt, 
and sadness.47 The bad wiring is strung between the more primitive 
lizard brain and the outermost cortex, where our consciousness and 
sense of self interact with the primal urges to feed, escape, attack, and copu￾late. Wariness is inevitable and protective, but the power of negative Dreaming 157
thinking is more problematic. Mild depression might be useful if it pro￾vides us with the opportunity to ruminate on a problem and reach a 
solution. It could also serve as an incentive device that is so unpleasant 
that it urges us to move on from a shattering experience. Deep relentless 
depression has no purpose. In his study of depression titled The Anat￾omy of Melancholy, Robert Burton (1577–1640) wrote, “What cannot be 
cured must be endured.”48 Mushrooms offer an alternative.
TO SHROOM OR NOT TO SHROOM
As calls to legalize psilocybin use grow, and corporations and govern￾ments seek to control the production of the drug, we need to be mindful 
of the implications of urging such abundant happiness in a frequently 
mordant mammal. Mortal illness and the approach of death can open 
Huxley’s reducing valve without shrooms. Author Chris Paling de￾scribed eating toast, his first solid food after six weeks on intravenous 
support in hospital: “I spread the butter. The aroma of it melting into 
the slightly charred bread is intoxicating. . . . I chew slowly. Another 
bite. Heaven.”49 Close to his death in 1994, British playwright Dennis 
Potter described the blossom on his plum tree: “I see it is the whitest, 
frothiest, blossomest blossom that there ever could be, and I can see it. 
Things are both more trivial than they ever were, and more important 
than they ever were, and the difference between the trivial and the 
important doesn’t seem to matter. But the nowness of everything is ab￾solutely wondrous.”50
It is sad that mortal illness and the approach of death are needed to 
taste the toast and see the blossomest blossom, but the euphoria felt in 
extremis or on psilocybin is unsustainable, and Huxley’s “ruts of ordi￾nary perception” keep us alive. But by opening the valve a little, we light 
up the brain wiring for deeper thinking and creativity. The downside 
with using mushrooms to do so is that they can create an ungovernable 
flow of information.51 The resulting feelings of oneness with the uni￾verse and empathy with the gods are entertaining, but they will not 
solve any mysteries or lead to meaningful insights about the cosmos. 
Remarkably, however, these festivities appear to soothe brains damaged 158 chapter 9
by childhood abuse or battlefield trauma and promise to ease the uni￾versal disquiet at the end of life. We have not found anything else with 
these amazing properties.
And from the mushroom magic that opens and closes the doors of 
perception and has given us religion, we examine the global symbiosis 
with fungi that preserves life on the surface of the earth in the final 
chapter. Without these wider ecological interactions, there would be none 
of the more intimate expressions of the human-fungus symbiosis.159
10
Recycling
THE GLOBAL MYCOBIOME
kepler 1649c is an Earth-sized planet in the constellation of Cygnus, 
three hundred light-years from our solar system. With its close orbit to 
a small star, climate models suggest it is quite Earth-like in temperature.1
If Kepler 1649c is watery, it seems likely to harbor life, and if it accom￾modates anything more complicated than our bacteria, it is certain to 
be populated with fungi. Confidence in this untestable hypothesis is 
born from understanding the essence of fungi on Earth. Our fungi are 160 chapter 10
the agents of entropy, transforming the energy captured in the web of 
life into the raw materials for the continuous regeneration of the bio￾sphere. Without a group of organisms with these properties, the ecosys￾tems of rocky worlds like Kepler 1649c would stall as planetary compost 
heaps of untappable energy. They must be there.
Mycology will evolve in its own way on this alien world, but some of 
its features are a given. Kepler’s fungi will grow as filaments that perme￾ate the solid refuse and multiply as yeasts on surfaces and suspended in 
fluids. The shapes of these cells will differ in detail from our species, but 
not in kind, because filamentous molds and budding yeasts are stream￾lined solutions to the challenges of growing in solids and liquids. Natu￾ral selection will craft them within the constraints of the environment 
on Kepler as it has on Earth.
There will be mushrooms too, which will cast spores into the au￾tumnal breeze of Kepler’s sunny hemisphere. Not fly agarics, of course, 
but stalked platforms of one kind and another that score the same 
goal of sending genes into the future. Beyond these bare necessities, 
Kepler’s mycology will be determined by the characteristics of the rest 
of the planet’s biology. If there are brains, the fungi will have found 
ways to lure some of their owners to help with spore dispersal and to 
dispel others from eating them. Supportive symbioses with the molds 
are as inevitable as damaging mycoses, and every Keplerian will carry a 
mycobiome. Mycology will be part of astrobiology across the cosmos—
if not on Kepler 1649c, then elsewhere in the galaxy on other potentially 
habitable planets. There is no reason to think that there is anything 
like a human anywhere else, but there is going to be something like 
a fungus.
Back on Earth, the indelible nature of the human-fungus symbiosis 
ensures that our collaboration will continue to evolve, unconsciously 
and consciously, for better and worse, in health and in sickness. This 
chapter begins with the greatest extension of this interrelationship, 
which may be the most difficult to appreciate because it is so distanced 
from the body. This is the life support system that exists in the soil and 
in the plants that energize every food chain on land and oxygenate the 
atmosphere. We depend on botany, and plants depend on fungi.2 Fungi Recycling 161
support plants through their mycorrhizal associations, as endophytes 
that live inside their tissues, and by forming a protective shield of hy￾phae on leaf surfaces. On the flip side of their botanical roles, fungi 
decimate crops, exterminate forest trees, and compost the lot.3 Fungi are 
the resurrection and the life.
SYMBIOSES WITH PLANTS
Attempts to categorize many species of fungi that interact with plants 
as faithful mutualists (advantage fungus/advantage host), commensals 
(advantage fungus/host unaffected), or parasites (advantage fungus/
host destroyed) are futile because they slide between these categories. 
The distinction between servant and slayer is blurred by fungi that are 
mutualists or commensals with some plants and parasites of others, and 
by mutualists that attack the tissues of their hosts when they are weak￾ened by drought or old age.4 In previous chapters we have seen how 
some of the fungi that we encounter all the time show a similar shift in 
behavior from harmless or even supportive interactions with the body 
to lethal pathogens when the immune system is compromised. Return￾ing to the mutualisms that support plants, ectomycorrhizas between 
mushrooms and tree roots have become part of the general knowledge 
of ecology. They are introduced to children in elementary school, il￾lustrated in posters and dioramas in nature centers, and enter informal 
conversations about the environment. Ectomycorrhizal fungi support 
trees by clothing their root tips with mycelia, radiating hyphae into the 
soil, and delivering water and dissolved minerals to their partners. There 
is nothing charitable about this: clamped to the roots, the fungus drains 
as much sugar from the plant as it allows. Research on these fungi has 
shown that their mycelia can create networks of filaments between the 
roots of adjacent trees and act as pathways for sharing resources within 
forests.5 The importance of these interconnections for the trees remains 
controversial, however, and it is possible that the fungi are the chief 
beneficiaries of these underground webs.
Mushrooms growing beneath trees can seem remote from our con￾cerns, but mycorrhizas are critical for forest health, and we benefit from 162 chapter 10
the resulting carbon capture, oxygen production, and water purification. 
Supplies of lumber and other forest products are also reliant on these 
underground symbioses. Equally inconspicuous synergies with fungi 
exist through agriculture, where a dif­ferent kind of mycorrhizal con￾nection nourishes crop plants. These symbioses are called arbuscular 
mycorrhizas, and they are established with species in most plant fami￾lies. Arbuscule, meaning a shrublike structure, is the term for the 
delicately branched connections that these fungi plug into root cells. 
This internal linkage or endomycorrhiza contrasts with the ectomycor￾rhizas that grow on the surface of roots and squeeze between their 
outermost cells.
Rice, corn, and wheat provide half of the calories consumed by 
humans, and the roots of all three of these staple plants are endowed 
with arbuscules. The fungi in these symbioses act as natural fertilizers 
by mopping up nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in the soil and 
sharing them with their plants.6 When the same trio of elements are 
provided to the crops as NPK fertilizer, the natural mycorrhizas dis￾appear.7 They are lost because the fungi are unnecessary when the cereal 
roots are bathed with a supernatural abundance of these elements in the 
soil. Something similar happens to the healthy mycobiome in the diges￾tive system when we poison the gut microbes with fast food.8 Refined 
sugars and artificial sweeteners are quickly absorbed into the blood￾stream, bypassing the community of bacteria and fungi needed to 
process complex carbohydrates (chapter 5). Fungicides are another 
problem for mycorrhizas. Sprayed on crops to control the rusts, smuts, 
blights, and blasts that plague monocultures, these chemicals trickle 
into the soil and kill the beneficial fungi before they can form mycor￾rhizas with the plants.9 This is like the trickle-down effect of medicated 
shampoos that control dandruff and have the potential to squash some 
of the supportive fungi on the rest of the skin (chapter 2).
Using the same molecular genetic methods that have been developed 
for work on the human mycobiome, plant scientists have documented 
the rise and fall of populations of mycorrhizal fungi in croplands. The 
disturbance or dysbiosis resulting from intensive farming has not been 
recognized as a great loss to agribusiness because crop productivity Recycling 163
keeps increasing through the mechanization of agriculture, chemical 
control of weeds and pests, and introduction of ever more vigorous ce￾real cultivars.10 Nevertheless, agricultural practices that promote 
mycorrhizas are becoming popular. No-till farming avoids tearing the 
mycelia of mycorrhizal fungi apart before the seeds are planted, and soil 
enrichment with manure stimulates fungal growth.11 The addition of 
spores as seed dressings is another strategy that provides seedlings with 
a preparatory mycobiome that can jumpstart the formation of mycor￾rhizas.12 Dusting seeds with supportive fungi is reminiscent of the bap￾tismal coating of newborn babies with yeasts from the mother (chap￾ter 1). Through these neonatal get-togethers, the roots of germinating 
plants are transformed into mycorrhizas, and we begin our lifetimes as 
myco-humans.
THE NECROMYCOBIOME
Fungi collaborate with plants and animals throughout their lives and rot 
them after death. Decomposition by fungi returns nutrients to the soil 
and carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. Fresh roots and their fungi soak 
up the minerals released by decay, leaves absorb sunlight and CO2
, and 
the great wheel of the carbon cycle keeps turning. Fungi mingle with 
bacteria, insects, and worms in a fallen tree, each contributing to the 
process of decomposition in a distinctive fashion. Mycelia of mush￾rooms use the pressure in their filamentous hyphae to force their way 
into the wood and release enzymes that turn the trunk into powder and 
pulp. Bacteria crowd along the surface of the hyphae, fermenting the 
chemicals leaking from the fungi; beetles gouge galleries through the wood 
where yeasts blossom in the damp darkness, roundworms puncture the 
hyphae to feed on their juices, and fungi retaliate with toxins and sticky 
traps. All of this happens relentlessly, year after year, until the tree van￾ishes. Hardened brackets and hoofs of perennial fruit bodies on the 
surface of the rotting wood are joined by annual flushes of fleshy mush￾rooms as the external evidence of the internal decomposition. Spores 
from these fruitings are dispersed in pursuit of new sources of food, 
driving cycle upon cycle of life, death, and decay.164 chapter 10
Fungi rot animals quite differently. Plants are made from sugars 
linked in chains to form cellulose and other polysaccharides that make 
up the dry weight of the plant. The fungi are the champions of releasing 
sugars from these materials. Animals are made from proteins and fats 
that are more susceptible to breakdown by bacteria, but yeasts grow in 
the slurry of the dead intestines and filamentous fungi set to work on 
the tougher tissues. Together with maggots that writhe in the froth and 
beetles that nibble at the sinews, the bacteria and fungi form the necrobi￾ome that gathers at the postmortem banquet to dissolve the dead into 
the soil.13
The fungi of the necromycobiome change as the human corpse bloats, 
enters the phase of active decay, and becomes skeletonized. In the bloat 
stage the gut microbes destroy the digestive tissues, releasing gases that 
distend the cadaver and force “purge fluid” from the nose and mouth. This 
is when the greatest diversity of fungi is found in the body, including 
Candida yeasts and the familiar Aspergillus, Mucor, and Penicillium molds.14
In the active stage of decomposition the diversity falls, and a mixture of 
specialized molds and yeasts works alongside the bacteria and maggots 
that liquefy the skin, muscles, and internal organs. Skeletonization 
leaves little food for the fungi apart from the hair and nails, which are 
digested by the species that cause ringworm in life.
The inevitability of our eventual decay is a fact of life that most of us 
would like to ignore. But we gain wisdom by understanding and em￾bracing the part that we play in this grand terrestrial circus. The German 
philosopher Heidegger, among others, suggested that the affirmation of 
our own limited timeline allows us to transcend everyday experience 
and seek greater agency in life.15 Some people find solace in this medita￾tion, and burial suits impregnated with fungi have been marketed as 
biodegradable attire for enriching forest ecosystems after our demise.16
This posthumous contribution to fertilizing the woods is a laudable am￾bition, and “green burials” of all kinds are a less poisonous exit plan than 
the use of embalming chemicals to keep the body looking cadaverous. 
Unfortunately, however, the advertised colonization of the burial suits 
with mycelia of oyster and shiitake mushrooms is not going to aid 
human decomposition because these are white-rot fungi that digest Recycling 165
cellulose. In the unlikely event that oysters and shiitakes came across 
the body of a pirate in the wild (who missed his traditional burial at 
sea), they would remove all trace of his wooden leg, but little else.17
SPOILING ART AND RESTORING SOIL
Wooden legs and everything else that we saw, chisel, and pulp from 
trees are prone to decomposition by fungi. Air and moisture condemn 
cut wood to decay without the defenses against fungi provided in the 
living tree or chemical preservatives in cut lumber. The seeds of destruc￾tion are resting in the soil and drifting in the air, always ready to strike. 
The oldest surviving woodwork is the 12,500-year-old Shigir Idol dis￾covered in a Russian peat bog in 1890. The lack of oxygen preserved the 
chiseled face and zigzag etchings of the five-meter-tall larch wood figu￾rine, which is more than twice the age of Ötzi the iceman (see chap￾ter 7).18 Civilizations came and went as the Shigir Idol rested in the bog, 
and the fungi erased all trace of their carpentry beyond rings of post￾holes found at Woodhenge, near Stonehenge, and other Neolithic 
settlements in Europe.
Paintings are damaged by fungi too. Millennia before the early Me￾solithic Siberians carved the Shigir Idol, artists decorated the walls of 
the Lascaux caves with pigments ground from local minerals. Within a 
few years of their discovery in 1940, the paintings showed signs of cor￾rosion as the breath and sweat of thousands of visitors increased the 
humidity of the caves and acidified the damp rock. Electric lighting in￾stalled in the vaults caused a green alga to spread over the walls, along 
with patches of mold.19 The Lascaux caves were closed to the public in 
1963, but the microbiological damage has persisted. The problems are 
intensified by insects that disperse fungi in the caves, including a mold 
that blackens the walls and ceiling.20
Michelangelo had to remove mold spots from the damp lime that 
served as the canvas for his fresco in the Sistine Chapel, and medieval 
wall paintings in churches throughout Europe are threatened by fungal 
spoilage.21 Fungal hostility toward our art and artifacts is relentless. 
Whatever we produce, they do their best to dissolve. Manuscripts and 166 chapter 10
books in library collections become moldy if the climate is not con￾trolled, film and videotapes can be ruined by fungi, and faces in photo￾graphs become blurred by tiny mycelia growing on the gelatin. Only 
digital images archived in clouds are safe. Fungi spot shoes, handbags, 
and everything else made from leather. Spots of mildew on a favorite 
jacket develop for the same reason that a fungus grows on our skin. Try 
as we might, we cannot insulate ourselves from the fungi.
In his 1665 masterpiece Micrographia, Robert Hooke published the 
earliest images of microscopic fungi, including a bread mold growing 
on a sheepskin book cover. Centuries later we are still playing catch-up 
with the universe of organisms and objects revealed with Hooke’s mi￾croscope. Whether we see them or not, there is a fungus on everything, 
decomposing its substance or sitting there as spores. Fungi have been 
cleaning up the mess made by the rest of biology for hundreds of 
millions of years, turning dead plants into compost and compost into 
soil, threading their way through animal dung and, as we have seen, 
dissolving the fibrous parts of animal corpses.
These skills in recycling are vital for soil regeneration after forest fires, 
and mycorrhizas can help plants regain a roothold in land deforested by 
timber harvesting and mining operations. We can also use mycelia to 
break down many of the nastiest pollutants that we release into the en￾vironment and to reconfigure other chemicals to reduce their toxicity.22
White rot fungi use some of the enzymes that are effective in wood 
decomposition to detoxify cancerous hydrocarbons produced when 
fossil fuels are burned. They are good at this because the ringed struc￾ture of these molecules is similar to the lignin in wood that they are 
accustomed to rotting. Other fungi are effective at breaking down agri￾cultural pesticides and herbicides, pharmaceutical wastes, dyes, and 
detergents. Mycelia also clean soils by concentrating toxic elements 
from the water that trickles over their hyphae. Through this natural form 
of filtration, fungi may even help remediate radioactive soil.23 Although 
we are a long way from extending this flair for detoxification from the 
lab to the farm field and industrial site, pilot studies on these remarkable 
processes offer a welcome distraction from the continuous newsfeed of 
planetary gloom.Recycling 167
FASHIONABLE FUNGI
Highlights of this science have trickled into popular culture, where 
mushrooms have been embraced as the instruments of recycling that 
refresh the planet and support new life. This newfound love of mycol￾ogy echoes the associations between mushrooms and fertility made 
by indigenous people across the world.24 According to their tradi￾tional beliefs, the Blackfoot Indians imagined that giant puffballs, or 
kakató’si, were created by fallen stars. They painted the fruit bodies as 
white circles arising from a dark band along the bottom edge of tipi 
covers to symbolize the birth of life.25 Now that the global scale of 
environmental damage is beyond any sensible question, the fungi 
have become widespread symbols of hope. After three hundred years 
of esoteric research and public disdain, fungi have become sexy.26
Mushrooms have been embraced as emblems of beauty and counter￾cultural cool in film and fashion, music, best-selling books, and inspi￾rational lectures. Art installations with mycological themes have in￾cluded giant mushrooms made from woven willow branches, living 
sculptures of heads grown from mycelia on wood chips and bristling 
with fruit bodies, and elaborate carvings and metalworks. Mushroom 
jewelry is very trendy too.
Ofer Grunwald, an Israeli artist, and his colleagues have created dot 
paintings with Aspergillus spores in tiny drops of agar jelly. Applied to 
sheets of glass, the drops form visible patterns when the spores germi￾nate into tiny mycelia that color each dot.27 Some of the designs are in￾fluenced by contemporary Australian Aboriginal art, and the participa￾tion of the fungi adds an extra dimension of individuality to every dot in 
the paintings. When the spherical spore of the mold germinates, its first 
thread can come from any point on its surface. The placement of the first 
branch to emerge from this hypha is similarly mutable, and the position 
of the second branch, and the branches from branches, so that within an 
hour of growth the tiny mycelia assume unique shapes in their drops. 
Although there is a high degree of predictability in the overall form of 
the growing fungus, its detailed geometry is a one-time creation. The 
colony is like a snowflake, whose precise details arise at one place 168 chapter 10
and time in the universe and will never occur again. (This not as impres￾sive as it sounds, perhaps, because nothing in biology is ever repeated. 
Even when cells and embryos have identical genes, they are unique in 
their physical minutiae.) Time-lapse photography captures the emer￾gence of shape and color in the dot paintings over two or three days. 
There is a sense in which the arrow of time is reversed in this act of 
creation: rather than destroying works of art, the molds make art in 
Grunwald’s hands by extracting energy from their jelly.
The creative impulse of the fungi is also expressed in vegan leather 
made from sheets of mycelia cultured in shallow trays and other fabrics 
produced by compressing blocks of mycelium grown on grains and 
wood chips. These materials have been crafted into handbags and cloth￾ing by famous designers and advertised as eco-alternatives to leather 
goods.28 Vegan leather has also been adopted by shoemakers, which 
reverses the mildewing of shoes by fungi to the manufacturing of shoes 
by fungi.
QUEER MYCOLOGY
As mycology follows this new phase of its evolution, superstitions 
about the fungi continue to influence opinions about their unimpor￾tance on one side and their overwhelming significance on the other. 
This continuum of responses runs from mycophobes who dislike 
everything fungal to fanatics who believe that fungi can save the planet. 
In this vein, Patricia Kaishian and Hasmik Djoulakian have proposed 
that mycology is harmed by pervasive mycophobia that can be under￾stood from the perspective of queerphobia: “Mycology is a science that, 
by its very nature, challenges paradigms and deconstructs norms. My￾cology disrupts our mostly binary conception of plants versus animals. . . .
Fungi are seen as poisonous, agents of disease, degenerate, deadly, 
freaky, gross, and weird—language historically leveled against both 
queer and disabled people—and as having no positive interrelation￾ships with their environment(s).”29 It is certainly true that fungi have 
suffered centuries of stereotyping that has burdened mycologists and 
inhibited progress in understanding their biology. Mycology has always Recycling 169
been a nonconformist field. Kaishian and Djoulakian suggest that, al￾though this has led many people to conclude that the fungi are “per￾verse and unworthy of formal investigation,” others have found their 
strangeness inspiring. This tension has created tight-knit groups of 
researchers who work outside the better-known scientific disciplines, 
but has also encouraged frustrating ideas about the supernatural pow￾ers of fungi as medicinal cure-alls and environmental saviors. It can be 
difficult for the real science of mycology to overcome these half-truths 
and falsehoods.
Changing perceptions of the fungi are palpable among professional 
biologists. For most of the previous century, articles on biodiversity in 
scientific journals guesstimated the number of animal and plant species 
and skipped the fungi. Plant ecologists went about their business as if 
fungi did not exist, or virtue-signaled in seminars by mentioning mycor￾rhizas, and there seemed no place for mycology in zoology. But today, 
the fungi are on full display in pyramids of species, often as fly agaric 
icons; mycorrhizas are part of general biological knowledge; and the gut 
mycobiome of every animal is being scrutinized. This level of awareness 
seemed out of reach when I began my research career. Like the parents 
of actors concerned about their children’s career choice, my dad was trou￾bled when I told him that I intended to specialize in mycology for my 
doctoral degree—enough to consult a mycologist who happened, con￾veniently, to have retired in our Oxfordshire village. This was C. T. In￾gold (1905–2010), a legendary figure in twentieth-century mycology 
who spent seventy years studying fungal spores.30
Ingold told dad that the study of fungi was an outstanding choice for 
a young scientist and that there would be dedicated departments of 
mycology in the universities before long. This was an overreach. The 
number of academic mycologists has actually declined since Ingold’s 
forecast, and mycology departments are as scarce as hen’s teeth.31 On 
the other hand, researchers specializing in the study of medical mycol￾ogy and plant diseases have attracted significant funding, and fungi are 
included in many areas of ecological research. And although they do not 
call themselves mycologists, yeast geneticists and biotechnologists who 
work with fungi are also employed in most research universities. As the 170 chapter 10
classical taxonomists who named and organized the fungi have retired, 
mycology has emerged from the dust of their herbaria. Mycology has 
evolved from the study of isolated species to the interactions between 
fungi and other organisms.
THE CONSCIOUS MYCOBIOME
The study of these interactions with the human body is brimming with 
possibilities because the science has so far to go and the life of the my￾cobiome is new to our consciousness. Most of the time we have no 
awareness of the activities of the mycobiome at all. Our trillions of cells 
go about their business, and the fungi go about theirs. We may wonder 
why our scalp is itchy and what makes us sneeze when we brush past a 
mildewed houseplant, but the fungi do not distract us from the to-do 
list for the day. There is an equity between the involuntary reactions of 
the body to the presence of fungi and the behavior of the yeasts and 
molds as they feed on the waxes of the scalp, snuffle around in the gut 
lining, and fight the immune system.32 We are complete coequals at the 
cellular level: fungal cells are every bit as perceptive and responsive as 
human cells.
The sensitivity of fungal cells is axiomatic. Hyphal filaments detect 
ridges on surfaces, grow around obstacles, and deploy a patch and repair 
system when they are injured. They react to confinement too, altering 
their growth rate, becoming narrower and branching less frequently. 
This allows them to adapt to the texture of the soil and the anatomy of 
plant and animal tissues as they push ahead and forage for food. Fungi 
also show evidence of learning and memory in experiments, responding 
to stress more effectively after training with a heat shock and growing 
in the direction where they found food in the past (see chapter 4). They 
are not thinking, in the sense that a brained animal thinks, but the fun￾damental mechanisms that allow a hypha to process information are the 
same as those at work in our bodies. Every thought in our lifetimes of 
thinking is processed by the billions of nerve cells in the brain and draws 
on cascades of reactions between proteins and other molecules. Every 
response of a fungal mycelium to its environment involves related Recycling 171
cascades of signaling molecules. The difference between thinking and 
reacting is a matter of scale rather than essence. How could it be any 
other way, when all life is made from cells?
Estimates of the density of hyphae in grassland suggest that there can 
be between 10 billion and 1 trillion hyphae in one cubic meter of soil, 
and as many as 130 trillion hyphal tips cultivated in the same volume of 
straw or sawdust. These numbers are comparable to the density of neu￾rons in the human brain, although nervous systems amplify their pro￾cessing power by forming synapses that allow each nerve cell to connect 
with thousands of neighbors. Despite the incredible numbers of hy￾phae, the potential for communication is probably limited to the slow 
passage of chemical signals, and the fungus is unlikely to be relaying 
anything other than “I’m hungry,” “I just found food,” and “Will you 
mate with me?” This covers most of human discourse too, of course, but 
you get the point. Fungi do not dream or dread.
Claiming any consciousness for the fungi is dangerous territory. 
There is an eager audience for fantastical tales about fungi, especially if 
they are stretched from a few scientific observations. The inner language 
of mushrooms is a particularly awkward proposal, derived from the 
analysis of electrical spikes measured by sticking electrodes into blocks 
of mycelia.33 The authors of this work concluded that the “complexity 
of fungal language is higher than that of human languages,” based on a 
published scale in which French was identified as the least sophisticated 
European tongue. There is an event horizon in mycological thinking 
that is crossed when enthusiasm and ego exceed experimental evidence. 
One wonders whether potatoes employ a dif­ferent syntax when their 
weak voltages are tapped to power LED clocks.
THE LUNAR EXTENSION OF THE MYCOBIOME
The interpretation of images of blobs on the surface of Mars from the 
Opportunity rover as puffballs and other mushrooms is a comparable 
flight of fancy.34 This discovery came too late for Terence McKenna, 
who would have seen confirmation of his declarations about fungal 
spores arriving on Earth from space (see chapter 9). By the time McKenna 172 chapter 10
developed his theory of cosmic migration, NASA had begun working 
in the other direction by transporting some of Earth’s mycology into
space. The Apollo missions extended the mycobiome to the Moon, 
when a dozen astronauts walked their fungi around on the lunar surface 
and left samples of the species from their guts along with urine and food 
wrappers in jettison bags. A photograph taken by Neil Armstrong dur￾ing the Apollo 11 mission shows one of these white bags dropped from 
the lander. With lunar temperatures ranging from boiling to deep freez￾ing, the bagged microbes are long dead, but their DNA will be readable 
if future visitors retrieve the Apollo refuse.35
Decades before the invention of the terms “microbiome” and “myco￾biome,” NASA scientists studied changes in the “fungal autoflora” of the 
astronauts on the Apollo 14 and Apollo 15 missions. Their interest in 
the microbiology of the body was way ahead of its time. The first meth￾ods for identifying bacteria and fungi from their DNA were not devel￾oped until the late 1970s, which limited the analysis of the astronaut 
mycobiome to identifying the fungi that could be grown from skin 
swabs and samples of astronaut feces. Filamentous fungi and yeasts 
were isolated from the swabs, and Candida yeasts were cultured from 
the fecal samples collected before, during, and after the missions.36 The 
most interesting observation was the loss of fungi during the space￾flights and on the lunar surface. The number of species declined in space 
because the astronauts ate sterilized food, and there were no fungi in 
space that could reinforce their surviving mycobiomes.
NASA has always expressed concerns about contaminating the rest 
of the solar system with our microorganisms, but they cannot be dis￾lodged from spacecraft. The problems begin with the assembly of space 
vehicles in cleanrooms.37 Bacteria and fungi dodge the best efforts to 
sterilize the air supply and materials carried into these facilities. The 
microbiomes of the engineers are another source of fresh contaminants. 
The spores of Aspergillus and other molds found in the cleanrooms must 
have bypassed the air filters, and Malassezia and Candida yeasts discov￾ered on surfaces probably originated on the workers. A rarified mixture of 
fungi persists on the International Space Station (ISS) in orbit, and some 
of them are expected to multiply in the absence of their earthbound Recycling 173
competitors in this closed environment.38 Experiments have demon￾strated the tenacity of some fungi subjected to high doses of ultraviolet 
radiation, but nothing can survive on the outside of spacecraft exposed 
to the desiccating vacuum of space and the cosmic rays that obliterate 
DNA. There are no mushrooms on Mars.
The fungi growing on the skin and in the guts of astronauts on the ISS 
change during the mission, with a significant increase in the abundance 
of Malassezia yeasts on the skin. This seems to be related to changes in 
the amount of sebum produced by astronauts in space.39 As the duration 
of space missions extends over years, the natural mixtures of microbes 
on the bodies of the astronauts are bound to disappear. Pathogens could 
prosper with the loss of species that normally keep them in check, and 
these anomalies are likely to be amplified by changes in the immune 
systems of the astronauts. Along with cosmic radiation, bone loss with￾out gravity, muscle atrophy, and psychological stress, the disruption of 
our fungi is a factor that may make human space exploration impossi￾ble.40 The good news is that we do not need rocket science to survive on 
Earth. We have everything we need biologically—other than the will to 
overcome the appalling selfishness of human nature. Appreciating the 
fungi is part of this terrestrial mission. This can begin with something as 
simple as looking at a mushroom—this beautiful oddity of nature—or 
inhaling the wondrous scent of a handful of rotting pine needles. There 
is so much beauty in this orgy of decomposition.
———
During our foray into the mycobiome we have encountered yeasts that 
live on the skin and a community of fungi roosting in the digestive sys￾tem. These permanent residents of the human-fungus symbiosis are 
joined by spores that cause allergies and invasive pathogens that pro￾duce lethal infections. As we have seen, we can also think of the exten￾sions of the mycobiome through our interactions with mushrooms that 
have fed and poisoned humans for millennia, and hallucinogenic spe￾cies that have aroused deep superstitions and inspired religions. Other 
cultural relationships with fungi include brewing and baking with yeast 174 chapter 10
and the use of filamentous fungi to ferment milk and make cheese. 
Rusts and smuts that ruin crops, and molds that spoil our harvests and 
homes, are part of the story too. These are examples of our partnership 
and competition with fungi throughout history and overlap with the 
modern engineering of yeasts and molds to produce life-saving drugs.
This is the story of the fungi near and far, which support the biosphere 
by forming mycorrhizas with plants, rotting the wastes of biology, en￾riching the soil, and purifying water. Life without fungi is impossible. 
There are as many of them living on the human body as there are stars in 
the Milky Way and, more importantly, they have a far greater influence 
on our lives than all but one of these galactic incinerators. They are every￾where and will outlive us by an eternity: in myco speramus.175
Appendix
GHOST GUT FUNGI
mycobiome research is challenging, and a lot of misinformation 
has made its way into published studies. The problems begin with the 
indirect nature of the experiments. We cannot watch the fungi as they 
make their way along the gut, and many of them will not grow in cul￾ture dishes when they are collected from samples of feces. The only 
option for studying our onboard fungi is to identify them from their 
DNA signatures. From the resulting species lists we can infer things 
about the activities of the fungi in the gut because we know, for ex￾ample, that one fungus digests fats and another consumes sugars, that 
this yeast can cope with low levels of oxygen, and its relative interferes 
with bacterial growth. At a time when identifying viruses using the 
polymerase chain reaction, or PCR, has become routine, analyzing 
fungi from their DNA might seem straightforward. But fungal ge￾nomes can be thousands of times bigger than viral genomes, which 
presents some technical difficulties, and there is another problem in 
separating the real gut fungi and signals from ghost gut fungi. Real gut 
fungi live in the gut or are ferried along in food; ghosts are cases of 
mistaken identification.
To make sense of the strings of As, Ts, Gs, and Cs amplified from fecal 
samples, investigators compare the sequences of fungi with reference 
DNA sequences associated with species catalog in online databases. 176 Appendix
This is called sequence alignment. Ghost fungi arise from fake strings 
of As, Ts, Gs, and Cs produced by faults in the sequencing process and 
from weak matches that come from using DNA sequences that are too 
short for an accurate reading. Additional problems can be traced to 
faulty databases in which 10 percent or more of the archived DNA se￾quences are linked to the wrong species names.1 For these reasons, the 
more reliable studies disregard the rarer matches to species whose se￾quences do not appear frequently in the samples and compare longer 
DNA sequences before concluding that a positive identification has 
been made.2
These technical errors are compounded by the lack of mycological 
training among the scientists scrutinizing the mycobiome. This has 
led to the publication of comical lists of species allegedly found in 
human feces that include toadstools that fruit from termite mounds, 
fungi that live inside eucalyptus trees, and tiny mushrooms that grow 
below the water in Argentinian lakes.3 The names of these ghost fungi 
come from real fungi found in nature whose DNA sequences overlap a 
little—just enough to be confusing—with the DNA sequences of fungi 
amplified from the fecal samples. I came across a particularly daft ex￾ample of this at a scientific conference when I spotted the name of a 
stinkhorn on a poster display about the infant mycobiome. The student 
presenting this work expressed no qualms when I suggested that this 
was an unlikely match. This stinkhorn, I explained, was a relative of a 
mushroom that looks like an erect penis and attracts carrion flies to its 
slime-covered tip. The presence of this fungus in the body was as im￾probable as finding a rhinoceros. He countered that he was simply re￾porting the data obtained from his computer search.4
Some of my colleagues may accuse me of duplicity here because I 
have criticized the work of taxonomists by writing about long-standing 
problems with the naming of fungal species.5 They have a point. If we 
abandon the practice of giving names to fungi, who is going to recognize 
that something is wrong with identifying a termite fungus or a stink￾horn in a mycobiome study? Having conceded this, it is essential to re￾main skeptical that fungi dubbed with the same Latin name belong to Appendix 177
the same species and behave in the same way. This is vital for clinical 
studies, because some versions or strains of the same “species” can have 
very dif­ferent effects on the human body than others. The diversity of 
the fungi is at once enthralling and frustrating.
A list of the fungal species identified correctly in a sample of feces 
comprises long-term symbionts that spend their lives inside us and tran￾sients relayed with recent meals. Most mycobiome studies report the 
relative abundance of the dif­ferent microbes. Pie charts are a good way 
to illustrate these results. When Candida albicans occupies a 70 percent 
wedge of the pie, this shows that seven of every ten strands of fungal 
DNA extracted from the sample came from this common yeast. Con￾tinuing with this hypothetical analysis, a 20 percent wedge might be 
occupied by Malassezia restricta (which also lives on the scalp), with the 
remaining 10 percent of the pie divided among a dozen rarer species. 
This pie chart shows that most of the mycobiome is populated by two 
fungi, which is interesting, but it does not tell us anything about the 
number of cells. In a depleted mycobiome with a total of a hundred 
million fungal cells, the relative abundance estimate in the example sug￾gests that 70 million Candida cells are present in the gut; in a richer 
mycobiome overflowing with 40 billion cells, there could be around 
30 billion cells of this omnipresent yeast. The pie chart showing relative 
abundance would look the same either way, and the missing informa￾tion on actual numbers could have significant health implications. Until 
recently, many studies have ignored this inadequacy and simply re￾ported relative abundance, but a growing number of investigators are 
taking the next step and measuring numbers using real-time PCR or 
qPCR, where the q stands for quantitative.
Traditional or old-school PCR measures the amount of DNA that 
has been amplified at the end of the PCR reactions. The Candida read￾ing in the example shows that 70 percent of the DNA at the end came 
from this fungus. In qPCR, the increase in DNA is measured as the 
cycles of the PCR reactions proceed.6 This means that the signal from 
Candida will increase swiftly in the early cycles because there are a lot 
of Candida cells containing Candida DNA at the beginning. The signals 178 Appendix
from the rare fungi build more slowly because there is so little starting 
material. In the qPCR method, the amplification of the DNA is moni￾tored using fluorescent dyes that bind to the DNA of the target species. 
To relate the intensity of the fluorescence to the number of cells, the 
same qPCR reactions are run on samples containing known numbers 
of fungal cells that have been grown in culture.179
Notes
CHAPTER ONE
1. Nicholas P. Money, Fungi: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2016). The fungal kingdom and the animal kingdom have been married in one of ten super￾groups of organisms, called the opisthokonts in modern biology. This uninspiring name refers 
to the arrangement of shared cell structures called cilia and should be replaced with a more 
evocative name: mycozoans would be better.
2. Candida is the Latin name of a genus of fungi that contains two hundred species of yeasts. 
It derives from candidus, meaning white, which is the color of the colonies of these yeasts dotted 
on a culture dish. Candida species have been found in Biscayne Bay, Florida; in deep-sea sediments 
beneath the turquoise waters of the Bahamas; in lakes and rivers in Brazil; and in grassland and 
agricultural soils. Candida grows on plants and inside the guts of insects, birds, and other animals. 
It is simpler to list the places where Candida is absent than to list its residences. The human my￾cobiome supports a half dozen species of Candida. Candida albicans is the dominant vaginal yeast 
and is the most frequent Candida species found in the gut and elsewhere in the body.
3. The interplay between fungi and bacteria in all ecosystems is a growing area of research: 
Aaron Robinson, Michal Babinski, Yan Xu, Julia Kelliher, Reid Longley, and Patrick Chain, “A 
Centralized Resource for Bacterial-Fungal Interactions Research,” Fungal Biology 127, no. 5 
(2023): 1005–1009.
4. Patrick M. Gillevet, Masoumeh Sikaroodi, and Albert P. Torzilli, “Analyzing Salt-Marsh 
Fungal Diversity: Comparing ARISA Fingerprinting with Clone Sequencing and Pyrosequenc￾ing,” Fungal Ecology 2, no. 4 (2009): 160–167.
5. Maonon Vignassa, Jean-Christophe Melle, Frédéric Chiroleu, Christian Soria, Charléne 
Leneveu-Jenvrin, Sabine Schorr-Galindo, and Marc Chillet, “Pineapple Mycobiome Related to 
Fruitlet Core Rot Occurrence and the Influence of Fungal Species Dispersion Patterns,” Journal 
of Fungi 7, no. 3 (2021): 175; Golam Rabbani, Danwei Huang, and Benjamin J. Wainwright, “The 
Mycobiome of Pocillopora acuta in Singapore,” Coral Reefs (2021), https://doi.org/10.1007
/s00338-021-02152-4; Luigimaria Borruso, Alice Checcucci, Valeria Torti, Federico Correa, 
Camillo Sandri, Daine Luise, Luciano Cavani, et al., “I Like the Way You Eat It: Lemur (Indri 
indri) Gut Mycobiome and Geophagy,” Microbial Ecology 82 (2021): 215–223.180 notes to chapter 1
6. Ibrahim Hamad, Mamadou B. Keita, Martine Peeters, Eric Delaporte, Didier Raoult, and 
Fadi Bittar, “Pathogenic Eukaryotes in Gut Microbiota of Western Lowland Gorillas as Revealed 
by Molecular Survey,” Scientific Reports 4 (2014): 6417; Alison E. Mann, Florent Mazel, Mat￾thew A. Lemay, Evan Morien, Vincent Billy, Martin Kowalewski, Anthiny Di Fiore, et al., 
“Biodiversity of Protists and Nematodes in the Wild Nonhuman Primate Gut,” ISME Journal
14, no. 2 (2020): 609–622; Ashok K. Sharma, Sam Davison, Barbora Pafčo, Jonathan B. Clayton, 
Jessica M. Rothman, Matthew R. McLennan, Marie Cibot, et al., “The Primate Gut Mycobiome￾Bacteriome Interface Is Impacted by Environmental and Subsistence Factors,” NPJ Biofilms and 
Microbiomes 8 (2022): 12.
7. James Cole, “Assessing the Calorific Significance of Episodes of Human Cannibalism 
in the Palaeolithic,” Scientific Reports 7 (2017): 44707. The body of an adult male weighing 66 
kilograms (146 pounds) contains an estimated 144,000 calories.
8. Ghee C. Lai, Tze G. Tan, and Norman Pavelka, “The Mammalian Mycobiome: A Complex 
System in a Dynamic Relationship with the Host,” WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine 11, no. 1 
(2019): e1438.
9. Lawrence A. David, Corinne F. Maurice, Rachel N. Carmody, David B. Gootenberg, 
Julie E. Button, Benjamin E. Wolfe, Alisha V. Ling, et al., “Diet Rapidly and Reproducibly Alters 
the Human Gut Microbiome,” Nature 505, no. 7484 (2014): 559–563.
10. The number of bacteria in the gut microbiome comes from Ron Sender, Shai Fuchs, and 
Ron Milo, “Revised Estimates for the Number of Human and Bacteria Cells in the Body,” PLoS 
Biology 14, no. 8 (2016): e1002533. Metagenomic analysis of fecal samples suggests that more 
than 99 percent of the DNA sequences come from bacteria, with the remaining sequences as￾sociated with archaea, viruses, and eukaryotes. Fungi are the most abundant of the eukaryotes 
in the gut, and we can come up with rough estimates of cell numbers from the relative abun￾dance of sequences, which varies from 0.03 to 0.1 percent of the total, corresponding to 11 to 38 
billion cells. This estimate is rounded to a maximum of 40 billion cells in the text. The mass, 
cumulative length, and surface area calculations for the cells are based on spherical bacteria and 
fungi with diameters of 1 μm and 4 μm, respectively. There is a good deal of wiggle room in these 
figures, but they serve as a useful order-of-magnitude guide to the scope of the mycobiome. The 
thousand-to-one ratio of bacteria to fungi in the microbiome (0.1 percent) appears in several 
studies, including the following review article: Tonya L. Ward, Dan Knights, and Cheryl A. 
Gale, “Infant Fungal Communities: Current Knowledge and Research Opportunities,” BMC 
Medicine 15 (2017): 30. The lower published estimate of 0.03 percent for the fungal abundance 
in the gut microbiome comes from Stephen J. Ott, Tanja Kühbacher, Meike Musfeldt, Philip 
Rosenstiel, Stephan Hellmig, Ateequr Rehman, Oliver Drews, et al., “Fungi and Inflammatory 
Bowel Diseases: Alterations of Composition and Diversity,” Scandinavian Journal of Gastroen￾terology 43, no. 7 (2008): 831–841. The gut surface area measurement was published in the same 
journal: Herbert F. Helander and Lars Fändriks, “Surface Area of the Digestive Tract—
Revisited,” Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology 49, no. 6 (2014): 681–689.
11. Indications that fungi play a relatively minor role in the gut microbiome come from re￾search showing that the gut mycobiome is monopolized by species delivered in our food, 
including yeasts in bread, and should not be classified as true colonizers: Thomas A. Auchtung, 
Tatiana Y. Fofanova, Christopher J. Stewart, Andrea K. Nash, Matthew C. Wong, Jonathan R. notes to chapter 1 181
Gesell, Jennifer M. Auchtung, et al., “Investigating Colonization of the Healthy Adult Gastro￾intestinal Tract by Fungi,” mSphere 3, no. 2 (2018): e00092-18. Thomas Auchtung and colleagues 
also found that frequent teeth cleaning reduced the levels of Candida albicans in the gut. Pre￾sumably, teeth cleaning removes this yeast from the mouth before it is swallowed, whereas 
people who are strangers to the toothbrush are more likely to harbor higher levels of Candida
in their digestive systems. An earlier study advised caution in interpreting metagenomic data 
on gut fungi because the techniques are so powerful that they identify species that are present 
in such low numbers that their biological effects must be negligible: Mallory J. Suhr and 
Heather E. Hallen-Adams, “The Human Gut Mycobiome: Pitfalls and Potentials—A Mycolo￾gist’s Perspective,” Mycologia 107, no. 6 (2015): 1057–1073.
12. Katarzyna B. Hooks and Maureen A. O’Malley, “Contrasting Strategies: Human Eukary￾otic versus Bacterial Microbiome Research,” Journal of Eukaryotic Microbiology 67, no. 2 (2020): 
279–295.
13. World Health Organization, WHO Fungal Priority Pathogens List to Guide Research, De￾velopment and Public Health Action (Geneva: World Health Organization, 2022), https://www
.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240060241.
14. Daniel B. DiGiulio, “Diversity of Microbes in Amniotic Fluid,” Seminars in Fetal and 
Neonatal Medicine 17, no. 1 (2012): 2–11.
15. Kent A. Willis, John H. Purvis, Erin D. Myers, Michael M. Aziz, Ibrahim Karabayir, 
Charles K. Gomes, Brian M. Peters, et al., “Fungi Form Interkingdom Microbial Communities 
in the Primordial Human Gut That Develop with Gestational Age,” FASEB Journal 33 (2019): 
12825–12837; Linda Wampach, Anna Heintz-Buschart, Angela Hogan, Emilie E. L. Muller, Sha￾man Narayanasamy, Cedric C. Laczny, Luisa W. Hugerth, et al., “Colonization and Succession 
within the Human Gut Microbiome by Archaea, Bacteria, and Microeukaryotes during the First 
Year of Life,” Frontiers in Microbiology 8 (2017): 738.
16. Matthew S. Payne and Sara Bayatibojakhi, “Exploring Preterm Birth as a Polymicrobial 
Disease: An Overview of the Uterine Microbiome,” Frontiers in Immunology 5 (2014): 595. Some 
studies have raised concerns about the formation of biofilms of Candida on IUDs: Francieli 
Chassot, Melyssa F. N. Negri, Arthur E. Svidzinski, Lucélia Donatti, Rosane M. Peralta, Terez￾inha I. E. Svidszinski, and Marcia E. Consalro, “Can Intrauterine Contraceptive Devices Be a 
Candida albicans Reservoir?,” Contraception 77, no. 5 (2008): 355–359. There is some evidence 
that the presence of an IUD throughout a pregnancy can boost the number of fungi in the 
amniotic fluid. In rare cases, amniocentesis can also introduce fungi and other microbes into 
the birth sac: Yohei Maki, Midori Fujisaki, Yuichiro Sato, and Hiroshi Sameshima, “Candida
Chorioamnionitis Leads to Preterm Birth and Adverse Fetal-Neonatal Outcome,” Infectious 
Diseases in Obstetrics and Gynecology 2017 (2017): 9060138.
17. Between the ages of one and six months, the average daily intake of breast milk is 750 
milliliters. One milliliter of breast milk contains 350,000 fungal cells: Alba Boix-Amorós, Cecilia 
Martínez-Costa, Amparo Querol, Maria C. Collado, and Alex Mira, “Multiple Approaches De￾tect the Presence of Fungi in Human Breastmilk Samples from Healthy Mothers,” Scientific 
Reports 7 (2017): 13016. This means that we gulp down more than two hundred million fungal 
cells per day in the first months of life. Similar numbers of bacteria were detected in an earlier 
analysis of breast milk samples: Alba Boix-Amorós, Maria  C. Collado, and Alex Mira, 182 notes to chapter 2
“Relationship between Milk Microbiota, Bacterial Load, Macronutrients, and Human Cells 
during Lactation,” Frontiers in Microbiology 7 (2016): 492.
18. Lisa J. Funkhouser and Seth R. Bordenstein, “Mom Knows Best: The Universality of 
Maternal Microbial Transmission,” PLoS Biology 11, no. 8 (2013): e1001631.
19. Michael Obladen, “Thrush—Nightmare of the Foundling Hospitals,” Neonatology 101, 
no. 3 (2012): 159–165; Thomas J. Walsh, Aspasia Katragkou, Tempe Chen, Christine M. Salva￾tore, and Emmanuel Roilides, “Invasive Candidiasis in Infants and Children: Recent Advances 
in Epidemiology, Diagnosis, and Treatment,” Journal of Fungi 5, no. 1 (2019): 11.
20. “Caesarean Section Rates Continue to Rise, amid Growing Inequalities in Access,” World 
Health Organization, June 16, 2021, https://www.who.int/news/item/16-06-2021-caesarean
-section-rates-continue-to-rise-amid-growing-inequalities-in-access-who. Live births by 
C-section vary, from less than 20 percent in Israel and Scandinavian countries to 45 percent in 
South Korea and more than half of all births in Turkey.
21. “Infant and Young Child Feeding,” UNICEF, last updated December 2022, https://data
.unicef.org/topic/nutrition/infant-and-young-child-feeding/#; “Breastfeeding,” Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention, accessed July 25, 2023, https://www.cdc.gov/breastfeeding
/index.htm.There is a lot of variation in the rate of breastfeeding across the United States, with 
more than two-thirds of babies in some states being breastfed for at least the first six months, 
declining to less than 40 percent of infants in Mississippi and Alabama.
22. Thomas A. Auchtung, Christopher J. Stewart, Daniel P. Smith, Eric W. Triplett, Daniel 
Agardh, William A. Hagopian, Anette G. Ziegler, et al., “Temporal Changes in Gastrointestinal 
Fungi and the Risk of Autoimmunity during Early Childhood: The TEDDY Study,” Nature 
Communications 13 (2022): 3151.
23. Lene Lange, Yuhong Huang, and Peter K. Busk, “Microbial Decomposition of Keratin 
in Nature—A New Hypothesis of Industrial Relevance,” Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology
100, no. 5 (2016): 2083–2096; Hermann Piepenbrink, “Two Examples of Biogenous Dead Bone 
Decomposition and Their Consequences for Taphonomic Interpretation,” Journal of Archaeo￾logical Science 13, no. 5 (1986): 417–430.
CHAPTER TWO
1. Katarzyna Polak-Witka, Lidia Rudnicka, Ulrike Blume-Peytavi, and Annika Vogt, “The 
Role of the Microbiome in Scalp Hair Follicle Biology and Disease,” Experimental Dermatology
29, no. 3 (2020): 286–294; Dong H. Park, Joo W. Kim, Hi-Joon Park, and Dae-Hyan Hahm, 
“Comparative Analysis of the Microbiome across the Gut-Skin Axis in Atopic Dermatitis,” In￾ternational Journal of Molecular Sciences 22 (2021): 4228.
2. This thought experiment begins with a size comparison of yeasts and humans. A yeast 
cell with a diameter of 4 × 10−6
 m (4 μm) has a cross-sectional area of 1.3 × 10−11 square meters 
(m2
). The floorspace occupied by a standing human with a modest allowance for arm move￾ment is 0.1 m2
, which is thirteen billion times larger than the outline of a yeast. One million 
yeasts growing in a one square centimeter patch of skin fill 13 percent of the available space. 
Crowded like yeasts, the current human population would occupy 1/0.13 × 8 × 109 × 0.1 m2 =
6.2 × 109
 m2 = 6,200 square kilometers, which equals the contiguous urbanized area of Los notes to chapter 2 183
Angeles. This density represents a five-hundred-fold increase in the current population of Los 
Angeles.
3. Robert L. Gallo, “Human Skin Is the Largest Epithelial Surface for Interaction with Mi￾crobes,” Journal of Investigative Dermatology 137, no. 6 (2017): 1213–1214. Gallo cites the widely 
accepted surface area estimates of 2 square meters (m2
) for the skin, 30 m2
 for the gut, and 50 m2
for the lungs. If we include the invaginations of the hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous 
glands, the epithelial surface of the skin increases to at least 30 m2
. A 140-by-70-centimeter bath 
towel has an area of 1 m2
.
4. The best estimates suggest that fewer than one hundred billion bacterial and fungal cells 
live on the skin, which compares with the estimated forty trillion occupants of the gut 
microbiome.
5. The highest levels of oxygen are found close to the wall of the gut, which is supplied by a 
rich system of blood vessels. Most of this oxygen is consumed by the microbiome and 
independent chemical reactions that keep the gut lumen anoxic: Elliot S. Friedman, Kyle Bit￾tinger, Tatiana V. Esipova, Likai Hou, Lillian Chau, Jack Jiang, Clementina Mesaros, et al., “Mi￾crobes vs. Chemistry in the Origin of the Anaerobic Gut Lumen,” Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA 115, no. 16 (2018): 4170–4175. Some bacteria can live with or without 
oxygen. They are called facultative anaerobes. Very few fungi have this flexibility, which means 
that fungal growth must be limited to locations next to the interior of the gut wall.
6. Hye K. Keum, Hanbyul Kim, Hye-Jin Kim, Taehun Park, Seoyung Kim, Susun An, and 
Woo J. Sul, “Structures of the Skin Microbiome and Mycobiome Depending on Skin Sensitiv￾ity,” Microorganisms 8, no. 7 (2020): 1032.
7. Zuzana Stehlikova, Martin Kostovcik, Klara Kostovcikova, Miloslav Kverka, Katernia Ju￾zlova, Filip Rob, Jana Hercogova, et al., “Dysbiosis of Skin Microbiota in Psoriatic Patients: 
Co-occurrence of Fungal and Bacterial Communities,” Frontiers in Microbiology 10 (2019): 438. 
Settled and well-defined communities of fungi are destabilized in cases of sensitive skin syn￾drome and psoriasis and replaced with dif­ferent collections of fungi on each patient. This is a 
mycological instance of the Anna Karenina principle, or AKP—namely, all happy mycobiomes 
are alike, but each unhappy mycobiome is unhappy after its own fashion. The AKP has been 
applied to science, politics, and economics, wherever it seems that there are more ways for the 
subject that is being examined to be unstable and dysfunctional than to be stable and functional. 
Microbiologists have found that about half of all diseases associated with changes to the com￾munities of microbes on the body follow the AKP: Jesse R. Zaneveld, Ryan McMinds, and Re￾becca Vega Thurber, “Stress and Stability: Applying the Anna Karenina Principle to Animal 
Microbiomes,” Nature Microbiology 2 (2017): 17121; Zhanshan S. Ma, “Testing the Anna Karenina 
Principle in Human Microbiome-Associated Diseases,” iScience 23, no. 4 (2020): 101007. The 
reason that variety rules the mycobiome in some illnesses and a single fungus emerges in others 
may come down to the role played by the fungi. According to this idea, the Anna Karenina princi￾ple applies when fungi respond to an illness rather than causing it to develop, and multiple species 
flare up as the tissue damage unfolds. See discussion of colon cancer in chapter 5.
8. Geoffrey C. Ainsworth, Introduction to the History of Medical and Veterinary Mycology
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1976).
9. Keith Liddell, “Skin Disease in Antiquity,” Clinical Medicine 6, no. 1 (2006): 81–86.184 notes to chapter 2
10. The translation of Suetonius, The Twelve Caesars, by Anthony S. Kline, explains that 
Augustus used the scraper very vigorously to relieve his itching. The standard translations con￾vey the false impression that the use of the scraper caused the skin blemishes, https://www
.poetryintranslation.com/PITBR/Latin/Suethome.php. The quote about Festus comes from 
the poet John Donne, who wrote a defense of suicide in 1608: Biathanatos, ed. M. Rudnick and 
M. Pabst Battin (New York: Garland, 1982), 66. The classical source for this story was the Roman 
poet Martial, who did not specify that Festus was suffering from ringworm: “o’er his very face 
crept black contagion.” This quote comes from Martial, Epigrams, vol. 1, ed. and trans. David R. 
Shackleton Bailey, Loeb Classical Library (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993), 
epigram 78, pp. 78–79. Donne’s sources are evaluated by Don C. Allen, “Donne’s Suicides,” MLN
56, no. 2 (1941): 129–133.
11. John Aubrey, The Natural History of Wiltshire: Written between 1656 and 1691, ed. J. Britton 
(London: J. B. Nichols, 1847), 37.
12. Ainsworth, Introduction, 4–5; Richard Owen, “On the Anatomy of the Flamingo 
(Phaenicopteris ruber, L.),” Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London 2 (1832): 141–145. The 
bird dissected by Owen had suffered from aspergillosis caused by a species of Aspergillus. The earli￾est report of human aspergillosis involved a sinus infection in a French soldier in the eighteenth 
century: M. Plaignaud, “Observation sur un Fongus du Sinus Maxillaire,” Journal de Chirurgie 
(Paris) (1791): 111–116. After several surgeries, the patient was cured with the use of a “branding 
iron introduced through the nose by means of a cannula. . . . The fungal growths, burnt to their 
root, never reappeared.” The fungus that caused pulmonary aspergillosis was described by John 
Hughes Bennett, a British physician working in Edinburgh, who examined sputum samples 
from infected patients: John H. Bennett, “XVII. On the Parasitic Vegetable Structures Found 
Growing in Living Animals,” Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 15, no. 2 (1844): 
277–294. Under the microscope, Bennett saw “the most beautiful and regular vegetable struc￾ture” of transparent tubes with “joints composed of distinct partitions . . . constricted like cer￾tain kinds of bamboo.” He also described “bead-like rows” of spores in the clinical samples. 
Infectious hyphae had been described in the previous century by William Arderon, who illus￾trated a freshwater roach whose tail was bristling with filaments: Ainsworth, Introduction, 3–4. 
This fish infection is caused by a microorganism classified as a water mold, rather than a fungus, 
and is known as saprolegniasis.
13. Editorial, “Robert Remak (1815–1865),” Journal of the American Medical Association 200, no. 6 
(1967): 550–551; Andrzej Grzybowski and Krzysztif Pietrzak, “Robert Remak (1815–1865): 
Discoverer of the Fungal Character of Dermatophytoses,” Clinical Dermatology 31, no. 6 (2013): 
802–805. Other pioneers in the study of fungal infections of the skin included Johannes Lukas 
Schönlein (1793–1864) and David Gruby (1810–1898). Schönlein was inspired by the work of Agos￾tino Bassi (1773–1856), who demonstrated that a fungus caused a disease of silkworms in the 1830s. 
Bassi was the first scientist to show that a microorganism could cause a disease in an animal.
14. Brian  P. Hanley, William Bains, and George Church, “Review of Scientific Self￾Experimentation: Ethics History, Regulation, Scenarios, and Views among Ethics Committees 
and Prominent Scientists,” Rejuvenation Research 22, no. 1 (2019): 31–42. Experiments on gonor￾rhea and syphilis were performed in the eighteenth century by a British surgeon, John Hunter. 
Hunter may have inoculated one or more of his patients with infected pus rather than himself, notes to chapter 2 185
which would have been criminal as well as unethical: George Qvist, “John Hunter’s Alleged 
Syphilis,” Annals of the Royal College of Surgeons of England 59, no. 3 (1977): 206–209.
15. Most ringworm infections in humans are caused by species of Trichophyton. These are 
classified in a family of ascomycete fungi called the Arthrodermataceae. Trichophyton rubrum
is the commonest cause of tinea corporis. Trichophyton violaceum is a very close relative that 
causes hair and scalp infections. Other species include Trichophyton mentagrophytes, which in￾fects humans when it is transferred from dogs, cats, and other pets. Skin infections are also 
caused by species of Epidermophyton, Microsporum, and Nanizzia, which belong to the same 
family as Trichophyton. Readers interested in exploring the taxonomy of these fungi should 
consult the following sources: G. Sybren de Hoog, Karoline Dukik, Michel Monod, Ann 
Packeu, Dirk Stubbe, Marijke Hendrickx, Christiane Kupsch, et al., “Toward a Novel Multilocus 
Phylogenetic Taxonomy for the Dermatophytes,” Mycopathologia 182, nos. 1–2 (2017): 5–31; 
P. Zhan, K. Dukik, D. Li, J. Sun, J. B. Stielow, B. Gerrits van den Ende, B. Brankovics, et al., 
“Phylogeny of Dermatophytes with Genomic Character Evaluation of Clinically Distinct 
Trichophyton rubrum and T. violaceum,” Studies in Mycology 89 (2018): 153–175.
16. Brian B. Adams, “Tinea Corporis Gladiatorum,” Journal of the American Academy of Der￾matology 47, no. 2 (2002): 286–290; D. M. Poisson, D. Rousseau, D. Defo, and E. Estève, “Out￾break of Tinea Corporis Gladiatorum, a Fungal Skin Infection Due to Trichophyton tonsurans, 
in a French High Level Judo Team,” Eurosurveillance 10, no. 9 (2005): 562.
17. Felix Bongomin, Sara Gago, Rita O. Oladele, and David W. Denning, “Global and Multi￾National Prevalence of Fungal Diseases—Estimate Precision,” Journal of Fungi 3 (2017): 57.
18. J. N. Moto, J. M. Maingi, and A. K. Nyamache, “Prevalence of Tinea Capitis in School 
Going Children from Mathare, Informal Settlement in Nairobi, Kenya,” BMC Research Notes 8 
(2015): 274.
19. Josephine Dogo, Seniyat L. Afegbua, and Edward C. Dung, “Prevalence of Tinea Capitis 
Among School Children in Nok Community of Kaduna State, Nigeria,” Journal of Pathogens
(2016): 9601717.
20. A. K. Gupta and R. C. Summerbell, “Tinea Capitis,” Medical Mycology 38, no. 4 (2000): 
255–287.
21. Morris Gleich, “Thallium Acetate Poisoning in the Treatment of Ringworm of the Scalp: 
Report of Two Cases,” JAMA 97, no. 12 (1931): 851. In his paper, Gleich referred to the deaths of 
fourteen children in an orphanage in Grenada, Spain, who received an accidental overdose 
of thallium acetate for ringworm in 1930. A year after the publication of Gleich’s paper, a British 
dermatologist endorsed the continued use of rat poison for treating ringworm: John T. Ingram, 
“Thallium Acetate in the Treatment of Ringworm of the Scalp,” British Medical Journal 1, no. 3704 
(1932): 8–10. Ingram wrote, “There is no serious evidence against the use of thallium acetate . . .
[t]hough toxic symptoms may occasionally be encountered, they are seldom severe, and the 
patient invariably recovers,” which was not very reassuring.
22. Anonymous, “‘X’ Rays as a Depilatory,” The Lancet 147, no. 3793 (1896): 1296.
23. S. Cochrane Shanks, “Thallium Treatment of Ringworm,” British Medical Journal 1 (1932): 121.
24. Rebecca Herzig, “The Matter of Race in Histories of American Technology,” in Technol￾ogy and the African-American Experience: Needs and Opportunities for Study, ed. Bruce Sinclair 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2004), 179–180.186 notes to chapter 2
25. Roy E. Shore, Miriam Moseson, Naomi Harley, and Bernard S. Pasternack, “Tumors and 
Other Diseases Following Childhood X-Ray Treatment for Ringworm of the Scalp (Tinea ca￾pitis),” Health Physics 85, no. 4 (2003): 404–408.
26. Liat Hoffer, Shifra Shvarts, and Dorit Segal-Engelchin, “Hair Loss Due to Scalp Ring￾worm Irradiation in Childhood: Health and Psychosocial Risks for Women,” Israel Journal of 
Health Policy Research 9 (2020): 34.
27. Esther Segal and Daniel Elad, “Human and Zoonotic Dermatophytoses: Epidemiological 
Aspects,” Frontiers in Microbiology 12 (2021): 713532. Geophilic mycoses are caused by fungi that 
come from an external source in the environment like soil or decomposing plant material.
28. Andriana M. Celis Ramírez, Adolfo Amézquita, Juliana E. C. Cardona Jaramillo, Luisa F. 
Matiz-Cerón, Juan S. Andrade-Martínez, Sergio Triana, Maria J. Mantilla, et al., “Analysis of 
Malassezia Lipidome Disclosed Differences among the Species and Reveals Presence of Un￾usual Yeast Lipids,” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 10 (2020): 338. Parasitic wasps 
that lay their eggs on caterpillars have followed the same evolutionary path as Malassezia and 
extract their fatty acids from their hosts.
29. Minji Park, Yong-Joon Cho, Yang W. Lee, and Won H. Jung, “Understanding the Mecha￾nism of Action of the Anti-Dandruff Agent Zinc Pyrithione against Malassezia restricta,” Scien￾tific Reports 8 (2018): 12086.
30. Hee K. Park, Myung-Ho Ha, Sang-Gue Park, Myeung N. Kim, Beom J. Kim, and W. Kim, 
“Characterization of the Fungal Microbiota (Mycobiome) in Healthy and Dandruff-Afflicted 
Human Scalps,” PLoS ONE 7, no. 2 (2012): e32847.
31. Diana M. Proctor, Thelma Dangana, D. Joseph Sexton, Christine Fukuda, Rachel D. Yelin, 
Mary Stanley, Pamela B. Bell, et al., “Integrated Genomic, Epidemiologic Investigation of 
Candida auris Skin Colonization in a Skilled Nursing Facility,” Nature Medicine 27 (2021): 
1401–1409.
32. Suhail Ahmad and Wadha Alfouzan, “Candida auris: Epidemiology, Diagnosis, Patho￾genesis, Antifungal Susceptibility, and Infection Control Measures to Combat the Spread of 
Infections in Healthcare Facilities,” Microorganisms 9 (2021): 807.
33. Nancy A. Chow, José F. Muñoz, Lalitha Gade, Elizabeth L. Berkow, Xiao Li, Rory M. 
Welsh, Kaitlin Forsberg, et al., “Tracing the Evolutionary History and Global Expansion of 
Candida auris Using Population Genomic Analyses,” mBio 11, no. 2 (2020): e03364-19.
34. Path Arora, Prerna Singh, Yue Wang, Anamika Yadav, Kalpana Pawar, Ashtosh Singh, 
Gadi Padmavati, et al., “Environmental Isolation of Candida auris from the Coastal Wetlands of 
Andaman Islands, India,” mBio 12, no. 2 (2021): e03181-20.
35. Arturo Casadevall, Dimitrios P. Kontoyiannis, and Vincent Robert, “On the Emergence 
of Candida auris: Climate Change, Azoles, Swamps, and Birds,” mBio 10, no. 4 (2019): e01397-19; 
Brendan R. Jackson, Nancy Chow, Kaitlin Forsberg, Anastasia P. Litvintseva, Shawn R. Lock￾hart, Rory Welsh, Snigdha Vallabhaneni, et al., “On the Origins of a Species: What Might Ex￾plain the Rise of Candida auris?,” Journal of Fungi 5, no. 3 (2019): 58. The putative link between 
an increasing number of fungal infections and the warming climate has entered popular con￾sciousness with the help of an HBO drama screened in 2023 called The Last of Us. The television 
series was referenced in an opinion article in the New York Times: Neil Vora, “‘The Last of Us’ 
Is Right: Our Warming Planet Is a Petri Dish,” New York Times, April 6, 2023. For information notes to chapter 2 187
on mesophiles, see Sarah C. Watkinson, Lynne Boddy, and Nicholas P. Money, The Fungi, 3rd ed. 
(Amsterdam: Academic Press, 2016), 173–174. Changes in rainfall and other weather patterns 
rather than temperature may be more important in the spread of mycoses in some regions: 
Anil A. Panackal, “Global Climate Change and Infectious Diseases: Invasive Mycoses,” Journal 
of Earth Science and Climate Change 1 (2011): 108.
36. Ewa Ksiezopolska and Toni Gabaldón, “Evolutionary Emergence of Drug Resistance in 
Candida Opportunistic Pathogens,” Genes 9, no. 9 (2018): 461.
37. Lise N. Jørgensen and Thies M. Heick, “Azole Use in Agriculture, Horticulture, and 
Wood Preservation—Is It Indispensable?,” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 11 
(2021): 730297; Paul E. Verweij, Maiken C. Arendrup, Ana Alastruey-Izquierdo, Jeremy A. W. 
Gold, Shawn R. Lockhart, Tom Chiller, and P. Lewis White, “Dual Use of Antifungals in Medi￾cine and Agriculture: How Do We Help Prevent Resistance Developing in Human Pathogens?,” 
Drug Resistance Updates 65 (2022): 100885.
38. Ron Pinhasi, Boris Gasparian, Gregory Areshian, Diana Zardaryan, Alexia Smith, Guy 
Bar-Oz, and Thomas Higham, “First Direct Evidence of Chalcolithic Footwear from the Near 
Eastern Highlands,” PLoS ONE 5, no. 6 (2010): e10984.
39. Contact lens solutions keep the eye clean with hydrogen peroxide, which works as a 
general disinfectant, and other compounds with more specific antimicrobial properties. The 
combination of natural cleansing and contact lens solutions works fine unless the cleaning fluids 
become contaminated with fungi. This is what happened in the United States in 2005 and 2006, 
when an outbreak of fungal keratitis affected 130 patients. One-third of the patients suffered eye 
damage that was serious enough to require corneal transplants. The CDC traced these cases to 
batches of contact lens solution manufactured by Bausch and Lomb, Inc., and legal settlements 
to victims have cost the company an estimated $1 billion. The fungus that caused this eye damage 
was a species of Fusarium, which normally grows on plants. Its spores must have landed in the 
lens solution during manufacture. Fungal keratitis continues to be a problem for wearers who 
are not careful to wash their lenses with fresh cleaning solutions. Y. Wang, H. Chen, T. Xia, and 
Y. Huang, “Characterization of Fungal Microbiota on Normal Ocular Surface of Humans,” Clinical 
Microbiology and Infection 26, no. 1 (2020): 123.e9–123.e13; Sisinthy Shivaji, Rajagopalaboopathi 
Jayasudha, Gumpili S. Prashanthi, Kotakonda Arunasri, and Taraprasad Das, “Fungi of the 
Human Eye: Culture to Mycobiome,” Experimental Eye Research 217 (2022): 108968; Arthur B. 
Epstein, “In the Aftermath of the Fusarium Keratitis Outbreak: What Have We Learned?,” Clinical 
Ophthalmology 1, no. 4 (2007): 355–366.
40. A description of mycetoma of the foot in the three-thousand-year-old Indian Athar￾vaveda is the oldest record of a human mycosis; Ainsworth, Introduction, 1–2. Readers interested 
in this disease should consult Henry Vandyke Carter’s book based on his observations in Bom￾bay, where he served with the Indian Medical Service: On Mycetoma; Or, the Fungus Disease of 
India (London: J. & A. Churchill, 1874). Carter was the illustrator of Gray’s Anatomy, and his 
hand-colored drawings of ferocious foot infections in On Mycetoma make this a collector’s item.
41. Kristina Killgrove, Thomas Böni, and Francesco M. Galassi, “A Possible Case of Myce￾toma in Ancient Rome (Italy, 2nd–3rd Centuries AD),” https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/2vjxk.
42. Bikash R. Behera, Sanjib Mishra, Manmath K. Dhir, Rabi N. Panda, and Sagarika Sa￾mantaray, “‘Madura Head’—A Rare Case of Craniocerebral Maduromycosis,” Indian Journal of 188 notes to chapter 3
Neurosurgery 7 (2018): 159–163. Madura hand is another rare presentation of this mycosis: 
K. Rahman, M. Naim, and M. Farooqui, “Mycetoma of Hand—An Unusual Presentation,” Internet 
Journal of Dermatology 8, no. 1 (2009), https://ispub.com/IJD/8/1/4863.
43. Rosane Orofino-Costa, Priscila M. de Macedo, Anderson M. Rodrigues, and Andréa 
R. Bernardes-Engemann, “Sporotrichosis: An Update on Epidemiology, Etiopathogenesis, 
Laboratory and Clinical Therapeutics,” Anais Brasileiros de Dermatologia 92, no. 5 (2017): 
606–620. Roses have prickles rather than thorns, so the infection mechanism for sporotricho￾sis involves a prickle prick rather than thorn prick, if we insist on the correct botanical defini￾tions. Sporotrichosis is another example of a zoonotic mycosis that can be spread to humans 
from their pet cats.
44. Yvonne Gräser, Janine Fröhlich, Wolfgang Presber, and Sybren de Hoog, “Microsatellite 
Markers Reveal Geographic Population Differentiation in Trichophyton rubrum,” Journal of 
Medical Microbiology 56, no. 8 (2007): 1058–1065; P. Zhan, K. Dukik, D. Li, J. Sun, J. B. Stielow, 
B. Gerrits van den Ende, B. Brankovics, et al., “Phylogeny of Dermatophytes with Genomic 
Character Evaluation of Clinically Distinct Trichophyton rubrum and T. violaceum,” Studies in 
Mycology 89 (2018): 153–175.
45. “Athlete’s Foot (Tinea Pedis) Treatment Market to Reach US$1.7 Bn by End of 2027,” 
PharmiWeb.com, April 1, 2021, https://www.pharmiweb.com/press-release/2021-04-01/athlete
-s-foot-tinea-pedis-treatment-market-to-reach-us-17-bn-by-end-of-2027.
CHAPTER THREE
1. My modest contributions to experimental mycology represent an extension of the 
pioneering studies on fungal spores by A. H. R. Buller (1874–1944) and Philip Gregory (1907–
1986). Buller was the Einstein of mycology, and Gregory is known as the father of modern 
aerobiology, which is the study of spores and other airborne biological particles. Like me, Buller 
and Gregory suffered from asthma. By developing methods for measuring the concentrations 
of airborne spores, Gregory and his colleagues were responsible for drawing attention to fungi 
as a cause of allergy: Philip H. Gregory and John M. Hirst, “Possible Role of Basidiospores as 
Air-borne Allergens,” Nature 170 (1952): 414. Asthma is not a qualification for spending decades 
studying spores. After all, one of the most influential mycologists of the twentieth century, C. T. 
Ingold (1905–2010), had no breathing issues, published papers on spores over a span of seventy 
years, and lived to the age of 104.
2. Alex Sakula, “Sir John Floyer’s A Treatise of the Asthma (1698),” Thorax 39, no. 4 (1984): 
248–254.
3. A spherical spore with a diameter 4 µm has a volume of 3.4 × 10−17 m3
; 100,000 of these 
spores occupy a space of 3.4 × 10−12 m3
. If these spores are dispersed evenly in one cubic meter 
of air, each spore will sail in a volume of air that is three hundred billion times larger than itself.
4. The inhalation of four hundred liters of air per hour (or 0.4 m3
), with an average spore 
concentration of five thousand spores per cubic meter, over a lifespan of seventy-nine years, 
exposes the individual to 1.4 billion spores: 5,000 m−3 × 0.4 m3 × 24 × 365 × 79 = 1.4 × 109
 spores. 
The total volume of these spores, based on the volume of the individual spore (calculated from 
note 3 above), equals 1.4 × 109 × 3.4 × 10−17 m3 = 4.8 × 10−8
 m3 = 4.8 × 10−5
 L = 0.05 mL. The density notes to chapter 3 189
of a spore is close to water, so the estimated mass of spores inhaled over a lifetime is 0.05 g or 
50 milligrams, which is a bit lighter than a garden pea.
5. Paul Klenerman, an immunologist from the University of Oxford, provides a nice intro￾duction to immunology: The Immune System: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford: Oxford Uni￾versity Press, 2018). The authoritative source on allergy is a weighty, two-volume book: A. Wesley 
Burks, Stephen T. Holgate, Robyn E. O’Hehir, David H. Broide, Leonard B. Bacharier, Gurjit K. 
Khurana Hershey, and R. Stokes Peebles, Middleton’s Allergy: Principles and Practice, 9th ed. 
(Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2020).
6. Immunoglobulin E (IgE) is the antibody that plays a vital role in type I hypersensitivity 
reactions found in asthma and other allergic diseases. IgE is also a component of the immune 
reaction against parasitic worms. There is growing evidence that the innate immune system is 
also involved in asthma: Stephen T. Holgate, “Innate and Adaptive Immune Responses in 
Asthma,” Nature Medicine 18 (2012): 673–683.
7. William E. Steavenson, Spasmodic Asthma: A Thesis for the M.B. Degree of the University of 
Cambridge (Cambridge: Deighton, Bell & Co., 1879).
8. Anon., “Obituary: William Edward Steavenson, M.D. Cantab., M.R.C.P.,” British Medical 
Journal ( June 6, 1891): 1261–1262. He died from influenza and bronchitis. Bronchitis is the most 
common complication of influenza. It is an inflammatory illness like asthma and shares the 
same type of antibody response involving immunoglobulin E (IgE): Christopher E. Brightling, 
“Chronic Cough Due to Nonasthmatic Eosinophilic Bronchitis: ACCP Evidence-Based Clini￾cal Practice Guidelines,” Chest 129, no. 1 suppl. (2006): 116S–121S.
9. Kathryn J. Waite, “Blackley and the Development of Hay Fever as a Disease of Civilization 
in the Nineteenth Century,” Medical History 39, no. 2 (1995): 186–196.
10. David W. Denning, B. Ronan O’Driscoll, Cory M. Hogaboam, Paul Bowyer, and 
Robert M. Niven, “The Link between Fungi and Severe Asthma: A Summary of the Evi￾dence,” European Respiratory Journal 27, no. 2 (2006): 615–626; Gavin Dabrera, Virginia Mur￾ray, Jean Emberlin, Jonathan G. Ayres, Christopher Collier, Yoland Clewlow, and Patrick 
Sachon, “Thunderstorm Asthma: An Overview of the Evidence Base and Implications for 
Public Health Advice,” Quarterly Journal of Medicine 106, no. 3 (2013): 207–217. The phenom￾enon of fungal-induced thunderstorm asthma was not recognized until 1983, when an asthma 
“epidemic” in Birmingham was linked to high levels of spores associated with a storm: G. E. 
Packe, P. S. Archer, and Jon G. Ayres, “Asthma and the Weather,” The Lancet 322, no. 8344 
(1983): 281; H. Morrow Brown and Felicity Jackson, “Asthma and the Weather,” The Lancet
322, no. 8350 (1983): 630.
11. The grow and blow model was originally proposed for the dispersal of the fungus Coc￾cidioides, but seems likely to apply to other species: James D. Tamerius and Andrew C. Comrie, 
“Coccidioidomycosis Incidence in Arizona Predicted by Seasonal Precipitation,” PLoS ONE 6, 
no. 6 (2011): e21009.
12. Agnieszka Grinn-Gofroń and Agnieszka Strzelczak, “Changes in Concentration of Alter￾naria and Cladosporium Spores during Summer Storms,” International Journal of Biometeorology
57, no. 5 (2013): 759–768; Ajay Kevat, “Thunderstorm Asthma: Looking Back and Looking 
Forward,” Journal of Asthma and Allergy 13 (2020): 293–299; Nur S. Idrose, Shyamali C. Dharmage, 
Adrian J. Lowe, Katrina A. Lambert, Caroline J. Lodge, Michael J. Abramson, Jo A. Douglass, 190 notes to chapter 3
et al., “A Systematic Review of the Role of Grass Pollen and Fungi in Thunderstorm Asthma,” 
Environmental Research 181 (2020): 108911.
13. Mark Jackson, Asthma: The Biography (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009). Jackson 
is concerned with the social history of asthma rather than the science, but mention of fungal 
spores would not have been amiss.
14. Morell Mackensie, Hay Fever and Paroxysmal Sneezing, 4th ed. (London: J. & A. Churchill, 
1887), 10.
15. Erich Wittkower and M. D. Berlin, “Studies in Hay-Fever Patients (the Allergic Personal￾ity),” Journal of Mental Science 84 (1938): 352–369. This paper was specific in its study of hay fever, 
as a seasonal allergy, but the wider concept of “the allergic personality” embraces the psycho￾logical characteristics of asthma patients.
16. Renee D. Goodwin, “Toward Improving Our Understanding of the Link between Mental 
Health, Lung Function, and Asthma Diagnosis. The Challenge of Asthma Measurement,” 
American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 194, no. 11 (2016): 1313–1315.
17. Nicholas P. Money, Carpet Monsters and Killer Spores: A Natural History of Toxic Mold
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
18. Cornelia Witthauer, Andrew T. Gloster, Andrea H. Meyer, and Roselind Lieb, “Physical 
Diseases among Persons with Obsessive Compulsive Symptoms and Disorder: A General 
Population Study,” Social Psychiatry and Psychiatric Epidemiology 49, no. 12 (2014): 2013–2022.
19. O. P. Sharma, “Marcel Proust (1871–1922): Reassessment of His Asthma and Other Mala￾dies,” European Respiratory Journal 15, no. 5 (2000): 958–960. Proust wrote much of his In Search of 
Lost Time in a cork-lined bedroom in Paris in an attempt to escape his invisible airborne enemies.
20. Paul Bowyer, Marcin Fraczek, and David W. Denning, “Comparative Genomics of Fun￾gal Allergens and Epitopes Shows Widespread Distribution of Closely Related Allergen and 
Epitope Orthologues,” BMC Genomics 7 (2006): 251; Viswanath P. Kurup and Banani Banerjee, 
“Fungal Allergens and Peptide Epitopes,” Peptides 21, no. 4 (2000): 589–599.
21. Noah W. Palm, Rachel K. Rosenstein, and Ruslan Medzhitov, “Allergic Host Defences,” 
Nature 484 (2012): 465–472; Michael Gross, “Why Did Evolution Give Us Allergies?,” Current 
Biology 25, no. 2 (2015): R53–55; Alvaro Daschner and Juan González Fernández, “Allergy in an 
Evolutionary Framework,” Journal of Molecular Evolution 88, no. 1 (2020): 66–76.
22. Grain silos packed with moldy barley create dense clouds of spores when they are un￾loaded, with one study showing a peak concentration of one billion spores per cubic meter of 
air: John Lacey, “The Microbiology of Moist Barley Storage in Unsealed Silos,” Annals of Applied 
Biology 69, no. 3 (1971): 187–212. Sampling of the airborne dust during cereal harvesting in 
Lincolnshire in the 1970s showed a peak concentration of two hundred million spores per cubic 
meter of air: C. S. Darke, J. Knowelden, J. Lacey, and A. Milford Ward, “Respiratory Disease 
of Workers Harvesting Grain,” Thorax 31, no. 2 (1976): 294–302. Twenty three percent of the 
farm workers in this study reported symptoms of wheezing and other respiratory complaints, 
but the remaining 77 percent of employees said that they were symptom-free. A similar spore 
count was recorded from a Swedish storehouse filled with wood chips used for fuel: Göran 
Blomquist, Gunnar Ström, and Lars-Helge Strömquist, “Sampling of High Concentrations of 
Airborne Fungi,” Scandinavian Journal of Work, Environment, and Health 10, no. 2 (1984): 109–113. 
Other records of high spore concentrations include measurements of 128 million spores per notes to chapter 3 191
cubic meter of air in a Portuguese cork factory, forty million spores per cubic meter in Finnish 
cow barns, and twenty million spores per cubic meter in Norwegian sawmills: John Lacey, “The 
Air Spora of a Portuguese Cork Factory,” Annals of Occupational Hygiene 16, no. 3 (1973): 223–
230; Rauno Hanhela, Kyösti Louhelainen, and Anna-Liisa Pasanen, “Prevalence of Microfungi 
in Finnish Cow Barns and Some Aspects of the Occurrence of Wallemia sebi and Fusaria,” Scan￾dinavian Journal of Work, Environment, and Health 21, no. 3 (1994): 223–228; Wijnand Eduard, 
Per Sandven, and Finn Levy, “Exposure and IgG Antibodies to Mold Spores in Wood Trimmers: 
Exposure–Response Relationships with Respiratory Symptoms,” Applied Occupational and 
Environmental Hygiene 9, no. 1 (1995): 44–48. A ten-year follow-up study of the workers exposed 
to the phenomenal levels of spores in the Norwegian sawmills found no evidence of long-term 
health effects: Karl Færden, May B. Lund, Trond M. Aaløkken, Wijnand Eduard, Per Søstrand, 
Sverre Langård, and Johny Kongerud, “Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis in a Cluster of Sawmill 
Workers: A 10-Year Follow-Up of Exposure, Symptoms, and Lung Function,” International Jour￾nal of Occupational and Environmental Health 20, no. 2 (2014): 167–173. The use of dust masks 
has become routine since the original study of sawmills. The Guinness World Records refers to a 
global all-time record concentration of 194 million spores per cubic meter of air that was 
measured in Wales, but I have been unable to track down the source of this measurement: 
https://www.guinnessworldrecords.com/world-records/450409-largest-fungal-spore-count.
23. Lisa A. Reynolds and B. Brett Finlay, “Early Life Factors That Affect Allergy Develop￾ment,” Nature Reviews Immunology 17, no. 8 (2017): 518–528; B. Campbell, C. Raherison, C. J. 
Lodge, A. J. Lowe, T. Gislason, J. Heinrich, J. Sunyer, et al., “The Effects of Growing Up on a 
Farm on Adult Lung Function and Allergic Phenotypes: An International Population-Based 
Study,” Thorax 72, no. 3 (2017): 236–244.
24. Andrew H. Liu, “Revisiting the Hygiene Hypothesis for Allergy and Asthma,” Journal of 
Allergy and Clinical Immunology 136, no. 4 (2015): 860–865.
25. Money, Carpet Monsters.
26. Indoor molds seem to blossom in the vacuum created by the removal of the bacteria: 
Laura-Isobel McCall, Chris Callewaert, Qiyun Zhu, Se J. Song, Amina Bouslimani, Jeremiah J. 
Minich, Madeline Ernst, et al., “Home Chemical and Microbial Transitions across Urbaniza￾tion,” Nature Microbiology 5, no. 1 (2020): 108–115.
27. My parents tried this remedy for me without success. The dust mite allergen is described 
by Andy Chevigné and Alain Jacquet, “Emerging Roles of the Protease Allergen Der p 1 in 
House Dust Mite–Induced Airway Inflammation,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology
142, no. 2 (2018): 398–400. Allergen avoidance as an asthma treatment is addressed by E. M. 
Rick, K. Woolnough, C. H. Pashley, and A. J. Wardlaw, “Allergic Fungal Airway Disease,” Journal 
of Investigational Allergology and Clinical Immunology 26, no. 6 (2016): 344–354.
28. Keigo Kainuma, Akihiko Terada, Reiko Tokuda, Mizhuo Nagao, Nobuo Kubo, and 
Takao Fujisawa, “Wearing a Mask during Sleep Improved Asthma Control in Children,” Journal 
of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 131 (2013): AB4; Barbara J. Polivka, Kamal Eldeirawi, Luz 
Huntington-Moskos, and Sharmilee M. Nyenhuis, “Mask Use Experiences, COVID-19, and 
Adults with Asthma: A Mixed-Methods Approach,” Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology: 
In Practice 10, no. 1 (2022): 116–123. Face masks appear to be effective in reducing the symptoms 
of allergic rhinitis: Erdem Mengi, Cüneyt Orhan Kara, Uğur Alptürk, and Bülent Topuz, “The 192 notes to chapter 3
Effect of Face Mask Usage on the Allergic Rhinitis Symptoms in Patients with Pollen Allergy 
during the Covid-19 Pandemic,” American Journal of Otolaryngology 43, no. 1 (2022): 103206.
29. Eric K. Chu and Jeffrey M. Drazen, “Asthma: One Hundred Years of Treatment and On￾ward,” American Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine 171, no. 11 (2005): 1202–1208.
30. Sheldon G. Cohen, “Asthma among the Famous: Roger E. C. Altounyan (1922–1987) 
British Physician and Pharmacologist,” Allergy and Asthma Proceedings 19, no. 5 (1998): 328–332; 
Jack Howell, “Roger Altounyan and the Discovery of Cromolyn (Sodium Cromoglycate),” 
Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology 115, no. 4 (2005): 882–885.
31. Teresa To, Sanja Stanojevic, Ginette Moores, Andrea S. Gershon, Eric D. Bateman, Al￾varo A. Cruz, and Louis-Phillipe Boulet, “Global Asthma Prevalence in Adults: Findings from 
the Cross-Sectional World Health Survey,” BMC Public Health 12 (2012): 204; I. Asher and 
N. Pearce, “Global Burden of Asthma among Children,” International Journal of Tuberculosis and 
Lung Disease 18, no. 11 (2014): 1269–1278.
32. Elizabeth H. Tham, Evelyn X. L. Loo, Yanan Zhu, and Lynette P.-C. Shek, “Effects of 
Migration on Allergic Diseases,” International Archives of Allergy and Immunology 178 (2019): 
128–140. Born in Birmingham, A. H. R. Buller (see note 1 above) escaped his asthma on the 
Canadian Prairies when he moved to Winnipeg in 1904 to found the Department of Botany at 
the University of Manitoba. He wrote that, “so far as the number of microorganisms is con￾cerned, the climate of Central Canada during the winter must be one of the best in any civilised 
country in the world”: Arthur H. R. Buller, and Charles W. Lowe, “Upon the Number of 
Micro-organisms in the Air of Winnipeg,” Transactions of the Royal Society of Canada, ser. 3, 4 
(1910): 41–58.
33. Daniel L. Hamilos, “Allergic Fungal Rhinitis and Rhinosinusitis,” Proceedings of the Ameri￾can Thoracic Society 7, no. 3 (2010): 245–252; Peter Small, Paul K. Keith, and Harold Kim, “Al￾lergic Rhinitis,” Allergy, Asthma, and Clinical Immunology 14, suppl. 2 (2018): 51.
34. Ulrich Costabel, Yasunari Miyazaki, Annie Pardo, Dirk Koschel, Francesco Bonella, 
Paolo Spagnolo, Josune Guzman, et al., “Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis,” Nature Reviews Disease 
Primers 6, no. 1 (2020): 65; J. Davidson, J. McErlane, K. Aljboor, S. L. Barratt, A. Jeyabalan, 
A. R. L. Medford, A. M. Borman, and H. Adamali, “Musical Instruments, Fungal Spores and 
Hypersensitivity Pneumonitis,” QJM 112, no. 4 (2019): 287–289.
35. Bibek Paudel, Theodore Chu, Meng Chen, Vanitha Sampath, Mary Prunicki, and Kari C. 
Nadeau, “Increased Duration of Pollen and Mold Exposure Are Linked to Climate Change,” 
Scientific Reports 11 (2021): 12816.
36. Michael R. Knowles and Richard C. Boucher, “Mucus Clearance as a Primary Innate 
Defense Mechanism for Mammalian Airways,” Journal of Clinical Investigation 109, no. 5 (2002): 
571–577; Ximena Bustamante-Marin and Lawrence E. Ostrowski, “Cilia and Mucociliary Clear￾ance,” Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 9, no. 4 (2017): a028241.
37. Avani R. Patel, Amar R. Patel, Shivank Singh, Shantanu Singh, and Imran Khawaja, 
“Treating Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis: A Review,” Cureus 11, no. 4 (2019): e4538; 
Avani R. Patel, Amar R. Patel, Shivank Singh, Shantanu Singh, and Imran Khawaja, “Diagnosing 
Allergic Bronchopulmonary Aspergillosis: A Review,” Cureus 11, no. 4 (2019): e4550.
38. Aaron S. Miller and Robert W. Wilmott, “The Pulmonary Mycoses,” in Kendig’s Disorders 
of the Respiratory Tract in Children, 9th ed., ed. Robert W. Wilmott, Andrew Bush, Robin R. notes to chapter 4 193
Deterding, Felix Ratjen, Peter Sly, Heather J. Zar, and Albert P. Li (Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2019), 
507–527e3.
39. Pamela P. Lee and Yu-Lung Lau, “Cellular and Molecular Defects Underlying Invasive 
Fungal Infections—Revelations from Endemic Mycoses,” Frontiers in Immunology 8 (2017): 735.
40. Russell E. Lewis and Dimitrios P. Kontoyiannis, “Invasive Aspergillosis in Glucocorticoid￾Treated Patients,” Medical Mycology 47, suppl. 1 (2009): S271–S281.
41. Tobias Lahmer, Silja Kriescher, Alexander Herner, Kathrin Rothe, Christoph D. Spinner, 
Jochen Schneider, Ulrich Mayer, et al., “Invasive Pulmonary Aspergillosis in Critically Ill Pa￾tients with Severe COVID-19 Pneumonia: Results from the Prospective AspCOVID-19 Study,” 
PLoS ONE 16, no. 3 (2021): e0238825.
42. Shawn R. Lockhart, Mitsuru Toda, Kaitlin Benedict, Diego H. Caceres, and Anastasia P. 
Litvintseva, “Endemic and Other Dimorphic Mycoses in the Americas,” Journal of Fungi 7 
(2021): 151.
43. L. F. Shubitz, C. D. Butkiewicz, S. M. Dial, and C. P. Lindan, “Incidence of Coccidioides
Infection among Dogs Residing in a Region in Which the Organism Is Endemic,” Journal of the 
American Veterinary Medical Association 226, no. 11 (2005): 1846–1850.
44. The numbers are taken from Felix Bongomin, Sara Gago, Rita O. Oladele, and 
David W. Denning, “Global and Multi-National Prevalence of Fungal Diseases—Estimate 
Precision,” Journal of Fungi 3 (2017): 57, which also serves as a useful source of data for other 
chapters.
45. “Fungal Diseases: Blastomycosis,” CDC, accessed July 15, 2023, https://www.cdc.gov
/fungal/diseases/blastomycosis/index.html; Katrina Thompson, Alana K. Sterkel, and Erin G. 
Brooks, “Blastomycosis in Wisconsin: Beyond the Outbreaks,” Academic Forensic Pathology 7, 
no. 1 (2017): 119–129; Keith Matheny, “Fungal Infection Outbreak Affects 90+ Workers at Es￾canaba Paper Mill,” Detroit Free Press, April 8, 2023.
46. P. Lewis White, Jessica S. Price, and Matthijs Backx, “Pneumocystis jirovecii Pneumonia: 
Epidemiology, Clinical Manifestation and Diagnosis,” Current Fungal Infection Reports 13 (2019): 
260–273; Gilles Nevez, Philippe M. Hauser, and Solène Le Gal, “Pneumocystis jirovecii,” Trends 
in Microbiology 28, no. 12 (2020): 1034–1035; R. Benson Weyant, Dima Kabbani, Karen Doucette, 
Cecilia Lau, and Carlos Cervera, “Pneumocystis jirovecii: A Review with a Focus on Prevention 
and Treatment,” Expert Opinion on Pharmacotherapy 22, no. 12 (2021): 1579–1592.
CHAPTER FOUR
1. Alon Tal, Pollution in a Promised Land: An Environmental History of Israel (Berkeley: Uni￾versity of California Press, 2002), 1–4.
2. Sandra C. Signore, Christoph P. Dohm, Gunter Schütze, Mathias Bähr, and Pawel Kermer, 
“Scedosporium apiospermum Brain Abscesses in a Patient after Near-Drowning—A Case Report 
with 10-Year Follow-Up and a Review of the Literature,” Medical Mycology Case Reports 17 
(2017): 17–19.
3. P. Hartmann, A. Ramseier, F. Gudat, M. J. Mihatsch, W. Polasek, and C. Geisenhoff, “Das 
Normgewicht des Gehirns beim Erwachsenen in Abhängigkeit von Alter, Geschlecht, Körper￾größe und Gewicht,” Pathologe 15 (1994): 165–170.194 notes to chapter 4
4. Karoll J. Cortez, Emmanuel Roilides, Flavio Quiroz-Telles, Joseph Meletiadis, Charalam￾pos Antachopoulos, Tena Knudsen, Wendy Buchanan, et al., “Infections Caused by Scedospo￾rium spp.,” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 21, no. 1 (2008): 157–197.
5. P. A. Kowacs, C. E. Soares Silvado, S. Monteiro de Almeida, M. Ramos, K. Abrão, L. E. 
Madaloso, R. L. Pinheiro, et al., “Infection of the CNS by Scedosporium apiospermum after Near 
Drowning: Report of a Fatal Case and Analysis of Its Confounding Factors,” Journal of Clinical 
Pathology 57 (2004): 205–207.
6. “Stop Neglecting Fungi,” Nature Microbiology 2 (2017): 17120.
7. Felix Bongomin, Sara Gago, Rita O. Oladele, and David W. Denning, “Global and Multi￾National Prevalence of Fungal Diseases—Estimate Precision,” Journal of Fungi 3, no. 4 (2017): 57.
8. The fungus Pneumocystis jirovecii causes pneumocystis pneumonia in AIDS patients (see 
chapter 3).
9. “Fungal Disease: C. neoformans Infection Statistics,” CDC, accessed July 15, 2023, https://
www.cdc.gov/fungal/diseases/cryptococcosis-neoformans/statistics.html.
10. Priority for the claim that all fungi are opportunists seems to lie with Raymond Van￾breuseghem (1909–1993), who was a mycologist at the Institute for Tropical Medicine in 
Antwerp: R. Vanbreuseghem and C. de Vroey, “Systemic Opportunistic Fungal Infections,” 
Postgraduate Medical Journal 55 (1979): 593–594.
11. Anuradha Chowdhary, Shallu Kathuria, Kshitij Agarwal, and Jacques F. Meis, “Recogniz￾ing Filamentous Basidiomycetes as Agents of Human Disease: A Review,” Medical Mycology 52, 
no. 8 (2014): 782–797.
12. C. Correa-Martinez, A. Brentrup, K. Hess, K. Becker, A. H. Groll, and F. Schaumburg, 
“First Description of a Local Coprinopsis cinerea Skin and Soft Tissue Infection,” New Microbes 
and New Infections 21 (2018): 102–104.
13. Erin L. Greer, Todd J. Kowalski, Monica L. Cole, Dylan V. Miller, and Larry M. Baddour, 
“Truffle’s Revenge: A Pig-Eating Fungus,” Cardiovascular Pathology 17, no. 5 (2008): 342–343.
14. Adela Enache-Angoulvant and Christophe Hennequin, “Invasive Saccharomyces Infection: 
A Comprehensive Review,” Clinical Infectious Diseases 41, no. 11 (2005): 1559–1568. A strain of 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae that is used as a probiotic is implicated in many cases. Some yeast special￾ists regard this as a dif­ferent species called Saccharomyces boulardii, although the distinction be￾tween species and strains is a matter of opinion rather than science in this instance. Rare cases of 
invasive disease caused by ordinary yeast strains used in baking have also been reported.
15. Arturo Casadevall and Liise-anne Pirofski, “The Damage-Response Framework of Mi￾crobial Pathogenesis,” Nature Reviews Microbiology 1, no. 1 (2003): 17–24; Mary A. Jabra-Rizk, 
Eric F. Kong, Christina Tsui, M. Hong Nguyen, Cornelius J. Clancy, Paul L. Fidel, and Mairi 
Noverr, “Candida albicans Pathogenesis: Fitting within the Host-Microbe Damage Response 
Framework,” Infection and Immunity 84, no. 10 (2016): 2724–2739; Antonis Rokas, “Evolution 
of the Human Pathogenic Lifestyle in Fungi,” Nature Microbiology 7, no. 5 (2022): 607–619.
16. Arturo Casadevall, “Determinants of Virulence in the Pathogenic Fungi,” Fungal Biology 
Reviews 21, no. 4 (2007): 130–132; Cene Gostinčar, Janja Zajc, Metka Lenassi, Ana Plemenitaš, 
Sybren de Hoog, Abdullah M. S. Al-Hatmi, and Nina Gunde-Cimerman, “Fungi between Ex￾tremotolerance and Opportunistic Pathogenicity on Humans,” Fungal Diversity 93 (2018): 
195–213.notes to chapter 4 195
17. One of the fungi blackened with melanin that causes impromptu brain infections has 
another complicated Latin name: this is Cladophialophora bantiana. To begin pronouncing 
Latin names of species you should speak the syllables out loud, clay-doe-fi-al- and so on, slowly 
at first, then repeat the chain faster and you will soon sound as seductive as a Roman bard. 
Cladophialophora is a soil fungus with a global distribution that forms lovely velvety colonies 
when it is grown in a culture dish. This fungus is especially worrying because it infects people 
with intact immune systems and kills about 70 percent of its victims. Early symptoms of infec￾tion include headaches, seizure, arm pain, and ataxia—or loss of muscle coordination. The 
fungus produces chains of spores that become airborne, and so we assume that it gets into us 
through the lungs or nasal passages. We have no idea why this ubiquitous fungus infects a tiny 
fraction of the people who must come in contact with its spores all the time. Studies on the 
immune systems of patients suggest that they may have an underlying vulnerability that would 
not be noticed if they had not been diagnosed with this fungus, but that is all we know. Treatments 
are limited to the surgical removal of infected tissue and use of powerful antifungal drugs, but 
the high mortality figures speak for themselves. This is a very unpleasant fungus: Todd P. Levin, 
Darric E. Baty, Thomas Fekete, Allan L. Truant, and Byungse Suh, “Cladophialophora bantiana
Brain Abscess in a Solid-Organ Transplant Recipient: Case Report and Review of the Litera￾ture,” Journal of Clinical Microbiology 42, no. 9 (2004): 4374–4378; Jon Velasco and Sanjay Re￾vankar, “CNS Infections Caused by Brown-Black Fungi,” Journal of Fungi 5, no. 3 (2019): 60.
18. Patient-to-patient transmission of pneumocystis pneumonia seems to be an exception 
among the mycoses (see chapter 3).
19. Emily Monosson, Blight: Fungi and the Coming Pandemic (New York: W. W. Norton, 
2023).
20. Synnecrosis means dying together: José P. Veiga, “Commensalism, Amensalism, and 
Synnecrosis,” in The Encyclopedia of Evolutionary Biology, vol. 1, ed. Richard M. Kliman (Oxford: 
Academic Press, 2016), 322–328. All biology is a battle, bellum omnium contra omnes, as Hobbes 
said. There is no generosity in nature, only nightmares in the making, as I say on rare occasions 
when the charms of the fungi fail to sweeten my view of life.
21. Peter G. Pappas, “Cryptococcal Infections in Non-HIV-Infected Patients,” Transactions 
of the American Clinical and Climatological Association 124 (2013): 61–79.
22. Judith N. Steenbergen, Howard Shuman, and Arturo Casadevall, “Cryptococcus neofor￾mans Interactions with Amoebae Suggest an Explanation for Its Virulence and Intracellular 
Pathogenic Strategy in Macrophages,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 98, 
no. 26 (2001): 15245–15250; Rhys A. Watkins, Alexandre Andrews, Charlotte Wynn, Caroline 
Barisch, Jason S. King, and Simon A. Johnston, “Cryptococcus neoformans Escape from Dictyo￾stelium Amoeba by Both WASH-Mediated Constitutive Exocytosis and Vomocytosis,” Frontiers 
in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 8 (2018): 108.
23. Liliana Scorzoni, Ana C. A. de Paula e Silva, Caroline M. Marcos, Patricia A. Assato, 
Wanessa C. M. A. de Melo, Haroldo C. de Oliveira, Caroline B. Costa-Orlandi, et al., “Antifungal 
Therapy: New Advances in the Understanding and Treatment of Mycosis,” Frontiers in Micro￾biology 8 (2017): 36.
24. “Fungal Disease: C. neoformans Infection,” CDC, accessed July 15, 2023, https://www.cdc
.gov/fungal/diseases/cryptococcosis-neoformans/index.html; World Health Organization, 196 notes to chapter 4
WHO Fungal Priority Pathogens List to Guide Research, Development and Public Health Action
(Geneva: World Health Organization, 2022); Abbygail C. Spencer, Katelyn R. Brubaker, and 
Sylvie Garneau-Tsodikova, “Systemic Fungal Infections: A Pharmacist/Researcher Perspective,” 
Fungal Biology Reviews 44 (2023): 100293. A relative of Cryptococcus neoformans called Cryptococ￾cus gattii also causes serious brain infections and is proficient at doing so in people with perfectly 
healthy immune systems: Lamin Saidykhan, Chinaemerem U. Onyishi, and Robert C. May, 
“The Cryptococcus gattii Species Complex: Unique Pathogenic Yeasts with Understudied Viru￾lence Mechanisms,” PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases 16, no. 12 (2022): e0010916.
25. Dimitrios P. Kontoyiannis, Hongbo Yang, Jinlin Song, Sneha S. Kelkar, Xi Yang, Nkechi 
Azie, Rachel Harrington, et al., “Prevalence, Clinical and Economic Burden of Mucormycosis￾Related Hospitalizations in the United States: A Retrospective Study,” BMC Infectious Diseases
16 (2016): 730.
26. Sylvia Slaughter, “Love Endures in the Face of Sorrow,” The Tennessean, January 12, 2003, 
pp. 6–13.
27. Mahnoor Sukaina, “Re-Emergence of Mucormycosis in COVID-19 Recovered Patients 
Transiting from Silent Threat to an Epidemic in India,” JoGHR 5 (2021): e2021067; Neil Stone, 
Nitin Gypta, and Ilan Schwartz, “Mucormycosis: Time to Address This Deadly Fungal Infec￾tion,” Lancet Microbe 2, no. 8 (2021): e343–e344.
28. Jana M. Ritter, Atis Muehlenbachs, Dianna M. Blau, Christopher D. Paddock, Wun-Ju 
Shieh, Clifton P. Drew, Brigid C. Batten, et al., “Exserohilum Infections Associated with Con￾taminated Steroid Injections: A Clinicopathologic Review of 40 Cases,” American Journal of 
Pathology 183, no. 3 (2013): 881–892.
29. Diana Pisa, Ruth Alonso, Alberto Rábano, Izaskun Rodal, and Luis Carrasco, “Dif­ferent 
Brain Regions Are Infected with Fungi in Alzheimer’s Disease,” Scientific Reports 5 (2015): 15015; 
Ruth Alonso, Diana Pisa, Ana M. Fernández-Fernández, and Luis Carrasco, “Infection of Fungi 
and Bacteria in Brain Tissue from Elderly Persons and Patients with Alzheimer’s Disease,” Fron￾tiers in Aging Neuroscience 10 (2018): 159.
30. Bodo Parady, “Innate Immune and Fungal Model of Alzheimer’s Disease,” Journal of Alz￾heimer’s Disease Reports 2, no. 1 (2018): 139–152; Yifan Wu, S. Du, J. L. Johnson, H.-Y. Tung, C. T. 
Landers, Y. Liu, B. G. Seman, et al., “Microglia and Amyloid Precursor Protein Coordinate Control 
of Transient Candida Cerebritis with Memory Deficits,” Nature Communications 10 (2019): 58.
31. Kelly Servick, doi:10.1126/science.aaw0147; R. C. Roberts, C. B. Farmer, and C. K. Walker, 
“The Human Brain Microbiome: There Are Bacteria in Our Brains!,” paper presented at the 
Neuroscience 2018 Conference, November 6, https://www.abstractsonline.com/pp8/#!/4649
/presentation/32057.
32. Ruth Alonso, Diana Pisa, Ana Fernández-Fernández, Alberto Rábano, and Luis Carrasco, 
“Fungal Infection in Neural Tissue of Patients with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis,” Neurobiol￾ogy of Disease 108 (2018): 249–260.
33. Diana Pisa, Ruth Alonso, and Luis Carrasco, “Parkinson’s Disease: A Comprehensive 
Analysis of Fungi and Bacteria in Brain Tissue,” International Journal of Biology Sciences 16, no. 7 
(2020): 1135–1152.
34. Mary Duenwald, “Parkinson’s ‘Clusters’ Getting a Closer Look,” New York Times, May 14, 
2002.notes to chapter 5 197
CHAPTER FIVE
1. Yang Sun, Tao Zuo, Chun P. Cheung, Wenxi Gu, Yating Wan, Fen Zhang, Nan Chen, et al., 
“Population-Level Configurations of Gut Mycobiome across 6 Ethnicities in Urban and Rural 
China,” Gastroenterology 160, no. 1 (2021): 272–286.
2. The Candida species in the Chinese study was Candida dubliniensis. This gut fungus, dis￾covered in Ireland in the 1990s, has a global distribution.
3. Emily A. Speakman, Ivy M. Dambuza, Fabián Salazar, and Gordon D. Brown, “T Cell 
Antifungal Immunity and the Role of C-Type Lectin Receptors,” Trends in Immunology 41, no. 1 
(2020): 61–76.
4. Lu Wu, Tiansheng Zeng, Massimo Deligios, Luciano Milanesi, Morgan G. I. Langille, 
Angelo Zinellu, Salvatore Rubino, et al., “Age-Related Variation of Bacterial and Fungal Com￾munities in Dif­ferent Body Habitats across the Young, Elderly, and Centenarians in Sardinia,” 
mSphere 5, no. 1 (2020): e00558-19.
5. Andrea K. Nash, Thomas A. Auchtung, Matthew C. Wong, Daniel P. Smith, Jonathan R. 
Gesell, Matthew C. Ross, Christopher J. Stewart, et al., “The Gut Mycobiome of the Human 
Microbiome Project Healthy Cohort,” Microbiome 5, no. 1 (2017): 153.
6. Mubanga H. Kabwe, Surendra Vikram, Khodani Mulaudzi, Janet K. Jansson, and Thu￾lani P. Makhalanyane, “The Gut Mycobiota of Rural and Urban Individuals Is Shaped by Geog￾raphy,” BMC Microbiology 20, no. 1 (2020): 257.
7. Eric van Tilburg Bernardes, Veronika K. Pettersen, Mackensie W. Gutierrez, Isabelle 
Laforest-Lapointe, Nicholas G. Jendzjowsky, Jean-Baptiste Cavin, Fernando A. Vicentini, 
et al., “Intestinal Fungi Are Causally Implicated in Microbiome Assembly and Immune De￾velopment in Mice,” Nature Communications 11, no. 1 (2020): 2577; Tahliyah S. Mims, Qusai A. 
Abdallah, Justin D. Stewart, Sydney P. Watts, Catrina T. White, Thomas V. Rousselle, Ankush 
Gosain, et al., “The Gut Mycobiome of Healthy Mice Is Shaped by the Environment and 
Correlates with Metabolic Outcomes in Response to Diet,” Communications Biology 4, no. 1 
(2021): 281.
8. Katherine D. Mueller, Hao Zhang, Christian R. Serrano, R. Blake Billmyre, Eun Y. Huh, 
Philipp Wiemann, Nancy P. Keller, et al., “Gastrointestinal Microbiota Alteration Induced by 
Mucor circinelloides in a Murine Model,” Journal of Microbiology 57, no. 6 (2019): 509–520.
9. M. Mar Rodríguez, Daniel Pérez, Felipe J. Chaves, Eduardo Esteve, Pablo Marin-Garcia, 
Gemma Xifra, Joan Vendrell, et al., “Obesity Changes the Human Gut Mycobiome,” Scientific 
Reports 5 (2015): 14600.
10. William D. Fiers, Iris H. Gao, and Iliyan D. Iliev, “Gut Mycobiota Under Scrutiny: Fungal 
Symbionts or Environmental Transients?,” Current Opinion in Microbiology 50 (2019): 79–86.
11. Mario Matijašić, Tomislav Meštrović, Hana Čipčić Paljetak, Mihaela Perić, Anja Barešić, 
and Donatella Verbanac, “Gut Microbiota beyond Bacteria—Mycobiome, Virome, Archaeome, 
and Eukaryotic Parasites in IBD,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 21 (2020): 2668; 
Umang Jain, Aaron M. Ver Heul, Shanshan Xiong, Martin H. Gregory, Elora G. Demers, Jus￾tin T. Kern, Chin-Wen Lai, et al., “Debaryomyces Is Enriched in Crohn’s Disease Intestinal Tissue 
and Impairs Healing in Mice,” Science 371 (2021): 1154–1159. There has been a lot of interest in a 
putative link between antibodies called ASCAs produced in response to proteins in the cell wall 198 notes to chapter 5
of baker’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and the development of Crohn’s disease: Heba N. Is￾kandar and Matthew A. Ciorba, “Biomarkers in Inflammatory Bowel Disease: Current Practices 
and Recent Advances,” Translational Research 159, no. 4 (2012): 313–325. Some research shows 
that although these antibodies play a role in gut inflammation they are not correlated with the 
consumption of the dietary yeast in baked foods and beer: Anne S. Kvehaugen, Martin Aas￾brenn, and Per G. Farup, “Anti-Saccharomyces cerevisiae Antibodies (ASCA) Are Associated with 
Body Fat Mass and Systemic Inflammation, But Not with Dietary Yeast Consumption: A Cross￾Sectional Study,” BMC Obesity 4 (2017): 28.
12. Irina Leonardi, Sudarshan Paramsothy, Itai Doron, Alexa Semon, Nadeem O. Kaakoush, 
Jose C. Clemente, Jeremiah J. Faith, et al., “Fungal Trans-Kingdom Dynamics Linked to Re￾sponsiveness to Fecal Microbiota Transplantation (FMT) Therapy in Ulcerative Colitis,” Cell 
Host and Microbe 27, no. 5 (2020): 823–829.
13. Arthur C. Macedo, André O. V. de Faria, and Pietro Ghezzi, “Boosting the Immune 
System, from Science to Myth: Analysis [of] the Infosphere with Google,” Frontiers in Medicine
6 (2019): 165.
14. Yao Zuo, Hui Zhan, Fen Zhang, Qin Liu, Eugene Y. K. Tso, Grace C. Y. Lui, Nan Chen, 
et al., “Alterations in Fecal Fungal Microbiome of Patients with COVID-19 during Time of 
Hospitalization until Discharge,” Gastroenterology 159, no. 4 (2020): 1302–1310.
15. Bing Zhai, Mihaela Ola, Thierry Rolling, Nicholas L. Tosini, Sar Joshowitz, Eric R. 
Littmann, Luigi A. Amoretti, et al., “High-Resolution Mycobiota Analysis Reveals Dynamic 
Intestinal Translocation Preceding Invasive Candidiasis,” Nature Medicine 26 (2020): 59–64; 
Bastian Seelbinder, Jiarui Chen, Sasha Brunke, Ruben Vazquez-Uribe, Rakesh Santhaman, 
Anne-Christin Meyer, Felipe Senne de Oliveira Lino, et al., “Antibiotics Create a Shift from 
Mutualism to Competition in Human Gut Communities with a Longer-Lasting Impact on 
Fungi Than Bacteria,” Microbiome 8 (2020): 133.
16. Sara Botschuijver, Guus Roeselers, Evgeni Levin, Daisy M. Jonkers, Olaf Welting, Sig￾rid E. M. Heinsbroek, Heleen H. de Weerd, et al., “Intestinal Fungal Dysbiosis Is Associated 
with Visceral Hypersensitivity in Patients with Irritable Bowel Syndrome and Rats,” Gastroen￾terology 153, no. 4 (2017): 1026–1039.
17. Natalia Vallianou, Dimitris Kounatidis, Gerasimos Socrates Christodoulatos [such a great 
name that I had to waive the citation style of middle name initial only], Fotis Panagopoulos, 
Irene Karampela, and Maria Dalamaga, “Mycobiome and Cancer: What Is the Evidence?,” Can￾cers 13 (2021): 3149.
18. Berk Aykut, Smruit Pushalkar, Ruonan Chen, Qianhao Li, Raquel Abengozar, Jacque￾line I. Kim, Sorin A. Shadaloey, et al., “The Fungal Mycobiome Promotes Pancreatic Oncogen￾esis via Activation of MBL,” Nature 574 (2019): 264–267; Jessica R. Galloway-Peña and Dimi￾trios  P. Kontoyiannis, “The Gut Mycobiome: The Overlooked Constituent of Clinical 
Outcomes and Treatment Complications in Patients with Cancer and Other Immunosuppres￾sive Conditions,” PLoS Pathogens 16, no. 4 (2020): e1008353; Lian Narunsky-Haziza, Gregory D. 
Sepich-Poore, Ilana Livyatan, Omer Asraf, Cameron Martino, Deborah Nejman, Nancy Gavert, 
et al., “Pan-Cancer Analyses Reveal Cancer-Type-Specific Fungal Ecologies and Bacteriome 
Interactions,” Cell 185, no. 20 (2022): 3789–3806; Anders B. Dohlman, Jared Klug, Marissa 
Mesko, Iris  H. Gao, Steven  M. Lipkin, Xiling Shen, and Iliyan  D. Iliev, “A Pan-Cancer notes to chapter 5 199
Mycobiome Analysis Reveals Fungal Involvement in Gastrointestinal and Lung Tumors,” Cell
185, no. 20 (2022): 3807–3822.
19. Nicholas P. Money, “Hyphal and Mycelial Consciousness: The Concept of the Fungal 
Mind,” Fungal Biology 125 (2021): 257–259.
20. Ecologists use the term ecotype to describe a population of a species of plant or animal 
that is adapted to a local environment. An ecotype is a variant within a species. Mycotype is used 
in a dif­ferent way to describe a community of fungi that is identified by the presence of single 
species of fungus. Enterotype is another term used to distinguish between dif­ferent versions of 
the gut microbiome based on their bacterial composition.
21. B. P. Krom, S. Kidwai, and J. M. Ten Cate, “Candida and Other Fungal Species: Forgotten 
Players of Healthy Oral Microbiota,” Journal of Dental Research 93, no. 5 (2014): 445–451; B. Y. 
Hong, A. Hoare, A. Cardenas, A. K. Dupuy, L. Choquette, A. L. Salner, P. K. Schauer, et al., “The 
Salivary Mycobiome Contains 2 Ecologically Distinct Mycotypes,” Journal of Dental Research
99, no. 6 (2020): 730–738.
22. M. N. Zakaria, M. Furuta, T. Takeshita, Y. Shibata, R. Sundari, N. Eshima, T. Ninomiya, 
et al., “Oral Mycobiome in Community-Dwelling Elderly and Its Relation to Oral and General 
Health Conditions,” Oral Diseases 23, no. 7 (2017): 973–982; Eefje A. Kraneveld, Mark J. Buijs, 
Marc J. Bonder, Marjolein Visser, Bart J. F. Keijser, Wim Crielaard, and Egija Zaura, “The Rela￾tion between Oral Candida Load and Bacterial Microbiome Profiles in Dutch Older Adults,” 
PLoS ONE 7, no. 8 (2012): e42770. Changes in the oral mycobiome associated with dentures 
were superimposed on a huge disparity between the baseline levels of Candida in the two popu￾lations: the saliva of the Japanese patients contained an average of ten thousand Candida cells 
per milliliter, compared with up to one hundred million yeast cells in the same volume of spit 
from the Dutch patients. It is possible that this discrepancy was due to the use of dif­ferent DNA 
primers in these studies.
23. David W. Denning, Matthew Kneale, Jack D. Sobel, and Riina Rautemaa-Richardson, 
“Global Burden of Recurrent Vulvovaginal Candidiasis: A Systematic Review,” Lancet Infectious 
Diseases 18, no. 11 (2018): e339–e347; Brett A. Tortelli, Warren G. Lewis, Jennifer E. Allsworth, 
Nadum Member-Meneh, Lynne R. Foster, Hilary E. Reno, Jeffrey F. Peipert, et al., “Associations 
between the Vaginal Microbiome and Candida Colonization in Women of Reproductive Age,” 
American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology 222, no. 5 (2020): 471.e1–e9.
24. Ning-Ning Liu, Xingping Zhao, Jing-Cong Tan, Sheng Liu, Bo-Wen Li, Wang-Xing Xu, 
Lin Peng, et al., “Mycobiome Dysbiosis in Women with Intrauterine Adhesions,” Microbiology 
Spectrum 10, no. 4 (2022): e0132422.
25. Erik van Tilburg Bernardes, Mackenzie W. Gutierrez, and Marie-Claire Arrieta, “The 
Fungal Microbiome and Asthma,” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 10 (2020): 
583418.
26. Raphaël Enaud, Renaud Prevel, Eleonora Ciarlo, Fabien Beaufils, Gregoire Wieërs, Ben￾oit Guery, and Laurence Delhaes, “The Gut-Lung Axis in Health and Respiratory Diseases: A 
Place for Inter-Organ and Inter-Kingdom Crosstalks,” Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Micro￾biology 10 (2020): 9.
27. Tomasz Gosiewski, Dominika Salamon, Magdalena Szopa, Agnieska Sroka, Maciej T. 
Malecki, and Malgorzata Bulanda, “Quantitative Evaluation of Fungi of the Genus Candida in 200 notes to chapter 6
the Feces of Adult Patients with Type 1 and 2 Diabetes—A Pilot Study,” Gut Pathogens 6 (2014): 
43; A. M. Yang, T. Inamine, K. Hochrath, P. Chen, L. Wang, C. Llorente, S. Bluemel, et al., 
“Intestinal Fungi Contribute to Development of Alcoholic Liver Disease,” Journal of Clinical 
Investigations 127, no. 7 (2017): 2829–2841; Lu Jiang, Peter Stärkel, Jian-Gao Fan, Derrick E. 
Fouts, Petra Bacher, and Bernd Schnabl, “The Gut Mycobiome: A Novel Player in Chronic Liver 
Diseases,” Journal of Gastroenterology 56, no. 1 (2021): 1–11.
28. Jessica D. Forbes, Charles N. Bernstein, Helen Tremlett, Gary Van Domselaar, and Nat￾laie C. Knox, “A Fungal World: Could the Gut Mycobiome Be Involved in Neurological 
Disease?,” Frontiers in Microbiology 9 (2019): 3249; Saumya Shah, Albertu Locca, Yair Dorsett, 
Claudia Cantoni, Laura Ghezzi, Qingqi Lin, Suresh Bokoliya, et al., “Alterations of the Gut 
Mycobiome in Patients with MS,” EBioMedicine 71, no. 1 (2021): 103557.
29. Mahmoud Ghannoum with Eve Adamson, Total Gut Balance: Fix Your Mycobiome Fast 
for Complete Digestive Wellness (Woodstock, VT: Countryman Press, 2019).
30. M. Ghannoum, C. Smith, E. Adamson, N. Isham, I. Salem, and M. Retuerto, “Effect of 
Mycobiome Diet on Gut Fungal and Bacterial Communities of Healthy Adults,” Journal of Pro￾biotics and Health 8, no. 1 (2020): 215.
31. Kearney T. W. Gunsalus, Stephanie N. Tornberg-Belanger, Nirupa R. Matthan, Alice H. 
Lichtenstein, and Carol A. Kumamoto, “Manipulation of Host Diet to Reduce Gastrointestinal 
Colonization by the Opportunistic Pathogen Candida albicans,” mSphere 1, no. 1 (2015): 
e00020-15.
CHAPTER SIX
1. The genus Penicillium was named by Heinrich Friedrich Link in 1809, who described the 
spore stalks or conidiophores produced from the mycelium as fertilibus erectis apice penicillatis, 
meaning raised fertile [branches] with brush-like tips: Heinrich F. Link, “Observationes in 
Ordines Plantarum Naturales: Dissertatio Ima,” Gesellschaft Naturforschender Freunde zu Berlin 
Magazin 3, no. 1 (1809): 3–42.
2. Pencillium evolved in the Cretaceous. This is the timing that we infer from the DNA clocks 
in multiple species of Penicillium that appear to have been ticking for more than seventy million 
years: Jacob L. Steenwyk, Xing-Xing Shen, Abigail L. Lind, Gustavo H. Goldman, and Antonis 
Rokas, “A Robust Phylogenomic Time Tree for Biotechnologically and Medically Important 
Fungi in the Genera Aspergillus and Penicillium,” mBio 10 (2019): e00925-19.
3. Frank Maixner, Mohamed S. Sarhan, Kun D. Huang, Adrian Tett, Alexander Schoenafin￾ger, Stefania Zingale, Aitor Blanco-Míguez, et al., “Hallstatt Miners Consumed Blue Cheese and 
Beer During the Iron Age and Retained a Non-Westernized Gut Microbiome until the Baroque 
Period,” Current Biology 31, no. 23 (2021): 5149–5162.
4. Nathaniel J. Dominy, “Ferment in the Family Tree,” Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences USA 112, no. 2 (2015): 308–309; Nicholas P. Money, The Rise of Yeast: How the Sugar 
Fungus Shaped Civilization (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018).
5. Jiajing Wang, Leping Jiang, and Hanlong Sun, “Early Evidence for Beer Drinking in a 
9000-Year-Old Platform Mound in Southern China,” PLoS ONE 16, no. 8 (2021): e0255833. Jia￾jing Wang and colleagues identified microfossils of filamentous fungi and yeast in the pottery notes to chapter 6 201
remains. Filamentous fungi are used as starters in rice wine fermentation to break down starch 
into sugars, and yeast feeds on the sugars, producing alcohol. Incidentally, rice wine is really 
rice beer because it is made from grains that contain starch that is converted into sugars in the 
first step of the fermentation, called saccharification. Wines are made from grape must and 
other fruit juices, which are full of sugars so that yeast can get to work without this saccharifica￾tion step.
6. Laure Segurel, Perle Guarino-Vignon, Nina Marchi, Sophie Lafosse, Romain Laurent, 
Céline Bon, Alexandre Fabre, et al., “Why and When Was Lactase Persistence Selected For? 
Insights from Central Asian Herders and Ancient DNA,” PLoS Biology 18, no. 6 (2020): 
e3000742; William T. T. Taylor, Julia Clark, Jamranjav Bayarsaikhan, Tumurbaatar Tuvshinjar￾gal, Jessica T. Jobe, William Fitzhugh, Richard Kortum, et al., “Early Pastoral Economies and 
Herding Transitions in Eastern Eurasia,” Scientific Reports 10 (2020): 1001; Mélanie Salque, 
Peter I. Bogucki, Joanna Pyzel, Iwona Sobkowiak-Tabaka, Ryszard Grygiel, Marzena Szmyt, and 
Richard P. Evershed, “Earliest Evidence for Cheese Making in the Sixth Millennium BC in 
Northern Europe,” Nature 493 (2013): 522–525.
7. Pliny, Natural History, trans. Harris Rackham, Loeb Classical Library 353 (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1942), Book XI, XCVII, 582–585, lines 240–242; Petronius, 
Satyricon, trans. Michael Heseltine, rev. Eric H. Warmington, Loeb Classical Library 15 (Cam￾bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1987), 148–149, line 66. The cheese description in the 
Satyricon comes from Habinnas, a guest at the feast of Trimalchio, who is asked about an 
earlier dinner.
8. Emilie Dumas, Alice Feurtey, Ricardo C. Rodríguez de la Vega, Stéphanie Le Prieur, 
Alodie Snirc, Monika Coton, Anne Thierry, et al., “Independent Domestication Events in the 
Blue-Cheese Fungus Penicillium roqueforti,” Molecular Ecology 29 (2020): 2639–2660.
9. Jeanne Ropars, Estelle Didiot, Ricardo C. Rodríguez de la Vega, Bastien Bennetot, Mon￾ika Coton, Elisabeth Poirier, Emmanuel Coton, et al., “Domestication of the Emblematic White 
Cheese-Making Fungus Penicillium camemberti and Its Diversification into Two Varieties,” Cur￾rent Biology 30, no. 22 (2020): 4441–4453, e1–e4.
10. Marie-Christine Montel, Solange Buchin, Adrien Mallet, Céline Delbes-Paus, Domi￾nique A. Vuitton, Nathalie Desmasures, and François Berthier, “Traditional Cheeses: Rich and 
Diverse Microbiota with Associated Benefits,” International Journal of Food Microbiology 177 
(2014): 136–154.
11. Eric Dugat-Bony, Lucille Garnier, Jeremie Denonfoux, Stéphanie Ferreira, Anne-Sophie 
Sarthou, Pascal Bonnarme, and Françoise Irlinger, “Highlighting the Microbial Diversity of 12 
French Cheese Varieties,” International Journal of Food Microbiology 238 (2016): 265–273.
12. Yuanchen Zhang, Erik K. Kastman, Jeffrey S. Guasto, and Benjamin E. Wolfe, “Fungal 
Networks Shape Dynamics of Bacterial Dispersal and Community Assembly in Cheese Rind 
Microbiomes,” Nature Communications 9 (2018): 336.
13. Clifton Fadiman, Any Number Can Play (Cleveland, OH: World Publishing, 1957), 105. 
In the same book (106), Fadiman described Roquefort as “Ewe-born, cave-educated, [and] 
perfected by moldy bread.”
14. Montel et al., “Traditional Cheeses.” Raw milk is enriched in vitamins that are lost in 
pasteurization, contains a healthier mixture of fats than processed milk (according to some 202 notes to chapter 6
nutritionists), and may even confer some protection against the development of asthma and 
other allergies in children.
15. Thibault Caron, Mélanie Le Piver, Anne-Claire Péron, Pascale Lieben, René Lavigne, 
Sammy Brunel, Daniel Roueyre, et al., “Strong Effect of Penicillium roqueforti Populations on 
Volatile and Metabolic Compounds Responsible for Aromas, Flavor and Texture in Blue 
Cheeses,” International Journal of Food Microbiology 354 (2021): 109174.
16. B. G. J. Knols and R. De Jong, “Limburger Cheese as an Attractant for the Malaria Mos￾quito Anopheles gambiae s.s.,” Parasitology Today 12, no. 54 (1996): 159–161.
17. Monika Coton, Franck Deniel, Jérôme Mounier, Rozenn Joubrel, Emeline Robieu, Au￾drey Pawtowski, Sabine Jeuge, et al., “Microbial Ecology of French Dry Fermented Sausages 
and Mycotoxin Risk Evaluation during Storage,” Frontiers in Microbiology 12 (2021): 737140. 
Concerns have been raised about the possibility of mycotoxin contamination of cheeses, but 
there have been no proven cases of poisoning associated with cheese consumption: Alan D. W. 
Dobson, “Mycotoxins in Cheese,” in Cheese: Chemistry, Physics and Microbiology, 4th ed., ed. 
Paul L. H. McSweeney, Patrick F. Fox, Paul D. Cotter, and David W. Everett (London: Academic 
Press, 2017), 595–601.
18. Giancarlo Perrone, Robert A. Samson, Jens C. Frisvad, Antonia Susca, Nina Gunde￾Cimerman, Filomena Epifani, and Jos Houbraken, “Penicillium salamii, A New Species Occur￾ring during Seasoning of Dry-Cured Meat,” International Journal of Food Microbiology 193 (2015): 
91–98.
19. Andrea Osimani, Ilario Ferrocino, Monica Agnolucci, Luca Cocolin, Manuela Giovan￾netti, Caterina Cristani, Michela Palla, et al., “Unveiling Hákarl: A Study of the Microbiota of 
the Traditional Icelandic Fermented Fish,” Food Microbiology 82 (2019): 560–572. Most of the sharks 
are killed as bycatch, and their great age adds to this tragedy: Greenland sharks are the longest￾lived vertebrates, with a maximum estimated life span approaching four hundred years.
20. There are frequent comparisons between the smell of surströmming and open sewers on 
the internet. This delicacy is one of the exhibits that can be tasted at the Disgusting Food Mu￾seum in Malmö (https://disgustingfoodmuseum.com/). Fermented fish dishes from Asia are 
described in the following review article: Yutika Narzary, Sandeep Nas, Arvind K. Goyal, Su S. 
Lam, Hermen Sarma, and Dolikajyoti Sharma, “Fermented Fish Products in South and South￾east Asian Cuisine: Indigenous Technology Processes, Nutrient Composition, and Cultural 
Significance,” Journal of Ethnic Foods 8 (2021): 33.
21. David Downie, “A Roman Anchovy’s Tale,” Gastronomica 3 (2003): 25–28; Brian Keogh, 
The Secret Sauce: A History of Lea & Perrins (Worcester, UK: Leaper Books, 1997).
22. Kotaro Ito and Asahi Matsuyama, “Koji Molds for Japanese Soy Sauce Brewing: Char￾acteristics and Key Enzymes,” Journal of Fungi 7 (2021): 658.
23. M. J. Robert Nout and Kofi E. Aidoo, “Asian Fungal Fermented Food,” in The Mycota, 
vol. 10, Industrial Applications, ed. Martin Hofrichter (Berlin: Springer, 2010), 29–58.
24. Climate may help to explain why the Mucor infections of humans described in chapter 4 
are more common in India and other parts of Asia than Europe.
25. Money, The Rise of Yeast, 52.
26. Jack A. Whittaker, Robert I. Johnson, Tim J. A. Finnigan, Simon V. Avery, and Paul S. 
Dyer, “The Biotechnology of Quorn Mycoprotein: Past, Present and Future Challenges,” in notes to chapter 7 203
Grand Challenges in Fungal Biotechnology, ed. Helena Nevalainen (Cham, Switzerland: Springer 
International Publishing, 2020), 59–79.
27. Pedro F. Souza Filho, Dan Andersson, Jorge A. Ferreira, and Mohammad J. Taherzadeh, 
“Mycoprotein: Environmental Impact and Health Aspects,” World Journal of Microbiology and 
Biotechnology 35, no. 10 (2019): 147; Maurizio Cellura, Maria A. Cusenza, Sonia Longo, Le Q. 
Luu, and Thomas Skurk, “Life Cycle Environmental Impacts and Health Effects of Protein-Rich 
Food as Meat Alternatives: A Review,” Sustainability 14 (2022): 979; Florian Humpenöder, Ben￾jamin L. Bodirsky, Isabelle Weindl, Hermann Lotze-Campen, Tomas Linder, and Alexander 
Popp, “Projected Environmental Benefits of Replacing Beef with Microbial Protein,” Nature
605, no. 7908 (2022): 90–96.
28. Robert King, Neil A. Brown, Martin Urban, and Kim E. Hammond-Kosack, “Inter￾Genome Comparison of the Quorn Fungus Fusarium venenatum and the Closely Related Plant 
Infecting Pathogen Fusarium graminearum,” BMC Genomics 19 (2018): 269.
29. The market for fungal products is dominated by yeast. See Nicholas P. Money, “The 
Fungus That’s Worth $900 Billion a Year,” OUPblog, February 25, 2018, https://blog.oup.com
/2018/02/fungus-worth-900-billion/.
30. The energy value of gilled mushrooms varies from 22 to 31 calories per 100 grams for raw 
white button mushrooms to 44 calories per 100 grams of shiitake; 100 grams of romaine lettuce 
contains 20 calories. Measurements of the calorific value of truffles vary between studies and 
for dif­ferent truffle species, but the high energy value of these fungi relative to gilled mushrooms 
is consistent. A study from China, for example, measured 378 calories per 100 grams of three 
species of Tuber from Yunnan, which matches the calorific value of Roquefort cheese. See U.S. 
Department of Agriculture, “Mushrooms, White, Raw,” April 1, 2019, https://fdc.nal.usda.gov
/fdc-app.html#/food-details/169251/nutrients; Xiangyuan Yan, Yanwei Wang, Xiaoyu Sang, 
and Li Fan, “Nutritional Value, Chemical Composition and Antioxidant Activity of Three Tuber
Species from China,” AMB Express 7, no. 1 (2017): 136.
CHAPTER SEVEN
1. U. Peintner, R. Pöder, and T. Pümpel, “The Iceman’s Fungi,” Mycological Research 102, 
no. 10 (1998): 1153–1162.
2. Luigi Capasso, “5300 Years Ago, the Ice Man Used Natural Laxatives and Antibiotics,” The 
Lancet 352, no. 9143 (1998): 1864. Capasso’s work was refuted by Håkan Tunón and Ingvar 
Svanberg, “Laxatives and the Ice Man,” The Lancet 353, no. 9156 (1999): 925–926, who wrote, 
“Ethnobotanical data from preindustrial Northern Europe show that the fungus has had several 
non-medical uses, such as to protect metal blades from rust, to sharpen razors, as toys, floats or 
pincushions. So it is odd that Capasso concludes that the fungi kept by the Ice Man were used 
to treat a worm infection and not for any other purpose. . . . We find it astonishing that Capasso 
draws so many conclusions from such a limited amount of data.”
3. Powerful drugs, including ivermectin, which was made famous during the COVID-19 
pandemic, paralyze and kill the worms, and modern sanitation allows us to avoid the worms in 
the first place. Insouciant attitudes toward intestinal parasites are among the unearned privileges 
of today’s affluence that must be judged naive against the global burden of billions of active 204 notes to chapter 7
infections by hookworms, roundworms, and Ötzi’s whipworm: Rachel L. Pullan, Jennifer L. 
Smith, Rashmi Jasrasaria, and Simon J. Brooker, “Global Numbers of Infection and Disease 
Burden of Soil Transmitted Helminth Infections in 2010,” Parasites Vectors 7 (2014): 37.
4. Ulrike Grienke, Margit Zöll, Ursula Peintner, and Judith M. Rollinger, “European Me￾dicinal Polypores—A Modern View on Traditional Uses,” Journal of Ethnopharmacology 154, 
no. 3 (2014): 564–583.
5. Robert A. Blanchette, “Haploporus odorus: A Sacred Fungus in Traditional Native Ameri￾can Culture of the Northern Plains,” Mycologia 89, no. 2 (1997): 233–240.
6. Investors view the medicinal mushroom industry as fragmented, meaning that hundreds 
of companies share the market in dif­ferent countries. Decentralization can be good for consum￾ers and provides plenty of opportunities for small-scale entrepreneurs to develop new product 
lines. This contrasts with the market for prescription and over-the-counter drugs, which is con￾trolled by a few very powerful pharmaceutical companies. See “Global Mushroom Market (2020 
to 2025)—Global Industry Trends, Share, Size, Growth, Opportunity and Forecast—Research￾AndMarkets.com,” Business Wire, July 1, 2020, https://www.businesswire.com/news/home
/20200701005442/en/Global-Mushroom-Market-2020-to-2025--Global-Industry-Trends
-Share-Size-Growth-Opportunity-and-Forecast--ResearchAndMarkets.com; Allana Akhtar, “5 
‘Functional’ Mushrooms the Wellness Industry Is Obsessed with, from Lion’s Mane to Turkey 
Tail,” YahooMoney, April 7, 2022, https://money.yahoo.com/5-functional-mushrooms-wellness
-industry-135455865.html.
7. Cordyceps is an ascomycete, more closely related to yeast than gilled mushrooms, and 
chaga is a mass of fungal tissues that does not produce any spores.
8. “Health Benefits of Mushrooms,” WebMD, September 12, 2022, https://www.webmd.com
/diet/health-benefits-mushrooms; “What Is the Nutritional Value of Mushroom Powder?,” 
Om (blog), May  11, 2021, https://ommushrooms.com/blogs/blog/nutritional-value-of
-mushroom-powder-m2.
9. Koichiro Mori, Yutaro Obara, Mitsuru Hirota, Yoshihito Azumi, Satomi Kinugasa, Satoshi 
Inatomi, and Norimichi Nakahata, “Nerve Growth Factor-Inducing Activity of Hericium eri￾naceus in 1321N1 Human Astrocytoma Cells,” Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 31, no. 9 
(2008): 1727–1732; Mari Shimbo, Hirokazu Kawagishi, and Hidehiko Yokogoshi, “Erinacine A 
Increases Catecholamine and Nerve Growth Factor Content in the Central Nervous System of 
Rats,” Nutrition Research 25, no. 6 (2005): 617–623. Although these are brief reports, they are the 
best publications on the effects of lion’s mane on cultured nerve cells and rat brains. Most of 
the published studies on Hericium would never pass peer review in reliable scientific journals. 
One detailed analysis of the fungus looked promising: Hsing-Chun Kuo, Chien-Chien Lu, 
Chien-Heng Shen, Shui-Yi Tung, Meng Chiao Hsieh, Ko-Chao Lee, Li-Ya Li, et al., “Hericium 
erinaceus Mycelium and Its Isolated Erinacine A Protection from MPTP-Induced Neurotoxicity 
through the ER Stress, Triggering an Apoptosis Cascade,” Journal of Translational Medicine 19 
(2021): 67. I used the past tense, looked, because the study was retracted when the editors of 
the journal learned that the research was associated with a Taiwanese company called Grape 
King Bio, Ltd., which produces extracts from the mushroom.
10. Koichiro Mori, Satoshi Inatomi, Kenzi Ouchi, Yoshihito Azumi, and Takasi Tuchida, 
“Improving Effects of the Mushroom Yamabushitake (Hericium erinaceus) on Mild Cognitive notes to chapter 7 205
Impairment: A Double-Blind Placebo-Controlled Clinical Trial,” Phytotherapy Research 23, no. 3 
(2009): 367–372.
11. Tero Isokauppila, Healing Mushrooms: A Practical and Culinary Guide to Using Mushrooms 
for Whole Body Health (New York: Avery, 2017).
12. “Lion’s Mane Capsules,” FungiPerfecti, accessed July 15, 2023, https://fungi.com/products
/lions-mane-capsules.
13. “Top 5 Lions Mane Health Benefits for Managing Erectile Dysfunction Effectively,” Cure 
My Erectile Dysfunction, accessed July 15, 2023, https://curemyerectiledysfunction.com/top-5
-lions-mane-health-benefits-for-managing-erectile-dysfunction-effectively; “Lion’s Mane Can 
Reduce Your Libido/Sex-Drive,” Boost Your Biology (blog), August 17, 2020, https://www
.ergogenic.health/blog/lions-mane-can-decrease-your-libido-sex-drive.
14. Hidde P. van Steenwijk, Aalt Bast, and Alie de Boer, “Immunomodulating Effects of 
Fungal Beta-Glucans: From Traditional Use to Medicine,” Nutrients 13 (2021): 1333.
15. Kurt Buchmann, “Evolution of Innate Immunity: Clues from Invertebrates via Fish to 
Mammals,” Frontiers in Immunology 5 (2014): 459.
16. Kenji Ina, Takae Kataoka, and Takafumi Ando, “The Use of Lentinan for Treating Gastric 
Cancer,” Anti-cancer Agents in Medicinal Chemistry 13, no. 5 (2013): 681–688.
17. Yiran Zhang, Meng Zhang, Yifei Jiang, Xiulian Li, Yanli He, Pengjiao Zeng, Zhihua Guo, 
et al., “Lentinan as an Immunotherapeutic for Treating Lung Cancer: A Review of 12 Years Clini￾cal Studies in China,” Journal of Cancer Research and Clinical Oncology 144 (2018): 2177–2186.
18. “Medical Health Benefits of Beta-Glucans in Medicinal Mushrooms,” WENY News, 
July 20, 2021, https://www.weny.com/story/44338597/medical-health-benefits-of-beta
-glucans-in-medicinal-mushrooms; Christopher Hertzog, Beta Glucan: A 21st Century Miracle?
(Bangkok: Booksmango, 2014).
19. Djibril M. Ba, Xiang Gao, Joshua Muscat, Laila Al-Shaar, Vernon Chinchilli, Xinyuan 
Zhang, Paddy Ssentongo, et al., “Association of Mushroom Consumption with All-Cause and 
Cause-Specific Mortality among American Adults: Prospective Cohort Study Findings from 
NHANES III,” Nutrition Journal 20, no. 1 (2021): 38.
20. Djibril M. Ba, Xiang Gao, Laila Al-Shaar, Joshua E. Muscat, Vernon M. Chinchilli, Rob￾ert B. Beelman, and John P. Richie, “Mushroom Intake and Depression: A Population-Based 
Study Using Data from the US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 
2005–2016,” Journal of Affective Disorders 294 (2021): 686–692; Djibril M. Ba, Paddy Ssentongo, 
Robert B. Beelman, Joshua Muscat, Xiang Gao, and John P. Richie, “Higher Mushroom Con￾sumption Is Associated with Lower Risk of Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis 
of Observational Studies,” Advances in Nutrition 12, no. 5 (2021): 1691–1704.
21. Piotr Rzymski, “Comment on ‘Mushroom Intake and Depression: A Population-Based 
Study Using Data from the US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES), 
2005–2016,’” Journal of Affective Disorders 295 (2021): 937–938.
22. Chayakrit Krittanawong, Ameesh Isath, Joshua Hahn, Zhen Wang, Sonya E. Fogg, 
Dhrubajyoti Bandyopadhyay, Hani Jneid, et al., “Mushroom Consumption and Cardiovascular 
Health: A Systematic Review,” American Journal of Medicine 134, no. 5 (2021): 637–642.e2.
23. Nicholas P. Money, “Are Mushrooms Medicinal?,” Fungal Biology 120, no. 4 (2016): 
449–453.206 notes to chapter 7
24. Christopher Hitchens, God Is Not Great: How Religion Poisons Everything (New York: 
Twelve, 2009), 150.
25. In addition to the web pages referring to the curative powers of the mushroom, many of 
the “shiitake acne” and “shiitake asthma” sites describe severe skin allergies in some people who 
consume the raw mushroom and in workers in the mushroom industry who handle the fruit 
bodies during packaging.
26. John Gerard, The Herball, or, Generall Historie of Plantes, 2nd ed., enlarged and 
amended by Thomas Johnson (London: Adam Islip, Joice Norton, and R. Whitakers, 1633), 
1578, 1583; Horace, Satires, Epistles, and Ars Poetica, trans. H. Rushton Fairclough, Loeb Clas￾sical Library 194 (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1929), Satires Book II, IV, 188–189, 
lines 20–21.
27. The study of medicinal mushrooms is lost in a madhouse of misrepresentation and pseu￾doscience that includes crackpot cures for terminal illnesses. For light relief, I nominate Robert 
Rogers, registered herbalist and author of Mushroom Essences: Vibrational Healing from the 
Kingdom Fungi (Berkeley, CA: North Atlantic Books, 2016), for The Batshit Crazy Award in 
Mycology. Rogers claims that mushrooms “express energy fields,” which can be channeled by 
skilled practitioners to “help peel away the steel bars of long-held emotional and mental impris￾onment.” There are many contenders for the award, but a sentence from the blurb of the book 
by Roger should satisfy the judges: “Similar to flower essences, but made under a lunar cycle, 
mushroom essences work subtly to bring deep healing to the mind and body; they are particu￾larly well suited for working with the ‘shadow’ or unintegrated parts of the psyche.” Ötzi would 
have slapped Robert with his birch conks.
28. Won C. Bak, Ji H. Park, Yong A. Park, and Kang H. Ka, “Determination of Glucan Con￾tents in the Fruiting Bodies and Mycelia of Lentinula edodes Cultivars,” Mycobiology 42, no. 3 
(2014): 301–304; Juan Chen, Xu Zeng, Yan L. Yang, Yong M. Xing, Qi Zhang, Jia Li, Ke Ma, 
et al., “Genomic and Transcriptomic Analyses Reveal Differential Regulation of Diverse Terpe￾noid and Polyketides Secondary Metabolites in Hericium erinaceus,” Scientific Reports 7, no. 1 
(2017): 10151; Marcus Künzler. “How Fungi Defend Themselves against Microbial Competitors 
and Animal Predators,” PLoS Pathogens 14, no. 9 (2018): e1007184. Some medicinal mushroom 
companies choose to highlight these distinctions and emphasize that they are selling extracts 
from fruit bodies rather than mycelia. Others suggest that mycelia are superior sources of me￾dicinals to mushrooms, and still more ignore the potential difference in chemistry between the 
two sources. In the end, neither claim affects consumers because the active compounds are 
never specified. Uncertainties about the marketing of extracts from fruit bodies versus mycelia 
is one aspect of wider concerns about the labeling of fungal products as foods and alternative 
medicines. A DNA barcoding study of dif­ferent food products containing “wild mushrooms” 
revealed that many contained common cultivated mushrooms, and that some of the ingredient 
labels misrepresented the species of fungi in dried powders, soups, and pasta sauces: W. Dalley 
Cutler II, Alexander J. Bradshaw, and Bryn T. M. Dentinger, “What’s for Dinner This Time? 
DNA Authentication of ‘Wild Mushrooms’ in Food Products Sold in the USA,” PeerJ 2, no. 9 
(2021): e11747.
29. Kenneth D. Clevenger, Jin W. Bok, Rosa Ye, Galen P. Miley, Maria H. Verdan, Thomas 
Velk, Cynthia Chen, et al., “A Scalable Platform to Identify Fungal Secondary Metabolites and notes to chapter 7 207
Their Gene Clusters,” Nature Chemical Biology 13, no. 8 (2017): 895–901; Claudio Greco, 
Nancy P. Keller, and Antonis Rokas, “Unearthing Fungal Chemodiversity and Prospects for 
Drug Discovery,” Current Opinion in Microbiology 51 (2019): 22–29; Matthew T. Robey, Lind￾say K. Caesar, Milton T. Drott, Nancy P. Keller, and Neil L. Kelleher, “An Interpreted Atlas of 
Biosynthetic Gene Clusters from 1,000 Fungal Genomes,” Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences USA 118, no. 19 (2021): e2020230118; Kirstin Scherlach and Christian Hertweck, “Min￾ing and Unearthing Hidden Biosynthetic Potential,” Nature Communications 12 (2021): 3864.
30. Carsten Gründemann, Jakob K. Reinhardt, and Ulricke Lindequist, “European Medici￾nal Mushrooms: Do They Have Potential for Modern Medicine?—An Update,” Phytomedicine
66 (2020): 153131.
31. Ravinder Kumar and Piyush Kumar, “Yeast-Based Vaccines: New Perspective in Vaccine 
Development and Application,” FEMS Yeast Research 19, no. 2 (2019): foz007.
32. I read a book about bird’s nest fungi (the only one on this subject) as a student and was 
struck with the intricate design of these things. Later, when I found them for the first time in 
Colorado, I felt something of “the tide of emotion” experienced by Stendhal in the Basilica di 
Santa Croce in Florence, where he visited the tombs of Machiavelli and Galileo, and saw the 
chiaroscuro frescos of Volterrano: “As I emerged from the porch of Santa Croce . . . I walked in 
constant fear of falling to the ground.” The French author’s response has been memorialized in a 
psychosomatic condition called Stendhal’s syndrome that describes tourists swooning before 
great works of art. This diagnosis should be extended to people with an exceptional sensitivity 
toward the fungi: “Sanctus stercore,” I thought in English when I gazed upon the tiny nests of the 
species whose Latin name is Cyathus stercoreus. Pursuing my mycological expression of Stend￾hal’s syndrome, I anticipate feeling quite emotional if I am fortunate enough to visit the Basilica 
Santa Croce, where, beneath the fresco, lies the tomb of Pier Antonio Micheli (1679–1737). 
Micheli is celebrated as the father of experimental mycology for his experiments with mush￾room spores, described in his magnum opus, Nova Plantarum Genera, published in 1729. There 
is a striking statue of Micheli in the colonnade outside the Uffizi, and he is also memorialized 
in street names in Florence and Rome. Sources: Harold J. Brodie, The Bird’s Nest Fungi (Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press, 1975); Stendhal, Rome, Naples and Florence, trans. Richard N. Coe 
(Richmond, UK: John Calder, 1959), 301–302; Iain Bamforth, “Stendhal’s Syndrome,” British 
Journal of General Practice 60, no. 581 (2010): 945–946.
33. Olchowecki’s original observations on the antibiotic stimulated the doctoral research of 
another student, Bhavdish Narain Johri, whose dissertation was the foundation for all the sub￾sequent work on the cyathins: B. N. Johri, H. J. Brodie, A. D. Allbutt, W. A. Ayer, and H. Taube, 
“A Previously Unknown Antibiotic Complex from the Fungus Cyathus helenae,” Experientia 27 
(1971): 853; A. D. Allbutt, W. A. Ayer, H. J. Brodie, B. N. Johri, and H. Taube, “Cyathin, a New 
Antibiotic Complex Produced by Cyathus helenae,” Canadian Journal of Microbiology 17, no. 11 
(1971): 1401–1407. Harold Brodie wrote the book on the bird’s nest fungi that I read as a student 
titled The Bird’s Nest Fungi (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1975), and introduced a 
crumb of mirth, intentionally or otherwise, into an otherwise dry scientific article on mycelial 
mergers with the subheading, “Attempts at Mating with Cyathus olla.” Less than a crumb.
34. Emma Dixon, Tatiana Schweibenz, Alison Hight, Brian Kang, Allyson Dailey, Sarah Kim, 
Meng-Yang Chen, et al., “Bacteria-Induced Static Batch Fungal Fermentation of the Diterpenoid 208 notes to chapter 8
Cyathin A3, a Small-Molecule Inducer of Nerve Growth Factor,” Journal of Industrial Microbiol￾ogy and Biotechnology 38, no. 5 (2011): 607–615; Christian Bailly and Jin-Ming Gao, “Erinacine 
A and Related Cyathane Diterpenoids: Molecular Diversity and Mechanisms Underlying Their 
Neuroprotection and Anticancer Activities,” Pharmaceutical Research 159 (2020): 104953.
CHAPTER EIGHT
1. “Celebratory Meal a Near Death Experience,” Raglan Chronicle, May 9, 2020, https://www
.raglanchronicle.co.nz/the-chronicle/2020/05/celebratory-meal-a-near-death-experience/; 
John Weekes, “Waikato Doctor Nearly Dies after Death Cap Mushroom Poisoning,” Stuff, 
May 11, 2020, https://www.stuff.co.nz/national/health/121464993/waikato-doctor-nearly-dies
-after-death-cap-mushroom-poisoning.
2. William E. Brandenburg and Karlee J. Ward, “Mushroom Poisoning Epidemiology in the 
United States,” Mycologia 110, no. 4 (2018): 637–641; Jeremy A. W. Gold, Emily Kiernan, Michael 
Yeh, Brendan R. Jackson, and Kaitlin Benedict, “Health Care Utilization and Outcomes Associ￾ated with Accidental Poisonous Mushroom Ingestions—United States, 2016–2018,” MMWR 
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 70 (2021): 337–341. Between 1999 and 2016, more than 
seven thousand Americans were poisoned by mushrooms every year, with 60 percent of cases 
reported for children younger than six, and few resulting in more than brief gastrointestinal 
distress. During this period, there were seven or fewer fatalities per year from mushroom poi￾soning, which was comparable to the number of lethal snake bites.
3. Anne Pringle and Else C. Vellinga, “Last Chance to Know? Using Literature to Explore 
the Biogeography and Invasion Biology of the Death Cap Mushroom Amanita phalloides (Vaill. 
ex Fr.:Fr.) Link,” Biological Invasions 8 (2006): 1131–1144; Anne Pringle, Rachel I. Adams, 
Hugh B. Cross, and Thomas D. Bruns, “The Ectomycorrhizal Fungus Amanita phalloides Was 
Introduced and Is Expanding Its Range on the West Coast of North America,” Molecular Ecology
18 (2009): 817–833.
4. Here are the corresponding Latin names: oyster mushrooms, Pleurotus ostreatus; lion’s mane, 
Hericium erinaceus; common puffballs, Lycoperdon perlatum; giant puffballs, Calvatia gigantea; 
golden chanterelles, Cantharellus cibarius; and porcini, ceps, or king boletes, Boletus edulis.
5. Dennis R. Benjamin, Mushrooms: Poisons and Panaceas—A Handbook for Naturalists, My￾cologists, and Physicians (New York: W. H. Freeman & Co., 1995). Amanita vaginata is the 
grisette; Amanita rubescens is the blusher; the fool’s mushroom is Amanita verna; and the de￾stroying angels are Amanita bisporigera, Amanita ocreata, and Amanita virosa.
6. Britt A. Barnyard, “The Real Story behind Increased Amanita Poisonings in North Amer￾ica,” FUNGI Magazine 8, no. 3 (2015): 6–9.
7. Chad Hyatt, The Mushroom Hunter’s Kitchen: Reimaging Comfort Food with a Chef Forager
(San Jose, CA: Chestnut Fed Books, 2018), 107–109.
8. Nicholas P. Money, Mushrooms: A Natural and Cultural History (London: Reaktion Books, 
2017), 137–138.
9. I refer readers interested in mushroom conservation to a prescient essay whose publica￾tion attracted a great deal of baseless dissent by mushroomers: Nicholas P. Money, “Why Pick￾ing Wild Mushrooms May Be Bad Behaviour,” Mycological Research 109, no. 2 (2005): 131–135.notes to chapter 8 209
10. Paolo Scocco, Giampietro Rupolo, and Diego De Leo, “Failed Suicide by Amanita phal￾loides (Mycetismus) and Subsequent Liver Transplant: Case Report,” Archives of Suicide Re￾search 4 (1998): 201–206.
11. Ismail Yilmaz, Fatih Ermis, Ilgaz Akata, and Ertugrul Kaya, “A Case Study: What Doses 
of Amanita phalloides and Amatoxins Are Lethal to Humans?,” Wilderness and Environmental 
Medicine 26, no. 4 (2015): 491.
12. Yongzhuang Ye and Zhenning Liu, “Management of Amanita phalloides Poisoning: A 
Literature Review and Update,” Journal of Critical Care 46 (2018): 17–22; Juliana Garcia, Vera M. 
Costa, Alexandra Carvalho, Paula Baptista, Paula G. de Pinho, Maria de Lourdes Bastos, and 
Félix Carvalho, “Amanita phalloides Poisoning: Mechanisms of Toxicity and Treatment,” Food 
and Chemical Toxicology 86 (2015): 41–55. Death caps contain three groups of toxins: amatoxins, 
phallotoxins, and vomitoxins.
13. The lethal dose of alpha-amanitin is estimated to be 0.1–0.3 milligrams per kilogram body 
weight (from Yilmaz et al., “A Case Study,” 491–496), which compares with 300–500 milligrams 
per kilogram for aspirin. Incidentally, alpha-amanitin is ten thousand times less deadly than 
botulinum toxin, or Botox, with an LD50 of 30 nanograms per kilogram. LD50 is the amount 
of a substance that kills half of the laboratory animals in an experiment. These estimates refer 
to oral administration.
14. Patrick L. West, Janet Lindgren, and B. Zane Horowitz, “Amanita smithiana Mushroom 
Ingestion: A Case of Delayed Renal Failure and Literature Review,” Journal of Medical Toxicology
5, no. 1 (2009): 32–38.
15. Brandon Landry, Jeannette Whitton, Anna L. Bazzicalupo, Oldriska Ceska, and Mary L. 
Berbee, “Phylogenetic Analysis of the Distribution of Deadly Amatoxins among the Little 
Brown Mushrooms of the Genus Galerina,” PLoS ONE 16, no. 2 (2021): e0246575.
16. Julian White, Scott A. Weinstein, Luc De Haro, Regis Bédry, Andreas Schaper, Bary H. 
Rumack, and Thomas Zilker, “Mushroom Poisoning: A Proposed New Clinical Classification,” 
Toxicon 157 (2019): 53–65.
17. Regis Bedry, Isabelle Baudrimont, Gerard Deffieux, Edmond E. Creppy, Jean P. Pomies, 
Jean M. Ragnaud, Michel Dupon, et al., “Wild-Mushroom Intoxication as a Cause of Rhabdo￾myolysis,” New England Journal of Medicine 345 (2001): 798–802.
18. Piotr Rzymski and Piotr Klimaszyk, “The Yellow Knight Fights Back: Toxicological, Epi￾demiological, and Survey Studies Defend Edibility of Tricholoma equestre,” Toxins 10, no. 11 
(2018): 468.
19. A one-kilogram potato contains between 20 and 130 milligrams of solanine hydrochlo￾ride, and mice studies provide an LD50 estimate of 42 milligrams of solanine per kilogram body 
weight. Using these numbers, a human would need to eat more than 20 kilograms of potatoes 
to absorb a comparable dose. Poisonings have occurred among people who have eaten more 
modest quantities of potatoes containing exceptionally high levels of solanine, which can de￾velop when the tubers become spoiled in storage. Potatoes belong to a toxic family of plants 
that includes deadly nightshade, which carries a lethal dose of atropine in a few of its onyx-black 
berries. See National Center for Biotechnology Information, “PubChem Compound Summary 
for CID 118796405, Solanine HCl,” accessed July 17, 2023, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/compound/Solanine-HCl.210 notes to chapter 8
20. Petteri Nieminen and Anne-Mari Mustonen, “Toxic Potential of Traditionally Con￾sumed Mushroom Species—A Controversial Continuum with Many Unanswered Questions,” 
Toxins 12, no. 10 (2020): 639.
21. Even morels upset some people: Benjamin, Mushrooms, 278.
22. Hikoto Ohta, Daisuke Watanabe, Chie Nomura, Daichi Saito, Koichi Inoue, Hajime 
Miyaguchi, Shuichi Harada, et al., “Toxicological Analysis of Satratoxins, the Main Toxins in 
the Mushroom Trichoderma cornu-damae, in Human Serum and Mushroom Samples by Liquid 
Chromatography–Tandem Mass Spectrometry,” Forensic Toxicology 39 (2021): 101–113.
23. Fungi with coral shapes belong to the basidiomycetes and the ascomycetes. The fire coral 
is an ascomycete, whereas the hundreds of species of Clavaria or fairy clubs, Ramaria, and other 
“clavarioid” fungi, are basidiomycetes.
24. Luis E. Alonso-Aguilar, Adriana Montoya, Alejandro Kong, Arturo Estrada-Torres, and 
Roberto Garibay-Orijel, “The Cultural Significance of Wild Mushrooms in San Mateo 
Huexoyucan, Tlaxcala, Mexico,” Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 10 (2014): 27.
25. “Ramaria flava (Schaeff.) Quél.,” First Nature, accessed July 15, 2023, https://www.first
-nature.com/fungi/ramaria-flava.php; Pamela M. North, Poisonous Plants and Fungi in Colour
(London: Blandford Press, 1967), 109–110.
26. Charles McIlvaine, One Thousand American Fungi: How to Select and Cook the Edible; 
How to Distinguish and Avoid the Poisonous (Indianapolis, IN: Bowen-Merrill Co., 1900). I have 
celebrated the extraordinary life and career of Captain McIlvaine in an earlier book: Mushrooms: 
A Natural and Cultural History (London: Reaktion Books, 2017), 84–86.
27. Normal Mier, Sandrine Canete, Alain Klaebe, Luis Chavant, and Didier Fournier, “In￾secticidal Properties of Mushroom and Toadstool Carpophores,” Phytochemistry 41, no. 5 
(1996): 1293–1299.
28. Paul A. Horgen, Allan C. Vaisius, and Joseph F. Ammirati, “The Insensitivity of Mush￾room Nuclear RNA Polymerase Activity to Inhibition by Amatoxins,” Archives of Microbiology
118 (1978): 317–319.
29. Frank M. Dugan, Fungi in the Ancient World: How Mushrooms, Mildews, Molds, and Yeast 
Shaped the Early Civilizations of Europe, the Mediterranean, and the Near East (St. Paul, MN: APS 
Press, 2008).
30. The literature on ergotism is voluminous. The following pair of papers on the Norwe￾gian history of the phenomenon are relevant to outbreaks of ergotism in other regions: Tor￾bjørn Alm and Brita Elvevåg, “Ergotism in Norway, Part 1: The Symptoms and Their Interpreta￾tion from the Late Iron Age to the Seventeenth Century,” History of Psychiatry 24, no. 1 (2013): 
15–33, and “Ergotism in Norway, Part 2: The Symptoms and Their Interpretation from the Eigh￾teenth Century Onwards,” History of Psychiatry 24, no. 2 (2013): 131–147.
31. The value of this distinction dissolves with the formation of satratoxins by the poison fire 
coral because satratoxins are also produced by molds. The presence of the same toxins in mush￾rooms and molds is explained by the fact that some fungi that produce mushrooms have a 
second identity as molds. A brief explanation of this complex feature of fungal life cycles is 
provided by Sarah C. Watkinson, Lynne Boddy, and Nicholas P. Money, The Fungi, 3rd ed. 
(Amsterdam: Academic Press, 2016), 20–21. The fire coral is an ascomycete mushroom, which 
is a closer relation to morels than gilled mushrooms and boletes, and its asexual stages are notes to chapter 8 211
classified as species of Trichoderma: Gary J. Samuels and D. J. Lodge, “Three Species of Hypocrea
with Stipitate Stromata and Trichoderma Anamorphs,” Mycologia 88, no. 2 (1996): 302–315.
32. Caroline De Costa, “St Anthony’s Fire and Living Ligatures: A Short History of Ergo￾metrine,” Lancet 359, no. 9319 (2002): 1768–1770.
33. Yan Liu, Healing with Poisons: Potent Medicines in Medieval China (Seattle: University of 
Washington Press, 2021).
34. Carolyn A. Young, Christopher L. Schardl, Daniel G. Panaccione, Simona Florea, Jo￾hanna E. Takach, Nikki D. Charlton, Neil Moore, et al., “Genetics, Genomics and Evolution of 
Ergot Alkaloid Diversity,” Toxins (Basel) 7, no. 4 (2015): 1273–1302.
35. Laurinda S. Dixon, “Bosch’s ‘St. Anthony Triptych’—An Apothecary’s Apotheosis,” Art 
Journal 44 (2014): 119–131.
36. Linnda R. Caporael, “Ergotism: The Satan Loosed in Salem?,” Science 192, no. 4234 
(1976): 21–26.
37. P. Salway and W. Dell, “Plague at Athens,” Greece and Rome 2, no. 2 (1955): 62–69; 
Mary K. Matossian, Poisons of the Past: Molds, Epidemics and History (New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press, 1989).
38. A. J. Holladay and J. C. F. Poole, “Thucydides and the Plague of Athens,” The Classical 
Quarterly 29 (1979): 282–300; Jane Bellemore, Ian M. Plant, and Lynne M. Cunningham, 
“Plague of Athens—Fungal Poison?,” Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences 49, 
no. 4 (1994): 521–545. The German pharmacologist and toxicologist Rudolf Kobert (1854–1918) 
believed that the symptoms of the plague might have been caused by a combination of a small￾pox outbreak in a population already weakened by ergotism.
39. Abraham Z. Joffe, “Alimentary Toxic Aleukia,” in Algal and Fungal Toxins, ed. Solomon 
Kadis, Alex Ciegler, and Samuel J. Ajl (New York: Academic Press, 1971), 139–189; and “Fusarium 
poae and F. sporotrichioides as Principal Causal Agents of Alimentary Toxic Aleukia,” in Myco￾toxic Fungi, Mycotoxins, Mycotoxicoses: An Encyclopedic Handbook, vol. 3, Mycotoxicoses of Man 
and Plants: Mycotoxin Control and Regulatory Practices, ed. Thomas D. Wyllie and Lawrence G. 
Morehouse (New York: Marcel Dekker, 1978), 21–86.
40. Outbreaks of ergotism in the twentieth century included a spate of cases among Jewish 
immigrants from Central Europe living in Manchester in 1927, and 250 poisonings in the town 
of Pont St. Esprit in southern France in the 1950s. Although ergotism fits many of the facts of 
the mass psychosis that afflicted the residents of Pont St. Esprit, mercury contamination of 
bread flour is one of several alternative explanations. Other eruptions occurred in India, and 
ergotism continues to flare up in Ethiopia: Sarah Belser-Ehrlich, Ashley Harper, John Hussey, 
and Robert Hallock, “Human and Cattle Ergotism since 1900: Symptoms, Outbreaks, and 
Regulations,” Toxicology and Industrial Health 29, no. 4 (2013): 307–316.
41. Noreddine Benkerroum, “Chronic and Acute Toxicities of Aflatoxins: Mechanisms of 
Action,” International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health 17, no. 2 (2020): 423; 
Stephanie Kraft, Lisa Buchenauer, and Tobias Polte, “Mold, Mycotoxins and a Dysregulated 
Immune System: A Combination of Concern?,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 22, 
no. 22 (2021): 12269.
42. J. W. Bennett and M. Klich, “Mycotoxins,” Clinical Microbiology Reviews 16, no. 3 (2003): 
497–516.212 notes to chapter 9
43. Yun Yun Gong, Sinead Watson, and Michael N. Routledge, “Aflatoxin Exposure and 
Associated Human Health Effects, a Review of Epidemiological Studies,” Food Safety (Japan)
4, no. 1 (2016): 14–27.
44. Robert J. Lee, Alan D. Workman, Ryan M. Carey, Bei Chen, Philip L. Rosen, Laurel 
Doghramji, Nithin D. Adappa, et al., “Fungal Aflatoxins Reduce Respiratory Mucosal Ciliary 
Function,” Scientific Reports 6 (2016): 33221.
45. Dr. Harriet Burge, a distinguished professor in the Harvard School of Public Health, 
demonstrated the improbability of significant inhalational exposure to mycotoxins in mold￾damaged homes by calculating the number of spores inhaled per hour: Harriet A. Burge, “Fungi: 
Toxic Killers or Unavoidable Nuisances?,” Annals of Allergy, Asthma, and Immunology 87 (2001): 
52–56.
46. Nicholas P. Money, Carpet Monsters and Killer Spores: A Natural History of Toxic Mold
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2004).
47. Joan W. Bennett, “The Fungi That Ate My House,” Science 349 (2015): 1018; Arati A. In￾amdar, Shannon Morath, and Joan W. Bennett, “Fungal Volatile Organic Compounds: More 
Than Just a Funky Smell?,” Annual Review of Microbiology 74, no. 1 (2020): 101–116.
48. Nandhitha Venkatesh and Nancy P. Keller, “Mycotoxins in Conversation with Bacteria 
and Fungi,” Frontiers in Microbiology 10 (2019): 403; Daniel G. Panaccione, “Origins and Signifi￾cance of Ergot Alkaloid Diversity in Fungi,” FEMS Microbiology Letters 251, no. 1 (2005): 9–17.
49. The potency of mycotoxins has not been lost on military strategists, and molds are un￾doubtedly part of secret bioweapons research. Mary K. Klassen-Fischer, “Fungi as Bioweapons,” 
Clinics in Laboratory Medicine 26, no. 2 (2006): 387–395; Edyta Janik-Karpińska, Michał Cere￾munga, Joanna Saluk-Bijak, and Michał Bijak, “Biological Toxins as the Potential Tools for 
Bioterrorism,” International Journal of Molecular Sciences 20 (2019): 1181.
50. Nicholas P. Money, The Rise of Yeast: How the Sugar Fungus Shaped Civilization (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2018).
CHAPTER NINE
1. Robert Alter, The Hebrew Bible, vol. 2, Prophets (New York: Norton, 2019), Ezekiel 1:15–17, 
pp. 1054–1055; Jacques M. Chevalier, A Postmodern Revelation: Signs of Astrology and the Apoca￾lypse (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 1997), 223–263; Shawn Z. Aster, “Ezekiel’s Adapta￾tion of Mesopotamian Melammu,” Die Welt des Orients 45, no. 1 (2015): 10–21.
2. Flavie Waters, Jan D. Blom, Thien T. Dang-Vu, Allan J. Cheyne, Ben Alderson-Day, Peter 
Woodruff, and Daniel Collerton, “What Is the Link between Hallucinations, Dreams, and 
Hypnagogic-Hypnopompic Experiences?,” Schizophrenia Bulletin 42, no. 5 (2016): 1098–1109; 
Rainer Kraehenmann, “Dreams and Psychedelics: Neurophenomenological Comparison and 
Therapeutic Implications,” Current Neuropharmacology 15, no. 7 (2017): 1032–1042; Camila Sanz, 
Federico Zamberlan, Earth Erowid, Fire Erowid, and Enzo Tagliazucchi, “The Experience Elic￾ited by Hallucinogens Presents the Highest Similarity to Dreaming within a Large Database of 
Psychoactive Substance Reports,” Frontiers in Neuroscience 12 (2018): 7; Benjamin Baird, Ser￾gio A. Mota-Rolim, and Martin Dresler, “The Cognitive Neuroscience of Lucid Dreaming,” 
Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 100 (2019): 305–323. Lucid dreaming refers to dreams in notes to chapter 9 213
which we become aware that we are dreaming as the action takes place, but there does not seem 
to be a clear distinction between this experience and very vivid dreams like my fantasy of the 
swirling cosmos.
3. Psilocin slips through cell membranes more easily than serotonin and binds with receptor 
proteins inside nerve cells. Serotonin stays on the outside. This difference may explain some of 
the longer-term effects of the mushroom alkaloid on the nervous system: Maxemiliano V. Var￾gas, Lee E. Dunlap, Chunyang Dong, Samuel J. Carter, Robert J. Tombari, Shekib A. Jami, 
Lindsay P. Cameron, et al., “Psychedelics Promote Neuroplasticity through the Activation of 
Intracellular 5-HT2A Receptors,” Science 379 (2023): 700–706.
4. Jiawei Zhang, “Basic Neural Units of the Brain: Neurons, Synapses and Action Potential,” 
May 30, 2019, arXiv:1906.01703.
5. The description of the brain as a computer is apt, as long as we recognize the limitations of 
this metaphor. Unlike a digital computer, the brain is an analog device that processes information 
by gathering data from multiple sources to produce approximate answers or personal represen￾tations rather than the precise and unvarying output of computers. The digital description is 
more useful at the cellular level because each of the nerve cells in the brain is limited to transmit￾ting or blocking an incoming electrical signal: Romaine Brette, “Brains as Computers: Metaphor, 
Analogy, Theory or Fact?,” Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution 10 (2022): 878729; Blake A. Richards 
and Timothy P. Lillicrap, “The Brain-Computer Metaphor Debate Is Useless: A Matter of Se￾mantics,” Frontiers of Computer Science 4 (2022): 810358. It is also noteworthy that the three￾pound ball of jelly in the skull draws no more energy than a lightbulb, whereas the supercomputer 
lives in an air-conditioned vault and consumes more electricity than a small city.
6. Drummond E.-W. McCulloch, Gitte M. Knudsen, Frederick S. Barrett, Manoj K. Doss, 
Robin L. Carhart-Harris, Fernando E. Rosas, Gustavo Deco, et al., “Psychedelic Resting-State 
Neuroimaging: A Review and Perspective on Balancing Replication and Novel Analyses,” Neu￾roscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 138 (2022): 104689.
7. N. L. Mason, K. P. C. Kuypers, F. Müller, J. Reckweg, D. H. T. Tse, S. W. Toennes, 
N. R. P. W. Hutten, et al., “Me, Myself, Bye: Regional Alterations in Glutamate and the Experi￾ence of Ego Dissolution with Psilocybin,” Neuropsychopharmacology 45 (2020): 2003–2011.
8. Lea J. Mertens, Matthew B. Wall, Leor Roseman, Lysia Demetriou, David J. Nutt, and 
Robin L. Carhart-Harris, “Therapeutic Mechanisms of Psilocybin: Changes in Amygdala 
and Prefrontal Functional Connectivity during Emotional Processing after Psilocybin for 
Treatment-Resistant Depression,” Journal of Psychopharmacology 34, no. 2 (2020): 167–180. The 
amygdala, or amygdala nuclei, are paired clusters of neurons buried in the brain that are involved 
in processing memories, making decisions, and controlling fear, aggression, and anxiety.
9. Nina Schimmel, Joost J. Breeksema, Sanne Y. Smith-Apeldoorn, Jolien Veraart, Wim van 
den Brink, and Robert A. Schoevers, “Psychedelics for the Treatment of Depression, Anxiety, 
and Existential Distress in Patients with a Terminal Illness: A Systematic Review,” Psychophar￾macology (Berlin) 239, no. 1 (2022): 15–33.
10. Gabrielle I. Agin-Liebes, Tara Malone, Matthew M. Yalch, Sarah E. Mennenga, K. Linnae 
Ponté, Jeffrey Guss, Anthony P. Bossis, et al., “Long-Term Follow-Up of Psilocybin-Assisted 
Psychotherapy for Psychiatric and Existential Distress in Patients with Life-Threatening Can￾cer,” Journal of Psychopharmacology 34, no. 2 (2020): 155–166.214 notes to chapter 9
11. Erwin Krediet, Tijmen Bostoen, Joost Breeksema, Annette van Schagen, Torsten 
Passie, and Eric Vermetten, “Reviewing the Potential of Psychedelics for the Treatment of 
PTSD,” International Journal of Neuropsychopharmacology 23, no. 6 (2020): 385–400; Mi￾chael P. Bogenschutz, Stephen Ross, Snehal Bhatt, Tara Baron, Alyssa A. Forcehimes, Eu￾gene Laska, Sarah E. Mennenga, et al., “Percentage of Heavy Drinking Days Following 
Psilocybin-Assisted Psychotherapy vs Placebo in the Treatment of Adult Patients with Al￾cohol Use Disorder: A Randomized Clinical Trial,” JAMA Psychiatry (2022), doi:10.1001/
jamapsychiatry.2022.2096; Meg J. Spriggs, Hannah M. Douglass, Rebecca J. Park, Tim Read, 
Jennifer L. Danby, Frederico J. C. de Magalhães, Kirsty L. Alderton, et al., “Study Protocol 
for ‘Psilocybin as a Treatment for Anorexia Nervosa: A Pilot Study,’” Frontiers in Psychiatry
12 (2021): 735523.
12. Richard E. Daws, Christopher Timmermann, Bruna Giribaldi, James D. Sexton, Mat￾thew B. Wall, David Erritzoe, Loer Roseman, et al., “Increased Global Integration in the Brain 
after Psilocybin Therapy for Depression,” Nature Medicine 28, no. 4 (2022): 844–851; Ling-Xiao 
Shao, Clara Liao, Ian Gregg, Pasha A. Davoudian, Neil K. Savalia, Kristin Delagarza, and Alex C. 
Kwan, “Psilocybin Induces Rapid and Persistent Growth of Dendritic Spines in Frontal Cortex 
In Vivo,” Neuron 109, no. 16 (2021): 2535–2544.
13. Sean McClintock, “Why Investors Are Turning toward Psychedelic Healthcare Compa￾nies,” Fortune, September 4, 2021; Yeji J. Lee, “What to Know about the Booming Psychedelics 
Industry Where Companies Are Racing to Turn Magic Mushrooms and MDMA into Approved 
Medicines,” Insider, June 30, 2022; Michelle Lhooq, “With Magic Mushrooms, Small Businesses 
Lead, Hoping Laws Will Follow,” Bloomberg Businessweek, July 21, 2022.
14. “Oregon Psilocybin Services Section Summary of Measure 109: Listening Session De￾cember 13–15, 2021,” Oregon Health Authority, December 2021, https://www.oregon.gov/oha
/PH/PREVENTIONWELLNESS/Documents/M109-Summary-2021-Dec.pdf.
15. Andrew Selsky, “Oregon Voters Face 2 Drug Measures on November Ballot,” AP News, 
November 4, 2020.
16. Theresa M. Carbonaro, Matthew P. Bradstreet, Frederick S. Barrett, Katherine A. 
MacLean, Robert Jesse, Matthew W. Johnson, and Roland R. Griffiths, “Survey Study of Challeng￾ing Experiences after Ingesting Psilocybin Mushrooms: Acute and Enduring Positive and 
Negative Consequences,” Journal of Psychopharmacology 30, no. 12 (2016): 1268–1278.
17. Andy Letcher, Shroom: A Cultural History of the Magic Mushroom (London: Faber and 
Faber, 2006).
18. O. T. Oss and O. N. Oeric, Psilocybin: Magic Mushroom Grower’s Guide (Berkeley, CA: 
And/Or Press, 1976). Otos is derived from the Greek word meaning insatiate (never satisfied) 
and oneiric is an adjective that refers to dreams. The coauthors were pseudonyms for McKenna, 
who wrote the foreword for his book under his real name.
19. N. Milne, P. Thomsen, N. Mølgaard Knudsen, P. Rubaszka, M. Kristensen, and I. Boro￾dina, “Metabolic Engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae for the de Novo Production of Psilo￾cybin and Related Tryptamine Derivatives,” Metabolic Engineering 60 (2020): 25–36; William J. 
Gibbons, Madeline G. McKinney, Philip J. O’Dell, Brooke A. Bollinger, and J. Andrew Jones, 
“Homebrewed Psilocybin: Can New Routes for Pharmaceutical Psilocybin Production Enable 
Recreational Use?,” Bioengineered 12, no. 1 (2021): 8863–8871.notes to chapter 9 215
20. Janis Fricke, Felix Blei, and Dirk Hoffmeister, “Enzymatic Synthesis of Psilocybin,” 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 56, no. 40 (2017): 12352–12355; R. C. Van Court, M. S. 
Wiseman, K. W. Meyer, D. J. Ballhorn, K. R. Amses, J. C. Slot, B. T. M. Dentinger, et al., “Diver￾sity, Biology, and History of Psilocybin-Containing Fungi: Suggestions for Research and Tech￾nological Development,” Fungal Biology 126, no. 4 (2022): 308–319.
21. Hannah T. Reynolds, Vinod Vijayakumar, Emile Gluck-Thaler, Hailee Brynn Korotkin, 
Patrick Brandon Matheny, and Jason C. Slot, “Horizontal Gene Cluster Transfer Increased 
Hallucinogenic Mushroom Diversity,” Evolution Letters 2, no. 2 (2018): 88–101.
22. Kevin McKernan, Liam Kane, Yvonne Helbert, Lei Zhang, Nathan Houde, and Stephen 
McLaughlin, “A Whole Genome Atlas of 81 Psilocybe Genomes as a Resource for Psilocybin 
Production,” F1000Research 10 (2021): 961.
23. M. Hibicke and C. D. Nichols, “Validation of the Forced Swim Test in Drosophila, and 
Its Use to Demonstrate Psilocybin Has Long-Lasting Antidepressant-Like Effects in Flies,” 
Scientific Reports 12 (2022): 10019. Psilocybin appears to boost the optimism of fruit flies 
immersed in water without any means of escape. This experiment is a scaled-down version 
of an unpleasant laboratory test in which rodents are dropped into glass cylinders filled 
with water to induce feelings of hopelessness. The animals struggle to climb out of the water 
before giving up and resorting to paddling to stay afloat. Animals attempt to escape this 
hopeless situation longer and harder if they are treated with antidepressants, which seems 
to parallel the development and relief of depression in humans. Like mice and rats, fruit flies 
fed with psilocybin struggle longer than controls, who give up the ghost after a few seconds. 
The details of the experiment show that the fruit flies respond to immersion in water with 
periods of immobility interspersed with activity and a shortening of the immobile periods 
under the influence of psilocybin. Fungus gnats have not been tortured in the same way, but 
their brains are similar to fruit flies, and our brains are constructed from the same cellular 
hardware as those of insects.
24. Although most spores are dispersed from gilled mushrooms by wind, insects that visit 
fruit bodies consume spores and carry them in their digestive systems when they fly away. These 
spores are deposited in the feces of the insects, which provides nutritional support for the 
growth of the young mycelia when they germinate. The insect attraction model for psilocybin 
is supported by the presence of the highest levels of the compound in the caps of these mush￾rooms: Klára Gotvaldová, Kateřina Hájková, Jan Borovička, Radek Jurok, Petra Cihlářová, and 
Martin Kuchař, “Stability of Psilocybin and Its Four Analogs in the Biomass of the Psychotropic 
Mushroom Psilocybe cubensis,” Drug Testing and Analysis 13 (2021): 439–446.
25. Ali R. Awan, Jaclyn M. Winter, Daniel Turner, William M. Shaw, Laura M. Suz, Alexan￾der J. Bradshaw, Tom Ellis, et al., “Convergent Evolution of Psilocybin Biosynthesis by Psyche￾delic Mushrooms,” bioRxiv (2018), https://doi.org/10.1101/374199.
26. Brian Lovett, Raymond J. St. Leger, and Henrik H. de Fine, “Going Gentle into That 
Pathogen-Induced Goodnight,” Journal of Invertebrate Pathology 174 (2020): 107398. “Pathogen￾Induced Good Night” would be Thomasian and make more grammatical sense.
27. Greg R. Boyce, Emile Gluck-Thaler, Jason C. Slot, Jason E. Stajich, William J. Davis, 
Tim Y. James, John R. Cooley, et al., “Psychoactive Plant- and Mushroom-Associated Alkaloids 
from Two Behavior Modifying Cicada Pathogens,” Fungal Ecology 41 (2019): 147–164.216 notes to chapter 9
28. Claudius Lenz, Jonas Wick, Daniel Braga, María García-Altares, Gerald Lackner, Chris￾tian Hertweck, Markus Gressler, et al., “Injury-Triggered Blueing Reactions of Psilocybe “Magic” 
Mushrooms,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 59, no. 4 (2020): 1450–1454.
29. Quentin Carboué and Michel Lopez, “Amanita muscaria: Ecology, Chemistry, Myths,” 
Encyclopedia 1 (2021): 905–914.
30. In English, fly was a familiar term for a demon in the sixteenth century. Reginald Scot, 
The Discoverie of Witchcraft (London: William Brome, 1584), refers to “a flie, otherwise called a 
divell or familiar” (III, xv, p. 65), and “Beelzebub, which signifieth the lord of the flies, bicause 
he taketh everie simple thing in his web” (xix, p. 518). Pieces of the mushroom soaked or boiled 
in milk attract flies that are poisoned by ibotenic acid, which is the precursor or prodrug of 
muscimol: Mateja Lumpert and Samo Kreft, “Catching Flies with Amanita muscaria: Tradi￾tional Recipes from Slovenia and Their Efficacy in the Extraction of Ibotenic Acid,” Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 187 (2016): 1–8.
31. Jan D. Blom, “Alice in Wonderland Syndrome: A Systematic Review,” Neurology Clinical 
Practice 6, no. 3 (2016): 259–270.
32. L. Alison McInnes, Jimmy J. Qian, Rishab S. Gargeya, Charles DeBattista, and Boris D. 
Heifets, “A Retrospective Analysis of Ketamine Intravenous Therapy for Depression in Real￾World Care Settings,” Journal of Affective Disorders 301 (2022): 486–495.
33. Francesca I. Rampolli, Premiila Kamler, Claudio C. Carlino, and Francesca Bedussi, “The 
Deceptive Mushroom: Accidental Amanita muscaria Poisoning,” European Journal of Case Re￾ports in Internal Medicine 8, no. 3 (2021): 002212. The same toxins are responsible for poisonings 
by the panther cap, Amanita pantherina: Leszek Satora, Dorota Pach, Krysztof Ciszowski, and 
Lidia Winnik, “Panther Cap Amanita pantherina Poisoning Case Report and Review,” Toxicon
47, no. 5 (2006): 605–607.
34. The literature on ethnomycology is vast. If readers are unfamiliar with this subject and 
are interested in exploring it further, a simple web search will lead to a wealth of online essays, 
books, and podcasts on the topic. The following paper also provides a helpful overview of the 
field: Giorgio Samorini, “The Oldest Archeological Data Evidencing the Relationship of Homo 
sapiens with Psychoactive Plants: A Worldwide Overview,” Journal of Psychedelic Studies 3, no. 2 
(2019): 63–80.
35. Alter, Hebrew Bible, vol. 2, Ezekiel 28:13–14, p. 1136.
36. Robert Graves, “Mushrooms, Food of the Gods,” The Atlantic, August 1957, https://www
.math.uci.edu/~vbaranov/nicetexts/eng/mushrooms.html.
37. R. Gordon Wasson, Soma: Divine Mushroom of Immortality (New York: Harcourt, Brace 
& World, 1969); Kevin Feeney, “Revisiting Wasson’s Soma: Exploring the Effects of Preparation 
on the Chemistry of Amanita Muscaria,” Journal of Psychoactive Drugs 42, no. 4 (2010): 
499–506.
38. John M. Allegro, The Sacred Mushroom and the Cross: A Study of the Nature and Origins 
of Christianity within the Fertility Cults of the Ancient Near East (London: Hodder & Stoughton, 
1970).
39. C. F. Evans, “The Scholars and the World of God,” The Times (London), November 11, 
1971. Wasson was appalled by Allegro’s shoddy scholarship, writing, “I think that he jumped to 
unwarranted conclusions on scanty evidence. And when you make such blunders as attributing notes to chapter 9 217
the Hebrew language, the Greek language, to Sumerian—that is unacceptable to any linguist. 
The Sumerian language is parent to no language and no one knows where it came from.” This 
critique is quoted from the following compilation: Jan Irvin, “The Defamation of Allegro,” in 
Jan Irvin and Andrew Rutajit, Astrotheology and Shamanism (San Diego: The Book Tree, 2005), 
51–58, http://www.johnallegro.org/the-defamation-of-allegro-by-jan-irvin-excerpted-from
-astrotheology-shamanism/.
40. Jerry B. Brown and Julie M. Brown, The Psychedelic Gospels: The Secret History of Hallu￾cinogens in Christianity (Rochester, VT: Park Street Press, 2016); and “Entheogens in Christian 
Art: Wasson, Allegro, and the Psychedelic Gospels,” Journal of Psychedelic Studies 3, no. 2 (2019): 
142–163.
41. R. R. Griffiths, W. A. Richards, U. McCann, and R. Jesse, “Psilocybin Can Occasion 
Mystical-Type Experiences Having Substantial and Sustained Personal Meaning and Spiritual 
Significance,” Psychopharmacology 187 (2006): 268–283; R. R. Griffiths, W. A. Richards, M. W. 
Johnson, U. McCann, and R. Jesse, “Mystical-Type Experiences Occasioned by Psilocybin Me￾diate the Attribution of Personal Meaning and Spiritual Significance 14 Months Later,” Journal 
of Psychopharmacology 22, no. 6 (2008): 621–632.
42. Roland R. Griffiths, Ethan S. Hurwitz, Alan K. Davis, Matthew W. Johnson, and Robert 
Jesse, “Survey of Subjective ‘God Encounter Experiences’: Comparisons among Naturally Oc￾curring Experiences and Those Occasioned by the Classic Psychedelics Psilocybin, LSD, Aya￾huasca, or DMT,” PLoS ONE 14, no. 4 (2016): e0214377.
43. For a provocative and objective article about the interpretation of mystical experiences 
produced by drug use, see Huston Smith, “Do Drugs Have Religious Import?,” Journal of Phi￾losophy 61, no. 18 (1964): 517–530.
44. Aldous Huxley, The Doors of Perception & Heaven and Hell (New York: Harper, 2009). 
Huxley’s description of the flower arrangement appears on pp. 16–17. Huxley took his title from 
William Blake, The Marriage of Heaven and Hell (undated poem written in the 1790s), and Jim 
Morrison, the name of his band. Without the assistance of mushrooms, Blake wrote, “If the 
doors of perception were cleansed every thing would appear to man as it is, Infinite.”
45. Aldous Huxley, Brave New World (London: Chatto and Windus, 1932), and Brave New 
World Revisited (New York: Harper, 1958).
46. Robin L. Carhart-Harris, Robert Leech, Peter J. Hellyer, Murray Shanahan, Amanda 
Feilding, Enzo Tagliazucchi, Dante R. Chialvo, et al., “The Entropic Brain: A Theory of Con￾scious States Informed by Neuroimaging Research with Psychedelic Drugs,” Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience 8 (2014): 20; Rubén Herzog, Pedro A. M. Mediano, Fernando E. Rosas, Robin 
Carhart-Harris, Yonatan S. Prl, Enzo Tagliazucchi, and Rodrigo Cofre, “A Mechanistic Model of 
the Neural Entropy Increase Elicited by Psychedelic Drugs,” Scientific Reports 10 (2020): 17725.
47. Steven D. Hollon, Paul W. Andrews, Daisy R. Singla, Marta M. Maslej, and Benoit H. 
Mulsant, “Evolutionary Theory and the Treatment of Depression: It Is All About the Squids 
and the Sea Bass,” Behavior Research and Therapy 143 (2021): 103849.
48. Robert Burton, The Anatomy of Melancholy (Oxford: John Litchfield and James Short, 
for Henry Cripps, 1621), Part II, Sect. 3. The quote derives from Horace’s Odes, I.24.
49. Chris Paling, A Very Nice Rejection Letter: Diary of a Novelist (London: Constable, 
2021), 151.218 notes to chapter 10
50. W. Steven Gilbert, The Life and Work of Dennis Potter (Woodstock, NY: Overlook Press, 
1998), 294.
51. Microdosing has become a popular approach to achieving the supposed creative benefits 
of the drug without losing practical contact with the immediate tasks of the day: Federico Ca￾vanna, Stephanie Muller, Laura A. de la Fuente, Federico Zamberlan, Matías Palmucci, Lucie 
Janeckova, Martin Kuchar, et al., “Microdosing with Psilocybin Mushrooms: A Double-Blind 
Placebo-Controlled Study,” Translational Psychiatry 12 (2022): 307. Unfortunately, this study 
found no evidence that microdosing increased feelings of well-being, creativity, or cognitive 
function beyond a placebo effect.
CHAPTER TEN
1. Stephen R. Kane, Zhexing Li, Eric T. Wolf, Colby Ostberg, and Michelle L. Hill, “Eccen￾tricity Driven Climate Effects in the Kepler-1649 System,” Astronomical Journal 161, no. 1 (2020): 
31. Kepler 1649c is three quadrillion kilometers from Earth, and it would take six million years 
for peopled or unpeopled probes to get there.
2. Yinon M. Bar-On, Rob Phillips, and Ron Milo, “The Biomass Distribution on Earth,” 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 115, no. 25 (2018): 6506–6511. Plants make 
up 80 percent of the weight of the biosphere; 2 percent of the biomass lives in fungi, and animals 
contribute less than 1 percent to the sum of biology. Land plants make up most of the billions 
of tons of botany, and one-third of the weight of plants is in their roots, where they form mycor￾rhizas with fungi.
3. Billions of elms and American chestnuts were wiped out in the twentieth century, and 
eucalyptus trees and pines are plagued by rusts today. Roderick J. Fensham and Julian Radford￾Smith, “Unprecedented Extinction of Tree Species by Fungal Disease,” Biological Conservation
261 (2021): 109276; Erin Shanahan, Kathryn M. Irvine, David Thoma, Siri Wilmoth, Andrew 
Ray, Kristin Legg, and Henry Shovic, “Whitebark Pine Mortality Related to White Pine Blister 
Rust, Mountain Pine Beetle Outbreak, and Water Availability,” Ecosphere 7, no. 12 (2016): e01610. 
These pandemic diseases are spread by global commerce and exacerbated by climate change.
4. N. C. Johnson, J. H. Graham, and F. A. Smith, “Functioning of Mycorrhizal Associations 
along the Mutualism-Parasitism Continuum,” New Phytologist 135, no. 4 (1997): 575–586; Nancy￾Collins Johnson and James H. Graham, “The Continuum Concept Remains a Useful Frame￾work for Studying Mycorrhizal Functioning,” Plant and Soil 363 (2013): 411–419; Marc-André 
Selosse, Laure Schneider-Maunoury, and Florent Martos, “Time to Re-Think Fungal Ecology? 
Fungal Ecological Niches Are Often Prejudged,” New Phytologist 217 (2018): 968–972. Even the 
supposedly saintly mycorrhizal fungi can stray from their benevolence toward plants by becom￾ing antagonistic toward their hosts and behaving as parasites. Truffles are ectomycorrhizal with 
oaks and hazels and create clear patches around their hosts called brûlés by parasitizing weeds 
and grasses that compete for soil nutrients: I. Plattner and I. R. Hall, “Parasitism of Non-Host 
Plants by the Mycorrhizal Fungus Tuber melanosporum,” Mycological Research 99, no. 11 (1995): 
1367–1370. Matsutake species seem particularly catholic, feeding as mutualists, as parasites, and 
as saprotrophs on dead roots: Wang Yun, Ian R. Hall, and Lynley A. Evans, “Ectomycorrhizal 
Fungi with Edible Fruiting Bodies 1. Tricholoma matsutake and Related Fungi,” Economic Botanynotes to chapter 10 219
51, no. 3 (1997): 311–327; Lin-Min Vaario, Taina Pennanen, Tytti Sarjala, Eira-Maija Savonen, 
and Jussi Heinonsalo, “Ectomycorrhization of Tricholoma matsutake and Two Major Conifers 
in Finland—An Assessment of In Vitro Mycorrhiza Formation,” Mycorrhiza 20, no. 7 (2010): 
511–518; Wang Yun, “Matsutake: A Natural Biofertilizer?,” in Handbook of Microbial Fertilizers, 
ed. M. K. Rai (Binghamton, NY: Food Products Press, 2006), 497–541.
5. Suzanne W. Simard, David A. Perry, Melanie D. Jones, David D. Myrold, Daniel M. Durall, 
and Randy Molina, “Net Transfer of Carbon between Ectomycorrhizal Tree Species in the 
Field,” Nature 388 (1997): 579–582. The importance of the fungi in nutrient transfer between 
trees was questioned when this classic study was published and remains controversial: David 
Robinson and Alastair Fitter, “The Magnitude and Control of Carbon Transfer between Plants 
Linked by a Common Mycorrhizal Network,” Journal of Experimental Botany 50, no. 330 (1999): 
9–13; Monika A. Gorzelak, Benjamin H. Ellert, and Leho Tedersoo, “Mycorrhizas Transfer 
Carbon in a Mature Mixed Forest,” Molecular Ecology 29 (2020): 2315–2317; Justine Karst, Mela￾nie D. Jones, and Jason D. Hoeksema, “Positive Citation Bias and Overinterpreted Results Lead 
to Misinformation on Common Mycorrhizal Networks in Forests,” Nature Ecology and Evolution
(2023), https://doi.org/10.1038/s41559-023-01986-1.
6. Thomas I. Wilkes, “Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi in Agriculture,” Encyclopedia 1 (2021): 
1132–1154; Manjula Novindarajulu, Philip E. Pfeffer, Hairu Jin, Jehad Abubaker, David D. Douds, 
James W. Allen, Heike Bücking, et al., “Nitrogen Transfer in the Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Sym￾biosis,” Nature 435 (2005): 819–823; Joanne Leigh, Angela Hodge, and Alastair H. Fitter, “Arbus￾cular Mycorrhizal Fungi Can Transfer Substantial Amounts of Nitrogen to Their Host Plant 
from Organic Material,” New Phytologist 181, no. 1 (2009): 199–207; Sally E. Smith, Iver Jakobsen, 
Mette Grønlund, and F. Andrew Smith, “Roles of Arbuscular Mycorrhizas in Plant Phosphorus 
Nutrition: Interactions between Pathways of Phosphorus Uptake in Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Roots Have Important Implications for Understanding and Manipulating Plant Phosphorus 
Acquisition,” Plant Physiology 156, no. 3 (2011): 1050–1057; Kevin Garcia and Sabine D. Zim￾mermann, “The Role of Mycorrhizal Associations in Plant Potassium Nutrition,” Frontiers in 
Plant Science 5 (2014): 337.
7. Ruairidh J. H. Sawers, M. Rosario Ramírez-Flores, Víctor Olalde-Portugal, and Uta Pasz￾kowski, “The Impact of Domestication and Crop Improvement on Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Symbiosis in Cereals: Insights from Genetics and Genomics,” New Phytologist 220, no. 4 (2018): 
1135–1140; Jeremiah A. Henning, Evan Weiher, Yali D. Lee, Deborah Freund, Artur Stefanski, 
and Stephen P. Bentivenga, “Mycorrhizal Fungal Spore Community Structure in a Manipulated 
Prairie,” Restoration Ecology 26 (2018): 124–133.
8. Laura A. Bolte, Arnau V. Vila, Floris Imhann, Valerie Collij, Ranko Gacesa, Vera Peters, 
Cisca Wijmenga, et al., “Long-Term Dietary Patterns Are Associated with Pro-Inflammatory 
and Anti-Inflammatory Features of the Gut Microbiome,” Gut 70, no. 7 (2021): 1287–1298; Ber￾nard Srour, Melissa C. Kordahi, Erica Bonazzi, Mélanie Deschasaux-Tanguy, Mathilde Touvier, 
and Benoit Chassaing, “Ultra-Processed Foods and Human Health: From Epidemiological 
Evidence to Mechanistic Insights,” Lancet Gastroenterology and Hepatology 7 (2022): 1128–1140. 
The explicit effect of a fast-food diet on the gut fungi is inferred from studies on mice (see 
chapter 5): Tahliyah S. Mims, Qusai Abdallah, Justin D. Stewart, Sydney P. Watts, Catrina T. 
White, Thomas V. Rousselle, Ankush Gosain, et al., “The Gut Mycobiome of Healthy Mice Is 220 notes to chapter 10
Shaped by the Environment and Correlates with Metabolic Outcomes in Response to Diet,” 
Communications Biology 4, no. 1 (2021): 281; Jata Shankar, “Food Habit Associated Mycobiota 
Composition and Their Impact on Human Health,” Frontiers in Nutrition 8 (2021): 773577.
9. Karin Hage-Ahmed, Kathrin Rosner, and Siegred Steinkellner, “Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Fungi and Their Response to Pesticides,” Pest Management 75, no. 3 (2019): 583–590; Anna 
Edlinger, Gina Garland, Kyle Hartman, Samiran Banerjee, Florine Degrune, Pablo García￾Palacios, Sara Hallin, et al., “Agricultural Management and Pesticide Use Reduce the Function￾ing of Beneficial Plant Symbionts,” Nature Ecology and Evolution 6 (2022): 1145–1154; Gavin 
Duley and Emanuele Boselli, “Mutual Plant-Fungi Symbiosis Compromised by Fungicide Use,” 
Communications Biology 5 (2022): 1069.
10. Megan H. Ryan and James Graham, “Little Evidence That Farmers Should Consider 
Abundance or Diversity of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi When Managing Crops,” New Phy￾tologist 220, no. 4 (2018): 1092–1107; Matthias C. Rillig, Carlos A. Aguilar-Trigueros, Tessa 
Camenzind, Timothy R. Cavagnaro, Florine Degrune, Pierre Hohmann, Daniel R. Lammel, 
et al., “Why Farmers Should Manage the Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Symbiosis,” New Phytologist
222, no. 3 (2019): 1171–1175.
11. Zahangir Kabir, “Tillage or No-Tillage: Impact on Mycorrhizae,” Canadian Journal 
of Plant Science 85, no. 1 (2015): 23–29; Xingli Lu, Xingneng Lu, and Yuncheng Liao, “Effect of 
Tillage Treatment on the Diversity of Soil Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungal and Soil Aggregate￾Associated Carbon Content,” Frontiers in Microbiology 9 (2018): 2986; Chen Zhu, Ning Ling, 
Junjie Guo, Min Wang, Shiwei Guo, and Qirong Shen, “Impacts of Fertilization Regimes on 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungal (AMF) Community Composition Were Correlated with Or￾ganic Matter Composition in Maize Rhizosphere Soil,” Frontiers in Microbiology 7 (2016): 1840.
12. Inês Rocha, Isabel Duarte, Ying Ma, Pablo Souza-Alonso, Aleš Látr, Miroslav Vosátka, 
Helena Freitas, et al., “Seed Coating with Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi for Improved Field 
Production of Chickpea,” Agronomy 9 (2019): 471.
13. M. Eric Benbow, Philip S. Barton, Michael D. Ulyshen, James C. Beasley, Travis L. 
DeVault, Michael S. Strickland, Jeffery K. Tomberlin, et al., “Necrobiome Framework for Bridg￾ing Decomposition Ecology of Autotrophically and Heterotrophically Derived Organic Matter,” 
Ecological Monographs 89, no. 1 (2019): e01331; Peter G. Kennedy and François Maillard, 
“Knowns and Unknowns of the Soil Fungal Necrobiome,” Trends in Microbiology 31, no. 2 
(2023): 173–180.
14. J. J. C. Sidrim, R. E. Moreira Filho, R. A. Cordeiro, M. F. G. Rocha, E. P. Caetano, A. J. 
Monteiro, and R. S. N. Brilhante, “Fungal Microbiota Dynamics as a Postmortem Investigation 
Tool: Focus on Aspergillus, Penicillium and Candida Species,” Journal of Applied Microbiology 108 
(2010): 1751–1756; Xiaoliang Fu, Juanjuan Guo, Dmitrijs Finkelbergs, Jing He, Lagabaiyila Zha, 
Yadong Guo, and Jifeng Cai, “Fungal Succession during Mammalian Cadaver Decomposition 
and Potential Forensic Implications,” Scientific Reports 9 (2019): 12907.
15. Zohreh Shariatinia, “Heidegger’s Ideas about Death,” Pacific Science Review B: Humanities 
and Social Sciences 1, no. 2 (2015): 92–97. This short paper by an Iranian scholar covers the es￾sentials of Heidegger’s thinking on death without a hint of philosophical jargon.
16. Katie Rogers, “Mushroom Suits, Biodegradable Urns and Death’s Green Frontier,” New 
York Times, April 22, 2016.notes to chapter 10 221
17. Piratical metaphors are very helpful for explaining biological facts: Nicholas P. Money 
and Mark W. F. Fischer, “What Is the Weight of a Single Amoeba and Why Does It Matter?,” 
American Biology Teacher 83, no. 9 (2021): 571–574.
18. Thomas Terberger, Mikhail Zhilin, and Svetlana Savchenko, “The Shigir Idol in the Con￾text of Early Art in Eurasia,” Quaternary International 573 (2021): 1–3.
19. Joëlle Dupont, Claire Jacquet, Bruno Dennetière, Sandrine Lacoste, Faisl Bousta, Genev￾iève Orial, Corinne Cruaud, et al., “Invasion of the French Paleolithic Painted Cave of Lascaux 
by Members of the Fusarium solani Species Complex,” Mycologia 99, no. 4 (2007): 526–533.
20. Pedro Martin-Sanchez, Alena Novakova, Fabiola Bastian, Claude Alabouvette, and Ce￾sareo Saiz-Jimenez, “Two New Species of the Genus Ochroconis, O. lascauxensis and O. anomala
Isolated from Black Stains in Lascaux Cave, France,” Fungal Biology 116 (2012): 574–589.
21. Laura Zucconi, Fabiana Canini, Daniela Isola, and Giulia Caneva, “Fungi Affecting Wall 
Paintings of Historical Value: A Worldwide Meta-Analysis of Their Detected Diversity,” Applied 
Sciences 12 (2022): 2988.
22. Nahid Akhtar and M. Amin-Ul Mannan, “Mycoremediation: Expunging Environmental 
Pollutants,” Biotechnology Reports (Amsterdam) 26 (2020): e00452; A. Arun and M. Eyini, 
“Comparative Studies on Lignin and Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons Degradation by Ba￾sidiomycetes Fungi,” Bioresource Technology 102, no. 17 (2011): 8063–8070.
23. Roc Tkavc, Vera Y. Matrosova, Olga E. Grichenko, Cene Gostinčar, Robert P. Volpe, 
Polina Klimenkova, Elena K. Gaidamakova, et al., “Prospects for Fungal Bioremediation of 
Acidic Radioactive Waste Sites: Characterization and Genome Sequence of Rhodotorula tai￾wanensis MD1149,” Frontiers in Microbiology 8 (2018): 2528. The fungus in this study is a yeast 
rather than a filamentous fungus, which is unusually tolerant to gamma radiation.
24. Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life 
in Capitalist Ruins (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2015); Alison Pouliot, The Allure 
of the Fungi (Clayton South, Australia: CSIRO Publishing, 2018).
25. A. Johnson, “Blackfoot Indian Utilization of the Flora of the Northwestern Great Plains,” 
Economic Botany 24 (1970): 301–324; William R. Burk, “Puffball Usages among North American 
Indians,” Journal of Ethnobiology 3 (1983): 55–62.
26. The study of the fungi began in 1729 with the publication of Micheli’s Nova Plantarum 
Genera (see chapter 7, note 32). Corrado Nai and Vera Meyer, “The Beauty and the Morbid: 
Fungi as Source of Inspiration in Contemporary Art,” Fungal Biology and Biotechnology 3 (2016): 
10; Regine Rapp, “On Mycohuman Performances: Fungi in Current Artistic Research,” Fungal 
Biology and Biotechnology 6 (2019): 22.
27. Ofer Grunwald, Ety Harish, and Nir Osherov, “Development of Novel Forms of Fungal 
Art Using Aspergillus nidulans,” Journal of Fungi 7, no. 12 (2021): 1018.
28. Emily Farra, “You Aren’t Tripping: Fungi Are Taking Over Fashion,” Vogue, April 2, 2021.
29. Patricia Kaishian and Hasmik Djoulakian, “The Science Underground: Mycology as a 
Queer Discipline,” Catalyst: Feminism, Theory, Technoscience 6, no. 2 (2020): 1–26.
30. Nicholas P. Money, “Obituary: Cecil Terence Ingold (1905–2010),” Nature 465 (2010): 1025.
31. Martin Grube, Ester Gaya, Håvard Kauserud, Adrian M. Smith, Simon Avery, Sara J. 
Fernstad, Lucia Muggia, et al., “The Next Generation Fungal Diversity Researcher,” Fungal Biol￾ogy Reviews 31, no. 3 (2017): 124–130.222 notes to appendix
32. Nicholas P. Money, “Hyphal and Mycelial Consciousness: The Concept of the Fungal 
Mind,” Fungal Biology 125, no. 4 (2021): 257–259; Kristin Aleklett and Lynne Boddy, “Fungal 
Behaviour: A New Frontier in Behavioural Ecology,” Trends in Ecology and Evolution 36, no. 9 
(2021): 787–796. Each cubic centimeter or milliliter of brain tissue contains sixty-eight million 
neurons, which is similar to the maximum number of hyphae that can be packed into the same 
volume of soil.
33. Mohammad Mahdi Dehshibi and Andrew Adamatzky, “Electrical Activity of Fungi: 
Spikes Detection and Complexity Analysis,” Biosystems 203 (2021): 104373; Andrew Adamatzky, 
“Language of Fungi Derived from Their Electrical Spiking Activity,” Royal Society Open Science
9, no. 4 (2022): 211926.
34. Rhawn G. Joseph, Richard Armstrong, Xinli Wei, Carl Gibson, Olivier Planchon, David 
Duvall, Ashraf M. T. Elewa, et al., “Fungi on Mars? Evidence of Growth and Behavior from 
Sequential Images,” Journal of Cosmology 29, no. 4 (2021): 480–550.
35. DNA profiles from human blood samples can be recovered after they are burned and 
reach a temperature of 1,000 degrees Celsius: A. Klein, O. Krebs, A. Gehl, J. Morgner, L. Reeger, 
C. Augustin, and C. Edler, “Detection of Blood and DNA Traces after Thermal Exposure,” In￾ternational Journal of Legal Medicine 132, no. 4 (2018): 1025–1033.
36. Gerald R. Taylor, Mary R. Henney, and Walter L. Ellis, “Changes in the Fungal Autoflora 
of Apollo Astronauts,” Applied Microbiology 26, no. 5 (1973): 804–813.
37. Adriana Blachowicz, Snehit Mhatre, Nitin K. Singh, Jason M. Wood, Ceth W. Parker, 
Cynthia Ly, Daniel Butler, et al., “The Isolation and Characterization of Rare Mycobiome As￾sociated with Spacecraft Assembly Cleanrooms,” Frontiers in Microbiology 13 (2022): 777133.
38. Aleksandra Checinska, Alexander J. Probst, Parag Vaishampayan, James R. White, Deep￾ika Kumar, Victor G. Stepanov, George E. Fox, et al., “Microbiomes of the Dust Particles Col￾lected from the International Space Station and Spacecraft Assembly Facilities,” Microbiome 3 
(2015): 50.
39. Takashi Sugita, Takashi Yamazaki, Otomi Cho, Satoshi Furukawa, and Chiaki Mukai, 
“The Skin Mycobiome of an Astronaut during a 1-Year Stay on the International Space Station,” 
Medical Mycology 59, no. 1 (2021): 106–109.
40. Donatella Tesei, Anna Jewczynko, Anne M. Lynch, and Camilla Urbaniak, “Understand￾ing the Complexities and Changes in the Astronaut Microbiome for Successful Long-Duration 
Space Missions,” Life 12 (2022): 495.
APPENDIX
1. Jie Tang, Iliyan D. Iliev, Jordan Brown, David M. Underhill, and Vincent A. Funari, “My￾cobiome: Approaches to Analysis of Intestinal Fungi,” Journal of Immunological Methods 421 
(2015): 112–121; Robert Edgar, “Taxonomy Annotation and Guide Tree Errors in 16S rRNA 
Databases,” PeerJ 6 (2018): e5030.
2. Amanda K. Dupuy, Marika S. David, Lu Li, Thomas N. Heider, Jason D. Peterson, Eliza￾beth A. Montano, Anna Dongari-Bagtzoglou, et al., “Redefining the Human Oral Mycobiome 
with Improved Practices in Amplicon-Based Taxonomy: Discovery of Malassezia as a Promi￾nent Commensal,” PLoS ONE 9, no.  3 (2014): e90899; Mallory  J. Suhr and Heather  E. notes to appendix 223
Hallen-Adams, “The Human Gut Mycobiome: Pitfalls and Potentials—A Mycologist’s Perspec￾tive,” Mycologia 107, no. 6 (2015): 1057–1073.
3. Analysis of the fungi found in the sputum of asthma patients in Wandsworth, in south 
London, identified some rather unlikely species: Hugo C. van Woerden, Clive Gregory, Richard 
Brown, Julian R. Marchesi, Bastiaan Hoogendoorn, and Ian P. Matthews, “Differences in Fungi 
Present in Induced Sputum Samples from Asthma Patients and Non-Atopic Controls: A Com￾munity Based Case Control Study,” BMC Infectious Diseases 13 (2013): 69. Hugo Cornelis and 
his team from the Cardiff University School of Medicine reported that one of the species that 
was prevalent in the lungs of asthma patients and absent in non-asthmatic controls was Termi￾tomyces clypeatus. This fungus produces a large mushroom that was discovered in the 1920s in a 
bamboo thicket in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, then the colony of the Belgian 
Congo, where it was fruiting from an abandoned termite mound. The mycelium of this mush￾room is farmed by termites, who consume scraps of wood and plant leaves and defecate onto a 
spongy “comb” that is colonized by the fungus. Most of the plant matter eaten by the insects is 
indigestible, like the fiber in our diet, which is where the mushroom comes in. By decomposing 
the fiber, the fungal mycelium becomes enriched with protein and fat that serves as the perfect 
food for the termites. The description of this species was not published until 1951: Roger Heim, 
“Les Termitomyces du Congo Belge Recueillis par Madame M. Goossens-Fontana,” Bulletin du 
Jardin Botanique de l’État Bruxelles 21, no. 3, 4 (1951): 205–222. Termitomyces clypeatus has a wide 
geographical distribution and is sold in local markets in Cameroon and Nigeria as a flavorful 
mushroom with purported medicinal properties: Oumar Mahamat, Njouonkou André-Ledoux, 
Tume Chrisopher, Abamukong Adeline Mbifu, and Kamanyi Albert, “Assessment of Antimi￾crobial and Immunomodulatory Activities of Termite Associated Fungi, Termitomyces clypeatus
R. Heim (Lyophyllaceae, Basidiomycota),” Clinical Phytoscience 4 (2018): 28. Wandsworth is a 
land of many splendors, but termite mounds are scarce. The presence of this mushroom in the 
sputum samples alleged by Van Worden was cited uncritically by Laura Tipton, Elodie Ghedin, 
and Alison Morris, “The Lung Mycobiome in the Next-Generation Sequencing Era,” Virulence
8, no. 3 (2017): 334–341, which illustrates how errors can persist in the literature when investiga￾tors have minimal knowledge of the organisms that show up in the DNA analyses. Besides this 
African toadstool, the extensive list of species identified from the lungs of asthmatic Londoners 
in the Van Worden study included a wood-rotter from forests in the Southern Hemisphere, a 
fungus that grows inside eucalyptus trees in South Africa, and, strangest of all, a little mushroom 
that fruits beneath the water in cold Argentinian lakes. The wood-decay fungus supposedly 
found in this study is Grifola sordulenta; Lasiodiplodia gonubiensis is the South African endo￾phyte; and Gloiocephala aquatica is the aquatic mushroom. There are many other species listed 
in this report that are also unlikely to be floating in the fragrant air of London.
4. Through this encounter I had, inadvertently, changed places with Professor Heinz Wolff 
(1928–2017), a well-known British academic, who stopped by my demonstration of sperm re￾lease in ferns at a science fair in Oxford, England, in the late 1970s, and peered into my micro￾scope. I was very pleased with myself for figuring out how to coerce explosions of swimming 
spermatozoids from tiny fern plantlets. Wolff asked me in his German accent why I had both￾ered to do this, saying, “But vot experiment hev you performed here?” (Think Peter Sellers as 
Dr. Strangelove.) It was a good question. My project was observational and only minimally 224 notes to appendix
experimental, and I admitted as much. He was not impressed and left my table shaking his head 
at what he appeared to perceive as a brief conversation with a sixteen-year-old imbecile. My 
science teacher was more supportive and cursed Wolff, after he was beyond earshot, with a 
shocking train of expletives. The prize winners that day were boys from a private school (ours 
was the local “comprehensive”) who had developed a nuclear reactor or something similarly 
impressive.
5. Nicholas P. Money, “Against the Naming of Fungi,” Fungal Biology 117 (2013): 463–465. In 
this publication, I wrote, “For 250 years mycologists have tried to reconcile fungal diversity 
with the Linnean fantasy of a divine order throughout nature that included unambiguous spe￾cies. This effort has failed and today’s taxonomy rests on an unstable philosophical foundation.” 
We lack a robust definition of a fungal species, which has led to treating some populations of 
fungi that are only distantly related as members of the same species, and, in other cases, assign￾ing more than one name to fungi that others regard as single species.
6. Petr Kralik and Matteo PandRicchi, “A Basic Guide to Real Time PCR in Microbial 
Diagnostics: Definitions, Parameters, and Everything,” Frontiers in Microbiology 8 (2017): 108; 
M. N. Zakaria, M. Furuta, T. Takeshita, Y. Shibata, R. Sundari, N. Eshima, T. Ninomiya, et al., 
“Oral Mycobiome in Community-Dwelling Elderly and Its Relation to Oral and General Health 
Conditions,” Oral Diseases 23, no. 7 (2017): 973–982.225
Illustrations
Chapter 1 Small fungal colony or mycelium of branching hyphae. 
Fungi growing in this form extract nutrients from solid 
materials including human tissues. Source: F. Felder, 
Lumott, LLC.
Chapter 2 Fungi multiplying as budding yeasts. Yeasts grow on 
the skin surface including the scalp. Source: Kallayanee 
Naloka / Shutterstock.
Chapter 3 Spores of the mold Alternaria are among the most 
common causes of asthma and other allergies. Source:
The Mycological Society of Japan, image from Junji 
Nishikawa and Chiharu Nakashima, “Morphological and 
Molecular Characterization of the Strawberry Black Leaf 
Spot Pathogen Referred to as the Strawberry Pathotype 
of Alternaria alternata,” Mycoscience 60, no. 1 (2019): 1–9.
Chapter 4 Stalks of the fungus Rhizopus tipped with sporangia 
containing airborne spores. Rhizopus grows on rotting 
fruit and can also cause lethal brain infections. Source: 
Christos Georghiou / Shutterstock.
Chapter 5 The digestive system is colonized with fungi from mouth 
to anus. Source: Shutterstock.
Chapter 6 Spores of the fungus Fusarium that is used to produce 
mycoprotein. Source: Kallayanee Naloka / Shutterstock.226 Illustrations
Chapter 7 Beautiful fruit bodies of bird’s nest fungi that are the 
source of antibiotics called cyathanes. ©2013 Insil Choi.
Chapter 8 St. Anthony of Egypt, whose relics became associated 
with the miraculous cure of ergotism in the Middle 
Ages. The victim of ergotism in this sixteenth-century 
woodcut is suffering from the ignis sacer or holy fire, 
which was a burning sensation in the extremities caused 
by vasoconstriction, and has lost one of his legs below 
the knee to gangrene. Source: World History Archive / 
Alamy Stock Photo.
Chapter 9 Fruit bodies of a species of Psilocybe with hallucinogenic 
properties. ©2022 Insil Choi.
Chapter 10 Mycorrhizal symbiosis between the roots of a tree and 
the mycelia of mushrooms that are fruiting at the surface 
of the soil. ©2022 Insil Choi.227
Index
Allegro, John, 153–154, 216–217n39
allergic rhinitis, 43–45, 51
allergy, 42–43, 47–53
alpha amanitin, 129–131
ALS (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis), 71
Altounyan, Roger, 50–51
Alzheimer’s disease, 69–70, 115
Amanita muscaria (fly agaric), 4, 151–154
Amanita phalloides (death cap), 126–132, 
134–135
Anna Karenina principle, 25, 183n7
antibiotics, 121, 123–124
antifungal agents, 34–37, 58
Apollo missions, 41, 171–173
art, 152–154, 167–168; spoilage of, 165–166
aspergillosis, 27, 53–55
Aspergillus, 28, 94, 103–104, 107, 121–122, 139, 
167, 184n12
asthma, 2, 40–52
athlete’s foot, 37–39
Aubrey, John, 26–27
bacterial interactions, 73–89, 163–164
beta glucans, 115–117
birch conk or polypore, 110–111, 123
bird’s nest fungi, 123–124, 207n32
Blackley, Charles, 44
blastomycosis, 55
blood-brain barrier, 59–60, 66
brain mycobiome, 69–72
brewing, 95–96
Buller, A. H. R., 188n1, 192n32
calories in mushrooms, 108–109, 203n30
cancer, 82–83
Candida, 179n2; Candida albicans, 5, 85–86, 
177, 180–181n11; Candida auris, 35–37, 64
cephalosporin, 121
cheese, 93–100
Cladophialophora, 195n17
Claviceps (ergot fungus), 135–136
coccidioidomycosis, 55
consciousness of fungi, 170–171
contact lens keratitis, 187n39
coughing, 53
COVID-19, 54, 68–69, 81
Cryptococcus, 65–66
cyclosporin, 12, 121, 130
dandruff, 32–35; treatments, 34
death cap. See Amanita phalloides
deaths from fungal infections (statistics), 
10, 61
diabetes, 87
diet, 75–79, 93–109; optimization of, 87–89
DNA analysis, 74–75, 175–178
dry-cured meats, 100–101
dysbiosis, 25–26, 86–87, 162–163228 index
economic value of fungi, 107
edible mushrooms, 108–109, 127–128
ergotism, 135–137
evolutionary medicine, 47–48
Exserohilum, 69
extraterrestrial mycology, 159–160, 
171–173
Ezekiel, 143, 153
fashionable fungi, 167–168
Floyer, John, 41–42
fly agaric. See Amanita muscaria
fungal cells, numbers of, 8–9, 23–24, 75, 
180n10, 183n3
fungal infections, deaths from, 10, 61
fungi, economic value of, 107
Fusarium, 70–71, 105–107, 187n39
Galerina, 131
genome mining, 122
geography and the mycobiome, 75–77
Gyromitra (false morel), 128
hákarl, 101–102, 104
hay fever. See allergic rhinitis
herbalism, 120–121
histoplasmosis, 55
HIV/AIDS, 54, 56, 60–62, 65, 66
HPV (human papilloma virus) vaccine, 
123
Huxley, Aldous, 155–156
hygiene hypothesis, 48
hypersensitivity pneumonitis, 51–52
hyphae (definition), 4; growth mechanisms, 
17, 27, 28, 32, 81, 161, 163, 167; sensitivity, 
170–171
IBD (inflammatory bowel disease), 
79–82
IBS (irritable bowel syndrome), 81–82
indoor molds, 48–49, 140
Ingold, C. T., 169
insulin, 122–123
lentinan, 117
lion’s mane, 114–115, 127, 204n9, 208n4
lovastatin, 121–122
Madura foot. See mycetoma
magic mushrooms, 142–158; and 
Christianity, 153–155; legalization of, 
147–148
Malassezia, 25, 32–35, 77
McKenna, Terence, 149
McIlvaine, Charles, 133–134
meconium, 13
medicinal mushrooms, 112–124
Mucor, 25, 67, 78, 98, 103
mucormycosis, 66–69
multiple sclerosis, 87
mushroom poisoning, 125–135
mushrooms, calories in, 108–109, 203n30
mycetoma, 38
mycobiome (definition), 3, 5–6
mycophobia, 168
mycorrhizas, 161–163
mycotoxins, 137–141
mycozoans, 179n1
necromycobiome, 163–165
numbers of fungal cells, 9, 23–24, 75, 180n10, 
183n3
obesity, 77–79
onychomycosis, 39
Ophiocordyceps, 151
opportunists, 61–69
oral fungi, 83–85
Ötzi, 110–112
Owen, Richard, 27
parasites, 111–112
Parkinson’s disease, 71, 115
Penicillium, 76, 94–98, 100–101, 103–104, 121, 
124, 130, 200n1
Pneumocystis, 56
Proust, Marcel, 46index 229
PSC (primary sclerosing cholangitis), 87
psilocybin (and psilocin), 143–151
psoriasis, 25
queer mycology, 168–169
Quorn, 105–107, 108
Ramaria (coral fungus), 132–133
Remak, Robert, 27–28
Rhizopus, 67
ringworm, 26–32; treatments, 29–32
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 4, 63, 75–76, 81–82, 
94–95, 194n14, 197–198n11
Scedosporium, 58–60
seborrheic dermatitis, 32–33
sensitive skin syndrome, 25
sneezing, 53
soy sauce, 103
spoilage of art, 165–166
spore concentrations (airborne), 42, 52, 
190–191n22
Sporothrix, 38
sporotrichosis, 38
Steavenson, William, 44, 189n8
surströmming, 102, 104, 202n20
tempeh, 103–104
thunderstorm asthma, 45
tinea capitis, 28–32
traditional Chinese medicine, 119–121
Trichophyton, 38–39, 185n15
vaginal fungi, 85–86
Wasson, Gordon, 149, 153–154
white blood cells, 7–8
World Health Organization (WHO), 10, 
16, 66
yeasts. See Candida; Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae
yellow knight mushrooms, 131–132
yogurt, 96
zoonoses, 31–32
