Moralizing the environmentMoralizing the environment
Countryside change, farming and pollution
Philip Lowe
University of Newcastle upon Tyne
Judy Clark
University College London
Susanne Seymour
University of Nottingham
Neil Ward
University of Newcastle upon Tyne
O Routledge
g^ Taylor & Francis Group
LONDON AND NEW YORK© Philip Lowe, Judy Clark, Susanne Seymour and Neil Ward 1997
This book is copyright under the Berne Convention.
No reproduction without permission.
All rights reserved.
First published in 1997 by UCL Press
Reprinted 2003 by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane
London, EC4P 4EE
Routledge is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication data are available.
ISBNs:
1-85728-839-4 HB
1-85728-840-8 PB
Typeset in Garamond by Graphicraft Typesetters Ltd, Hong Kong.
Printed and bound by Antony Rowe Ltd, EastbourneContents
Preface ix
Acknowledgements xi
1 Moralizing the environment: understanding (arm
pollution 1
Introduction 1
Methodology: following actors, following pollution 9
Methods 12
Outline of the book 15
2 Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem 18
Processes of change on dairy farms 18
Effluents in the environment 32
Conclusions 36
3 Farm pollution as a non-issue 39
Tackling an emergent problem 40
Agricultural exceptionalism 42
Farm pollution regulation in the 1970s and early 1980s 53
Conclusions 57
4 The politicization of farm pollution 60
Introduction 60
The politics of water privatization 62
Farm pollution incidents 65
Defining the problem 68
Making sense of the data 71
VContents
Local investigations: the Torridge Report 75
Challenging agricultural exceptionalism 77
Devising a solution 79
A new regulatory framework 82
Conclusions 85
5 The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution 88
Introduction 88
The regional organization of farm pollution control 90
A day in the life of Bob: the field culture of a rural
Pollution Inspector 94
Perceptions of pollution and farming 102
The regulation of farm pollution 104
The threat of prosecution 111
Conclusions 117
6 The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution 119
Introduction 119
Life on a dairy farm 120
The environment and the ethos of production 125
Farmers and farm pollution 127
Pollution control and the logic of farm improvement 134
Farmers and the NRA 136
Conclusions 143
7 Pollution control and social networks 145
Introduction 145
ADAS, farmers and farm pollution: the technical discourse 146
Local environmentalists and farm pollution: the moral
discourse 154
The NRA, Pollution Inspectors and farm pollution:
negotiating the moral discourse 162
The farmers' networks 173
Conclusions: farm pollution and patterns of enrolment 183
8 Conclusions: constructing moral orders 191
Introduction 191
Nature, rurality and morality 192
The moralization of risk and regulatory science 195
VIContents
Networks, enrolment and identity creation 197
Agriculture's moral economy 200
The farmer and the field-level bureaucrat 202
Afterword 207
Bibliography 209
Index 219
VIIPreface
There was a time when pollution was equated with the urban and
the industrial. It was factory chimneys and outfalls and town sewers that
belched the grime, slime and smog into the atmosphere, the water system
and the natural environment. In contrast, the countryside and agriculture
were associated with a natural order of things, with rural communities
existing apart from the corrupting influences of urban industrialism, and
farmers working in harmony with nature to produce our food.
But things have changed. What were previously mutually exclusive cat￾egories of "agriculture" and "pollution" have been brought together in a
new, morally charged atmosphere. In Britain in the 1980s, amid the political
turmoil surrounding the privatization of the water industry, new catego￾ries of environmental risk emerged. The spillage of farm effluents into
rivers and streams shifted from being a little regarded technical side-effect
of efficient agricultural production, to being an example of wrongdoing,
a breach of a new environmental morality. Farmers, once respected as the
guardians of the countryside, now stood indicted of ecological crime.
Moralizing the environment is a study of how this shift came about. It
examines the emergence of the farm pollution problem in Britain in the
1980s. It draws upon a study of the regulation of farm wastes - cattle
slurry, silage effluent and the dirty water from farmyards — conducted
between 1989 and 1995. Detailed surveys and ethnographic fieldwork
were carried out in the south-west of England among dairy farmers, pol￾lution inspectors, agricultural advisers and environmentalists. In trying to
get to grips with farm pollution they were pursuing different notions not
only of sound agricultural practice but also of nature, morality and the
law. What ultimately was at stake was who could be trusted to safeguard
the countryside.
ixThe study operates at three levels. At one level, it is a study of a change
in regulatory regimes. Agriculture has passed from being one of the least
to one of the most formally regulated sectors from the point of view of
pollution control, and the book examines what this entails for regulatory
and farming practice. In effect, what this shift has meant is the insertion
into the agricultural community at the local level of Pollution Inspectors
armed with new legal powers and under public and political pressure to
take a tough stance over farm pollution. At another level, therefore, the
study is one of boundary maintenance and change, revealing how new
powers and priorities are negotiated with a particularly entrenched and
traditional occupational community. But these developments are linked
to wider transitions in social meanings about what is natural and what is
unnatural. At its broadest, therefore, the study is one of the eclipse of
farming as a source of natural values by the new environmental morality
and how this shift is related to a changing rural world.
X
PrefaceAcknowledgements
We would like to thank the Economic and Social Research Council for
funding this study under its Joint Agriculture and Environment Programme
(Grant W 103 25 1008); Graham Cox, David Goodman, Richard Munton
and Mike Winter for their help in the development and management of
the research; Graham Cox, Jonathan Murdoch and Michael Mayerfield
Bell for their comments on a draft of this book; Pam and David Rosenthall
and Alastair Shaw for their help in arranging the farm survey fieldwork;
and the Devon dairy farmers, farming officials, environmental activists,
civil servants of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food and the
Department of the Environment and staff of the National Rivers Author￾ity and Agricultural Development and Advisory Service for their time and
patience in being interviewed about their experiences and "shadowed" in
their work.
xiCHAPTER ONE
Moralizing the environment:
understanding farm pollution
Introduction
Imagine the scene. A gentle river runs between small dairy farms tucked
into the folds of a quiet Devon valley. The water is foaming, there is a
stench of ammonia in the air and dead fish float on the surface. Someone's
slurry store has overflowed. This beautiful countryside has been desecrated,
its natural waters have been polluted and its wildlife has suffered. The
farmer responsible could be prosecuted and, if so, may face a heavy fine.
But he too feels he is a victim. Persistent rain led to the overflow and if
the rain continues it will eventually cleanse the river. After all, specialized
dairy farming has for more than a century shaped and maintained the
countryside in these parts. Of course, it has had to modernize and intens￾ify to stay in business, but government has encouraged it to do so, and
the public take for granted the ready supply of milk produced. One con￾sequence of the technological revolution in dairy farming, though, has
been a much greater volume of effluents to be handled, which involves
farmers in additional costs, as well as in tasks that are unpleasant and often
hazardous. What causes them to feel beleaguered is a growing climate of
intolerance they experience if, by accident, these wastes reach the rivers
and streams that cross their farms.
An unfortunate but largely unavoidable side-effect of vital production
activities, or the desecration of the environment by careless and wasteful
practices? These are two starkly contrasting views of pollution. They mark
a basic perceptual divide between seeing pollution as a technical side-effect
of production and seeing it as something discreditable that attracts blame.
/Moralizing the environment
The crucial distinction is whether or not any moral opprobrium is attached,
whether it is wrong or simply unfortunate to pollute.
In the past there has certainly been a rhetoric - encapsulated in the
Victorian saying "where there's muck, there's brass" — which has asso￾ciated grime with graft, pollution with industriousness. On the other
hand, within Victorian society, there was a counter-reaction to the abomin￾able conditions of the industrializing towns and cities, which represented
industrialization as a corrupter of the moral and social order, as well as of
human health, traditional values and the physical environment. These
anti-industrial values were embodied in institutions and campaigns to
preserve aspects of traditional culture and the natural world from the
ravages of urban-industrial growth. Nature and the countryside came to
provide an alternative value system, one that stood as an indictment of the
bleakness and degradation of the industrial age.
By the early twentieth century, rural preservation had become a signific￾ant force in British politics, dedicated to protecting nature and the coun￾tryside from industrial advance. The need to protect agriculture and create
conditions in which it could flourish was part of the conventional wisdom
of rural preservation. The preservationists tended to have a highly roman￾tic and idealized view of farming, summed up by G. M. Trevelyan in his
English Social History (1942) in the following terms: "Agriculture is not
merely one industry among many, but is a way of life, unique and irre￾placeable in its human and spiritual values." Agriculture had been in a
chronic state of depression since the 1880s, which contributed to its image
as an occupation steeped in tradition and at one with the natural world.
Farming practices seemed to pose no possible threat to other rural interests
and pursuits. On the contrary, it was felt that the debilitated condition of
farming exacerbated many other threats to the countryside, such as urban
encroachment and the decline of rural communities. A secure and revital￾ized agriculture was seen as the essential conserver of both the social life
and the natural beauty of the countryside.
At the same time, social regulation1
 gradually emerged to curb the worst
dangers and excesses of industrial advance, championed largely by urban
social reformers, the labour movement and professional and scientific groups.
The German sociologist Ulrich Beck (1992a,b) has pointed out that part
of the constitution of industrial society is a system of rules for dealing with
industrially produced hazards and insecurities, which contains and redis￾tributes their consequences. These rules include procedures such as insur￾ance contracts, compensation agreements, liability law, regulatory systems,
2Introduction
preventive measures and after-care provisions. Underpinning them is a
calculus of risks in which statistics, for example on mortality rates, take the
place of moral imperatives, thereby allowing "technological moralization"
or a "type of ethics without morality" (Beck 1992b: 99). In this way,
industrial society has sought to come to grips with the uncertainty and
hazards it systematically creates.
Thus, in the past, pollution could come to be regarded in relative and
not absolute terms. Considered in the context of urban-based production,
it was seen as a necessary concomitant of jobs and prosperity, as an unfor￾tunate but unavoidable counterpart of industriousness. Formal efforts to
curb the worst excesses of industrial pollution emerged pragmatically in
Britain in response to specific problems and were informed by the approach
of "best practicable means". Quite separately, factory legislation and public
health legislation sought to provide basic protection for workers and resid￾ents. Implicit within such measures and the way they were implemented was
a trade-ofF between the benefits and risks from the local industries on which
particular districts depended.
Only with the advent of the contemporary environmental movement was
the equation between pollution and prosperity systematically challenged.
One of the most important achievements of the environmental movement
has been to establish an abstracted conception of pollution (or pollutants).
Environmental groups have been assisted in this by social change. Fewer
people directly depend on polluting industries, and the expanding geograph￾ical impact of pollution has affected groups and areas not dependent on
the particular polluting industries. Widely publicized investigations into
the effects of two particular types of pollutant - radioactive fallout from
nuclear tests and the residues of persistent organochloride insecticides -
catalyzed profound shifts in popular attitudes (see, for example, Com￾moner 1966). Alarming evidence of the universal distribution of these
toxic substances (such as the discovery of DDT in 1965 in penguins in the
Antarctic) and their concentration in food chains (such as strontium-90
in mothers' milk) served to symbolize powerfully the potential dangers
of global environmental pollution. Perceptions of a radioactive and chem￾ical universe - invisible, all pervasive, insidious - were profoundly disturb￾ing. They not only blighted faith in scientific and technological progress
but also compromised the former escape route of geographical mobility,
whereby the upper and middle classes had distanced themselves from the
older and more local environmental problems arising from slums, smoke
and sewage.
3Moralizing the environment
People have been distanced from the causes, but not the consequences,
of pollution and technological hazards as a result of marked changes in the
employment structure. Since the 1960s there has been a decisive shift to
the service sector, which now provides most jobs. Consequently, a grow￾ing majority of people no longer owe their livelihoods to forms of employ￾ment that involve the manipulation or processing of natural resources
- whether in agriculture, mining, construction or manufacturing - and that
inevitably poses the most acute environmental problems. Fewer and fewer
people, therefore, are exposed directly - through their work and income
dependency - to a personal conflict between economic and environmental
welfare. Opinion surveys do confirm that environmental concern tends to
be most strongly expressed by those employed in the burgeoning service
sector (Lowe and Riidig 1986).
Such changes have fostered understandings of the phenomena of pol￾lution separate from its original context, involving a shift in perspective
from one to do with the unwanted by-products of production to one that
focuses on the consequences of pollution. The more that pollution could
thereby be detached from job or wealth creation and could be seen to be
deleterious to innocent (and often distant) others (such as residents, chil￾dren, future generations, wildlife, etc.), the more it could be portrayed as a
matter of wrongdoing, that is to say, a moral issue. This has been a spe￾cific achievement of the contemporary environmental movement, which has
elevated pollution and industrial risks to the status of a crime and forged
a new environmental morality (Grove-White 1993).
The development of this environmental morality within Britain has
focused particularly on the countryside. This is, in part, the legacy of the
rural preservation movement. Since the late nineteenth century the coun￾tryside has been seen as a source of spiritual, aesthetic and moral re￾invigoration, a view that has propelled a major counter-urbanization movement
of middle-class residents throughout the twentieth century, but more par￾ticularly since the 1950s. The growing evidence of the ubiquity of pollution
has encouraged an even greater sense of protectiveness towards a rural
environment, which for many people is experienced as a place of retreat
or retirement, detached from productive activities.
Most disturbing of all, therefore, has been a sense of a threat to the
rural environment from within. Since the Second World War, agriculture
has undergone a profound technological revolution based on an indus￾trial model of high input and high output farming. No other problem so
encapsulates the move from simple husbandry to industrialized methods
4Introduction
5000 T
4000
3000
2000
1000
1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989
Number of incidents
Year
Figure I. I Number of farm pollution incidents, 1979-90.
(Source: National Rivers Authority, I992a: 22)
of farming as does agricultural pollution. In England and Wales, the
number of reported pollution incidents from farms more than doubled
during the 1980s from approximately 1500 in 1979 to over 3500 a year
by the late 1980s (Fig. 1.1), but even the latter figure may be just the
tip of the iceberg. From detailed survey work on over 10 000 farms,
the National Rivers Authority (NRA) has estimated that "in many catch￾ments the proportion of farms polluting, or at high risk of doing so, is
about 40 per cent" (NRA 1992a: 22). Because farm pollution is concentrated
in rural rivers and streams, which normally are of a high water quality, and
because farm wastes have a strong polluting potential, such pollutants can
be particularly damaging. Indeed, in 1990 over a third of all major water
pollution incidents were from farms (ibid.), leading to the identification
of agriculture as "the most damaging single activity in relation to water
quality" (Howarth 1992: 53).
A general definition of pollution is that it is matter out of place such
that it causes harm or offence. Traditionally, pollution has been associated
with industry, and the recognition of agricultural pollution comes as some￾thing of a shock. Agricultural pollution is thus both a physical problem
and at the same time a dislocation of our conceptual categories, particu￾larly those that place agriculture in a reciprocal relationship with nature
and the two of these in opposition to industry.
5Moralizing the environment
Approximately 80 per cent of farm pollution incidents during the 1980s
were associated with livestock farms, with intensive dairy farms being the
most implicated. One farmer and prominent official from the National
Farmers' Union even told Farmers Weekly magazine "I very much doubt
there is a single dairy farmer who isn't causing pollution in some way"
(quoted in Paice 1991: 3). The main pollutants from dairy farming are
cattle slurry (a mixture of faeces, urine and water), "dirty water" (which
contains washings from the farmyard and milking parlour) and silage
effluent (fermented grass used as catde feed). These can be highly pollut￾ing when they enter watercourses. Dirty water is, on average, around six
times more polluting than raw domestic sewage, catde slurry 80 times,
and silage effluent 170 times more polluting. The threat is vividly encap￾sulated in a report by the former South West Water Authority, which
explained that:
An average sized Devon dairy farm, with a herd of 53 cows, has a
pollution potential load equivalent to that of a community of 465
inhabitants. If silage is made for winter storage, which is likely, then
an average crop for a herd of this size would be 650 tonnes. If this
crop had been wilted (i.e. cut and left in the field to wilt) then there
would be 145 000 litres of silage effluent to be disposed of at the rate
of 19 000 litres per day. The potential pollution load of this effluent
is equivalent to that of a community of 10 800 inhabitants. (South
West Water Authority 1986: 52)
All too often, the diagnosis of environmental problems such as farm
pollution is presented as purely and simply a matter of objective science.
However, in many environmental conflicts there is confusion and dispute,
even among the scientists, about the nature, cause and extent of the prob￾lem. What counts as a pollution incident or a quality standard is essen￾tially a social judgement, albeit one that is informed by available scientific
evidence. To understand how such judgements arise from contested con￾structions calls for sociological analysis. Such an approach is particularly
appropriate in elucidating agricultural pollution because of the complex
social relations and cultural symbols that surround farming and the rural
environment. A study of agricultural pollution is, therefore, also a study
of the social construction of the environment, and of how different groups
struggle to define the specific nature of the problem and construct solu￾tions to it.
6Introduction
It would be wrong, however, to imply that agricultural pollution arises
solely with modern intensive production methods and is entirely novel.
On the contrary, it would be hard to conceive of a farming system that
caused no environmental impact (Conway & Pretty 1991). Very particu￾lar pollution problems have long been recognized - for example, the dis￾posal of animal wastes from town dairies. By the mid-Victorian period,
too, scientists had recognized that rivers flowing through highly cultivated
districts were of poorer water quality and that agriculture was a major
source of organic and other impurities, including nitrates leached from
manured land (Wilmot 1993). But such problems paled in comparison
with sewage pollution and industrial effluents. In any case, it is likely that
they diminished during the long agricultural depression that stretched
from the 1880s to the 1930s.
The period since then has undoubtedly seen a major and extensive
build-up of agricultural pollution. Until recently, this has gone largely
unacknowledged as a public problem. Popular perceptions as well as regu￾latory institutions have focused upon pollution as an urban-industrial
phenomenon. When recognition came, it came suddenly, reflecting the
charged reaction to any defilement of the rural environment. Legislation
quickly followed and in the late 1980s agriculture passed from being one
of the least to one of the most formally regulated sectors from the point
of view of pollution control.
Such a reversal is a pointer to more deep-seated social and cultural
developments, involving, for example, broader reassessments of the social
functions of the countryside and the role of farming within it, linked to
changes in the social and political structures of rural areas (Marsden et al.
1990, 1993). Above all, it represents the ascendancy of an environmental
morality over another older discourse, which lauds farming as a vital and
morally worthwhile way of life.
Formal recognition of pollution problems and legislation to address
them may, however, be poor indications of what is actually happening
"out in society", or "on the ground" (Hawkins 1984). Farming, compris￾ing a myriad of small family businesses, is a particularly intractable sector
on which to impose regulations. Equally, established approaches to pollu￾tion regulation, oriented towards gross pollution from point industrial
sources (i.e. factory chimneys and waste pipes), are not well suited to the
regulation of farm effluents (Lowe et al. 1992, Clark et al. 1994).
It is the aim of this book to elucidate these issues, based on a major
empirical investigation of water pollution by farming. This investigation
7Moralizing the environment
was carried out between 1989 and 1995, in the wake of the switch in
regulatory law governing farm pollution. At one level, therefore, it is
a study of a change in regulatory regime and what that actually entails
for regulatory and farming practice. What makes the study of particular
interest from this perspective is that the British approach to environmental
regulation is often characterized as one marked by informality and an
avoidance of legal sanctions; by considerable discretion accorded to those
charged with regulatory responsibilities; and by close consultation and nego￾tiation with the industrial interests and concerns being regulated (Vogel
1986, Lowe & Flynn 1989). Within this tradition, agriculture is usually por￾trayed as representing an extreme case, one best described as self-regulation.
Thus, in the past, agriculture has often been given special treatment or
exemptions within planning, environmental and safety legislation. Instead,
a form of agricultural regulation has long been used which draws upon
traditions of autonomy and self-management within the farming commun￾ity (Cox et al. 1990). The approach relied on the provision of information
and advice by farm advisers, the promulgation of so-called codes of prac￾tice (i.e. guidelines drawn up in consultation with representative groups
specifying good or desirable practice) and specific financial incentives.
The central principle was that farmers should be encouraged to adopt a
particular kind of conduct, rather than coerced. This voluntary form of
regulation is aimed at achieving a practical and farmer-determined balance
between the protection of the environment and the commercial produc￾tion of agricultural produce. The recent shift to a much more formal and
legalistic approach to pollution regulation in this, of all sectors, is clearly
a momentous event that at one and the same time, raises major questions
about how it is being put into practice and portends far-reaching changes
in Britain's approach to social regulation.
In practice, what this shift has meant is the insertion into the agri￾cultural community at the local level of pollution regulators armed with
new legal powers and under public and political pressure to take a tough
stance over farm pollution. Farmers and their advisers have had to adjust
to this new presence, as well as to the greater scrutiny and public criticism
surrounding their work. At another level, therefore, our study is one of
boundary maintenance and change, revealing how a new environmental
morality is impacting on a particular occupational community, which for
a long while had resisted it. But the change is linked to wider shifts in
social meanings and, at its broadest, the study is one of the eclipse of
farming as a source of natural values by the new environmental morality.
8Methodology: following actors, following pollution
Tackling these issues has demanded empirical work guided by a meth￾odology sensitive to the differences in meanings and strategies of the
various groups involved. The work presented here is a sociological analysis
based on a major investigation of the water pollution problems associated
with dairy farming. A detailed farm survey has been conducted in river
catchments in a locality where pollution problems from dairy farming are
rife - Devon, in the South West of England. Interviews and participant
observation work have been carried out with pollution control officials and
farm advisers in the area. Representatives of farming and environmental
interests and agricultural supply companies have been interviewed, along
with those responsible for policy-making and for scientific research on
agricultural pollution. The book is structured around the ways in which
these different actors perceive and evaluate pollution and contribute to the
overall social definition of the problem and the formulation of responses
and possible solutions to it. The next part of this chapter describes the
methodology pursued.
Methodology: following actors, following pollution
Our choice of methodology for researching and analyzing the farm pollu￾tion issue has its origins in two main concerns: that the phenomenon of
farm pollution and the construction of solutions to it are the product of
more than just the farmers actions; and that the different actors2
 involved
in farm pollution may see the problem differently. With respect to the
first of these concerns, what dairy farmers do in their fields, cowsheds and
milking parlours is to produce goods for the market, and at one and the
same time this activity produces effluents, but not necessarily pollution.
Weather and topography, for example, intervene such that the same action
can result in effluents contaminating a river or stream in one instance but
not in another. For contamination to be termed "pollution" it has to be
detected, and for this to happen other actors must be involved, such as a
vigilant public, the scientists who developed the detection methods and
pollution inspectors armed with instruments and knowledge. Repercus￾sions for the farmer are linked not only to the detection of pollution but
also to assessments of its seriousness, and interpretations of regulations.
This extends the network of actors involved to include regulators, civil
servants, politicians and so forth. In addressing pollution risks, farmers'
9Moralizing the environment
actions may draw in actors as diverse as agricultural advisers explaining
control technologies, civil servants deciding on grant applications and
journalists reporting on prosecutions in the local paper (Clark & Lowe
1992). Thus, although the farm is a compulsory location in the water
pollution story, the processes that lead to pollution are entwined by a
whole host of actions, connecting the farmer to myriad other actors near
and far, in fields, offices, rivers and laboratories. The methodology we
chose had to be able to encompass this assemblage of actors and the
interactions that take place between them.
Our wish not to favour any one type of actor but to deal even-handedly
with all perspectives was linked to our second concern: how to cope with
actors "seeing things differently". A look at virtually any environmental
issue will typically turn up a clamour of certainties, opinions, strategies
and prescriptions concerning what the real problems are, how they might
be rectified and what needs to be done to achieve this. Farm pollution is
no different. We wanted to be able to approach our research in a way that
allowed us to account for differences in the ways in which actors "see"
things, without having to resort to the uncritical elevation of some actors'
views or the equally uncritical denial of others. Our interest centred on
finding out how actors' worlds are constituted and the actions they pro￾voke; how pollution events, and their solutions, are assembled.
Many sociologists look to society itself, expressed in the form of con￾cepts such as class, institutions, norms, interests, hegemony, and so on, to
explain what is going on in the social world. They work with what Bruno
Latour (1986) terms an ostensive definition of society. Latour contrasts the
ostensive definition, in which society itself is the cause of actors' views and
behaviour, with what he terms the performative definition, in which soci￾ety is the consequence of what actors do, and in which it is actors them￾selves who in practice state what society is about.
The performative definition of society thus differs radically from the
ostensive definition. It shifts the focus to how society is made, in contrast
with the ostensive definition's concern with what society is in essence.
Under the performative definition, the conventional idea of society is
turned upside down in the sense that the social concepts (such as social
class) conceived as causes of social action within an ostensive definition,
become outcomes within a performative definition. In practice, the perform￾ative definition changes the task of the social scientist from that of invok￾ing abstract social concepts to explain why actors do what they do, to that
of investigating how actors are linked together in society - how social
10Methodology: following actors, following pollution
groupings are forged, built and maintained through time. It does not deny
that society exists, but what it emphasizes is how society is constituted.
The two definitions have different implications for the way in which
the empirical observation that actors may "see things differendy" should
be treated. The ostensive definition requires the observer to judge one
representation "authentic" and others "mistaken". The performative defini￾tion, on the other hand, is concerned about how society's attributes are
settled in practice. It can accommodate the reality of "seeing things dif￾ferently" in a way that does not deny particular rationalities and does not
favour particular actors. It is the perspective we have adopted in our study
in an approach derived from "actor network theory" (see, for example,
Gallon 1986a,b, Latour 1987, Law 1992, Murdoch 1994).
Actor network theory espouses a simple analytical principle - "follow
the actors" (Gallon et al. 1985: 4) - and at times during our study we
literally did just that. The task of the analyst is to "describe, with neither
fear nor favour, what it is the actors do" (ibid.: 5). This means study￾ing the worlds built by actors on their own terms. Actors construct their
worlds from what is around them, that is by designating and associating
entities which they select, define and link together. In attributing charac￾teristics to entities in the worlds they build, actors are attempting to speak
for others and to impose particular definitions and roles on them. To be
successful, other actors' worlds must be colonized. Some actors will be in
a better position to accomplish this than others, owing to their control of
resources, both cultural and economic. However, success also depends on
what other actors do.
At any one point in time, many representations (claims, or, in the
terminology of actor network theory, "translations") will already have been
successful in the sense that they will have been taken on board by other
actors and be embodied in things that circulate between them, such as
machines, money, knowledge, regulations and agricultural products (Gallon
1991). Other representations will be incipient and uncertain as the actors
struggle to achieve them.
The vocabulary of actor network theory makes it possible to explain
how actors "define their respective identities, their mutual margins of
manoeuvre, and the range of choices which are open to them" (Gallon
1986a: 201). Combined with obedience to the principles of "agnosticism"
and "generalised symmetry" (ibid.: 200), it allows the analyst to do this
even-handedly. No one actor need be favoured, no one perspective taken
as superior. The main results of our empirical fieldwork are presented in
11Moralizing the environment
Chapters 5-7, and these provide what we hope are quite faithful accounts
of the worlds of the actors we studied.
Methods
Our field research was carried out in Devon, and included a farm survey,
which was confined to just three river catchments centred upon the dis￾trict of East Devon. In principle we could have extended our investiga￾tions to one or more additional dairy farming areas but this would have
meant sacrificing some of the depth and richness of the material gathered.
Another possible strategy would have been to undertake a "representative"
farm survey (regardless of farm location) while still confining our invest￾igation of other actors to a single area. However, this approach would have
lost the advantage of consistent conditions; that is, of all the field actors
ostensibly encountering the same circumstances. We thus preferred a fully
intensive strategy to a partially or wholly extensive one. However, our
choice has also meant that on occasion we have had to address a particular
type of challenge: "How do you know that the area you have chosen is
typical of dairy farming's pollution problems?"
The question implies that, if the area is not typical, then the findings
of the study cannot be extrapolated from the particular setting to the
general issue of farm pollution. This sort of challenge to case studies has
been addressed by Mitchell (1983). He argues that questions about typ￾icality betray, in the mind of the questioner, "a confusion between the
procedures appropriate to making inferences from statistical data and those
appropriate to the study of an idiosyncratic combination of elements or
events which constitute a "case" (ibid.: 188). This confusion derives from
failing to distinguish surface relationships (correlations) and logical con￾nections between features of a situation. While the validity of extrapolat￾ing correlations from a sample to the whole population - for example,
asserting that large farms are in general more profitable - does depend on
the representativeness of the sample, the validity of inferences concern￾ing the processes that link such features does not, but depends instead on
the cogency of the reasoning. For example, invoking economies of scale
to explain a link between profitability and farm size would probably be
accepted; invoking farmers' religious beliefs would probably not be. How￾ever, in neither case is the reasoning related to the representativeness of the
12Methods
sample; describing a relationship does not involve the same sorts of pro￾cedures as explaining it.
Questions about typicality, however, betray more than confusion over
analytical practice. They also rest on the basic assumption that the pursuit
of "the typical" is a meaningful quest. In the case of farm pollution, this
assumption is highly dubious. Our initial work quickly revealed the het￾erogeneous constitution of pollution problems. Pollution is locally com￾posed and locally specific, reflecting the heterogeneity of the natural world
in which it occurs and the diversity of the social contexts through which
it is represented. There is no such thing as an area or farm that typifies
pollution, and hence our decision to focus on a particular geographical
area, and our choice of area, reflects rather different criteria.
We selected a part of the South West as the location for our study
because this region appears archetypal of the farm pollution issue. This is
not just a matter of numbers, although recorded farm pollution incidents
do in fact put the South West at the top of the league. More importantly,
the South West served as the prototype for the expression and construc￾tion of farm pollution issues in a national context. By the mid-1980s such
pollution, involving dairy farms in particular, had become a clear issue
there, preceding and foreshadowing similar concerns in other regions.
Our choice of Devon was determined primarily by the size and signific￾ance of the dairy industry there. It is the most important type of farming
in terms of acreage, number of farms, farm profitability and most other
indicators. In a national context, Devon's dairy farms tend to be smaller
than average; at the time of our study the average herd size was 60 cows,
while the figure for England and Wales as a whole was 65 cows. Small
producers present perhaps the greatest challenge to most types of agricul￾tural regulation. The county also has a relatively wet climate and varied
topography, whose most striking features are the range of heights encoun￾tered, the frequency of steep-sided valleys and the abundance of water￾courses. The archetypal Devon dairy farm is sited on the side of a hill with
a stream running beside, below or even through the farmstead. Few set￾tings are worse in terms of the pollution threats they pose.
Although the Devon environment is particularly vulnerable to farm
pollution, the characteristics of that environment - its mild climate, its
varied topography, its small-farm landscapes - have proved very attractive
to outsiders. Since the 1970s, Devon has seen some of the highest levels
of population inmigration of any county. Rural Devon, in particular, has
experienced a large influx of commuter families, retired people and second
13Moralizing the environment
homeowners. Such people often have a different perspective from that of
farmers, not only on issues to do with agriculture and the environment
but also on the appropriateness of regulation or the law to deal with them.
It was felt therefore that the area presented a potentially fruitful one in
which to examine how the social construction of pollution and the regu￾latory response was shaped by social change.
Following our decision to work intensively within a limited geograph￾ical area, we embarked upon a series of linked studies that investigated the
intersecting "worlds" - the views, perceptions and attitudes - of key actors
in the field: farmers, Pollution Inspectors and agricultural advisers. This
called for close and empathetic observation of the encounters between
them and the discourses through which these encounters were constructed.
We therefore employed participant observation, shadowing the field staff
of the National Rivers Authority (NRA) and the Agricultural Development
and Advisory Service (ADAS) in their dealings with farmers on pollution
matters. To understand the responses of the farmers more fully, we also
conducted an in-depth survey of 60 farms in the area. Finally, semi￾structured interviews with policy actors, including regional and national
officials and pressure-group members, and analysis of documentary sources,
were used to explore how developments in rural Devon had influenced,
and been influenced by, national developments in policy and politics.
The research was carried out at a time which all the actors involved
recognized as being one of great uncertainty. In recent years, agricultural
policies and priorities have been changing rapidly, and even now stability
is not in sight. At the same time, the dominant public image of farmers
has changed from that of the "guardians of the countryside" to "destroyers
of the environment". Indeed, farmers see themselves now as the whipping
boys of a vocal public increasingly demanding that the rural environment
be made over in their own idealized images. Public and political pres￾sures to clean up the environment have been accompanied by increasingly
stringent formal and legalistic controls over farm effluents; regulatory
arrangements that contrast markedly with past practice characterized
by rather more relaxed, voluntary and informal arrangements. When we
began our project, the NRA was but a few months old; ADAS was continu￾ing in the throes of radical structural and functional change that were
making it more subject to commercial pressures and accountable policy
targets; and the regulations to control livestock and silage effluents were
going through parliament and.their implementation began during the
research period.
14Outline of the book
For the observer, attempting a definitive account of such fluid and deter￾minate circumstances could be the stuff of nightmares. From our perspect￾ive, where interest centres on how phenomena and events are constituted,
a study at this point in time offered an ideal opportunity. It is at such
times that boundaries change, meanings shift, and social and institutional
relationships are restructured. Watching the story as it unfolds can reveal
the formative processes, the struggles, the choices made, which subsequendy
become submerged when circumstances have become more stable and all
the trials and tribulations of the time have hardened into opaque truths
and normalities.
Outline of the book
The study focuses on how the phenomenon of pollution and ways of
solving it were constituted. How did the various actors define pollution,
and how did they see the farm pollution problem? How did each see the
other actors involved? Who was managing to enrol whom into their way
of "seeing the world"? Whose version was succeeding?
We begin by describing the context in which farm pollution became a
public issue. Chapter 2 outlines how dairy farming in Britain has changed
over recent decades and in doing so has created certain pollution risks. In
Chapter 3 the traditional official response to pollution from farm effluents
is described. Informed by the view that this was an unfortunate but infre￾quent concomitant of a progressive agriculture, the response was to treat
pollution as a minor technical matter to be left to the industry, and as
being of no wider public concern. Over the years, a variety of codes of
practice to protect the environment were promulgated, covering a range
of farming activities, and these were backed up with information and
advice on pollution control from ADAS, the farming advisory arm of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food. In addition, grant aid could
be obtained for facilities to store and handle farm effluents installed under
farm development schemes. At the same time, however, the much more
powerful stimulus of production policy acted to increase pollution risks.
The situation altered dramatically in the mid- to late 1980s. Evidence of
mounting farm pollution incidents and of deteriorating river quality helped
politicize the problem of farm wastes in a political context charged by
the prospect of water privatization and by the challenges to the narrowly
15Moralizing the environment
productivist aims of agriculture following the European Community's
imposition of milk quotas.3
 These two developments opened up respect￾ively the fields of water pollution and agricultural policy to external scrutiny
and public debate. Water pollution from farm effluents, lying at the inter￾section of these two previously contained policy fields, was subjected to
an unprecedented glare of attention. No longer was it possible to maintain
that this was simply a technical matter. Other definitions of the problem
were able to emerge that stressed the primacy of environmental protection
rather than production and which, at their most radical, presented the issue
of pollution from farm effluents as an indictment of an over-intensive
agriculture. In 1987, a parliamentary Select Committee concluded that
rising pollution from farm effluents in Britain was an important contribu￾tory factor to declining river quality, and called for "a far more interven￾tionist and regulatory approach to farm pollution" (House of Commons
Environment Committee 1987). Chapter 4 outlines the circumstances of
this politicization of the farm effluent problem and the resultant shift in
the regulatory regime surrounding it.
The Pollution Inspectors of the NRA were thereby charged with new
powers to tackle pollution from farms. Chapter 5 examines how they actu￾ally exercised this authority in the field. The Pollution Inspectors' work and
outlook are portrayed, and their attitudes towards agriculture and water
pollution are described, providing a basis for considering the strategies
they adopted in relation to farmers.
Pollution control was one of many pressures faced by the farmers.
Although they acknowledged problems with farm wastes, they resented
being stigmatized as polluters. To them, practical and financial constraints
loomed large in considering how to respond to the pressures upon them.
Many sought to draw the Pollution Inspectors into an understanding of
these constraints. Chapter 6 therefore examines the farmers' perspectives
on farm pollution.
Other groups of actors were also involved in negotiating pollution control
on farms, including agricultural advisers, environmental activists and con￾cerned local people who were prepared to challenge what they considered
to be unacceptable practices. Chapter 7 examines the emerging social net￾works around local pollution control as part of the changing rural world.
Our strategy in writing this book has been to "describe, then analyze."
The final chapter draws together our analysis from our field research. It
concludes by discussing how the problem of pollution from dairy farms
challenged the conventional representations of pollution and agriculture,
16Notes
and how its regulation pitched together new and old conceptions about
responsible conduct towards the natural environment.
Notes
1. Here the term social regulation is used as defined by Hawkins as "those forms
of regulatory control that are not directly concerned with the control of mar￾kets or other specific aspects of economic life, but instead aim to protect people
or the environment from the damaging consequences of industrialisation"
(Hawkins 1989: 663).
2. We use the word actor in a generic sense, meaning any entity which can
represent other entities and act in society (Gallon 1986a). However, the essence
of our usage is that actors' worlds and actions arc collectively generated even
though it is ultimately individuals who act.
3. Agricultural productivism is taken here to imply "a commitment to an intens￾ive, industrially driven and expansionist agriculture with state support based
primarily on output and increased productivity" (Lowe et al. 1993: 221).
17CHAPTER TWO
Changing dairy farming and the
pollution problem
The practice of dairy farming has changed radically over the past 40 years
or so. Technological change and the economics of agricultural support
have encouraged the concentration of production, which in turn has driven
increases in farm size. Together these interlinked developments have cre￾ated pollution risks on the modern dairy farm. Farmers now have to
dispose of large volumes of liquid effluents of great potency where once
they returned solid manure to the land as a crop nutrient. The develop￾ments in the scale and techniques of dairy farming that have brought
about this situation are described in the first half of this chapter. Whether
or not pollution actually occurs in any particular instance and, if so, the
degree and extent of the consequent damage, depend upon more imme￾diate factors. So, the chapter goes on to consider the routes by which farm
effluents may come to contaminate rivers or streams and the implications
for the water environment.
Processes of change on dairy farms
Specialization, concentration and changing farm size
In order to achieve economies of scale, farmers have tended to concentrate
their land, labour and capital resources on the production of a smaller
range of commodities. Given the high relative capital costs of milk pro￾duction, for many dairy farmers this has meant a move away from mixed
livestock and cropping systems and an emphasis on expanding the dairy
enterprise. As a result, the average size of dairy herds in Britain has more
than trebled since 1960, when it was just 21 cows.
18Processes of change on dairy farms
More fodder has been required to feed the extra cattle, so either more
land has been needed or existing land has had to be farmed more intens￾ively. Until the 1980s the strategy of investing surplus profit into buying
extra land was an important element in a farming ethos, fuelled by rising
land prices. At the same time, the rising real cost of farmland encouraged
farmers to increase the density at which their farms were stocked.
The switch from hay to silage as the main feedstuff, combined with
improved fertilizer techniques and grass seed varieties, did mean that farmers
were able to increase the number of cows kept on the same area of land.
Thus, the rate of increase in farm size did not keep pace with that of herd
size. According to Milk Marketing Board statistics, the average land area
of dairy farms in England and Wales increased by 75 per cent between
1960 and 1987, but the amount of land per cow decreased by 43 per cent
over this period. In consequence, there was more farm effluent to be
stored and less land to spread it on. Slurry-spreading has gradually become
more a practice of "waste disposal" than simply the manuring of grassland,
an outlook reinforced by the availability of cheaply priced and easily usable
manufactured nitrogen.
For most of the post-war period, such growth and specialization were
officially encouraged. However, this changed in March 1984 with the
European Community's introduction of milk quotas, targeted to curb
milk supply and tackle the budgetary crisis of the Common Agricultural
Policy. The Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) referred to
the move as "a seismic shock", a view shared by dairy farmers who found
their milk production was to be restricted, almost overnight, to 9 per cent
less than their 1983 production level. It was a policy change that was espe￾cially hard to swallow for those producers who, in line with government
policy, advice and grant incentives, had been modernizing and expanding,
often with money borrowed against assumed increases in output.
Specialization of production gives the farmer less scope to adapt in
response to changing external conditions. Those farmers who had concen￾trated resources into the dairy enterprise and expanded its scale prior to
the 1980s often found themselves locked into this strategy. Moreover, the
course of action now favoured in official circles - of diversification into
non-farming work - is less feasible an option for dairy farm households,
who tend to be more dependent on agriculture for their income than
other farm households, not least because of the particular daily demands
that dairy farming makes on family labour (see Ch. 6).1
19Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
In consequence, the imposition of milk quotas has had little impact on
the tendency towards specialization and concentration in the dairy sector.2
What has happened is that increasing the intensity of production and self￾sufficiency in feedstuffs has become more important than expanding farm
size or herd size to achieve economies of scale. Obtaining additional milk
quota is more important to farmers than buying more land or stock, par￾ticularly with cuts in quota and continuing increases in milk yields per cow.3
Data from MAFF'S annual June census show how stocking rates of dairy
cows changed during the 1980s. The average increased by 10 per cent in
Devon, an increase slightly greater than that for England as a whole.
Enlarged herd sizes, along with the growth in stocking densities, have
meant not only that more cattle require feeding, bedding and watering but
also that greater volumes of effluent have to be dealt with. The greater
quantity of slurry has implications not only for pollution risk from the
farmyard and buildings but also in the fields. In considering whether any
farms simply have too much livestock for their land area, it should be
borne in mind that the vast majority of dairy farms carry not only cows
but dairy followers (the young cows that will eventually become milkers)
and often other cattle as well. Using the figures in MAFF'S Code of practice
for the protection of water, specifying the land area required to spread
effluents from different types of livestock safely, overall stocking rates have
been derived for the 60 dairy farms we surveyed in Devon (MAFF/WOAD
1991: 69). In 1981 43 per cent of the farms we surveyed were stocked at
rates higher than three dairy cow equivalents per hectare and by 1991 this
had risen to 53 per cent.
The crucial constraint, though, is not the total size of a farm, but the
area within it that is suitable for spreading effluents. The Ministry's code
of practice, for example, states that suitable land should be at least 10 m
away from any watercourses and 50 m from a spring, well or borehole,
and that steep sloping land should be avoided (MAFF/WOAD 1991: 7),
which significantly reduces the area suitable for spreading on most Devon
farms. Current MAFF guidance is that the minimum area of land required
for disposal of the effluent of one cow is 0.16 ha (ibid.). On this basis, it
is likely that most of the 18 per cent of dairy farms in our survey with
overall stocking levels in excess of four cows per hectare are overstocked.
The NRA certainly believes that livestock farmers have intensified their
production and increased herd sizes "to a point where the associated land
is often insufficient to cope with the slurry produced" (NRA 1992a: 33).
The EC Nitrates Directive 1991, which is concerned with protection of
20Processes of change on dairy farms
Table 2.1 Production levels of animal manure by dairy farms
in the West of England 1990/1991
Average Production
of Animal Manure
Share of Total
Number of
(kgN/ha) Farms (%)
Farms with nitrogen from manure
not exceeding 1 70 kg per hectare 127 58
Farms with nitrogen from manure
exceeding 1 70 kg per hectare 2 1 1 42
Total number of dairy farms
represented (II 120) 156 100
Source: Farm Accounts Data Network. (FADN) European Commission: Analysis
by the Agricultural Economics Research Institute, the Netherlands (LEI-DLO).
waters against nitrate pollution from agricultural sources, requires that the
application of animal manure in vulnerable zones should not exceed 170 kg
of nitrogen per hectare. Table 2.1 presents estimates of the proportion of
dairy farms in the West of England (including the South West) that exceed
this level of production of animal manure. Of course, not all these farms
will be in areas vulnerable to water pollution.
Technological changes
Technological changes in dairy farming have been closely related to pro￾cesses of specialization and the concentration of production. The techno￾logical developments that have been instrumental in raising pollution risks
are the move away from housing catde on straw in loose housing to slurry￾based systems with concrete-floored cubicles and the trend towards mak￾ing silage rather than hay. With these innovations have come associated
changes such as the concreting of farmyards. At the same time, the use of
water has increased markedly. Indeed, the dairy sector is the largest agri￾cultural user of water (Bailey & Minhinick 1989).
Traditional loose housing of cattle on straw beds yields solid farmyard
manure (Fig. 2.1). In contrast, many slurry systems use little bedding, and
so the waste washings from these consist largely of a mixture of urine and
faeces, plus spilt food and water with only a small amount of straw or
other bedding matter. Overall, the solid material usually makes up less
than 15 per cent (Mason 1992). Slurry systems were first introduced in
21Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
Figure 2.1 Traditional solid farm manure is easy to stack in heaps and
poses less of a pollution risk than liquid effluents. (Photograph courtesy
of Louise Morriss)
22Processes of change on dairy farms
Figure 2.2 Dairy cows housed in concrete cubicles with an
automatic scraper to remove slurry. (Photograph courtesy of the
Water Services Association)
the early 1960s. Dairy farmers find that they not only allow more cows to
be kept in the same shed area but also that they reduce the workload for
mucking out the housing. This is a chore that many farmers and labourers
find tedious and which, moreover, is also perceived as a poor use of time.
Slurry's liquid form makes it more amenable to mechanical removal from
buildings and yards, and automatic scrapers (Fig. 2.2), pumps and tractors
can be used. With some systems the slurry is simply scraped or hosed out
of the housing. Others have slatted floors over underground reception
pits or transfer channels, from which the slurry can be sluiced, scraped or
pumped. The Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution estimated
that in 1976 just over half the dairy farms in England and Wales used
23Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
some type of slurry-based system (Royal Commission on Environmental
Pollution 1979: 129). By 1989 the proportion had risen to two-thirds,
and in our survey of Devon dairy farms in 1991 it was 82 per cent of
farms (but, because these tended to be the larger farms, they accounted for
88 per cent of the cows covered by the survey). With the typical dairy cow
producing around 57 litres of slurry per day (MAFF/WOAD 1991: 69), the
average dairy herd in our sample (78 cows) would produce about 800 000
litres of slurry during the six months of the year for which herds are
normally kept inside.
Modern housing systems and milking parlours also use greater volumes
of water for cleaning. In part this is because the regular washing down
of milking parlours is stipulated in the Dairy Regulations, which set sta￾tutory hygiene standards and which have become more stringent over
the years. At the same time, the greater convenience of high-pressure hoses
has made them a common means of washing down equipment and hos￾ing out cubicles and yards. For the average herd in our sample, such use
of a power hose would mean over 2700 litres of washings to be handled
each day. These parlour and yard washings include faeces, urine, waste
milk and the chemicals used for sterilizing parlours. They are commonly
referred to as "dirty water", a term that also includes rain runoff from
dirty areas of the yard. The pollution potential of dirty water is lower than
that of slurry but high enough to have a serious impact on watercourses
(see Table 2.2 below).
Table 2.2 Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of common organic wastes
Effluent
type
BOD range
(mg/l)a
Typical BOD
(mg/l)b
Treated sewage effluent 20-60
Paw domestic sewage 300-400 350 c Dirty water 1000-2000 2000
Cattle slurry
Pig slurry
10000-20000]
20 000-30 000 [ 30 000d
Poultry slurry 30 000-35 OOOJ
Silage effluent 30 000-80 000 60000
Milk 140000 140000
Clean river water <5
Notes
a. Source: MAFF/WOAD (1991: 3) b. Source: NRA (I992a: 25)
c. Dairy, parlour and yard washings d. Figure for "animal slurry".
24Processes of change on dairy farms
The concreting of yards has accompanied the move from farmyard
manure to slurry systems, and increases in herd size have often meant
enlargement of the buildings in which the cows are housed and fed. The con￾sequence is a greater area of impermeable surface, which in turn increases
the volume of rainwater that can collect through runoff. In the wetter
parts of Britain, there will be around a thousand litres of runoff for every
square metre of concrete per year (Pake 1991). Yards and waste storage
facilities are not normally covered, guttering is commonly inadequate,
and separate drainage for clean and dirty water is often lacking. Therefore,
many farmers are unable to exclude rainwater runoff from their pol￾luting effluents, which greatly increases the volume of contaminated liquid
to be managed and effectively diminishes the capacity of effluent storage
facilities. This in turn means that periods of heavy rainfall put these
facilities under the greatest pressure at the very time when farmers should
be storing effluent rather than disposing of it on land. At any time of
the year, though, a sudden downpour may overwhelm inadequate storage
systems.
Various types of storage facilities are used for farm effluents. The small￾est ones are simple pits; for most farms these are too small, although for
some they represent the only storage available. Other types generally hold
much larger volumes. Lagoons (shallow holes with earthed banks) and
large cylindrical "tin tanks" (or "above-ground stores") are used to contain
thin slurries. In the tanks, which are commonly regarded as providing the
most secure containment (Mason 1992), the slurry is normally stirred to
prevent separation of the solid and liquid fractions, and pumped into a
slurry tanker for disposal (Fig. 2.3). In contrast, a common practice with
lagoons is to use a strainer box to separate out the solids, facilitating the
disposal of the liquid by low-rate irrigation or tanker. "Weeping wall"
stores are used for thicker slurries; typically they have concrete floors and
sides constructed of railway sleepers or concrete panels; narrow gaps are
left in at least one side through which liquids, but not solids, can pass to
a separate effluent tank (Fig. 2.4). Slurry separators are also available,
which mechanically separate the solid and liquid fractions. The solid waste
can then be handled using a manure spreader, and the liquid can be
disposed to land by low-rate irrigation.
Dirty water can be handled with the slurry. Where handled separately,
it is typically piped to settlement tanks. The small proportion of solids
settle out as sludge and the liquids are piped to a field irrigator, which is
normally run continuously at a low rate during the daylight hours.
25Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
Figure 2.3 An above-ground store (or "tin tank") with slurry
being emptied into a tractor-drawn tanker to be spread on farmland.
(Photograph courtesy of Graham Cox)
26Processes of change on dairy farms
Using grass and crop land for effluent disposal and treatment is likely
to remain the predominant method, in part because manure, slurry and
even dirty water can still serve as nutrients. Certain active treatments have
been tried, including mechanical aeration, anaerobic digestion, reed beds
and barrier ditches. All have their costs and drawbacks; none are capable of
producing an effluent that is anywhere near clean enough to be discharged
into a watercourse, and consequently their use is rare (Mason 1992).
Official advice on the design and construction of slurry and dirty-water
systems has been available since the mid-1960s (Agricultural Research
Council 1976, MAFF 1980, 1982a,b, 1983). The most recent publications
at that time formed part of the recommendations contained in the 1985
Code of good agricultural practice (MAFF 1985). However, adherence to any
such guidance was entirely voluntary until the introduction in 1991 of
regulations under the 1989 Water Act (The control of pollution (silage,
slurry and fuel oil) regulations 1991). These "Farm Waste Regulations" set
statutory technical standards for the design and construction of new
and substantially altered slurry and dirty-water handling facilities. Such
facilities must be impermeable, must be guaranteed to last for at least 20
years with proper maintenance, must be sited at least 10m from any
27
Figure 2.4 A newly constructed "weeping-wall" slurry stone.
(Photograph courtesy of Graham Cox)Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
watercourses (including ditches), and must incorporate at least four months'
storage unless the farmer can show that adequate provision can be made
for disposal to land. There is also provision for ordering the upgrading of
existing installations should a serious pollution risk be apparent. The Water
Act also required MAFF to issue a new Code of good agricultural practice,
which it did in July 1991. Unlike the Regulations, failure to keep to the
Code does not constitute an offence, but such a failure may count against
the farmer in legal action over water pollution. The Code is intended as
"a practical guide to help farmers and growers avoid causing water pollu￾tion" (MAFF/WOAD 1991: 1) and covers not only slurry and dirty-water
management but also silage effluent, fertilizers, pesticides and other poten￾tial pollutants.
However, the majority of systems currently in use were built before the
new Code was issued and the Regulations came into force. Previous guid￾ance not only carried no statutory weight but was in any case less thor￾ough. First, lower figures were used for calculating storage capacity than
the now accepted 57 litres of effluent per cow per day. Assuming it was
properly estimated at the time, storage capacity would be insufficient by
25-40 per cent by todays standards (MAFF 1980, Mason 1992: 26). Sec￾ondly, although the guidelines included more construction advice over the
years, and alluded to technical standards - for example, that slurry stores
should be built in accordance with (the old) British Standard 5502 and
that earth-banked structures should be impermeable (MAFF 1982b) - in
practice few farmers are thought to have complied. Constructing proper
effluent management facilities was simply not perceived as a productive
use of available capital. Rather, the arrangements made tended to be deter￾mined primarily by the "cow end" of the system, with makeshift facilities
put in at minimal cost and least disturbance to daily farming practices. Any
design and construction generally relied on no more than the skills of
the local jobbing builder or the individual farmer's do-it-yourself capab￾ilities. It is only very recently that pollution prevention concerns have come
to the fore in the design and construction of farm waste facilities.
Decades of dealing with livestock effluent as cheaply as possible have
left a legacy of inadequate handling systems. Some 14 per cent of British
farms handling slurry and 34 per cent of those handling manure have no
storage whatsoever (Furness et al. 1991: 28), necessitating spreading on
the fields whatever the weather. Moreover, more than three-quarters of
all farms have less than the four months' storage capacity recommended
by the regulations. Many, if not most, older systems are prone to leakage
28Processes of change on dairy farms
Figure 2.5 A dairy cow grazing on silage, with effluent escaping into the
ground. (Photograph courtesy of the Water Services Association)
- for example, lagoons and pits built on permeable soil and without liners
make seepage unavoidable. Poorly laid concrete, which corrodes relatively
quickly, has led to chronic leakage, and weakened structures have a higher
risk of catastrophic failure. Dirty water, too, is often overlooked and sel￾dom separately managed: about a quarter of farms have no provision for
storing parlour and dairy washings, and almost two-thirds have no store
for yard runoff (Furness et al. 1991: 22, 24).
In short, effluent management has not kept pace with the new demands
of slurry-based systems. Poor quality handling facilities, insufficient stor￾age and poor spreading practices intensify the likelihood of livestock efflu￾ent escaping into watercourses, increasing the risk of pollution. The farm
pollution stakes have been raised even further by the second major tech￾nological development of the times: the trend towards a greater use of
silage rather than hay as the main source of winter fodder (Fig. 2.5).
The advantages for dairy farmers in making silage are twofold: it is less
vulnerable to unpredictable weather conditions than is hay-making; and
it can also be cut earlier, making several cuts possible in the season.
Although the switch at first meant farmers had to invest in a silage clamp
or silo and learn new techniques, the benefits in terms of convenience,
29Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
Figure 2.6 Big-baled silage, wrapped in polythene, stacked in a farmyard.
(Photograph courtesy of Graham Cox)
labour saved and increased feed production led to widespread adoption of
the technology (Brassley 1996). Subsequendy, the introduction of big
balers, which wrap the silage in polythene, enabled many smaller livestock
farms to make silage without the need to invest in an expensive silo
(Wilkinson 1990) (Fig. 2.6).
Additives are available to assist silage-making. Wet grass is prone to
rotting and makes poor-quality silage. This can be avoided by additives
that promote proper fermentation and preservation. So, their use renders
silage-making less vulnerable to wetter weather. Early products, such as
molasses and salts of formic acid, have been joined on the market by a
wide range of additives, including sulphuric acid and microbiological inno￾culants. However, a significant minority of surveyed farmers disapproved
of the use of silage additives, feeling that they represented a "short cut"
or "easy option". As one farmer explained to us, "If weather conditions
are such that a silage additive is required, you shouldn't be making
silage."
Silage-making itself produces an effluent that is extremely polluting, up
to two hundred times more so than untreated sewage (see Table 2.2 on
p. 24). The effluent is also difficult to control; its acidity makes it corros￾ive, and it can easily escape the confines of the silo. The quantity of silage
30Processes of change on dairy farms
effluent produced depends on how wet the grass is when it is ensiled, and
whether an absorbent such as chopped straw is used. Ideally, silage efflu￾ent should be intercepted in collection channels (including channels around
the silo perimeter to catch any escaping liquid) and drained to a purpose￾built, corrosion-resistant tank, from which it can be spread or irrigated on
land. The Farm Waste Regulations specify that new tanks must be imper￾meable and made to last for 20 years without maintenance. The Regula￾tions also set down a minimum tank capacity, which is approximately
equivalent to 30 litres for every tonne of silage made.
These new statutory requirements represent considerably higher tech￾nical standards than obtained in the past when the majority of silos now
being used were built. A survey carried out in Scotland in 1981 (Brownlie
&: Taylor 1982) clearly exposed the shortcomings of silo construction at
that time. Defective floors were found to be the most common cause of
effluent leakage, and fewer than half the silos surveyed had separate efflu￾ent tanks. These were often too small for the amount of effluent produced
and defective drainage from silos to tanks was also a significant prob￾lem. The study concluded that most of these problems arose from design
flaws, use of unsuitable materials and faulty workmanship in construction.
Information for Britain as a whole is provided by a more recent survey
(Furness et al. 1991). Its findings suggest that some 81 per cent of dairy
farmers who make silage use a silo. Of these, about half collect effluent
in a separate tank, but almost half of these tanks hold less than the
statutory minimum capacity. Of those farmers without tanks for silage
effluent, more than 20 per cent take no action at all to deal with it, and
others fail to take care of all the effluent produced (ibid.: 156). The
picture becomes even more grim when the likelihood of poor design and
construction is considered. The Scottish survey found that 70 per cent of
the 50 randomly selected silos surveyed had structural defects (Brownlie
& Taylor 1982). Thus, a substantial proportion of existing silos may be
liable to leak, regardless of whether collection and storage facilities are
sufficient in practice to cope with the quantity of effluent produced.
Although the state of existing effluent systems on farms gives cause for
serious concern, the farmer whose system is substandard will not necessarily
precipitate pollution. Conversely, the farmer with a technically sound system
will not necessarily avoid polluting. Whether effluent escapes depends not
only on the quality of the technology but also on how well the system is
managed and maintained. Then, whether a significant amount of effluent
reaches a watercourse is related to the location of the farm, the topography
31Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
of the countryside and the exigencies of the weather. The majority of
farmers rely on spreading and irrigation as a means of final disposal, and
these practices may also lead to pollutants reaching watercourses. Further￾more, the extent of any pollution so caused depends on the nature of the
particular effluent and its rate of discharge. So, the pollution risks posed
by a modern dairy farm are complex.
Effluents in the environment
Routes of contamination
The deliberate discharge of farm effluents into watercourses is now quite
rare, although it was once a common practice (see Ch. 3). Even so, it is
estimated that some five per cent of dairy farms nationally still discharge
dairy and parlour washings straight into a field drain or stream, and a
similar percentage send dirty water runoff directly into a ditch (Furness
et al. 1991: 22, 157).
The routes by which effluents can unintentionally escape are various.
One already mentioned is overflow from systems too small to cope with
heavy rain. Like all engineered structures, effluent facilities are not con￾trived to cope with every eventuality. In particular, the storage capacity
may cope with rainfall only up to a particular intensity. A so-called return
period of, say, five years means that a rainstorm that will overwhelm the
system will occur once every five years on average (Mason 1992). The
extent to which older installations have been designed to allow for storms
is uncertain, but in any case the choice of return period involves a trade￾off between the additional cost of more capacious storage and the con￾sequent reduction in the risk of pollution from overflow.
Leaks and accidents can happen at any time. The less charitable might
term many of the latter "management failures"; valves are left open, pumps
fail to work, silage effluent tanks overflow, transfer pipes come uncoupled,
tanks burst. Some systems include engineering controls such as lights or
bells to raise the alarm when things go wrong, but these too may fail to
operate properly, or all too frequently are deliberately turned off because
of irritating false alarms. Chronic seepage because of failure to maintain
a system that was originally perfectly adequate might also be termed a
management failure, as might seepage attributable to poor design and
construction, on the grounds that a good manager would do something
32Effluents in the environment
about it. On the other hand, such seepage may be hidden from view, and
it can percolate through the ground to emerge some distance away. Similarly,
imminent catastrophic failure, such as a tank in danger of bursting, may
not be obvious to someone who is not trained to recognize a critically
weakened structure.
Nonetheless, and although requirements for management and mainten￾ance are bound up with the quality of the system, unintentional escape
of effluent is often a reflection of the farmers management capabilities.
The tasks of operation are rarely difficult, but they are routine and oner￾ous in the sense that continual vigilance is required if accidents are to be
avoided. At the same time the demands of animal husbandry, silage￾making, paperwork and the like compete with technical duties; the needs
of the cows and the business may well take priority over, say, checking the
pump or getting out with the spreader to avert a potential overflow.
Similarly, repairs and routine maintenance may be put off until what the
farmer perceives as more pressing matters have been dealt with, although
the fact that the tasks involved are unpleasant and may be hazardous may
also encourage procrastination. Among ADAS and NRA field staff, farmers
are notoriously perceived as indifferent (or even incompetent) managers
of equipment. Operational failure, bursts and leaks have caused the vast
majority of recorded pollution incidents involving slurry, manure and
silage effluent (Table 2.3). In turn, these made up more than 30 per cent
of all pollution.
The disposal of effluents to agricultural land provides the second major
route by which pollutants can escape inadvertently and, in recent years,
incidents caused by land runoff have made up to about one-sixth of
recorded incidents. Unlike design and construction, disposal is not con￾trolled under the Farm Waste Regulations. Rather, reliance is placed on
farmers adhering to the Code of good agricultural practice* which encour￾ages them to plan when and where they will spread effluents. The risk that
effluent will reach a watercourse and cause pollution is increased if it is
spread during wet or freezing weather, at too high a rate of application,
on sloping land, on land adjacent to watercourses, on permeable or cracked
soils overlying an aquifer and on fields that are under-drained. It is some￾what ironic that fields with an effective system of land-drains present an
increased risk, given that up until the 1980s much subsidy was poured
into land drainage in the name of agricultural improvement.
Farmers* spreading practices were surveyed just before the introduction
of the current Code of good agricultural practice (Furness et al. 1991). It was
33Changing dairy fanning and the pollution problem
Table 2.3 Farm pollution incidents involving dairy cows/cattle by source,
1989
Source of pollution Reported incidents
number o/
xb
Slurry stores
inadequate storage design capacity 203 10.3
bursting/leaking stores 171 8.6
man-made holes/sluices/valves 40 2.0
poor storage operation 175 8.8
Solids stores
inadequate storage capacity or containment 68 3.4
poor storage operation 53 2.7
Yard washings 395 20.0
Dairy/parlour washings 183 9.3
Land run-off 380 19.2
Treatment system failure 65 3.3
Silage
inadequate effluent storage 70 3.5
leaking silos 100 5.1
leaking effluent stores/drains 75 3.8
Total 1978 100.0
Note: This is the latest year for which such a detailed breakdown of the
statistics is given.
Source: National Rivers Authority (I990b: 21).
estimated that, on more than half of all dairy farms, slurry and manure are
spread on land adjacent to rivers, brooks or ditches, with 10 per cent
doing all their spreading on land next to watercourses. Just under half were
estimated to utilize sloping land, with 5 per cent using steeply sloping
fields. Some 40 per cent of farmers interviewed also believed that lack of
storage capacity forced them to spread in unsuitable conditions (ibid.: 32).
However, even where enough storage capacity exists, effluent disposal is
often adjusted to the convenience of the farmer, rather than related to
the riskiness of the operation in terms of pollution. Of course, the two
considerations might fortuitously coincide. The Devon dairy farmers we
surveyed were asked what the most important factors were in deciding when
to spread slurry. The majority cited ground and weather conditions; but, for
most, their logic turned out to be agricultural rather than environmental,
34Effluents in the environment
explaining their response in terms of a concern not to damage the grass
sward with heavy machinery.
Environmental impacts
Before discussing water pollution implications, it is worth noting that,
although farm effluents have their greatest impact on the water environ￾ment (Conway & Pretty 1991, National Rivers Authority 1992a), they
can also damage other habitats (Nature Conservancy Council 1991).
Pathogens, too, lurk in animal effluents and it is possible for them to be
transmitted to humans via polluted v/atercourses - for example, the para￾site that causes the disease cryptosporidiosis may be ingested in contam￾inated drinking water or during water-based recreation (Milne 1989). In
addition, where livestock farms are located near villages or towns, odour
from storage facilities and spreading can become a source of complaint
(Nielson 1990).
The seriousness of farm pollution depends on the strength of the efflu￾ent, which is commonly gauged by its biochemical oxygen demand (or BOD).
This is a measure of the amount of oxygen required to break down organic
matter in the effluent and, as such, it indicates the potential impact of
a discharge into watercourses in terms of oxygen depletion. Table 2.2
provides estimates of the BOD of some organic wastes. It includes sewage
effluent to show the much higher pollution potential of livestock as com￾pared with human excreta. The range in BOD value for each type of
material reflects the variability encountered in practice; substances of relat￾ively consistent composition, such as milk, show very little variation.
Organic wastes disturb the water environment in three main ways
(Hellawell 1986, Haslam 1990, Holmes 1990, Nature Conservancy Council
1991). First, concentrated effluent can kill organisms directly; in sufficient
concentrations, ammonia (from excreta) and chlorine (from the hypochlorite
used to sterilize milking parlours) can be toxic to both fish and inverteb￾rates. Secondly, the decomposition of organic material reduces the amount
of dissolved oxygen in the water, which can lead to death by suffocation of
species intolerant of lowered oxygen levels. If oxygen depletion is severe,
it can even cause the death of micro-organisms that feed on waste, thus
breaking the self-purification process and rendering water completely lifeless.
Thirdly, nitrogen and phosphorus in the effluent can change the nutrient
balance of the receiving water. Plants that tolerate nutrient-poor condi￾tions are particularly vulnerable, as they can easily be suppressed by more
competitive species, which flourish in enriched conditions.
35Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
The net result of these processes is a reduction in the diversity of plants,
fish and invertebrates, with only species tolerant of the particular level of
contamination being able to survive in the water. The precise impact in
particular places will depend not only on the type of effluent but also on
how much effluent enters the water, how rapidly it gets there and the
character of the receiving water. The pattern of discharge may assume any
permutation from a slow trickle to a rapid flood, and discharges them￾selves may be solitary, intermittent or continuous. Correspondingly, impacts
range from transient to persistent. With large v/ater bodies, effects can
be mitigated by dilution, whereas fast flowing water can carry pollutants
down stream. Flowing water also gives mobile organisms an opportunity
to escape contamination. Variations in natural water chemistry and the
presence of other pollutants - such as domestic sewage, fertilizers from
leaching or runoff (which raise nutrient levels) and sulphur and nitrogen
compounds from atmospheric emissions (which acidify the water) - may
also compound matters.
At one extreme, gross pollution episodes can result in large-scale fish
kills and major changes in invertebrate populations. Indeed, the fish life
of whole stretches of rivers can be effectively killed off by large farm￾pollution incidents. Such pollution shows up immediately, but a single
episode, even a large one, will generally have less impact in the long term
than smaller but persistent discharges. Leakage over long periods can lead
to a chronic lowering of oxygen levels and a permanently increased nutri￾ent load, with more or less permanent effects on fish, invertebrate and
river-plant communities. The impoverishment of the fauna and flora of
chronically polluted watercourses may not be evident except to the trained
observer, but where the load is sufficient there will often be obvious indica￾tions of contamination such as the discolouration of water, the presence
of sewage fungus and mats of blanket weed.
Conclusions
The nature of the pollution problem from dairy farming means that, for
the farmer, the problem is not so much one of causing pollution as being
detected of doing so. The escape of effluents alone will not necessarily
result in penalties being imposed. Farmers are prosecuted for causing a
water pollution incident, not for the leaky effluent systems, slipshod prac￾tices or lack of spreading area that may lead to it.
36Conclusions
Because of difficulties of detection, the full extent of dairy farm pollu￾tion and its overall contribution to reduced water quality are unknown.
Certainly, by the late 1980s, farming accounted for around a third of all
water pollution incidents and the great majority of farm pollution incid￾ents are attributable to dairy farming. However, it is impossible to know
how much effluent pollution these figures capture, for although the incid￾ent statistics probably include a significant proportion of the discharges that
cause gross pollution, chronic low-level pollution may well go unnoticed
and unrecorded. Moreover, although gross discharges are acknowledged
to have serious short-term effects on watercourses, the impact of persistent
low-level contamination is more contentious. The early 1980s saw a decline
in river quality nationally (ooE/Welsh Office 1986a, National Rivers Author￾ity 1991), but the extent of the contribution of diffuse farm pollution is
uncertain because of the difficulty of establishing direct links between the
two. Evidence supporting a link comes from detailed catchment studies
such as that of the Eastern Cleddau in Wales (Schofield et al. 1990), but
the sort of chronic diffuse pollution identified by such intensive invest￾igations does not show up on routine monitoring of river quality.
Even if the full extent remains uncertain, it is now accepted that farm
effluent is a significant source of water pollution. Undoubtedly, this has
been the case for some years, but only in recent years has it become recog￾nized as a public problem. The following two chapters seek to explore
why farm pollution was overlooked for so long and what brought it to
public recognition.
Notes
1. In a survey of 250 Devon farms, whereas 58 per cent of all the farm house￾holds derived at least three-quarters of their total household income from
agriculture, some 86 per cent of those with dairy farms fell into this "most
agriculturally dependent" category. These statistics are based on our own ana￾lysis of the data compiled at the Centre for Rural Studies at the Royal Agri￾cultural College and collected in 1991 as part of a large, pan-European study
of multiple job holding among farm households coordinated by the Arkleton
Trust (see MacKinnon et al. 1991, Hawkins et al. 1993).
2. A survey of dairy farmers in Devon conducted two years after the introduction
of quotas found that, although the overall expansion in milk production had
37Changing dairy farming and the pollution problem
ended, one-third of farms had still been able to increase their production above
1983 levels (Halliday 1987; 1988). This was mainly due to the buying or
leasing of additional milk quota, preponderantly by larger farms.
3. For example, the average milk yields per dairy cow in England and Wales rose
from 4800 litres in 1981 to 5115 litres in 1991, an increase of 6.6 per cent
(Federation of United Kingdom Milk Marketing Boards 1991: 40).
38CHAPTER THREE
Farm pollution as a non-issue
Until recently, pollution from farm effluents has remained largely unregu￾lated. This seeming laxity is partly because historically farm pollution was
more localized and less severe in its consequences than it is now; but also
it has only recently been recognized publicly as a problem needing regu￾lation. Indeed, the pollution control authorities used to turn a blind eye
to problems of the disposal of farm effluents.
The extension of the regulatory framework from the 1950s onwards to
embrace farm pollution proceeded hand in hand with the developing recog￾nition of the problem. However, this was by no means a linear progres￾sion. Instead, various groups successively sought to shape the definition of
the problem. The initial response of law-makers and regulators was to draw
farm pollution into the existing system for regulating sewage and indus￾trial discharges, with the implicit assumption that it was no different in
character. However, with the prospect in the 1970s of that system itself
being tightened, the agricultural establishment successfully sought specific
exemptions for farming, arguing that farm wastes were fundamentally
different in character from industrial wastes and that any problems were
short-term, localized and technical matters best dealt with internally within
the sector. In consequence, what had been an emergent problem became
something of a "non-problem" in the 1970s (Ward et al. 1995a,b),
effectively internalized within the agricultural community and given
exceptional legal status. However, by the mid-1980s, it was proving im￾possible to contain the issue in this way - with evidence of rising farm
pollution incidents, a decline in river quality and in the highly charged
political context following the government's proposal to privatize the water
industry. For the first time, pollution from farm effluents became a public
issue and was identified as a major cause of the decline in water quality.
39Farm pollution as a non-issue
Very quickly it was brought within a detailed regulatory framework. This
chapter charts these shirts in problem definition as reflected in changes in
regulatory policy towards farm pollution.
Tackling an emergent problem
The discharge of any effluents into watercourses has always been covered
by common law, particularly in regard to the rights of downstream riparian
owners (the owners of land bordering the riverbank). If their interests in
the use of the water in the stream were damaged by pollution, then they
could seek legal redress. However, starting with the Public Health Act of
1848 and the River Pollution Prevention Act of 1876, a complex body of
statutory law built up for the administrative regulation of water pollution.
This framework was aimed at the treatment and disposal of sewage and
industrial effluents, and farm pollution was not specifically identified as a
problem. As Weller & Willetts (1977: 201) have commented:
Farmers have always held a privileged position with respect to the law
relating to pollution. The law, historically, has avoided being specific
and farmers have had a considerable degree of leeway in its interpreta￾tion. Industrialists, however, have had specific standards to meet since
their effluent streams invariably discharge to sewer or other water
under the control of the water authorities. The farmer has access to
land for effluent spreading and this is under no one specific control.
Pollution from such activity is extremely difficult to prove, owing to
the diffuse character of the pollution and the non-continuous effluent
discharge.
Indirectly, though, pollution by farm effluents was brought within stat￾ute law, most notably through fishery protection legislation, which, in
seeking to safeguard a specific resource, sought to be comprehensive in
covering the potential polluting threats. Such legislation began with the
Salmon Fisheries Act, 1861 which made it an offence to poison salmon
waters. The Salmon and Freshwater Fisheries Act, 1923 extended the
protection to all freshwater fish. Under the legislation it was an offence to
discharge into any waters containing freshwater fish any matter to such an
extent as to cause the water to be injurious to the fish. Successful prosecu￾tions were mounted under this Act, following fish kills from silage and
40Tackling an emergent problem
slurry pollution. The Act was not a pollution control measure as such, but
a prosecution measure where there had been a proven fish mortality. Even
in this regard, however, it was hedged with qualifications that limited its
effectiveness. The legislation was administered by fisheries protection offi￾cials and so it tended to be they, rather than pollution control officials, who
acquired any experience in dealing with agricultural pollution.
The immediate post-war period saw an effort to rationalize the piece￾meal structure of water pollution administration and law that had evolved
since the mid-Victorian period. A key development was the establishment
in 1948 of river boards with comprehensive responsibility for river pol￾lution control. With administrative boundaries defined by catchments,
the new boards assumed the functions previously exercised by a range of
authorities. The substance of water pollution law was also updated in the
Rivers (Prevention of Pollution) Acts of 1951 and 1961, a key provision
of which was to make it an offence to use a stream for the disposal of any
polluting matter. The Acts also made it illegal to discharge trade effluents
into a watercourse without the consent of the appropriate river authority.
By 1963, all trade discharges, including farm discharges, needed such a con￾sent. The Public Health Act of 1961 completed the picture by bringing farm
effluents under its definition of trade effluents, thus giving farmers the
qualified right to require the public health authority to receive their wastes
into the public sewer, while giving the authority the right to refuse consent
if this was impractical or, if consent was granted, to lay down conditions,
including charges.
Many river authorities took on extra staff during the 1960s to invest￾igate the nature and extent of farm discharges into watercourses. There
were thousands of applications for discharge consents; many related to
septic tank outflows or runoff from manure middens and collecting yards
into ditches. By mid-1969, however, of 131 171 discharges recorded from
form to river, only 3 per cent were under consent, 22 per cent were
pending consent and the remaining 75 per cent were technically illegal
(Gowan 1972: 26). Most authorities were overwhelmed by the number
of applications for discharge consents. In Yorkshire, for example, "only
those causing gross pollution and public complaint were dealt with, usu￾ally by consent refusals, to take effect over a negotiated period of time.
This still left thousands of unresolved applications gathering dust" (Beck
1989: 467).
Some authorities attempted to deal with all their applications, either by
consent or refusal, with varying degrees of success. However, most farm
41Farm pollution as a non-issue
discharges, including many insignificant ones, could not comply with the
then normal standard limit for any effluent, of 20 parts per million (ppm)
for BOD and 30 ppm for suspended solids, as laid down by the Royal
Commission on Sewage Disposal in 1912. A spokesman for one river
authority was quoted as saying that the authorities imposed "realistic
conditions such as 300/300 [ppm of BOD/ppm of suspended solids] that
can be enforced, rather than 20/30 that the farmer hasn't a hope in hell
of achieving" (Weller & Willetts 1977: 29). Likewise, although a river
authority was entitled by law to sample at the point of discharge into a
watercourse, many stretched the definition of effluent sampling to mean
the receiving stream or ditch at the point where it left the farm boundary.
This allowed a farmer to take advantage of the ditches and streams on the
farm for the dilution, self-purification and re-aeration of any effluent.
With the law applied in such a lax manner, it is not surprising that it
was little understood. In the words of one contemporary commentator
"The farmer for his part often has no conception whatsoever of what he
is doing to a stream or river or lake, and probably has no understanding
of the words BOD, and indeed may also be ignorant of the basic law."
(Gowan 1972: 22). In such a context, the pollution officers of the river
authorities lacked legitimacy and authority, and the same commentator
reported the resentment of farmers at "what they class as the snooping
activities on the part of the river authority" (ibid.: 21—2). This lack of
legitimacy, in turn, militated against the enforcement of the law except in
exceptional cases. Even so, in 1972, 555 formal warnings were issued and
148 prosecutions brought against farmers by river authorities (Advisory
Council for Agriculture and Horticulture 1975: 48). Indeed, 45 per cent
of all those prosecuted for river pollution were farmers, although the
average fine they faced was only £30 (Storey 1977).
Agricultural exceptionalism
Given the traditionally indulgent treatment of farmers, agricultural leaders
became alarmed as pollution became a public issue in the late 1960s and
early 1970s. Although attention focused on industrial and sewage pollu￾tion, there was concern lest any general clampdown might adversely affect
the economic viability of agriculture and bring unwelcome interference
into farming practices. Sir Nigel Strutt, the chairman of the statutory
42Agricultural exceptionalism
Advisory Council for Agriculture and Horticulture, warned the farming
industry:
We are living today in the initial years of a great public movement
of resentment against all forms of pollution, a movement which in
the United States has reached a stage of almost hysterical crescendo.
No section of the community can afford to ignore this. Agriculture
is right in the thick of it. (Gowan 1972: foreword)
The following year, Strutt's Advisory Council was asked by the Minis￾ter of Agriculture to report on agricultural pollution. In addition, it was
becoming apparent to some of those involved in implementing the river
pollution legislation of the 1960s that the prevailing regulatory model -
of discharge consents to watercourses for treated wastes or waste flows
with little polluting content, and the use of the public sewerage for other
wastes - was not appropriate to agriculture. It was often difficult to locate
discharges from farm premises because these were rarely point discharges
and were not continuous. For the same reasons it was even more difficult
to monitor them. With the prospect of a mammoth task just to bring
myriad farm discharges under consent, it was becoming quite evident that
most of them could not possibly meet the standard conditions of consent
(formulated by the Royal Commission). As Weller & Willets observed,
"agricultural wastes have extremely high BOD and suspended solids levels,
and discharge to watercourses is not compatible with the [Royal Commis￾sion] standards" (Weller & Willets 1977: 28).
For some farms, especially those close to built-up areas, there was the
possibility of discharge to the public sewers and, particularly for many
intensive livestock units with limited land, this was the only option to
avoid causing serious pollution. This practice was considered by an official
Working Party on Sewage Disposal which sat in 1969. In its report, the
Working Party came to the conclusion that it would be quite impractic￾able and uneconomic for adoption on a national scale: the capital invest￾ment required at sewage works for the treatment of livestock effluents
would be much greater per animal than per head of the human popula￾tion. The report therefore recommended that effluents should be returned
to the land wherever possible, and this became a theme that subsequent com￾mittees and reports echoed, reflecting a general unwillingness to accept
farm wastes as pollutants.
The theme was picked up, for example, by the new Royal Commission
on Environmental Pollution (RCEP), which was appointed in February
43Farm pollution as a non-issue
1970. With a membership made up of distinguished scientists and other
public figures, the Commission was intended to provide independent and
authoritative advice concerning the significance of, and possible solutions
to, existing and prospective pollution problems. Its first report presented
a broad overview of environmental problems. Under the subheading of
"Pollution and agriculture", farm animal excreta was identified as a source
of potentially polluting materials. The Royal Commission concluded that
the problem was essentially one of "valuable manure from intensive farm￾ing [being] wasted" (RCEP 1971: para. 127). Noting that MAFF kept the
issue under review and offered advice to farmers, and that additional
resources had been provided for research into the matter, the Royal Com￾mission allocated the problem to the category of "priorities for enquiry
which seem to be receiving attention elsewhere and which, despite their
importance, we do not propose to tackle ourselves, though we shall be
concerned to see prompt and effective decisions" (ibid.: para. 130). In its
fourth report (RCEP: 1974), the Commission indeed returned to the prob￾lem, to urge that a continuing effort be made to improve storage facilities
for excreta on farms so that material could be spread on land at the
optimum times to supply crop needs and minimize pollution risks.
The report of the Agricultural Advisory Council
This pressure from the Royal Commission and its implied threat of inde￾pendent investigation may well have been a factor in prompting MAFF to
ask its own Advisory Council for Agriculture and Horticulture (ACAH),
under the chairmanship of Sir Nigel Strutt, to undertake a review of
problems to do with farm wastes. The government was also committed to
the introduction of legislation that was to consolidate and strengthen
controls over water pollution, and there was concern within the Ministry,
as well as within the farming industry, over what the implications would
be for agriculture. In February 1973, therefore, MAFF requested its Advis￾ory Council:
to investigate and report on the extent to which agriculture contrib￾utes to pollution through the use of fertilizers and by the disposal of
farm waste; whether control measures are adequate or unnecessarily
restricting and any action which may be desirable. (ACAH 1975: 1)
The Council was composed of distinguished agriculturalists and
horticulturalists, together with a senior MAFF civil servant. It was the Minister
44Agricultural exceptionalism
of Agriculture's official advisory body on broad questions of agricultural
policy. Over the following 22 months it produced three reports: on pol￾lution from nitrogenous fertilizers, on farm odours, and on the disposal of
farm wastes. Its report on farm wastes concentrated on the water pollution
problems arising from livestock manures and silage effluent. It was at
pains to distinguish the circumstances of farm pollution from those of
industrial pollution, pointing out that:
agriculture, unlike other industries, is in a special position in that the
land, which is agriculture's raw material, is also a source of water.
Excessive restrictions placed on the agriculture industry with the aim
of improving water supplies can only be at the expense of domestic
food production. (ACAH 1975: 5)
In other words, a balance had to be struck between the competing
needs of food and water supply. The Advisory Council went on to chal￾lenge the applicability to agriculture of the "polluter pays" principle that
had recendy been adumbrated by the Royal Commission on Environmental
Pollution and the OECD and assented to by the EC Council of Ministers.
The Committee argued that, agriculture was a "price taker" rather than
a "price setter" and it was not possible for it to pass on the costs of
pollution control measures automatically to its customers, with the con￾sequence that "a farmer might be required to bear the cost of control
measures imposed on him, or have restrictions imposed on his activities
for, say, social reasons when in terms of good agricultural practice these
measures are not necessary" (ibid.: 28).
The Advisory Council also reasoned that farming was not intrinsically
a polluting activity in that the problems of farm wastes "are not primarily
ones of disposal but rather of better resource utilization and standards
of management" (ibid.: 2). The fundamental problem, therefore, was
where holdings had insufficient land for proper utilization of effluents.
This seemed to be specific to the intensive pig sector. "Nearly all dairy
enterprises appear to have sufficient land to spread their manure" (ibid.: 4)
- the June 1973 farm census indicated that there were only 200 dairy
holdings keeping cows at densities in excess of 2.5 cows per acre (6.2 per
hectare), and most of them were the survivors of the old town dairies.
Somewhat disingenuously, the report pointed to the few formal warnings
and prosecutions against farmers for causing water pollution as an indica￾tion of the exceptional nature of the problem, while commending "the
45Farm pollution as a non-issue
attitude of most authorities in seeking to persuade and educate rather
than resorting to formal legal sanctions" (ibid.: 12). Still, only a very small
proportion of farmers seemed to be causing serious offence.
The Advisory Council's report conceded that "agriculture is no doubt
a source of a certain amount of diffuse pollution" (ibid.: 12), but such
problems were minor and should in any case largely solve themselves.
Inorganic fertilizers, which were no longer subsidized by the Ministry,
had risen markedly in price in recent years. In consequence, "livestock
manures are now an increasingly valuable resource and the cost savings to
be achieved by good use of the nutrients have become an important con￾sideration" (ibid.: 2). Many of the practical precautions which farmers
could take to prevent pollution were already spelt out in advisory leaflets
issued by the Ministry. Any shortcomings therefore were essentially ones of
information and training: "Farming expertise in agricultural waste manage￾ment and pollution control", declared the Advisory Council, "is significantly
less than in other sectors of farming" (ibid.: 6). Thus, many of its recom￾mendations related to enhancing ADAS'S expertise in the management of
farm wastes; publicizing the advice ADAS provided on pollution preven￾tion; encouraging farmers to seek such advice; drawing particular pollu￾tion risks to the attention of the farming community; and improving
liaison with planning and water authorities.
The Advisory Council, however, clearly felt that much greater sources
of ignorance, outside of farming, also needed to be tackled and that these
misperceptions were as much part of the problem as were unfortunate
cases of the runoff of farm effluents. It called for improvement therefore
to "the education of the general public in the ways of the countryside,
especially those who have gone from the towns to live in the country, as
well as officials of public bodies, such as those concerned with health and
water supplies" (ibid.: 30). Not only should the public be given a better
understanding of the problems faced by farmers, but it should also be
made more aware of its dependence on the farming industry for much of
its food supplies and the threat that restrictions might pose of reduced
production. Indeed, the Council urged the need to safeguard agricultural
interests from any future restrictive measures that might threaten a drop
in farm output, and this is exactly what the government did.
The 1974 Control of Pollution Act
The Advisory Council's deliberations on farm pollution coincided with
the passage of the Control of Pollution Act 1974 (COPA). Although this
46Agricultural exceptionalism
legislation promised potentially new controls over serious sources of pol￾lution, it also reflected the sort of defensiveness and complacency towards
agriculture that the Advisory Council displayed. Thus, on the one hand,
it strengthened the duties and power of water authorities both to forestall
and remedy water pollution. The greatest potential implications for agri￾culture arose from two changes. First, the offence of causing water pollu￾tion was extended to include underground water with gathering evidence
of nitrate contamination of some groundwater sources. Secondly, a reserve
power was introduced whereby the Secretary of State for the Environment
could designate as a water protection zone an area where there was a risk
of water pollution and, within it, could proscribe activities that could not
then be carried out without the consent of the water authorities. On the
other hand, the legislation gave a general exemption from prosecution for
causing water pollution to any farmer operating in accordance with "good
agricultural practice".
A Department of the Environment (DOE) guide to pollution control
in Great Britain summarized the reason for the provision as being that:
"normal farming practices may sometimes result in water pollution and
farmers are therefore afforded some protection by the Act" (DOE 1976:
para. 84). The Advisory Council for Agriculture and Horticulture explained
the exemption in the following terms:
Under this Act the offence of causing or knowingly permitting the
contamination of water is extended to include underground water
... In recognition of the possible difficulties which these provisions
could cause for some farmers, particularly as regards underground
water, special provision has been made for bona fide agricultural
activities. (ACAH 1975: 23)
The exemption caused hardly any contention during the Bill's parliament￾ary passage. On the contrary, grave misgivings were expressed by MPS and
peers with agricultural connections at the possible threat posed to normal
farming practices by the all-embracing nature of the offence of causing
water pollution, as well as the reserve powers of blanket regulation in
water protection zones. While ministers gave assurances that these powers
would be used sensitively and sparingly (the powers, in fact, were never
used), they resisted calls for farmers to be compensated for restrictions on
their activities, even if such restrictions ran counter to good agricultural
practice.
47Farm pollution as a non-issue
Nevertheless, the Act contained crucial safeguards that preserved the
autonomy of the agricultural sector against creeping pollution controls.
The most crucial was the "good agricultural practice" defence. The legis￾lation left it to MAFF to specify in a code what should count as good
agricultural practice, and thus to determine which normal farming activ￾ities should transcend pollution controls. However, a water authority could
apply to the Secretary of State for the Environment for a notice to request
a farmer to desist from such an activity, if it was thought to be causing
pollution, and this would then open the farmer to prosecution if pollution
subsequently occurred.
Special arrangements were also made for agriculture in establishing water
protection zones. These allowed, first, for an agricultural assessor to assist
an inspector at the public enquiry, which would normally be held before
regulations were made. Secondly, where farmers wished to appeal against
the refusal of a consent for a proscribed activity, they would be able to
apply to the Minister of Agriculture for a certificate of good agricultural
practice in respect of that activity; and if a certificate was granted the
appeal would be determined joindy by the minister and the Secretary of
State for the Environment.
Pressed to say why such exemptions should not apply to other sectors,
such as quarrying, an Environment Minister responded:
The special provision in the bill has been limited to farmers for three
good reasons. First of all, modern farming involves applying extens￾ively to the soil substances which, in sufficient concentrations, would
pollute water unacceptably. Secondly, agriculture still uses so much
of the surface of the land . . . that in the aggregate farming is far
more at risk than any other industry of inadvertendy polluting water.
Thirdly, it is still an industry in which a large number of people work
in small units, on their own account. (Lord Sandford, Hansard, House
of Lords Debates. 22 January 1974 col. 1424)
Among contemporary commentators the provision did not seem overly
tendentious. For example, a leading commentator on environmental law
remarked on this "concession to farmers", in the following terms:
the idea behind the provision must be that the farmer will be permit￾ted to carry on with normal farming practices until the resulting pollu￾tion is such that, on the balance of advantages to the community,
48Agricultural exceptionalism
it is better that he should change his methods. The discretion will lie
with the Secretary of State who will have power to issue the notices.
The procedure will be characteristic of English pollution legislation.
(Mclaughlin 1975: 78)
The water industry seemingly put up no concerted resistance. Never￾theless, there was significant concern internally about agricultural pollu￾tion, as revealed in the earlier efforts of the river boards to record and
register farm discharges, the rising number of farm pollution incidents
mentioned in their annual reports, the level of formal warnings and pros￾ecutions issued against farmers (555 and 148 respectively in 1972), and a
spate of papers on farm wastes in the Journal of the Institute of Water
Pollution Control in the mid- to late 1970s.
However, the water industry's highly fragmented structure did not lend
itself to effective lobbying or give it a coherent voice, and it was in any
case being subjected to a periodic bout of reorganization. The 1973 Water
Act replaced the 29 river authorities, 157 water undertakings and 1393
sewerage units operating in England and Wales with just ten large regional
organizations responsible for all aspects of water, from source to sewer.
Although these regional water authorities would become more powerful
organizations, the passage of the Control of Pollution Act 1974 coincided
with the highly disruptive period of their establishment. Subsequendy,
though, the new water authorities expressed to the Royal Commission on
Environmental Pollution their concern that "the provisions of the Act
may be held to place agriculture in a special position in relation to pol￾lution" and "that, in conflicts between agricultural and pollution consid￾erations, the former may be regarded as paramount" (RCEP 1979: 3).
With an overriding policy commitment to expand food production in
Britain, there was little room for the recognition of farm pollution as other
than a very minor and peripheral concern. This commitment was actually
strengthened in the mid-1970s. Britain's entry into the EC and its Com￾mon Agricultural Policy coincided with concerns about possible world
food shortages, which led to a renewed imperative for agricultural expan￾sion. The 1975 White Paper on agriculture, for example, even though
setting out a target for expansion of 2 per cent a year, which was bound
to involve considerable intensification of production, made no more than
a passing reference to pollution (MAFF 1975).
The view within MAFF was that pollution problems were ephemeral
and that technical solutions would be found to any short-term difficulties
49Farm pollution as a non-issue
in the handling of farm wastes. A paper prepared by ministry staff,
"Agriculture in 2000 AD", predicted a continuing trend in livestock
farming towards higher stocking densities, larger units and the housing
of animals (MAFF 1979). Greater quantities of effluent would need to be
disposed of, but the paper was optimistic about "further developments in
effluent treatment and handling, including improved usage as manure
or in recycled form as animal food" (ibid.: 248). All new and modern￾ized dairy units were expected to adopt cubicle housing, resulting in an
increase in slurry handling, but environmental problems were expected to
decline, with the development of techniques of applying slurry to land
and separating the solid and liquid fractions, to the point where the nuis￾ance might be "no greater than from conventional manure handling sys￾tems involving [farm-yard manure]" (ibid.: 252). At the same time,
improved hay-making methods were thought likely to halt or even reverse
the trend towards more silage, thus reducing the risks of pollution from
silage effluent.
The significance that MAFF accorded farm pollution at this time can be
gauged from the fact that, out of an ADAS staff complement of 5800, the
Farm Waste Unit comprised just four specialists and one clerk. Their
function was to act as a source of expertise and guidance for local agricul￾tural advisory staff, but the location of the Unit in the Agricultural Science
Service, rather than in one of the "front line" advisory services, indicated
the way in which farm pollution was regarded as a minor, technical matter,
detached from the central concerns of crop and animal production and
farm management. In keeping with this outlook, greater resources were
allocated to research: in 1976 MAFF devoted £0.25 million pounds to work
on farm wastes; and the Agricultural Research Council and Department
of Agriculture and Fisheries in Scotland also supported research in this
field. The Agricultural Research Council posed the problem in the follow￾ing terms: "In nearly all circumstances in the United Kingdom slurry
produced in livestock units is sooner or later returned to the land ... Its
treatment and effective use are therefore primarily agricultural problems"
(ibid.: 131).
The 1979 Royal Commission report
In 1977 the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution launched an
investigation of agriculture and pollution, which emerged as its seventh
report in 1979. This was only the second time it had taken a detailed
look at a specific sector, the previous one having been nuclear power.
50Agricultural exceptionalism
Whereas the investigation into nuclear power had covered an issue of great
contention, agriculture was a sector that at the time aroused little contro￾versy regarding pollution. Evidendy the Commission was goaded into action
by the widespread complacency it found in the agricultural sector, rather
than by specific problems. In a preliminary discussion held with MAFF the
Commission members "were not persuaded that sufficient attention was
being paid to the pollution that might be caused by agriculture . . . we
were left with the impression that such problems were regarded as second￾ary in importance and as unavoidable concomitants of food supply*' (RCEP
1979: 3). The Commission took an inclusive view of agriculture and
pollution, covering not only pesticides, nitrogen fertilizers and farm efflu￾ents, but also the effects of pollution from urban and industrial sources on
agriculture itself, in obeisance to the widespread view within the sector
that farming was more sinned against than sinning.
In relation to farm wastes, the Commission emphasized how the 1975
report from the Advisory Council for Agriculture and Horticulture had
provided a valuable starting point and assistance to its own inquiries. The
categories of waste covered included manures and slurries, cereal straw,
silage effluent, sheep-dip liquors and surplus pesticides and pesticide con￾tainers, although the bulk of attention was devoted to pollution risks from
slurry, which the Commission regarded as the major problem. On some
of the other problems, the Commission took what proved to be an over￾optimistic view of the prospects, for example, expressing itself "satisfied
that in view of the extensive advice that is now made available on silage￾making, and the increased awareness by farmers of the risks, pollution
from this cause should be a diminishing problem" (ibid.: 154).
Regarding animal effluent, the Commission drew a basic distinction
between "traditional, mixed farming systems [in which] the manure pro￾duced is part of a balanced, self-sustaining cycle, in which nutrients are
returned to the land" and large-scale intensive livestock units established
on relatively small areas of land and in which "animal production is vir￾tually a factory process for converting grass or grain into meat or eggs"
(ibid.: 127). In the first case, the Commission questioned the appropriate￾ness of the term "waste": "given good management, the storage and spread￾ing of the manure presents no significant pollution problems" (ibid.: 128);
moreover, it had considerable nutrient value as a fertilizer and was a good
soil conditioner. In the second case, though, where "the area of land
available for the disposal of excreta may be far less than that required for
the nutrient value of this material to be efficiently used . . . the excreta
51Farm pollution as a non-issue
may indeed be regarded as waste; that is, as something of little intrinsic
value, to be disposed of as cheaply as possible" (ibid.: 128). For this reason
and because of the much higher pollution risks involved, the Commission
judged that "intensive livestock units are not intrinsically agricultural in
character; they are essentially industrial enterprises and should be regarded
as such" (emphasis added). The implication was that, "as with other indus￾tries, the need for pollution control, and the need to bear the costs of
that control, must be accepted" (ibid.: 128). The Commission, therefore,
recommended that from the perspective of both planning control and
pollution control, the development and operation of intensive livestock
units should be subject to local authority regulation, as well as MAFF
inspection.
The Commission's distinction can be seen to be an essentialist one,
contrasting livestock farming proper, to which pollution should be an
anathema, with factory production of animals, whose high polluting risks
confirmed its separate industrial character. The difficulty with the distinc￾tion was that it left unclear the status of specialized animal production,
particularly dairy farming, which had not undergone the processes of
concentration to the same extent as had occurred with pigs and poultry,
but which was increasingly employing intensive practices. However, the
Royal Commission was preoccupied with large intensive pig units. Its
members paid a visit to North Humberside, where there was the greatest
concentration of such units in Britain, causing locally acute problems of
pollution and nuisance, which evidently left a strong impression on them.
As their report remarked "The smell of pig slurry, as we experienced when
visiting Humberside with its many pig units, is highly offensive and pen￾etrating" (ibid.: 134).
However, the Commission could not fail to acknowledge adverse
trends in dairying, including a growth in herd sizes, an increase in the
number of large herds on relatively small farms, and a strong trend towards
slurry-based housing systems, all of which led to "the risk of pollution
from leakage or overflow, from the runoff of slurry, and of smell from
that slurry spread on land or stored" (ibid.: 17). Nevertheless, its overall
judgement was that "The pollution problems . . . appear mainly to be
down to pig and poultry units rather than to cattle units" (ibid.: 133).
Indeed, in proposing a definition of an intensive livestock unit, based on
its polluting potential, for the purposes of statutory regulation, the Com￾mission suggested that it should not include the winter housing of cattle
(ibid.: 193).
52Farm pollution regulation in the 1970s and early 1980s
Because of the concentration and heavy regional specialization that had
occurred in pig and poultry production, the Commission remarked that
the pollution problems associated with the storage and disposal of animal
excreta were localized and usually sporadic. They identified three types of
pollution risk: water pollution, transmission of disease and smell. For the
first two, the Commission looked to technical solutions. Water pollution
risks could be avoided or minimized by care in the siting and construction
of waste storage facilities and by conscientious management of these facil￾ities and subsequent spreading operations. Likewise, the risk of infection
would be minimized by not spreading onto grazing land or by storing the
slurry for at least one month and then leaving the land ungrazed for at
least six weeks. By far the most intractable problem was that of the smell.
As the Commission commented "It is clear that the smells associated with
intensive animal production give the most offence to, and cause most
complaint by, the public at large. It is also the most difficult problem to
define" (ibid.: 134).
Although the Royal Commission proposed that intensive livestock units
should be subject to the planning laws, the whole thrust of its report was
that farm pollution should primarily be the concern of the agricultural
sector itself. Its report called for "a new emphasis on pollution matters
within MAFF", and the Ministry was criticized for having been in the past
"unduly defensive and protective towards agricultural interests". The
Commission was adamant that "the initiative for action to deal with
pollution caused by agriculture should rest with MAFF" (ibid.: 211).
Farm pollution regulation in the 1970s and early 1980s
The Control of Pollution Act 1974 (COPA) had left the objectives of farm
pollution control ambiguous. All that was clear was that the pursuit of
water quality had to be qualified by considerations of agricultural effi￾ciency and productivity. Unclear objectives were compounded by a dearth
of information on the problem. Prior to the Act, the level of prosecutions
of farmers had been one indicator of the scale of serious farm pollution.
However, after 1973 the number of prosecutions dropped sharply and did
not reach their pre-coFA levels again until the mid-1980s (see Table 3.1).
Significantly, the number of written warnings fell much less sharply than
53Farm pollution as a non-issue
Table 3.1 Number of convictions for farm
pollution (!972-91)
Year Number of
convictions
1972 148
1973 69
1974/5 23
1976 n/a
1977 28
1978 n/a
1979 38
1980 34
1981 71
1982 64
1983 87
1984 1 10
1985 159
1986 128
1987 225
1988 148
1989 163
1990 221
1991 214
Sources: Advisory Council for Agriculture and
Horticulture (1975), Grundey (1980), NRA (I992b).
the number of prosecutions, indicating a more marked reluctance to pursue
cases through the courts. After 148 prosecutions in 1972, there were just
23 in 1974 and 28 in 1977. The drop was not solely due to the exemption
for farmers provided by COPA (the relevant section of which did not, in
any case, formally come into force until 1986). The legislation had coin￾cided with the reorganization of the water industry in which the river
boards were subsumed into the multipurpose regional water authorities.
For the former, river quality had been a prime objective, but this became
secondary to the water authorities' overriding concern with water supply
and sewage treatment.
Whatever the cause, farmer prosecutions were clearly no longer an indica￾tion of the scale of the problem (if they ever had been). During the 1970s,
indeed, water pollution from farming became something of a non-problem.
54Farm pollution regulation in the 1970s and early 1980s
The water authorities acquiesced in the priority given by government to
the expansion of food production over the curbing of farm pollution. This
led to a lack of effort in monitoring and measuring the problem. Schemes
initiated by the former river boards, to bring all significant farm discharges
under formal consent procedures, were no longer pursued. The main river
monitoring activities of the water authorities focused on major stretches
affected by urban and industrial pollution and neglected the rural catch￾ments where farm pollution might be prevalent. In any case, the periodic
sampling procedures used were not designed to pick up the diffuse or
spasmodic pollution typically caused by farming activities. Hence, there
was a lack of information about the extent of the farm pollution problem,
which completed a vicious circle that, in effect, closed off the issue. For
the dearth of information meant, in turn, a lack of public awareness of the
problem, with little pressure on water authorities to do anything about it,
or on politicians to acknowledge its existence.
On the surface, all seemed well. Water authorities were reported to
believe that "negotiation, rather than punitive measures, will lead to better
cooperation" (Weller & Willetts 1977: 29); and a National Farmers' Union
spokesman remarked that the authorities had been "taking a cooperative
and helpful line over discharges of farm effluent and certainly few cases
come to us for attention" (quoted in Weller & Willetts 1977: 29). How￾ever, little regulation of farm waste pollution took place, and the sub￾merged reality of what did occur was much more problematic, as research
by Keith Hawkins at Oxford University subsequently revealed. Reporting
on participant observation fieldwork with water authority pollution con￾trol staff, Hawkins remarked:
Farmers are an occupational group regarded by officers with rural
patches as particularly troublesome, partly because of lack of resources,
partly because of a characteristic stubbornness born of decades of
water-use unencumbered by the attentions of any regulatory agency.
They have a culture of their own which sometimes impedes the
officer in doing his job: "They're a tight-knit community," said an
officer of long standing from a large rural area, "and they won't
inform against one another. There's a lot of cover-up." Indeed, of all
the occupations regularly encountered, the farmer is the most con￾sistently described as difficult to handle, as an area supervisor's ques￾tion, posed with deliberate ingenuousness, acknowledges: "Farmers,
in particular where you get an uncooperative one, are [some] of the
55Farm pollution as a non-issue
worst customers that we come across. I don't know whether you've
heard that before?" (Hawkins 1984: 115)
Dealing with farmers was seen to demand particular tact and diplomacy,
and Hawkins found that pollution control officers in rural districts learned
early on that it was essential, in the words of one of them, to "avoid
getting their backs up. You get their backs up and you'll get nowhere". Too
ready a reference to the law was considered to be counterproductive, as
another of them explained, in describing how he approached farmers:
I try and take an interest... in the farm, show them - try and show
them — I'm not just someone who comes along from an office in his
suit who doesn't know anything about farming at all. I may not
approach the question directly. I may have a chat about the farm, see
what's he's got... You go along and be bloody-minded to a farmer,
try and lay the law down, go quoting this Act and that Act which
he's probably never heard of and doesn't understand, he'll just put
his foot down and you won't get anywhere, (ibid.: 136)
Given the difficulties in dealing with farmers and with farm pollution,
field staff were inclined to turn a "blind eye" to the problem as long as
there were no wider repercussions. Such an approach was often condoned
by their area supervisors, one of whom was quoted as saying he would
"bend the rules on farms", because: "farmers are one of the most intrac￾table problems you can get. You can't treat farm effluent satisfactorily ... So
far as I'm concerned the farmers can continue until someone squeals"
(ibid.: 217).
Farm pollution thus went unregulated in practice. Official neglect was
matched by and helped perpetuate public unawareness, which in turn
fostered political indifference. The period from the late 1970s to the mid￾1980s was indeed a political hiatus for problems of agricultural pollution.
The Royal Commission had deliberated on the subject and had produced
a report which, although critical of the agricultural sector, had looked to
it to put its own house in order. The Commission had made various
proposals for improved practice and administration, relating not only to
intensive animal husbandry but also to the use of pesticides and nitrogen￾ous fertilizers. Even so, the government took four years to respond (DOE
1983) and then rejected some of the key proposals, including a require￾ment for agricultural capital grants to be made conditional upon water
56Conclusions
authority consultation. In principle, COPA offered certain additional con￾trols, but these too were subject to government delay and equivocation.
The provisions of this Act relating to water pollution (Part n) did not start
to come into effect until July 1984, ten years after the legislation had been
passed. The farming lobby was particularly concerned about the extension
of water authority powers to control discharges to land, and the National
Farmers' Union and Country Landowners' Association, with the assistance
of MAFF, negotiated an agreement which specifically exempted farmers
from the operation of the proposed regulation.
In February 1984 MAFF circulated a draft of the Code of Good Agricul￾tural Practice* as required under Part n of COPA. The water authorities
reacted strongly. They were reported to feel that "many of MAFF'S advisory
leaflets which are to underpin the code are so overwhelmingly concerned
with agricultural productivity as to be virtually useless for water control
purposes" (ENDS 1985: 21). In response, the Code, finally issued in Janu￾ary 1985, was substantially rewritten and stressed - unlike the draft - that
"in planning and operating a farm enterprise it is essential to take precau￾tions against all forms of pollution" (MAFF 1985). Although the Code had
been intended to be a defence of responsible farmers, and the farming and
landowning lobbies had been consulted on it, there was unease among
them at its declaration that "nothing that is likely to cause water pollu￾tion could be accepted as good agricultural practice". MAFF responded by
drawing a commitment from the DOE to write to all water authorities under￾lining the need to interpret the Code in a reasonable manner and com￾mitting itself to monitor the administration of the Act and to "take the
necessary action" if the water authorities proved unaccommodating (Country
Landowner, April 1985: 9).
Conclusions
Thus, throughout the 1970s and early 1980s, agricultural pollution as an
issue was very much under the control of the agricultural community. As
such, it was largely removed from political debate and, with the exception
of the smell arising from intensive livestock units, aroused little, and then
only localized, public concern. The response of the agriculture depart￾ments was equally low key and consisted almost wholly of the funding of
research and development, much of which was directed at odour control.
57Farm pollution as a non-issue
Information about the subject was available to farmers through ADAS, and
grant aid could be obtained for waste facilities installed under farm devel￾opment schemes. There were, however, no regulations governing the stor￾age or disposal of farm effluents, and the subject had a low profile, so there
was little incentive for the farmer to take action to prevent pollution. On
the contrary, the much more powerful stimulus of production policy acted
to increase pollution risks, not only indirectly through its encouragement
to intensify production, but also directly through the provision of grant
aid to such measures as the concreting of yards, the construction of animal
housing and the under-drainage of fields. As a water official in the South
West commented subsequendy, "the ministry. . . dumped large amounts
of money into [dairy] farms to change their practices. It never seemed to
occur to anyone to tell them what to do with the pollution" (The Inde￾pendent, 16 October 1987).
Retrospectively, as we shall see, it became evident that pollution from live￾stock farms was widespread and systematic. MAFF'S own surveys revealed
that, on many farms, livestock wastes were being applied at rates higher
than their take-up by crops; and in the South West of England in par￾ticular significant amounts of dairy cow manure were being applied at
rates far in excess of crop requirements (Richardson 1976). What helped
keep such a chronic and endemic problem from wider recognition was
that most of it was low level and spasmodic and it occurred away from
major abstraction points. But the acquiescence of many farmers, agricul￾tural advisers and regulatory officials in this state of affairs points to the
importance also of the prevailing conceptual categories through which the
issues were understood and through which fundamental boundaries were
maintained.
As we have seen, various sources of authority had drawn upon and
reinforced a fundamental distinction between agriculture and industry in
reviewing the issue of farm waste. None of these was blind to the fact that
farming was changing in its scale and intensity. As the Royal Commission
commented, "Farming, long regarded as a way of life, is now becoming
as much an industry as many other businesses" (RCEP 1979: 2). It was
generally acknowledged, moreover, that these changes were generating
increased environmental pressures. Even so, although ministers and the
Agricultural Advisory Council addressed various arguments to justify its
exceptional treatment in environmental law, the distinctive character of
agriculture remained something unquestioned - a fundamental assump￾tion that required no explanation precisely because it went unchallenged,
58Conclusions
but which underpinned the reasoning that, because of its natural origins,
farms produced "waste" but not "pollution". Only the Royal Commission
felt the need to reflect briefly on what constituted agriculture's funda￾mental distinctiveness and it identified this in agriculture's dependency on
"the weather, type of soil and other variables that make farming an art as
well as a science" (RCEP 1979: 128). In a move revealing of the wider issues
at stake, the Commission proposed to move the boundaries, in effect to
preserve the categories: those husbandry activities that the Commission
recognized as significant sources of pollution - namely, intensive livestock
rearing - it redefined as not agricultural but industrial. Agricultural pol￾lution was thus not only an aberrant act but also an anomalous category.
The recognition of agricultural pollution would therefore necessitate a
major shift in meanings, and we turn next to consider under what circum￾stances and with what consequences this shift actually occurred.
59CHAPTER FOUR
The politicization of farm pollution
Introduction
In 1983, the DOE formally responded to the Royal Commission's report
on Agriculture and Pollution. The 34-page response, which was given over
mainly to pesticides and nitrate fertilizers, included just two-and-a-half
pages on animal wastes and these made no specific reference to water
pollution (DOE 1983). Instead, it simply echoed the received wisdom on
the issue, namely that the problem was essentially one of intensive live￾stock units, mainly in the pig sector but also in the poultry sector, and
that the chief concern was to deal with the smell associated with the waste.
Yet again, a code of good practice was seen as the way forward. The gov￾ernment rejected proposals that grant aid should be linked to pollution
control measures and that there should be a formal requirement for water
authorities to be consulted over planning or grant aid applications for
agricultural developments likely to cause water pollution.
In stark contrast, just five years later the government accepted that farm
wastes were a major source of water pollution which needed to be regu￾lated (DOE 1988). This admission was made in response to a report on
river pollution by the House of Commons Environment Committee (1987).
In the short intervening period between the two government statements,
therefore, water pollution from farm wastes had emerged as a significant
and a politicized problem. It is unlikely that its extent or scale had changed
significantly. What then had happened to give farm effluents such promin￾ence as an environmental issue?
Crucially, the two policy communities that until then had either sup￾pressed or ignored the problem had been thrown into disarray. On the
one hand, the agricultural policy community had been rocked by the EC's
60Introduction
imposition of milk quotas in March 1984, which, at a stroke, had under￾mined its single-minded preoccupation with boosting production. On the
other hand, government plans to privatize the water authorities, published
in February 1986, had provoked considerable opposition which had engulfed
the water policy community. Of all the privatizations of the Thatcher gov￾ernments, this proved the most controversial, involving the transfer￾ence of a very traditional and vital public service into private hands. With
government so evidently willing to divest the public sector of its respons￾ibilities, there was scope for others to assert their claims to represent the
public interest, and, in particular, this provided a major opportunity for
regulatory officials and pressure groups to promote the new environmental
morality.
Out of the breakdown of these two important communities, new group￾ings emerged, as both insider and outsider groups sought to shape a very
fluid policy agenda and to position themselves in relation to any reconsti￾tution of the policy communities. One such grouping brought together
both disaffected regulatory staff of the water authorities and various inter￾est groups opposed to the plan to privatize the regulatory functions of the
regional water authorities alongside their service functions. In seeking to
generate support for the water authority's regulatory functions, they began
to expound a rhetoric concerning the need for independent regulation in
the public interest. Nothing seemed to illustrate that case more than the
neglected issue of farm pollution. The turbulence of the agricultural policy
community provided the opportunity for this issue to be prised from it
and to be redefined as an environmental problem rather than as a tech￾nical problem of production. With the loss of the imperative to expand
agricultural production, it could no longer be convincingly maintained
that farming objectives should automatically take precedence over envir￾onmental considerations.
The Environment Committee's investigation of river pollution was a
key event in politicizing the issue of farm pollution, as well as in formu￾lating a consensus between agricultural and water interests over how the
problem might be tackled, which was then taken up in government policy.
The investigation had been triggered by the publication of the quinquennial
survey of river quality conducted in 1985 and published in the following
year (DOE/Welsh Office 1986a). There were reductions from the previous
survey (undertaken in 1980) in the lengths of river classified at either
extreme as either "good" or "bad" quality, with an associated increase in
the proportion of rivers within the middle categories of "fair" and "poor".
61Politicization of farm pollution
The net shirts were slight but the overall change could only be interpreted
as a deterioration, making it the first in the seven national surveys con￾ducted since 1958 not to record an overall improvement. In interpreting
the results of the river quality survey, another set of statistics, also issued
in 1986, but likewise referring to 1985, was very influential - namely the
compilation of reported water pollution incidents caused by farm waste in
England and Wales (Water Authorities Association/MAFF 1986). It drew
public attention for the first time to the widespread and seemingly grow￾ing incidence of farm pollution. These two publications together trans￾formed perceptions of the farm waste problem. They had such an impact,
partly because of the new information they contained in respect of trends
in river pollution and its causes but also because of the political context
in which the statistics appeared.
The politics of water privatization
What made evidence of increasing water pollution so politically charged
was the announcement of the government's proposals for the privatization
of the water authorities (DOE/Welsh Office 1986b). These envisaged that
the existing regime for water pollution control would remain intact: the
regulatory duties and functions of water authorities would simply pass to
the new private water service companies. The proposals caused consider￾able consternation, which the publication of the river quality survey only
served to fuel. The various interpretations that could be put upon the
survey's findings became central to an intensifying debate over what was
wrong with water pollution regulation and whether the government's
privatization plans would improve or worsen matters. Those opposed to
privatization could argue that the deterioration in river quality was already
an indictment of the weakening of public controls and of public invest￾ment within the water industry that privatization would only serve to
exacerbate. Those in favour of privatization were able to point to the
apparent failure of public regulatory bodies in safeguarding the water
environment. As well as this partisan debate over the rights and wrongs of
Thatcherism, discussion and interpretation of river quality statistics were
also joined by various groups - some within the water industry, others
from outside, including environmental groups and industrial users of water
62The politics of water privatization
- all seeking to influence the form that privatization might take and any
safeguards that the government might feel obliged to introduce.
The regional water authorities had been set up in 1973. Based on the
concept of integrated river basin management (IRBM), they exercised con￾trol over every aspect of water management in their particular region. As
Richardson et al. comment: "Dominated by engineers, the water policy
sector conformed fairly closely to the model of a policy community in
which technical expertise was the main basis for consensual decision making"
(1991: 7). Environmental groups were not included: the only environ￾mental interests represented on the boards of the water authorities tended
to be MAFF appointees from Regional Fisheries Committees. Significant
changes occurred in the policy sector during the early 1980s. In 1983, the
last vestige of local authority control was removed with the ending of the
appointment of members to the regional water authorities by local author￾ities. At the same time, the National Water Council, the planning body
for the sector, was abolished to be replaced by a trade association, the
Water Authorities Association (WAA), which quickly established a stronger
corporate identity and lobbying potential for the water industry nation￾ally. Under the impact of tighter budgetary restrictions and a climate of
opinion increasingly hostile to the public sector, water came to be seen less
and less as a service and more and more as a commodity, and an ethos of
commercialism began to prevail (Saunders 1985).
It was within this context that the notion of water privatization emerged,
being first proposed publicly by a chairman of one of the regional water
authorities. Indeed, a strong driving force to privatize emanated from
senior water authority management. The proposal was taken up by right￾wing ministers. Plans for privatization were drawn up in consultation with
the water authorities, but when published they caused such contention as
to throw wide open the policy community. It was evident that many
ordinary people were deeply shocked at the prospect that such a basic
resource should become subject to commercial control. Richardson et al.
in their study of water privatization (1991; see also Maloney & Richardson
1994, 1995) argue that the proposals for privatization and the response to
them had the effect of destabilizing the existing policy community. The
resulting political void, they argue, allowed many previously "outsider"
groups to become at least temporarily involved in this policy field. They
suggest that it was in the possible reconstitution of a new policy commun￾ity that these outsiders saw their chance to influence decisions. Several
hundred interest groups were aroused to lobby on the matter, and at the
63Politicization of farm pollution
same time, privatization plans revealed critical fissures within the water
authorities themselves.
Opinion was divided not only between water authorities but also among
the staff they employed. The WAA adopted a stance that, if privatization
was to go ahead, then the authorities should be privatized whole, as they
stood. Likewise, the main professional body, the Institution of Water
Engineers and Scientists, argued that the principle and practice of IRBM
must be preserved in any changes, and that it was therefore essential to
retain within a single structure the environmental management of each
area, including the regulatory functions of resource management and
pollution control (see Kinnersley 1988, 1994, Maloney & Richardson
1994, 1995). However, the main grouping of regulatory staff, the Institute
of Water Pollution Control (IWPC) although also arguing for the retention
of IRBM, felt that maintenance and control should be carried out by an
independent public body (something akin to the River Purification Boards
that still existed in Scodand)1
. The IWPC thereby aligned itself with a range
of groups, including environmental, industrial, landowning, fisheries and
angling concerns, who, in opposition to the government and the WAA,
wanted to see the retention in the public sector of the key regulatory
functions. Out of this commonality of interests, one can see the begin￾nings of the emergence of a new policy network, of which the National
Rivers Authority was the eventual incarnation.
The question arises of why the IWPC adopted this dissenting position.
Its members had mainly worked for the English and Welsh river boards
and had tended to lose status and independence when these boards had
been subsumed into the regional water authorities. They had also suffered
disproportionately in the financial squeezes and managerial reforms of the
early 1980s. To maintain performance targets with reduced staffing levels,
it had tended to be the regulatory and monitoring activities rather than
the operational and service functions that had suffered the greatest cuts.
For example, in the South West Water Authority there was a 50 per cent
reduction in sampling for river quality monitoring between 1980 and
1985 (House of Commons Environment Committee 1987: 308). It was
unlikely that, within privatized utilities, such priorities would be reversed;
indeed, it was likely that the pressures on such unprofitable functions
might intensify. Among this grouping, therefore, there was an emerging
interest in a higher public profile and increased political support for public
regulatory functions. The publicizing of farm pollution helped achieve just
this objective.
64Farm pollution incidents
Farm pollution incidents
Here was an apparently novel threat to the integrity of rural rivers and
streams, although it had concerned water authority staff for some time.
What had been lacking in the past was systematic evidence of the prob￾lem. Commenting on British pollution control practice in general in that
period, one perceptive American commentator remarked, "On the one
hand we are told that the system is one of the best in the world and that
pollution is firmly under control. Yet there are persistent and nagging
doubts. Much of what one would expect in a well developed control
system is missing." (Hays 1984: 22). Traditions of administrative secrecy,
pragmatism and informality, he argued, rendered the objectives of pollu￾tion control opaque and made it impossible to assess its achievements.
"Are there no firm numbers?*' he was led to complain (ibid.: 22). It is,
after all, through the medium of statistics - expressed as rates, levels, trends,
correlations and the like - that the significance and progress of public prob￾lems are usually gauged and judged (Porter 1995).
Such scepticism would have applied with particular force to the area of
farm pollution. The Control of Pollution Act (COPA) had left the object￾ives of control ambiguous, with the pursuit of water quality qualified by
considerations of agricultural efficiency and productivity. Unclear object￾ives were compounded by a dearth of information. As we have seen
(Table 3.1, p. 54), COPA led to a sharp drop in the prosecution of farmers,
which not only cut off the main source of publicity about farm pollution,
but which also meant that the level of prosecutions was no longer an
indication of the scale of the problem. The dearth of information in turn
helped close off the issue from public debate.
Of course, individual water authorities did have information on the
cases of farm pollution that they had to tackle. Eventually, the gathering,
systematic collating, publishing and publicizing of statistics on such incid￾ents were to provide the missing numbers that enabled farm pollution to
become a public issue through becoming a measurable problem (WAA/
MAFF 1986). Indeed, it may be argued that it was necessary to construct
the notion of a "farm pollution incident" - by turning isolated, individual
cases into statistical events - to break out of the vicious circle of this "non￾problem" (Hill et al. 1989, Ward et al. 1995a).
But what is a farm pollution incident? It is essentially a gross pollution
event whose consequences (say, in the form of a fish kill, sewage fungus
or a discoloured stream) are observed and hence the event is reported; but
65Politicization of farm pollution
for an event to become an incident requires someone there, on the spot,
to observe and report. However, the regional water authorities had con￾centrated their pollution control staff and monitoring activities elsewhere,
to deal with industrial pollution, and the other relevant professional field
staff who might be alert to pollution occurrences - namely fishery biolo￾gists and water bailiffs - were thin on the ground. Such staff, nonetheless,
were accustomed to cooperating closely with interested members of the
public, such as anglers, naturalists and riparian owners, who were often
vital sources of information on the conditions of rivers and their fish life,
which included reports of pollution and fish kills. For reported incidents
to be taken as a yardstick of the problem, it was necessary that potential
informants be actively recruited and encouraged. Pollution control staff,
therefore, began to adopt a proselytizing role as part of their efforts to
establish a constituency for their work. For example, in some regions they
began to give talks to local groups on farm pollution, discussing what to
do if it was encountered.
It was the practice of the water authorities, and before them the river
boards, to give descriptive accounts in their annual reports of the major
pollution problems they had had to tackle. Typically, some statistics would
be provided on the major pollution incidents that had occurred and on
their causes. In Yorkshire, for example, the fourteenth annual report of the
Yorkshire Ouse River Board, covering the period 1963-4, was the first to
include a small section headed "Farm effluents" although no statistics were
given. It was not until the report for 1966-7 of the now Yorkshire Ouse
and Hull River Authority that farms appeared for the first time as a
separate category of trade premises causing significant pollution incidents
- 13 per cent of the total (Beck 1989: 468). In all subsequent years,
annual reports featured agricultural pollution as a regular and increasingly
important subject, and the practice was continued by the new water author￾ities formed in 1974.
Efforts were made by MAFF'S Farm Waste Unit to collate these statistics,
and from 1981 it began to issue annually a limited circulation of cyclostyled
tables on pollution from farm wastes drawing on information obtained
from the water authorities. This perpetuated the tradition whereby the agri￾cultural community defined the problem and, in the words of the head
of the Farm Waste Unit, established its "interpretation of figures whose
accuracy must be suspect" (Payne 1986: 335). In 1983, however, an
informal Farm Waste Group was set up under the auspices of the WAA,
bringing together relevant regulatory staff from several water authorities,
66Farm pollution incidents
notably those such as the South West, Welsh and Severn Trent, who were
experiencing the most severe difficulties with farm pollution. The original
terms of reference for this group included the publicizing of agricultural
pollution and the promotion of solutions; it came to have an increas￾ingly influential role in wresting back from MAFF the initiative in defin￾ing the farm pollution problem, but also in raising the public profile of
the issue.
In 1985, at the initiative of the WAA, steps were taken to ensure that
more consistent statistics were collected from the separate water author￾ities and that the results received publicity. It was agreed that MAFF and the
WAA should publish an annual joint survey of farm pollution incidents
using an agreed set of definitions for the categorization of incidents. It was
explained that "Pollution resulting from agricultural activities is of grow￾ing importance and it was decided that a regular survey would assist in
determining the main reasons for pollution occurring and so indicate
where improvements are necessary" (WAA/MAFF 1986: 1). The report of
the survey, actually published by the WAA, was entitled Water pollution
from farm waste.
The WAA had been provoked into an active stance in part by the pros￾pect of the introduction of MAFF'S Code of good agricultural practice. The
WAA'S Farm Waste Group coordinated the water sectors response to. the
draft code and this had helped greatly strengthen the preventive potential
of the advice it contained. There was then keen interest to pursue the
implementation of the new code, which was introduced in January 1985.
Unfortunately, its introduction coincided with a downgrading and staff
cuts to MAFF'S Farm Waste Unit (despite the recommendations of the
Royal Commission that this unit should be strengthened). This provided
the WAA with both cause and opportunity to assume the leading role in the
overall monitoring of farm waste pollution.
The survey of pollution incidents did provide a means to gauge what
effect, if any, the code was having on advisory or farming practice. Unfortu￾nately, incidents caused by silage effluents, for example, were revealed to
have leapt by 76 per cent to more than 1000 in 1985 (WAA/MAFF 1986).
Silage-making had increased greatly in the wake of milk quotas, as farmers
had sought means to cut back on bought-in feedstuffs for their animals
(Brassley 1996). This had often occurred without adequate provision for
silage effluent storage facilities (see Ch. 3), and the poor summer weather
did not help matters. MAFF'S Code of good agricultural practice advised:
"In favourable weather, the best policy is to wilt the crop". This would
67Politicization of farm pollution
certainly help to reduce the pollution risk. However, advice in the farming
press and from ADAS officials was often against wilting. As one ADAS sci￾entist remarked "Any production system for silage that uses wilting pays
a tremendous penalty on animal output [sic]" (Pearce 1986: 27). Water
authority staff were concerned that MAFF was not prepared to condemn
those who did not wilt, and this issue was seized upon because it seemed
to make a mockery of the code. As Ron Thorns, Chief Scientist at Wessex
Water, remarked "If there were to be a much closer involvement of MAFF
in solving the farm pollution problem, the difficulties experienced could
become a thing of the past" (ibid.: 27). The volume of incidents thus
became something of a test for the Code of good agricultural practice. As
the Water pollution from farm waste report commented, "It is apparent
from this survey that, had the farmers concerned followed the recommenda￾tions in the Code, the number of pollution incidents would have almost
been eliminated" (WAA/MAFF 1986: 5).
The development of incident statistics can thus be seen as part of an
effort by water authority regulatory staff to get a handle on the problem
of farm pollution as a basis for judging the adherence of farmers and their
advisers to the Code of good agricultural practice. However, the availability
of the statistics and the publicity they attracted also helped transform
public perceptions. Not least, with its indication that the total number of
reported incidents had increased by a quarter on the previous year, Water
pollution from farm waste drew considerable attention for the first time to
this particular, and seemingly growing, problem. Inevitably, the report
informed and shaped the wider debate about trends in river quality.
Defining the problem
The river quality survey ranked stretches of water into four categories
ranging from "good" quality to "bad". Overall, it found that "The waters
of England and Wales continue to be of high quality with 90 per cent of
river and canal length and 92 per cent of estuarial length assessed of Good
or Fair Quality" (DOE/Welsh Office 1986a: 3). However, over a quarter
of river length was assigned to a different class in 1985 than it had been
in the previous survey undertaken in 1980: 12 per cent had improved its
classification, whereas 14 per cent had moved down.
68Defining the problem
Of course, the question arose of who or what was to blame for this net
deterioration in river quality. It should be pointed out - and there were
those who did so - that there were difficulties involved in interpreting the
results of the river quality survey and even more so in comparing the
results from one year with those of a previous year. This did not stop
various groups from providing their own gloss; indeed it encouraged them.
The report of the survey contained commentaries by each of the water
authorities on the underlying factors affecting changes in water quality in
their areas. The main factors behind improvement in quality were iden￾tified as follows: investments in sewerage and sewage treatments works;
improvements by industry to trade effluent discharges; the closure of fac￾tories and collieries; the diversion of polluting discharges to water author￾ity treatment works; and the reduction of farm pollution through preventive
campaigns in particular areas. The main factors in the deterioration in
water quality were identified as: a worsening of the effluent from sewage
works, often because of greater loads; increased operation of storm over￾flows because of overloading; more pollution from intensive farming prac￾tices; discharges from fish farms; discharges from mines; and an increase
in pollution incidents, particularly from agriculture. Within this agenda,
various interest groups and commentators began to point an accusatory
finger at specific factors. Agriculture, it will be observed, appears both on
the credit side (once) and on the debit side (twice). The publication of the
compiled farm pollution incidents, when no breakdown of the incidents
caused by other industries was published, also helped to focus attention on
agriculture's role in water pollution.
This focus served the interests of a variety of influential groups, all of
whom were given the opportunity to spell out their concerns when the
House of Commons Environment Committee launched its inquiry into
river pollution in February 1987. To industrialists it was a welcome devel￾opment to have the spotlight of attention turned from polluting industrial
practices onto farming. As the Confederation of British Industry (CBI)
pointed out "The improved quality of known, direct discharges, including
those from industry, has often served to emphasize the significance of
diffuse and unknown sources of potential pollutants" (CBI 1987: 64). In
a neat reversal of roles - indicative of the wider shifts in meaning that were
occurring - the CBI expressed its concern about the increasing incidence
of pollution from intensive farming practices because "Industry, which is
a major consumer of water, is naturally concerned about any reduction in
water quality which is likely to have an impact on the water's potential
69Politicization of farm pollution
uses" (ibid.: 63). For most industrial users, occasional contamination of
their water supplies from agricultural discharges posed a rather specific
problem. As the CBI pointed out, "it is not usually the substances released
into a river in agricultural runoff which have caused problems for indus￾trial abstractors, but more the unpredictability of such discharges, which
can lead to chemical imbalances within an industrial process" (ibid.: 64).
Industrialists doubted the vigour with which a privatized water industry
would pursue such problems where they did not directly threaten its
abstraction points.
For the water authorities, likewise, farm pollution caused difficulties but
also helped deflect attention from the mixed performance of their own
sewage treatment works. The WAA argued strongly that the latter problem,
in any case, was attributable to the financial constraints under which its
members had to operate, whereas the "rapid growth" in farm pollution
demanded new countermeasures (WAA 1987: 17). With their exacting
standards of water quality for public consumption, the water authorities
relied on abstraction from rural catchments for potable supplies of water.
They were particularly concerned therefore at the impact on their operat￾ing costs of the possible need for advanced treatment and the commission￾ing of alternative supplies to counter the effect of farm pollution. The
Welsh Water Authority had estimated that the capital and revenue costs
incurred in one year in only two of its seven divisions to overcome farm
waste problems was approximately half a million pounds - costs then
passed onto water consumers (Welsh Water Authority 1984). The pro￾spect of privatization simply posed more starkly the question of who should
bear these additional costs.
To rural conservationists, a focus on farming provided yet another
opportunity to challenge agricultural policy and its support for intensive
methods of production. As the Council for the Protection of Rural Eng￾land (CPRE) remarked, "the processes at work behind increasing pollu￾tion incidents from slurry stores and silage effluent are the same as those
responsible for the increasing rate of hedgerow loss and the destruction of
other important landscape features and wildlife habitats" (CPRE 1987: 362).
There were also direct consequences for freshwater fauna and flora. The
Nature Conservancy Council (NCC) implicated agricultural pollution in
the demise of at least two species of dragonfly, as well as in the reduced
populations of the less tolerant fish, insect and plant species (NCC 1987:
256-60). Between 1986 and 1990, the NCC found that at least 71 Sites of
Special Scientific Interest had been damaged by farm pollution incidents,
70Making sense of the data
and feared the real figure could be "considerably higher" (NCC 1991: 15).
Wildlife groups had long pressed for the implementation of specific pro￾visions, in the 1974 Control of Pollution Act (§46(1-3)), to remedy or
forestall pollution injurious to flora and fauna. Government proposals to
revoke these unimplemented measures as part of its privatization plans
triggered off a campaign by wildlife organizations to make nature conser￾vation a central consideration in the national water quality objectives that
the government had proposed should be set for the privatized water indus￾try. As the NCC complained, "the criteria used for judging 'clean' rivers are
not enough to guarantee that sensitive plant and invertebrate communities
will flourish" (NCC 1987: 256). With the wildlife interest concentrated so
singularly on the highest-quality rivers and with just these watercourses
being the most vulnerable to agricultural runoff, conservation organiza￾tions focused on this source of pollution to highlight their campaign.
Indeed, the large majority of the 60-plus organizations that gave evid￾ence to the House of Commons Environment Committee's inquiry into
river pollution identified farm waste as a major source of river pollution.
These included, inter alia, the DOE, the WAA, the Chemical Industries
Association, the CBI, the Natural Environment Research Council, all of
the regional water authorities that gave evidence, Friends of the Earth,
Greenpeace, the Institution of Water and Environmental Management,
the NCC, the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, the Anglers' Co￾operative Association, the Association of Chief Technical Officers, the
CPRE, the Country Landowners' Association, the Countryside Commis￾sion, the Royal Society for Nature Conservation, the Water Companies
Association, the Water Research Centre and the National Anglers' Coun￾cil. Such a chorus of objections could hardly be ignored.
Making sense of the data
Few of the organizations that gave evidence to the House of Commons
Environment Committee's inquiry had expressed themselves on the issue
previously. Most had been unaware of the problem. Nevertheless, they
seized on the emerging evidence of farm pollution to pursue their primary
concern, which was opposition to the privatization of the regulatory func￾tions of the water authorities. Few had any independent evidence of their
own on farm pollution and, to interpret the river quality survey, most of
71Politicization of farm pollution
them drew heavily on the compiled statistics for farm pollution incidents
in the WAA'S report Water pollution from farm waste. In a Memorandum
to the Environment Committee, for example, the Natural Environment
Research Council (NERC), in what was to become a routine juxtaposition,
expressed the seemingly mutually reinforcing interpretation between them
in the following terms:
The last full river survey in 1985 showed that there had been a
reduction in gross pollution over the preceding five years, but also
indicated deterioration in some rivers. The latter was attributed to
several factors but farm pollution was identified as a major problem.
A report by the Water Authorities Association based on a survey in
1985 has documented the rising trend in farm pollution incidents
arising from effluent. (NERC 1987: 78)
Careful commentators, though, conceded that both of these data sources
were flawed. With the river quality survey there were problems to do with
differences in methodology and data interpretation between the water
authorities, for example in the discretion allowed in the assessment of bio￾logical evidence as against chemical parameters, in the option to take data
from the previous two years and in the scope for differences of interpreta￾tion of the river classification system. Such problems were particularly
acute in assessing the evidence from rural catchments where agricultural
pollution would have been most prevalent. As Dr Mance (Regional Sci￾entist of the Severn Trent Water Authority and representative of the WAA)
remarked:
[in] the rural catchments . . . sampling frequencies are low and there￾fore the security of actually making a judgement about which class
the river is in, is correspondingly low and we are relying on support
information in terms of biological survey data. There is inevitably an
element of subjective judgement as to what that actually says in
relation to the chemical results we have had. (House of Commons
Environment Committee 1987: 29)
Such discrepancies raised difficulties in interpreting not only the aggreg￾ate results for England and Wales but also changes between successive
surveys, as ministers and their senior civil servants emphasized. The head
of DOE'S Water Quality Division pointed out various problems in using
the river quality survey to identify and interpret trends:
72Making sense of the data
One is the classifications have changed. There are problems of con￾sistency in the way the information is collected by authorities and if
you are measuring things at two points in time, there are also prob￾lems of weather conditions, which can have quite an impact on water
quality, (ibid.: 46)
To underline such misgivings, the DOE announced that it had instituted
a review of river quality monitoring procedures, with the aim of standard￾izing the classification methods used and providing a better indication of
long-term trends (DOE 1987: 9).
On the other hand, agriculture ministers and their civil servants were
anxious to put "into perspective" the statistics on farm pollution incidents.
The total number recorded in 1985 involved "less than one per cent of the
farming community", pointed out MAFF, "and represents only one-sixth of
water pollution incidents from all sources" (MAFF 1987: 116). In addition,
Mr Reed (Head of MAFF'S Environment and Conservation Policy Divi￾sion) reasoned that "The increase in the number of pollution incidents
may not be entirely due to an actual increase on the ground. Part of the
increase will surely be due to the greater public awareness of pollution
problems, to improved reporting by the water authorities and to public
matters of that sort" (House of Commons Environment Committee 1987:
122). There was also the possibility, though, that reported incidents revealed
only the tip of the iceberg. The South West Water Authority (SWWA)
reported the following results from its Farm Pollution Campaign in which
all farms in selected catchments were being visited: "There is surprising
consistency in the extent of the problem from catchment to catchment.
With little variation first visits reveal the same proportions of 'red',
'green' and 'blue' farms: 25 per cent - pollution occurring; 25 per cent -
pollution potential; 50 per cent - satisfactory" (SWWA 1987: 307). From
these findings the Authority estimated that, of the 30 000 farm holdings
in Devon and Cornwall, between 5000 and 10 000 were causing pollution
(ibid.: 307). The number of reported farm pollution incidents for the
region in 1985, however, was only 622.
If analysis of the two separate data sources raised problems, then com￾parison between the two of them might be thought even more fraught.
After all, the statistics had quite different bases. However, no-one raised
this objection. Instead, different interests tended to use their interpreta￾tion of one to shore up their interpretation of the other. Although the vast
majority of organizations did this to highlight agriculture's contribution to
73Politicization of farm pollution
river pollution, a different gloss could be placed on the comparison. The
National Farmers' Union (NFU) attempted to do just that. Its Memoran￾dum to the Select Committee commented, "The number of pollution
incidents reported by the water authorities has shown a steadily increas￾ing trend over the past ten years, in spite of the overall improvement of
river quality which has taken place in this period" (NFU 1987: 137).
The Memorandum then went on to challenge the statistics on farm pollu￾tion incidents: "it is by no means certain that the increasing number of
incidents reflects an increasing level of pollution . . . We would not accept
the validity of this system of measurement by the number of recorded
'incidents' as an objective method of determining levels of pollution"
(ibid.: 137). Extraneous factors, identified by the NFU as likely to influence
the number of reported incidents, included shirts in public awareness,
changes in staffing levels, fluctuations in rainfall from one year to another
and the effect of the industrial recession reducing the amount of industrial
pollution. Undoubtedly, there was some truth in these arguments. The
recording of pollution must be dependent on the resources and effort
put into it. Similarly, rainfall fluctuations do contribute to variations in
pollution. For example, 1985 was a very wet year and, although this would
have helped dilute industrial effluent flows, it would have exacerbated farm
pollution problems. The NFU'S line, though, was a difficult one to carry
conviction, as it involved a reading of the river quality surveys at odds
with the whole thrust of the Environment Committee's inquiry; and the
investment of a touching faith in the soundness of that data source to
support the Union's thorough-going scepticism towards the figures on
farm pollution incidents.
In any case, by the time the NFU came before the Environment Com￾mittee, the tide of opinion was running too strongly against it. The DOE,
the first organization to be interviewed by the Committee, had identified
two main causes of the deterioration of river quality: agricultural pollution
and increased loads from sewage treatment works (DOE 1987: 10). The
WAA were the second to give evidence orally, a week after the DOE. By
then, it would seem, a remarkable consensus on the problem had emerged.
As Sir Hugh Rossi, the Chairman of the Environment Committee, com￾mented in his opening questions to the representatives of the WAA, "We
shall want to pursue with you . . . the questions of agriculture and sew￾erage because from the evidence we received last week these seem to be
the two factors contributing the most to the pollution of our rivers at
the moment'1
 (House of Commons Environment Committee 1987: 28).
74Local investigations: the Torridge Report
Agricultural pollution now had a formal existence as a significant problem
acknowledged by a range of authoritative organizations.
Local investigations: the Torridge Report
Of course, the precise causes of farm pollution and practical solutions still
remained to be decided. In this context, there was a premium on well
constructed local investigations. The decline in river quality was most
marked in the South West of England, where the 1985 survey revealed
that almost 45 per cent of total river length was classified as being of lower
quality than in 1980 and identified agricultural practices as the major
cause of the decline. In this context, the South West Water Authority's
detailed investigation into the environmental degradation of the River
Torridge took on special significance as a case study of the causes of
deterioration of one particular river system. The members of the Environ￾ment Committee were briefed on the Torridge Report, and several of the
organizations that gave evidence to the Committee drew heavily on it.
The River Torridge was chosen for detailed study because there was
evidence of water quality deterioration: its salmon and sea trout fishery
had declined dramatically and there was considerable public interest in the
river's decline. The Poet Laureate, Ted Hughes, fished there and had
added his voice to complaints over declining catches. The study found
clear indications that quality in most of the catchment had declined in the
short term. The deterioration related in the main to determinants such as
dissolved oxygen, ammonia, BOD and suspended solids, which are closely
associated with prevailing land-use practices. The limited studies of inver￾tebrates, macrophytes and algae indicated pollution-sensitive biota were
no longer as abundant as they had been and, conversely, those species
tolerant of organic pollution were more numerous and widespread.
Surveys of juvenile salmon and trout populations showed significant
decreases in distribution and abundance. Areas where salmon were relat￾ively numerous had become extremely restricted. Some tributaries were
devoid of both salmon and trout, suggesting that the cause was not solely
excessive cropping of salmon, a cause suggested previously. Such tributar￾ies were often completely unaffected by sewage disposal, trade wastes or
any human activity other than livestock farming.
Land use and farming practices in the catchment had changed consid￾erably since the early 1950s. Reductions in the area under cereals, rough
75Politicization of farm pollution
grazing and temporary grass had been matched by a large increase in
intensively managed permanent grass. Livestock numbers had almost
doubled and, in turn, this had led to increased use of fertilizers and the
making of silage, as well as a move to winter housing, with greater prob￾lems of waste handling and disposal. It was estimated that there were
84 000 cattle and 140 000 sheep in the River Torridge catchment. In a
telling but highly charged comparison, the potential pollution load from
the cattle was calculated as equivalent to that from 589 000 people, about
40 times the existing population in the catchment connected to sewage
treatment works (SWWA 1986).
There were contrasting interpretations, though, of the implications of
the Torridge Report and the approach adopted by the SWWA to the prob￾lems revealed. The SWWA itself concluded there was:
a considerable weight of evidence implicating modern agricultural
practices as the main cause of river quality deterioration in the South
West. This is a direct, unwelcome, environmental consequence of
national agricultural policy which has concentrated on increasing
production without adequate considerations of wider implications.
(SWWA 1987: 308)
Friends of the Earth (FOE) referred to the Torridge report as "an unpre￾cedented study of the impacts of agriculture on water quality" (FOE 1987:
175). Basing its evidence to the Environment Committee on water pol￾lution from farm effluents almost entirely on the Torridge Report, FOE
concluded that, "Agricultural wastes, particularly silage liquor and slurry,
now cause widespread and worsening water pollution" (ibid.: 175). Like￾wise, the NCC'S Senior Freshwater Ecologist referred to the evidence of reduc￾tion in salmon and salmonid stocks on the Torridge as exemplifying how
less tolerant species succumb to agricultural pollution (NCC 1987: 262).
The Torridge Report, however, also conceded "the lack of irrefutable,
quantitative evidence linking the problems [in the Torridge catchment] to
the suggested major causes" (SWWA 1986: 7). The relative contribution of
gross discharges as against problems of chronic runoff and of different
types of pollutant, such as slurry, silage liquor and farm hygiene products,
remained unclear. To the SWWA, this served to highlight the "inadequate
data base on which environmental protection is founded" (ibid.: 7), and
in its evidence to the Environment Committee it drew attention to the
financial constraints that compromised its ability to undertake effective
environmental monitoring, with the consequence that:
76Challenging agricultural exceptionalism
the authority will continue to be criticised for not fully understand￾ing the problem [and] to be subject to attack by vested interests
suggesting that the evidence linking agriculture, river quality and
environmental deterioration is only circumstantial and not adequate
to support change in agricultural practice. (SWWA 1987: 308)
As if on cue, the head of MAFF'S Environment and Conservation Policy
Division, when asked by the Environment Committee about the Torridge
study, replied: "They have had a significant deterioration in their water
quality .. . although it is not clear . . . what are the precise reasons . . .
There is certain subjective evidence to the effect that agriculture is involved.
But I do not think that we can pin down precisely what are the causes.
It certainly is not agriculture alone." (House of Commons Environment
Committee 1987: 121)
Inevitably, also, the question arose of how typical the problems of the
Torridge catchment were, or as one MP put it to the delegation from the
DOE, was the Torridge "the norm for relatively intensive dairy farming
parts of the country" (House of Commons Environment Committee 1987:
23). The Head of the Water Directorate responded "this is a very inter￾esting, but probably extreme, example in that it is a small, enclosed catch￾ment with a very large load of intensive farming upon it. There are other
examples but. . . not. . . ones that produce this kind of effect quite so
clearly. This one tends to be quoted." (ibid.: 23). The more the Torridge
study was quoted, the more it fixed the notion that dairy farm wastes were
a major cause of the deterioration of rural rivers that must be tackled. This
triggered off considerable debate during the Environment Committee's
hearings over what were the shortcomings of the existing safeguards.
Challenging agricultural exceptionalism
The tide of opinion was clearly against the exceptional legal status for
agriculture that the Control of Pollution Act 1974 (COPA) embodied. As
Dr Matthews, an operations manager for the Anglian Water Authority,
remarked "the agriculture industry has, in effect, been left outside the
normal network of controls ... By virtue of the "exemption" enjoyed by
the agricultural industry, the aquatic environment is suffering unnecessary
harm." (House of Commons Environment Committee 1987: 252).
77Politicization of farm pollution
MAFF alone reiterated the traditional justification for agriculture's exemp￾tion under COPA. It began its assessment of the impact of agricultural
activities on water pollution with the words: "It is recognized that modern
farming practices have a potential to cause pollution of water. However,
it is equally important to acknowledge that such practices are necessary to
meet consumer demands" (MAFF 1987: 116). Yet, MAFF was also keen to
dispel the notion that its Code of good agricultural practice in any way
sanctioned pollution. As the Head of the Ministry's Environment and
Conservation Policy Division commented, "We have never found a case
where a farmer would have committed a pollution offence if he had com￾plied entirely with the Code's recommendations" (House of Commons
Environment Committee 1987: 131). Dr Holdgate, the DOE'S Chief Sci￾entist, likewise commented that "adherence to the Code of good agricul￾tural practice would substantially reduce, if not eliminate, the problem",
and added cryptically "we are in the first instance looking at ways of
operating within the Code more effectively than has been the situation so
far" (ibid.: 22).
Ironically, what had been intended initially as a safeguard for farmers
was now, in different circumstances, interpreted as an environmental safe￾guard. However, if the Code did indeed incorporate adequate preventive
measures, why was it necessary to exempt compliant farmers from pros￾ecution? This legal privilege would seem to serve no practical purpose and
appeared unwarranted. MAFF knew of no case where a farmer had success￾fully used the defence, and of only one case where a farmer had even
attempted it. Significandy, no-one was prepared to defend the privilege
before the Environment Committee, nor to gainsay the WAA'S recommenda￾tion of "strengthening the status of the Code of good agricultural practice
so that it is used as a positive guide rather than a defence under COPA"
(WAA 1987: 27). On the contrary, MAFF officials called for more prosecu￾tions of offending farmers as a deterrent (House of Commons Envir￾onment Committee 1987: 123), and both the NFU and the Country
Landowners' Association accepted the necessary contribution of prosecu￾tion (or the threat of it) to an effective strategy for combating farm pol￾lution. Such rearguard advocacy of exemplary action against "rogue"
individuals when voluntaristic arrangements were coming under strain
had had parallels for the agricultural community in other environmental
fields (Cox et al. 1988).
The position that MAFF sought to maintain was that voluntary coopera￾tion, along the lines of the Code of good agricultural practice, would be
78Devising a solution
sufficient to take care of the problem in most cases. The NFU, though, was
not alert to the new and positive role being accorded the Code; its sub￾mission to the Select Committee failed even to mention it. One of the
MPS commented on the omission and referred to his own experience: "I
met seven dairy farmers, one of whom had a copy of the Code, two had
heard of it but said that they did not have time for things like that and
four of them did not know what I was talking about" (House of Com￾mons Environment Committee 1987: 148). David Naish, then Deputy
President of the NFU, responded lamely, "There is a general awareness
but a very unsatisfactory amount of knowledge of the detail of the whole
of the code" (ibid.: 148).
The Environment Committee concluded " The Code of good agricultural
practice may be a good concept, but the reality does not withstand very
close scrutiny" (ibid.: xxviii). About 20 separate publications formed the
Code. They were not widely available and it would have cost a farmer up
to £20 to acquire all of them. As the Head of MAFF'S Environment and
Conservation Policy Division commented "It would be wrong to envisage
a situation in which the entire Code (which stands some six inches tall when
all the leaflets are stacked together) is thrust into the hands of an indi￾vidual farmer... So it is the responsibility of an individual ADAS officer
to make a judgement as to which parts of the Code a farmer would need."
(ibid.: 125). Crucially, therefore, this raised the question of the nature and
quality of the advice directly available to farmers, but also whether farmers
should be obliged to seek or act upon that advice. Here again various of
the disputants referred to experience from the South West.
Devising a solution
The SWWA had adopted a particular approach to the problem, starting
with a series of visits to farms in the Torridge catchment: to assess the
pollution risk on each farm, to check their waste-handling facilities, and
to explain to the farmers the effects of effluent runoff. The intention
was not only to gather information to clarify the extent and causes of
farm pollution but also to identify what should be done to improve
matters. The SWAA had sought the cooperation of local ADAS and the
county NFU in approaching and following up farmers. It had been agreed
79Politicization of farm pollution
that farmers with problems would be referred to ADAS for advice. To encour￾age cooperation they would not be prosecuted, but problems would be
followed up. A second visit was timed to allow the farmer adequate oppor￾tunity to approach ADAS and to check on the appropriateness of any pro￾posed changes. A third and final visit was made to check completion of
the improvements.
On the initial visits, about a quarter of livestock farms were found to be
actually polluting, and a further quarter were in danger of causing pollu￾tion. By the final visit fewer than 1 per cent were found to be polluting.
The results persuaded the SWWA to try the approach elsewhere within
its region and it was decided to launch a farm campaign under the slogan
"Pollution - together we can beat it." In doing so, it had the approval
of agricultural interests defending the principle of voluntary cooperation.
The Head of MAFF'S Environment and Conservation Division commented:
"the campaigns in the South West have achieved a considerable improve￾ment [and] provide an example of what can be done, if the resources are
available, through advice and exhortation" (ibid.: 122). Likewise, in pro￾posing a joint approach by MAFF and the water authorities to pollution
prevention, the NFU referred approvingly to the recent "concentrated
campaign in the Torridge catchment by all the interested organizations
[which] resulted in a very dramatic improvement in water quality for this
heavily stocked agricultural catchment" (NFU 1987: 138). The Country
Landowners' Association, for its part, advocated that the approach should
be followed through in a series of county-by-county clean-ups, to be
masterminded by ADAS.
The other water authorities also regarded the South West as something
of a test case for an approach based on consultation and persuasion, but
with their own reservations. As Dr Mance, representing the WAA, com￾mented "All authorities actually carry out some educational programme as
far as the farming community is concerned . . . Most authorities are look￾ing closely at what South West are actually doing because they have taken
it to an extreme because they have a particularly severe problem .. . Possibly
we will follow down that route but it is very intensive on manpower and
resources" (ibid.: 38). Asked if it seemed that the South West was succeed￾ing in its approach, Dr Mance replied "the South West effort may yield
benefits in the short term but the question I have in my mind is whether
they have to sustain that level of effort permanently in terms of annual
visits to every farm on all their catchments. That is clearly a large manpower
input and we are effectively becoming an extension of the Agricultural
80Devising a solution
Advisory Service if we are not careful" (ibid.). The Environment Com￾mittee agreed and set down that it "would be concerned if water authorit￾ies ended up giving the advice by default which should rightfully be given
by ADAS" (ibid.: xxviii).
It was evident that the water authorities were not prepared to rely on
persuasion alone. That was what they saw as the major drawback of the
Code of good agricultural practice — that it was "not direcdy enforceable and
as such has had little benefit" (ibid.: 244). However, those authorities that
had begun actively to prosecute farmers were not convinced that this was
the best way to tackle the matter either. The North West Water Author￾ity, for example, had suffered a marked net deterioration in river quality,
over half of which was judged to be attributable to agriculture. As an
official explained "We have prosecuted more people in recent years than
most other water authorities for such incidents, but, to use an analogy, that
is locking the stable door [after the horse has bolted], in that we can pro￾secute a farmer for making a polluting discharge, but the river is already
polluted and the damage has been done. What we would like to see is
more emphasis on prevention, and that goes back to additional controls
in the agricultural industry" (ibid.: 100). There was, indeed, common
ground among the water authorities over the need for preventive controls.
As Dr Mance put it "Our evidence is that we cannot rely purely on the
good intentions of farmers to follow the Code of good practice. . . We do
require some compulsory preventive power." (ibid.: 236—7).
A number of the submissions from the water authorities and their staff
called for legally enforceable improvement notices to allow them to tackle
cases of poor waste handling and storage, and referred to an equivalent
power possessed by the Health and Safety Executive. Dr Matthews of the
Anglian Water Authority elaborated: "What we want... is for the water
authorities to have powers to be able to go to a farm, to be able to say;
'We do not like that pile of manure over there' or 'That retaining wall is
in a dreadful state. Will you please do something about it?>w
 (ibid.: 251).
The MPS were receptive to these arguments but were concerned that any
such powers should not be entirely open-ended. As one MP put it "It is
unusual to find that an Authority could have powers of such a Draconian
type without some standards against which they can be measured as to
whether they were reasonable" (ibid.: 236). The implication was that
discretionary preventive powers needed an objective backstop. The Chair￾man of the Environment Committee developed the point - "of justice
having to be seen to be done" - in a question to Dr Matthews:
81Politicization of farm pollution
If it were simply left to the wide discretion of... officials . . . who
can vary in the severity of their attitude . . . , it might well be felt that
we are introducing an arbitrary element to the extent that we were
giving an individual power over a farmer. . . But not so if there are
certain criteria laid down that, for example, if you have twenty cattle
your catchment pit must have a capacity of so many cubic metres,
that it must be lined in concrete, that it must have an outlet of a
diameter of so much . . . , or whatever. Would regulations of that
kind ... be of more help to everybody concerned? (ibid.: 253)
Dr Matthews replied:
They would be of enormous help to the water industry and to the
professionals working in them. It would provide a technical refer￾ence point to which all arguments could be addressed ... If, in the
absence of any technical criteria, we were to try to enter a farm to do
something to use these powers, we would be involved in quite hor￾rendous arguments, quite apart from such matters of access and
magistrates' orders and so on. (ibid.: 253)
Subsequently, the Environment Committee visited a number of European
countries specifically to learn how they controlled farm wastes: Members
returned to Britain "convinced that it is perfectly feasible to regulate farm￾ing activity relating to slurry and silage liquor" (ibid.: xxix).
A new regulatory framework
The Commons Environment Committee concluded that rising pollution
from farm effluents was an important contributory factor to declining
river quality, and called for "a far more interventionist and regulatory
approach to farm pollution" (ibid.: xxx). The Committee's report, issued
in May 1987, recommended that the special defence from prosecution for
farmers should be repealed and that a revised Code of good agricultural
practice should be made both readily available and enforceable. As an
immediate step, regulations should be introduced on the location, con￾struction and maintenance of waste storage facilities. Grant aid should be
available for farmers towards the costs involved, and ADAS should provide
82A new regulatory framework
much more advice on pollution prevention free of charge. More generally,
the Committee urged that water pollution control staff should seek to
enforce the law and to prosecute polluters more frequendy; and that
magistrates should show less leniency.
The government's response to these recommendations followed on revised
proposals for privatizing the water industry, which this time conceded
the case for retaining regulatory functions in the public sector. Within
MAFF and the agricultural lobby there was still resistance to the introduc￾tion of controls, which was backed up by the argument that time and
encouragement were needed for farmers to improve matters, and rein￾forced where necessary by a tougher approach to prosecution. At the 1988
Staffordshire Silage Conference, the Minister of Agriculture warned "We
either make sure that we solve these problems ourselves, voluntarily within
the Code ... or we are bound to find that the rest of the commun￾ity demands that we be restricted and policed in a way which we would
find burdensome and restrictive" (quoted in Beck 1989). In the foreword
to the WAA/MAFF report on farm pollution incidents in 1987, which re￾corded yet more rises in the number of incidents, the Minister urged that
"1988 must be the year when the farming community gets really tough
with pollution". To reinforce the message, the Lord Chancellor agreed to
exhort magistrates, when trying cases of farm pollution, to impose "fines
high enough to establish that this type of illegal act can be seen not to
pay" (The Magistrate, April 1987). The NFU circulated a letter to all its
members, pointing out that farmers who polluted rivers were increasingly
likely to face prosecution and urging them to take immediate preventive
action. Members were advised of grant assistance and of special discounts
secured by the NFU on a range of equipment to help solve some common
pollution problems.
However, the WAA/MAFF report for 1988 showed a continuation of the
upward trend in farm pollution incidents. These successive annual sur￾veys maintained the profile of the issue and fed an increasingly censorious
press coverage. Newspaper articles with headlines such as "Farms destroy
rivers" demanded firm action from the government and tough controls
(The Sunday Times, 5 March 1989). A "wait and see" approach was no
longer credible.
The government issued its response to the Environment Committee's
report in July 1988 (DOE 1988) and in November it announced the replace￾ment of the old farm capital grant scheme with a new environmentally
oriented scheme. The resultant package of measures, which was broadly
83Politicization of farm pollution
along the lines recommended by the Environment Committee, tended to
be characterized as a "stick and carrot" approach, with new Farm Waste
Regulations and a tougher approach to prosecutions, matched with advice,
grant aid and R&D. The sticks were to be under the control of the new
National Rivers Authority (NRA), which was to assume responsibility for
water pollution control on the privatization of the water authorities, and
the carrots were MAFF'S.
Under the new Farm and Conservation Grant Scheme, which came
into effect in February 1989, the level of grant aid from MAFF for invest￾ment in waste storage, treatment and disposal facilities was raised from 30
to 50 per cent, and provision was made for up to £50 million to be
expended on this over the first three years.2
 Every proposal for grant had
to be vetted by the new NRA. Any new waste facilities were subject to
Regulations, introduced in 1991 and policed by the NRA, specifying mini￾mum technical standards such as component lifetimes, construction quality,
storage capacity and siting. The NRA was also given the power to compel
farmers to upgrade any existing facilities that it judged presented a significant
risk of pollution. With their enforceable standards the Regulations repre￾sented a departure from the voluntary and discretionary approach that had
typified British pollution control policy in general and the treatment of
agriculture in particular.
The grant scheme complemented changes in MAFF'S advisory policy. In
1988 ADAS underwent a major reorganization, which resulted in greater
prominence for work on farm waste and pollution prevention. Since the
previous year it had been obliged to charge farmers for most production￾oriented advice, but "public good" advice, mainly on conservation and
pollution, remained free of charge in the first instance (follow-up work,
say on the design of a farm waste management plan or system, would
require a fee). For some staff in the western half of the country, advice on
waste management now came to dominate advisory time. For the year
1991/2, MAFF set an objective of 5000 free pollution advice visits for
England and Wales, allowing roughly one in six dairy farms to be visited.
The advice given drew upon and reinforced a new Code of good agricul￾tural practice for the protection of water, issued by MAFF in July 1991 and
made readily available to farmers (MAFF/WOAD 1991).
The new NRA was also concerned to educate and inform farmers and,
although prosecution for pollution incidents was the high profile "stick",
the Authority saw persuading farmers to prevent pollution as much more
preferable than taking them to court. Nevertheless, the NRA did present a
84Conclusions
tougher image on prosecutions than the old water authorities had, and the
ceiling on the fines it could seek to have imposed was raised from £2000
to £20 000 under the 1990 Environmental Protection Act.
Conclusions
Seldom could a field of regulation have been so dramatically transformed,
involving a new regulatory regime, novel instruments, new and reorgan￾ized agencies, and reshaped policy communities. Agriculture passed from
being one of the least to one of the most formally regulated sectors from
the point of view of pollution control. The most profound changes were
in meanings and perceptions.
A few years earlier, farm waste pollution had barely existed as a public
problem; now it was recognized as "one of the two major threats to water
quality" by the respected House of Commons Environment Committee
(1987: xxvi). A neglected problem had thus belatedly been acknowledged.
However, this was not simply a matter of public discovery of something
that had been hidden; rather, it arose from a shift in wider moral pur￾poses. Thus, the Environment Committee could ringingly proclaim: "We
cannot think of circumstances where pollution of a stream or a river by
a farmer could be justifiably excused on the grounds that 'it accorded with
good agricultural practice'. The two are mutually exclusive" (ibid.: xxvi).
Yet it was only three years earlier that Parliament had approved the com￾ing into operation of the very section of COPA that had given farmers the
"good agricultural practice" defence from prosecution for causing water
pollution.
What separated the mentality of COPA from the new mentality was the
altered notion of goodness in agriculture. In the 1970s it implied an heroic
activity committed to the vital and laudable aim of providing ever more
of the nation's food needs. However, with the imperative of food self￾sufficiency superseded by surpluses, and with war-time shortages and ration￾ing a fading memory, this once-hallowed priority now seemed tarnished
and redundant. The successive budgetary crises of the Common Agricul￾tural Policy had altered the public image of farmers. The once-honest
sons of the soil could now be portrayed as grasping individuals demanding
ever more public subsidy to intensify production in a way that damaged
the environment, merely, it seemed, to add to the "mountains" of unwanted
85Politicization of farm pollution
food. In the circumstances it could no longer plausibly be maintained that
farm production requirements were superordinate.
In a paradoxical way, the exceptional treatment previously accorded to
agriculture made it a prime candidate for subjection to the new environ￾mental morality and its framing of the notion of goodness. There were
concealed problems to be uncovered: much of the press coverage, for
example, adopted an expose' stance of "the hidden menace down on the
farm" kind. Critically, the discovery depended on the statistical invention
of the "farm pollution incident" in a context in which agricultural prac￾tices and their consequences for the environment were coming under
increasing scrutiny. Before the recognition of agricultural pollution, the
debate around the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 had first aroused
public concern. The Act formally acknowledged a problem of damage to
the rural environment caused by modern agricultural practices and put in
place a set of measures to address the problem. However, these new measures
were based largely on voluntary means (Lowe et al. 1986, Cox et al. 1988)
and so relied upon the trust and cooperation of the farming community.
As claims that these measures were faltering began to take hold by the
mid-1980s, then increasingly the role of farmers as guardians of the coun￾tryside was called into question. The public acceptability of systems of
self-regulation rests on trust; if that trust is lost, then what once seemed
proper concessions may appear to be indefensible privileges. This is exactly
what happened in farm pollution policy: in the event, no-one was pre￾pared to defend agriculture's legal exemption. As a result, the Code of good
agricultural practice was inverted: the farmers' safeguard became an envir￾onmental safeguard.
Environmental morality was a ubiquitous feature of the late 1980s, and
was not only visited on agriculture. It was particularly pronounced in
regard to water, which of all the natural elements is the one most intim￾ately associated with notions of health, vitality and purity. This partly
explains the shock experienced by many at the prospect of water privatiza￾tion, which seemed to shake their very faith in government. With minis￾ters alienating this traditional and vital public service, the defence of the
public interest was left to others to champion. This elicited an oppositional
coalition, which included water authority regulatory staff and environ￾mental groups unified by their espousal of environmental morality and the
need for strong, independent public regulation. Also, and perhaps cru￾cially, industry found the prospect of regulation by a private sector com￾pany to be unacceptable.
86Conclusions
Our analysis in this chapter suggests that agricultural pollution emerged
as a side issue from this other debate. Hardly any of the organizations that
so roundly condemned agriculture as a significant source of pollution had
expressed themselves on the issue before 1986. Most, it must be assumed,
had been blithely unaware of the problem. They were alerted to it by the
publication of Water pollution from farm waste, which provided them with
ammunition in their opposition to the government's privatization proposals.
One group only had considerable knowledge of the problem — that was
the regulatory staff and scientists of the water authorities. It was they who
defined the problem as a public issue: who compiled the river quality
survey and its regional commentaries; who collated information on farm
pollution incidents; and who conducted local investigations such as the
Torridge study. Their efforts to raise the public profile of the issue were
orchestrated through the Farm Waste Group of the WAA, and through
several outlets - the separate water authorities, their professional associ￾ation and the WAA - this group paraded their evidence of the problem and
their proposed solutions before the Environment Committee.
In seeking to build a constituency for public regulatory functions,
pollution regulators could draw on the discourse of environmental moral￾ity propagated by the environmental movement. In doing so, they needed
to publicize and help politicize the existence of significant but neglected
problems of pollution. Farm waste pollution exactly fitted the bill. How￾ever, in order to define the matter as a public problem, there was a need
for data. Hence, farm pollution incident statistics were first collated. These
seemed to indicate a large and growing problem, one that was profoundly
shocking because of the desecration of the countryside it revealed by those
conventionally portrayed as its guardians. Strong legislative action was
demanded and it followed swiftly.
Notes
1. Subsequently, the Institution of Water Engineers and Scientists and the Insti￾tute of Water Pollution Control joined forces to become the Institution of
Water and Environmental Management.
2. Subsequently, in December 1993, the grant was cut to 25 per cent, and it was
abolished altogether in the Budget of 1994.
87CHAPTER FIVE
The Pollution Inspectors' accounts
of farm pollution
Introduction
The 1989 Water Act gave the new National Rivers Authority (NRA) sig￾nificantly enhanced powers to tackle agricultural pollution, including
controls for the first time over the storage of farm waste. Of equal import￾ance, those powers were to be exercised in a greatly altered context. One
aspect was the heightened public concern over water pollution, including
widespread recognition of the problem of farm wastes. Another was the
newly formed regulatory body itself and the way it conceived its role. The
NRA deliberately sought to project an image sharply different from the old
regional water authorities or the newly privatized water companies, even
though the bulk of its staff came from the old authorities and most of their
former colleagues now ran the new companies. In particular, it sought to
align itself with the environmental movement and draw on the movement's
moral authority.
An introductory leaflet issued by the NRA contrived not to mention
either the old authorities or the new companies but presented itself not
only as a new creation but as a novel force. Entitled Gttardians of the water
environment, the leaflet opened with the following foreword by Lord
Crickhowell, a former Conservative minister and the NRA'S new chairman:
"September 1st, 1989, represented a turning point in the history of envir￾onmental protection in England and Wales. On that date the National
Rivers Authority took up its duties. Overnight the NRA became the strong￾est environmental protection agency in Europe". To press home the point,
the leaflet continued: "The existence of a powerful, impartial and inde￾pendent organization with a clear statutory responsibility to carry out its
88Introduction
duties transforms the way in which our water environment is guarded. It is
an immense improvement on the arrangements that have existed before."*
(NRA 1989b).
In this distancing of itself from its forebears, the NRA sought immedi￾ately to seize the high ground of environmental morality. The Authority
had come "into existence at a time when there has never been more
concern at the damage mankind inflicts on the natural systems on which
we all depend". Foremost among its "far-reaching responsibilities" was "to
control pollution and improve the quality of our country's river systems
and coastal waters... for the sake not only of this generation - but of
those to come". It would act "as a tough and effective regulator" armed
not just with stronger powers but also with a publicly sanctioned moral
authority: "The strength of the NRA goes beyond the authority invested in
it by Parliament and the assurances of the government that it will give us
all the necessary support. It taps as well the vast reservoir of public opin￾ion, with its strong feelings about the importance of the environment"
(NRA 1989b).
However, the NRA did not cover all sources of water pollution. The
regulation of the major industrial sources was transferred to Her Majesty's
Inspectorate of Pollution (HMIP) by the 1990 Environmental Protection
Act, which made that Inspectorate responsible for integrated (or cross￾media) pollution control. Likewise, discharges of trade effluents to the
public sewers were regulated by the water companies. This left the com￾panies as the most prominent dischargers to rivers to be regulated by the
NRA. Although the NRA wished to distance itself from its predecessor author￾ities and their commercial successors, it and its staff had to reach a modus
vivendi with their former colleagues, and the government relaxed discharge
conditions on sewage works for a period, to avoid prosecution of the newly
privatized companies. In any case, sewage pollution incidents were often
caused by cross connections or a problem on the sewerage networks. In
such cases it was not only difficult to apportion blame but there was also
a defence in law for the water companies if there had been an illegal
discharge by a third party. The NRA'S scope to pursue its crusade against
pollution was thus considerably circumscribed in relation to urban and
industrial sources by the inter-institutional relations in which it was obliged
to work.
Outside of urban and industrial areas, the most prevalent source of
pollution was agriculture. Farm effluents did not fall within the ambit of
HMIP and they were not usually discharged into the water companies'
89The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
sewers. Most pollution from farm wastes occurred through direct discharge
or runoff into the rivers that were the NRA'S responsibility. The NRA had
been given powers, moreover, that gave it an entre'e into the agricultural
realm through its responsibility for administering the new Farm Waste
Regulations. The staff who had made an issue of farm pollution - the
members of the WAA'S Farm Waste Group and their colleagues - had been
thrust into senior positions in the formation of the NRA. Almost inevitably,
therefore, the control of farm pollution was central to the new authority's
efforts to make good its claim to be the guardian of the water environ￾ment. As the press remarked, "the farming community would be one of
the NRA'S chief targets" (Financial Times, 31 October 1990).
Although the NRA'S publicity and public relations proclaimed it to be
a brand new organization with novel powers, a fresh outlook and no
history, the reality was somewhat different. The new authority inherited
not only the regional structure of the old water authorities but also most
of their staff, facilities and commitments in the regulatory, fisheries and
water management fields. In these fields, there was considerable continuity
between the South West Water Authority and NRA South West, as there was
with other regions. However, the NRA'S first annual report (for 1989/90)
declared its intention to take polluting events seriously, to pursue a higher
rate of enforcement than the former water authorities had, and to press for
stiffer penalties following successful prosecutions.
It was on the shoulders of the regional regulatory staff that the NRA'S
high-profile commitments vigorously to tackle pollution and defend the
water environment rested in practice. This demanded a new approach of
them, most especially in regard to farming. The chapter considers how
that worked out in practice. After a brief description of the regional organ￾ization of farm pollution control, we recount a narrative of a day in the
working life of a rural Pollution Inspector, so as to convey as vividly as
possible what the work entailed. The second half of the chapter then
analyzes the Pollution Inspectors' perceptions of pollution and farming,
and their regulatory and prosecuting roles.
The regional organization of farm pollution control
The South West of England was one of the smaller NRA regions, having
(in March 1992) 531 staff. These staff were divided between departments
90The regional organization of farm pollution
of environmental protection, engineering, finance and administration. The
region's multifunctional Environmental Protection Department, incorpor-*
ating pollution control, fisheries, water quality and water resources, had
suffered from a legacy of underfunding in a region without major tradi￾tional problems of water quality, where the overwhelming issue had been
seen as ensuring water supplies that are particularly stretched through the
peak summer tourism period.
For the deployment of field-based staff, the region was divided into two
areas. For the Eastern Area, which covered most of Devon (plus small
parts of Dorset and Somerset), there were 11 Pollution Inspectors - nine
with their own geographical patches and the other two helping out where
needed - overseen by two more senior staff. The Pollution Inspectors were
responsible for all water pollution control within their patches, including
the monitoring of major dischargers. Those with rural patches tended to
spend the majority of their time on farm pollution control. As the frontline
of the NRA'S enforcement of water pollution law among farmers, they had
powers to take formal samples with a view to prosecution, to give the NRA'S
agreement to proposals under the Farm and Conservation Grant Scheme
(F&CGS), and to issue notices requiring waste facilities to be improved. In
the same Eastern Area there were 12 wardens, most of them former
water bailiffs, who carried out routine work for both the Pollution Control
and the Fisheries sections.
In NRA South West, strategic importance was attached to a regulatory
effort which targeted the individual farm and its pollution problems, to
encourage a general improvement in farmers' waste facilities and practices
(see Ch. 4). This regulatory style had been developed by the former South
West Water Authority (SWWA) in the early 1980s, when an ethos of
u
 information and persuasion" prevailed. Only those farmers who persistendy
ignored SWWA warnings and advice had been in danger of prosecution.
With the establishment of the NRA, the region presented a tougher regulat￾ory image. As a spokeswoman declared
 <vwe are really cracking down now
on farmers who pollute" (Western Morning News, 1 June 1990). However,
work at the farm level was still regarded as crucial and, in practice, per￾suasion was still preferred to prosecution (see Table 5.1).
The SWWA'S Farm Campaigns were continued by the NRA and were
taken up in other regions, but they were no longer the main cornerstone
of agricultural regulation. Following the instigation of the F&CGS in 1989,
grant approval visits became an important means of contacting and regu￾lating farmers. Pollution Inspectors visited all farms where a pollution
91The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
Table 5.1 Prosecution in the South West1
Under South West
Water Authority
Under NRA
South West
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991
No. of
prosecutions instigated 23 31 19 22 30 40 26
% of reported incidents 3.7 3.7 3.4 3.2 5.4 5.1 3.3
% of serious incidents 30 42 5 6 20 23 n/k2
% of major incidents 56 104
average fine3 (£) 136 136 141 322 350 425 655
range of fines (£) 0- 0- n/k n/k 0- 0- 0-
250 300 2000 2000 4000
total fines (£000) 2.72 3.8 3.1 15.2 14.0 18.3 17.3
Notes
1. Prosecution rates relate to reported incidents occurring in the stated year
for which prosecution proceedings have been started. Prosecutions of
incidents occurring in a previous year are not included.
2. Serious incidents were no longer reported after 1990.
3. Figures relate to cases heard in the year in question and do not include
costs. Average fine levels are calculated from lists in Water Authority
Association and NRA reports. Absolute discharges and cases found not
guilty are excluded from the calculations. Conditional discharges are
included, together with cases where no fine is actually awarded for other
reasons. If more than one incident occurred at the same place on the
same day and concerning the same type of pollutant they are counted as
one case. If more than one incident occurs (i.e. an oil spillage and a silage
effluent incident) they are counted as two separate cases.
control grant had been applied for and subsequently revisited them to
check that any approved work had been properly completed.
A significant and growing proportion of the time of Pollution Inspec￾tors was spent responding to pollution incidents. In 1990, NRA South
West set up a round-the-clock pollution "hotline". In a publicity drive to
advertise the free emergency number, tens of thousands of pocket-size
cards were distributed around the region, along with posters for notice
boards. The public were urged to carry the cards with them as a handy
92The regional organization of farm pollution
reminder of the number. "They can then help guard the water environ￾ment by ringing in with reports of suspected pollution" remarked the
NRA'S own news sheet (The Water Guardians no. 7: July 1990). Clem
Davies, the region's Environmental Protection Manager, who had master￾minded the scheme, commented "Everyone has a role to play in caring
for our rivers. There is great scope for an increasing partnership between
the community and the NRA . . . The Authority has staff in the field but
the public are our eyes and ears too." (ibid). In the week after the launch,
50 calls were received, and more in the following weeks. Many local organ￾izations requested additional cards to distribute, including fishing and canoe
clubs, parish councils, nature groups and the coastguards. The scheme
even stimulated the formation of a group called the Devon Emergency
Volunteers to take on the role of a "pollution watch".
Pollution Inspectors normally received several calls a day via the hodine,
varying according to the time of week (with more at weekends when more
people are out and about in the countryside), the nature of the patch
and the weather. Such calls were valuable in tracing farm pollution and,
depending on the consequences and circumstances, could result in a pros￾ecution. NRA guidelines distinguished the response to be adopted accord￾ing to whether the pollution incident was major, significant or minor. It
was national policy that major incidents should be prosecuted where there
was sufficient evidence.1
 However, discretion could be applied to signific￾ant incidents2
 which might result in prosecution or a warning letter, depend￾ing on the severity of the pollution and any mitigating circumstances.
Final decisions on prosecution were made by senior pollution control
officers, in liaison with the Legal Department, once an incident had been
identified and suitable evidence collected by the Pollution Inspector on
the ground.
Reports by members of the public tended to be dominated by minor
incidents, especially involving oil, as this is easily seen, even when only
small amounts are involved. Large numbers of such reports could deflect
the Pollution Inspectors from their other duties. However, they relished the
challenge of a non-minor pollution incident, or for that matter a chronic
pollution problem, which demanded painstaking detective work that tested
their field knowledge in tracing and diagnosing the cause. Pollution Inspec￾tors also kept an eye on the general state of the watercourses in their daily
journeys around their patches, but systematic or intensive checks could
only really be made in slack periods, such as during long dry spells in the
winter. Finally, tending one's patch involved a fair amount of public
93The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
relations, keeping in touch with regular informants, giving talks to farm￾ing and angling groups, and staffing a stand at agricultural shows and the
local agricultural college's open days.
To convey what, in the round, was involved in patrolling a patch, we
now recount a working day of a rural Pollution Inspector whom we have
called Bob.3
 The account given here is a composite one, drawing on the
shadowing of a number of Pollution Inspectors. Bob is therefore fictional.
However, all of the component elements of his day given here - the
incidents described and the views expressed - are faithfully taken from
field observations. Although each Pollution Inspector shadowed was dif￾ferent and each working day varied, there were aspects common to most
working days and to the approaches adopted by the individual Inspectors.
We have presented this composite account to illustrate the range of issues
and tasks Inspectors regularly dealt with and the ways in which they
generally went about their work, in order to give a flavour of the job while
protecting the anonymity of those we shadowed (for more details on this
strategy see Revill and Seymour 1996).
A day in the life of Bob: the field culture of a rural
Pollution Inspector
Bob is responsible for pollution control in the catchments of two large
rivers set in a rural area expanding in population. Agriculture, however,
remains the most important land use and is dominated by dairying. This
is Bob's patch: a landscape of low hills scattered with farms, villages and
a couple of small towns, defined by the catchments of rivers from their
headwaters to the sea. Bob is responsible for controlling all sources of
pollution within his patch, whether it be from the sewage treatment works
of the small town - the recent performance of which has been so poor that
a prosecution is likely in the near future - the large creamery processing
local dairy produce, or the multitude of farms and other small rural busi￾nesses. He has a qualification in agriculture, from a national agricultural
college, and experience of working on farms. Some of the recent recruits
to the pollution control force have a similar background, whereas others
were trained in environmental sciences.
Bob is aware that he is in the public eye. He is careful to follow up all
the incidents that the public report, and to inform those who leave their
94A day in the life of Bob
names of the outcome of his investigations. He also feels it important to
be seen out and about in his patch. People are then reminded about the
NRA and feel it is "really doing something". They are also more likely to
report any changes in their local river or stream. Conversely, his active
presence locally may deter anyone tempted to discharge to the river, or
may shake the complacency of those with inadequate pollution control.
Even when Bob is not around, posters scattered about his patch in librar￾ies and on parish notice boards ask the public to report pollution to the
NRA. Bob himself notes several similarities between his work and that of
a police officer on the beat.
Bob has an obvious pride in knowing his patch. "There's no substitute
for knowing every bridge and every stream", he says. Such knowledge
takes years to build up: now he rarely, if ever, refers to a map. Subcon￾sciously he plans his routes so that he crosses the rivers and streams at
various points and can keep an eye on them. Bob has a good idea of the
condition of his rivers. He distinguishes particularly bad tributaries from
those that are very good. He is also well acquainted with the local topo￾graphy and farming pattern. He knows where small farms predominate and
where the larger units are located. Dairy farms cause him the most prob￾lems; he has "far less trouble" from beef and sheep production, and even
intensive pig and poultry units are less of a problem than dairy farming,
where the cattle are in and out all the time. However, because he has so
many responsibilities and a patch of substantial size, he cannot know the
majority of farmers individually, as he does the staff at his handful of
industrial dischargers. Instead, relationships with farmers tend to be formed
where a "problem" is discovered or an improvement planned, and to be
of an intermittent and limited duration. Indeed, there are farms in his
patch that he has never visited. Nonetheless, Bob still values a personal
approach with farmers. At the beginning of his work on the farm cam￾paign visits, he went through the farmers in the Yellow Pages and reor￾ganized the list according to farm name. Being able to go onto a farm and
say "Hello, Mr X" is, Bob feels, "worth its weight in gold".
Bob has followed the encouragement of Pollution Control and lives
in his patch and works from home. He works alone, although he liaises
closely with the wardens who cover the same area. Bob spends as much
as three-quarters of his time driving around attending appointments and
emergency calls. He can easily clock up 2000 miles in a month.
He begins his day by phoning the office for information about incid￾ents, messages from Pollution Control or any extra duties he might have
95The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
to take on. He plans his day around the incident work and any appoint￾ments he has made, fitting other routine duties into any gaps left. Plan￾ning itself has to be flexible, as urgent incidents take priority. He remains in
touch with Pollution Control via his car phone, and his day is usually punc￾tuated by at least a couple of incident reports from members of the public.
Sometimes he feels frustrated that, with so many incidents - usually of
a minor nature - coming in, he is left with less time for preventive work,
although he would not want the public to stop reporting.
His car is packed with any equipment and paperwork he might need
during the day: bottles for routine samples, the formal sample kit, a cam￾era for collecting photographic evidence, ropes, buckets, funnels and any
other contraption he has, by experience, found to be of use in his daily
work. Forms for the F&CGS and for making planning applications, infor￾mation sheets, names and addresses and publications (such as MAFF'S Code
of good agricultural practice) are also packed in, together with the essential
Wellington boots and waterproofs. His car is really a mobile office and
store in one!
Today, the winter weather is cold but dry, and Bob thinks he is unlikely
to be inundated with incidents. The only incident-related work Pollution
Control has passed onto him is to check on a sewer that had been overflow￾ing. He has also made an appointment for a F&CGS visit and he intends
to do some routine sampling at the sewage treatment works and in one of
his troublesome tributaries.
On the way to the F&CGS visit, Bob diverts slighdy to pass a "problem"
farm, classified as "Red", or polluting, by the region's farm campaign. Like
many Devon farms, this one is somewhat off the beaten track and a stream
runs close to the farmyard. Bob makes a quick and discreet check on the
watercourse (which in the past has had effluent going straight into it from
the yard), but he does not enter the farmyard to see the farmer today. Bob
often visits here both to monitor the pollution and to stress to this rather
resistant farmer that the problem will not just go away. The farmer is not
keen on the attention Bob is paying him, but tolerates it. Today the ditch
seems in order, although it is difficult to tell when it is so dry. Even
though Bob suspects that the yard was sometimes scraped into the stream
(the farmer escaped a prosecution "by the skin of his teeth" in the last year
of the regional water authority), his preference remains to improve the
situation and avoid bad feeling with the farmer. He feels that taking a
farmer to court risks destroying the relationship that has built up between
them, which he regards as his main instrument in improving water quality.
96A day in the life of Bob
Bob is only infrequently involved in court cases and does not often take
formal samples, but the basic procedure is one of his field skills and he can
cite the legislation, chapter and verse.
Bob arrives at the farm, a low-lying property bordered by a substantial
stream, for his 11 a.m. appointment for the F&CGS approval. He already
has some idea of the scheme the farmer, Mr Shields, wishes to undertake
and has looked out information on past dealings with the farm. It was
visited a few years ago by one of the wardens, who found slurry overflow￾ing from an open pit. The farmer has since installed a steel slurry store to
deal with that problem. However, last spring when Bob was checking the
nearby stream, he found some bad discharges, and visited the farm again.
He had made a note in his diary to return the following winter to check
on the situation. However, before he could do this, the farmer had phoned
into the NRA office, requesting a grant approval. Bob welcomes any such
initiative on the part of a farmer; it is better than him having to chase
them up.
On this occasion, Bob parks in the yard and goes to find the farmer.
He introduces himself as "Bob Brown - National Rivers Authority", and
addresses the farmer by name. Mr Shields unfortunately has lost the form
he is supposed to have filled in for the NRA, but Bob has a spare blank
copy. The only form Mr Shields produces is one relating to discharge
consents (see Ch. 3). He asks Bob if it is worthwhile keeping the consent.
Bob says no, firmly: consents are not suitable for farm effluents, which are
far too polluting to comply with normal consent conditions. It is import￾ant to prevent any discharge, Bob argues, and, after expressing some initial
doubts, Mr Shields concurs. The farmer does have contractors' estimates
for the proposed scheme - a dirty water disposal system, including a
settlement tank and low-rate irrigation, to add to the steel slurry tank he
already has - and shows these to Bob. The estimates include a couple from
leading engineering firms in the area, but Mr Shields would prefer to use
his local builders as they are cheaper and, because they are looking for
work, can start the job as soon as he gets MAFF approval. Bob peruses the
estimates briefly.
He then asks the farmer to spell out what he is intending to do and to
point out where the new system will go. The farmer responds with a half￾hour tour of the farmyard, in which he answers Bob's enquiries. Bob
wants to know what is kept where. Where are the cattle housed, where is
the collecting yard, dairy, parlour and silage clamp? He places great import￾ance on the farmer showing him round and describing the new system.
97The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
Bob is particularly concerned about the location of underground pipes
and old drains. Will the existing effluent drainage, including pipes from
the silage clamp, be connected to the new system? Bob asks to look at the
actual site of the proposed settlement tank to check on its suitability. He
then turns his attention to roof water and guttering. Is rain water diverted
away from the dirty water? Bob stresses that the farmer should do as much
of this as possible, as it cuts down on the volume of waste produced.
Mr Shields obviously sees Bob's visit as a good opportunity to clarify
the NRA view on some issues. Although Bob is willing and able to oblige
on certain points, he avoids being drawn into others. When Mr Shields
seems worried that his slurry store may become solid if most of the liquid
is diverted to the proposed low-rate irrigation system, Bob suggests that
the new system should be flexible enough to allow the diversion of some
water into the slurry store if and when this is required. On the other hand,
when Mr Shields raises a point which he has discussed with the contrac￾tors about whether or not he will actually need to put in a settlement tank,
Bob is less forthcoming. He warns about the risk of settlement within the
irrigation pipes and thinks that much depends on the type of pump
chosen. Some will finely chop the waste, thus reducing the risk of settle￾ment within the pipes. However, he admits that he is not an expert and
cannot advise on the type of pump to be installed.
After looking around the farmyard, Bob asks the farmer to show him
the fields proposed for irrigation. They view the fields together and Bob,
applying his knowledge of the local soils, is happy with the amount of
land available for spreading. However, two of the fields are low-lying and
adjoin the stream, and Bob warns these should be used for irrigation only
during the summer months.
He fills in the details of Mr Shields's proposed scheme onto the F&CGS
application form and the farmer signs it. Bob says the NRA'S letter of
approval will be sent through as soon as it is typed up, which takes at least
a week. He advises Mr Shields to get on with the work as quickly as
possible, as the grant scheme could run out. He then goes back around the
farmyard and in a few minutes completes the sketch that the farmer should
have supplied on the form. It includes the position of the dairy, cattle hous￾ing, steel slurry storage tank and reception pit, silage clamp, collecting yards,
parlour, main underground drains and the points for the irrigation hydrants.
On leaving the farm, Bob pulls into the side of the road to draft his
letter of approval. This is based on a standard format used in the South
West region and has a series of get-out clauses for the Authority in the
98A day in the life of Bob
event of an "approved" system polluting. Bob also makes a note in his diary
to revisit the farm in about three months' time to check on the progress
of the scheme.
Once Bob has finished this paperwork, he carries on up the valley to
make a routine check on the state of the river. He takes a route that
frequently passes over the small bridges crossing one of his more trouble￾some tributaries, the Yore. Driving over one such bridge, Bob notices a
discoloration in the stream and pulls over. He assesses the conditions by
looking for visual changes in the stream. Is it cloudy, foaming, or full of
sewage fungus? He smells the water. Does it smell of slurry or domestic
sewage or silage liquor? Checking involves him walking right into the
stream. From there it is easier to spot small amounts of the slimy white
fungus that is a sign of sewage pollution. He can also pick up and feel the
stones on the river bed to discover if they are slimy. Another of the clues
Bob uses to indicate the presence of organic pollution is the invertebrate
mix of the watercourse. To check this, he picks up stones from the stream
bed and examines the wildlife on their undersides. Mayfly larvae, together
with freshwater snails, are the main indicators of clean water at this time
of the year. This stream, despite the discoloration, still has plenty of
mayfly larvae. Further investigation of the locality jogs Bob's memory -
there have been problems here before - and he recalls that an informant
lives nearby. He has been out to investigate her calls a couple of times in
the past, but, by the time he has arrived, the problem has disappeared. He
decides to call in, both to ask about the stream and because such visits are
good for public relations. She allows Bob access to the stream from her
garden. While he examines the water, she tells him of a more recent
incident when she found a few small trout on the riverbank, and suggests
the cause was slurry runoff from local farms, although she also complains
about sewage leaking from the village council houses. Bob finds informa￾tion from such informants useful and well meaning, if not always com￾pletely accurate.
Bob remains unhappy with the state of the stream and wants to invest￾igate it further, but back inside his car, he receives a call from Pollution
Control informing him of a reported oil incident. He sets off immediately to
deal with this, as it sounds relatively serious. This entails driving to a large
village on the lower reaches of his other main river. Once he has finished
dealing with the oil incident, Bob finds a quiet lay-by to have his lunch.
After lunch, Bob decides to carry on with his investigation of the Yore
tributary. On his way back, he stops to check the stream below a large
99The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
tenanted farm. When he was last there, the previous year, dirty water from
the cattle yard was running down through rough ground and into the
stream. Now the stream is very clean and Bob feels satisfied. It is one of
the rewards of the job to see a once dirty stream clean and he decides to
call in at the farm to see how the problem has been solved. Mind you, he
is not surprised to see the improvement here. Mr Lorton is a resourceful
farmer running a large farm, the type who is conscious he will have to do
something about pollution sometime, but who needs a visit from Bob to
nudge him into action.
Mr Lorton is very pleased to show Bob what he has done, confiding,
"We should have done it years ago". The farmer has designed the system
himself. All the waste scraped from the yards, the dirty water and some
of the parlour washings now go into a new lagoon. The liquid fraction is
pumped out and irrigated using a tanker. Although his pollution problem
has apparently been solved, Mr Lorton still wants to make some improve￾ments to his system. When the cows go out in the spring, he aims to
concrete the area next to the lagoon to make it easier to scrape. He also
plans to divide the lagoon with ex-railway sleepers to retain the more solid
material at one end by a type of "weeping wall" effect. He hopes this will
avoid the pump blocking. Bob suggests that he might consider extending
to beyond the sleepers the pipe bringing in the dairy and parlour wash￾ings, to aid solid and liquid separation. Mr Lorton has not lined the slurry
lagoon and laughingly notes to Bob that there must be some percolation.
He and Bob consider the likelihood of this material eventually finding its
way down the hill to the stream. In Bob's experience such lagoons gen￾erally seal themselves, but only time will tell, the real test coming with
prolonged winter rainfall. Mr Lorton does not want problems with the
stream but also hopes the lagoon will not seal itself too effectively, as
seepage is a good means of disposal and it reduces his need to pump the
lagoon out as frequently.
After this short stop, Bob sets off for the Yore tributary once again.
Moving upstream from his point of investigation in the morning, he
observes, from another of the small bridges, that the water looks clearer.
However, on checking the stones he feels there is something wrong with
the invertebrate mix. A farm up the valley has a small creamery with consent
to discharge the effluent from its treatment works into the stream. There
have been serious problems here in the past and, although thousands of
pounds have been spent to remedy them, he suspects there is still some￾thing wrong. His view is confirmed when he sees the slightly discoloured
100A day in the life of Bob
and lifeless condition of the stream immediately below the discharge.
Instead of mayfly larvae, Bob finds plenty of leeches and only a few small
snails. He takes two samples around the discharge point and one up￾stream. Bob walks downstream of the creamery to where the drainage of
another farm enters the Yore. On this occasion he is pleased to find that
the water is fine, despite problems there the previous winter.
Bob decides then to check a little farther down stream. Although the
farm campaign was carried out here three or four years previously, Bob's
experience is that problems do recur. Farms need monitoring, particularly
to ensure that proper maintenance is being carried out. Bob consults his
map and his farm list from the Yellow Pages, and finds the farm he wants
to check. It adjoins the stream and has had pollution problems in the past.
Checking farms like this, where there is no nearby bridge, is difficult, as
you must either enter the farmyard itself- something that cannot be done
every fortnight or the farmer would begin to feel harassed - or trek up the
river. On this occasion, he decides on the latter course and, after negoti￾ating a gate and a fence and crossing a riverside meadow, Bob reaches the
boundary of the farm. He thinks everything looks in order today. The
ditch connecting the farmyard to the stream is clean, whereas it had been
full of slurry last time. Bob is once again pleasantly surprised, and begins
the walk back to the car, along the opposite bank. However, soon after he
has set off, he spots a pipe which had been hidden from view from the
opposite bank. Bob enters the stream to inspect the pipe more closely.
Although the slight discharge from the pipe is clear, when Bob looks more
carefully and feels inside the pipe he finds it is coated with a thin film of
white slime. This he associates immediately with past slurry discharges. He
suspects these will recur, and makes a mental note to call back when the
weather breaks.
Back at the car, another call comes through from Pollution Control. A
complaint has been received about a polluted pond. Supplied with the
details, Bob sets off to investigate. The informant has just moved to the
area and has found dirty smelly water in her pond. She introduces Bob to
another nearby resident who confirms that there have been persistent
problems with both the pond and the ditch. Bob discovers fungus in the
pond, which he thinks is probably caused by farm effluents, especially
when he finds the ditch feeding into the pond to be full of fungus. The
ditch is fed by a drain and Bob sets out to trace the source of the effluent.
His suspicions fall upon a nearby dairy farm. Bob parks in a lay-by and
walks down the road from the farm, following the line of drains from the
101The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
farmyard which sound as if they are carrying about the same amount of
water as issued from the pipe into the ditch. Eventually he discovers that
the drains do cross the road and are piped under the field, emerging into
the polluted ditch and pond.
Having thus confirmed the source, Bob returns to the farmyard, where
he meets Mrs Chapman who runs the farm with her husband. He intro￾duces himself and tells her about the polluted ditch and pond. Her first
reaction is to say "if we have to do too much we'll have to get out". This
is a small enterprise with only 32 dairy cows, little land around the farm￾stead and no chance of buying more on the edge of an expanding com￾muter village. Bob is not put off: in his view, if a farm is polluting, some
improvement must be made, however small the enterprise. Nevertheless,
Bob cannot tell what might need to be done until he has been shown
around, which Mrs Chapman somewhat reluctantly does. Bob is particu￾larly interested to find out where the drains go and is concerned when he
is told that all the dirty water is being filtered to one small field. He tells
her he would like to see a broader dispersal. He also suggests putting up
more guttering to divert clean roof water. Once he has looked around,
Bob feels certain that the dairy and parlour washings go down the road￾side drains, instead of into the field, as he had suspected. He deduces this
from the straight line of drain covers that run from the dairy and parlour
complex to the road drains. Bob tells Mrs Chapman that she needs to call
in a consultant and he shows her a list. She is under the impression that
ADAS will charge for a visit, but Bob puts her right. He leaves his card and
pointedly says he will call back to check on progress.
On returning to his car, Bob makes some notes on the incident. For
each report he receives, a form has to be filled out in triplicate: one for
the computer, one for the filing system and one for himself. Bob then
heads off home; the rest of the paperwork will have to wait until the
morning.
Perceptions of pollution and farming
We observed several Pollution Inspectors in their work. Their assessments
of pollution were framed in absolutes. To them, pollution was a "dirty"
stream or river. Seeing a once dirty stream made clean was the ultimate
102Perceptions of pollution and farming
goal and in principle nothing less could be condoned. Such an appreci￾ation derived from their biological training, which had impressed upon them
the complex interconnectedness of ecological systems, and was reinforced
by the gathering evidence of discernible changes in aquatic ecosystems, even
from very low levels of farm waste contamination. Seeing the water envir￾onment as a realm of consequences underpinned a moral imperative in
the Pollution Inspectors' responses to farm pollution. Although they might
concentrate on the most pressing problems, they regarded pollution on any
scale as wrong and they tried to avoid falling into the trap of saying a
little is acceptable. One Pollution Inspector commented that "if a farm is
polluting, it's polluting. . . whether the problem is caused by ten or a
hundred cows, something must be done to remedy this".
In practice, Pollution Inspectors needed more workable definitions and
these were very much shaped by their practical experience. There was a
strong ethos among Pollution Inspectors of "knowing" their rivers, and
their definitions of pollution drew upon this very intimate knowledge and
inspection of the aquatic environment. A dirty river or stream was thus
assessed by: visual changes - cloudy, foaming or discoloured water, the
growth of sewage fungus; the presence of odour — the smell of sewage
fungus or silage effluent; the feel of stones in the stream - the presence of
slime; and the nature of the macro-invertebrate population of the stream
- mayfly larvae and freshwater snails indicating clean water (during winter
months), whereas their absence and the presence of leeches indicated to
the Pollution Inspector that the water was suffering from organic pollution.
Pollution Inspectors' interpretations of pollution also tended to be influ￾enced by the types of problems they encountered. Thus, they distin￾guished the most serious pollution by such criteria as fish being killed, a
water intake closed, several hundred yards of the river affected, or some￾one else's use of the water disrupted. In contrast, working assessments
of pollution took little account of the hidden problems of groundwater
contamination or more diffuse pollution such as that from nitrates or
pesticides.
The response of Pollution Inspectors to farm pollution was also influ￾enced by their perceptions of farmers as regulatory subjects. Startlingly,
dairy farmers were viewed overwhelmingly as a group of potential law￾breakers. This perception appeared to have two roots. First, the Pollution
Inspectors were acutely aware of the sheer potency and quantity of the
wastes that dairy farmers had to dispose of. Secondly, farmers had long been
regarded as an intrinsically problematic group to regulate (Hawkins 1984,
103The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
Watchman et al. 1988). Compared with most of the industrial and com￾mercial dischargers with which Pollution Inspectors had to deal, farmers
were seen to lack professionalism in their approach to waste management
matters and regulatory procedures and standards: they usually lacked relev￾ant specialist training, they were often ill informed of the law, and they
could be obstreperous and uncooperative in their dealings with officials.
Dairy farmers also had a poor reputation as technicians, in managing and
maintaining their equipment, and this was seen as a major factor in pollution
incidents. All in all, this added up to an impression among the Pollution
Inspectors of farmers as a difficult, recalcitrant and even deviant group.
Here again, in practice, Pollution Inspectors needed more workable
definitions to deal with the numbers and diversity of farmers they encoun￾tered. Although Pollution Inspectors considered any dairy farmer capable
of pollution at some time, they tended to distinguish between the majority
of farmers, who seemed open to encouragement to clean up their waste
management, and the minority, who seemed quite uncooperative.
With many cases to deal with, the Pollution Inspectors were often
obliged to make a provisional judgement of a farmer, on their initial
encounter, as likely to be a "problem" farmer or a "persuadable" farmer,
drawing on their past experience with other farmers. The sort of charac￾teristics expressed to us as informing this categorization are shown in
Table 5.2. They combine assessments of the resourcefulness and flexibility
of the farmer (size of the farm, age and apparent alertness of the indi￾vidual), with judgements of their moral worth (tidiness of the farm, dis￾position of the individual and evidence of guile) and impressions of their
openness and responsiveness. Pollution Inspectors then calibrated their
responses accordingly. Provided that major pollution was not involved,
with those farmers judged persuadable the Pollution Inspectors did not
adopt an overdy coercive stance, but, often with considerable patience, they
would seek to persuade them to improve their facilities and procedures for
waste management. With those thought to be problem farmers, in contrast,
Pollution Inspectors were inclined from the start to take a tougher line.
The regulation of farm pollution
Pollution Inspectors such as Bob were the regulators of farm pollution.
However, most of their work was not the formal enforcement of pollution
104The regulation of farm pollution
Table 5.2 Pollution Inspectors' perceptions of farmers
"Persuadable" farmers "Problem" farmers
Physical factors
Tidy farmyards Untidy farmyards
Larger farms Smaller farms
Social factors
Have got it up here; (nous) Ignorant
Younger farmers Older farmers
Attitudinal factors
just waiting to be told
to do something
Do not like being told what
to do
Willing to talk; friendly Tell you to get lost and
hope that by doing so the
problem will just go away
Straightforward Shifty; have something to
hide
Will ask for information Never contact anyone
Resigned to having to
do something
Resist having to do anything
law. Instead, as we have seen, it was an amalgam of inspection, detection,
investigation and persuasion. Pollution Inspectors continuously drew upon
and replenished their intimate knowledge of the local river systems, against
which they assessed and assimilated the pieces of information they received
- from Pollution Control, from informants, from farmers — about actual or
potential sources of pollution. On the basis of that knowledge and informa￾tion, they expressed their judgement about the risks from particular sources
and sanctioned specific courses of action. Most of the time they were
dispensing not the law but their own judgements, and this in a manner
calculated to enrol farmers into their way of seeing pollution. Farmers
were thus alerted to the vulnerability of watercourses, the polluting poten￾tial of farm effluents, the inescapable hydrodynamics of their own fields,
and the gravity of the problem of farm pollution.
105The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
The way in which this was done was thought to be crucial in winning
over the farmer. In the absence of major pollution, Inspectors adopted an
informal approach. A farmer might be causing some pollution or be at risk
of doing so, but the Pollution Inspector usually sought to be "reasonable".
Thus, the law was not enforced to the letter. Instead, farmers were told
what the problem was and were given time and encouragement to make
changes. This was seen as the best way of securing an improvement in
water quality. In the negotiations into which Pollution Inspectors were
thereby drawn, their stance was interwoven with nuances of friendliness,
didacticism and authority.
Right from the start they liked to give the impression of personableness.
They placed store on being able to go onto a farm and greet the farmer
by name. They also left their cards to help the farmer remember who
called and to encourage future contacts. Pollution Inspectors were anxious
to avoid seeming to be overbearing in their dealings with farmers, who
were not thought to respond well to being ordered around. This might
"put the farmer's back up", whereas a discussion about the problem they
faced was seen as more likely to encourage positive steps and a change of
outlook. One Pollution Inspector referred to his handling of a situation
where manure was being stored on a concrete pad right next to a stream:
he "could have gone in heavy handed" and demanded the farmer stop
using the store. However, he thought that a chat with the farmer would
do the trick. Despite having only ten cows, the farmer already had a dirty
water irrigation system installed, and the Pollution Inspector interpreted
this previous investment as an indication that the farmer was amenable.
Pollution Inspectors recognized F&CGS visits as particularly valuable in
building up cooperative relations. The farmer would already be commit￾ted to taking some action and spending money on pollution control, and
also knew that NRA agreement was needed before any grant aid could be
received. On these occasions, Pollution Inspectors usually felt welcomed,
and they encountered much less suspicion and foreboding than on their
other farm calls. They were keen to capitalize on this different atmosphere
to cement their relationships with cooperative farmers.
Not only did Pollution Inspectors find that friendly relations helped in
persuading farmers to address current problems, they were also believed to
encourage farmers to be more open in approaching the NRA for advice sub￾sequently. From a pollution control viewpoint it was obviously preferable
for farmers to make contact when they had a problem, rather than for the
NRA to have to discover and locate the pollution, and such responsible
106The regulation of farm pollution
behaviour, in all but the most severe circumstances, was rewarded with relief
from prosecution. Thus, when a farmer with concerns about seepage from
the concrete base of his new slurry store bantered that if there was any
problem "I'll be on to you!", the Pollution Inspector involved replied "That's
OK with me". This reaction illustrates well the subtlety of the Pollution
Inspector's role. Although the farmer might have had a different inter￾pretation of this interchange (indeed, we analyze this exchange from the
farmer's point of view in Ch. 6), and was probably seeking to spread the
responsibility for any future problems with the facility, the Inspector either
ignored this aspect or deliberately turned the comment around to create
a positive regulatory point. He thereby avoided a possibly fraught and formal
exchange over correct legal responsibilities, and sought instead to build up
a trusting relationship with this farmer.
Displays of authority by Pollution Inspectors were subde rather than
totally absent. Even on an initial routine visit, a Pollution Inspector who
introduced himself as "Bob Brown - National Rivers Authority" reminded
the farmer that he had the authority of the organization behind him.
Thus, the initial presentation was also that of a figure of authority who
could enforce the law.
In general, though, the formal sanctions of the law remained implicit.
Pollution Inspectors, for example, tended not to mention the potential
fines in personal negotiations with farmers. This might have been unneces￾sary, as most farmers already had an exaggerated perception of the risks
and penalties of being prosecuted for farm pollution (see Ch. 6). Con￾versely, Pollution Inspectors were reluctant to refer to the actual likely
levels of fine (see Table 5.1 on p. 92), which they regarded as being of
questionable deterrence: "Being told you could be fined £500 if you pollute
because you have not spent £10 000 on a pollution control system is
hardly a compelling argument".
In negotiating improvements, Pollution Inspectors felt they had to be
persistent. A not untypical example of the timescale involved is provided
by a farm found to be polluting a stream on the first visit of the farm
campaign in February 1988. The farmer was advised to contact either
ADAS or a consultant. Although the farmer received advice from ADAS,'at
the second farm campaign visit, not made until over a year later in July
1989, the farm was still polluting. The farmer was once again encouraged
to seek advice and remedy the problem. Another visit followed just four
months later and this time, although the farm again was found to be
polluting, the farmer was in communication with local contractors. Once
107The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
the farmer had put forward a scheme, it was agreed to by the Pollution
Inspector under the F&CGS arrangements. The new facilities were completed
in June 1990 and, when checked in November of that year, were thought
to have solved the problem in the stream. This farmer was not con￾sidered to be deviant; indeed, the Pollution Inspector involved described
him as friendly and prepared to invest in a comprehensive scheme. However,
the farm did have serious locational problems, which meant that the solu￾tion to the problem was more complex than normal, and between each of
the five visits he had taken steps - contacting ADAS, calling in contractors,
putting forward a scheme under F&CGS - which could be taken as indicat￾ing a cooperative stance. Nevertheless, it was nearly two-and-a-half years
between the initial classification of the farm as polluting and the comple￾tion of the new scheme.
For most farmers the problem was not so much one of causing pollu￾tion as being detected doing so. In that sense, the Pollution Inspector was
the embodiment of the problem for the farmer, and Pollution Inspectors
actually saw their own persistence as a means of convincing farmers that
a pollution problem would not simply go away. Individual Pollution
Inspectors had ways of reinforcing this message verbally. One played upon
the "peace of mind" that an agreed improvement would bring. He reas￾sured farmers that, once they had addressed their particular problem, "at
least you know we won't be bothering you again" - the apparent solici￾tousness laced with the threat that failure to act would attract not only
continued regulatory surveillance but also possible penalties.
As the example above shows, a series of visits might be necessary to
encourage or cajole a farmer into making some improvement. Revisiting
also allowed Pollution Inspectors to update farmers with current NRA
thinking. As one Pollution Inspector noted, practices "thought OK four
years ago we wouldn't say were OK now". This upgrading was a continu￾ing process. For example, none of the Pollution Inspectors shadowed in
1991 required farmers to plan for eventualities such as frozen or water￾logged ground in the construction of low-rate irrigation systems. However,
the following year a requirement for contingency planning was laid down
in national guidelines for farmers applying for grant aid on low-rate irri￾gation systems without four months storage. Given the poor reputation of
farmers for looking after their equipment, revisiting was also viewed as
essential to check that they were managing and maintaining their pollu￾tion control facilities and practices adequately. However, pressure of other
commitments limited the scope for such "after treatment" revisits, which
108The regulation of farm pollution
tended to be concentrated on catchments with particularly intractable
problems.
Inevitably, in these repeated encounters with farmers, Pollution Inspec￾tors conveyed a good deal of information and advice. However, they saw
themselves primarily as pollution regulators and protectors of the water
environment and were reluctant to admit an advisory role regarding the
remedial or preventive measures a farmer should take, out of a concern
not to compromise their regulatory duties. However, fieldwork identified
important types of information, which they integrated into their enforce￾ment work and which conveyed something of their own understanding of
pollution. The intention seemed to be to get farmers to make connections
between their own activities and the consequences for the water environ￾ment and, from this altered perspective, to reassess their responsibilities.
First, Pollution Inspectors made use of their water industry experience
and expertise, supplemented by some knowledge of farming, to encourage
farmers to look at their farms from the viewpoint of water protection. They
would point out any problem they felt the farmer had. This might involve
drawing attention to "something simple, something the farmer has never
thought about". Much of this type of advice was aimed to make farmers more
conscious of the hydrological characteristics of their own farms: getting them
to think carefully about the location of ditches, streams and underdrains,
about flood risks and about variations in slope and soil permeability. Such
advice potentially had an important educational role in improving the
farmer's awareness of environmental risks in their managerial decisions.
Pollution Inspectors also played a crucial role in educating farmers
about the impact of farm pollution and more specifically of their own
farming activities on the water environment. In part this constituted an
appeal to the polluter's sense of social responsibility. Although the Pollution
Inspectors acknowledged progress in this area - most farmers had come
to regard the disposal of slurry into rivers as unacceptable (see Ch. 6) -
they still came across ignorance or indifference about the effects of less
publicized farm pollutants. For example, they found that some farmers,
apparently not realizing that milk was highly polluting, might be control￾ling their slurry and yard washings, but overlooking those from the dairy
and the parlour. Other farmers were found to turn a blind eye to small
discharges of farm wastes, perhaps believing that, as not much was escap￾ing, it would not do any harm. Pollution Inspectors sought to convince
farmers of the damage that was caused by such small discharges, by show￾ing them the resultant sewage fungus and its effects.
109The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
Such educative efforts were distinct from technical prescription. Not
only did Pollution Inspectors eschew a formal advisory role, they also
denied having the relevant technical expertise in agriculture and farm
waste management. Nevertheless, they did have strong views on technical
solutions to farm pollution problems, which informed their regulatory
work. In practice, they often gave out information on general technical
matters which might influence the type of facility a farmer decided to
invest in. Thus, on farm visits they all repeatedly emphasized the import￾ance of the separation of clean and dirty water in preventing pollution,
which was "half the battle" in one Inspector's view. Likewise, Pollution
Inspectors occasionally expressed their judgement on the choice of equip￾ment. For example, the use on hilly ground of mobile irrigators, designed
to operate on flat areas, was questioned. Conversely, some Pollution Inspec￾tors explicitly favoured "weeping wall" stores, arguing that they presented
less risk of pollution if they failed than an above-ground metal store would
because it would be containing more liquid slurry. Some, indeed, dis￾suaded farmers from installing tin tanks because they believed the farmers
would not carry out the routine maintenance required to minimize struc￾tural failure. In certain contexts, the need for specific advice-giving was
acknowledged: for example, in the case of emergencies where stop-gap
measures needed to be taken to minimize the pollution; and on "problem
farms" where a solution was proving difficult for the farmer and consult￾ant, and the Pollution Inspector was invited along to give his or her views.
Pollution Inspectors were at their most specifically prescriptive in impres￾sing on farmers the need to manage and maintain farm waste facilit￾ies properly, usually when inspecting new facilities installed under F&CGS.
At that point, they could not be accused of interfering with the main
technical choices to be made, but might be less than happy with the out￾come because they felt that some systems demanded more attention than
farmers were prepared to devote to them. In any case, with their perception
of farmers as poor managers of equipment and machinery, Pollution Inspec￾tors were at pains to urge farmers to make daily checks on their waste
storage facilities and to check nearby watercourses. They also stressed that
mobile irrigators must be moved regularly, that tin tanks should be peri￾odically cleaned out and inspected internally to minimize the risk of struc￾tural failure, and that sluices and valves should be checked regularly to
guard against blockage.
In the main, where specific technical advice was needed, Pollution
Inspectors tended to follow the official line of the NRA and deny that they
110The threat of prosecution
did or could advise farmers. As one Pollution Inspector remarked, "It's
not our job to advise on specific work; we're not qualified. . . . We're not
consultants". It would put them "in an impossible situation" if advice
were given and subsequently there was pollution, as this could jeopardize
court action and harm the reputation of the NRA.
Instead, farmers were referred to ADAS or other agricultural consultants
for such technical advice. Although Pollution Inspectors thus nominally
deferred to agricultural expertise, in private discussion some were critical
of what was available. One Pollution Inspector felt ADAS free advice to be
"no better or more extensive than the advice we give". In his view, it just
told the farmer he or she had a problem, and the real point of the free visit
was to sell ADAS commercial services. Quite apart from such muted ques￾tioning of the exclusiveness of ADAS'S authority, the Pollution Inspectors
as a group saw themselves as having an important role to play, alongside
ADAS, in educating farmers.
Thus, the Pollution Inspectors had to perform the sometimes difficult
task of balancing the need to provide information and yet to avoid giving
specific advice; as one Pollution Inspector noted, there was "always a thin
line" between telling farmers they had to do something and telling them
what to do. The NRA stance against giving out technical advice contrasted
markedly with that adopted by field staff of the regional water authorities
in the mid-1970s. Hawkins reported the willingness of those officers, in
dealing with industrial dischargers, to act as "expert consultants" and to
give "technical advice" as part of the compliance process in which advice was
traded for cooperation. Although this advice was given out "tentatively",
to protect the officers and their authorities from any liability repercussions,
the lack of prosecutions minimized that possibility (Hawkins 1984: 125).
With the NRA'S greater emphasis on prosecution, there was now a cautious￾ness about being seen to give advice. On the other hand, particularly with
regard to farmers, there was also much greater opportunity and pressure
to advise.
The threat of prosecution
The crucial difference with the past was that prosecution was now re￾garded as an active option, reinforced by internal and external pressures on
the NRA to take a firm stance against pollution and its perpetrators. In this
111The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
context, Pollution Inspectors saw themselves less in the role of trading
advice for cooperation than in giving information that would help farmers
avoid pollution and therefore prosecution. By and large, though, with
responsive farmers the Pollution Inspectors did not adopt an overtly coer￾cive stance, although elements of coercion were implicit in the nuances of
the language they used, the resoluteness with which they pursued pollu￾tion problems, and the reputation of the NRA for prosecuting serious or
persistent polluters.
With some farmers, however, Pollution Inspectors did adopt an expli￾cidy coercive stance. These were the ones identified by the Pollution
Inspectors as "problem" farmers because of their uncooperative attitudes.
Such farmers were subjected to repeated visits, whether welcome or not,
to underline the Pollution Inspectors' determination, and to keep the
pollution problem under surveillance. The legal sanctions available were
also explained, and Pollution Inspectors had few qualms about resorting
to formal enforcement against obstinately unresponsive or obstructive
farmers if the problem persisted. "There are always some farmers who
don't care" commented one Pollution Inspector; another explained "YouVe
got to have a legal comeback if you can't by friendly means get a farmer
to do something".
Of course, individual farmers did not necessarily conform to the Pol￾lution Inspectors' categories. A farmer initially categorized as persuadable
or cooperative might eventually exhaust the patience of a Pollution Inspec￾tor through failure over a protracted period to take any remedial measures,
leading to reclassification as a "problem" farmer. Informal approaches
might then give way to the issuing of a warning letter. Prosecution in
such cases was regarded as a failure of the negotiation process and of the
Pollution Inspector's initial assessment of the farmer.
In the main, when major pollution was not involved and Pollution
Inspectors therefore retained the discretion whether or not to initiate a pro￾secution, they tended to show considerable patience towards the farmers
they regarded as persuadable. They were, for example, sympathetic to cases
where farmers faced real obstacles to taking action but appeared to be
doing what they could. Various considerations came into play. First,
Pollution Inspectors did not want to jeopardize the relationship they had
built up with the farmer in question. That relationship they saw as the
basis for any real progress. By comparison, they regarded prosecution as
an ineffective deterrent, seeing it mainly in terms of the financial costs
to the farmer, with the level of fines generally being much lower than
112The threat of prosecution
the costs of preventive measures. Pollution Inspectors acknowledged that
the implicit sanction of prosecution could be instrumental in securing the
cooperation of some farmers, but the actual deployment of the threat
might poison relations.
Even when negotiations with a farmer had palpably not succeeded,
and there seemed to be little to lose, Pollution Inspectors were concerned
about upsetting the broader context in which they had to operate. The
chances for a cooperative relationship with the individual farmer might look
bleak, but any NRA response should not alienate local farming opinion.
One Pollution Inspector expressed strong misgivings lest ill judged
prosecutions actually undermined the efforts to build up goodwill among
local farmers, which he saw as the only realistic means to secure long-term
improvements in pollution control. He contrasted cases that served to
reinforce the NRA'S authority - for example, cases of deliberate gross pol￾lution, or cases where NRA advice had been flaunted - with ones that
might undermine its authority. It would be imprudent, he thought, to
take to court a farmer who had spent thousands of pounds on pollution
control measures, as this could lead to bad publicity in the press, depicting
the NRA as unreasonable, unless, that is, the pollution were very serious
and roundly condemned by the same press.
Pollution Inspectors were also not indifferent to the compliance costs
that farmers faced. Initial pleas by farmers that they could not afford any
remedial action were usually discounted as standard reflex excuses. How￾ever, in cases where advice had been taken and the costs were likely to be
particularly high and to cause real difficulty, there was a reluctance to
proceed against the farmer. Here again, considerations of whether the
action would be considered reasonable by the farming community came
into play. Strong misgivings were expressed about strict adherence to the
law that might lead to a farmer deciding to quit. One Pollution Inspector
warned that it would be highly counterproductive if word ever circulated
that the NRA had put a farmer out of business: "I don't want that"; but
it could arise, he pointed out, if a small farmer were pressed to pay a lot
for pollution control facilities. The subsequent rumours would always
oversimplify the issue, but if farmers came to fear that the NRA would close
them down, it could prompt "the wrong attitudes" and, worst of all, the
"midnight valve phenomenon" of farmers deviously dumping waste into
watercourses. This Pollution Inspector was "absolutely sure" that there
had been a change in farmers' attitudes resulting in less pollution and did
not want to jeopardize this by overly rigorous enforcement.
113The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
Another Pollution Inspector cited a case where strict enforcement would
have involved closure of a dairy unit. The farm, identified as polluting on
the farm campaign, was poorly located from the perspective of water
protection. Situated in the floodplain between two rivers, it was "in effect
in the wrong place". The only real solution to prevent pollution, which
occurred as a result of the frequent flooding of the farmyard, was to close
down the dairy unit. The owners had agreed to do this as long as they
could move the dairy operations to higher ground and redevelop the
existing farm buildings to offset their costs. However, they had been held
up by delays in the granting of planning permission for the redevelop￾ment, and the case had dragged on for over two years. Although the NRA
could have initiated legal action, this Pollution Inspector felt that, as the
owners were "doing what they can" in a very difficult physical location, there
was "no point in prosecuting", despite there being a continuing problem.
In other circumstances, the gravity of the pollution caused meant that
legal action was the first not the last resort. If the Pollution Inspector
judged an incident to be major, a formal stance would be adopted. In the
1970s, incidents were dealt with in this way only if they were very severe
and heavily publicized and, even so, the prosecution of farmers was speci￾fically avoided (Hawkins 1984). The threshold that triggered legal action,
regardless of the character of the polluter, had lowered significantly since
then. By the early 1990s, indeed, farm pollution incidents were more likely
to be prosecuted than were other types of pollution.4
The criteria used in the assessment of a pollution incident were a
marked effect on the watercourse for several hundred metres, a fish kill,
or a significant effect on someone else's use of water. In practice, Pollution
Inspectors usually found it easy to diagnose a major case of farm pollution.
The affected stream was likely to be green or brown in colour, and froth￾ing, with a distinctive smell of animal or silage effluent. Dead or distressed
fish might also be found. In the farmyard, tidemarks on ruptured or empty
stores might indicate the scale of the spill.
Upon arrival at a serious incident in which the discharge was still flow￾ing, a Pollution Inspector would take immediate action to stem the source.
For example, if a lagoon was overflowing, the farmer might be told to dig
some trenches to contain the waste or to fill a vacuum tanker and spread
the waste onto suitable fields. As soon as possible the Pollution Control
office would be contacted for assistance in investigating the extent of the
incident, in instigating remedial measures, in warning water users and in
collecting and photographing any dead fish. Remedial action could be a
114The threat of prosecution
major operation. A small stream that had been polluted might be dammed
to create a lagoon effect in order to intercept the head of the pollution.
Spray irrigation equipment could then be brought in to irrigate the pol￾luted water onto nearby fields. When a large watercourse was involved,
aeration equipment might be used. Back-up of this sort allowed Pollution
Inspectors, as the "investigating officers", to get on with their main task
in such circumstances: the collection of evidence for a prosecution and
cautioning the farmer.
Once a Pollution Inspector decided formal action should be taken with
a view to prosecution, the procedure followed mirrored that used by the
police: "anything you say may be used in evidence against you", the Inspec￾tor would warn the farmer. There would be no effort to be genial with
the farmer, even where an informal relationship had been cultivated in the
past. The Pollution Inspectors regarded legal proceedings as quite separate
from and inimical to compliance-seeking strategies. They felt that once
they had decided that legal action was appropriate "we have burned our
bridges." The collecting of evidence in these circumstances was not seen
as a means of reinforcing compliance but was carried out strictly to secure
a prosecution.
The caution, indeed, marked the beginning of a procedure that Pol￾lution Inspectors acknowledged had to be followed in meticulous detail
if a pollution was to be successfully prosecuted. A key element was the
taking of water samples to be used in court. To be admissible as evidence,
these had to be in accordance with the provisions of the 1989 Water Act
and were referred to as legal, formal or tripartite samples. The sampling
kit, consisting of a bucket, botdes, funnels, labels and seals, always accom￾panied the Pollution Inspector. In describing the formal sampling process,
Pollution Inspectors made repeated references to the need to avoid doing
anything that would allow a defence lawyer successfully to challenge their
evidence on a technicality, leading to the case being thrown out of court.
They were keen to get the procedure right also because failure to do so
might lead to disciplinary action from their immediate supervisors.
In collecting evidence, Pollution Inspectors were supposed to take a
sample downstream of the discharge, then one of the discharge itself, then
another upstream from the discharge so that the sampling procedure had
no effect on the results. Equal care was needed in the splitting of formal
samples, to provide one portion for the farmer, another for the NRA to
analyze and a third to be stored away for future independent analysis if the
NRA'S analytical results were to be contested. The Pollution Inspector had
115The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
to ensure the liquid was thoroughly mixed in the collection vessel before
it was divided into three one-litre portions, preferably in the presence of
the farmer. "Section 148 [of the 1989 Water Act] is crucial" stated one
Pollution Inspector, emphasizing the point by quoting from it. He then
explained the need to keep on filling the three bottles, even if they were
overflowing. To leave some of the liquid in the collection vessel would
divide it into four pans and this would contravene the letter of the law.
Other Inspectors stressed the need to rinse the collection vessel carefully
between samples, so that defence lawyers could not argue that one sample
had contaminated another; and one detailed the deliberate and painstak￾ing steps he took, to wash out collection vessels, which had obviously been
of use to him in court. Each of the three bottles had then to be labelled
and put into a bag and sealed with an official NRA seal. Once this had been
completed, the discharger was allowed to choose one of the three bottles
and was free to have the sample analyzed.
After the sampling had been done, the Pollution Inspector would take
notes of the incident. The farmer would be questioned, although he or
she had a legal right to remain silent. The Pollution Inspector also had
a camera to collect photographic evidence. They would take photographs
wherever they could, as this "helps magistrates to see" the impact of the
pollution.
After a major pollution incident, a letter would be sent out advising the
farmer that he or she might be prosecuted and asking for any comments
on the incident. Pollution Inspectors prepared a case to be considered for
prosecution from the analysis of the formal samples, the defendant's state￾ment, details of the impact of the incident, any consent conditions and
accounts of any previous problems the farmer had experienced. All this
information was given to the area and regional supervisors, who made the
final decision on whether the case should be prosecuted, in liaison with
the region's Legal Department.
From this point on, the Pollution Inspector relinquished any control
over the case. The NRA solicitor would take it through the court. If a
defendant pleaded guilty, the solicitor would put forward all the evidence
and present the case; Pollution Inspectors were needed only to give evid￾ence if a case was contested. Most felt at a disadvantage in the legalistic
atmosphere of the court. The validity of the evidence they had collected
might be questioned and their sworn statements challenged. They felt that
their expertise was not sufficiently respected by magistrates and defence
lawyers; nor were they conceded the authority of their office as, say, a
116Conclusions
police officer would have been. As one Inspector noted, "in theory, I
should be able to stand up in court and say I saw an illegal discharge", but
in practice a Pollution Inspector's statement would not on its own have
secured a conviction. Very few cases would be taken without formal sam￾ples, and those that were invariably had plenty of other evidence, such as
quantities of dead fish. Legal action was thus often seen by Pollution
Inspectors as an eclipse of their professional authority, for a number of
reasons: because it signalled a failure of their preferred compliance strat￾egy; because the case in question had been taken out of their hands; and
because they felt their professionalism was not significantly recognized in
the courts.
Conclusions
Charged to tackle farm pollution, NRA Pollution Inspectors had been armed
with new legal powers and the moral authority of the environmental move￾ment. However, most of their work with farmers was not the enforcement
of pollution law but involved investigation of the occurrence and causes
of farm pollution and efforts to persuade farmers to remedy the situation.
Prosecution was treated as a last resort.
It was not that Pollution Inspectors did not regard pollution as wrong.
On the contrary, more than any other group, they appreciated the threat
posed by farm wastes to the vitality and utility of the water environment.
But they found themselves charged with responsibilities, which meant that
they had to work with the farming community. Without the cooperation
of the large majority of farmers, their task would have been impossible. To
bring to justice each and every farmer who had caused pollution of any
significance would have meant prosecuting a considerable proportion of
Devon's dairy farmers. But that would hardly have generated the commit￾ment and the diligence - the required investment in waste facilities and
the due attention to the management and disposal of waste - needed to
address the problem. For, by their own inertia or indifference, farmers
individually or collectively could exercise a sanction on regulatory author￾ity imposed upon them. The potential sanction, moreover, was not only
the negative one of inaction, but might also encompass, for the unscru￾pulous or bloody-minded farmer, the "midnight valve phenomenon". The
impossibility of being omnipresent meant that Pollution Inspectors had to
117The Pollution Inspectors' accounts of farm pollution
rely on the cooperation of farmers and this implied that they had to act
in a way that the farming community regarded as reasonable. The law as
a weapon of environmental morality thus proved to be a blunt instrument
for regulators, who had to mobilize the sense of responsibility and of
censure (i.e. the morality) of the farming community. Conversely, farmers
needed to know how to manage farm effluents and, to be willing to take
responsibility for this, Pollution Inspectors responded mainly by adopting
another role, equally imbued with environmental morality - that of edu￾cators. We now turn to see how farmers understood the pollution issue
and constructed their sense of responsibility for the problem.
Notes
1. Major, or "Category 1", pollution incidents are defined as involving one or
more of the following: (a) potential or actual persistent effect on water quality
or aquatic life; (b) closure of potable water, industrial or agricultural abstraction
necessary; (c) extensive fish kill; (d) excessive breaches of consent conditions;
(e) extensive remedial measures necessary; (f) major effect on amenity value
(NRA 1994: 62).
2. Significant incidents are defined as those incidents that involve one or more of
the following: (a) notification to abstractors necessary; (b) significant fish kill;
(c) measurable effect on invertebrate life; (d) water unfit for stock; (e) bed of
watercourse contaminated; (f) amenity value to the public, owners or users
reduced by odour or appearance.
3. Most Pollution Inspectors were men.
4. For 1993, for example, agriculture was the source of 11 per cent of all pollution
incidents, yet attracted 34 per cent of NRA prosecutions (NRA 1994).
118CHAPTER SIX
The dairy farmers' accounts of
farm pollution
Introduction
What did pollution regulation imply for the farmers? Pollution Inspectors
were trying to persuade, cajole and, in a few cases, force them to man￾age their wastes in a way that would not cause pollution. To do so, the
Inspectors had to engage with the farming community. But the farmers
were not simply passive receivers of their exhortations and injunctions, and
in any case had other preoccupations than water pollution. Indeed, just
as the Inspectors sought to enrol the farmers to their view of pollution, so
farmers in turn sought to enlist the Inspectors and others into an under￾standing of the difficulties and constraints they faced. During our detailed
interviews with dairy farmers in Devon, many were keen to explain why
the pollution issue was causing them such difficulties and to point to what
they saw as the injustices of the recently introduced regulatory arrange￾ments. This chapter draws on those interviews plus our participant observa￾tion of the interactions between farmers and Pollution Inspectors to provide
the dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution.
Dairy farmers are not, first and foremost, managers of animal wastes but
producers of milk. In the period since the introduction of milk quotas, their
strategies had altered from an expansionist and production-maximizing
approach, to one of producing a fixed quantity of milk at least cost. How￾ever, stricter regulations coupled with high profile pollution prevention
campaigns and the universal condemnation of pollution incidents meant
that, increasingly, the "knack" of dairy farming was to produce near to the
permitted quantity of milk, still at least cost, but at the same time ensur￾ing that farm effluents did not get into watercourses. Waste management
119The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
practices had to be fitted into an already busy schedule. We begin, there￾fore, with a description of the working routines of a dairy farm.
Life on a dairy farm
Although most farmers would be keen to stress that farming is as much
a way of life as it is a business, the claim has particular pertinence for dairy
farmers. Dairy farming requires that livestock be milked, usually twice a
day, as well as bedded, fed and watered on a daily basis. It is this exacting
routine with its close involvement with livestock that sets dairy farming
apart in terms of the particular demands it places on family based labour.
For dairy farmers the day starts early. The cows are milked before
breakfast, usually by the farmer but often with the help of other family mem￾bers. The animals are familiar with the twice daily routine and wait, usually
in the yard outside, and often in a recognizable pecking order, to enter the
parlour. Once all the cows in milk have passed through, the floor and the
milking equipment are thoroughly washed to comply with hygiene regu￾lations. The washings from the parlour contain a mixture of cattle excreta,
urine, spilled milk and the chemicals used to sterilize milking equipment.
Milking completed, the farm family and any hired hands share break￾fast together in the farmhouse kitchen, typically between nine and half￾past nine. The breakfast table provides the setting where the rest of the
day's work can be discussed. The workload for the remainder of the morn￾ing will vary according to the time of the year, but among the routine
tasks are the feeding, watering and bedding of the stock. In addition,
there are other cattle to be looked after besides those to be milked, includ￾ing young stock and replacement heifers.
The cubicles where the cattle are kept over the winter are cleaned daily,
with the slurry either being washed or pushed out of each concrete-floored
cubicle into a central channel. Waste management practices depend on
the storage facilities on the farm (see Ch. 2). The slurry may either be
pushed directly into a storage pit, pumped into a tank or pushed by a
tractor with a blade up a ramp and into a "weeping wall" store. Some
dairy farmers, most usually those with small herds, have no storage facilit￾ies for slurry and so push it up a ramp, and straight into a muck spreader.
Farmers whose animals are still kept in loose housing with straw bed￾ding over the winter are able to clear the waste from their buildings far
less frequently. Each day they simply add more straw and so the manure
120Life on a dairy farm
can be left, sometimes for up to several months, without being cleared out.
A small minority of farms (just two in our sample of sixty, for example)
have no livestock housing at all. The cows remain outside and have to be
brought in from the fields twice daily all year round. Although such farms
may be considered technologically backward, the problems they face in
waste management are of a much lower order and are restricted to the
washings from the farmyard and the parlour.
During the morning the milk lorry will call at the farm as part of its
twice daily round to collect the milk. The farmer need not be present as
the lorry driver will know how the system works. Other callers may include
the vet, ADAS officials and sales representatives from agricultural merchants.
Once the stock has been dealt with the farmer may turn to fieldwork.
If the weather is fair there may be the chance to spread some slurry, or
perhaps to apply some nitrogen fertilizer, or even to spray some herbicide,
to keep down nettles and other weeds.
Lunch is usually between one and two o'clock and this provides another
opportunity to chat and catch up with the progress made on the day's
tasks. Farm machinery or milking equipment may be in need of repair;
buildings and field boundaries also require careful maintenance on live￾stock farms; and, of course, there is the health of the animals themselves.
A trip to the local market town may be required to fetch drugs from the
vet, or machinery parts or building materials.
Waste facilities also require periodic maintenance. Settlement tanks and
dirty water pumps have to be "de-clogged" of solid matter and gulleys and
channels in the farmyard have to be kept free from obstruction. The Code
of good agricultural practice for the protection of water urges that slurry stores
be checked regularly and once a year be completely emptied and cleaned
down to check for any signs of corrosion or damage (MAFF/WOAD 1991: 19).
The Code also suggests that dirty water sprinklers should be moved regu￾larly, surrounding land should be checked for signs of runoff or ponding,
and tanks and lagoons should be examined frequently (ibid.: 32).
Any such tasks, along with any work in the fields, must be finished by
mid-afternoon, because milking begins again between four and five o'clock.
Depending on the time of year, there may then be a couple of hours of day￾light left for some field work before the final rounds, when the farmer will
ensure that all the farm animals are fed, watered and secure for the night.
Events in the farming year place added requirements on farm labour.
Dairy farmers will often want to be present when cows are calving,
particularly if there have been any problems during pregnancy. There is
121The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
also the management of cattle breeding programmes, with cows increas￾ingly being artificially inseminated, usually with the help of outside expertise.
In the summer months, when most cows are out in the fields, the daily
chores around the farmyard and buildings may be reduced but the work￾load does not let up. The finer weather means farmers are able to get to
grips with building improvements and the maintenance of the house, the
yard, hedges and fences. Summertime also brings silage-making which is
by far the busiest period in the dairy farmers' year (see Ch. 2). If the farm
has a sheep flock, then lambing in the early spring is also a very hectic
time; and for those farms with arable land, the harvesting of cereal crops
in the late summer is an added demand.
The dairy farm can be viewed as a complex unit with family labour at
the centre of a sophisticated technological system dealing with the daily
pressures and constraints posed by the ceaseless round of milking, feed￾ing and mucking out. Technological and management choices tend to be
driven by the specific labour demands on the farm family in the context
of this routine.
It will probably be necessary to draw on hired labour at some time
during the season, such as for help with silage-making, or in the shape of
a relief-milker to allow a holiday to be taken. (Many dairy farmers, though,
do not regularly take a holiday). Hired labour may also be taken on, per￾haps on a part-time, casual or contract basis, during particular stages of the
family cycle, for example, if young children need to be looked after, or if
a farmer approaching old age finds the farm work too physically exacting.
Equally, the shifting hopes and plans for the business - reflected in
switches in farming enterprises and significant investment decisions - are
inextricably linked to changing family circumstances and expectations. If
the farm is being run with a succession to the next generation planned for,
the farmer is more likely to build up the most profitable enterprises, will
perhaps be more prepared to invest in new technology and buildings to
make the farm easier to run, and will tend to manage and develop the
business with a longer time-span than his or her own working life in
mind. For example, plans to expand the dairy herd and reduce the sheep
flock may result from the conjunction of changing trends in relative profit￾ability and the need to create extra work to support a son or daughter
entering the business. This can be contrasted with a middle-aged farmer
who has no successor, who may be winding down the business by selling
off or leasing milk quota and reverting to a less demanding beef or sheep
enterprise, in order to reduce the workload in older age.
122Life on a dairy farm
Of course, these daily and medium-term rhythms of the farm are sub￾ject to external factors too. As we saw in Chapter 2, dairy farmers operate
in highly regulated markets and the changing political and economic rela￾tions of production pose significant constraints and pressures on their busi￾nesses. The regulated nature of the agricultural economy leaves farmers
vulnerable to sudden policy changes. Since the introduction of milk quotas,
farmers have come to feel that they live and work in a capricious world,
subject to shifts in the political and economic environment as erratic as
the weather. Many, indeed, bracket together the natural and political
happenings beyond their control which disrupt their plans. Among the
farmers we studied, it was repeated cuts in milk quotas and the spread of
BSE that were proving the biggest shocks to be accommodated, although
the establishment of the National Rivers Authority and the tightening of
farm pollution regulations were also characterized by many farmers in
similar terms. Indeed, a large national survey of dairy producers carried
out in March 1991 found that pollution control regulation was the issue
of most widespread concern (Centre for Agri-food Business Studies 1991).
Seventy-five per cent of dairy farmers classed it as one of the "main prob￾lems" facing the industry (see Table 6.1).
Table 6.1 The Main Problems Facing British Milk Producers
Issue Percentage of surveyed farmers
considering the issue to be a
main problem they face
Pollution control regulations 75
Break up of the Milk Marketing Board 67
Milk prices 55
Changes to the quota system 49
The dominance of a few large dairy companies 44
The GATT negotiations 43
Declining consumption of liquid milk 41
Greater competition from Europe after 1992 37
High interest rates 33
Increased milk sales through supermarkets 15
Declining consumption of butter 12
BSE 9
Others 8
High feed costs 5
Source: Centre for Agri-food Business Studies (1991).
123The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
By and large, the Devon farmers had come to accept that they should
do something about farm pollution. Equally, though, they did not accept
personal guilt for causing it. In part, this was because they did not think
of themselves as necessarily to blame, but also because most did not con￾sider farm pollution as a morally charged issue of right and wrong. In
improving their waste management procedures and facilities they did not
see themselves atoning for past misdeeds but as responding to external
pressures on farming arising from changes in what society regarded as
acceptable. They had a self-image of themselves as responsible people who
respected the countryside.
Farmers were, therefore, offended by implications that they did not care
for the countryside. They had an intimacy with it that others did not, and
so criticism from "townies" was particularly unpalatable. After all, farmers'
livelihoods depended upon an acute understanding of the natural and
biological processes involved in the management of their land and stock.
External interference in these matters challenged their self-esteem as well
as their farming strategies. For many farmers, therefore, there was an under￾lying defensiveness and resentment in their response to pollution regulation.
Of course, the farmers saw the land and stock primarily as productive
resources but most took a long-term view of their management of these
assets, and most were not insensitive to the way their farming impinged
on the countryside more generally. As one older farmer commented plaint￾ively "farmers like the environment, otherwise they wouldn't be here". It
was their efforts and those of their forebears in pursuing an honest living
that had generated the pastoral countryside that modern society so valued.
As another farmer put it, "it was farmers that made the countryside."
Farmers readily conceded that certain modern farming practices might
be detrimental, but pointed out that they had been encouraged to adopt
these by a government and a society wanting cheap and abundant food
efficiently produced. There might, indeed, have been trade-offs between
efficient food production and environmental conservation but the fact
that they as farmers were being blamed for the consequences added further
to their sense of being victims of an increasingly fickle public.
In the case of farm pollution, the public pressures on farmers were
personified in the NRA'S Pollution Inspectors. Inevitably, they were a focus
for much of the farmers' resentment. Most farmers would have preferred
to avoid their attention and some were decidedly brusque where encoun￾ters did occur. However, in a world in which it was felt that farming was
widely misunderstood, Pollution Inspectors were not just another species
124The environment and the ethos of production
of meddlesome bureaucrats but were influential officials who were obliged
to enter the farmers' realm. Most farmers in their dealings with Pollution
Inspectors sought to project themselves, just as they saw themselves, as
responsible producers and countrymen. At the same time they took the
opportunity to convey the practical and commercial pressures on contem￾porary dairy farming, and thereby to recruit regulatory officials to an
understanding of the constraints faced in altering farming practices or
investing in new equipment.
The environment and the ethos of production
Even though in an era of high-tech agriculture, the farmers would still
express to us the need to conserve their farms' productive base. They liked
their farms to be in "good condition", and most held that an important
goal in their farming lives was to "improve the farm" so that it could be
passed on "in a better condition". By this they meant that the accounts
should be sound and that the equipment in the milking parlour, the
tractors and field machinery, the farm buildings and perhaps the pollution
control equipment should all be in good working order. But besides the
technology and the layout of the farmyard, which helped to make the farm
easier to manage (a crucial consideration given the dependence of most
dairy farms on family labour), conservation of the farm's land resources
remained a crucial element in the farmers' understandings of their farm's
"condition".
They expressed some of these notions in terms of their soil, or land
being "in good heart". This concern had two strands. First, field bound￾aries had to be properly managed and kept in good repair, thus ensuring
not only that hedges, ditches and fences were secure to the stock but also
that the farm looked tidy and well kept. The second strand involved the
maintenance of soil fertility, and arose primarily from dairy farmers' con￾cern for their productive asset, not only for their own use but for their
descendants' also. This was often expressed in terms of responsibility to
the land, as in remarks to the effect that a good farmer "should not take
more out of the soil than gets put back in".
This utilitarian notion of resource conservation, set within a logic of
farm improvement, was reinforced within the farming community. The
farmers were asked if they made comparisons between themselves and
125The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
their neighbours, and if so, on what basis. For the four-fifths who did so,
the bases of comparison fell into three main categories. The first group
(comprising 30 per cent of these farmers) referred to notions of good
farming, the health of stock and tidiness of fields. One farmer explained
[I look at] "not how much money they make, but how they're keeping the
farm - what sort of husbandry". A second group (30 per cent) made
comparisons mainly based on the timing and methods employed on the
farm, such as who was cutting silage first and what types of machinery
were used. The third and largest group (40 per cent) made comparisons
in terms of yields. A typical response in this group came from a farmer
who said, "I always try to do that little bit better, to get a better yield".
Overall, therefore, production-maximizing values continued to have strong
currency among the farmers, although notions of good husbandry were
also important.
How, if at all, did these resource conservation preoccupations of farmers
articulate with the environmental concerns of the non-farming public?
By the early 1990s, farmers generally had become sensitized to environ￾mental issues. Eighty-three per cent of those interviewed acknowledged that
agricultural practices could have an adverse effect on the environment. In
all of our discussions with them, however, only two expressed misgivings
that farm pollution might damage the farm's productive base. For the rest,
environmental concerns lay outside the logic of farm improvement.
For both dissenters, their misgivings centred on low rate irrigators used
to spread dirty water on land which they feared was killing worms essen￾tial to the health of the soil. One of the two was a young farmer running
an 80 cow dairy herd on a 100 ha mixed farm with a loose housing and
farmyard manure system. He expressed a distincdy "non-productivist"
attitude to farming: "I'd like to think that I farm 80 cows well rather than
increasing for the sake of it. I get more pleasure from doing it right rather
than getting bigger. Farming has to be a pleasure to me first. I can't do
anything for profit alone". He had a clear sense of what passing on his
farm "in a better condition" would mean, namely "without any damage
and still in a healthy and farmable state, leaving nothing that the next
generation would have to work hard at to put right". In this regard, he
saw the current fashion for dirty water systems as not only damaging to
the land but also as an ineffectual solution to farm pollution. "They just
pump the effluent around the farm, onto the land and it gets back into
the drains". He had considered moving over to a cubicles and slurry-based
system but the potential slurry problems had dissuaded him.Farmers and farm pollution
To this farmer, it was quite conceivable that modern agricultural prac￾tices were damaging farming's productive base. The view of the vast
majority, however, was expressed by one who remonstrated that "No farmer
is going to do something that is going to ruin his own property and his
own livelihood".
Farmers and farm pollution
The vast majority of farmers thus did not accept farm pollution as an
indictment of their farming systems. This did not mean that they denied
the need to improve matters, but in taking action they saw themselves
essentially having to respond to external pressures, arising from increased
public sensitivities.
Two thirds of them acknowledged that environmental concerns had
begun to influence the way that they farmed. Responses ranged from
using environmental criteria to decide on a whole production system at
one extreme, to "feeling a bit guilty when I use nitrogen and sprays" at
the other; with over one third of the sample (unprompted) citing the more
careful handling of effluents to minimize pollution risks. One of the larger
farmers explained how environmental considerations had been an import￾ant factor in reorganizing the cropping system: "We now put down autumn
cover crops and have stopped applying nitrogen in the autumn. Also, we
are much more aware of how to apply slurry. We have done some trials
with injecting slurry". Practices once widespread, such as letting slurry run
straight into streams or ditches, were now frowned upon.
Some farmers clearly felt coerced to act. A farmer in his early 40s
with a medium size holding remarked: "You hear of people in the village
being prosecuted, and more people than ever are putting in dirty water
systems now. You hear that the NRA are hot after everyone who's pol￾luting". One heavily indebted farmer had recendy spent £6000 that he
could ill afford installing pits and a pump to handle dirty water from his
farmyard: "The NRA visited us several times last year", he explained, add￾ing "they were rather persistent". Others, however, saw the need "to put
agriculture's house in order"; for them it was a question of farmers' social
responsibility, of farming's public image. For example, when asked what
he thought about a strict prosecution policy for farm pollution incidents,
127The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
Figure 6.1 A mucky farmyard. (Photograph courtesy of the
Water Services Association)
128Farmers and farm pollution
one farmer said "there's nothing wrong with it. The pollution has got to
be stopped". Whether out of a sense of being coerced or one of social
responsibility, however, farmers felt they were responding to outside con￾cerns. There was a paradox here in the very meaning of farm pollution to
the farmers which reinforced the sense among them of being subject to
external and obtuse pressures. They spent their working days surrounded
by animal wastes but difficulties only arose when someone else was affected
and complained.
Indeed, farm wastes were a ubiquitous fact of life for them. More
often than not, the farmyard, which usually adjoined the farmhouse,
was splattered or caked with manure. Each morning as they began the
working day, farmers stepped into a world of muck (Figs. 6.1 and 6.2).
It caked their boots, dirtied their clothes and stained their hands. Perpetu￾ally, slurry had to be cleaned from buildings, pumped into tanks, spread
on land, scraped from boots and washed from clothes. Undeniably, it
was farmers, as well as their workers and their families, that were most
exposed to farm wastes, their unpleasantness and risks, to the point of
extreme familiarity. The dangers were not to be underestimated: noxious
fumes could collect in effluent handling equipment, and there had been
cases of farmers being killed while trying to break up the solid crust that
often formed on top of stored slurry. But no-one counted any of this as
pollution, certainly not the farmers. For the farmer the problem was not
so much one of causing pollution as being detected doing so. Although
they constantly experienced farm wastes, for many of them their initial
experience of farm pollution was a visit from the NRA or a complaint from
a neighbour.
The farmers' very familiarity with farm wastes inclined some of them
to question the significance of farm pollution as a threat to the environ￾ment. Four-fifths of the surveyed farmers felt that it was a less serious
threat than pollution from industry. A few of the farmers elaborated on
this point drawing on notions of farm waste as natural substances. One
said "I feel that chemical waste [from industry] is much more serious
compared to farm waste. I know it kills fish, but I can't see what's wrong
with brown water - it's natural. I know silage effluent is bad, but it's only
like juice from grass. It's not like liquid from industry". Another farmer
commented "Industrial pollution can be a lot worse - they're using chem￾icals. Our pollution is a natural pollution. Animals have been making it for
years. Industrial pollution is modern pollution. It's not like country smells
and that". While these farmers emphasized the biological nature of farm
129The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
Figure 6.2 Slurry being stored in the corner of a farmyarxl before being
spread on land. (Photograph courtesy of Louise Morriss)
130Farmers and farm pollution
waste, others asserted the naturalness of farm pollution through its met￾eorological origins. A number, for example, pointed out that, as pollution
was most likely during heavy rain, any runoff or spillages would be rapidly
diluted and washed away by rivers in spate. The implication was that any
ill effects were essentially transient. One young farmer (in his early 30s)
running 70 milking cows on 60 ha explained: "I try to stop pollution in
every way. I think most people would. But it's impossible when there's
really heavy rain and it washes off the yard. I don't think it does too much
damage because it's during flooding conditions and it gets diluted and
washed away."
For most farmers, the disjuncture between their own quotidian experi￾ence of farm waste and pollution regulation as an unexpected visitation
firmly placed the public phenomenon of polluuon into the category of
external capricious event. In their own eyes, the fact that the immediate
cause of the problem might have been a sudden downpour, prolonged rain
or equipment failure cast them as hapless victims rather than perpetrators.
Repeatedly farmers referred to such incidents as "acts of God". Much farm
pollution was portrayed in this way as accidental; therefore the farmers
involved were not necessarily culpable. In a telling turn of phrase, one
young tenant farmer with 60 dairy cows protested: "Accidents can hap￾pen. If a slurry store breaks and the farmer can prove it was an accident,
then it's wrong that his name gets dragged through the mud". This inver￾sion of the idiom of environmental morality neatly captured the indigna￾tion of many farmers lest pollution besmirch their good character.
While the immediate causes (and consequences) of farm pollution might
be presented as natural ones, the public and official responses were under￾stood to arise from changes in society. This was how farmers made sense
of the fact that they had always had to dispose of farm waste but it was
only in recent years that they had been challenged about the way they did
it and the consequences. Basically, public attitudes were seen to have
changed, and the climate of opinion was now perceived to be much less
sympathetic towards farming and less tolerant of the problems farmers
faced.
Of course, farmers recognized that modern farming methods such as
slurry systems and silage-making involved a higher risk of pollution, but
most of them in the survey had adopted these methods several years
earlier. They had done so, moreover, with official blessing. It was therefore
unfair, they felt, for them to be blamed. "It all boils down to the pressure
to farm intensively", one farmer reasoned. Another in his early 60s, with
131The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
a 50 cow milking herd on 32 ha explained: "It was the move away from
mixed farming. We have been taught to specialize and that means slurry
problems. Mixed farms didn't have waste problems". A third of the farmers
explicitly blamed "the system" in this way.
If farm pollution was an unfortunate consequence of farming methods
that the Ministry of Agriculture itself had promoted, then the wider com￾munity with its demands for plentiful, hygienic and inexpensive milk,
must shoulder some of the blame. Did not the 50 per cent grant from
public funds towards pollution facilities acknowledge that complicity? For
many of the farmers interviewed, this was the real source of injustice -
that in finding the finance for the other 50 per cent themselves they were
being expected to pay out considerable sums to comply with a change of
policy. As one farmer said indignandy, "If they're going to enforce some￾thing like that, they should cough up the money".
Farmers did not deny all personal responsibility for farm pollution.
When asked who specifically was to blame, two-thirds of them spoke of
a small number of "bad farmers" or "cowboys" who deliberately emptied
their wastes into rivers. This group was the counterpoint to the majority.
Their wantonness could be contrasted with the responsibility of the major￾ity. Their culpability underlined the misfortune of those caught "accid￾entally polluting". Such comparisons were frequently made when farmers
were asked their opinion on prosecuting cases of farm pollution. With
regard to "the cowboys" there was general condemnation and an attitude
of "they get what they deserve". They should be prosecuted not least
because they tarnished agriculture's good name. One farmer in his late 50s
running a very small farm of 17 dairy cows on 17 ha of land explained
how a stricter prosecution policy was the best means of dealing with these
"bad farmers": "It would stop a lot of them. It would stop the 'don't care'
attitude of those who let stuff get into the water".
There was, however, wariness or opposition towards prosecution in
other cases and the distinctions drawn revealed that for most farmers
culpability was wholly to do with intentionality, with deliberate acts of
wickedness. The tenant farmer quoted earlier protesting the injustice if a
farmer's name got "dragged through the mud" for accidentally causing
pollution added equally forcefully: "If stuff gets tipped in the river on
purpose then they should lock him up because that's not on". Another,
older farmer running a 90 cow milking herd stressed that "the law's the
law, but there's always that odd occasion when there is an accident like
732Farmers and farm pollution
an unforeseeable burst. Even with slurry stores, they have a life span. You
get these natural accidents. They happen". One farmer drew the distinc￾tion this way: "It's difficult to regulate strictly against accidents, when
they're not intentional. If guidelines are clear and strict and then are
blatantly broken, then a strict prosecution policy would be OK. But it's a
bit like the difference between consciously speeding in a car or just driv￾ing along unaware with a dodgy brakelight". Concern was also expressed
that, even though farmers might have done all that was expected of them
in improving their facilities, "accidents" could still happen. Investment
in equipment could never provide "a hundred per cent guarantee against
pollution".
A third of the farmers argued more generally that prosecution was the
wrong approach to an already beleaguered sector. One such farmer, in his
60s and running a fairly large farm with about 120 dairy cows, com￾plained, "It will drive some farmers out of business. There won't be no
more farmers . . . Agriculture is being butchered in this country. We've
increased efficiency and have done what we have been told to do, and now
it's almost as if people don't want a farming industry". Another farmer,
a local magistrate, explained what he saw as the limit of a strict prosecu￾tion policy: "I know people who have been prosecuted ... I don't think
it's the best way. You're taking money off the farm for the fine. That
money would be better spent on putting in the [pollution control] equip￾ment. It's better to keep it out of the courts, to talk to people rather than
prosecute."
In summary, although there was greater sensitivity to environmental
issues among the farming community, environmental concerns were still
generally seen by the farmers very much as external pressures on the
farming sector. In the main, the changes in farming practices that were
occurring were not arising as a result of farmers acknowledging some past
"errors" of their ways, nor from fears that environmentally harmful agri￾cultural practices might actually damage the productive base of their own
farms. Rather, farmers were acquiescing in environmental pressures, either
because they felt coerced to do so, or from a sense of social responsibility.
Linked to this were farmers' perceptions of where the responsibility lay for
farm pollution. Deliberate discharges of effluents into water should be
strictly dealt with, but for other types of pollution incident, farmers stressed
either their accidental nature or the fact that farming practices and tech￾nologies had been strongly shaped by government policies.
133The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
Pollution control and the logic of farm improvement
In most of their dealings with farmers, Pollution Inspectors were trying to
get them to alter or improve their waste management. But for the farmers,
as we described above, waste management was very much a secondary
chore to the serious business of efficiently producing the right quantity
of wholesome milk. This primary purpose demanded close attention to
animal husbandry, including the health of the cows, the management of
their lactation cycle and their feeding to ensure sustained milk yields. One
aspect of waste management was seen as crucial to milk production and
that was dairy hygiene. It was vital that the farm's milk should be fit and
wholesome and so the parlour had to be kept scrupulously clean. Effective
application of slurry could also reduce the need to buy in fertilizer but the
slurry was very variable in its fertilization values. Otherwise, sound waste
management contributed little, if anything, to the financial efficiency of
the business, but was a charge upon it in terms of time and money. It
would therefore not normally have been a major priority for farmers in
planning improvements to their farms.
For most farmers, indeed, straight investment in pollution control tended
to be seen as "dead money". A slurry store or a dirty water system con￾tributed nothing to the commercial viability of the holding. As one dairy
farmer complained in the Farmers Weekly (12 April 1991, page 70), "The
money spent on pollution control does not generate one penny of extra
income and the rules are being tightened at a time when incomes from dairy￾ing are falling and there is great uncertainty about quota levels". Moreover,
farmers were unable to pass on the costs of improved pollution control to
their customers through higher prices. As a Country Landowners' Associ￾ation spokesman explained, farmers "can't write to the Milk Marketing
Board and ask for so much more per litre of milk to cover the cost of anti￾pollution measures taken" (Farmers Weekly, 12 April 1991, page 70).
In these circumstances, the 50 per cent grant then available at the time
of our survey for pollution control facilities was considered by farmers to
be both necessary and justified. However, many farmers felt that the level
of grant should be higher. One older farmer explained, "Where do you get
the money from when there is no return on the investment. Even if you
get a 50 per cent grant, you've still got to find the money first". Another
farmer complained that, three months earlier, he had spent £27 000 on
new pollution control facilities which had been approved for grant aid but
134Pollution control and the logic of farm improvement
the cheque had not yet arrived and in the meantime he was having to pay
the interest on the loan himself at a time of high interest rates.
These financial complexities and costs meant that pollution control
investments needed to be fitted into the farmer's investment horizons.
Factors such as the availability of spare capital and the changing long and
medium-term plans for the farm would often come into play in deciding
what steps to take to install new equipment and address pollution risks.
For those farmers approaching retirement age and with no plans for pass￾ing the business on to the next generation, there was often a marked
reluctance to spend thousands of pounds on equipment which would
yield little in terms of the improved profitability of the business.
For others, however, investing in pollution control could be justified
within the terms of their own logic of farm improvement and often in
these cases the eligibility for 50 per cent grant aid was seen in a different
light, as a useful incentive. Improved effluent storage and pollution con￾trol facilities might help make the farm easier to run, enhance its cap￾ital value or facilitate future expansion. As an article in Farmers Weekly
(17 January 1992, page 51) stressed, on many farms "the installation of
a grant-aided new or improved slurry store together with a dirty water
disposal scheme will be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to improve work￾ing conditions around the dairy unit, reduce the labour required for slurry
handling, and at the same time increase the value of the farm" (Fig. 6.3).
Several of the farmers we interviewed explained how new slurry stores
or dirty water systems were making their lives easier. For example, a new
store would mean that slurry would not have to be routinely spread on
land every day, thus freeing up time for other tasks about the farm.
Storing slurry and choosing when to spread also made for better use of its
nutrient value. Finally, new facilities might mean that it was easier for a
farmer to handle additional stock, perhaps after leasing or buying extra
milk quota. Several farmers had taken the opportunity provided by the
grant not only to improve their waste handling and storage facilities but
also to enlarge them, to allow for a possible expansion of the dairy enter￾prise at a later stage. Strictly speaking, this broke EC rules against the use
of grant aid to expand farm productive capacity.
Some farmers would have liked the grant to cover a greater range of
items. Expenditure on the roofing of yards, for example, was not eligible.
In many cases, roofing would have provided an effective means of improv￾ing pollution control because rainwater could be kept separate from farm
735The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
Figure 6.3 A large concrete-walled slurry pit under construction.
(Photograph courtesy of Graham Cox)
effluents greatly reducing their volume and so increasing the length of
time they could be stored before spreading. Several farmers expressed
frustration that they could not obtain grant aid for what they saw as a
sensible solution to the pollution problems on their particular farms.
Most of the changes in farm effluent management remained within a
dominant food production logic. Some formers, indeed, admitted that
"more careful" use of slurry or nitrogen was because financial pressures
were forcing them to be more efficient with inputs, rather than from any
feelings of conscience towards the environment. More generally, quotas
and subsidy cuts aimed at curbing over-production were seen to favour the
boosting of margins through increased efficiency of input use rather than
the pursuit of maximum yields.
Farmers and the NRA
Most farmers felt that they were doing their best to manage farm wastes
and prevent effluents from contaminating watercourses, often in difficult
circumstances. Nevertheless, even on a well run farm, pollution might
happen and bring with it the unwanted attention of the NRA. To many
136Farmers and the NRA
Figure 6.4 An NRA Pollution Inspector discussing a new waste storage
system with a farmer. (Photograph courtesy of the Environment Agency)
farmers, the NRA'S Inspectors were pollution personified. In particular,
they seemed to embody that shift whereby society had come to value a
pristine water environment over and above its vital food supplies. As one
farmer remarked of the NRA: "They're tossers. They're not practical peo￾ple. I don't think they understand. They go in with their water samples
and they want everything to be perfect. They don't give a damn about
what goes on on farms or what the implications are for farmers."
Of course, no farmer would want to be caught polluting. But in a
capricious world in which farming was subject to distant and anonymous
decisions, Pollution Inspectors were not regarded simply as obtrusive and
overwheening officials. However unwelcome their message, they were not
faceless officialdom. They entered the farm and attempted to strike up a
relationship with the farmer (Fig. 6.4). Their very presence, which was so
disquieting or threatening to some farmers, provided an opportunity to
others to draw the Pollution Inspectors into their world, to explain the
constraints under which farmers had to work and to implicate the Pollu￾tion Inspectors in the decisions and actions that needed to be taken. In
short, the Pollution Inspectors were a crucial connection to that wider
society in which farming was so misunderstood.
Undoubtedly, though, there were a number of farmers who hoped that
by "keeping your head down0
 they would avoid the attention of the NRA.
Of the 60 dairy farmers surveyed in Devon in 1991, 25 had not upgraded
their pollution control facilities since 1981. Six of these had plans to
improve pollution control and were in the process of seeking advice or
applying for grants, leaving 19 farmers who had made no changes and had
no plans to do so. While a few of them were running lower risk, non￾slurry systems, some of the others admitted they were "lying low".
137The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
One such farming couple, who were in their 40s with two teenage
children, had taken over the tenancy of a 55 ha farm from his father in
the early 1980s. They had subsequently expanded the dairy herd from 40
to 50 cows but the waste facilities remained primitive. The cows were
housed in cubicles but there was no storage for the slurry which had to
be spread daily. Likewise, none of the dirty water was collected, despite
the fact that the farm was close to a river. The farmer's wife mused,
 tcl
suppose we must be polluting, and our dirty water probably does go into
the stream, but it's a tributary. It's not as if it's the main river itself. Most
of the neighbouring farms in the valley had been visited by the NRA, but
not yet theirs. The couple talked with evident dread of the possibility of
an impending visit, commenting "Our days are numbered". They were
very worried about what types of spending might be called for in harsh
economic times — the farm's viability had tailed off sharply in the previ￾ous two years. They joked that their strategy would be to "hide behind the
sofa" when the NRA finally called, although the wife did concede that it
would be a relief to find out what changes might be required and to put
their minds at rest. It had not occurred to them to approach the NRA
themselves.
The vast majority of farms had received visits from NRA officials. These
visits fell into three categories. First were the NRA-initiated "farm cam￾paign" visits to all farms in a locality to check on waste management
facilities and practices and to discuss any potential problems and possible
improvements to reduce the risk of pollution. Second were the farmer￾initiated visits where the NRA would be called onto the farm to discuss
plans for the installation of new pollution control facilities or to secure
NRA approval as part of the farmer's application for Farm and Conserva￾tion Grant Scheme funding. Finally, there were those visits by the NRA in
response to a pollution incident. The pollution might have been reported
by a member of the public, or by the farmer, or might have been spotted
by an NRA Inspector.
Farmers' accounts of their encounters with the NRA varied according
to the circumstances. We have supplemented their accounts here with
evidence drawn from our participant observation of Pollution Inspectors'
farm visits. A complaint of several farmers was that NRA officials had been
brusque and unhelpful in investigating pollution incidents. Accounts of
what had happened were often prefaced with details of how a pump or
valve or a containing wall had spectacularly failed and how the farmer was
struggling to stem the problem when the NRA official arrived on the scene.
138Farmers and the NRA
One farmer's dirty water pump had failed in heavy rain leading effluent
to spill over into the stream that ran alongside the farmyard. The farmer
was trying to pump out the dirty water from the area near the stream
when the "despicable little man" from the NRA arrived: "The first thing he
said when he arrived was 'anything you say may be taken down and used
in evidence'. He took up half the day taking samples from the river. This
approach gets farmers' backs up".
Farmers contrasted the disposition of NRA staff investigating an incident
with the approach adopted on other occasions. For a number of the farmers,
the pollution incident had involved a different NRA official from the
one who had paid them a farm visit. These farmers tended to personal￾ize the distinct stances adopted, rather than dwell on the different circum￾stances. One young farmer running an intensive dairy farm with inadequate
waste management facilities commented as follows on his involvement
with the NRA: "There's one bloke, you couldn't meet a nicer bloke. He
advises you and is helpful in any way he can be ... He's somebody you
could take to straight away . . . But the other bloke is a right one." When
the farmer was reported for causing pollution by his neighbour, it was the
"other bloke" who came to take the water samples: "He was ignorant
beyond words, and very unhelpful". The farmer concluded: "They've all
got a job to do, I suppose, but if they could just be nice about it. It makes
a lot of difference".
The farmers preferred a cooperative and understanding relationship with
NRA officials and were put out by what they regarded as officiousness.
They did not find the persona of the law enforcer acceptable. Of course,
farmers' feelings about being investigated over a pollution incident were
coloured by the threat of prosecution hanging over them, but they also
found it demeaning to be treated brusquely. At such times, NRA staff were
seen as unyielding and punitive officialdom.
Under other circumstances, of course, an NRA visit might be much less
distressing, but not necessarily so. All dairy farmers, including those who
had never been at the centre of a pollution incident, were acutely aware
that NRA staff "carry a big stick". One farmer commented: "the local NRA
bloke, I know him. He's abrasive. He thinks he's God and he struts
around as if he owns the place. He could be a bit more civil. He's very
policeman-like. Although most policemen I know are better than him".
The message from NRA staff when they came to inspect a farm's facil￾ities might also be quite unpalatable - for example, the need to spend
thousands on pollution control. Even so, the manner of the approach was
139The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
different and not so seemingly devoid of sympathy as when a pollution
incident was being investigated. It was not just a question of courtesy but
of the scope for the farmer to engage officialdom and thereby to avoid
being merely the object of unbending regulation.
Some farmers, indeed, expressed considerable alienation at just this: at
being at the receiving end of apparently capricious and insensitive rules.
One farmer, for example, expressed contempt of both the NRA and the
agricultural advisory service, ADAS: "The NRA pass you to ADAS. ADAS pass
you to the NRA. I don't think any of them know what they're on about."
He went on, "you can't get any sense out of them. The pollution regu￾lations keep changing and the goal-posts keep moving. . . You could do
just what they say and then the next minute you're caught out because
they change the regulations. Anyway, even farmers who have done all they
say have still been prosecuted".
Most farmers, therefore, took the opportunity of their involvement
with NRA officials to seek to draw those officials into the decisions that had
to be taken. This included conveying to them the constraints under which
they as farmers had to operate: the risk to flooding of a farmyard, the lack
of capital, the volume of waste, the difficult circumstances of dairy farm￾ing. It also involved trying to domesticate regulatory authority. As we saw
in Chapter 5, Pollution Inspectors were adamant that they were not there
to advise farmers, but this was precisely the role into which they were cast
by the farmers. Farmers did not simply want to be informed that they
risked causing pollution but what steps they should take to avoid doing
so. For many this boiled down to divining what needed to be done to
placate the NRA. When asked what their most important source of advice
regarding waste management was, most farmers cited the NRA. Our par￾ticipant observation revealed Pollution Inspectors giving a range of types
of advice, going well beyond the expected advice related to possible risks
and sources of pollution on the farm, and the regulations covering the
storage of farm wastes. They also gave advice, for example, on the opera￾tion and maintenance of waste equipment and on spreading practices and
procedures (see Ch. 5).
Many farmers had found that the Pollution Inspectors were unwilling
to be drawn on certain types of advice, particularly the technical details of
what pollution control facilities might be needed. This apparent obtuse￾ness was a source of considerable frustration for the farmers, not least
because many of them saw installing the correct technology as the guar￾antee that their pollution problems would be solved. Such an attitude was
140Farmers and the NRA
reinforced by the Farm Waste Regulations and the Farm and Conservation
Grant Scheme. The final reassurance sought by farmers was the blessing
of the NRA, but all too often NRA staff would not commit themselves
on what needed to be done. One such farmer was planning to expand
his herd from 90 to 140 milking cows and develop a new dairy unit fur￾ther away from the village. As part of the development, he had recently
installed a whole new pollution control system, including a "weeping wall"
store, new channelling and a dirty water system of settlement tanks and
a low rate irrigator at a total cost of £45 000. Before proceeding, he had
called the NRA onto the farm to discuss his plans and had asked whether
they thought them suitable, but their response had been "let's wait and see
when it's put up". The advice, he complained, had been "wishy washy",
but "when you are investing that sort of money you want to know whether
it's right. They haven't come up with the answers one way or the other".
A similar complaint was expressed by a small dairy farmer (with fewer
than 40 milking cows) who had become worried about more stringent
water pollution controls and so had invited the NRA to inspect his farm to
see if any changes needed to be made: "they were extremely vague and
wouldn't commit themselves at all. They said 'We are not an advisory
service. See ADAS' . . . We'd like to know exactly what we should do, but
the NRA wouldn't say. We were trying to be responsible but we came up
against a brick wall." This sort of stance was regarded by farmers as a sign
of aloofness or indifference towards the practicalities of farming.
Farmers, however, were not inclined to leave the matter there. They
expected experts to provide certainty and reassurance. The Farm Waste
Regulations required the NRA'S assent to any material change in a farm's
waste storage facilities, and such assent was needed if the farmer was to
apply for grant aid. Universally, farmers referred to this assent as the NRA'S
"approval" or "seal of approval" and even the Pollution Inspectors acqui￾esced in this terminology. But their complicity often went much further
than that. It was not unusual for Pollution Inspectors to help farmers to
fill in the forms through which NRA assent was sought. In the case of
Farmer Shields, reported in Chapter 5, the Pollution Inspector actually
filled in the form and drew the required sketch map for the farmer for a
new dirty water system that he proposed to install.
Once the work had been completed, farmers tended to be even more
keen to gain the blessing of the Pollution Inspectors to the improvements
made. Farmers then were usually at their most welcoming, and often at
their most open. It would seem that they saw the Inspector's approval at
141The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
this stage as a sort of guarantee, if not against pollution occurring, then
against NRA retribution if it did. This tactic was particularly transparent in
a number of cases we observed where the farmers were keen not only to dis￾play the completed works but also to draw the Inspector's attention to any
apparent defects. Evidently, these farmers were seeking not only approval
for what had been done, but also complicity in any of its deficiencies.
One farmer, showing a Pollution Inspector around his recently com￾pleted, grant-aided, slurry management scheme, repeatedly pointed out
what he considered to be potential defects of the concrete base. The con￾tractors, he explained, had needed to dig out several feet of boggy matter
and put in a large amount of hard core before the new concrete yard and
slurry store could be constructed. He was concerned about settlement of
the concrete and recalled that the first slurry put into the store had dis￾appeared overnight. He drew the attention of the Pollution Inspector to
joints in the concrete that were not well sealed and to signs of seepage.
He then speculated on whether any seepage would lose its polluting power
if it were to percolate through the soil and reach a brook which was
60-70 metres away. The farmer was clearly seeking reassurance. The
Pollution Inspector suggested the use of a sealant but, as to whether the
brook would be affected, he remarked "we will have to wait and see".
Tellingly, the farmer immediately responded "if there's any problem, I'll
be on to you". (We analyzed this interchange from the Inspector's point
of view in Chapter 5.)
Farmers felt that NRA staff, through their involvement in regulating
waste management facilities, were implicated in the actions taken. This
was most clearly expressed by a farm family who had recently been at the
centre of a pollution incident. They had been "plagued" with pollution
problems on their 100 ha farm with over 100 milking cows. A four-tank
settlement system with a dirty water pump had recently been installed, but
there had still been pollution problems. A channel in the farmyard took
the slurry from the yard to the collecting pit. Just a week before our
interview with this farmer, after several dry days, the channel had become
blocked with about a week's worth of dry scrapings. Following some heavy
rain, the rainwater from the adjacent road and the farmyard built up
behind the blockage. Once it broke through, there was a rush and the dirty
water system was overwhelmed. The pump stopped working and the efflu￾ent spilled over into the stream that ran alongside the yard. The farmer
had done his best to contain the spill but the NRA had been alerted and had
formally investigated the incident. The farmer complained, "We put in all
142Conclusions
that's needed. First there was the slurry. I invited the water authority to
come up and discuss it and they said 'put in a big store' so we did. Five
years later, that wasn't enough. They wanted a dirty water system, and so
we did that. We've done everything they asked us to do ... I feel tremen￾dously let down, especially if the NRA [decide to] take legal action".
Conclusions
The Devon farmers we met had become sensitized to environmental con￾cerns and recognized that some farming practices could harm the environ￾ment. But they did not see farm pollution as necessarily an indictment of
the way they farmed, although they were keen to avoid causing it, either
out of a sense of social responsibility or from wanting to stay on the right
side of the law.
Their self-image was that of responsible producers and countrymen,
but they were at pains to point out that they were also subject to forces
and constraints beyond their control. On the one hand, through public
demands for plentiful supplies of milk efficiently produced, they had been
pressed to adopt farming practices that posed greater risks to the environ￾ment. This implied, at the very least, a shared responsibility with the
wider society for the consequences. On the other hand, as farmers they
were subject to the uncertainties of the elements and many of the cases of
pollution that resulted were portrayed as unfortunate accidents.
To blame society or nature in this way might seem commonplace re￾sponses to charges of wrongdoing or error, and in that sense the farmers
were not unusual. What was particular was the way in which they could
draw upon a natural morality — to justify themselves and explain the
constraints upon them - based on the elemental nature of agriculture.
Thus, on the one hand, in supplying its primary sustenance, society had
a basic and absolving dependence upon agriculture, but, on the other
hand, the farming of land and animals had an unavoidable dependence on
nature. These verities gave the farmers a strong sense of where they stood
in the order of things. However, whilst pollution could thus be attributed
to the capriciousness of nature and society, it also implied a disturbance
to that order which was deeply unsettling, if not threatening, to their
identity and sense of worth. Their reaction was to reiterate their own
feelings of personal responsibility and attachment towards the land and
143The dairy farmers' accounts of farm pollution
the countryside and to denounce those who wantonly damaged the environ￾ment and thereby tarnished agriculture's good name.
In the next chapter, we go on to examine the process of negotiating
pollution control on farms in more detail, looking at the way that differ￾ent groups of actors represented the nature of the problem, and the net￾works of inter-relations within which they were embedded. The dairy
farmers' accounts have highlighted an increasingly key element in the
story. It was not just the NRA that "imposed" pollution regulations upon
farmers. Other people in the countryside were also willing to challenge
what they considered to be unacceptable practices. Therefore, in Chapter 7
we go on to explore farm pollution in the context of the changing rural
order.
144CHAPTER SEVEN
Pollution control and
social networks
Introduction
It was in the interacting working lives of farmers and Pollution Inspectors
that farm pollution in Devon was caused, detected and sometimes recti￾fied. The pollution issue was constituted by the reciprocal efforts of the
Inspectors and the farmers to recruit the other to their own oudook on
besetting problems. In trying to fix one another, however, they were separ￾ately involved in additional networks: the farmers were part of an agri￾cultural community living and working in a changing rural world; and the
Pollution Inspectors were part of a large, new institution with a prominent
public profile and extensive dealings beyond the farmyard. These other
networks were potentially a resource to be drawn on, but might also act
as constraints; through them, other actors could be called upon, or in
turn, might seek to impose their own perspectives. Two such prominent
sets of actors influencing the constitution of the farm pollution problem
were agricultural advisers and environmental activists. In this chapter our
interactionist analysis is extended to embrace these other actors, drawing
upon local research "shadowing" ADAS officials in their work advising
farmers on how to deal with farm effluents, and upon interviews with
local environmental activists campaigning against water pollution. Below
we examine, in turn, their respective roles in the farm pollution issue,
before returning to refocus on the farmers and the Inspectors and on the
different networks in which they were both embedded and in which the
fate of the water environment was sealed (see also Seymour et al. 1997).
145Pollution control and social networks
ADAS, farmers and farm pollution: the technical discourse
Farm pollution control was undoubtedly seen as a threat by farmers, but
not only by them. ADAS, the Ministry of Agriculture's official farm advis￾ory service, had, in the years before milk quotas, advised farmers to switch
to slurry systems, to enlarge their animal housing, to concrete over yards,
to under-drain fields and to make silage rather than hay. Such single￾minded expansionist advice had taken a knock with the imposition of
milk quotas, but rising problems of farm pollution further discredited
it. The damage done to the legitimacy of ADAS paved the way for the
service to be cut and commercialized in the late 1980s. Against this trend,
the shift in policy towards farm pollution in 1989 opened up a new area
of activity for ADAS by extending its role in advising farmers on waste
management, linked to the provision of grant aid for waste facilities.
However, the policy shift also inserted the NRA'S Inspectors into the regu￾lation of farm waste facilities, giving them a sanction over the approval of
grant aid. Not only did this represent an invasion of ADAS'S traditional
territory, but also made its advisory and grant-approval authority subject
to external ratification. How then did ADAS staff deal with these additional
responsibilities and challenges?
ADAS supplied technical advice on farm waste management and pollu￾tion prevention. Under MAFF'S "public good" advisory policy, farmers were
offered the opportunity of a free visit from ADAS to provide broad general
advice on waste management problems. The advice so dispensed covered
the identification of pollution risks and an indication of what types of
solution might be appropriate, along with information about the regula￾tions and financial assistance. Typically, during the course of a visit lasting
at least an hour, quite complex technical matters would be discussed; but
although the advice given might include recommending a particular type
of system, free advice always stopped well short of providing an actual
design. That could be provided by ADAS'S commercial arm, which also
offered a service that would draw up detailed plans for waste management
systems for individual farmers.
Within ADAS, commercial services were regarded as having a higher
priority than statutory work such as free pollution visits (House of Com￾mons Committee of Public Accounts 1991). The availability of free visits
and ADAS consultancy services was made known to potential customers
through the divisional bulletins sent out to 150 000 farmers and through
talks to farming groups and stands at agricultural shows. Alternatively, a
146ADAS, farmers and farm pollution
farmer might be urged by an NRA Inspector to seek advice on undertaking
preventive work or receive a recommendation from a farming colleague
who had already had an ADAS visit. Whatever the provenance of the request,
though, ADAS visits were entirely voluntary on the part of the farmer. As
one senior ADAS official put it emphatically: "We go on to the farm at
the farmer's request and only at the farmer's request".
The actions of ADAS field staff were conditioned in three distinct ways:
by organizational requirements, by their professional allegiances and by
their orientation to their farmer clients. As members of a large bureau￾cratic and hierarchical organization, their effectiveness and efficiency were
typically measured in quantitative terms, and displayed as performance
measures and targets achieved. Numbers of free visits made, response
times, types of pollution hazard discussed, numbers of consultancy jobs
completed, amounts of grant given - measures of these sorts of things -
were what counted. Files had to be kept on every farmer visited, and
reports compiled and sent after each free visit and consultancy job. Besides
the need to report back to clients, checking up was as much to do with
accounting for taxpayers' money as anything else.
While the organization broadly determined what the adviser spent his
time doing, its content was much less governed. Here, professional rather
than organizational allegiances tempered ways of doing things. ADAS is a
discipline-based organization. In 1991, approximately 300 professional
staff were employed throughout the South West region, covering every
discipline involved in agriculture from entomology to economics. The
majority of these worked as "front-line" advisers. Since the introduction
of charging, advisers had specialized; the traditional generalist, who had
his own patch and advised all the farmers in it about anything and every￾thing, had given way to the consultant, specializing in, for example, farm
business management, dairy farming, crop protection or pollution control.
These consultants were supported by discipline-based regional specialists,
including experts in soil science, grassland management, dairy breeding and
animal nutrition, who were there to provide specialized back-up expertise.
Farm pollution advice and consultancy services in Devon and Cornwall
were delivered by a seven-member, multidisciplinary Farm Waste Team.
Two of them provided free advice, normally visiting between six and ten
farms a week; the others spent most of their time designing pollution
control systems. Pollution control had little tradition as a separate dis￾cipline and was not really regarded as such within ADAS. Rather, it had
become an extension of other disciplines, such as soil and water engineers,
147Pollution control and social networks
whose main line of work used to be land drainage, and mechanization
specialists, who had always dealt with pumps, tanks, lagoons and the like.
With pollution control not being an established specialization, there was
less scope for field-level advisers to consult upwards within the organiza￾tion, although there was a national Farm Waste Unit. More than usually,
advisers relied on their own technical judgement, informed by their pro￾fessional oudook as engineers.
For example, the selection of the return period for dirty water systems
(i.e. the probable frequency of the scale of storm that would overwhelm
a system) was left to the discretion of advisers who based their calculations
on a variety of rules. One explained how he had made his decision: "I was
asked to do a job. When I asked for criteria by which to do it, no-one
could give me any that would satisfy me. That said, I didn't look that far
at the time because my senior manager didn't think this was a job I should
be worrying about." The adviser settled on one in five years because this
"has always been our engineering standard in my mind". He decided it was
also "realistic from an environmental point of view. If you start demand￾ing higher standards, that's overcooking." When the one-in-five-year storm
did occur, he reasoned, any overflow of dirty water would in any case be
very dilute. Farmers often made a similar point - that heavy storms helped
cleanse the pollution they caused.
Another adviser remarked that, although the farm buildings experts said
that overflow pipes were prohibited, because then a reception tank would
not be impermeable as required by the Regulations, he thought that was
"nonsense". If there was too much effluent, it was surely better for it to
be discharged sensibly than for it to overwhelm the tank. He was "in the
middle" and he had to make up his own mind. In the field "you play
things by ear".
The discretion assumed by ADAS advisers was within the tradition of
their organization as an extension agency, in which field staff were expected
to exercise their professional judgement in tailoring available sources of
expertise to the specific needs and circumstances of the individual farmer.
However, until the mid-1980s, such discretion was exercised within a well
established policy framework in which the overall objective - of increasing
output and raising productivity - was clearly acknowledged. Since then,
the purpose of agricultural policy had become less clear.
Pollution advice was one of the responsibilities that had risen to promin￾ence subsequendy, but its precise aims remained unspecified. A pollution
148ADAS, farmers and farm pollution
control role, in particular, was disavowed. In such a context, where pro￾cedural targets (such as the number of free advice visits) took the place of
substantive targets (such as reduced levels of pollution), advisers were left
with an unusual degree of discretion regarding not only the technical
content, but also the specific purpose of the advice they gave.
Advisers involved in farm pollution work admitted that they used to
view farm wastes rather differendy. Managing animal wastes was always a
pan of livestock farming, and increasingly farmers had needed advice on
storing and disposing of ever larger volumes, but until the mid-1980s the
pollution side tended to be downplayed. Some of the advisory staff in the
South West had taken part in joint visits to farms with Pollution Inspec￾tors as part of the Farm Campaign begun in 1984 by the old regional
water authority. From this experience they had learned not only about
spotting the signs of pollution (e.g. how to recognize some of the inver￾tebrates whose presence signified clean water) but also about identifying
how it could occur. This had given them a greater appreciation of con￾tamination, not just from large spills of neat slurry, but also from minor
leaks and from dirty water.
The third factor influencing the way advisers acted was the need to main￾tain the trust and respect of the farming community. An ADAS adviser's
work was as much about building up relationships and maintaining a
reputation as a knowledgeable and helpful adviser as it was about doing
the job itself. In such a closed community the grapevine worked fast and
farmers soon learned on whose advice they could generally depend. But
to satisfy individual farmers it was important that the advice was tailored
to their specific circumstances and concerns. Farmers would not follow
advice if they perceived it to be impractical. ADAS advisers saw themselves
as serving the farmers' interests, and how they interpreted those interests
was, therefore, crucial.
In seeing farmers, first, as "our clients", ADAS staff assigned certain
interests to them. In particular, the farmer's commercial interests were
viewed as predominant, for example in assessing what the farmer "can
realistically do". Farmers were also seen to desire "peace of mind", and it
was in this context that advisers discussed engineering controls and the
need for regular maintenance of systems. Farmers were also seen to need
reassurance, and advisers would patiently spend much of their time on
visits discussing the implications of choosing one sort of system rather
than another.
149Pollution control and social networks
Secondly, the farmer was a manager. In general, farmers were seen as
good managers of animals but poor managers of technology. This was
evident both from the way advisers talked about farmers and from the way
they negotiated with them during visits. "A lot of farmers think that when
they put in a control system that's the end of their problem," one adviser
said to us. Another commented that the awkward maintenance jobs were
always left until tomorrow: "if something's a lot of hassle it won't get
done". In short, "there's always a time when a farmer will be doing some￾thing daft".
ADAS staff presented their role in pollution control as helping farmers to
avoid causing a pollution incident. The key to that was the installation
and management of appropriate facilities for effluent storage and disposal.
As one adviser remarked: "our goal is to reduce pollution, and you can
only do that by design". The farm pollution problem was not seen first and
foremost as one of too much polluting effluent to be managed. Instead,
design took as a given that a particular quantity of waste was generated,
and sought to solve the effluent containment and disposal problem.
The main obstacle was seen to lie with the financial circumstances of
agriculture in general and of individual farmers in particular. But at the
same time inaction might also be costly if it resulted in a fine. In other
words, the farm pollution problem was seen to pose a financial problem
to the farmer. Indeed, it was often presented as just that in discussions
with farmers. Pollution was characterized as something that "you can be
fined up to £20 000 for". Alongside a sensitivity towards a farmer's financial
circumstances, cost-effectiveness was a paramount consideration in the
advice that ADAS gave. There was a need, as one of them put it, to find
"a solution acceptable to the farmer and his bank balance".
Given that the overall objective was to avoid pollution incidents, cost￾effectiveness was not necessarily a matter of looking for a quick and cheap
solution, but of identifying when the farmer could afford to implement an
appropriate solution. Where there was no immediate pollution problem,
ADAS advisers were quite prepared to countenance the continued use of
substandard facilities, although they usually warned the farmer that there
should not be any difficulty unless a pollution incident occurred. Where
there was no obvious cure for a chronic problem, advisers encouraged
whatever practical measures might be taken to mitigate it.
In some cases, however, it was quite clear to ADAS advisers that what
had to be done was well beyond the financial means of the farmer. As one
adviser explained, "you know what needs to be done and you know roughly
150ADAS, farmers and farm pollution
the income of the farmer and the two don't match". Such farmers were
"in a cleft stick": often the farm was simply "in the wrong place", the land
was poor, and there had been little investment. They had to be warned of
the risk they ran and the prohibitive cost of putting things right, running
up to tens of thousands of pounds. The only practical possibility to put
to them might be a change of enterprise, say to less profitable beef-cattle
or sheep.
The adviser's view of the farm pollution process thus associated not only
effluent storage and safe disposal as solutions, but also pollution as an "event"
or prosecutable incident, and money as profits, fines and investment costs.
In the main, it came down to economics for most farmers. Therefore, it
was not a problem "unless you cause a pollution event" (as an ADAS adviser
explained to us). Implicit in this comment, of course, was endorsement of
the view that causing pollution was rule-breaking rather than a criminal act.
However, providing practical technical solutions to farmers' waste dis￾posal problems was not the only function that ADAS pollution advisers per￾formed on their farm visits. In general, the farmer who requested a visit,
already had a reasonable idea about what needed to be done. Although
much time could be spent clarifying technical matters - ranging from the
general advantages and disadvantages of particular systems down to the
minutiae of, say, pump design and operation - advisory discussions also acted
as a means for passing on interpretations of the rules and regulations, with
the adviser acting as a translator of possible consequences.
The NRA'S requirements were thus routinely explained, including the
need for its "approval", if grant was going to be claimed, and selected
features of the Farm Waste Regulations. Typically, this covered such things
as storage requirements, exempt structures and farm waste management
plans. ADAS staff translated the NRA'S requirements, saying, for example,
"that should satisfy them" to one farmer's disposal plan for dirty water,
and to another farmer who wanted a pit and a chopper pump (macerator)
that "the NRA won't like it".
In many cases, what the adviser was providing was reassurance (some￾thing that farmers expected experts to provide; see Ch. 6). Typically, the
farmer had already decided what was to be done and was able, financially,
to do it. The adviser essentially confirmed the appropriateness of what the
farmer proposed and might influence minor details. But in other cases,
what was being sought, and was sometimes provided, was implicit or
covert sanctioning of rule-breaking. Typically, the farmer had a good idea
of what ought to be done, but was unable or unwilling to do it, or all of
151Pollution control and social networks
it. The adviser judged what the farmer could realistically do, and the result
was often advice of the form "you needn't do it yet".
With reference to a substandard silage effluent control system, one
adviser warned the farmer "It can continue to be used until you cause
some pollution". On another farm, an earth-banked slurry pit would not
meet current requirements, but the adviser said "Frankly, I'd leave that
one for now", and advised the farmer to concentrate on his more pressing
dirty water problems.
In several cases it seemed clear that the farmer intended to do "a DIY
job" that might repair the worst of the problem for a while. It was against
the Regulations for farmers not to tell the NRA, but, as long as they did
not claim grant, they were unlikely to be found out. Such solutions were
cheaper for the farmer. Advisers did not rule them out. "Better to do
something than nothing", they reasoned.
Advisers even turned a blind eye to cases where it was likely that a
farmer would do what the Regulations specifically prohibited. One farmer
had built a silo in 1990 and, to save money, wanted to pipe the silage
effluent into the new slurry pit for which he was seeking grant aid. The
Regulations, however, specified that silage effluent receptors should be
impermeable for 20 years without maintenance and it would be very
expensive to construct a slurry pit to that design standard. So, the adviser
suggested installing a separate silage effluent tank at a cost of about £2500.
"That's the party line" he commented later, "What he will do in practice,
I'm sure, is to put that pipeline in [to the reception pit] and say nothing
about it in his grant claim!"
ADAS advisers specifically disavowed a role as pollution regulators. As
one of them commented "virtually every farm I go to is polluting to some
extent or another, but it's not my job to tell them so". They saw their task
instead as suggesting remedies for deficiencies in waste management and
disposal practices. Of course, they would point out to a farmer if he had
a problem that was likely to get him into trouble. But they did not take
the matter any further and certainly did not see it as part of their respons￾ibility to report the pollution they came across during their farm visits.
That would have been a breach of their "client's trust", and counterpro￾ductive if farmers became wary of consulting them. One adviser com￾mented that on only two occasions, both involving obstreperous farmers
and serious pollution, had he notified the NRA about something he had
seen on a farm visit without first getting the farmer's permission. He had
done so surreptitiously.
152ADAS, farmers and farm pollution
Much of the interaction between ADAS and NRA field staff was actually
mediated through the farmer, with ADAS officers seeing their main role as
steering farmers through the NRA'S procedures. ADAS tended to talk about
the NRA in terms of its official roles and how its staff fulfilled these: they
detected water pollution, informed farmers if they were causing it, meted
out punishment to the perpetrators of pollution and "approved" designs
for new pollution-control facilities. With the exception of the last, these
roles were accepted and their performance generally, if sometimes begrudg￾ingly, was respected. In the words of one adviser: "They are very good at
inspecting watercourses . .." This sort of remark put the Pollution Inspec￾tors in their place, at the watery margins of the farm. Resonating with
more overtly critical comments by farmers, such as that "they care more
about fish than farmers", it implicitly asserted ADAS'S stance as the only
people who understood agriculture.
In contrast, ADAS staff strongly and explicidy contested the NRA'S right
to the role of "giving the go-ahead" for a farmer to proceed with the
construction of an effluent installation on which grant would be claimed.
To continue with the words of the adviser quoted above: "... but not very
good when it comes to engineering. . . The NRA set themselves up as
judge and jury when they don't know anything", and to quote another:
"In my mind they cannot reject any [proposals for waste facilities] because
they don't have the expertise. They're not qualified to judge that sort of
thing". At the same time, though, ADAS staff argued that the NRA should
provide design guidelines.
This is not the contradiction it may seem. While ADAS contested whether
NRA staff were qualified to judge the engineering aspects of design - design
loads, construction standards and so on - the guidance they sought con￾cerned the level of pollution risk incorporated in the design. This risk was
embodied in the "return period". Implicit in this notion was that pollu￾tion would inevitably and periodically occur. What ADAS staff regarded as
a stark engineering reality meant that selection of any practical capacity
standard to contain pollution was, at one and the same time, acceptance
that pollution would occur in the extreme circumstances when the stand￾ard was exceeded. The risk could be reduced, but not eliminated, and only
at extra cost by increasing the storage capacity. Rhetorical references to the
need for NRA guidance on such matters were actually, therefore, to be
more of a challenge to absolute notions of pollution control and an asser￾tion that the real choice, in which the NRA was irredeemably implicated,
was between more or less pollution at less or more cost.
753Pollution control and social networks
In practice, ADAS'S designs were rarely rejected by the NRA. Accord￾ing to one ADAS adviser, this was because the Pollution Inspectors "rely on
the designer to get it right", implying that the NRA acquiesced in ADAS'S
self-definition as the engineering experts. Thus, on the ADAS frontline the
NRA were pollution experts but not engineering experts and were certainly
not experts in agriculture. Significantly, the rural Pollution Inspectors
acquiesced in these characterizations, even though some of them did have
agricultural training and experience, and all of them had an appreciation
of farming issues. As one of them remarked: "We are careful not to tell
farmers how to run their farms . . . We don't give advice except on pol￾lution risks. We avoid treading on ADAS'S toes."
Local environmentalists and farm pollution:
the moral discourse
Whereas ADAS staff reinforced the notion of farm pollution as a technical
problem and a form of rule-breaking, the NRA'S Pollution Inspectors had
come to embody, for farmers, a new morality in the countryside which
saw pollution as something discreditable — a form of environmental crime.
As such, Pollution Inspectors were indicative of a changing rural society
in which agriculture and its prerogatives were increasingly under chal￾lenge. New people were living in the countryside with ideas about how it
should be managed which often differed sharply from those of traditional
production interests.
Counter-urbanization had been a feature of most of rural England since
the 1960s, turning it into a predominantly middle-class territory. Devon's
population growth had been among the highest, totalling 13 per cent
between 1970 and 1990 (Champion & Townsend 1990: 54). In contrast
to, say, the South East and the Midlands, the bulk of those moving into
the rural areas of the South West were not commuters but long-distance
migrants and retirees, many of them attracted by the high quality of the
environment (Bolton & Chalkley 1990). By 1991 four out often house￾holds in East Devon were occupied solely by pensioners. During the
1980s, the migration flows that previously had impacted largely on the
coastal and market towns also began to affect the villages and the deep
countryside. The completion of the M5 motorway opened up many parts
of rural Devon to long-distance commuting, but residential dispersal was
154Local environmentalists and farm pollution
also encouraged by the liberalization of the planning system and facilitated
by farmers themselves, many of whom (with government encouragement)
sought to realize some of their assets by converting redundant farm build￾ings into expensive dwellings (see DOE/Welsh Office 1992, Kneale et al.
1992). The social fabric of once small agricultural villages and hamlets was
transformed. The influx of large numbers of newcomers was also associ￾ated with, and helped catalyze, a major shift in public attitudes to agricul￾ture and the countryside. Many farmers had new neighbours with quite
different perceptions of the function of the countryside. Of the dairy
farmers surveyed in Devon, one in six had experienced direct pressure
from neighbours and local people to change their farming practices.
The scale of regional growth and the social change associated with it led
to increasing prominence in local politics for environmental issues. The
combination of an attractive countryside and in-migration meant that
local amenity groups flourished. The Green Party recorded its greatest
achievements in the region, where at times it seemed on the verge of a
major breakthrough, most notably in the 1989 European elections when
it received over 20 per cent of the popular vote. Amid this rising environ￾mental consciousness, a local network of newspapers, environmental groups
and activists ensured a high profile for farm pollution issues, which kept
up the pressure on the NRA. The regional newspaper, the Western Morning
News, played a key role, and its coverage of the findings of South West
Water Authority's (1986) report on pollution in the River Torridge
helped make farm pollution a public issue in the region. Subsequendy,
farming leaders, regulators and advisers have had to deal with repeated
press enquiries.
Friends of the Earth (FOE) were the group most active nationally and
locally in campaigning on the issue of farm pollution. As part of the rising
level of environmental concern and activism in the late 1980s, the local
FOE groups in Exeter and Plymouth had seen their memberships grow and
new local groups had been formed in North Devon, and in Honiton and
Sidmouth in East Devon. These local groups were especially active in
fundraising, and it had been agreed with FOE headquarters in London that
some of the money raised in the South West should be returned to the
region to fund a particular local campaign. The majority opinion among
local activists was for a campaign against farm pollution, which seemed to
be such a growing problem in the region. In the run up to the privatiza￾tion of the regional water authorities and the formation of the NRA, water
pollution had become a high-profile issue nationally in which FOE had
155Pollution control and social networks
become prominent. In its evidence to the House of Commons Environ￾ment Committee's investigation into Britain's deteriorating rivers, FOE had
drawn heavily on the Torridge Report (see Ch. 4) to identify farm effluent
as a growing threat to the water environment that demanded stronger
regulation. FOE headquarters wanted to get a better purchase on the issue
of farm pollution and so it agreed in 1990 to finance a campaign in the
South West, supporting one full-time campaigner in Devon and one in
Cornwall for a six-month period. The main aims were to draw attention
to the problem, bring pressure to bear on the NRA to be tougher in pro￾secuting offences and to draw up a manual to assist local groups elsewhere
to combat farm pollution.
The local campaigners were to work under the broad direction of FOE'S
Water and Toxics Department. This department was one of the strongest
in FOE, previously having been run by the much-respected Andrew Lees,
who had conducted successful campaigns to draw attention to the issue of
pesticide contamination of drinking-water supplies in the late 1980s. By
1989 Lees had gone on to become FOE'S campaign director.
The work in the South West was to feed into and inform FOE'S
national activities on water pollution. As with its other campaigns, this had
a strong orientation towards the protection of nature as a vital but besieged
force, expressed in FOE'S slogan "Help the Earth to fight back". The group
wanted to see water-quality policy and monitoring reformulated on an
ecological basis, with natural objectives and criteria to replace the existing
ones based on human uses of water. This shift from a relative to an absolute
definition of environmental protection, with its orientation to "the ecological
integrity" or "the ecological health of watercourses" (House of Commons
Environment Committee 1987: 160, 162), was argued for by Andrew
Lees in the following terms:
a duty... to take action to prevent injurious pollution occurring to
flora and fauna must lie at the heart of any policy for protecting the
water environment. If we had in our rivers the flora and fauna con￾sistent with the ecological potential of the rivers we would then know
that. . . the rivers were healthy and also suitable for other uses. The
biota of a river is its most sensitive characteristic; the diversity of
biota is a reassurance that river quality is high, (ibid.: 214)
From such a perspective, a natural river was not just a resource but an
ideal, an exemplar and a guarantor. It provided an absolute standard
156Local environmentalists and farm pollution
against which to judge the deterioration of other rivers and to gauge any
progress made in their improvement. The protection of the best quality
rivers was therefore an overriding consideration, and FOE was dismissive of
overall assessments of trends in water quality that offset improvements in
rivers of poorer quality against deteriorations in rivers of better quality.
FOE saw the greatest threat to the best quality rivers coming from agricul￾tural pollution. In the words of one of its campaign guides, "farm pollu￾tion strikes at some of our most environmentally valuable watercourses"
(FOE 1991). The threat, moreover, was both stark and insidious: "Some￾times the damage is obvious - large discharges mean dead fish. Even small
seepages can cause a subtle reduction in the diversity of aquatic flora and
fauna" (ibid.: 160).
FOE'S national staff had had little direct experience of farm pollution,
but they believed that it was seriously under-recorded because of the lack
of monitoring of rural catchments, and as a result was not treated with the
gravity it deserved. There was a desire, therefore, to demonstrate not only
that there was more pollution going on but also that the problem was
much more grave than was officially acknowledged. This required FOE to
become involved in the detection and regulation of water pollution, which
was the task assigned to the two farm pollution campaigners in the South
West. It wanted thereby to be able to influence the way in which the
newly created NRA fulfilled its responsibilities and to demonstrate the need
for many more resources to be devoted to monitoring and enforcement.
To do so it had to politicize pollution regulation.
The campaign in Devon and Cornwall thus had several components.
One was to penetrate the NRA'S regulation of farm pollution incidents to
ensure that it treated each with due dispatch and rigour. A former water
authority pollution officer acted as an adviser to FOE on the campaign.
He drew up a manual on how to spot and record farm pollution and
when were the best times to look for it during the farming year. Armed with
this information and equipment to take water samples, the two FOE
farm pollution campaigners began patrolling the rivers of the South West
looking for farm pollution. They started at the beginning of March when
they had been advised that "slurry stores may be full and overflowing"
(FOE 1991). Whenever they encountered any pollution, they alerted the
NRA, and during the first month 15 farms were reported for polluting
(Western Morning News, 14 June 1990). The time taken for an Inspector to
arrive on the scene would be noted; if there was a significant delay a com￾plaint would be lodged. One of the campaigners complained to the Western
157Pollution control and social networks
FARM POLLUTION
IS
KILLING RIVERS!
IF YOU SEE RIVER POLLUTION
CALL THE NATIONAL RIVERS
AUTHORITY (NRA) ON
0800 378500
AND
CALL FRIENDS OF THE EARTH'S
FARM POLLUTION
MONITORING UNIT ON
0392 423308
Friends of the Earth
Figure 7.1 "FARM POLLUTION is KILLING RIVERS!". (Source: Friends of the Earth)
158Local environmentalists and farm pollution
Morning News of delays of up to 14 days, "by which time all the evidence
had disappeared" (ibid.: 5 April 1990). Response times generally were
collated and reported regularly to the NRA'S regional headquarters. Not
surprisingly, it was found, "they pulled out the stops more and more".-1
The FOE campaigners would then observe the Inspectors' handling of the
incident. If they had already taken formal water samples themselves, they
would inform the Inspector, thereby obliging him not only to do the same
but also to treat the incident seriously. They found that "Formal samples
can be used as an instrument to persuade the NRA to take decisive action"
(FOE 1991), and they warned publicly that "If the NRA is unable to collect
evidence, as a result of understaffing, the FOE is prepared to take formal
samples and follow through with legal proceedings" (ibid.). Afterwards,
the campaigners would follow up, with phone calls and letters to the NRA,
any incident they had reported, checking up on progress and complaining
of any delay or apparent laxity in dealing with the matter.
FOE was critical of the small proportion of incidents that were actually
prosecuted. According to the Devon campaigner, "the Inspectors on the
ground were pretty dedicated to preventing farm pollution, but action
would get stopped by those above them." Too much emphasis was being
placed by the NRA on the "together we can beat it" approach - "too much
of the carrot and not enough stick". To keep up the pressure, the cam￾paigners would alert not only the NRA but also the media to the more
severe incidents they encountered. They were able to attract coverage in
the regional newspaper, the Western Morning News, and on regional tele￾vision. The Devon campaigner had a regular column in a local free news￾paper, the Exmouth Herald. The campaigners distributed leaflets to local
FOE members, and posters to libraries and village noticeboards, asking people
who spotted farm pollution to telephone the NRA and FOE (Fig. 7.1). The
image of West Country farming, which FOE had to overcome, was typic￾ally a cosy one of farm families looking after their cows and their pastures,
producing wholesome milk and purveying cream teas. FOE'S publicity
emphasized instead the menace of farm pollution and the threat it posed
to the water environment, pointedly passing over its social origins. FOE'S
widely circulated poster declared starkly "FARM POLLUTION is KILLING
RIVERS" - a message whose explicit animism emotively encapsulated the
new environmental morality.
Seen as environmental crime, pollution should be prosecuted: a suc￾cessful prosecution served to confirm wrongdoing. FOE'S line was that all
instances should be prosecuted where the evidence justified bringing a case
159Pollution control and social networks
(House of Commons Environment Committee 1987: 162). A prosecution
also raised the profile of the issue: it attracted publicity, which in turn
broadcast the moral message. In the words of the Devon campaigner, "It
would only be seeing a lot of farmers in court that would bring the
pressure to bear on the farming community". The campaigners, though,
found themselves in a conundrum: often it seemed that, without publicity
over a pollution incident, there was not so much pressure on the NRA to
make an example of the farmer, but that the media was less interested if
a prosecution was not in sight. It was vital for the campaigners to lift farm
pollution out of the routines of farming practice and the recesses of regu￾latory bureaucracy, and to give it a public profile as a shocking issue. The
strategy to achieve this was to target prominent farmers and "blow the
whisde on them." FOE groups were asked to "look out for your local big
farmer - see if he's polluting".
The strategy was influenced by a fear that the media might be becom￾ing inured to farm pollution incidents: "There were so many that it had
become a bit run of the mill", the Devon campaigner told us. Targeting
the larger and more prominent farmers also avoided the risk of adverse
publicity from being seen to get "some small poor farmer" into trouble.
The Western Morning News was reluctant to run stories that seemed to be
anti-farming. The campaigners also feared that the NRA might be able to
dismiss cases they brought to light which involved more vulnerable mem￾bers of the local farming community. A prominent and wealthy farmer,
however, would bring more adverse public attention. "People would say
what the hell are the NRA doing" and this would help "buck the NRA into
action". One notable "scalp" was the then vice-chairman of the county
branch of the NFU (National Farmers' Union). The Devon campaigner,
alerted by a local angler informant, came across pollution coming from
the farm in the Torridge catchment, took samples, and called the NRA and
the BBC. The farmer was eventually fined £1240.
Environmental activists were not the only ones vigilant against farm
pollution. Riparian owners - particularly those from outside the area and
not themselves engaged in farming - had become more energetic in pursu￾ing pollution issues and protecting their fishing interests. Their efforts
were stimulated not least by the powers and consultative structures of
the new NRA. Anglers were active in reporting incidents. Local amenity
groups also undertook organized river walks, partly to "keep an eye out for
pollution".
160Local environmentalists and farm pollution
The FOE campaign in the South West had several results. First, it dem￾onstrated the under-reporting of farm pollution incidents. The South West
had the worst record of farm pollution incidents in the country, with 589
reported in 1989. However, FOE alarmingly suggested that "the actual
figure could be more than 10 000" (Western Morning News, 5 April 1990).
The Devon campaigner, writing to the Western Morning News about the
number of incidents reported by FOE ("despite the fact that FOE is made
up of ordinary members of the public who . .. have no experience in
detecting farm pollution") concluded: "Clearly, therefore, farm pollution
is a much more serious problem than the farm industry would like us to
believe. It also shows that the NRA is hopelessly understaffed" (Western
Morning News, 14 June 1990).
Secondly, the campaign did reveal that the NRA staff resources given
over to farm pollution monitoring and enforcement were a limiting factor.
FOE made much of this in their publicity. It was clearly an objective of
their campaign but also part of a strategy to encourage the NRA to see FOE
as an ally (significandy, FOE studiously refrained from publicly criticizing
the NRA, except for being insufficiently resourced and staffed). As the
Cornwall campaigner complained "unless they [the NRA] are given more
manpower, farmers will continue to get off" the hook at the expense of
river quality" (Western Morning News, 5 April 1990). Writing in the NRA'S
own newspaper, FOE'S national water campaigner reasoned that, with less
than one Pollution Inspector for every thousand dairy farms in the South
West region, "the level of enforcement is almost not enforcement. It is a
fire brigade service" (quoted in Western Morning News, 2 August 1990).
These criticisms did have some effect on the NRA (see below).
If the NRA was seen essentially as an ally, it is clear where FOE pinned
the blame for farm pollution. The third result of the South West cam￾paign was a Campaigners' guide to farm pollution which distilled the lessons
learned and made them available for local groups and activists nation￾wide (FOE 1991). The guide did not mince its words in identifying "THE
CULPRIT - MODERN AGRICULTURE" adding that "Today every modern
farm must be regarded as a potential threat to the environment." The
guide proposed that "Identifying and reporting farm pollution is a way for
everyone to do something for the local environment", and in simple terms
it described what to look out for, when and where farm pollution might
occur, and what steps to take if it were found. "Shopping" your local
farmer was what responsible citizens should do.
161Pollution control and social networks
The NRA, Pollution Inspectors and farm pollution:
negotiating the moral discourse
Although farmers and the pollution they caused were the object of FOE'S
campaign, its objective was to steel the NRA to take decisive action. The
agency in turn sought to identify with the environmental movement and
draw on the movement's moral authority, but it was subject to other
pressures and constraints, which meant that its approach to farm pollution
in practice was not so single minded or straightforward. The NRA needed
to be seen to be firm in its handling of polluters, but also to be reasonable
and even-handed in dealing with different industrial sectors, including
agriculture, to ensure their cooperation in improving water quality. This
led to efforts to develop a more consistent, defensible and high-profile
approach to prosecution, to be pursued alongside the more traditional
means of pollution control, namely those of persuasion and preventive
regulation. The agency's field staff had the task of reconciling these con￾trasting approaches. In tackling farm pollution, they operated not only
within a framework of NRA policies and procedures, but also through their
own local networks of colleagues, informants and farmers. They thus had to
negotiate conflicting discourses about the rights and wrongs of pollution.
Through its publicity and consultations, the NRA aligned itself with
popular concern for the environment. Moderate conservationists were
brought onto its board and its Regional Rivers Advisory Committees,
alongside the more traditional industrial and agricultural representatives.
The Authority committed itself to undertake its statutory liaison duties
through "a much more open consultation process with . . . conservation
bodies than pertained under previous arrangements" (NRA 1989a). The
NRA also paid considerable attention and resources to publicizing its work.
It claimed as a key achievement of its first year of operation the establish￾ment of "a corporate identity and strong public image . . . through effect￾ive media relations" (NRA 1990a: 4). Its eye-catching logo of an arching
salmon was displayed prominendy on its vans, buildings, leaflets and posters.
Press releases which concentrated on "publicising pollution incidents and
their effects, and the NRA'S regulatory role" (ibid.: 39), projected the image
of the authority as an environmental guardian and pollution watchdog. A
key means of actively associating the public with its work was through the
reporting of pollution incidents. Following the FOE campaign, the NRA South
West had set up its 24-hour free pollution hotline. The encouragement of
people to be vigilant over pollution gave it the air of a moral crusade.
162The NRA, Pollution Inspectors and farm pollution
Notices alerting the public to the threat to rivers from farm pollution, and
encouraging people to report any incidents, were visible on most village
notice boards and pinned to telegraph poles in even the most isolated parts
of the Devon countryside. Hotline cards were to be found in local librar￾ies, police stations and even the local branch office of the NFU. In general,
its public relations drew upon and encouraged expectations that the NRA
would take a tough stance on pollution, and this was indeed the agency's
declared intention - to take polluting events seriously, to pursue a higher
rate of enforcement and to press for stiffer penalties (NRA 1990a).
The creation of a national body from the separate regional authorities
provided the opportunity to develop a strategic outlook on how to protect
and improve the rivers of England and Wales, and to build up a central
body of scientific and policy expertise. It began to address the criticism
made by both environmental and industrial lobbies of varying standards
and approaches under the old regional water authorities, by setting out
national policy standards and taking steps to ensure their consistent applica￾tion. In 1990, NRA headquarters started issuing a series of policy imple￾mentation guidelines, and in 1991 it created a new post of Director of
Operations, with responsibility for overseeing the application of national
standards (NRA 1992b: 11).
As part of this more strategic approach to its work, the NRA began to
prepare studies of major problems in water quality. One of the first of
these was on agricultural pollution, prepared by the NRA'S Farm Waste
Group (the successor to the WAA'S Farm Waste Group (see Ch. 4) and
including many of the same members). However, the consultations sur￾rounding its preparation brought to a head the antagonism of farming
organizations. What was seen as a confrontational stance by the NRA was
causing growing alarm among farmers. There was a strong feeling that
they were being unfairly targeted by the new regulators. The BBC radio
programme, Farming Today, reported that "Farmers do feel that the NRA
is gunning after them", to which an NRA spokesman responded "We try
to be evenhanded between farmers and any other polluters" (Farming
Today, 11 May 1990). Of even greater concern to farming leaders was the
NRA'S challenges to production and policy decisions. The chairman of the
NRA had declared publicly that "in many areas of intensive livestock pro￾duction, present levels of stocking and slurry disposal are damaging the
environment" (Financial Times, 31 October 1990). Within the NRA there
was a strong feeling that the farm waste problem was endemic in cer￾tain regions (including the South West) with many of the dairy farms
163Pollution control and social networks
overstocked, in the wrong place or having production systems that were
intrinsically risky. Fundamentally, it was felt that the fault lay with agri￾cultural policy for having encouraged the intensification of dairy farming.
From this perspective, the prosecution of individual farmers was dealing
with the symptoms of the problem. It was much more important to seek
the redirection of farming practices and policies towards ones that posed
reduced environmental risks and pressures.
Whereas the regional water authorities had had no standing in agri￾cultural policy circles, the farm pollution issue had pitched the NRA into
a significant position. It was closely consulted on the Farm Waste Regula￾tions, which were drawn up by its main parent department, the DOE. The
1989 Water Act specified the NRA as a statutory consultee in the drawing up
of the Code of good agricultural practice, and the NRA was not only closely
involved in the preparation of the code by MAFF but also was represented
on MAFF'S Farm Waste Committee. Although NRA officials had trenchant
criticisms of agricultural policy, they had to be careful not to overstep the
bounds of their acknowledged expertise. They were pollution specialists,
not agricultural specialists (which was the role of ADAS). What they sought
to do therefore was to draw the environmental constraints of waste man￾agement and disposal more centrally into production decision-making.
They did this through the notion of farm waste management planning.
The idea of a farm waste management plan was a simple one of iden￾tifying, on a map of the farm, the areas suitable for waste disposal: taking
account of topography, geology and soil type, the location of drains and
watercourses, the season and rainfall. For the NRA, though, it had a much
larger purpose. It built upon the NRA'S wish to get away from the technical
fix mentality that grant aid and the Farm Waste Regulations had encour￾aged, and to pursue a didactic approach instead. In the words of a member
of the Farm Waste Group: "Farmers understand their land more than they
understand a new-fangled storage system, so you should get them to con￾centrate on that; this is what the farm waste management plans do". The
intention was "to get farmers thinking a little like waste treatment engin￾eers". The systematic preparation of farm waste management plans would
also begin to indicate which farms were overstocked and which ones were
ill sited. Such plans were thus seen as the key components of a strategy of
improved planning for the disposal of farm wastes. Individual plans would
be prepared and implemented in relation to the needs of river catchments,
which was the preferred planning framework for water professionals (see
Ch. 4). The completion of plans for a catchment would help pinpoint the
164The NRA, Pollution Inspectors and farm pollution
risks to the river system and provide the basis for judging whether the
catchment was overstocked. The chairman of the NRA'S Farm Waste Group
called for all farms to have a waste management plan, approved by the
NRA; those without sufficient land capacity to absorb the waste produced
would have to reduce their herds (ENDS 1990). The consequence would
have been to draw this aspect of farm management, and those who advised
on it, into the ambit of the NRA'S catchment planning approach - an
approach premised on the proposition that the NRA had to influence land
use in order to protect water.
The NRA pursued the notion at successive stages in the development of
farm waste policy. For example, where a farmer sought exemption under
the Farm Waste Regulations from the requirement for at least four months
slurry storage capacity, the NRA required the preparation of a farm waste
management plan to demonstrate that the slurry could be safely spread
throughout the year. The NRA also introduced into the Code of good agri￾cultural practice the basic steps of survey and assessment that together would
comprise a simple practical waste management plan.
The NRA'S major report on agricultural pollution was to be the vehicle
for setting out its strategy on farm waste management plans. During the
preparation of this report, however, the NRA came under strong pressure
from agricultural interests, both behind the scenes and in the press. The
NFU felt that the powers already given to the NRA under the Farm Waste
Regulations were "arbitrary and even excessive" (NFU 1990: 2). The NFU
president wrote to the chairman of the NRA, challenging its objectivity in
preparing the report (Farmers Weekly', 18 October 1991). The farmer
members of the NRA Board (nominated by MAFF and the Welsh Office)
also objected strongly to the draft report and there was unease within both
MAFF and ADAS. According to the report's chief author, "we had our knuckles
rapped for straying too far into land use policy".
When the report eventually appeared in January 1992, its tone was
strikingly conciliatory (NRA 1992a). In the preface, the NRA'S Chief Scien￾tist, Dr Jan Pentreath, reasoned that the prominence of "the agricultural
industry" as a source of pollution was "not because it is less controlled
or more careless than any other, but because of its immense size, the
complexity of the tasks which it undertakes, and its virtual ubiquitous
presence in all catchment areas" (ibid.: 3). This was seen to justify an
industry study of this type, but further reassurances were given that farm￾ing was not being singled out for a more stringent approach. "The NRA",
Pentreath reassured, "is committed to working together with such industries,
165Pollution control and social networks
particularly the farming industry with which such good relationships have
been built up in the past". While acknowledging that the Authority "must,
however, remain a firm regulator if environmental improvements are to be
attained", he ruled out the need for any additional legislation and looked
to the production of "reports such as this", to clarify the problems "such
that both the NRA and the farming industry can work together to achieve
the improvements which are sought" (ibid.: 3).
The report reviewed the causes, scale and impact of different types
of agricultural pollution, and set out the NRA'S strategy for dealing with
them, centred upon a "catchment management planning" approach within
which pollution risks from individual farms could be addressed by means
of waste management plans. The NRA called for grant aid to assist farmers
in drawing up these plans, and for the adoption of such plans to be a
prerequisite for grant support for other pollution prevention measures.
On the same day that the NRA'S report was published, MAFF announced
the establishment of a pilot scheme to address farm waste pollution through
farm waste management plans (MAFF 1992). Although what was proposed
fell short of the NRA'S ideal - plans were to be voluntary, not grant aidable,
and not necessarily with any expert input - it marked the accommodation
of MAFF'S and the NRA'S positions. From this point onwards, the NRA sought
to depoliticize the farm waste problem.
The NRA ceased to issue annual reports on farm pollution incidents.
The first of these, back in 1986, had established agricultural pollution as
a public problem (see Ch. 4). It was now deemed that singling out agri￾cultural problems was neither "equitable, nor a sensible basis upon which
to proceed" (NRA 1992c: preface) and they were replaced by reports of
water pollution incidents from all sources. The role of prosecutions was
also de-emphasized. The NRA'S major report on agricultural pollution of
1992 had made no reference to prosecution policy, and in 1993 the NRA
made it clear that "the approaches required for preventing pollution and
dealing with agricultural waste are much broader than legal action", and
embraced "catchment management planning, waste disposal planning, farm
waste management plans, farm visits and cooperation and liaison with the
farming community" (NRA 1993: 47).
Despite the earlier rhetoric of the NRA, it is evident that there was
greater continuity than change in the way in which industry in general
and agriculture in particular were dealt with. There was still considerable
reliance on the sort of information campaigns and persuasion that had
been pursued by the former regional water authorities. Although the NRA'S
166The NRA, Pollution Inspectors and farm pollution
tough words might have alarmed farmers, the reality "on the ground" was
different, as we have seen in Chapter 5. However, as it edged away from
confrontation with the farming lobby, the NRA had to face a sceptical
environmental lobby.
The contradiction between the NRA'S rhetoric and reality emerged most
starkly in relation to the pollution incident statistics. By encouraging the
public to report incidents, the authority had let loose a genie. With increased
vigilance from the public and environmental activists, the Authority was faced
with a rising level of reported pollution incidents (Table 7.1). However,
Table 7.1 Farm pollution incidents in England and Wales and
the South West
Under RWAS Under NRA
1986 1988 1989 1990 1991 1993 1994
Reported 3427 4140 2889 3147 n/k n/k n/k
Substantiated n/k n/k n/k n/k 2954 2883 3329
Serious 622 940 522 644 n/k n/k n/k
Major n/k n/k n/k 239 99 63 36
% of reported/substantiated incidents
Serious 18.1 22.7 18.1 20.4 n/k n/k n/k
Major n/k n/k n/k 7.6 3.3 2.2 I.I
Under South West Under NRA
Water Authority South West
1986 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992
Reported 830 836 589 782 n/k n/k
Substantiated n/k n/k n/k n/k 718 686
Serious 74 420 160 173 n/k n/k
Major n/k n/k n/k 71 25 13
% of reported/substantiated incidents
Serious 8.9 50.2 27.2 22.1 n/k n/k
Major n/k n/k n/k 9.1 3.4 1.9
Sources: for Tables 7.1 and 7.2
See Table 7.2.
767Pollution control and social networks
Table 7.2 Prosecution of farm pollution incidents in England
and Wales and the South West#
Under RWAS Under NRA
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1993
No. of
prosecutions
instigated 159 128 225 148 161 123 159 96
% of reported
incidents 4.5 3.7 5.8 3.6 5.6 3.9 5.4* 3.3*
% of serious
incidents 28 21 23 16 31 19 n/k n/k
% of major
incidents 51 161 152
Under South West
Water Authority
Under NRA
South West
1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991
No. of
prosecutions instigated 23 31 19 22 30 40 26
% of reported incidents 3.7 3.7 3.4 3.2 5.4 5.1 3.3
% of serious incidents 30 42 5 6 20 23 n/k
% of major incidents 56 104
Notes
# Rates relate to incidents occurring in the stated year for which prosecution
proceedings have been started (whether complete or not). Prosecutions, in
the stated year, of incidents occurring in a previous year are not included.
The "rates" given for serious and major incidents in this table are also
slightly misleading as they relate to the proportion of those categories
which would be covered by the number of prosecutions taken. Thus, there
is no certainty that for example, 51 % of major incidents were prosecuted
nationally in 1990, only that the number of prosecutions would account for
51% of major incidents. More information is available for 1993 when only
21 % of major incidents were actually prosecuted, the remainder of the
prosecutions were for significant incidents. The figures, thus, have a tendency
to overestimate the prosecution rates of serious and major incidents.
* Rates given are of substantiated incidents.
Sources: for Tables 7.1 and 7.2
WAA/MAFF 1986, 1987, 1988, 1989; NRA/MAFF 1990; NRA I992c, I992d, 1993,
1994, 1995; figures supplied by Pollution Control NRA South West, 1992 and
NRA HQ Bristol.
168The NRA, Pollution Inspectors and farm pollution
this was not matched by a significant increase in the number of pro￾secutions (Table 7.2), and the paradoxical consequence was a falling
rate of prosecutions. This did not impress environmental groups, and the
NRA began to attract the type of criticism - of organizational laxness or
even complicity - that had tarred the regional water authorities. In 1991
the Commons Public Accounts Committee pronounced that too few
polluters were being taken to court and that farmers in particular were not
being submitted to the "polluter pays" principle (House of Commons
Committee of Public Accounts 1991).
The NRA responded by seeking to establish a more consistent and just￾ifiable approach to prosecution. To ensure greater uniformity between and
within regions, nationally coordinated legal training was established for all
new Pollution Inspectors, covering pollution and case law, report pre￾paration and the types of evidence required, together with a mock trial.
But the most critical and decisive action of the NRA was to alter the way
in which pollution incidents were classified and reported, and at the same
time to introduce a set of national prosecution guidelines related to the
new classification. These changes, which were introduced in 1991, meant
that the Authority could counter criticisms from both the environmental
and agricultural lobbies and address its own ambivalence over how pollu￾tion and polluters should be treated.
One change was to replace the "reported" incident category (previously
taken as the overall level of incidents) by a "substantiated" incident cat￾egory, such that incident reports from the public were counted only if
pollution had been verified by an Inspector (NRA 1992d). Reported incid￾ents that were not verified were excluded from the total. This allowed the
NRA both to loosen the dependence of its prosecution rates on increased
reporting by the public and to address the NFU'S criticism that the reported
incident totals relied on public interpretations of pollution - of course, the
change made the total dependent on the availability of Pollution Inspec￾tors instead.
The other change was to the way incidents were then classified. Previ￾ously, they had been divided into "serious" incidents and the rest; the
serious category accounted for about 20 per cent of the total. Now there
was to be a threefold classification of "minor", "significant" and "major"
incidents. The new "major" category was to include "only the most severe
incidents" (NRA 1992c: 13).
This change in the classification system was accompanied by the intro￾duction of national guidelines, which advised that all major incidents
169Pollution control and social networks
be prosecuted if there was "sufficient evidence to take such action" (NRA
1993: 40). By regrouping incidents in this way and pledging to prosecute
the most severe, the NRA could publicly present itself as taking a clear and
principled stance. It could thus respond to the imperatives of the envir￾onmental lobby and counter its criticisms of organizational ineptitude.
At the same time it relieved the moral dilemma of Pollution Inspectors
by bringing these severe incidents within the realm of environmental mor￾ality, where the seriousness of the offence overrode the question of the
culpability of the perpetrator. On the other hand, by leaving discretionary
the issue of whether or not to prosecute "significant" incidents the NRA
acquiesced to the technical discourse of the agriculturalists and assuaged
the farming lobby who had accused the NRA of being too ready to prosec￾ute. It also allowed Pollution Inspectors to continue working with farmers
with lesser pollution problems, while reserving to them the sanction of
prosecution as a threat against particularly troublesome or deviant indi￾viduals. The scope retained for discretionary action was considerable - the
"significant" category included the large majority of incidents that previ￾ously would have been judged "serious" - thus leaving room for the
negotiation of pollution control at the farm level.
How the new guidelines operated was obscured by the NRA'S reporting
of prosecution rates, which did not break them down by incident cat￾egory, so that it was impossible to judge .the NRA'S performance. With
the level of prosecutions high in relation to the number of major incid￾ents, the impression was given of a firm regulatory stance. Unfortunately,
the prosecution figures embraced unrevealed numbers of lesser incidents,
and so it was unclear specifically what proportion of major incidents were
prosecuted.
Any image of firmness towards agriculture was undermined when incid￾ent figures for 1993 were released in a form distinguishing the categories to
which prosecutions related. These revealed that only 20.6 per cent of the
major farm pollution incidents that occurred in that year were subsequendy
prosecuted (NRA 1994: 54-5). A subsequent report by the National Audit
Office revealed that just 9 per cent of the most serious farm pollution incid￾ents were prosecuted by the NRA in 1993 (National Audit Office 1995: 2).
Evidently, the staff on the ground were still struggling with the NRA'S
ambiguities. The dual message that the Pollution Inspectors received from
their own organization - prosecute more but still work with farmers - was
compounded by the conflicting pressures they experienced on the ground
170The NRA, Pollution Inspectors and farm pollution
- from the public, the press and environmentalists, to be tough; and, from
farmers and agricultural advisers, to be conciliatory.
The much publicized moral mandate of the new Authority to act as a
"water guardian", together with increasing public concern over the envir￾onment, certainly impacted on the Pollution Inspectors. By the early 1990s
they had come to regard pollution as an environmental "crime" rather
than a breaking of the rules. Certainly, there had been a fall in their thres￾hold of tolerance of pollution from what it had been in the 1970s (see
Hawkins 1984, Knowland 1993). While very much sharing an environ￾mentalist perspective on the problem, the Pollution Inspectors did not
accept the single-minded approach to prosecution demanded by FOE. Indeed,
the FOE farm pollution campaign caused some resentment and irritation.
One Pollution Inspector commented that, if FOE find something, they
expect action on it immediately. He believed they "don't really under￾stand what's involved" in regulating farm pollution and instead they simp￾lified the issue.
Although acutely aware that effective pollution control involved much
more than instigating legal procedures, Pollution Inspectors nonethe￾less felt there was a moral justification for increasing the number of pro￾secutions and recognized the benefits of such a strategy in terms of
public support. One Pollution Inspector felt that, whereas the public
had had "very little faith" in the former water authority, the NRA was more
popular because of some "crucial" prosecutions and the winning over of
the press. Pollution Inspectors valued public vigilance in their patches. Pre￾ssures also came from their bosses in Pollution Control, who told them
that it was NRA policy to prosecute more and if in doubt to take a formal
sample.
However, Pollution Inspectors had reservations about how far this more
stringent approach should, or could, go. One set of doubts related to the
judicial process. Although Inspectors acknowledged that a serious pollu￾tion incident deserved punishment, the fines handed down were not felt
to fit the crime; many were considered "derisory". Despite the raising of
the maximum fine levels that a magistrates court could award for pollu￾tion from £2000 to £20 000 in 1991, magistrates seemed swayepl more by
arguments of mitigating circumstances focused on the farmer's (lack of)
culpability than by the consequences of the pollution itself. Thus, in
court, Pollution Inspectors faced a system of judgement in which the
moral discourse focused on the farmer and not the pollution, and fines
171Pollution control and social networks
were usually low. The average fine for farm pollution in the South West
region in 1990 was £425, with 63 per cent of those prosecuted receiv￾ing fines of less than £500. Such low levels of fines were seen by Pollution
Inspectors to discourage farmers from taking care to prevent pollution and
to perpetuate a discourse of pollution as merely overstepping the rules.
The following year, many fewer prosecutions were taken (26 compared
to 40 in 1990), but the average fine level rose to £665, reflecting the
view expressed by one senior pollution control officer that it was not
worthwhile to pursue cases that would probably attract fines of below
£500.
Pollution Inspectors were also frustrated that more of the pollution
incidents they presented for prosecution were not pursued in court, ascrib￾ing this in the main to the requirement for clear-cut "watertight" cases.
Despite their heightened sensitivity to pollution and the instigation of
legal training for new staff, it was clear that Pollution Inspectors found
problems in switching to a more legally oriented style of regulation and
in getting the details right. For those who had worked for the former
regional water authority, legal action and specifically formal sampling were
neither part of their routine work culture nor of their training. Some cases
had failed because of insufficient or incorrectly (according to judicial rules)
gathered evidence by Pollution Inspectors. This, in turn, reinforced a
cautiousness on the part of senior staff in deciding to initiate prosecutions.
They only wished to proceed with cases they were completely sure of
winning. It was preferable to issue a warning letter or a caution if there
was any chance of losing a case. Indeed, the National Audit Office found
that the NRA'S prosecution success rate was some 97 per cent in 1993
(National Audit Office 1995: 2).
Above all, Pollution Inspectors held strong reservations about the effi￾cacy of legal action. On the one hand, low fines seemed no deterrent;
on the other, they were concerned lest a more coercive stance on their
part might damage their relations with the farming community. Most still
felt that the prosecution of farmers had less value in preventing pollution
than did friendly persuasion. Although they recognized that there was
some leeway to tighten up on the prosecution of uncooperative "problem"
farmers (and here the implicit or explicit threat of prosecution was seen
as a useful device), they displayed ambivalence about the value of prosecut￾ing "persuadable" farmers or pushing any to the extent that they went out
of business. Although they recognized serious pollution as an environmental
crime that should be punished, the orientation of Pollution Inspectors'
172The farmers' networks
preventive strategies around the assessment of farmer types was disturbed
when it was a "persuadable" rather than a "problem" farmer whom they
were faced with prosecuting. The crime may be worthy of punishment but
not necessarily the perpetrator. Without the cooperation of the large major￾ity of farmers, the Pollution Inspectors' task would have been impossible,
and in order not to alienate them, Inspectors were encouraged to act in a
way that the forming community regarded as reasonable. Such an enrolment
was eased by the agricultural connections or training of several Inspectors,
their interaction with ADAS officials and, most important, the everyday
contact that Pollution Inspectors had with farmers and their pollution
problems.
The farmers' networks
The farming community is often characterized as being relatively closed
because of the extensive overlap in social and kinship networks that tend
to set farmers apart (Newby et al. 1978). Their closest friends are often
other farmers, as are their closest relatives. Social change in the country￾side, while eroding that closedness, is also reinforcing for many farmers
their sense of being different and separate. For some, this means an absorp￾tion into non-farming networks; for others, a closing in amid a growing
feeling of beleaguerment; and overall, a fragmentation of the farming com￾munity. Pollution regulation, as we have seen, is tied up with social change.
The responses of farmers to pollution problems and pressures do differ
and can be understood in terms of the different networks in which they are
involved in a changing rural society.
These differences are highlighted if we compare the farmers at either
end of the spectrum of opinions on farm pollution and their social net￾works. The middle ground of opinion (just under two-thirds of our sam￾ple of farmers) held that pollution was a significant problem for farming,
which, although not necessarily the farmers* fault, should be tackled to
avoid trouble and to protect the image of agriculture. However, there was
also a group of farmers (just one-fifth of the sample) who were unequi￾vocal in viewing farm pollution as reprehensible (we have labelled these the
"radicals"); and another group (one-sixth of the sample) who questioned
the "fuss" being made about it (we have labelled them the "sceptics"). The
radicals were, on average, somewhat younger farmers who occupied larger
173Pollution control and social networks
farms, compared to the sceptics. The radicals tended to have more com￾plex land occupancy or tenurial relations: whereas only a third of them ran
family owner-occupied farms, all of the sceptics did. The radicals were
generally less committed to family continuity on the farm and were much
more likely to have embraced diversification as a farm survival strategy,
which in several cases had included enterprises associated with countryside
recreation or tourism. A majority of the radicals also had rivers or streams
running close to their farms, and some of them used or let the fishing
rights.
By drawing comparisons between the two extreme groups, we can begin
to see how a farmer's networks might shape the way in which pollution
problems were perceived (Ward & Lowe 1994, Ward et al. 1995a). The
sceptics who felt that farm pollution was not a serious problem could be
said to show characteristics of a "traditional" approach rooted in the ethos
of family farming. They saw themselves as a special group in society, set
apart from everyone else. Family farming dominated their lives and they
argued that "farming is all we know". Thus, they tended to be more
locked into a productivist agricultural way of thinking, and were much
less likely to have diversified their farm businesses. They tended to have
reactive as opposed to proactive farm management strategies. Changes on
the farm during the 1980s were more likely to have been agricultural and
made in response to changing economic or family circumstances. These
farmers were more likely to feel embattled because of farming's poor
economic fortunes, and environmental and pollution regulations were seen
as yet another attack on farmers. However, notions of family continuity
remained strong among this group and were linked to dynastic notions of
land ownership and farm improvement. The sceptics tended to belong to
local farming families with close relatives farming nearby, which may have
reinforced their inward-looking and agro-centric view of the world.
On the other hand, the radicals who saw farm pollution as reprehen￾sible could be said to show characteristics of a more "modern" approach.
First, that they tended to be younger farmers is important because, not
only did they tend to be trained to a higher level, but their experience of
training was more recent. Also, they tended to have a broader outward￾looking view, associated with their more extensive social and economic
links beyond farming, including links with the non-farming public through
on-farm diversification and an inclination to socialize much more outside
the local farming community. These farmers, in enjoying wider links beyond
farming, were in turn reflecting the views about farming's environmental
174The farmers' networks
problems held in wider society. They did not tend to see themselves as a
special group set apart. With regard to their own farms, these farmers
tended to be less risk averse and more flexible. They viewed themselves
more as rural entrepreneurs or "businessmen". Changes in the farm busi￾ness were often proactive, and they were more likely to have established
non-agricultural enterprises on their farms. At the same time, they were
losing the dynastic sense of family continuity and, on several farms, suc￾cession to the next generation had definitely been ruled out. Some of the
farmers in this group had young children who were learning about envir￾onmental issues and problems at school, thus providing another route by
which new sets of environmental values "flowed" into the household.
The ways in which farmers in different social networks had come to view
pollution differently are illuminated in the following case study examples
of a sceptic, a radical and a farmer representative of the middle ground of
farming opinion (we have labelled this middle group the "ambivalent
farmers").
Case study I: farmer Hill (a "sceptic")
Mr Hill is in his late-50s and he runs a 60 ha dairy farm with his wife and
three sons. The farmyard and buildings are tidy and well maintained, and
lie at the end of a long track surrounded by rolling hills. Mr Hill comes
from a large local farming family and has several other close relatives
involved in farming in the area. Explaining that the farmwork takes up all
his time, Mr Hill remarks that he has "no social life". The family does not
travel much: only the odd agricultural show every few years takes him out
of Devon. The family are very much part of the farming community and
tend to have little to do with "the outside world".
The farm business includes beef and sheep enterprises and has been
built up in recent years in preparation for two of the sons, who are in their
teens and are keen to enter the family business. Expansion in the 1980s
continued a trend evident since the 1940s. The milking herd quadrupled
in size from 20 cows between 1950 and 1980, and grew by a further ten
during the 1980s, bringing the total by 1991 to 90 cows. Additional milk
quota was bought in the late 1980s to facilitate this continued expansion.
The beef enterprise has also been built up and 20 ha of additional land has
been acquired. Mr Hill, indeed, equates "improvement" with "expansion".
Much of his farming life has been spent under a system designed to
encourage farmers to expand the scale of their production, and it is prob￾ably his enthusiasm for those past clear goals that makes adjusting to new
775Pollution control and social networks
conditions all the more difficult. Nevertheless, being a progressive farmer
is an important element of Mr Hill's approach: "if you are a good farmer,
you are going to have to be up to date". Although the farm's profitability
has fallen slighdy in the past two years, Mr Hill has no specific plans to
improve its economic performance, seeing the next few years as a period
of consolidation. When asked if he plans to diversify, he replies "Good
God, no! It's too good a farm to do that", the implication being that
diversification is an option forced upon failing farmers on "poor" farms.
For Mr Hill, farming is under attack in several ways. He sees the efforts
of farmers, trying to get on with what they know best, as being constandy
encroached upon by external meddling: "the attitude of the media and
government policy makes you feel cynical. And you get the city coming
out to the countryside and telling us what to do, like on Exmoor with the
stag-hunting. City people criticize [us] but the farmers know best". When
it comes to forming's environmental problems, Mr Hill feels that the
"over-use of fertilizers" could affect the environment, but he rejects criti￾cism of pesticides with the argument that: "You've got to use sprays to
keep yields up". Increasing environmental concerns have not affected him.
When asked if he has experienced any pressure from local people to alter
his farming practices, he replies "No, I'm out of the way", and expresses
sympathy for other local farmers who have received complaints for walk￾ing stock on local roads. "The townies in the village haven't got a clue",
he remarks.
Mr Hill's dairy cows are housed in cubicles and the amount of slurry
produced has increased as the herd has grown. He had an above-ground
tank installed in the 1970s and has the capacity to store slurry for three
months without spreading. In 1990 he added a system of pumps to han￾dle the dirty water. As long as the drainage channels are kept clear from
blockages and the pumps are in order, the system works well. Mr Hill is
also aware of the risks of pollution from spreading slurry on land. As he
explains, "You have to make sure that the ground will take it and it won't
run off". However, there could be problems if he were required to upgrade
his waste facilities, for example to enlarge its storage capacity. He has
recendy borrowed money to buy additional land, and the thought of
having to find additional cash to spend on waste control makes him
shudder. "The government would have to pay for it", he declares.
Public concern over farm pollution, Mr Hill feels, has got out of per￾spective. He characterizes "pollution" as "interfering with the natural
environment in an unjust way", adding illuminatingly that "nature can
176The farmers' networks
cope with so much muck, but not too much". He feels that pollution
from farms is much less significant than from industry, but that des￾pite this, farmers are being more strictly regulated. "We are not the
main culprits. I suppose with the misuse of chemicals and fertilizers ... yes
. . . but with slurry in water, it's not a chemical. It is not a dangerous
substance. It's got to go somewhere. It's got to go into Mother Earth"
he explains. In any case, the extent of farm pollution ought to be dimin￾ishing. "We should see more life in the rivers in the future than over the
last few years. Intensification is slowing down." In dealing with agricul￾tural pollution, he admits "you've got to have guidelines" but regulation
shouldn't get "too official". He goes on to explain "the law's the law, but
there's always an odd occasion when there's an accident. You get unfore￾seeable bursts. Even with [above ground] stores, they have a lifespan. You
get these natural accidents". Under such circumstances, prosecution would
be unfair.
To summarize, Mr Hill's approach to farming has been shaped by his
experience of more than 40 years of intensification and expansion. The
farm has done reasonably well and, fortunately, as part of its general
modernization, the waste facilities have been adequately upgraded, and
so the risks of serious pollution are fairly low. This is all the more for￾tunate because Mr Hill has some trouble seeing farm pollution as a sig￾nificant environmental threat. His social networks rarely extend beyond
the farming community and this reinforces his view of pollution being a
problem brought upon farmers from elsewhere. For him, pollution con￾trol is part of the regulatory onslaught that makes life ever more difficult
for farmers like himself, who just want to get on with the job of pro￾ducing their quota of milk as efficiendy as possible. It is those farmers
with similar perceptions of farm pollution, but with inadequate waste
storage and disposal systems, that can pose the greatest problems for the
regulators.
Case stoidy 2: farmer Cross (a "radical")
Mr Cross, who is in his early 30s, joined his family's farm business in
1981 and is now effectively the principal manager of the 100 ha dairy,
beef and arable farm, which is mostly rented. The dairy herd has fallen
in size by about 20 per cent over this period. The family is not totally
dependent on agriculture for its income, and there is a possibility in the
future of expanding the modest holiday cottage business, but this would
depend on planning permission being granted. The holiday cottages bring
177Pollution control and social networks
tourists and visitors onto the farm, and Mr Cross's networks extend well
beyond just the farming community. Discussing farming issues with friends
and holiday visitors has given him a strong sense of the ways that farming
can be misunderstood by the non-farming public. He explained that the
farming community needs to be "a little bit more careful about the view
we portray to the general public. Farmers have been poor purveyors of
what we do. With the scandals there's been an element of worry but they
haven't been explained well enough".
Mr Cross sees himself as "a perfectionist rather than an expansionist",
and explains "we cut the herd partly as a result of quotas, and partly
because we can produce the same quantity of milk from a smaller number
of cows ... I get more pleasure from doing it right rather than getting
bigger". Indeed, he rates "enjoying the farming way of life", "looking after
the countryside" and "keeping the land in good heart", as being more
important priorities than "maximizing profitability" or "being a progres￾sive, up-to-date farmer".
This does not mean that he is backward-looking or resistant to change,
simply that he strives for an integrated view of the development of the
farm that encompasses the wellbeing of his land and animals, as well as his
own personal satisfaction in the ways things are done. That tends to make
him sceptical of external advice and critical of fellow farmers who blindly
follow it. He sums up his own approach to farming as "being very critical
of what we do". In comparing his own farm work with surrounding ones,
he assesses, in particular, "the quality of people's successes and mistakes". He
feels that his own empirical expertise is more important than the external
advice available to which he seldom turns. In the 1980s, for example, he
switched completely from hay to silage, primarily for the labour-saving
advantages. Now between 30 and 40 per cent is maize silage, which suits
the rotation, the feeding system and the local climate better, and he is
proud of his achievements in increasing the proportion of home-produced
feed. His own farm trials led him to ignore the advice of the chemical
companies on fertilizer application, and he now applies no manufactured
nitrogen to the maize, although four bags were recommended. He sees
high input use as a sign of bad farming, and emphasizes that "it's not
margin per hectare that matters. Any berk can make a profit with 500
cows on a small acreage".
To him, the art of good farming is mixed farming. He takes satisfac￾tion from the fact that it requires a wider range of skills and specialist
knowledge, and he feels strongly that "mixed farming helps the landscape".
178The farmers' networks
Environmental problems arise because "farming has become over-intensive
in certain areas". His own environmental concerns have affected his farm￾ing practices. He cites two examples. First, the family considered switch￾ing to a slurry-based system with cubicles, but the potential for slurry
problems persuaded them to stay with loose housing. Mr Cross felt that
in doing so, the comfort and happiness of his cows were better ensured
and that using more solid manure would benefit the land. Secondly, by
increasing the acreage of maize for silage, Mr Cross feels that "we now
don't have to push the grass so hard", meaning he need not apply such
high levels of inputs and there is less pressure to maximize the number of
cuts for silage.
Mr Cross feels strongly that "pollution controls have to be taken on
board, particularly on livestock farms", and sees this as one of the main
issues confronting dairy farming. He feels that statutory controls on waste
management are the right way forward. He is sceptical about voluntary
changes in farming practice based on government advice, partly because
such advice is often too abstract or misguided. In an area of under 75 mm
rainfall per year and with a non-slurry-based housing system, he recog￾nizes "it's a relatively easy job for me". The solid muck gets mixed with
straw, stored on concrete and then ploughed in. He also gets about one
tonne, or one rota-spreader load of slurry, per day from scrapings from the
collecting and silage yards, which is always spread on land that will be
ploughed for maize. However, there are still risks. Yard washings are not
separated from rainwater and slurry has to be spread every day through the
winter ("something that will have to be changed in the future").
He is careful not to make any silage when it rains or if rain is forecast
and he aims for high dry-matter silage. He feels that "MAFF advice that
direct-cut silage was better than dried silage was one of the worst pieces
of advice they ever gave". His own approach means no significant effluent
is produced. As with other technical shortcuts, he is dismissive of silage
additives: "if weather conditions are such that you need to use an additive,
you shouldn't be making silage".
The two case studies illustrate how the values of the farmers in the
two "extreme" categories differ in terms of pollution issues, and farm￾ing problems more generally. But as farmers' values change over time,
how is the make-up of these groups likely to change? We would expect
that in the future those values that tend to be held by the "radicals" will
become more widespread, whereas the number of farmers sharing the views
of the "sceptics" will shrink. Social change in the countryside is likely to
179Pollution control and social networks
confront more and more farmers with the attitudes of the non-farming
public. Also, greater awareness of pollution and other environmental
issues is likely to continue to filter through to farms via a variety of
channels ranging from changing syllabuses in agricultural colleges to tele￾vision programmes on the environment. Of crucial importance will be the
response of the broad middle group of farmers. An insight into some
of the pressures they face and how they are coping is provided by our
third case study.
Case study 3: farmer Jones (an "ambivalent" farmer)
Mr Jones is in his mid-40s and he farms an 80 ha dairy farm with his
wife. He told us how he is becoming worried about changes in his small
hamlet. Until the late 1980s, it was a farming settlement, but in recent
years the two other farmhouses have been sold off and a neighbour's barn
has been converted into residential units. With his farm being the one
remaining and with eight private dwellings close by, Mr Jones fears that
there will be opposition to ordinary farming practices from the new￾comers to the hamlet. He wondered, "will they object to the noise and
the smell?" How will they react to the noise of the milking machinery or
the cattle moving around the yard in the early morning? He is fearful of
objections, and complains about "more town people in the countryside
putting pressures on farmers . . . They don't like to see mud on the road
and the like".
Mr Jones's response to successive external events - milk quotas, BSE, the
storms of 1987, farm pollution controls and social change in the village
- has been to try to absorb them but not to be deflected. The prime
consideration has been to build up and maintain the dairy business as a
viable unit in terms of its demands on family labour and the income that
it provides. As Mr and Mrs Jones approach middle age, their ability to
cope with these demands has become an important consideration. During
the past ten years, they have built up the dairy herd, and have acquired
additional quota and land, with the aim of achieving and then maintain￾ing an 80 plus milking herd. However, external events seem to be conspiring
against this strategy. Mrs Jones, in particular, has begun to question the
likelihood and even desirability of their son taking over the business in the
future, and to explore alternative sources of income.
In coping with external shocks, Mr Jones has developed a risk-averse
approach to farming. Before the imposition of milk quotas in 1984, he
attempted to build up the herd, when "everyone was encouraged to expand".
180The farmers' networks
Although since then he has increased the dairy herd to 90 cows by buying
and leasing quota, he does not consider this to have been an expansion.
Rather, it is a response to having BSE in the herd and, he feels, is a case
of "running to stand still". The disease tends to appear when a cow is at
its-fullest milking potential, and so can have a disproportionate impact on
the productivity of a herd.
The latest external shock is the new pollution regulations. Their efflu￾ent management system was upgraded in 1990. In addition to the slurry
pit, with its ten-week storage capacity, a dirty water system now collects
rainwater and runoff from the yard and spreads the effluent on the land.
Mr Jones stresses that there is a running cost associated with the new
system. "Every time it rains we've got a two-horsepower motor running."
More work is also involved: the dirty-water sprinklers have to be regularly
moved by hand. Conversely, Mr Jones perceives few, if any, benefits: there
has been only a minimal reduction in nitrogen use on the land, and the
soil has become saturated.
The £21 000 for the dirty-water system was a major capital outlay for
the Jones family, even if half was covered by a grant. The prospect of such
an ouday, which, as they saw it, would not contribute to their overall
strategy (of making the holding more viable as a working family-run unit),
catalyzed a reassessment of that strategy. First, it led the family to look at
radical change to preserve the strategy and then, when this did not seem
ppssible, to begin to question the strategy itself.
They had other capital priorities and it did not seem right to sink so
much into a farm where much of the animal housing was in need of
modernization. Following the lead of a neighbouring farmer, therefore,
they first commissioned a feasibility study on the possibility of converting
the barns, selling the farmhouse and moving to a new one with modern
buildings elsewhere on the holding. However, the costings showed a
£100 000 shortfall and they were not prepared to go that much into debt.
The neighbour, though, has gone ahead and, having obtained planning
permission, is now selling out completely with the probability of another
new non-farming neighbour for Mr and Mrs Jones. "Farmers are being
forced out of business by pollution regulations", he complains. "They
know they will have to spend £20 000 and many see it as their last chance
to sell up with milk quota."
The concatenation of external events has thus begun to shake their
resolve. Mr Jones looks in vain to government to provide some stability
but instead sees it as a destabilizing force. Indeed, he feels that the major
181Pollution control and social networks
difficulties facing farmers today are the "uncertainty in policy; of govern￾ment and the EC not planning far enough ahead. With a dairy farm you
want to know what you're doing in three years time." Pollution regula￾tions not only seem to be the last straw but have brought home to them
that they are caught up in a larger power struggle, over which they have
no control. Ultimately, it may engulf them, making it difficult or imposs￾ible to continue farming in the way they have been.
Although the national and European policy contexts seem so uncertain
and subject to remote decision-making, the most immediate threat to the
continuity of their farming operations is on their very doorstep. Here, the
microgeography of the farm and its neighbours is of crucial significance,
with the prospect of the farm being the only one left in the small hamlet.
"It's the new people in the countryside who will be imposing the regula￾tions", Mr Jones comments resignedly. With a sense of the external pres￾sures closing in on them, he and his wife have begun to question their
farming strategy, with Mrs Jones taking the lead. Part of the house has
been converted for holiday letting; 1990 was the first year. Mr Jones
suggests that the income from it has been modest so far. Even so, he has
extended a wet clay pit and stocked it with tench and bream to provide
fishing with the holiday accommodation, in order to extend the letting
season. Bringing tourists and visitors onto the farm to fish was also having
the effect of extending the Jones's networks beyond the farming commun￾ity, and anglers in particular bring with them quite different experiences
of farm pollution from those of the farming community. Although the
other half of the longhouse is derelict, there is the possibility of repairing
it for holiday accommodation or long-term letting. But Mr Jones warns
"it's not the golden egg". It would cost a lot to repair.
When asked what his aims for the farm business are, Mr Jones refers
to the uncertainty over milk quotas. Are they here to stay? Will they
remain transferable? Will they be cut further? A 2 per cent cut in quota
would oblige them to lease 50 000 litres of quota, as against 30 000 cur￾rently, just "to stay still". Alternatively, "we could cut the herd by about
ten" and switch resources to repair the house. This he identifies as the key
decision they will have to make in the next two years. He has also heard
rumours of the possibility of even tougher pollution controls and that may
make it prudent to curb the size of the herd. Although they seem beset by
insecurity and uncertainty, there is a tangible sense that they are approach￾ing a crossroads in their farming endeavours.
182Conclusions
Conclusions: farm pollution and patterns of enrolment
Although pollution is measurable in terms of its impacts on aquatic life,
we have seen in this chapter that what counts as pollution is socially
defined. Therefore, just what pollution is, and how much is acceptable,
become key questions. Our study found different definitions of pollution
and different understandings of the seriousness of the problem. There was
a reasonable consistency of views about what constituted pollution between
regulators and advisers in the field, and a variety of views among farmers.
However, there were considerable disparities between the groups over the
tolerance of pollution. ADAS advisers were much more willing than NRA
Pollution Inspectors to tolerate higher levels of pollution risks, because of
the widespread lack of financial resources on farms to invest in pollution
control, whereas farmers were tolerant of "accidental" pollution.
Environmental activists were very intolerant of farm waste pollution,
which they saw as the outcome of agriculture's recklessness. Increasingly, this
view was reflected in the media reporting of farm pollution incidents and
helped shape the formal regulatory regime that was introduced in 1989.
However, although water pollution was classified as a criminal offence,
the view of farm pollution as "environmental crime" was not dominant
among the field-level actors. Some of the NRA'S informants took this view
and it was becoming the orthodoxy among NRA regulators, but quite dif￾ferent perspectives prevailed among advisers, farmers and magistrates.
Thus, the fundamental struggle centred on whose representation of
the pollution problem should prevail. The basic conflict was between the
definition of farm pollution as a problem for farming, which implied agri￾culturally led solutions (such as upgrading storage facilities according to
the needs of the current production system), and farm pollution as a
problem ^farming, which implied environmentally led solutions (such
as the setting of water quality standards, with changes being made to pro￾duction systems as appropriate). Of course, underlying the distinction,
between pollution as a technical problem (a form of "rule-breaking") and
pollution as something discreditable that attracts blame (a type of "environ￾mental crime"), was whether or not any moral opprobrium attached to it.
Among the dairy farmers we interviewed, there was the full spectrum
of views - from perceptions of agricultural waste as "natural", to rule￾breaking, to environmental crime. This represented a spectrum from those
who emphasized the productive context in which pollution arose to those
183Pollution control and social networks
who emphasized its environmental consequences (in other words, from an
inward-looking to an outward-looking perspective). For many of the farmers
who viewed pollution as a form of rule-breaking, contextual questions to
do with intentionality were clearly of significance in judging any particular
incidents (was the pollution a deliberate, wanton, or an accidental act?).
Such judgements focused on the responsibility of the actor rather than the
consequence of the action. This was a discourse that farmers* leaders had
helped to structure. It was one that incidentally, happily saw them trans￾lated as instruments of government policy - any responsibility for pollu￾tion when farmers were conforming to policy or following official advice
was thus displaced.
It seems that ADAS regarded pollution in a matter-of-fact manner.
It was a problem that needed to be dealt with, but it carried no moral
overtones. This could be because as engineers they generally adopted a
pragmatic problem-solving approach to the succession of issues that con￾fronted farmers, and could also be because past ADAS advice was so impli￾cated in the causes of pollution. In many instances, the judgement ADAS
staff were making was essentially a balancing of the risks of pollution and
detection against the financial costs (of prosecution or remedial action) to
the farmer.
The NRA was confronted by a much more complex set of judgements.
Traditionally, the Pollution Inspectors of the former water authorities had
treated pollution as a technical issue. However, the establishment in 1989
of the NRA as a national regulatory body, cast by itself and the environ￾mental lobby in the role of environmental watchdog, injected a new and
morally charged discourse into the proceedings. The Pollution Inspectors
had thus to operate day-to-day in a farming world (and arguably in an
institutional tradition) in which pollution was predominantly considered
a technical issue. However, the NRA increasingly adopted a public stance
that water pollution was unacceptable and reprehensible.
More generally there were now two conflicting forces at work. A general
increase in interest in environmental issues and the rising numbers of
articulate middle-class people who had moved to the countryside accounted
for the growing public intolerance of farm pollution. Images of farming
as the "natural" way of life were easily shattered by the noise of auto￾mated milking parlours, the smell and ubiquitous nature of slurry, and
the overall factory-like appearance and practices of modern industrial
farms. Public opinion had come to have a growing influence on the water
authorities, particularly with pollution increasingly defined by members of
184Conclusions
the public reporting pollution incidents they had encountered. Furthermore,
the creation of the NRA had not only given institutional expression to this
popular concern but had also significantly altered the balance of expert
opinions. In particular, the domination of the water authorities by chem￾ists and engineers had been superseded by a rising concern with biology
and the conservation of complete water systems. This holistic view of the
management of water environments enlarged the definition of pollution
and underpinned a lowering of tolerance thresholds.
At the other extreme, the views of agriculturalists on the definition of
pollution and its seriousness, which in the past had dominated the debate2
still continued to have great influence. The notion of "good agricultural
practice", which until the 1990s had defined "good environmental prac￾tice", was still prevalent. Despite increasing environmental concerns and
surpluses of many agricultural products, faith in high-tech intensive farm￾ing had not been undermined. From the approaches and attitudes adopted,
it would appear that the productivist era had not ended for most agricul￾turalists and farmers.
The distinction between pollution as a technical problem and pollu￾tion as environmental crime encompassed two quite separate patterns
of enrolment among the various actors involved. Technical problems
were appropriately dealt with through adjustments to farming practices,
effected by advice, information, the formalization of standards and incent￾ives; this was the realm of the Farm Waste Regulations, capital grants and
ADAS advice. Criminal acts, in contrast, elicited remonstration, public
condemnation and prosecution; this was the realm of pollution incidents,
environmental campaigning and the courts. Arguably, in the implementa￾tion of the Regulations, ADAS and the farming community were seeking
to enrol the NRA into a technical definition of the problem, with the
interpretation and implementation of the Regulations and the Farm
and Conservation Grant Scheme central to the process of enrolment.
On the other hand, environmental groups and a wider public were seek￾ing to enrol the NRA into treating pollution as an environmental crime, with
the emphasis on the recording, investigation, reporting and prosecution
of pollution incidents. Central to the enrolment process here was the abil￾ity of a member of the public to report a pollution incident, which then
had to be investigated. The availability of published information on incid￾ents then gave the opportunity for environmental groups both to express
alarm about the scale of the problem and to condemn what could be
presented as leniency.
185Pollution control and social networks
It is notable how unequal these enrolment processes were. It was farmers
who had to be persuaded or dragooned into acting differendy. Their limited
scope and inclination for action was a major determinant of the pace of
change. In addition, the Pollution Inspectors were in day-to-day contact
with the farming community. In contrast, environmental groups were only
fitfully involved in the issue. The agricultural community was thus much
better placed to impose its definitions of the problem and to proffer solu￾tions on a day-to-day basis.
As we saw earlier, the availability of a means to quantify farm pollution
had helped turn it into a public problem. The efforts of water regulatory
staff to quantify farm pollution had not only made it into a public prob￾lem but also had encouraged its popular definition. Crucially, farm pol￾lution incidents depended upon members of the public reporting them
and, from the mid-1980s, the regional water authorities and subsequently
the NRA had actively encouraged the public to do just that. The NRA had
continued to rely on the level of incident-reporting as an indicator of the
overall problem, as well as in its day-to-day work in tracking down sources
of pollution. The NRA, with its telephone hotline for the reporting of
pollution incidents, clearly regarded this public responsiveness as both a
boon to its operational duties and as a means of maintaining popular sup￾port for its work. What it did not welcome, though, was the way in which
the details of incident statistics and prosecution levels allowed environ￾mental activists both to interfere with its operational activities and to chal￾lenge publicly its commitment to a strict approach towards farm pollution.
These concerns prompted the NRA to revise the way it reported pollution
incidents and prosecution totals. The overall effect was to de-emphasize
farm pollution and to obscure its prosecution practices.
Although the NRA thus sought to diminish the influence of environ￾mental campaigners on its work, it also sought to extend its own influence
over farm management and agricultural policy. The instrument for achiev￾ing this aim was the farm waste management plan. The recognition by
MAFF of such plans as a potential tool in the minimization of farm pol￾lution signalled, at the policy level, the acceptance of the NRA as a member
of the farm waste policy community and, at the operational level, the
establishment of a modus vivendi with ADAS. By 1994 the pilot scheme
in which ADAS helped farmers prepare farm waste management plans had
been extended to cover 16 river catchments. MAFF reported the results of
an ADAS evaluation of the scheme, which found that, of the farmers volun￾teering to take part, 50 per cent were able to draw up their own plans
186Conclusions
with little assistance from ADAS and that over 80 per cent of the particip￾ants had incorporated the plan into their v/aste management practices in
some way (MAFF 1994a). Although these voluntaristic pilot schemes fell
well short of the NRA'S ideal of compulsory waste management plans for
all farms subject to its sanction and subordinate to catchment manage￾ment planning, what they did do was to begin to integrate waste manage￾ment into farm management and to implicate ADAS advice in the responsible
disposal, as well as the storage, of farm waste. In this way, the onus of
responsibility for the preventive management of farm waste was pinned on
farmers and their advisers and was hopefully made a feature of routine farm￾ing practice rather than being seen as something which could be solved
simply by buying new storage facilities or the latest spreading equipment.
Crucially, though, the approach adopted remained firmly within the vol￾untaristic ethos which had come to characterize British agri-environment
policy.
With the overall problem of farm waste pollution seemingly being
contained, the NRA was content not to press the issue further. The DOE set
the seal on this settlement between the NRA, ADAS and MAFF when it
responded belatedly in 1995 to a major Royal Commission report on
freshwater quality that had been published in 1992. The Royal Commis￾sion had proposed a much more protective approach to water quality, one
that would involve less reliance on the capacity of the water environment
to deal with wastes. It therefore endorsed the NRA'S earlier proposal for a
comprehensive system of farm waste management plans, drawn up within
a catchment planning framework. In response, though, the DOE confirmed
what was now the official line, that encouragement of voluntary farm
waste management plans was the most suitable and "practical" means of
addressing pollution risks from farm waste (DOE 1995: 28). However, with
waste management planning becoming an accepted feature of agricultural
advice and farm management, a bridgehead had been established for a
dirigiste approach to be resurrected, should matters deteriorate and the
policy climate change.
However, MAFF was strongly committed to the voluntaristic approach
and was concerned to show the effectiveness of its grant aid scheme and
advisory efforts. Increasingly it had expressed confidence that the farm
waste problem was being effectively addressed. By the end of 1993 about
9000 farmers in England had received grant aid for pollution control
measures. According to the Minister of Agriculture, this had "led to a
steep drop in the number of major agricultural pollution incidents" (MAFF
187Pollution control and social networks
1993). The government felt able then to cut the level of grant aid pro￾vided to farmers from 50 per cent to 25 per cent, and a year later it was
abolished. The press release that accompanied the announcement of the
ending of the grant proclaimed that "in England the number of major
pollution incidents caused by agriculture had fallen from 99 in 1991 to
67 in 1992 and to 63 in 1993" (MAFF 1994b).
Had the problem been solved then? Politically it had. The announce￾ment of the abolition of the grant scheme caused little reaction from
farming or environmental organizations. But had it been solved practic￾ally? This question is far more difficult. The fundamental pressures on
farmers and their farming practices had not changed significantly. There
had certainly been some improvement in the storage and handling of farm
waste, but only about a third of dairy farmers had made grant-aided
improvements to their facilities. However, no-one could now have been
unaware of the farm pollution problem and the possibility of prosecution
for causing it. Unfortunately, the change in the basis of the statistics does
not allow clear inferences to be drawn on what the consequences were for
pollution incidents. From 1991 onwards, only the categories of major and
substantiated incidents were publicly reported, but neither of these categor￾ies had been in use previously, with the result that meaningful compar￾isons over time could not be made. The following years' figures do indicate
a modest decline in major farm pollution incidents. At the same time,
however, the number of substantiated incidents caused by farming was
rising. Rather incredibly, the proportion of major to substantiated incid￾ents fell from 7.6 per cent in 1990 to 1.1 per cent in 1994. At such a
tiny and diminishing percentage, to place great store by precise absolute
numbers of major incidents and the apparent trends they reveal would
demand an unwarranted faith in the complete consistency and objectivity
of scores of Pollution Inspectors across the country. Unfortunately, the
Pollution Inspectors were under complex and changing institutional pres￾sures. Increasingly, it was in their own personal or organizational interest
to be very cautious in judging a pollution incident to be a major one. If
they did so, they personally lost the discretion that they normally enjoyed
in responding to an incident or in dealing with a farmer. If an incident
was categorized as major, and then subsequently a prosecution was not
pursued or did not succeed, then this could be judged a personal and an
organizational failure. Overall, there was an organizational imperative to
match the number of major incidents recorded with the number of pros￾ecutions pursued and to do so in a context from 1992 onwards in which
188Conclusions
the NRA informally de-emphasized prosecution as a means of tackling farm
pollution. All one can say with any certainty is that the problem of gross
pollution from farm wastes was statistically buried.
Starved of much of the information that had made campaigning pos￾sible and which previously had traced a telling upward curve, environ￾mental activists lost interest. In any case, other issues had overtaken farm
pollution. The interest in it had been more about its symbolic significance
than its practical consequence; the symbolism had related to concerns
about agriculture's environmental responsibilities and the development of
official regulatory strategies at a time of water privatization. By the early
1990s, other issues more powerfully captured these concerns and attracted
the attention of environmental groups. The focus of their campaigning
was increasingly international, especially at the European level. For agri￾culture, this meant such matters as the Habitats Directive, the Nitrate
Directive and CAP reform. Environmental groups were attracted to the
European Union (EU), not only because this was where the political action
was in the development of environmental policy and legislation, but also
because the style of EU regulation, with its explicit formal standards and
reporting requirements specified in law, gave them a firmer purchase on
environmental problems and their regulation than did the informal prac￾tices that British procedures nurtured (Lowe and S. Ward 1998).
As the focus of attention moved on, where did this leave the farmers?
They continued trying to earn their living through their dairy farms. Most
had come through this episode chastened and with a greater understand￾ing and sense of responsibility for the problems caused by the manage￾ment and disposal of their farm waste. Undoubtedly, the increased attention
given to prosecutions in the late 1980s and early 1990s had been a crucial
factor. But its significance to the farmers was misunderstood, and this
pointed to a wider gulf of misunderstanding that served to isolate the
farming community. In our survey we came across no farmers who con￾sciously or deliberately took the sort of calculated risk over the possibility
of prosecution that ADAS advisers presumed they did, or over the scale of
the fines following prosecution that Pollution Inspectors assumed they
did. The reason why none of the farmers thought in this way was because
all of them regarded the prospect of prosecution not as an affront to their
wallets but as an affront to their good name and character. In general, they
saw the threat of prosecution and the publicity such cases attracted in the
local press as personally demeaning and as a slight on the industry. It
contributed further to their sense of alienation and beleaguerment. However,
189Pollution control and social networks
for the farmers too, the salient issues moved on, as new controversies
emerged around the transportation of live calves, and fears of BSE. For
many, though, these served to reinforce a sense that farmers were the
victims of the prejudices and whims of a demanding but uncaring urban
society. Farming organizations pointed to the grim statistics, indicating
higher suicide levels among farmers, to dramatize the pressures and isola￾tion that some farmers face. Pollution Inspectors were not unmoved by
such worries and anxieties. Indeed, we were told, without any apparent
sense of irony, by one of the NRA officials who had helped set up the
pollution hotline, that he had subsequently been asked to be involved in
the setting up of a Samaritan advice line for despairing farmers.
Notes
1. The unattributed quotes given in this section are taken from our interview with
Andrew Hickson, the Devon FOE campaigner (13.8.91).
2. So much so that for many years there was no debate.
190CHAPTER EIGHT
Conclusions: constructing
moral orders
Introduction
In Chapters 3 and 4 we saw how farm pollution in Britain shifted from
being a "non-issue" during the 1970s, contained within the realms of the
agricultural and water policy communities and treated as little more than a
technical side effect of efficient production, to a situation where it became
seen as a pressing environmental problem, a key contributor to declining
river quality and an issue demanding a much stronger regulatory approach
on the part of government. In Chapters 5 and 6 we moved away from
Whitehall and Westminster and the "high politics" of farm pollution,
where policies are formalized, to the worlds of NRA Pollution Inspectors
and dairy farmers deep in rural Devon. In this final chapter, we return to
a discussion of the overall analytical approach to our study, which we
outlined in Chapter 1. In presenting our conclusions, we attempt to situ￾ate our study within wider theoretical questions in social science, not only
about agriculture, pollution and regulation, but also about what we have
termed the moralization of the environment.
This chapter turns first to a discussion of the different views of pollu￾tion and the two moral discourses that surround them. It then goes on to
examine the implications of our study on our understanding of what
German sociologist, Ulrich Beck, describes as the risk society and, in
particular, the role of regulatory science in bringing environmental prob￾lems to light. Thirdly, it returns to a discussion of actor-network theory
to illustrate how various roles and representations became ascribed and
fixed in the networks through which farm waste pollution became recog￾nized as a public problem and hence an object of regulation. The chapter
191Conclusions: constructing moral orders
ends with a section that focuses on the key field-level relationship between
the farmer and the Pollution Inspector, as a site where the two competing
moral discourses had to be reconciled in everyday life.
Nature, rurality and morality
Chapter 1 introduced a distinction between two views of pollution: one
seeing it as a technical problem (a form of "rule breaking") and the other
seeing it as something discreditable that attracts blame (a type of "environ￾mental crime"). A major achievement of the contemporary environmental
movement, we would argue, has been to establish an abstracted concep￾tion of pollution as wrongdoing. It has thereby elevated pollution and
industrial risks to the status of a crime, and forged a new environmental
morality.
Our study of the moralization of the environment has taken the example
of farm pollution as its focus. However, this has proved not to be a simple
tale of public-spirited campaigners stigmatizing a hapless group of pro￾ducers for the environmental damage they cause. What we saw instead was
two moral discourses pitched against each other: the new environmental
morality encountering an older rural morality rooted in the virtuous indus￾try of the farming community.
When defending themselves against charges of damaging the environ￾ment, we found that farmers were able to draw on a rich repertoire of
justification, which essentially naturalized their actions, by portraying
themselves as subject to elemental forces that they could only partially
control and which therefore absolved them of culpability. In the past,
somewhat similar arguments have been used to characterize groups such
as children, women and native people as creatures of nature, not entirely
responsible for their actions and therefore not capable of being full moral
subjects. Although many farmers do think of themselves as victims (or as
being victimized), they also see themselves as proud, independent coun￾trymen who are inferior to none. To reinforce this identity, they can draw
on traditional notions of masculine authority, particularly those of the
toiling provider and the guardian of the countryside. Such rhetorics are
often expressed by the self-same farmers who also claim diminished respons￾ibility for slurry leaks and spills, occasionally in the self-same breath.
Traditionally, these obverse images — of farmers as both objects and
agents in the interface between society and nature - have had wide currency.
192Nature, rurality and morality
The sons of the soil were also the husbanders of the land. This complex
dual imagery served to represent farmers as natural subjects* playing a vital
role in both nature and society, and with such responsibilities - to the
land, to the countryside, to socially vital needs - that transcended mere
material interest or social convention.
At the root of the farmers' responses was a set of distinctions that
equated agriculture with nature and distinguished it from industry, in
denying or minimizing the pollution risk from farming. In doing so they
were drawing on long-established categories. In Chapter 3 we saw how
these categories had structured official action over many years. When, in
the 1970s, legislation was passed to tighten up pollution control, agricul￾ture was formally exempted. Later that decade, the Royal Commission on
Environmental Pollution felt impelled to investigate agriculture, but even
then emphasized agriculture's fundamental distinctiveness deriving from
its embeddedness in nature. Indeed, the Royal Commission proposed that
those husbandry activities which it recognized as significant sources of
pollution - namely intensive livestock rearing - be redefined as not agri￾cultural but industrial. Agricultural pollution was thus not only an aber￾rant act but also an anomalous category.
Where did these established categories come from? The distinction
between what is natural and what is unnatural is a fundamental one in the
construction of different social orders. It was Mary Douglas, in her study
Purity and danger (1966), who first drew attention to the importance of
the maintenance of boundaries between categories such as these. In seek￾ing to understand why something perfecdy acceptable to one society or
social group is seen as dangerous to another, she pointed to the ways we
make sense of the complexities of the world by categorizing phenomena
and drawing morally charged boundaries between them. Things that trans￾gress, or destabilize, conventional boundaries are often seen as threatening,
or "polluting". In Douglas's celebrated phrase, pollution is "matter out of
place".
We can see how industrial society was constructed on a sharp, if ultim￾ately elusive, distinction between nature and society (Latour 1993). Whereas
science and technology sought to subjugate nature, the industrial city sep￾arated people physically from the natural world. Rural areas, stripped of most
of their population and their preindustrial economic activities, became
specialized spaces for producing food for the urban population. In this way
the rural became equated with the agricultural. But the rural also acquired
strong associations during the period of industrialization: it was seen as
193Conclusions: constructing moral orders
where many city dwellers had come from, and for many it also represented
the last vestiges of their contacts with nature. Rural and agrarian values thus
figured strongly in cultural reactions to the disruptions and depredations
of urban industrialization and became a central feature in the definition
and assertion of national identities against what was seen as the roodess and
homogenizing cosmopolitanism of the industrial age (Lowe & Bodiguel
1990, Lowe et al. 1995). Rurality was thus portrayed as "natural" and it
became a source of moral affirmation and condemnation (Bell 1994). In
contrast to the supposed innocence of rural life, the city was perceived as
corrupting, not only of traditional morality and social hierarchies, but also
of nature, through industrial pollution (Mumford 1961). We thus see a
correspondence between the categories of society and nature, urban and
rural, and industry and agriculture.
Foucault (1965, 1970) suggested that industrial society sought system￾atically to manage a form of "social order" through the imposition and
maintenance of certain predominant categories such as these. Other import￾ant ones were those of male and female, home and work, and capital and
labour. Crucially, these categories reinforced one another, and together
formed a means of systematic "ordering" (Law 1994). By providing a place
for everything, they helped to keep everything in its place, and thus to
establish the natural order of things. Through such interlocking dichotomies
and their morally prescribed boundaries of what was natural and what was
unnatural, identity and social behaviour became fixed in a social structure.
Agriculture was an important receptacle of the natural morality. The
discourse that projected natural values onto farming and rurality origin￾ated with poets, philosophers, naturalists, artists and the like, not with
country people who were often portrayed as rural innocents (i.e. natural
subjects). Real agriculture was always more complex, including both tech￾nologically progressive "improving" farmers and backward or traditional
"dog and stick" farmers. Nevertheless, the discourse of natural morality
was available for use as a resource by agriculturalists in promoting and
defending agriculture. For example, the discourse has been drawn upon to
emphasize the farmers' responsibility for the countryside, with the implica￾tion that environmental concerns around agriculture are best left to self￾regulation and voluntary schemes. Equally, the equation of agriculture
with the rural and the natural on the one hand, and of pollution with the
industrial and the urban on the other hand, for a long time precluded the
very category of agricultural pollution from recognition. Conversely, when
agricultural pollution did come to be recognized, it was a pointer not only
194The moralization of risk and regulatory science
to the changing nature of agriculture but also to wider shifts occurring in
social meaning and sources of authority, including the erosion of some of
the basic dichotomies of industrial society. What has happened in recent
years is that, while nature continues to be a source of moral values and an
inspiration to efforts to sustain or recreate a new moral order, the actors
that now successfully mobilize this notion are environmental groups and
activists rather than agriculturalists. In consequence, contemporary con￾flicts between farming and the environment have a wider significance than
the specific issues of concern, being also struggles between competing
claims to authority. Indeed, agricultural pollution emerged as an issue in
the 1980s out of the highly charged debates over who should be trusted
with the vital responsibility of safeguarding the purity of water.
The moralization of risk and regulatory science
Throughout this period, what became apparent was a growing public
sensitivity towards risk, not least the risks involved in any contamination
of water sources. In recent years, the most influential sociological charac￾terization of technological and environmental risks has been that outlined
by Ulrich Beck (1992a,b). According to Beck, the distinctive nature of
contemporary risk is that it arises from the techno-economic decisions and
considerations of utility made by commercial and state organizations. It is
this that makes industrial risk a political issue. He goes on to argue that
a series of contemporary technological developments pose acute difficulties
for the political management of risk because of the scale, ubiquity, incal￾culability or unaccountability of the dangers they pose. This is exacerbated
by the "monopoly of scientists and engineers in the diagnosis of hazards"
(Beck 1992b: 107) including often the self-same people who are respons￾ible for creating the hazard in the first place. Beck's proposed solution is
a challenge to technocracy - a call for the establishment of democratic
control over "the hazard producing and administering industries" (ibid.:
115). The agents for this "ecological extension of democracy" (ibid.: 119)
must be oppositional citizens groups, since business, science and the state
are too implicated in the technological project. In this unequal struggle,
the main weapon citizens' groups have at their disposal is the contradic￾tions arising from a potentially "self-annihilating progress" (ibid.: 113).
Our own study confirms much of Beck's analysis but challenges it in
crucial respects. In particular, our study demonstrates how regulatory
195Conclusions: constructing moral orders
officials and citizens groups can combine to establish pollution as a major
public issue open to popular definition and with science playing a sup￾porting role. In seeking to build a constituency for public regulatory Func￾tions at the time of water privatization, pollution regulators were able to
draw on the discourse of environmental morality propagated by the envir￾onmental movement. In doing so, they needed to publicize and help poli￾ticize the existence of significant but overlooked problems of pollution.
Farm waste pollution exactly fitted the bill. However, in order to define
this matter as a public problem, there was a need for data. Hence farm
pollution incident statistics were first collated, and these seemed to indicate
a large and growing problem (Lowe et al. 1996).
What happened in the politicization of farm pollution, though, differs
from standard accounts of scientification (i.e. the process whereby a public
problem is redefined as a technical or scientific problem). Undoubtedly,
many individuals and organizations in the past had suffered from farm
pollution (anglers, riparian owners, other farmers, fish farmers, water sup￾pliers, water consumers, naturalists and so on). With the exception of the
"bad smell", however, the issue had not been a public problem but a tech￾nical problem (i.e. one subject to engineering or agronomic definitions
and solutions). Previously, the role of science - at least that conducted
by agricultural researchers on odour measurement and control - had been
to belittle the public aspect of the problem.
Now, in contrast, the availability of a means to quantify pollution
helped turn it into a public problem. Rather than expert closure, the very
opposite occurred. The attempt to quantify farm pollution, orchestrated
by water regulatory staff, not only made it into a public problem, but also
encouraged its popular definition. Crucially, farm pollution incident stat￾istics depended upon members of the public reporting incidents and,
from the mid-1980s, the regional water authorities and subsequendy the
NRA actively encouraged the public to do just that. The NRA continued
to rely on incident reporting as a gauge of the overall problem, as well as
in its day-to-day work in tracking down sources of pollution. The NRA
clearly regarded this public responsiveness as both a boon to its opera￾tional duties and as a means of maintaining popular support for its work.
There are parallels in other fields, such as the relationship between volun￾tary wildlife groups and conservation scientists and officials — a network
which, through its ability to assemble diffuse evidence about the status of
wildlife, has been able to uncover various insidious environmental threats
including, for example, the link between the use of certain pesticides and
196Networks, enrolment and identity creation
declines in bird populations (Moore 1987). Such examples suggest that,
through strategic links between regulatory scientists and environmental
groups, particular sociocultural constructions of risk can be established to
accommodate popular experience.
Networks, enrolment and identity creation
These examples also illustrate how accounts of pollution problems gener￾ally involve a host of social actors, natural entities and technical artefacts,
and so pose a challenge for conventional sociological study. The story of
farm waste pollution, for example, requires that we consider the roles and
functions of farmers, environmentalists, Pollution Inspectors, magistrates,
cows, fish, snails, slurry, rain, pits, tanks, pumps and various pieces of
paper (forms, guidelines, regulations and codes of practice). The recogni￾tion of the problem and its solution necessitate the orchestration of these
diverse and diffuse elements and actors. That is, they are the outcome of
actors constructing networks. In the words of Gallon et al. (1985: 10), the
role of sociological analysis within an actor network approach is to study
the creation of "categories and linkages, and examine the way in which some
are successfully imposed while others are not". The key to the approach
is the way in which actors create networks of relationships that assign roles
and identities to others. Through the successful creation of networks, some
actors are thereby able to assert particular meanings and representations
over others.
On the one hand, the broad recognition of farm waste pollution involved
the creation of a network drawing together environmental groups, regu￾latory officials, policy-makers, parliamentarians, farmers and concerned
members of the public. That network was able to establish the notion of
farm wastes as a major source of water pollution in the late 1980s. In
doing so, it established new identities for the various actors involved — for
example, casting members of the public as pollution watchdogs ("the eyes
and ears" of the regulators in the words of the NRA), farmers as potential
polluters, and the NRA as "Europe's strongest environmental protection
agency". On the other hand, the regulation of farm pollution involved
another network which, although intersecting with the first, was separate
from it. This second network encompassed the field-level actors: the farmers,
ADAS officials and Pollution Inspectors. It presented the solution for farm
197Concisions: constructing moral orders
pollution as being a matter of improved and expanded storage of farm
wastes. It cast farmers as waste managers and the field-level officials as
advisers in the storage and disposal of farm wastes.
These were not the only efforts at enrolment that were taking place.
For example, environmental activists sought to enrol Pollution Inspectors,
regional NRA managers, farmers, the local media and magistrates to adopt
a view of pollution incidents as criminal acts demanding summary pros￾ecution. At the same time, farmers* leaders with policy-makers, and indi￾vidual farmers with the officials they encountered, sought to recruit support
for their own self-image as responsible producers and countrymen attempt￾ing to cope with a regulatory onslaught.
How then do some networks succeed over others? If actors act in accord￾ance with the roles assigned to them, then this strengthens a network. For
example, the NRA'S acceptance of the mantle of environmental watchdog
was in keeping with the role assigned to it by the environmental lobby.
Likewise, many farmers tacitly accepted that they were potential polluters.
On the other hand, despite their detailed involvement with the farming
community over farm waste management issues, NRA Pollution Inspectors
acquiesced in the role assigned to them by ADAS officials of being special￾ists in river pollution but inexpert in agricultural matters. Similarly, it was
the view among farmers and agricultural advisers, encouraged by MAFF'S
Farm and Conservation Grant Scheme, that the "pollution problem" could
be "solved" through investment in technical equipment to store farm
effluents and dispose of them to land; a grant awarded and equipment
installed signified a problem solved. NRA officials struggled against this
technical-fix representation. In emphasizing the need for farmers to carry
out routine monitoring and maintenance of waste facilities and to be
vigilant against pollution, they sought to enlarge the accepted notion of
responsible farming practice. When such ascribed roles were accepted, and
actors acted accordingly, networks were strengthened and order emerged.
Networks eventually become stabilized through the circulation of "things"
between actors. As Gallon remarks "actors define one another in inter￾action - in the intermediaries that they put into circulation" (Gallon 1991:
135). Law suggests that some materials and artifacts appear more durable
than others and so maintain their relational patterns for longer. "When we
start to perform relations - and in particular when we embody them in
inanimate materials such as texts and buildings - they may last longer"
(Law 1992: 387). Hence a good ordering strategy, in the building of stable
networks, is to embody a set of relations in durable materials. Durability
198Networks, enrolment and identity creation
may be a function of how intermediaries are constructed or what they are
constructed from.
Legislation is one way of constructing durable intermediaries. The Farm
Waste Regulations, for example, established a statutory role for Pollution
Inspectors in overseeing farmers' waste facilities. Likewise, when the Code
of good agricultural practice changed from being a defence of farmers to a
defence of the environment, its legal basis was reconstructed. Conversely,
the NFU and MAFF resisted any suggestion that farm waste management
plans should be made legally compulsory. Another way of stabilizing net￾works through intermediaries is to fix relationships technologically (i.e. to
embed them in equipment or set them in concrete). The most durable
practical legacy of the episode we have studied was undoubtedly the many
tanks, pits and pumps that farmers were induced and subsidized to acquire.
These technological artefacts cast farmers as waste managers. They illustrate
Latour's claim that "technology is society made durable" (Latour 1991).
A variety of intermediaries, including pollution incident statistics, tele￾phone hotlines, regulations, codes of practice and waste management plans,
were all important in efforts to mobilize diffuse networks, in order to
stigmatize or regulate farm pollution. However, their meanings were not
predetermined, but were derived from, and reinforced by, particular pat￾terns of enrolment. Separate networks thus construed them differently,
and the ambiguities in the key intermediaries in our study underlined the
fact that one network had not prevailed over all others.
A pollution hotline, for example, could be a means of mobilizing pop￾ular support for the pollution regulators; however, environmental activ￾ists might seek to use it to gain leverage over the regulators' response to
pollution incidents. A Pollution Inspector's signature on a farmer's grant
application form for a pollution control scheme also signified quite differ￾ent things to different actors. To the NRA and to ADAS, it meant that the
scheme would be technically adequate to address the problem; but ADAS
staff saw this as a formality if they had designed the scheme; and the NRA
staff stressed the additional requirement of continual and careful mainten￾ance and management. To many farmers, though, the NRA'S approval
signified that the NRA was implicated in the decision about how best to
address pollution risks through technology: any future pollution problems
would, therefore, be "its fault too". Another example is the Code of good
agricultural practice, which was cast as a farmers' defence under a former
pattern of enrolment; but came to be seen as an environmental defence
when a new pattern was established. Likewise, waste management plans
199Conclusions: constructing moral orders
were put forward by the NRA as part of its development of a strategic and
preventive approach to catchment management planning and regulation,
one that would cast the farmers partly in the role of "waste treatment
engineers"; but waste management plans were taken up by ADAS and MAFF
as a means of extending the voluntary approach to agri-environmental
policy. These ambiguities represent attempts at counter-enrolment and
serve to indicate that the predominant pattern of enrolment is rarely total
or complete.
The key actors in these competing networks understood that they were
involved in a struggle to establish or resist different meanings. Even when
closure had been effected, there were still lone voices who sought to chal￾lenge a now predominant meaning. Some farmers, for example, did not
think of farm wastes as potent pollutants and, in refusing to identify
themselves as potential polluters, were inclined to ignore all those inter￾mediaries that would tend to cast them in such a role, including the Farm
Waste Regulations, the Code of good agricultural practice m& the Farm and
Conservation Grant Scheme. Likewise, the NFU would not accept pollu￾tion incident statistics as a measure, however crude, of the incidence of
farm pollution. Instead, and as if taking a leaf out of actor-network theory,
they objected to these statistics on the grounds that they were a social
construction (because of their dependence on public reporting)!
Agriculture's moral economy
In responding to charges of pollution, farmers were not abject; nor was
their sense of being responsible producers and countrymen a sham. In
understanding their responses, we have drawn on the notion of a moral
economy (Scott 1976), by which we mean a community's working defini￾tions of what is fair and unfair.
At the time of our field study in Devon, pollution was certainly among
the most pressing issues that dairy farmers faced nationally. The problem
was seen by farmers as yet another issue in a succession of crises - includ￾ing the imposition of milk quotas, the storms of 1987, BSE and so on
— seemingly visited on them by a capricious world. Most accepted the
desirability of avoiding pollution of rivers by farm wastes and felt they
had done what they could to minimize pollution risks. Mainly, they had
done so within what might be termed their "productivist rationale" which, at
200Agriculture's moral economy
the same time, acted as a major constraint in really tackling the problem.
Understanding productivism is essential to understanding how farmers
view the environment and how the farm pollution problem often poses
such conceptual difficulties for them.
Society needs food and so depends upon the success of farmers in
carrying out their work. This fact provided the obvious and undeniable
foundation for portraying agriculture as a vital and socially worthwhile
activity. The experience of urban industrialization and the consequent
spatial and occupational separation of the bulk of the population from its
own basic provisioning served to heighten this sense of dependency, par￾ticularly in the century of total war and the threat this posed to the food
security of urban populations. But the rationale of the sector was not
simply to provide, but became, above all, to expand. The philosophy of
productivism construed production as good, but also more production as
always better.
Productivism resonated with a work ethic which saw sloth rather than
greed as sinful, linked virtue and industriousness, and saw greater wealth
as the just reward for hard work. Thus, productive farmers were seen as
better farmers, with greater yields displaying the virtuousness of hard work.
This work ethic became especially associated with agrarian culture, par￾ticularly since urban culture had come to project virtues such as refine￾ment, taste and artistic achievement, which bespoke leisure time, and
vices, such as unemployment, welfare dependency and hedonism, which
bespoke idleness and dissolution.
The quest to "make two blades of grass grow where only one once
grew" became agriculture's central maxim in the technological revolution
of the post-war decades. It infused agricultural policy, but became even
more firmly ingrained at the farm level, where technological changes brought
profound increases in output and productivity. The effect was to eliminate
the old dichotomy between progressive and traditional farming and replace
it with a single dominant model of "technocentric productivism". Paul
Thompson describes such a philosophy as "the headlong and unreflective
application of industrial technology for increasing production" (1995: 70,
see also Ward 1993, 1995). As such, it could almost be described as an
anti-environmental philosophy, save for one important fact. Productivism
in agriculture was usually combined with and qualified by the duty of
stewardship - the responsibility to care for nature. This notion was often
expressed by farmers in terms of keeping the land "in good heart", includ￾ing a sense that sound farming involved passing on the farm to the next
201Conclusions: constructing moral orders
generation in "a better condition". Farmers also readily acknowledged a
wider role that they played within the countryside, and often talked of
their contribution to the making of the landscape. They used farming's
past contribution as a rhetorical defence against contemporary accusations
of polluting nature.
However, according to Thompson, traditional agrarian stewardship "is
conceived as a duty ethically subservient to production; hence when stew￾ardship would entail constraints on production, duties to nature seldom
prevail over the productivist ethic" (1995: 72). In effect, modern techno￾logy drove a wedge between the farmer's interest in production and tradi￾tional agrarian stewardship, although within the moral economy of the
farmer the discourse of stewardship is still drawn upon. However, the
crucial distinction between productivism and stewardship as a set of values
is that the former is embodied in the techno-economic system within
which farmers are embedded, whereas the latter is individualized and seen
as a matter of personal responsibility.
Thus, few of the farmers we surveyed were critical of technology. They
tended to see technological change as inevitable and ineluctable, closely
associated with notions of "agricultural development" and "progress". The
vast majority of farmers did not see pollution as an indictment of the
farming systems or the technologies they used. Although technology was
thus seen to be an impersonal but benign force, pollution problems were
seen to arise from changing public attitudes. Increased public sensitivities
to environmental issues, coupled with a climate of opinion less sympa￾thetic towards farming, was leading to growing intolerance of the prob￾lems farmers faced. On this issue, therefore, farmers' personal sense of
worth (in the stewardship ethos) faced social rejection, and inevitably this
reinforced their feeling of isolation and alienation.
The farmer and the field-level bureaucrat
The farmers were not the only ones in our study who had to deal with
contradictory demands. This was also true of the Pollution Inspectors.
They operated at the intersection of the two main networks we have
identified: one constructed on the basis of environmental morality; the
other on agriculture's moral economy. Other studies of the working lives
202The farmer and the field-level bureaucrat
of local officials have characterized their positions as ones of structural
ambiguity or contradiction in having to mediate between grassroots realit￾ies and centrally imposed rules. Here, two such literatures have proved
helpful in interpreting our findings.
The first literature originates in studies of the implementation of public
policy (particularly urban and social policy) and concerns the work (in
exercising discretion, interpreting policy and in dealing with the complex￾ity of the social world) of the so-called "street-level bureaucrat" (Lipsky
1980). Given the different context of our work, we have adapted this label
to that of "field-level bureaucrat". The second literature originates in
development studies and rural sociology, where "actor-oriented" perspect￾ives have been developed to examine "encounters at the interface", typic￾ally between rural producers and representatives of states, development
agencies or technology interests (see, for example, Long 1989).
The street-level bureaucrat literature tells us that "the decisions of street￾level bureaucrats, the routines they establish, and the devices they invent
to cope with uncertainties and work pressures, effectively become the
public policies they carry out" (Lipsky 1980: xii). Such a perspective sug￾gests caution over the feasibility of top-down policy change amid the
inertia of established ways of working and field-level relationships. It is
through implementation "on the street" (or in our case, in the field) that
de facto regulatory policy is created (see also Ham & Hill 1993). Of cru￾cial importance is the development by street-level bureaucrats of practices
that enable them to cope with the pressures they face. Lipsky explains,
"they believe themselves to be doing the best they can under adverse cir￾cumstances and they develop techniques to salvage service and decision￾making values within the limits imposed upon them by the structure of
their work. They develop conceptions of their work and of their clients
that narrow the gap between their personal and work limitations and the
service ideal" (Lipsky 1980: xii). The field-level bureaucrats we studied
conformed to this model. The literature suggests their coping strategies
may include: choosing easy rather than difficult cases; routinization of
procedures and working methods; standardized classification of the regu￾lated world and of client groups; and adopting a cynical attitude to ambi￾tious goals and their replacement with more personal goals.
The literature also identifies a range of regulatory policy styles, with
legislative approaches at one extreme and laissez faire (with its associated
risks of policy "capture") at the other. Between these two extremes lies
"flexible enforcement" (see Bardach &: Kagan 1982) where discretion is
203Conclusions: constructing moral orders
exercised over centrally devised rules, but where the identification of "good
apples" and "bad apples" among target groups comes to be of crucial
importance. We found this to be so in our study of Pollution Inspectors
and farmers.
The basic twofold division which Pollution Inspectors make of farmers
- that of "persuadable" and "problem" types - fits in well with findings
from other studies of regulatory agencies. These have recognized that,
whereas officials regard most offenders as potentially compliant, there is
usually a small minority who cannot be persuaded to comply with the law
by appeal to a sense of social responsibility (Hawkins 1984). However, in
none of these other studies does there appear to be such suspicion of the
regulated group to the extent that an overriding model of the regulated as
potential law-breakers emerges.
Pollution Inspectors have an absolute notion of farm pollution. To
pollute a river or stream is a wrongful act, because of its effects. Pollution
Inspectors have an expert understanding of the sensitivity of the water
environment and the functioning of aquatic ecosystems, and they are
aware of the potency of farm effluents. They therefore fully appreciate the
damage that farm pollution can do. Their task is to "make rivers clean"
and they are reluctant to regard any amount of pollution as acceptable.
In contrast, farmers have a relative notion of pollution informed less
by an understanding of its consequences and more by an understanding
of the context in which it arises. Dairy farmers have to deal with consider￾able volumes of farm effluents every day. In heavy rain or when storage
facilities fail, effluent escape is unavoidable, and may be mitigated by the
circumstances - for example, the rapid dilution and dispersal of pollutants
in a river in spate. Of course, a large spillage of effluent is regrettable but
"a little won't hurt"; after all, farm wastes are "natural" substances. For
farmers, the morality of farm pollution concerns the morality of the deed -
whether the pollution was deliberate or accidental. Their sense of personal
worth, responsibility and circumstances all come into play around the
morality of farming and the morality of pollution.
In recent years, farmers have been required to alter their farming prac￾tices, sometimes in major ways, because of pollution regulations, but these
changes go "against the grain" of the prevailing production logic. They
have been reluctant to spend what they regard as "dead" money on install￾ing pollution equipment, and have resented the additional regulatory powers
being exercised over them. Many farmers in our survey saw these regula￾tions as indicative of a wider "anti-farmer" sentiment in society. In part,
204The farmer and the field-level bureaucrat
this explains their rather begrudging response. As one farmer succinctly
explained to us:
Farmers are more aware of the problem and are making plans to put
it right. [Pollution regulations] haven't made people change their set
ups too much. They just try to deal with it in their own way. For
example, people haven't switched to straw bedding or cut their stock.
They try and go on as they were and do what they have to, to stop
pollution, (farmer interview)
That is to say, when farmers did take steps to improve pollution control
on their farms, they were "taking it on board" but not "altering course".
The fact that intensive slurry-based dairy farming continued as the model
production system was, however, increasingly at odds with the growing
public perception, propagated by environmental pressure groups, of farm
pollution as an indictment of modern farming practices. Most of the
changes made on farms were undertaken within the constraints of food
production processes, rather than as part of the farmers' role as environ￾mental managers. Our survey revealed a few farmers making changes in their
fodder cropping patterns and feeding practices, for example, in an effort
to make slurry more manageable and so reduce the risk of pollution.
However, such steps remained the exception rather than the rule, and
tended to be limited to those farmers with both the resources and an
understanding of the scale of the challenge that pollution might pose for
the farming industry. For the majority of farmers, modifications to their
pollution-control facilities and procedures were largely reactive, made in
response to regulatory pressures from the field-level bureaucrats, and were
mainly "add on" changes that did not alter their production systems.
Although the Pollution Inspectors were armed with new powers, the
farmers were not powerless in the face of a seemingly much stricter regime.
After all, it was they who had to be persuaded or dragooned into acting
differently. Their limited scope or inclination for action was a major
determinant of the pace of change. In his study of forms of resistance
among peasants in rural Malaysia, Scott examined the ordinary, everyday
"weapons" of relatively powerless groups in the face of state bureaucracy
or capitalist exploitation (Scott 1985). Scott's subjects, as subordinate
classes, were interested less in changing the larger structures of the
state and the law than in what Hobsbawm (1973) termed "working the
system ... to their own minimum disadvantage". In such an endeavour,
205Conclusions: constructing moral orders
the weapons at the peasants* disposal included foot-dragging, false com￾pliance, feigned ignorance and so on. In similar terms, what "weapons" do
British dairy farmers use when confronted by new regulatory controls?
We have identified four types of strategy from our fieldwork. The first
involved "keeping your'head down", hoping no problems would arise that
would draw the regulators' attention to your farm, and hoping the issue
of pollution would just "go away". The second strategy was to pursue
delaying tactics in order to avoid spending on pollution control facilities
or to deflect prosecution. This might involve stringing out negotiations
with Pollution Inspectors, losing forms, pleading lack of time or resources,
arguing that any required action was inopportune, or endless procrastina￾tion. The third strategy was to seek to coopt the Pollution Inspectors. This
might involve the farmer in trying to explain the specific difficulties posed
by the farm circumstances, such as the poor financial conditions or the
level of indebtedness, in order to "educate" the Pollution Inspectors about
the particular constraints faced. Farmers also treated Pollution Inspectors
as advisers, thereby seeking to implicate them in the decisions and actions
taken. A fourth "weapon" of resistance was to attempt to "blackmail" the
Pollution Inspectors. These attempts ranged from threats that the farm
might go out of business if regulations were enforced, to threats of non￾cooperation, and even to threats of violence. In our interviews with farmers
and our participant observation studies "shadowing" regulatory officials in
their work, we learned of examples of each of these strategies.
In response to the variety of farmers, and because of the farmers* ability
to exercise sanction over regulatory power, whether through inaction or
malicious action, the Pollution Inspectors had to develop coping strat￾egies. Often, these strategies involved the Pollution Inspectors developing
working classifications of farmers as "good" and "bad". Such categoriza￾tions were relative, distinguishing between conscientious or "persuadable"
farmers and "rogue" or recalcitrant ones. Crucially, the Pollution Inspec￾tors' categories resonated with those of the farming community in being
based on the moral worth of the farmer rather than the consequences of
the pollution.
Usually, Pollution Inspectors' weapons of environmental morality were
thus only deployed when they corresponded to the farmers' own moral
values. The only farmers automatically prosecuted in the courts for caus￾ing pollution were those responsible for major, serious pollution incidents
(that is, in obeisance to environmental morality). Beyond that, the only
farmers to be prosecuted were those viewed essentially as "rogue" farmers,
206Afterword
not only by the Pollution Inspectors but also by the farming community.
It was as if prosecution had either to have the tacit acceptance of the farm￾ing community or it had to be obviously seen by the Pollution Inspector
to reinforce the categories held by the farmers themselves - in other words
between what was seen as responsible and what was seen as utterly irrespons￾ible behaviour. Overall, under 10 per cent of farm pollution incidents were
usually prosecuted each year. Thus, although Pollution Inspectors were
armed with the outlook and powers of the new environmental morality,
they found in their efforts to improve river quality in practice that they
were dependent upon the cooperation of the farming community. To
secure that cooperation they had to work with the grain of what that
community considered fair and unfair, right and wrong - in other words,
the farming community's moral economy. Punishing farmers who deliber￾ately emptied slurry into rivers would be acceptable, but it would be less
acceptable to prosecute where overflows or equipment failure had occurred
in heavy rain, or where farmers were doing their best to improve waste
management facilities, or where enforcement action might put them out
of business.
Afterword
The politicization of farm pollution led to the imposition of various con￾trols on agriculture to restrain the excesses of agricultural productivism.
What these environmental regulations meant in practice was that farmers
were increasingly confronted by regulatory officials armed not only with
new powers but also with a new moral authority. The exchanges that took
place between them were not limited to what constituted sound agricul￾tural practice, but touched on nature, morality and the law. Much of what
was of interest to us not only in the regulation of polluting agricultural
practices, but also in terms of the making and undoing of moral dis￾courses, occurred in these encounters. What was revealed was a traditional
order (of agricultural productivism) under challenge and a new order
(around environmentally responsible agriculture) being discursively con￾structed and resisted.
As we put the finishing touches to the manuscript for this book, we
cannot help but reflect upon how our account of the moralizing of the
environment might be relevant beyond the confines of our particular
207Conclusions: constructing moral orders
empirical focus of farm pollution. For the past nine months of 1996,
British agriculture has been in turmoil over BSE, following the acknow￾ledgement by the Secretary of State for Health in March 1996 of the
possible link between eating contaminated beef and the identification of
a new strain of the human brain disease, Creutzfeldt Jacob Disease. For
the Devon dairy farmers we studied, the scale of this crisis will have
swamped the farm pollution crisis of a few years earlier. In a perceptive
piece in The Independent^ journalist Andrew Marr has pointed to the ways
that the degree of public outrage over BSE reflect a clash of moral values
(Marr 1996). Mad cow disease is not just a question of public health, nor
simply a question of regulatory politics:
 ult is a question of town and
country. It has provoked the biggest crisis for generations in relations
between farming . . . and the cities where most of us live." Marr's story is
a familiar one, and similar to our own. Farmers were once "respected
national heroes whose sweat and knowledge helped the country survive
war and eat ever better in peacetime". Yet recently we have seen a dra￾matic change of attitude. "A rampant urban moralism has increasingly
painted farmers as big business villains - cruel, greedy, insensitive, pollut￾ing". Campaigners protest about live animal exports, suspicious consumers
view meat and fruit with fear and trepidation. "Urban Britain stares bleakly
at rural Britain, and finds it wanting. . . . From the other end of die tele￾scope, the minority still working the land stares back at the cities and
suburbs and sees a haze of hypocrisy and ignorance".
We have sought in our study to reveal the roots of these competing
moralities by examining how farm pollution shifted from being a technical
side-effect of efficient food production to an environmental crime. We
have done this by tracing the views and actions of those actors most
closely involved, following them as they constructed their networks, pre￾cariously building their worlds and struggling to convince others of what
is natural and what is unnatural, what is right and what is wrong.
208Bibliography
Advisory Council for Agriculture and Horticulture 1975. Inquiry into pollution
from farm waste, pan III - report on pollution from farm wastes (December).
London: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Agricultural Research Council 1976. Studies of farm livestock wastes. London: Agri￾cultural Research Council.
Bailey, R. & J. Minhinick 1989. The agricultural requirement for water, with
particular reference to irrigation. In Agriculture and the environment: technical
papers from the annual symposium^ Institution of Water and Environmental
Management, 8.1-8.16. London: Institution of Water and Environmental
Management.
Bardach, E. & R. Kagan 1982. Going by the book: the problem of regulatory unrea￾sonableness. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Beck, L. 1989. A review of farm waste pollution. Journal of the Institution of Water
and Environmental Management 3, 467—77.
Beck, U. 1992a. Risk society: towards a new modernity. London: Sage.
Beck, U. 1992b. From industrial society to the risk society: Questions of survival,
social structure and ecological enlightenment. Theory, Culture and Society 9, 97-
123.
Bell, M. M. 1994. Childerley: nature and morality in a country village. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Bolton, N. & B. Chalkley 1990. The rural population turnaround: a case study
of North Devon. Journal of Rural Studies 6, 29-43.
Brassley, P. 1996. Silage in Britain, 1880-1990: the delayed adoption of an innova￾tion. Agricultural History Review 44, 68-87.
Brownlie, T. & N. Taylor 1982. Report on survey of fodder silos. Edinburgh: Depart￾ment of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland.
Gallon, M. 1986a. Some elements of a sociology of translation: domestication of
the scallops and fishermen of St Brieuc Bay. In Power, action and belief: a
new sociology of knowledge^ J. Law (ed.), 196-233. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
209Moralizing the environment
Gallon, M. 1986b. The sociology of an actor-network: the case of the electric
vehicle. In Mapping the dynamics of science and technology* M. Gallon, J. Law,
A. Rip (eds), 19-34. London: Macmillan.
Gallon, M. 1991. Techno-economic networks and irreversibility. In The sociology
of * monsters, J. Law (ed.), 132-61. London: Routledge.
Gallon, M., J. Law, A. Rip 1985. How to study the force of science. In Mapping
the dynamics of science and technology, M. Gallon, J. Law, A. Rip (eds), 3-17.
London: Macmillan.
Centre for Agri-food Business Studies 1991. A survey of dairy farmers' attitudes
towards MMB reform. Royal Agricultural College, Cirencester.
Champion, A. & A. Townsend 1990. Contemporary Britain: a geographical perspec￾tive. London: Edward Arnold.
Clark, J. & P. Lowe 1992. Cleaning up agriculture: environment, technology and
social science. Sociologia Ruralis 32, 11-29.
Clark, J., P. Lowe, S. Seymour, N. Ward 1994. Sustainable agriculture and pollu￾tion regulation in the UK. Working Paper Series 13, Centre for Rural Economy,
University of Newcastle upon Tyne.
Commoner, B. 1966. Science and survival New York: Viking.
Confederation of British Industry 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the Com￾mittee. See House of Commons Environment Committee (1991) 63-7.
Conway, G. & J. Pretty 1991. Unwelcome harvest: agriculture and pollution. Lon￾don: Earthscan.
Council for the Protection of Rural England 1987. Memorandum of evidence to
the Committee. See House of Commons Environment Committee (1987) 360-
66.
Cox, G., P. Lowe, M. Winter 1988. Private rights and public responsibilities: the
prospects for agricultural and environmental controls Journal of Rural Studies 4,
323-37.
— 1990. The voluntary principle in conservation. Chichester: Packard.
Department of the Environment 1976. Pollution control in Great Britain: how it
works [Pollution Paper 9]. London: HMSO.
— 1983. Agriculture and pollution: the Government's response to the seventh report
of the Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution [Pollution Paper 21]. Lon￾don: HMSO.
— 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the Committee. See House of Commons
Environment Committee (1987) 1-14.
— 1988. The Government's response to the third report of the Environment Commit￾tee (Session 1986-87) on pollution of rivers and estuaries [HC Paper No. 543].
London: HMSO.
— 1995. Freshwater quality: Government response to the sixteenth report of the
Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution. London: Department of the
Environment.
Department of the Environment/Welsh Office 1986a. River quality in England
and Wales 1985: a report of the 1985 survey. London: HMSO.
210Bibliography
Department of the Environment/Welsh Office 1986B. The water environment: the
next steps. London: Department of the Environment.
— 1992. Planning policy guidance: the countryside and the rural economy [Planning
Policy Guidance 7]. London: HMSO.
Douglas, M. 1966. Purity and danger: an analysis of the concepts of pollution and
taboo. London: ARK Paperbacks.
ENDS 1985. MAFF persuaded to tighten agricultural pollution code. ENDS Report
120, 21-2. London: Environmental Data Services.
ENDS 1990. River authority wants farm waste plans to reduce water pollution.
ENDS Report 183, 6-7. London: Environmental Data Services.
Federation of United Kingdom Milk Marketing Boards 1991. United Kingdom
dairy facts and figures — 1991. Thames Ditton: Federation of United Kingdom
Milk Marketing Boards.
Foucault, M. 1965. Madness and civilization. New York: Pantheon.
— 1970. The order of things. New York: Vintage.
Friends of the Earth 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the Committee. See
House of Commons Environment Committee (1987) 160-96.
— 1991. The water campaigners guide to farm pollution. London: Friends of the
Earth.
Furness, G., D. Colman, S. Webb, K. Hendry 1991. The status of waste handling
facilities on livestock farms in Great Britain, 1990/91. Report to the Ministry of
Agriculture, Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Manchester.
Gowan, D. 1972. Slurry and farm waste disposal Ipswich: Farming Press.
Grove-White, R. 1993. Environmentalism: a new moral discourse for technolo￾gical society? In Environmentalism: the view from anthropology* K. Milton (ed.),
18-30. London: Routledge.
Grundey, K. 1980. Tackling farm waste. Ipswich: Farming Press.
Halliday, J. 1987. The effect of milk quotas on milk producing farms: a study of
registered milk producers in the Honiton and Torrington areas of Devon. Exeter:
Devon County Council/University of Exeter.
— 1988. Dairy farmers take stock: a study of milk producers' reactions to quota
in Devon. Journal of Rural Studies 4, 193-202.
Ham, C. & M. Hill 1993. The policy process in the modern capitalist state, 2nd edn.
Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Haslam, S. 1990. River pollution: an ecological perspective. London: Pinter (Belhaven).
Hawkins, K. 1984. Environment and enforcement: regulation and the social defini￾tion of pollution. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
— 1989. Rule and discretion in comparative perspective: the case for social regu￾lation. Ohio State Law Journal 50, 663-79.
Hawkins, E., J. Bryden, N. Gilliatt, N. MacKinnon 1993. Engagement in agri￾culture 1987-1991: a West European perspective. Journal of Rural Studies 9,
277-90.
Hays, S. 1984. The British conservation scene: a view from the United States. Ecos
5(3), 20-27.
211Moralizing the environment
Hellawell, J. 1986. Biological indicators of freshwater quality and environmental
management. London: Elsevier.
Hill, M., S. Aaronovitch, D. Baldock 1989. Non-decision-making in pollution
control in Britain: nitrate pollution, the EEC Drinking Water Directive and
agriculture. Policy and Politics 17, 227-40.
Hobsbawm, E. 1973. Peasants and politics. Journal of Peasant Studies 1, 3-22.
Holmes, N. 1990. British river plants. British Wildlife 1, 130-43.
House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts 1991. Advisory services to
agriculture [HC Paper 465, Session 1990-91]. London: HMSO.
House of Commons Environment Committee 1987. Pollution of rivers and estu￾aries [HC Paper 183-1, Third Report, Session 1986-7]. London: HMSO.
Howarth, W. 1992. Agricultural pollution and the aquatic environment. In Agri￾cultural conservation and land use: law and policy for rural areas, W. Howarth &
C. Rogers (eds), 51-72. Cardiff: University of Wales Press.
Institution of Water and Environmental Management 1987. Memorandum of
evidence to the Committee. See House of Commons Environment Committee
(1987) 243-8.
Kinnersley, D. 1988. Troubled water: rivers, politics and pollution. London: Hilary
Shipman.
— 1994. Coming clean: the politics of water and the environment. London: Penguin.
Kneale, J., P. Lowe, T. Marsden 1992. The conversion of agricultural buildings: an
analysis of variable pressures and regulations towards the post-productivist country￾side. Countryside Change Working Paper 29, Department of Agricultural Eco￾nomics and Food Marketing, University of Newcastle upon Tyne.
Knowland, T. 1993. Changing the guard? institutional change in water pollution
control. PhD thesis, School of Environmental Science, University of East Anglia.
Latour, B. 1986. The powers of association. In Power, action and belief: a new
sociology of knowledge^ J. Law (ed.), 196-233. London: Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
— 1987. Science in action: how to follow scientists and engineers through society.
Milton Keynes, England: Open University Press.
— 1993. We have never been modern. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Law, J. 1992. Notes on the theory of the actor-network: ordering, strategy and
heterogeneity. Systems Practice 5, 379-93.
— 1994. Organizing modernity. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Lipsky, M. 1980. Street-level bureaucracy. New York: Russell Sage.
Long, N. (ed.) 1989. Encounters at the interface: a perspective on social discontinuities
in rural development. Department of Sociology, Wageningen Agricultural Uni￾versity, The Netherlands.
Lowe, P. & M. Bodiguel (eds) 1990. Rural studies in Britain and France. London:
Pinter (Belhaven).
Lowe, P. & A. Flynn 1989. Environmental politics and policy in the 1980s. In
The political geography of contemporary Britain, }. Mohan (ed.), 225-79. Lon￾don: Macmillan.
272Bibliography
Lowe, P. & W. Riidig 1986. Political ecology and the social sciences. British
Journal of Political Science 16, 513-50.
Lowe, P. & S. Ward (eds) 1998. British environmental policy and Europe. London:
Routledge.
Lowe, P. & N. Ward 1997. Field-level bureaucrats and the making of new moral
discourses in agri-environmental controversies. In Globalizing Food: agrarian
questions and global restructuring, D. Goodman & M. Watts (eds). London:
Routledge.
Lowe, P., G. Cox, M. MacEwen, T. O'Riordan, M. Winter 1986. Countryside
conflicts: the politics of farming, forestry and conservation. Aldershot, England:
Gower.
Lowe, P., J. Clark, S. Seymour, N. Ward 1992. Pollution control on dairy farms:
an evaluation of current policy and practice. London: SAFE Alliance.
Lowe, P., J. Murdoch, T. Marsden, R. Munton, A. Flynn 1993. Regulating the
new rural spaces: issues arising from the uneven development of land. Journal
of Rural Studies 9, 205-22.
Lowe, P., J. Murdoch, G. Cox 1995. A civilised retreat? Anti-urbanism, rurality
and the making of Anglo-centric culture. In Managing cities: the new urban
context, P. Healey, S. Cameron, S. Davoudi, S. Graham and A. Mandani-Pour
(eds), 63-82. Chichester: John Wiley,
Lowe, P., N. Ward, S. Seymour, J. Clark 1996. Farm pollution as environmental
crime. Science as Culture 25, 588-612.
MacKinnon, N., J. Bryden, C. Bell, A. Fuller, M. Spearman 1991. Pluriactivity,
structural change and farm household vulnerability in Western Europe. Sociologia
RuralisSl, 58-71.
Maloney, W. & J. Richardson 1994. Water policy-making in England and Wales:
policy communities under pressure. Environmental Politics 3, 110-38.
— 1995. Managing policy change in Britain: the politics of water. Edinburgh: Edin￾burgh University Press.
Marr, A. 1996. Town vs country: a rampant urban moralism has been unleashed
upon the countryside. The Independent (29 March).
Marsden, T., P. Lowe, S. Whatmore (eds) 1990 Rural restructuring: Global pro￾cesses and their responses. London: David Fulton.
Marsden, T., J. Murdoch, P. Lowe, R. Munton, A. Flynn 1993. Constructing the
countryside. London: UCL Press.
Mason, P. 1992. Farm waste storage: guidelines for construction [CIRIA
Report 126]. London: Construction Industry Research and Information
Association.
McCloughlin, J. 1975. Control of farm pollution. Journal of Planning and Envir￾onmental Law 4, 78.
Milne, R. 1989. Parasite in farm waste threatens water supplies. New Scientist
(29 July), 22.
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food 1975. Food from our own resources
[Cmnd 6020]. London: HMSO.
273Moralizing the environment
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food 1979. Agriculture in 2000 AD. In
Agriculture and pollution [Seventh Report of the Royal Commission on
Environmental Pollution [Cmrtd 7644], 242-68]. London: HMSO.
— 1980. Slurry handling: useful facts and figures [Booklet 2356]. London: MAFF
Publications.
— 1982a. Profitable utilization of livestock manures [Booklet 2081, revised 1982].
London: MAFF Publications.
— 1982b. The storage of farm manures and slurries [Booklet 2273, revised 1982].
London: MAFF Publications.
— 1983. General information: farm waste management [Booklet 2077, revised 1983].
London: MAFF Publications.
— 1985. Code of good agricultural practice [PB0100]. London: MAFF Publications.
— 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the Committee. See House of Commons
Environment Committee (1987) 114-19.
— 1992. Pilot study to cut farm waste pollution [MAFF News Release, 21 January]
London: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
— 1993. Changes to the Farm and Conservation Grant Scheme [MAFF News Release
418/93, 30 November] London: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
— 1994a. Further action against farm waste pollution [MAFF News Release 322/
94, 23 August]. London: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
— 1994b. Farm waste handling grants to end [MAFF News Release 444/94,
29 November]. London: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food/Welsh Office Agriculture Department
1991. Code of good agricultural practice for the protection of water. London: MAFF
Publications.
Mitchell, J. 1983. Case and situation analysis. Sociological Review 31, 187-211.
Moore, N. 1987. The bird of time: the science and politics of nature conservation.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mumford, L. 1961. The city in history. London: Seeker & Warburg.
Murdoch, J. 1994. Weaving the seamless web: a consideration of network analysis and
its potential application to the study of the rural economy. Centre for Rural Economy
Working Paper 3, Department of Agricultural Economics, University of New￾castle upon Tyne.
— 1995. Actor networks and the evolution of economic forms: combining descrip￾tion and explanation in theories of regulation, flexible specialisation and networks.
Environment and Planning A 27, 731-57.
— forthcoming. Inhuman/nonhuman/human: actor-network theory and the pro￾spects for a non-dualistic and symmetrical perspective on nature and society.
Environment and Planning D: Society and Space.
National Audit Office 1995. National Rivers Authority: river pollution from farms
in England - report by the Comptroller and Auditor General [HC 235 Session
1994-5]. London: HMSO.
National Farmers' Union 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the Committee. See
House of Commons Environment Committee (1987) 136—43.
214Bibliography
National Farmers' Union 1990. Proposed control of pollution regulation: a statement
by the NFU. London: National Farmers' Union.
— 1992. NFU welcomes recommendations on pollution [NFU Press Release, 21 Janu￾ary 1992]. London: National Farmers' Union.
National Rivers Authority 1989a. Fact sheet 13: conservation. London: National
Rivers Authority.
— 1989b. Guardians of the water environment [NRA leaflet]. London: National
Rivers Authority.
— 1990a. Annual report and accounts 1989/90. London: National Rivers Authority.
— 1990b. Water pollution from farm waste 1989: England and Wales. London:
National Rivers Authority.
— 1991. The quality of rivers, canals and estuaries in England and Wales: report of
the 1990 survey [Water Quality Series 4]. Bristol: National Rivers Authority.
— 1992a. The influence of agriculture on the quality of natural waters in England
and Wales. Bristol: National Rivers Authority.
— 1992b. Annual report and accounts - 1991/2. Bristol: National Rivers Authority.
— 1992c. Water pollution incidents in England and Wales - 1991. [Water Quality
Series 9] Bristol: National Rivers Authority.
— 1992d. Water pollution incidents in England and Wales - 1990. [Water Quality
Series 7] Bristol: National Rivers Authority.
— 1993. Water pollution incidents in England and Wales - 1992 [Water Quality
Series 13]. Bristol: National Rivers Authority.
— 1994. Water pollution incidents in England and Wales - 1993 [Water Quality
Series 21]. Bristol: National Rivers Authority.
— 1995. Water pollution incidents in England and Wales - 1994 [Water Quality
Series 25]. Bristol: National Rivers Authority.
National Rivers Authority/Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food 1990. Water
pollution from farm waste 1989 (England and Wales). London: National Rivers
Authority.
National Rivers Authority South West Region 1992. NRA in New Year pollution
blitz [National Rivers Authority South West News Release, 8 January]. Exeter:
National Rivers Authority South West.
Natural Environmental Research Council 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the
Committee. See House of Commons Environment Committee (1987) 74-82.
Nature Conservancy Council 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the Committee.
See House of Commons Environment Committee (1987) 256-60.
— 1991. Nature conservation and pollution from farm wastes. Peterborough: Nature
Conservancy Council.
Newby, H., C. Bell, D. Rose, P. Saunders 1978. Property, paternalism and power.
London: Hutchinson.
Nielson, V. 1990. Farm waste management: the challenge of the next decade.
Journal of the Royal Agricultural Society of England 151, 187-200.
Norgaard, R. 1994. Development betrayed: the end of progress and a co-evolutionary
revisioning of the future. London: Routledge.
215Moralizing the environment
Pake, C. 1991. Your solution to pollution. Farmers Weekly (21 June), 62-6.
Payne, M. 1986. Agricultural pollution - the farmers' view. In Effects of land use
on fresh waters, J. F. de L. B. Solbe (ed.), 329-34. Chichester: Ellis Horwood.
Pearce, F. 1986. A green unpleasant land. New Scientist (24 July), 26-7.
Porter, T. 1995. Trust in numbers: the pursuit of objectivity in science and public life.
Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Revill, G. and S. Seymour 1996. Dishing the dirt: telling stories of Pollution
Inspectors, ethnography and rural research. Paper presented at the RSG/IBG
Conference, Glasgow.
Richardson, S. J. 1976. Proceedings of Conference on Agriculture and Water
Quality Agricultural development and advisory service technical bulletin No. 32.
London: Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and Food.
Richardson, J., W. Maloney, W. Riidig 1991. Privatising water. Strathclyde Papers
on Government and Politics 80, Department of Government, University of
Strathclyde.
Royal Commission on Environmental Pollution 1971. First report [Cmnd 4585].
London: HMSO.
— 1974. Pollution control: progress and problems [Fourth Report, Cmnd 5870].
London: HMSO.
— 1979. Agriculture and pollution [Seventh Report, Cmnd 7644]. London: HMSO.
— 1992. Freshwater quality [Sixteenth Report, Cmnd 1966]. London: HMSO.
Saunders, P. 1985. The forgotten dimensions of central-local relations: theories of
the "regional state". Environment and Planning C3, 149-62.
Schofield, K., J. Seager, R. Merriman 1990. The impact of intensive farming
activities on river quality: the eastern Cleddau catchment study. Journal of the
Institute of Water and Environmental Management 4, 176-86.
Scott, J. 1976. The moral economy of the peasant: rebellion and subsistence in South￾east Asia. New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.
— 1985. Weapons of the weak: everyday forms of peasant resistance. New Haven,
Connecticut: Yale University Press.
— 1989. Everyday forms of resistance. In Everyday forms of peasant resistance,
F. Colburn (ed.), 3-33. New York: M. E. Sharpe.
Seymour, S., P. Lowe, N. Ward and J. Clark 1997. Environmental "others" and
"elites": rural pollution and changing power relations in the countryside. In
Revealing rural "others": representation power and identity in the British country￾side, P. Milbourne (ed.), 57-74. London: Pinter.
South West Water Authority 1986. Environmental investigation of the River Torridge.
Exeter: Department of Environmental Services, South West Water Authority.
— 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the Committee. See House of Commons
Environment Committee (1987) 306-9.
Storey, D. 1977. A socio-economic approach to water pollution law enforcement
in England and Wales. International Journal of Social Economics 4, 207-24.
Thompson, P. 1995. The spirit of the soil: agriculture and environmental ethics.
London: Routledge.
Trevelyan, G. 1942. English Social History. Harlow, England: Longman.
216Bibliography
Vogel, D. 1986. National styles of regulation: environmental policy in Great Britain
and the United States. Ithaca, New York: Cornell University Press.
Ward, N. 1993. The agricultural treadmill and the rural environment in the post￾productivist era. Sociologia Ruralis 33, 348-64.
— 1995. Technological change and the regulation of pollution from agricultural
pesticides. Geoforum 26, 19-33.
Ward, N. &: P. Lowe 1994. Shirting values in agriculture: the farm family and
pollution regulation. Journal of Rural Studies 10, 173-84.
Ward, N., P. Lowe, S. Seymour, J. Clark 1995a. Rural restructuring and the
regulation of farm pollution. Environment and Planning A 27, 1193-211.
Ward, N., H. Bullcr, P. Lowe 1995b. Implementing European environmental policy
at the local level: the UK experience with water quality directives [2 volumes].
Research Report, Centre for Rural Economy, University of Newcastle upon
Tyne.
— 1996. The Europeanisation of local environmental politics: bathing water
pollution in south west England. Local Environment 1, 21-32.
Watchman, P., C. Barker, J. Rowan-Robinson 1988. River pollution: a case for
a pragmatic approach to enforcement. Journal of Planning and Environmental
Law 17, 674-9.
Water Authorities Association 1987. Memorandum of evidence to the Commit￾tee. See House of Commons Environment Committee (1987) 25-8.
— 1986. Water pollution from farm waste 1985 (England and Wales). London:
Water Authorities Association.
Water Authorities Association/Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food 1986.
Water pollution from farm waste 1985 (England and Wales). London: Water
Authorities Association.
— 1987. Water pollution from farm waste 1986 (England and Wales). London:
Water Authorities Association.
— 1988. Water pollution from farm waste 1987 (England and Wales). London:
Water Authorities Association.
— 1989. Water pollution from farm waste 1988 (England and Wales). London:
Water Authorities Association.
Welsh Water Authority 1984. Memorandum of evidence to the Committee. In
Agriculture and the environment, House of Lords Select Committee on the Euro￾pean Communities, 348-52. London: HMSO.
Weller, J. & S. Willetts 1977. Farm wastes management. London: Crosby Lockwood
Staples.
Whatmore, S. 1994. Global agro-food complexes and the refashioning of rural Eur￾ope. In Globalization, institutions and regional development in Europe, N. Thrift
& A. Amin (eds), 46-67. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wilkinson, M. 1990. Silage UK, 6th edn. Marlow, Buckinghamshire: Chalcombe.
Williams, R. 1976. Keywords: a vocabulary of culture and society. London: Fontana.
Wilmot, S. 1993 Agriculture and pollution in Victorian Britain. Paper presented
at the combined British Agricultural History Society and Institute of British Geo￾graphers annual conference, Institute of Historical Research, London.
217Index
actor network theory 10-12, 197-200
see also enrolment
advice 44, 46, 107-10, 178
Advisory Council for Agriculture and
Horticulture 42-7, 51, 58
Agricultural Development and Advisory
Service 8, 14, 16, 33, 50, 64, 68,
80-2, 102, 107-8, 111, 140, 145-54,
183-6, 189, 197
agricultural policy community 60—1
agricultural productivism, see
productivism
Agricultural Research Council 27, 50
agricultural supply companies 9
agriculture
agricultural census 45
agriculture's exemption from
prosecution 8, 39, 42-53
as a source of natural values 2, 4,
7-8, 192-5
see also farmers; farming
anglers 64, 66, 160
see also fish
Anglers' Co-operative Association 71
Anglian Water Authority 77, 81
animal housing 21-5, 58, 120-2, 146
see also cubicles
Bailey, R. 21
Bardach, E. 203
BBC 160
Beck, L. 41, 66
Beck, U. 2-3, 191, 195-7
Bell, M. M. 194
biochemical oxygen demand 24, 35,
42-3, 75
Bodiguel, M. 194
Bolton, N. 154
boundaries 2-9, 85-7, 162, 183-90,
192-5, 197-208
Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy
(BSE) 123, 181, 190, 208, 220
Brassley, P. 30, 67
Brownlie, T. 31
Gallon, M. 11, 17, 197
capital grants, see Farm and
Conservation Grant Scheme
cattle cubicles, see cubicles; animal
housing
Centre for Agri-food Business
Studies 123
Centre for Rural Studies 37
Chaikley, B. 154
Champion, A. 154
Chemical Industries Association 71
Clark, J. 7, 10
class 3, 10
see also middle classes; social change
codes of good agricultural practice 8,
20, 27, 33, 57, 60, 67-8, 78-9,
82-4, 96, 121, 164-5, 197-200
Common Agricultural Policy 19, 49,
85, 189
Commoner, B. 3
Confederation of British Industry 69,
71
consents to discharge 41-3, 47, 55
219Moralizing the environment
Control of Pollution Act 1974 46-8,
53-4, 57, 65, 71, 77-8
Control of Pollution (Silage, Slurry and
Fuel Oil) Regulations 27-8, 31, 33,
90, 141, 148, 151-2, 164-5, 185,
199-200
convictions for farm pollution 54
see also prosecution
Conway, G. 7, 35
Council for the Protection of Rural
England 70-1
counter-urbanisation 4, 13, 154
see also social change
Country Landowners Association 57,
71, 78
Countryside Commission 71
courts 54
see also Pollution Inspectors and the
courts; prosecution
Cox, G. 8, 78, 86
Creutzfeldt Jacob Disease (CJD) 208
Crickhowell, Lord 88
cryptosporidiosis 35
cubicles 21, 23, 50
see also animal housing; cattle
cubicles
dairy farming 18-37, 45, 52, 120-5
dairy herds 18-20, 25, 52
dairy hygiene 24, 120
dairy parlours 34, 120
Dairy Regulations 24
DDT 3
Department of Agriculture and
Fisheries, Scotland 50
Department of the Environment 32,
47, 60, 68, 72, 74, 155, 187
Devon Emergency Volunteers 93
dichotomies 192-5, 201
see also nature-society dualism;
moral discourse of farm pollution;
rurality
diffuse pollution 37, 40, 46, 55, 69
dirty water 6, 24-5, 27-9, 32
dirty water systems 25, 27, 126, 148
see also farm waste management
plans; silage; slurry storage
discharge consents, see consents to
discharge
discourses, see moral discourse of farm
pollution; technical discourse of farm
pollution
Douglas, M. 193
Eastern Cleddau 37
enrolment 11, 15, 105, 119, 183-90,
197-200
see also actor network theory
environmental groups 3-4, 62-4, 71,
76, 155-61, 183, 186, 192, 195,
197
see also Friends of the Earth;
environmental morality
environmental impacts of farm
pollution 35-6, 44, 50, 58
environmental morality 4, 7—8, 61,
86-7, 89, 117-18, 146-61, 202
see also moral discourse of farm
pollution
environmental movement, see
environmental groups; Friends of the
Earth
Environmental Protection Act 1990 85
European Community 16, 19-20, 45,
49, 60, 182, 189
everyday resistance 205
exemption (from prosecution), see
agriculture's exemption from
prosecution
Farm and Conservation Grant
Scheme 56, 60, 82-5, 87, 91, 96,
106, 132, 134-5, 138, 166, 185,
187-8, 198-9
Farm Waste Group, see NRA Farm
Waste Group
farm waste management plans 186-7,
199-200
Farm Waste Regulations, see Control of
Pollution Regulations
Farm Waste Unit (ADAS) 50, 66-7
form wastes 19, 25, 27-9, 31-4, 43-6,
50-3, 60, 70, 145-54, 164
see also dirty water; slurry, silage;
farm waste management plans
farmers
ambivalent farmers 173-5, 180-2
daily working lives 33, 120—5
220Index
deviant farmers 132
good apples and bad apples 203-7
persuadable farmers 104—5, 112,
173, 204, 206
and Pollution Inspectors 46, 55,
127, 134, 136-43, 145, 162-73
see also NRA; Pollution Inspectors
problem farmers 55-6, 104-5, 112,
173, 204, 206
radical farmers 173-5, 177-80
sceptical farmers 173-7
see also agriculture; social change
Farmers Weekly 6, 165
farming
factory farming 51-2
farm diversification 19, 177, 181
farm specialisation 18-21, 52-3
farm survey 12-14, 24, 30, 34, 126,
129, 131-3, 137, 173-82, 189,
204-6
Farming Today (BBC Radio) 163
Federation of United Kingdom Milk
Marketing Boards 38
fertilizer 28, 36, 44, 46, 51, 60
see also nitrogen
field level bureaucrats 202—7
fieldwork 11-15
fines 85, 92, 150, 171-2
fish 35-6, 40-1, 65-6, 69-70, 75,
156-7
Flynn, A. 8
formal samples 91
see also Pollution Inspectors
Foucault, M. 194-5
Friends of the Earth 71, 76, 155-61,
171
Furness, G. 28-33
good agricultural practice 45, 47—8, 57,
77-85, 201-2
see also codes of good agricultural
practice; farm waste management
plans
Gowan, D. 41-3
Green Party 155
Greenpeace 71
gross pollution, see pollution incidents
Grove-White, R. 4
Grundey, K. 54
Halliday, J. 38
Ham, C. 203
Haslam, S. 35
Hawkins, E. 37
Hawkins, K. 7, 17, 55-6, 111, 114,
171, 204
Hays, S. 65
Health and Safety Executive 81
Hellawell, J. 35
Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Pollution
89
Hill, M. 65, 203
Hobsbawm, E. 205
Holdgate, Dr M. W. 78
Holmes, N. 35
Hotline, see Pollution Hotline; National
Rivers Authority
House of Commons Committee of
Public Accounts 146, 169
House of Commons Environment
Committee 16, 60-1, 64, 71-86,
156, 160
Howarth, W. 5
Hughes, Ted 75
Independent 58, 208
industrial discharges 39, 40, 69, 79
industrial model of farming 5, 17, 51, 52
industrial pollution 7, 42, 45, 51, 55, 66
industrial society 2-3, 193-5
industrialists 40, 69
inorganic fertilizers, see fertlizers;
nitrogen
Institute of Water Engineers and
Scientists 64, 87
Institute of Water Pollution Control
49, 64, 87
Institution of Water and Environmental
Management 71
intermediaries 198-9
Kagan, R. 203
Kinnersley, D. 64
Kneale, J. 155
Knowland, T. 171
Latour, B. 10-11, 193-9
Law, J. 11, 194, 198
Lees, A. 156
221Moralizing the environment
Lipsky, M. 203
Long, N. 203
low rate irrigators, see dirty water
systems
Lowe, P. 4, 7-8, 10, 17, 86, 174, 194,
196, 198
MacKinnon, N. 37
magistrates 116, 183, 197-8
Maloney, W. 63
Mance, Dr G. 72, 80
manure 21, 27, 33, 45-6, 50-1, 58
Marr, A. 208
Marsden, T. 7
masculinity 192
Mason, P. 21, 25, 27-8, 32
Matthews, Dr P. J. 81-2
McLoughlin, J. 49
Members of Parliament 47, 81
methodology 9-16
middle classes 3
see also class; social change
milk 24, 35
Milk Marketing Board 19
milk quotas 19-20, 60-1, 67, 119,
123, 146, 175, 180, 182, 200
milk yields 38
MUne, R. 35
Minhinick, J. 21
Minister of Agriculture 43, 48
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food 20, 27, 44-6, 48-53, 57-8,
62, 67, 73, 77-80, 83, 132, 146,
164-5, 186-90
Mitchell,]. 12
monitoring, see river quality monitorin
Moore, B. 197
g
moral discourse of farm pollution 1-5,
154-61, 162-73, 183-90, 191-5,
200-8
see also rurality
moral economy 200—2
moral order 194—5
morality of nature 143
Mumford, L. 194
Murdoch,]. 11
Naish, D. 79
National Anglers' Council 71
National Audit Office 170, 172
National Farmers' Union 55, 57, 74,
78-80, 160, 165, 169, 220
National Rivers Authority 5, 14, 37,
84, 88-118, 162-73
annual reports 90
Farm Waste Group 67, 87, 163-5
and the new environmental morality
88-90, 103, 117-18, 154-73
South West region 90-118, 148-9,
161
Regional Rivers Advisory Committees
162
report on agriculture and pollution,
1992 5, 20, 35, 165-9
see also pollution; Pollution
Inspectors; Pollution Hodine
Natural Environmental Research
Council 71-2
nature 5, 192-5
Nature Conservancy Council 35,
70-1
nature conservation 71
natural morality 143, 192-5
nature-society dualism 5, 192
see also dichotomies; moral discourse
of farm pollution
Newby, H. 173
Nielson, V. 35
NIMBYs, see social change
nitrate pollution 7, 20-1, 47, 60
see also fertilizers
nitrogen 19, 21, 35-6, 45, 51, 136
North West Water Authority 81
nuclear power 50—1
odour 35, 45, 52-3, 57, 60
OECD 45
ostensive definition of society 10-11
overstocking 20, 45
Oxford University 55
Paice, C. 25
Parliament 14, 89
participant observation 9, 14, 119, 138,
140, 206
pathogens 35
Payne, M. 66
Pentreath, Dr J. 165-6
222Index
performative definition of society
10-11
pesticides 2-3, 8, 51, 56, 60, 176, 196
pig farming 45, 52—3, 60
polluter pays principle 45
pollution
absolute notion of 3, 154-61, 204
categories of pollution incidents 3,
36, 167-71, 188
control equipment 31—3
differing views of 6, 9, 14, 183-7,
192
as environmental crime 4, 171,
183-7, 192, 207
incidents 5-6, 15, 33-5, 37, 39, 41,
62, 65-75, 114-16, 118, 167-73,
186-8
pollution potential of effluents 6, 20,
24, 52
pollution risks 20, 28-9, 31-4, 44,
46-7, 51-3
as rule-breaking 39-59, 124, 133,
183-7, 192
statistics on pollution incidents 3, 5,
32-4, 41-2, 54, 73, 186-8, 196,
200
as a technical issue 1, 4, 39-59
Pollution Hodine 92, 100, 162-3, 186,
190
Pollution Inspectors (of the NRA) 14,
16, 91, 124, 153-4, 159, 202-7
coping strategies 203—7
and the courts 96-7, 117
daily working life 94-102
definitions of pollution 102-4, 183,
204
displays of authority 106
interactions with farmers 8, 46,
55_6, 94-102, 119, 134, 136-43
use of discretion 8, 104, 203-7
views of farmers 103-6, 112-14
Porter, T. 65
poultry farming 52-3, 60
Pretty, J. 7, 35
privatization, see water privatization
productivism 16-17,125-7,200-2,207
prosecution 40-2, 45-7, 53-7, 65,
81-7, 91-3, 111-18, 132, 166,
168-73, 207
Public Health Act 1848 40
Public Health Act 1961 41
Purity and danger 193
radioactivity 3
rain 1, 25, 131, 135, 142, 148
Reed, J. W. 73
regional fisheries committees 63
regional water authorities, see water
authorities
regulation, see Pollution Inspectors;
social regulation; Control of Pollution
Regulations
Richardson, J. 58, 63
riparian owners 40, 66
see also anglers; fish
risk society 2-3, 191, 195-7
river boards 41, 49, 54-5, 64, 66
River Pollution Prevention Act 1876
40
River Purification Boards 64
river quality 39, 54, 61, 68-9, 75
see also pollution; river quality
monitoring
river quality monitoring 55, 61, 64,
66, 72-3, 75-6
river quality surveys 61—2, 68—9,
71-2, 74
River Torridge 75-7, 87, 155-6,
160
Rivers (Prevention of Pollution) Act
1951 41
Rivers (Prevention of Pollution) Act
1961 41, 43
Rossi, Sir H. 74
Royal Agricultural College 37
Royal Commission on Environmental
Pollution 23-4, 43-5, 49-53, 56,
58-60, 187, 193
Royal Commission on Sewage Disposal
42
Royal Society for Nature Conservation
71
Royal Society for the Protection of
Birds 71
Riidig, W. 4
runoff 25, 29, 33-4, 36, 41, 46, 52,
70-1
rurality 2, 4, 192-5
223Moralizing the environment
salmon 75
Salmon Fisheries Act 1861 40
Salmon and Fresh Water Fish Act 1923
40
Samaritans 190
Sandfbrd, Lord 48
Saunders, P. 63
Schofield, K. 37
scientific expertise 9, 50, 195-7
Scott, J. 200, 205
Secretary of State for the Environment
47-9
self-regulation, see voluntarism
Severn Trent Water Authority 67, 72
sewage 7, 24, 35-6, 39, 40, 42, 54,
69-70, 74-7, 89
silage 6, 24, 28-34, 40, 45, 50-1,
67-8, 76, 122, 131, 179
Sites of Special Scientific Interest 70
slurry 20, 24, 33-4, 50-2
slurry spreading 19-20, 29, 34-5,
50-3, 70
slurry storage 21-34, 82, 120-1,
134, 146-54, 197-8
social change in the countryside 3,
13-14, 173-82
social construction of pollution 4, 6,
9-12, 183-7, 208
social regulation 2, 8
sociology of translation 9—12
see also enrolment; actor network
theory
South West Water Authority 6, 64, 67,
75-7, 79-81, 90-2
stewardship 125-7, 143-4, 201-2
stocking rates 20, 45, 50, 52
Storey, D. 42
street level bureaucrats 203-7
Strontium-90 3
Strutt, Sir Nigel 42-6
suicide 190
symmetry 11
technical advice 3, 146—54
technical discourse of farm pollution 1,
44_6, 50-3, 57-9, 127-36, 146-54,
162-73
technical solutions 49, 53, 146-54,
170
technological change 1, 4, 18-37,
201-2
Thatcher, M. 61
Thompson, P. 201-2
Thorns, R. 68
town dairies 7, 95
Townsend, A. 154
Trevelyan, G. M. 2
urban-rural dualism 2, 208
see also rurality
Vogel, D. 32
voluntarism 8, 27, 78, 86, 187
Ward, N. 39, 65, 174, 201
Ward, S. 189
Watchman, P. 104
Water Act 1973 49
see also water privatization
Water Act 1989 27, 88, 115-16
water authorities 40, 46-8, 54-7,
62-70, 78-88, 166, 171, 184, 196
Water Authorities Association 62—8,
70-4
water companies 89
Water Companies' Association 71
water engineers 63
water industry 49, 54, 61-3, 70-1, 82
water policy community 61—3
water protection zones 47-8
water privatization 15, 39, 61-3, 83, 155
see also Water Act; water industry
water quality 37, 53, 69, 70, 71
see also pollution; biochemical oxygen
demand
Water Research Centre 71
weapons of the weak 205-6
Welsh Water Authority 67, 70
Weller, J. 40, 42-3, 55
Welsh Office 37, 61, 68, 155, 165
Wessex Water 68
Western Morning News 9, 155, 157-61
White Paper on agriculture 49
Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981 86
Wilkinson, M. 30
WUletts, S. 40, 42-3, 55
Wilmot, S. 7
Working Party on Sewage Disposal 43
224
