Mountains of Fire Mountains of FireCLIVE OPPENHEIMER
Mountains of Fire
The Secret Lives of Volcanoes
MOUNTAINS 
OF FIRE
The University of Chicago Press
The Menace, 
Meaning, and Magic 
of Volcanoes
CLIVE 
OPPENHEIMERFirst published in Great Britain in 2023 by Hodder & Stoughton
An Hachette UK company
1
Copyright © Clive Oppenheimer 2023
The right of Clive Oppenheimer to be identifi ed as the Author of the Work has been 
asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Lines from The Poetic Edda translated by Lee M. Hollander, 2nd edition, revised. 
Copyright © 1962, renewed 1990. By permission of the University of Texas Press.
Maps of western and eastern hemispheres on pp.vi-vii
by Emma Lopes. © Emma Lopes 2023.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored 
in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means without 
the prior written permission of the publisher, nor be otherwise circulated 
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published and 
without a similar condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
A CIP catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
Hardback ISBN 978 1 529 35109 5
Trade Paperback ISBN 978 1 529 39414 6
eBook ISBN 978 1 529 35110 1
Typeset in Plantin Light by Hewer Text UK Ltd, Edinburgh
Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, Elcograf S.p.A.
Hodder & Stoughton policy is to use papers that are natural, renewable 
and recyclable products and made from wood grown in sustainable 
forests. The logging and manufacturing processes are expected to 
conform to the environmental regulations of the country of origin.
Hodder & Stoughton Ltd
Carmelite House
50 Victoria Embankment
London EC4Y 0DZ
www.hodder.co.uk
The University of Chicago Press, Chicago 60637
© 2023 by Clive Oppenheimer
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any 
manner whatsoever without written permission, except in the case of brief 
quotations in critical articles and reviews. For more information, contact 
the University of Chicago Press, 1427 E. 60th St., Chicago, IL 60637.
The moral right of the author has been asserted.
Published 2023
Printed in the United States of America
32 31 30 29 28 27 26 25 24 23 1 2 3 4 5
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-82634-9 (cloth)
ISBN-13: 978-0-226-82635-6 (e-book)
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7208/chicago/9780226826356.001.0001
First published in Great Britain in 2023 as Mountains of Fire: The Secret 
Lives of Volcanoes by Hodder & Stoughton
An Hachette UK company
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Oppenheimer, Clive, author.
Title: Mountains of fire : the menace, meaning, and magic of volcanoes / 
Clive Oppenheimer.
Description: Chicago : The University of Chicago Press, 2023. | First 
published in Great Britain in 2023 as Mountains of Fire: The Secret 
Lives of Volcanoes by Hodder & Stoughton. | Includes bibliographical 
references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022054475 | ISBN 9780226826349 (cloth) | ISBN
9780226826356 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Oppenheimer, Clive—Travel. | Volcanoes—Popular works. 
| Volcanology—Popular works. | Scientific expeditions.
Classification: LCC QE521.2 .O66 2023 | DDC 551.21—dc23/eng20230302
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022054475
 This paper meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO Z39.48-1992 
(Permanence of Paper).‘How do we know a mountain? . . . by understanding its posi￾tion on the globe . . . or by supplicating the gods that call the 
mountain home?’
 – Ruth Rogaski, ‘Knowing a Sentient Mountain’1Contents
Dreamland of the Living Earth 1
Land of God 13
What Upsets Volcanoes? 39
Emerald Isle 61
Night Market of the Ghosts 89
White Mountain, Heaven Lake 117
Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 145
Red Sea, Black Gold 171
Water Tower of the Sahara 197
Flame in a Sea of Gold 221
The Volcano and You 251
Acknowledgements 261
Notes 265
Index 349
Color illustrations follow page 230Dreamland of the Living Earth
‘The Fiery Gulph ejected great Stones’. Amerindians and 
Spaniards meet at the foot of Popocatépetl, México, in 1519.1
‘Observations are the only truth . . . Therefore, one good way, 
probably the only way, to add to the scope of science is to make 
reliable new observations of the unknown.’
– Jack Oliver, ‘Earthquake seismology in the 
plate tectonics revolution’ 2Grains of ash are dropping from the sky after a piercing 
detonation; they tinkle on my rucksack. Several large lava 
bombs blaze high above the crater, but fall back into the bowl￾shaped depression, whose inner walls are striped with bands of 
cinders and rubble. At the bottom are two pits – one exhales a 
dusty smoke, but sometimes a much thicker brown cloud billows 
out silently to unfurl then dissipate across the larger, magma￾fi lled vent, whose fumes are blue-tinged.
Trade winds sweep ash off the outer crater rim behind me 
like sand off a dune, showering the grey plain below, which 
stretches to a tract of lime- and emerald-green scrub and bush. 
The humid climate does a good job of confi ning the volcano’s 
fl agrant footprint. Ahead, beyond the crater, the South Pacifi c 
spans half the horizon, from silver under the sun to hazy blue.
Another deafening volley! I sense the heat on my face this 
time as lava dances up from the sloshing maw with a roar like 
the full thrust of jet engines – I feel it in my chest and through 
my feet. The crater fi lls with a wreath of sulphurous fumes; they 
spill out, making acid tears in my eyes. More ash prickles my 
skin. The experience is dynamic, elemental, mesmerising; it 
assails all the senses at once. 
Now the fumes have thickened and I can no longer see where 
the bombs are fl ying. I turn off the spectrometer I’ve been using 
to measure gas emissions, and start heading back to my lodge in 
the forest. It’s better to not sacrifi ce oneself for one’s art.
*4 Mountains of Fire
Volcanoes get a bad press. They are most in the public eye when 
tourists have been assailed by lava projectiles, neighbourhoods 
buried beneath pyroclastic fl ows, populous shorelines ravaged 
by tsunamis, or planes grounded owing to the ash forecast. But 
volcanoes mean more than menace and calamity. Dramatic and 
traumatic as their outbursts can be, most volcanoes, most of the 
time, are tranquil mountains with diverse microclimates and 
habitats, and valuable mineral and geothermal resources. If we 
think of the places where humans have long lived in the shad￾ows of volcanoes, the volcanoes were almost invariably there 
fi rst. Like our parents, they’ve led whole lives before we get to 
know them. They are visual anchors in our landscapes and paint 
the sky with their plumage; they are supernatural realms; and 
they can turn the world’s weather on its head. Even when their 
wild days are long past and their fl ames forever extinguished, 
their eroded landforms still enliven our skylines and invite 
outdoor adventure. Wherever we live on the planet, they are 
more a part of our lives than most people realise.
Volcanoes loom at a thrilling crossroads of nature, spirit, 
climate, geology, technology, society and culture. They play 
with time – stretching it over a geological epoch, yet able to 
shapeshift and change everything in the blink of an eye. As 
portals, they allow us to trace story and memory through deep 
time and back again.
As a volcanologist, I have dedicated my career to observing 
simmering craters, often at very close quarters, with a view to 
revealing their secrets. I’ve followed in the footsteps of pioneers 
like the American geologist, Thomas Jaggar, who established the 
Hawaiian Volcano Observatory in 1912. I love his description of 
geology being the ‘science of the dreamland of the earth’s inte￾rior’,3
 and much of my work has involved recording phenomena 
at the mouths of volcanoes to help us understand their anatomy 
and physiology, to visualise their unseen lungs and alimentary Dreamland of the Living Earth 5
tracts.4
 The truth is, I spend a lot of my time imagining the 
underworld, and comparing the quirks and frolics of diff erent 
volcanoes. They never asked for an advocate but I am not alone 
in seeking to translate the language of these sonorous moun￾tains for a wider audience.
Volcanoes are hard to ignore, especially if you live near one. 
We have probably admired and feared them ever since our 
species evolved in the shadows of Kilimanjaro and other fi re 
mountains of eastern Africa, a few hundred thousand years ago. 
Given their sonic and visual spectacle, even between eruptions, 
it seems certain the ancestors would have sought to interpret 
their omens. But when did the more systematic study of volca￾noes begin? Whose shoulders have I stood on in hope of seeing 
further? Historians of science might well diff er on its origins, 
but I trace volcanology’s fi rst whispers back to the period when 
the term volcano was coined, and to the man whose careful 
observations would establish a template for centuries of colonial 
exploration (and exploitation): Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y 
Valdés.5
As a teenager in 1493, Oviedo must have felt the lure of the 
unknown when he joined a jubilant throng in Barcelona cheer￾ing the return of Christopher Columbus from the Caribbean. 
But before succumbing to the draw of far-off adventure, Oviedo 
settled in Italy, sensitising him to sulphurous volcanoes such as 
Solfatara, a steaming, bubbling crater near Naples, and Vulcano, 
one of the Eolian islands north of Sicily, famed since antiquity 
for its fl amed frenzies. During this period, he also acquired 
a sensibility for fi gurative art, meeting Leonardo da Vinci, 
Mantegna and Michelangelo.6
 These experiences would serve 
him well as offi cial chronicler – in both words and pictures – of 
the Spanish conquest of the New World.7
It was 1514 when Oviedo fi rst sailed for the West Indies. His 
mission: to oversee the production of gold and silver. His 6 Mountains of Fire
compatriots, meanwhile, were expanding Spanish dominion on 
the mainland. Hernán Cortés landed in Veracruz (in modern￾day México) in 1519, and within months was leading an assault 
on the Aztec capital, Tenochtitlan. Reaching the high pass 
between two towering volcanoes, Iztaccí huatl and Popocatépetl, 
Cortés marvelled at their height and the ‘fl ames’ emitted from 
the latter.8
 The active crater of Popocatépetl would later furnish 
him with sulphur, a key ingredient of the gunpowder he needed 
to wage his campaign.9
By 1524, the Spaniards were colonising Guatemala and 
Nicaragua, where they encountered one volcano after another 
in various states of activity. This posed a problem – until now, 
there was no word ‘volcano’; they were known instead as ‘mouths 
of fi re’ or ‘burning mountains’. Their superabundance in 
Mesoamerica cried out for the invention of a simple term. Many 
of the conquistadors were familiar with the Mediterranean sea. 
Like Oviedo, they knew of the island of Vulcano, itself named 
after the Roman god of fi re, Vulcan. And so, the proper name 
seeded the generic volcan, which quickly permeated other 
languages.10
The most fabled volcano in all the region, and before long 
the subject of wild stories in European circles on both sides 
of the Atlantic, was Masaya in Nicaragua. The fi rst colonial 
governor of the country, the brutal Pedrarias Davila, with 
whom Oviedo had sailed across the Atlantic, wrote of it in a 
letter to Emperor Charles V in 1525: ‘there is a large mouth 
of fi re which never ceases to burn and after dark . . . there is 
light as if it were day’.11 Some said you could read a book by 
its brilliant glow at night, others that it hosted valuable 
reserves of sulphur. Holy men denounced it as the mouth of 
hell, among them the priest Francisco de Bobadilla who went 
so far as to exorcise the volcano, erecting a tall cross at the 
crater’s edge.Dreamland of the Living Earth 7
But Oviedo wasn’t someone to take the word of others 
unquestioningly, and so determined to explore Masaya for 
himself. He travelled there in July 1529, staying at a ranch near 
the village of Nindiri, a few miles from the peak. What happened 
next is recounted with brio and fl ourish in his fi fty-volume
History of the New World.
12
Oviedo set off on horseback in the middle of the night, 
escorted by Nacatime, the Chorotegan chief of Nindiri, and an 
African servant. The trail across old lava fl ows, rough as ‘black￾smith’s slag’, was tough. No shoe suited to it had yet been fabri￾cated, in Oviedo’s opinion.13 When the incline became too steep 
for the horses, he put on wooden sandals and continued on foot.
The sun was rising as they reached the summit area: a plateau 
covered with multicoloured rocks and punctured by a chasm ‘so 
wide a musket ball could not traverse it’ and, from judging the 
descent of rocks hurled into it, around 130 fathoms (240 metres) 
deep. Oviedo spent the next hours applying all his senses and 
attention to observing, note-taking and sketching.
One of the puzzles he hoped to solve was the origin of 
Masaya’s acclaimed radiance. At close range, he could see the 
light came not from fl ames but rather from fumes emerging 
from the funnel-shaped crater, which were lit up like smoke 
refl ecting a bonfi re’s blaze by whatever burned deeper down. 
Leaning over the brink, he could make out a round fl oor far 
below, large enough to contain ‘a hundred fencing cavaliers 
watched by a thousand spectators’.14 Recessed into it was 
another pit, at the bottom of which seethed ‘a fi re liquid as water, 
the colour of brass’. It put him in mind of gold foundries he had 
inspected, except that it was covered with a black scum that 
repeatedly tore open to reveal matter ‘red and brilliant as the 
light of heaven’. Occasionally, it surged into the air, plastering 
the walls of the pit. Since clocks were not yet commonplace, 
Oviedo marked time by reciting the credo. The expelled spatter 8 Mountains of Fire
glowed for six credos before extinguishing – around fi ve minutes, 
by my reckoning.
Everything caught Oviedo’s attention: the sounds like ocean 
waves dashing against rocks, the sulphurous greasy fetor of the 
fumes, the fi erce radiation from the pit warming his skin. If his 
units of time, distance and area seem quaint, make no mistake: 
this is a luminous and faithful description of a lava lake. 
Furthermore, his keen powers of observation didn’t end with 
the survey of physical manifestations. He asked Nacatime about 
a pile of broken pots, plates and bowls lying on the crater lip. 
The chief explained they’d contained food off erings for an 
ancient seeress with spiky hair, fi ery eyes and razor-sharp teeth, 
who dwelt in the volcano. He would meet secretly at the crater’s 
edge with other village heads to consult her on matters of war 
and peace, and to make oblations in anticipation of a good 
harvest. Oviedo learned that dishes of stew were not always 
suffi cient tribute, though. During droughts or following earth￾quakes and storms, women and children were hurled into the 
magma to appease the prophetess.15 Around the world today, 
people still protect themselves from volcanoes with rituals and 
magic as much as with science and engineering, though thank￾fully without resorting to human sacrifi ce.
Summing up his feelings, Oviedo wrote that no other volcano 
was as worthy of admiration or as remarkable, yet no Christian 
beholding it could be oblivious to the everlasting fi re awaiting 
those ungrateful to God. This ambiguity cemented Masaya’s 
reputation – as both marvel and hellhole – for centuries to 
come.16
Not all holy men feared the volcano, however. On reading 
Oviedo’s testimony, a Spanish friar, Blás de Castillo, became 
convinced that what Oviedo had seen churning in the crater was
molten gold. For months, he schemed with three accomplices, 
making furtive visits to the crater, before attempting to extract Dreamland of the Living Earth 9
the precious liquor on 13 April 1538. ‘Keep your silence,’ the 
monk commanded the others. ‘God doesn’t want the gold to be 
discovered by the rich, but by the poor and humble.’ Crucifi x in 
hand, habits gathered at the waist, with an iron helmet for 
protection and fl ask of wine for courage, he climbed into a 
basket at the end of a rope, to be lowered into the crater by his 
henchmen. He reached the fl oor, but the ‘gold’ was still out of 
reach within a deeper pit. Three days later, the conspirators 
were back. This time, they set up pulleys to drop an iron bowl 
into the inferno, but it fused with the molten matter, and an 
exhausting tug of war ensued. More manpower was needed.
At this point, the friar confi ded in the provincial governor, 
who, a fortnight later, watched in disbelief as Blás and seven 
assistants were hoisted down into the crater. One can imagine a 
handful of Chorotegans watching the proceedings impassively. 
After much eff ort, they managed to haul out several samples 
before the chain attached to their lava scoop broke.
It didn’t take long, of course, for the molten matter to congeal, 
and after all the eff ort, who would have dared suggest the resi￾due looked an awful lot like the rocks underfoot? The samples 
were examined by the colonial mint in León.17 The inevitable 
fi nding followed. An infl amed governor forbade Blás from 
any future prospecting, but the friar could not relinquish his 
dream so easily. He travelled to Spain, and successfully peti￾tioned the emperor for the rights to reap Masaya’s wealth. Sadly, 
he died soon after returning to Nicaragua. Some might think 
him avaricious, delusional, reckless, but he was a dreamer and 
fantasist of the highest order. He deserves a crater named in his 
honour.
Volcanoes, then, can be sites of encounter and performance, 
where history is made. Sometimes their eruptions are so 
dramatic they make history themselves – the Indonesian volcano, 
Krakatau, which exploded violently in 1883 claiming 36,000 10 Mountains of Fire
lives, comes to mind.18 And volcanoes are accomplished scribes 
– they write their history, in the folios of pumice and ash from 
which they are built. Pare back the layers of the archive and you 
might fi nd ancient soils, agricultural land, towns, footprints, 
bodies and all traces of once-vibrant life whose chance exhuma￾tion connects us across millennia with fl eeting seconds of peril.19
*
As Oviedo noticed centuries ago, volcanoes are a feast for the 
senses. There are myriad attributes to the behaviour of a 
volcano one could choose to record. But because it is the gases 
in magma that infl uence whether a volcano erupts like uncorked 
champagne or oozing syrup, I chose to dedicate a large portion 
of my life to observing the fumes they emit. A Japanese chem￾ist by the name of Sadao Matsuo once described volcanic gas 
as ‘a telegram from the earth’s interior’. My work aims to 
decode these vaporous messages to help me probe the dream￾land, to seek answers to the mysteries of magma. I use a tech￾nique called spectroscopy to measure volcanic emissions, rely￾ing on the principle that every gas leaves its own unique 
fi ngerprint on the light that passes through it.20 The propor￾tions of diff erent gases – such as water vapour, carbon dioxide 
and sulphur dioxide – can signal a volcano’s mood, suggesting 
what it might do next.
Making observations is where my abilities and proclivities 
lie,21 and much of my research has involved expeditions, a word 
that originates from Latin, for ‘to free the feet from fetters’. I am 
a great believer in experience, experiments and experts (the 
roots of these three words also derived from Latin, for ‘to try’ or 
‘to put to the test’). Models and projections are beguiling – they 
readily spawn striking graphics purporting to tell us what the 
future holds. But without grounding in real-world observations, Dreamland of the Living Earth 11
their value as tools for forecasting – whether it be of economic 
effi ciency, a pathogen’s progress, or a volcano’s vivacity – is 
questionable. This isn’t to say that making observations is the 
only way to do science – reason and experience should go hand 
in hand. I try then, while on fi eldwork, to unencumber both feet 
and mind, and to do all possible to come home with good data. 
I’ve often found that putting in the groundwork is the best way 
to give serendipity a chance to play its hand and thereby learn 
things beyond my imagination.
Until recently, scientifi c knowledge of volcanoes was almost 
exclusively the domain of geologists, geophysicists and geochem￾ists. Today, some of the most exciting research is being done at 
the edges of the discipline – where it meets anthropology, 
history, climatology, ecology and glaciology, to name a few. 
Volcanology is also an applied science – dedicated observers 
around the world keep a watchful eye on restless craters to 
protect their communities. During my career, I’ve watched the 
fi eld broaden immensely in scope, gain confi dence, lead the way 
in addressing wider challenges such as climatic change and 
disaster risk reduction, and make positive steps towards empow￾ering the people it touches.22
But academic scholarship is not the only way to make sense of 
volcanic activity. Geologists now widely accept that knowledge 
accumulated through experience, wisdom, ancestral culture and 
spirituality matters.23 Not only can it convey information on the 
nature and consequences of eruptions of the distant past24 it also 
conditions how people respond to volcanic crises.25 Imagine if 
unknown scientifi c experts suddenly show up in a neighbour￾hood, try to explain that their seismometers indicate an impend￾ing eruption, and ask everyone to abandon their homes and 
land. It would not be a recipe for successful risk mitigation. And 
this is why volcanologists increasingly interact with society, so 
that all sides are understood when the pot starts bubbling.12 Mountains of Fire
Volcanoes shaped my perspectives on causality, agency, risk 
and how knowledge is built. They taught me to listen: to indig￾enous tribal elders living close to restive craters; to experts in 
diff erent branches of learning; to the lava breathing within our 
lively Earth; and to the messages, not meant for me, that make 
their way to the sky. Volcanoes changed me, and I believe 
strongly that they off er us all a diff erent and unexpectedly 
humanizing way of seeing the world.Land of God
Lazzaro Spallanzani observing Stromboli. Can you spot him?1
‘All around us we could feel the power of an extraordinary 
world on a scale that was not our own, and absolutely indiff er￾ent to our existence.’
– Haroun Tazieff , Craters of Fire2Her handbag stuff ed with the money in one hand, and a 
suitcase in the other, Karin struggles to stay upright on 
the incline of volcanic gravel; each footfall dislodges a fl urry of 
fi ne dust. She stumbles again as a gust steeped in acrid fumes 
from the crater engulfs her. She gasps for breath. Glancing 
back, she sees through burning eyes the village she has aban￾doned, clinging to the island’s shoreline far below. Antonio must 
be searching for her by now. Tormented and exhausted, she 
unwittingly drops her possessions and clambers on – now, all 
she carries is her unborn son.
As night falls, she reaches the barren peak just as a thunder￾ous detonation from the crater blasts fi re and cinders into the 
sky. At the sight of such an infernal and meaningless abyss, 
Karin collapses, sobbing hysterically, her hot tears absorbed by 
black ash. ‘Enough, enough!’ she wails. ‘God, if you exist, bring 
me some peace!’
God’s response to Karin’s petition at the close of Roberto 
Rossellini’s fi lm Stromboli: Land of God, is ambiguous, but for 
Ingrid Bergman, who played Karin, there was surely no peace. 
Her personal life at the time was as volatile as the cauldron of 
magma beneath the island, one of the seven volcanoes of the 
Aeolian archipelago that rise from the Tyrrhenian Sea between 
Sicily and the toe of Italy. Hollywood’s biggest and most whole￾some star of the 1940s was having an extramarital aff air with the 
Italian director, fi lling gossip columns on both sides of the 
Atlantic, and shocking (and thrilling) a prurient public.3
 Perhaps 
the primal excrescences of the island aroused their adultery. 16 Mountains of Fire
Bergman was carrying a child during shooting – is this why the 
denouement of Stromboli is so powerful?
But despite the fi lm’s sustained dramatic tension, the real-life 
scandal wrecked its release in 1949/50. Among those off ended 
was Senator Edwin C. Johnson of Colorado, who condemned 
the ‘stupid fi lm about a pregnant woman and a volcano’ on the 
fl oor of the U.S. Senate, describing Bergman as ‘an apostle of 
degradation’ on an ‘immoral binge’, and Rossellini as ‘vile and 
unspeakable’. Other critics disparaged the director’s use of 
unprofessional actors, including two sailors recruited for lead 
roles, and Stromboli’s residents, cast as extras. It is true that the 
islanders were so baffl ed by the production that Rossellini tied 
strings to their toes so he could orchestrate their actions on 
camera. But the documentary style and visual aesthetic give the 
fi lm an uncommon intensity and authenticity – in one scene, the 
villagers fl ee from a hail of lava bombs; in another, the sea erupts 
with tuna as the fi shermen entrap and haul them on to their 
boats (much to Karin’s disgust). Today, Stromboli is rightly 
regarded as a masterpiece of Italian cinema.4
After the Second World War, the island of Stromboli was an 
isolated and forbidding spot, one of the most remote parts of Italy. 
Mass emigration had emptied the villages, and a weekly mailboat 
from Naples was the only regular connection with the mainland. 
At the beginning of Stromboli, we learn that Karin has met Antonio 
in a camp for displaced persons. Marked by untold experiences of 
the war in Europe, she marries him when hopes of emigrating to 
Argentina are dashed. But she has not imagined the desolation 
and resentment that awaits her on Stromboli, where her feckless 
husband resumes his job as a fi sherman. The confi nement and 
alienation prove unbearable for Karin, but her ultimate confronta￾tion is with the utter callousness of sulphurous nature: the volcano.
*Land of God 17
Rossellini’s epic was not the fi rst volcano movie. Fifty years 
earlier, the British fi lmmaker and pioneer of animation, Walter 
Booth, had made a short adaptation of Edward Bulwer Lytton’s 
hugely popular novel, the Last Days of Pompeii.
5
 We might even 
see the roots of volcano cinema in the Vesuvian Apparatus of Sir 
William Hamilton, Britain’s envoy at the court of Naples from 
1764 to 1800, and a man who did more than most to excite 
public interest in Pompeii and Vesuvius. His contraption 
consisted of a wooden cabinet with a transparent coloured 
painting of the volcano at the front. Inside, a clockwork mecha￾nism presented fl ickering light to the lava fl ows swirling down 
the volcano’s fl anks, while striking a drum to simulate the 
accompanying booms.6
But more than a designer of drawing room entertainments, 
Hamilton was the fi rst serious volcano watcher in Western 
history. The timing of his posting to Naples could not have been 
more propitious to turn a savant to volcanic aff airs. Vesuvius 
was fi red up for a prolonged bout of pyroclastic vigour, while 
excavations at Pompeii and Herculaneum were yielding spec￾tacular relics that had been entombed in pumice for seventeen 
centuries. Hamilton compulsively acquired the spoils of the 
archaeological digs, but also made more than sixty ascents to 
the crater of Vesuvius over a period of thirty years, collecting 
rocks and minerals, and documenting eruptions and the trans￾formations they eff ected on the landscape. He travelled with an 
entourage of assistants and artists who sketched and painted the 
eruptive phenomena. On one visit, in 1767, he and a guide were 
caught in an eruption. In near total darkness beneath thick ash 
clouds, they hotfooted non-stop for three miles to outrun a 
torrent of lava coming at them. In an understated report of the 
episode, Hamilton noted the ejecta to have been of ‘such a size 
as to cause a disagreeable sensation upon the part where they 
fell’, and that it had been ‘prudent’ to retreat. So strong was the 18 Mountains of Fire
sustained seismic shaking when he reached his villa that he 
gathered his household and retreated to Naples, stopping at the 
royal court in Portici to urge King Ferdinand to fl ee, too.
Lava fl ows threatened several towns, and the sustained roar￾ing from the mountain incited widespread terror. People opened 
umbrellas to shield their faces from falling ash. Even Hamilton, 
mindful of the terrible eruption of 1631, which had claimed 
4,000 lives in Portici, feared ‘some dire calamity’. It was time for 
San Gennaro, the preeminent patron saint of Naples, to inter￾cede. His effi gy was processed towards the volcano, subduing its 
clamour. At least, this is how the public viewed it, though 
Hamilton was unconvinced – he had observed many alterna￾tions in the crater’s sonority before.
Hamilton was a renowned socialite, and anyone of distinction 
or erudition would call on him if in Naples. And many came, 
attracted by the region’s classical heritage and vivacious volcano, 
a titillating highlight of the Grand Tour, its ascent a rite of passage 
for young aristocrats. Goethe was among those aroused by 
sublime encounters with gushing lava. He also got on famously 
with Hamilton, whose universal taste he admired. With this 
cultural vortex centred around Naples, Hamilton was swept into 
contemporary scientifi c debates and successfully built connec￾tions to the learned societies.7
The perfect marriage of Hamilton’s dual passions for antiq￾uities and volcanism is represented in his fi rst-hand report 
Campi Phlegræi: Observations on the Volcanos of the Two Sicilies, 
printed in instalments from 1775. Hamilton nails his empiricist 
colours to the mast in its opening discourse, writing: ‘Accurate 
and faithfull observations on the operations of nature, related 
with simplicity and truth, are not to be met with often.’ Going 
further (and echoing Oviedo’s unwillingness to accept hearsay), 
he laments that ‘those who have wrote most, on the subject of 
Natural History, have seldom been themselves the observers, Land of God 19
and have too readily taken for granted sistems, which other 
ingenious and learned men, have perhaps formed in their 
closets’.8
Fidelity, then, mattered to Hamilton – at least in scientifi c 
practice (he famously tolerated his second wife’s notorious 
aff air with Horatio Nelson). In Campi Phlegræi, he presented 
the most authentic depictions of volcanic activity, geological 
strata and rock specimens possible. The fi fty-four plates in 
Campi Phlegræi, ‘colour’d after Nature’, were made by the artist 
Pietro Fabris under his vigilant supervision. This was a radical 
departure: scientifi c treatises of the period were usually embel￾lished with stylised monochrome engravings, characterised by 
fanciful juxtapositions, impossible gradients and whimsical 
renderings of the subterranean.9
 So sumptuous and costly were 
Hamilton’s illustrations that, despite a favourable public recep￾tion, publication of Campi Phlegræi actually added to his endur￾ing fi nancial precarity, born of lavish entertaining and profl igate 
collecting.
Campi Phlegræi set a benchmark for science communication. 
I admire it greatly for challenging the (still commonplace) 
narrative that volcanoes connote doom – Hamilton hoped his 
‘exact representations of so many beautifull scenes’ would help 
people see volcanism in ‘a Creative rather than a Destructive 
light’. And his work infl uenced art as well as science, notably a 
later generation of landscape painters that included Caspar 
David Friedrich.10
And yet, despite his passion for all things igneous and his 
true-to-nature approach to scientifi c visualisation, Hamilton’s 
volcanological legacy is eclipsed, for me, by his contempo￾rary, Lazzaro Spallanzani, a priest and professor of natural 
history at the University of Pavia in northern Italy. In fact, 
Spallanzani is much better known as the founder of experi￾mental biology; it was only late in life that he turned to the 20 Mountains of Fire
volcano.11 It is his experimental as well as observational 
approach – and his eye for research design – that marks him 
out. He didn’t just collect rocks for the university’s cabinet of 
natural history: he pulverised, heated, chemically treated and 
analysed his samples to simulate processes he had witnessed 
beside the crater. All the while he posed questions and probed 
assumptions in his pursuit of nature’s secrets. His methods 
feel extraordinarily modern, and are all the more remarkable 
considering that geology barely registered as a discipline in 
the late 18th century.
Well acquainted with Campi Phlegræi, Spallanzani gave ‘the 
most attentive consideration’ to Hamilton’s work, but found it 
not uniformly ‘consonant with fact’. The British diplomat lacked 
mineralogical knowledge, he wrote, and was ready to accept 
accounts of others ‘more marvellous than true’. Hamilton’s 
opinions on Stromboli were particularly fl awed, he added, being 
based on observations made at sea with only the aid of a tele￾scope. While other proto-geologists of the period hardly set foot 
in remote outposts like Stromboli, as an energetic traveller who 
knew how to plan a fi eld mission, Spallanzani would make his 
inspection at disconcertingly close range. This valour was noted 
by the Swiss scientist and eulogist Jean Senebier, who wrote: ‘He 
dissected, as it were, the uninhabited volcanoes, with the exact￾ness of a naturalist anatomizing a butterfl y, and the intrepidity 
of a warrior defying the most imminent dangers’.12
Spallanzani arrived on the island in October of 1788 and set 
about climbing the volcano at once, assisted by local guides. But 
his progress was thwarted when he reached ‘the extreme edge of 
the smoke’, which resembled ordinary cloud, except that it was, 
as he subtly recorded, ‘inconvenient to respiration’. He retreated 
down the slopes to the coastal village, where he lodged with an 
elderly priest. Just a stone’s throw from the crater, the house was 
rattled by explosions, which Spallanzani correctly attributed to Land of God 21
atmospheric shockwaves rather than seismic shaking. In the 
morning, a sprinkle of black ash settled upon the village.
Two days later, under more clement skies, the tall and well￾built Spallanzani set out again, dressed in a fi ne coat, waist￾coat and breeches, and sporting a wide-brimmed, fl at-crowned 
hat. The going was good on this second attempt on the volcano 
– until he reached a vast scree of cinders strewn with occa￾sional larger boulders of lava. This engulfed him up to his 
knees with each stride. Just a few months shy of his sixtieth 
birthday, he must have been a fi t and adventurous man for his 
age to endure and enjoy this taxing ascent. At 900 metres 
above sea level, he came to a precipice known as the Pizzo 
sopra la Fossa, the ‘peak above the pit’. Stromboli’s active 
crater lay at the far end of a wide, bowl-like depression stretch￾ing before him.
The gravelly surface at his feet was strewn with big clots of 
unweathered lava. Spallanzani correctly surmised they could 
not have rolled there, and that their fresh appearance suggested 
recent arrival. They had to have been hurled through the air. 
Undaunted by the prospect of further ballistic projectiles, 
Spallanzani marched towards their point of origin for a better 
view. Luckily, he found a small recess below the Pizzo, protected 
by an overhang. In an illustration from his published research, 
he is secreted in this nook, at one with the grain of the volcano, 
and staring into the fi re pit. What he saw there reminded him of 
a vat of molten brass. The lava would rise, its surface blistering 
until large bubbles ruptured it violently, spurting red-hot rock 
into the air. Now the magma would subside until the next 
upsurge of fi ery spume. For Spallanzani, nothing less than 
‘Truth and Nature’ were exposed before his wondering senses.
While Hamilton had noted Stromboli’s intermittent and 
monotonous activity, Spallanzani could see that, in fact, the lava 
seethed ceaselessly; louder explosions expelled more rock. But 22 Mountains of Fire
just when he thought he recognised a pattern, the lava level 
plummeted, and the vent silenced. Then, jets of incandescent 
fume burst from apertures along a fi ssure that was unnervingly 
nearby. Spallanzani feared these vapours might have ‘mischie￾vous eff ects’, and was about to leg it when his guides reassured 
him there was no threat. They said the ‘air’ animating the lava 
had temporarily found an alternative path to the surface, and 
that normal activity would resume shortly. Spallanzani was duly 
impressed when the prediction was borne out.
Displaying a respect for local lore not widely shared by natu￾ralists of his day (most of whom were scathing of anything that 
smacked of ‘peasant superstition’), Spallanzani was eager to 
discover more of the islanders’ knowledge of their volcano. He 
learned that the crater’s fuming foretold the weather – when 
subdued, more northerly winds would prevail, whereas increased 
vigour of the plume heralded southerlies. The great Roman 
philosopher, Pliny the Elder, had heard this, too, writing in his 
monumental Natural History from 79 CE: ‘From the smoke of 
this volcano it is said that some of the inhabitants are able to 
predict three days beforehand what winds are about to blow.’ 
Even further back in time, the Greeks regarded Stromboli as the 
home of Aeolus, the god and keeper of winds. In the Iliad, 
Odysseus was entertained at Aeolus’ palace on a ‘fl oating island’ 
with sheer cliff s and a ‘wall of unbreakable bronze’.13
*
It was only natural to begin my research career in the cradle of 
volcanology. Two hundred years to the month since Spallanzani’s 
fi eldwork on Stromboli, I followed in his footsteps, though not 
nearly so stylishly costumed. I know exactly how his legs ached 
as he slogged up the side of the volcano, and how he must have 
admired the spectacle of its internal commotions.Land of God 23
Stromboli’s main settlement clings to the north shore of the 
island. It was a fi ne day as I set off , but, being out of season, 
there were very few tourists about. Many of the whitewashed 
cellular homes were shuttered, front gates padlocked, bougain￾villea and hibiscus fl owering untamed over garden walls. The 
trail led out of the village, then meandered across abandoned 
terracing, a relic of the viticulture for which the island was once 
famed before the destructive pest, phylloxera, arrived in the late 
nineteenth century. The bugs ravaged the grape vines, provok￾ing a great exodus from the island. Another wave of emigration 
followed in the 1930s, so that within two generations the popu￾lation declined from several thousand to a few hundred.14 This 
abandonment is evocatively portrayed in Rossellini’s fi lm, and 
represents the cultural backdrop to Karin’s profound isolation 
on Stromboli.
Nearly halfway up, the trail reaches the margin of an abrupt 
declivity on the northwest fl ank of the volcano – the Sciara del 
Fuoco, which roughly translates as ‘the scar of fi re’. This wound, 
formed by an ancient landslide of part of the cone, plunges to 
the sea. It is the chute down which the vents spill most of their 
lava. The submarine part of the volcano extends twice as far 
beneath the waves as it projects above; most visitors see 
Stromboli as a modest volcano in scale, but strip away the 
Tyrrhenian Sea and it would not look out of place with its loom￾ing cousins in the Pacifi c Ring of Fire.
Nearing the peak, I witnessed my fi rst eruption. It was brief 
but thunderous, and accompanied by a convoluting puff of 
brown ash that had punched through a garland of white steam 
clouds gathered about the crater. The mottled plume rose 
skyward until the wind sheared it off towards the sea. Loose 
cinders underfoot made the rest of my ascent more of a slog, 
like climbing sand dunes. But twenty minutes later, I had 
reached the Pizzo sopra la Fossa. I could now make out a row of 24 Mountains of Fire
four cones, shaped like upturned dishes and built from accumu￾lations of dark volcanic slag. Each was truncated by a fuming 
crater, the closest of which greeted me with an arresting whoosh. 
I had arrived in a pristine world that I could not have properly 
imagined. Nothing felt stable; all was sterile, temporary, shift￾ing, piling up, subsiding.
What had brought me into this world above the clouds? I was 
in my twenties and had started the fi rst year of my PhD with a 
research trip to Southern Italy. Armed with little equipment 
apart from a notebook and a thermometer capable of readings 
over 1,000°C (1,800°F), my quest was to investigate whether it 
was possible to take the temperature of a volcano from space. 
The idea of monitoring volcanoes from Earth’s orbit was not 
new. As early as 1966, one of the fi rst weather satellites, Nimbus 
II, had registered the heat radiated from lava fl ows on the new￾born island of Surtsey, south of Iceland.15 By the mid-1980s, 
with more advanced infrared imagers spaceborne, it looked 
possible not only to detect eruptions but also to quantify areas 
and temperatures of lava or hot gas vents. Underpinning this 
approach was a foundational equation relating the spectrum of 
heat radiation from a surface to its temperature, derived by the 
physicist Max Planck in 1900. As well as expressing ‘red-hot’ in 
physical units, the law explains why a red-hot surface glows red￾orange, orange and then yellow to white as it heats up. But 
several assumptions were needed to apply Planck’s formula to 
volcanic features, and my task was to test them in the hope it 
would pave the way to an orbiting volcano observatory. This 
required ‘ground-truth’ – lava temperatures measured at close 
range to compare with measurements made with the satellite 
data. With hindsight, I got unduly close.
At the top of Stromboli my main tool was an infrared radiom￾eter, a ‘telephoto’ version of an ear thermometer. It resembled a 
video camera and, unlike its clinical counterpart, did not require Land of God 25
direct insertion into the orifi ce – I could record temperatures at 
a distance. I particularly wanted to investigate the uniformity of 
lava surface temperatures and their variability over time. But on 
reaching the Pizzo sopra la Fossa, I faced the same quandary as 
Spallanzani two centuries before – the lava vents within the 
craters were hidden from view. I needed a direct line of sight. 
And for that, I had to get nearer.
Nothing like Spallanzani’s niche caught my eye, so I loped 
down the southern rim of the wide depression and then up to 
the lip of the nearest crater. I leaned over the chasm. The inner 
walls exposed layers of lava and scree tinged pink from oxida￾tion, or stained yellow where sulphur had condensed around 
innumerable perforations in the rock. At the bottom, surrounded 
by drifts of rubble, two magma-fi lled pits sputtered and wheezed 
noisily, spitting bright-orange molten rock from their mouths 
every few seconds. But at longer intervals of ten minutes or so, 
larger explosions would blast projectiles well above my level. 
Some of these detonations sounded like pistol shots or thunder￾cracks; others roared for ten or twenty seconds. Each would be 
followed by a succession of dull thuds as a fusillade of solidify￾ing lava fell to earth, followed by a clatter like hailstones on a tin 
roof as smaller fragments rained out – an igneous rendition of 
musique concrète.
Ignoring the tumult, I fi xed the infrared thermometer on a 
tripod and trained its optics at the most expressive vent, which 
was also the closest. Unfortunately, the device had no inbuilt 
recording capability, so I had to read the temperatures in the 
telescopic viewfi nder, and scribble them down in a notebook as 
fast as possible, while simultaneously keeping an eye on my 
watch to time the observations. With a little practice, I managed 
a measurement every second or two.
Through the viewfi nder, I could observe the live action of the 
blusterous vent. The explosions began with a tumescence of the 26 Mountains of Fire
lava, much as Spallanzani had described. The magma skin 
would then rupture, unleashing a jet of blue fl ame. An instant 
later, a blast of orangey-red glowing spatter and bluish fumes 
shot above the mouth of the crater. Soon, I would experience a 
light dusting of dark glassy shards and crystal fl akes. They 
collected in the crease of my notebook, making it easy to decant 
small samples of the ash – just forged in the fi ery aperture – into 
plastic bags. The explosions reverberated in my chest, seismic 
tremors shivered my feet, and a metallic whiff like a struck 
match smarted my eyes. I was seized by the realisation that vola￾tile molecules just unfettered from the inner Earth, and tasting 
like sour milk at the back of my throat, were now in my lungs, in 
my bloodstream.
In fact, these kinds of exhalations are exactly what established 
the Earth’s primary atmosphere aeons ago. We are made of the 
very same stuff , and some think that life began in the primordial 
chemical soup of volcanic vents. Through the actions of tectonic 
plates and volcanoes, our fl eshly inventories of carbon, oxygen, 
hydrogen, nitrogen, sulphur and many other elements are 
making just a brief sojourn in an eternal cycle between the deep 
interior and the surface of the planet. I was discovering, as I am 
certain Spallanzani felt, that fi eldwork on an active volcano is a 
profoundly embodying experience.
Another booming volley! But this time lava spray reached not 
only above, but over the crater’s edge. One piece landed not far 
away and I dashed over to inspect the missile. It was light grey 
with a frothy texture. The vernacular for this substance – scoriae
– comes from the Greek word for dung. Any projectiles brick￾size and up are known as ‘lava bombs’. If they splat when they 
hit the ground, they are ‘cowpat lava’. As my fi ngers closed on 
the fi nd, I howled in pain: in my spontaneous curiosity, I’d over￾looked the heat capacity of rock. My thermometer confi rmed 
the surface temperature was hotter than a pizza oven. I look Land of God 27
upon this period as the steep part of my learning curve as a 
volcanologist.
Back at my station at the lip of the crater, the activity was 
ramping up. Large explosions now recurred every few minutes. 
The thermometer readings plummeted as the crater fi lled with 
fumes. But I could still hear the polyphony of hisses, roars, 
rumbles and cannonades. When not making temperature meas￾urements (with one hand still throbbing from the burn), I 
recorded the time and characteristics of each explosion. For one 
of these entries in my fi eld notebook, the ink jerks up halfway 
through a word. I retrospectively labelled this jolt ‘blind terror’. 
Half a minute later, an even more violent spasm daubed the 
crater walls with fl uid basalt, and the subsequent salvo hurled 
molten cowpats at a lower angle, dropping one just a few paces 
away – it was still glowing. My notebook reveals growing risk 
acumen: ‘Working here extremely hazardous,’ I remarked.
The crater cleared, revealing again the smouldering vents. 
Like Spallanzani, I tried to imagine what lay beneath – did these 
pits converge on a common magma source? It puzzled me that 
two adjacent openings could display such diff erent behaviour: 
one blazed steadily but seldom shed sparks; the other was erratic, 
boisterous and violent. As each second passed after an explo￾sion, I tensed up in expectation of the next. The anxiety must 
have got to me, for I suddenly needed to eject my own scoriae: 
not the most convenient time or place. A double volley (from 
the volcano) propelled bombs well above me again, and this 
time I had to watch where the buzzing projectiles were headed 
in case it might be necessary to hop out of harm’s way.
Then Aeolus switched tactics: it began raining. Cold, wet 
precipitation somehow caused me greater alarm than a threat￾ening hail of lava bombs. I retreated up the ridge leading to the 
Pizzo sopra la Fossa to fi nd cover. Several crude shelters dotted 
the rise. They were no more than knee-high, circular walls of 28 Mountains of Fire
lava rocks, but they aff orded protection from the wind.16 I found 
some plastic sheeting in one – the vestige of a tourist’s adven￾tures, no doubt – and stretched it across the top of the wall, then 
crawled under. For the fi rst time, it struck me that I was 
completely alone on the volcano. 
Even after the rain eased, there was no point in returning to 
the craters, because thick, white steam clouds, provoked by the 
wetting of hot rocks and magma, now fi lled their mouths. It 
would be impossible to see in, let alone take temperature read￾ings. At dusk, these clouds refl ected the lava light, becoming 
luminous like bonfi re smoke. Explosions intensifi ed the glow 
moments before incandescent lava bombs fl ared out, tracing 
ballistic arcs across clear sky – a mesmerising sight. In the 
distance across the sea, points of light in the darkness mapped 
the contours of settlements on nearby Salina island and the 
shoreline of Reggio Calabria on mainland Italy. It was hard to 
tear myself away from the pyrotechnics – ‘Just one more,’ I kept 
saying to myself – but eventually, I turned in for the night.
I slept fi tfully in my crude tent, discomfi ted by the cold and 
disturbed by the incessant fl apping of the sheeting in the wind. 
Acidic gases drifting from the craters had fumigated the ridge 
intermittently, and it had turned out I had a companion: my 
makeshift shelter was also the refuge of a rodent, which scuttled 
across me and sniff ed my neck. At fi rst light, I was about to tuck 
into panini and ricotta for breakfast, when I spotted neat punc￾ture holes in the crust, through which all the soft interior of the 
rolls had been extracted. At that moment, a small mouse poked 
its snout from a crevice in the rocks.
My stomach bubbling from hunger, I returned to the crater 
to collect more data. But the fumes were too thick, and explo￾sions sprinkled me with pea-sized pieces of lava froth. So I 
headed off to investigate the adjacent crater, which seemed to 
have been tranquil. Five minutes later, an ear-splitting explosion Land of God 29
pelted my measurement site with ejecta. Reaching the rim of the 
unexplored crater, I found it, too, strewn with lava bombs.
Pondering the implications of a red-hot cowpat landing on 
my head, I felt a surge of unease and retraced my steps. I hadn’t 
gone far when a massive discharge from this crater assailed the 
spot where I had been standing. Before there was time to refl ect, 
an explosion from another crater propelled rocks high over￾head, which buzzed as they picked up speed on descent. Feeling 
increasingly like a target in a shooting gallery, I called it a day 
and hiked back to the village.
*
It’s an understatement to say now that this fi eldwork was impru￾dent. Given that lava fragments leave the vent at bullet-like 
velocities, I would have had no time to react had one been 
coming at me. It wouldn’t have just been the end of my PhD 
studies.
I lived and learned. But even my antics pale in comparison 
with those of one of the most renowned and controversial 
volcanologists of the twentieth century, Haroun Tazieff , who 
explored the volcano with surprising impunity in 1949. Tazieff , 
of Polish descent, was very well known in France, where he 
settled, thanks to his thrilling fi lms of expeditions to remote and 
intriguing volcanoes of the world. He was to volcanoes what 
Jacques Cousteau was to the oceans.17
Tazieff did not just go up to the active craters on Stromboli, 
he scrambled round the back of them, teetering along a narrow 
hinge between the chasm and the swooping incline of the Sciara 
del Fuoco. Dodging lava bombs, he came abruptly to a small 
opening in a subterranean passage fi lled with fl owing magma, a 
feature known as a ‘skylight’. Shielding his face from the heat, 
he aimed a handheld pyrometer (a forerunner of the device I 30 Mountains of Fire
used). It read 1,100°C (2,000°F). About halfway down the 
Sciara, he spied the lava re-emerging as a river. But this wasn’t 
the time to explore it.
Down in the village, there was quite a commotion owing to 
the presence of Rossellini’s production team. The director and 
Bergman were at sea fi lming the tuna-catch scene, and Tazieff 
befriended the fi lm’s location manager, General Ludovico 
Muratori. At forty-eight years old, Muratori was a veteran of 
Mussolini’s war in Ethiopia, where he had commanded guerrilla 
units fi ghting the British and Haile Selassie’s forces. Hearing of 
Tazieff ’s escapade on the volcano, Muratori asked where he 
might fi nd a ‘sensational, but safe’ spot at the summit to shoot 
the fi lm’s climax, when Karin attempts to traverse the island by 
way of its magma pits. Tazieff suggested locations where the 
danger was ‘minimal’ – at least between explosions, he cautioned. 
For himself, he had a maximally hazardous adventure in mind: 
to reach the lava fl ow he had spied the previous day. And he 
wanted to observe it by night for greatest eff ect.
It was already dark by the time he was back at the brink of 
the Sciara del Fuoco, but this made it easier to chart a course 
to the lava channel, now a bright beacon. He slid down the 
shifting scree, anxious at many points of triggering a rocky 
avalanche that would sweep him away. He stumbled over boul￾ders, one of which turned out to be a dull-red glowing block of 
lava that had spalled off a solidifying fl ow above. Fresh chunks 
of it broke free and bounded furiously downslope, casting off 
sparks with each bump. At another crag of lava, Tazieff tripped, 
smashing the lamp he had brought for the return ascent, which 
by now he was dreading. He was parched, and it took several 
more hours to reach the lava torrent. But he was spellbound by 
the inexorable blazing pageant, which reminded him somehow 
of columns of marching ants, and admired it for a while before 
getting out his instruments and cameras. The climb back, Land of God 31
without a light, was every bit as horrendous as he’d feared, and 
he was desperately thirsty. There were several further narrow 
escapes: a bellowing rockslide; stifl ing clouds of dust and 
fumes; a broadside of bombs just paces away. But at last, he 
made it to the tent he had pitched near the top, where he had 
cached water.
Sunlight woke him in the morning, and he was enjoying a 
mug of tea when he spotted mules emerging from the sulphur￾ous miasma encircling the peak. They were being led, but for 
one, whose rider lay at an awkward angle. Tazieff ran to the 
group and found the passenger was Muratori, who had come 
up to establish camps for the fi lming. His face was livid, his 
voice rattled, and he slumped against Tazieff , gasping, ‘Fumes–
air!’ His condition deteriorated alarmingly, and Tazieff and the 
muleteers lifted him and started down to the village as fast as 
they dared on the dusty trail. But they did not get far before the 
general died in Tazieff ’s arms.
Was Rossellini’s fi lm worth a life? The general’s death renders 
the scene where Karin is suff ocating in the fumes very close to 
the bone. Bergman herself paid for the funeral and made a 
considerable donation to the bereaved family.
Were Tazieff ’s data important enough to justify such excep￾tional risks? My own observations at the crater’s edge were to 
little purpose: futile, even, in retrospect. The thermometer read￾ings were erratic – they rose and fell by the second, according to 
the ebullition in the magma vent and quantity of fumes passing 
across the instrument’s view. I realised a satellite image snapshot 
of such a scene could do no more than confi rm a volcano’s 
activity – it would not yield a meaningful temperature measure￾ment. This meagre fi nding merited a paragraph in a paper that 
only a handful of people have cited in the three decades since it 
was published.18 I doubt that anyone who read it imagined the 
caper of collecting the data, unless they stopped to think on 32 Mountains of Fire
reading that I had made the measurements at ‘viewing distances 
of approximately 50 metres’. Tourists are no longer permitted 
anywhere near the craters. Even though my excursion happened 
before the era of risk assessment, most people would have taken 
one look at the bombardment and had the sense to keep well 
clear of the evident peril. For me, it took a while for fear to 
trump fervour.
*
The banality of my fi ndings aside, the volcano of Stromboli is 
undeniably among those that have propelled understanding of 
the fundamental drivers of eruptions. It ranks in the top three 
most-studied volcanoes worldwide, along with its compatriots, 
Etna and Vesuvius. In his research, Spallanzani posed two ques￾tions that remain as relevant to volcanology today as they were 
then: why is Stromboli’s activity so persistent, as suggested by 
records stretching back 2,500 years? And what is the explosive 
mechanism?
On the fi rst point, Spallanzani argued that whatever nour￾ished Stromboli’s perpetual confl agration was the same 
substance animating other volcanoes known only for sporadic 
eruptions. Some naturalists of the period regarded petroleum as 
the energy source. They argued that this explained the dark 
plumes that roared into the atmosphere during eruptions. 
Spallanzani, however, discounted this hypothesis, believing 
instead that an inexhaustible supply of burning sulphur, a well￾known active ingredient of gunpowder, sustained Stromboli’s 
incendiary behaviour. This would explain the stench of exhaled 
fumes and the abundant yellow sulphur encrusting gas vents. As 
to the nature of lava, while many of his contemporaries consid￾ered it to be a mixture of sulphur and bitumen, Spallanzani 
insisted – correctly, as now seems obvious – that it was the Land of God 33
molten form of the rock found everywhere at the surface of the 
volcano.19
Now, we understand the generation of magma that feeds 
Stromboli to be a by-product of the sustained collision between 
the African and Eurasian tectonic plates. This induces localised 
melting of the rocks of the Earth’s mantle, deep below the 
surface, producing magma that percolates upwards. It accumu￾lates at a depth of around six miles, forming a chamber. This 
feeds a shallower ‘reservoir’ a little below the level of the seabed, 
and it is this that supplies the crater vents.20
Spallanzani tackled the question of Stromboli’s activity 
systematically through innovative experiments on his return to 
Pavia. He was convinced that an ‘elastic fl uid’ (in other words, a 
gas) must animate the magma column. After all, he had directly 
witnessed bubbles rupturing in the magma pond, and the hiss￾ing of pressurised gases from rents in the crater. To test his idea, 
he crushed each rock specimen to a powder, decanting some 
into a clay crucible. This was attached by glass tubing to a fl ask 
of mercury that would trap any gases expelled when the samples 
were heated. Looking through the end of the glass tube, 
Spallanzani observed the miniature magma cauldrons he had 
created, transporting him back to Stromboli.
Most of the captured gas proved to be air from inside the 
vessel, but Spallanzani recovered white fumes given off during 
some experiments. Tasting the condensed droplets, he identifi ed 
hydrochloric acid, but was sure other gases must also be ‘impris￾oned’ in the molten rock beneath Stromboli until they escaped 
thanks to their buoyancy. Reaching the confi nes of the vent, he 
argued, they formed the large bubbles he’d seen burst so 
violently, fl inging out lava shrapnel.21
Spallanzani wondered about collecting the gas emissions on 
the volcano, but ruled it out because of ‘the manifest danger 
there would be of falling a victim to so impudent a curiosity’. (I 34 Mountains of Fire
must add ‘impudent’ to ‘imprudent’ to describe my fi rst fi eld 
mission to Stromboli.) However, he reasoned, they were prob￾ably similar to emanations from docile volcanic vents at Solfatara 
near Naples, which were then known to contain ‘carbonic’ and 
‘sulphureous’ acids and ‘oxygenous gas’. Somehow foreseeing 
the fruits of twentieth-century technologies, he concluded: ‘Of 
the existential nature of these substances, perhaps, we may not 
always remain ignorant.’
We now know that nearly two-thirds of the volume of the 
bubbles that burst in the vent consist of water vapour and a 
third is carbon dioxide.22 Minor quantities of sulphur dioxide 
and hydrogen chloride (which Spallanzani had detected in his 
experiments) impart the plume’s acidity. A bubble the size of a 
ping-pong ball deep in the volcanic plumbing becomes yoga￾ball-sized near the surface, simply due to decompression. At the 
end of their journey, approaching the atmosphere, the expand￾ing bubbles want to speed up, but their passage is resisted by an 
abundance of crystals in the magma.23 Bubbles also catch up 
with each other, and coalesce to make larger bubbles that 
squeeze against the walls of the magma conduit. Reaching the 
vent, they distend the lava surface until it ruptures violently. The 
sudden acceleration of escaping gas eviscerates the molten rock, 
slinging fragments up into the air. A typical explosion discharges 
a tonne of gas and a few tonnes of molten rock – in total, as 
much as the weight of an average car. Videos of the explosions 
recorded at 500 frames per second and played back in slow 
motion have further revealed that each explosion is a composite 
of discrete pulses – there is not one bubble, but a whole proces￾sion.24 When we change the scale of observation, so often we 
fi nd something that we hadn’t noticed before. Without bubbles, 
magma would be boring.
Spallanzani’s research marks him out as a trailblazer in exper￾imental petrology, a fi eld that continues to illuminate the Land of God 35
internal action of the Earth where probes cannot penetrate.25
Just as Spallanzani tested his concepts for the underlying driv￾ers of volcanic action through experiment, so today the metabo￾lism of magmas can be simulated in the laboratory. Now it is 
possible to conduct such experiments both at high temperature, 
as did Spallanzani, and at the crushing pressures corresponding 
to the depths of real magma bodies. In parallel, the technologies 
for analysing the chemical and physical properties of samples 
have evolved tremendously.
Spallanzani’s conclusions were infl uential for years to come 
and remain remarkably aligned with thinking today. Highlighting 
his importance, he is connected with the fi rst recorded usage of 
the term ‘volcanology’ in English, in the June 1800 issue of The 
Edinburgh Magazine:
We fi nd in the Voyages of Spallanzani a new volcanology; he 
therein teaches the way to measure the intensity of the fi re of 
volcanoes, to glance at the causes, to touch almost, in the 
analysis which he makes of the lava, that particular gas which 
resembling a powerful lever, tears from the bowels of the 
earth . . . those torrents of stone in fusion . . .26
His contribution was trumpeted again in the fi rst English￾language synthesis of volcano knowledge, published in 1825: 
Considerations on Volcanos, the work of a precocious polymath 
and politician, George Poulett Scrope. He’d visited Stromboli a 
few years earlier and wrote that Spallanzani was the fi rst to 
establish ‘the nature of volcanic agency in its true light’.27
On mainland Italy, Vesuvius continued to steal the show. The 
visiting scientists included Humphry Davy, discoverer of 
sodium and potassium, and inventor of the miner’s safety lamp, 
who mistakenly attributed volcanic fury to the exposure of reac￾tive metals to water and air. He attended several eruptions of the 36 Mountains of Fire
Neapolitan volcano in 1819 and 1820 and hurled assorted 
chemical compounds on fl owing lava but the experiments failed 
to validate his theory.28 Meanwhile, local scholars began to 
lament the piecemeal attention paid to the volcano’s behaviour 
– the activity was so changeable, it would be easy to miss some￾thing important simply because no one was present to observe 
it. Among those who saw the opportunities of continuous vigi￾lance were the mineralogists Teodoro Monticelli and Nicola 
Covelli, who wrote in 1823: ‘If educated men watched from a 
meteorological-volcano observatory to record all the events of 
Vesuvius, and observe their eff ects [. . .] a veil would be lifted on 
the physics of volcanoes’.29 Without such a facility, they argued, 
making sense of Vesuvius would be like reading a novel from a 
selection of randomly detached pages.
Their dream was realised with the founding of the Royal 
Vesuvius Observatory in 1841 – the world’s fi rst dedicated 
volcano institute. It was built on a prominent cone on the slopes 
of Vesuvius with a fi ne view of the summit crater. But this was 
a time of political upheavals and its fi rst director was soon 
ousted in a purge of intellectuals. It was several years until a 
successor, Luigi Palmieri, was appointed but he would hold 
the post for forty years. He designed and operated the world’s 
fi rst electromagnetic seismograph and, just as importantly, he 
ran an open-door policy, enabling collaboration with other fi eld 
and laboratory scientists, and he regularised data archiving and 
reporting. With such organised and institutionalised inquiry, 
‘volcanology’ had come of age.
The rising star of the discipline as Palmieri grew old was 
another Italian priest and professor, Giuseppe Mercalli. Like 
Hamilton and Spallanzani, Mercalli believed the key to under￾standing the natural world was to observe it.30 It was he who 
coined the term ‘strombolian’ to describe the typical activity of 
Stromboli: moderate explosions of expanding gases that blast Land of God 37
out projectiles in a persistent cycle. Strombolian activity is 
one of the most ubiquitous varieties of volcanic eruption – it is 
likely even to be responsible for deposits and landforms seen 
on Venus and Mars, albeit with changes of scale refl ecting diff er￾ent surface conditions.31 Mercalli also classifi ed more explosive 
varieties of eruption: ‘vulcanian’, ‘plinian’ and ‘peléan’. After 
many years yearning for the top job in volcanology, he was in 
his sixties when he became director of the Vesuvius observatory 
in 1911. But his tenure was tragically cut short when he was 
consumed by a blaze at his home. Some thought he might 
have knocked over an oil lamp and been unable to contain 
the resulting confl agration, but others suspected he was the 
victim of a botched burglary, the fi re lit to conceal evidence of 
murder.32
Today, Stromboli still feels like the periphery of Europe, at 
least outside of the tourist season. The resident population 
remains just a few hundred. For farmers and fi shermen, the 
volcano is a companion. But the relationship goes deeper. On 
one visit, while disembarking from the boat that had brought me 
from the neighbouring island of Lipari, I encountered one of 
Stromboli’s resident priests. He was carrying a plastic super￾market bag, and I could not help noticing a glass case projecting 
from the top of it. It housed a silver gauntlet, a priceless reli￾quary allegedly containing remains of the Apostle Bartholomew, 
who is said to have been miraculously washed ashore on Lipari.33
The priest confi ded that his parishioners’ beliefs melded 
Catholic faith with traditional culture: ‘They believe this is the 
land of God but also, that the land is God. Even now, when the 
volcano erupts more violently, the people shudder. It reminds 
them that another divinity pervades the island.’
I have encountered such accommodations of seemingly 
disparate creeds all over the world, wherever there are volca￾noes. On Stromboli, the priest’s observation was borne out 38 Mountains of Fire
when I met one of the island’s oldest inhabitants at his home in 
the village. He had been in his teens when Rossellini and 
Bergman were fi lming there. On a dresser in his dining room sat 
a small shrine adorned with Christmas lights and housing keep￾sakes interconnecting the sea, Church, family and volcano: a 
framed tinted photograph of his mother; a model sail ship; a 
diorama of the village made with shells and lava stones; a souve￾nir snow globe from Rome; a nugget of sulphur beside a picture 
of the Madonna; and a plastic amaryllis. He asked if I would like 
to hear a poem he had written.
His weathered eyes twinkled as he recited (in regional dialect), 
and I found myself transported to Pizzo sopra la Fossa at dusk:
Dear friends, come, come!
I bring joy:
A gilded sunset, a million-coloured rainbow between sky and sea.
By night you hear me tremble.
But I do it to make you embrace.
Come, kiss me,
You won’t forget it; my kiss is made of fi re.
See the sparks burst from my mouth.
I hear you cry ‘che bello, che bello’.What Upsets Volcanoes?
Taking fl ight from a restrained expulsion 
of Antuco volcano, Chile.1
‘What is it that upsets the volcanoes
That spit fi re, cold and rage?’
– Pablo Neruda, The Book of Questions2A young geologist, Charles Darwin, was resting in woodlands 
 in southern Chile, when, half an hour before noon, his 
peace was ruptured by a sudden rise and fall of the ground.3
 It 
lasted two minutes, shook the trees and left him giddy. He later 
confi ded in his diary that day, 20 February 1835, that such an 
earthquake ‘at once destroys the oldest associations; the world, 
the very emblem of all that is solid, moves beneath our feet like a 
crust over a fl uid’. Two weeks later, he rode into what remained 
of the city of Concepción, close to the epicentre of the tremor. 
The devastation aroused mixed feelings. It was ‘the most awful 
yet interesting spectacle’ he had ever beheld, ‘terrible’, yet, in its 
evocation of ancient Greek and Roman ruins, ‘picturesque’. The 
scene at the port of Talcahuano, which had been ravaged by 
tsunamis, was even more desolate – a schooner had been tossed 
into the town centre – but at least the inhabitants there had 
reacted to the sight of a receding sea and found refuge on higher 
ground in time. Survivors blamed the earthquake on the curse of 
an indigenous Mapuche woman, rumoured to have stoppered 
Antuco volcano over a dispute. This tale intrigued Darwin as it 
mirrored his own views on the relationship between earthquakes 
and the suppressed activity of volcanoes. Plug a crater, he argued, 
and it will surely build up pressure elsewhere.
Darwin was further struck by the upheaval of land that had 
accompanied the earthquake. On Santa Maria island, just 
off shore, beds of recently thriving mussels had been thrust 
above the high-tide mark. Writing in his fi eld notes, Darwin 
connected these phenomena – the earthquake, uplift, muzzled 42 Mountains of Fire
volcanoes. His ruminations led, on his return to England, to his 
fi rst major published work, which identifi ed one of the now￾recognised triggers of volcanic eruptions, and came remarkably 
close to pre-empting a central plank of plate tectonic theory – 
the ‘subduction zone’ – by well over a century.4
Darwin made contact with many informants who shared their 
perspectives on the earthquake and its side-eff ects. One corre￾spondent asserted that, at the instant of the shock, Osorno 
volcano, south of Concepción, vomited ‘a thick column of dark 
blue smoke’. Lava had then ‘boiled up’ from a new crater, blast￾ing out incandescent rock. The source also claimed that even the 
more distant Minchi nmávida volcano had erupted as the ground 
trembled, and that nearby Corcov ado volcano had followed 
suit before the year was out. Meanwhile, the British Governor 
on lonely Robinson Crusoe Island, far off the Chilean coast, 
reported an eruption at sea just hours after the earthquake.
The apparent synchroneity and geographic range of these 
phenomena astounded Darwin. Drawing the analogy of stamp￾ing on a frozen pool, forcing water up through dispersed holes 
in the ice, he imagined Chile fl oating on a ‘lake of molten stone’. 
He reasoned that lava was evacuated through the volcanic 
orifi ces in the cordillera at the moment of the shock, and that 
repeated intrusions of liquefi ed rock were responsible for cumu￾lative surface uplift. This explained how beds of fossilised 
seashells could come to lie at the top of a hill. Extrapolating in 
both time and space, Darwin thought that the whole of the 
Andes was subject to the same mysterious infernal force. He 
argued that the 1835 temblor marked just the latest ‘step in the 
elevation of a mountain-chain’ and that countless similar incre￾mental upheavals might explain the formation of other moun￾tain belts around the world.
While not all his facts were straight (for instance, there prob￾ably wasn’t an eruption on Robinson Crusoe Island),5
 Darwin’s What Upsets Volcanoes? 43
pursuit of a unifying explanation for topography, seismicity and 
volcanism is extraordinary, the more so since his thinking 
diverged signifi cantly from that of his then more established 
contemporaries. One prevailing view considered that mountain 
ranges were wrinkles in the skin of a cooling and contracting 
Earth. Today, geophysical observations have unveiled a fold in 
the Nazca plate where it collides with the South American plate 
– from Colombia to southern Chile – and sinks into the deep 
Earth under its own weight. This ‘subduction’ is the main motive 
force of tectonic plates, and it simultaneously acts as our plan￾et’s recycling factory by reprocessing old ocean fl oor and 
younger sediments. Subduction goes on to concentrate miner￾als in giant ore deposits, and fuel the world’s most violent vol￾canoes with explosive magma. Masaya, Vesuvius and Stromboli 
are vivifi ed in this manner.6
But the Andean plate boundary is not so well lubricated – it 
sticks, accumulating strain in the rock that is eventually released 
catastrophically by ‘megathrust’ temblors. For 135 years after 
‘Darwin’s earthquake’, this segment of the plate margin 
remained locked, even though the two sides continued grinding 
together at about the rate that hair grows. On 27 February 2010, 
the pent-up energy was unleashed in another massive earth￾quake. The towns of Concepción and Talcahuano were devas￾tated once again, and 500 people lost their lives.
*
Understanding the triggers of volcanic eruptions is one of the 
keys to prediction. Darwin’s image of the crust fl oating on a sea 
of molten rock is wide of the mark – magma bodies are very 
localised. But the idea that great earthquakes can provoke 
volcanic eruptions retains scientifi c currency and is backed up 
by statistical evidence. Although calculations suggest that the 44 Mountains of Fire
disturbance of seismic waves in a magma reservoir must be very 
subtle, in a region with many volcanoes, a few may be primed 
for eruption at any given time, and a nudge may be suffi cient to 
unclamp the forces holding back the molten rock.7
There are at least sixty volcanoes in southern Chile, a high 
concentration for any country. Fifteen months after the 2010 
earthquake, the volc ano Cordón Caulle exploded violently – its 
largest historical eruption. Closer to the epicentre, Llaima 
volcano did not erupt but it did rumble.8
 More surprisingly, fi ve 
of the region’s other volcanoes subsided ever so slightly, possi￾bly because the seismic rattling shifted geothermal waters 
trapped below ground.9
While Darwin’s accounts and more recent events have furnished 
some of the strongest evidence for earthquake triggering of erup￾tions, the link is not yet clear enough to provide a reliable means of 
forecasting. In fact, Chilean volcanologists have often been taken 
by surprise by the country’s eruptions. One of the most dramatic 
examples of this was the reawakening in May 2008 of Chaitén 
volcano, a small off shoot of snow-clad Minchinmávida. The initial 
fi re and fury expelled dark towers of ash that scintillated with 
lightning. The plume soared into the stratosphere and fi ne ash 
drifted into air corridors, disrupting fl ights across the Southern 
Hemisphere. The fallout covered a wide swathe of southern 
Argentina, a nation that has repeatedly had cause to resent being 
situated downwind of Chile’s volcanoes. Luckily, despite being 
completely unprepared, the 4,600 residents of Chaitén town at the 
foot of the volcano evacuated safely.10
It is even possible that the 1960 Valdivia earthquake, the larg￾est ever recorded, lit a slow fuse for the Chaitén eruption. The 
seismic palpitations from that event appear to have opened a 
pathway for viscous magma stored deep under Minchinmávida 
to rise into a fault zone below Chaitén.11 It gathered there over 
the next half a century until it became so pressurised that it What Upsets Volcanoes? 45
popped the overlying crust like an overfi lled balloon, squeezing 
molten rock up to the surface. Most volcanic eruptions are 
thought to arise in this fashion, from overinfl ation of a magma 
chamber. Sometimes, magmas with distinct chemical composi￾tions are stirred together, producing pumice that looks a lot like 
marble cake.
Before Chaitén’s spasm, Chilean volcanologists thought it 
had not erupted in more than 9,000 years, and ranked it fortieth 
in their list of volcanoes to worry about.12 With limited resources 
to devote to surveillance, it did not make the priority list. Had it 
been monitored, precursory phenomena would have been 
detected. This is certain, because it later emerged that seismom￾eters on some of the volcanoes higher up the pecking order had
detected unusual activity beneath Chaitén.
Concerned by this forecasting failure, the Chilean president 
at the time, Michelle Bachelet, funded a new agency tasked with 
surveillance of Chile’s volcanoes and identifying the signs of 
impending eruptions. I saw the fruits of this a decade later on a 
visit to the Volcano Observatory of the Southern Andes in 
Temuco. It is the nerve centre for sensors on volcanoes that 
stretch from the Altiplano, a vast volcanic plateau in the north, 
to Patagonia in the south. The main operations room was a 
large, airy and light space with three rows of desks facing dozens 
of large display panels affi xed to the wall. Each screen showed 
live data feeds, mostly from seismometers but some from gas 
sensors, GPS equipment and cameras. The desks also bristled 
with computer panels. Personnel in the front row were tasked 
with reviewing all this real-time information. In the event of 
spotting an anomaly, they would alert staff behind them, who 
would then evaluate the signal in light of archived data. If it still 
stood out, the case was passed to the third tier for detailed 
contextual analysis. With so many volcanoes to track, I could see 
the sense in this hierarchy.46 Mountains of Fire
Even with this impressive facility, stealth eruptions still occur. 
My Chilean colleagues might cite Calbuco’s 2015 er uption as 
an example. It gave only three hours’ advance notice of its inten￾tions via the observatory’s seismometers, leaving very little time 
to react. Even more incredulous were the residents of Puerto 
Montt, as they watched a gigantic mushroom-headed plume of 
ash soar above the city skyline. Fortunately, there were no casu￾alties, but farmland was extensively damaged, especially down￾wind in Argentina.13
A forensic chemical analysis and microscopic imaging of the 
pumice deposits in this case showed no evidence of magma 
mixing. Instead, it looks like the eruption was set in motion by a 
process known as ‘second boiling’.14 As magma cools in the 
Earth’s crust, crystals form and grow, concentrating dissolved 
water in the liquid rock. Eventually, the magma can hold no 
more water, which then has no choice but to form vapour 
bubbles. A layer of foam accumulates, pressurising the magma 
chamber until a crack opens in the enveloping crust, sparking 
an eruption, which can be every bit as violent as that resulting 
from an overfi lled magma chamber.
My PhD research was not directly concerned with identify￾ing eruption triggers, but it did seek ways of identifying temper￾ature anomalies that might signal the touchpaper had been lit. 
With so many volcanoes at diff erent stages in their eruption 
cycles, it was inevitable I would carry out some of my fi eld 
research in Chile. It was 1990, and the whole country was under￾going a diff erent kind of seismic shift – Augusto Pinochet had 
relinquished power and a new government was about to be 
sworn in. In Santiago, a city of ice-cream parlours and noxious 
air, I watched President Aylwin’s inaugural speech on TV, and 
sensed the air of optimism.
I soon discovered that democracy was not the only excite￾ment, though. Láscar volcano, situated in the north of the What Upsets Volcanoes? 47
country, had just exploded, expelling a plume of ash and steam 
into the stratosphere. Residents of the nearby communities of 
Talabre and Toconao were anxious, since a renowned geologist 
and Antarctic explorer based at the University of Chile, Oscar 
González-Ferrán, had urged their immediate evacuation. Half 
the mountain might be blown away with further eruptions, he 
claimed. At least, that was how the newspapers reported it. It 
hadn’t been my intention to head into the heart of an evolving 
volcanic crisis but it was hard to ignore since Láscar was the 
target of my fi eldwork, and my host was the Chilean geologist 
Moyra Gardeweg, who was suddenly tasked with responding to 
the emergency. As luck would have it, also in our party was one 
of the world’s leading volcanologists, Steve Sparks. I had taken 
his lab classes (on the 1980 eruption of Mount St Helens) as an 
undergraduate. Whereas I turned to volcanoes because I’d never 
had a better idea, Steve must have had little choice with a name 
like Sparks.
Flying north from Santiago to Calama on the Tropic of 
Capricorn, you cannot take your eyes off the Altiplano, the larg￾est, highest, driest plateau in the Americas. Perhaps only on 
Jupiter’s volcanically hyperactive moon, Io, is creation and 
destruction by volcanic agency laid bare with more exuberance 
and strangeness. Almost devoid of vegetation, all the tints, tinc￾tures and textures of weathered and varnished andesite, dacite 
and rhyolite are displayed: gravels and dusts in shades of rust, 
umber, ochre and maroon run together from ridges to valley 
fl oors. The inner Earth has been at play here, and these geogenic 
pigments have yielded sought-after resources.
We fl ew above Chuquicamata, the most prolifi c copper 
orebody in the world, spawned from subduction and magmatic 
activity dating back thirty million years. Before copper, it was 
the Atacama desert’s vast reserves of saltpetre that enticed 
miners. This nitrate mineral was essential for making fertilisers 48 Mountains of Fire
and gunpowder. But the extractive industry collapsed with the 
discovery of a synthetic manufacturing process during the First 
World War, and the mines were abandoned, the shacks left to 
warp in the unforgiving sunlight.
Moyra had an appointment at the district government offi ce 
in Calama to discuss the Láscar crisis, and Steve and I tagged 
along. A small crowd had gathered around a bearded guy play￾ing the guitar in the town’s plaza and singing ‘Compañero, here 
today, you are free  . . .’ The lamp posts were festooned with 
posters imploring ‘Where are they?’ and showing faces of Chile’s 
‘disappeared’, the people who had vanished under Pinochet. 
Some of them had ended their days not far from Calama at one 
of the saltpetre mines, repurposed as a concentration camp for 
political prisoners.15 It features in Patricio Guzmán’s stunning 
and harrowing fi lm, Nostalgia for the Light. The dust of the 
disappeared blows in the desert’s burning wind.
Attending the meeting were the new mayor for the region 
(appointed since the change of president), the provincial gover￾nor, the mayor of San Pedro de Atacama (the nearest town to 
Láscar), civil protection offi cials and members of the press. 
Provoked by Oscar González-Ferrán’s widely publicised alarm, 
the army had stationed trucks in Talabre in readiness for an 
evacuation call. The governor asked if Moyra shared González￾Ferrán’s point of view. She demurred, explaining that without 
monitoring equipment, it was hard to read the volcano’s aff airs 
or foretell more violent eruptions. However, in light of Láscar’s 
past behaviour, she viewed the recent explosion as typical of the 
life cycle of the dome of viscous lava known to reside on the 
crater fl oor. Any major escalation in activity, she argued, would 
likely be preceded by ground shaking strong enough to be felt in 
villages around the volcano. She added that the cost of a seismo￾graph, which could give early warning, was much less than that 
of resettling Talabre’s inhabitants.What Upsets Volcanoes? 49
Scenting controversy, the journalists jumped on the apparent 
divergence from González-Ferrán’s conviction. But Moyra 
would not contradict a colleague’s assessment. In an equal 
display of diplomacy, the head of the regional emergency offi ce 
noted that González-Ferrán was a two-hour fl ight away in 
Santiago; accordingly, he would listen to the expert who was 
present. The army would remain on standby and seismic equip￾ment would be obtained. But, he wanted to know, if evacuation 
should prove necessary, how long might it last, and what should 
be done for the thousands of livestock, mostly llamas?
For a rookie volcanologist as I was then, the exchange was 
gripping – it revealed the complexities and confl icts of manag￾ing a volcanic crisis, and the importance of science in informing 
critical decisions aff ecting people’s lives and livelihoods. The 
area around Láscar is sparsely populated; fewer than 100 people 
inhabited Talabre. While traumatic for those impacted, an evac￾uation order would not have presented a major logistical chal￾lenge. But transpose such a crisis to an urban area, and the anxi￾ety surrounding decision-making amplifi es intensely.
An hour or so’s drive brought us to San Pedro de Atacama, 
where we spent the night. Along with the scents of weeping 
eucalypts in the plaza, kitchen woodsmoke and mule droppings, 
I couldn’t help noticing a sulphurous reek, always rousing for a 
volcanologist. It didn’t take long to fi nd out that sulphur was 
being mined from the 5,500-metre-high summit of nearby 
Purico volcano, and refi ned at a plant on the edge of town.16
The mine has since closed, but the volcano still has its uses as a 
lofty foundation for the Atacama Cosmology Telescope.
In the morning, Moyra, Steve and I set off in two four-wheel￾drive vehicles barrelling south down the undeviating ‘Road of 
Patience’, crossing the eastern edge of the immense Salar de 
Atacama salt fl at. The latest extractive industry to fl ourish here 
is the harvesting of lithium, sourced from magmatic fl uids and 50 Mountains of Fire
weathering of volcanic rocks, and distilled in the Salar’s brines. 
As the power source of rechargeable electric batteries, demand 
for the metal has rocketed. The abundance of lithium in the 
region is even evident in the hair of ancient Atacamanian 
mummies.17
After so much anticipation, fi rst impressions of the Andean 
volcanoes from the ground were underwhelming. The cones 
formed indistinct silhouettes, far less imposing than I had imag￾ined; the scenery seemed, if anything, drab. But I was being 
tricked by a collusion of atmosphere and terrain – what seemed 
a few miles away was actually ten times more distant. Adapting 
to this illusory perspective, my excitement rebounded as we 
turned east and began ascending the Altiplano’s massive 
piedmont.
This rampart was forged during the most violent volcanic 
cataclysms the Earth has known: sustained explosive aff airs so 
extreme that we have no other terms for them than ‘super-erup￾tion’ and ‘mega-colossal’. Super-eruptions produce at least one 
trillion tonnes of rock, known as ignimbrite. Recent analysis of 
the geological record suggests such gargantuan events recur 
every 20,000 years or so, more often than once thought.18
Whereas most eruptions are triggered when magma chambers 
reach a critical pressure due to overfi lling or a build-up of 
bubbles, super-eruptions may result when the sheer buoyancy 
of an immense reservoir of molten rock fractures the lid of over￾lying crust – like releasing a football held underwater.19
Ignimbrite is a rock made up of the ash and pumice depos￾ited from tumultuous plumes of magmatic debris and gas that 
have surged, with the combined qualities of hurricane, landslide 
and furnace, from giant rents in the Earth’s crust. Ignimbrite 
can be powdery and friable, but where it has sintered through 
stewing in its own juices soon after eruption it forms a resilient 
lightweight rock known as sillar, well suited for construction. Its What Upsets Volcanoes? 51
desert varnish has an orange-pink tinge, but a fresh surface is 
dazzlingly bright in the intense Atacama sunlight. Super￾eruptions expel so much magma that the ground founders 
above the voiding magma chamber, forming a vast depression. 
These are not the classical volcanic cones we are familiar with; 
they are, instead, calderas – exceptionally large holes in the 
ground.
Moyra was particularly familiar with the ignimbrite we were 
driving up; she had examined it in detail and written the bench￾mark paper on its age and characteristics.20 It is linked to a 
massive caldera the size of Greater London, known as La 
Pacana, and is nearly four million years old. If spread evenly 
across the entire USA, the debris would reach above ankle 
height. For comparison, Yellowstone’s greatest convulsion is 
half La Pacana’s age, but the deposit is similar in scale.
The Altiplano is a vast palimpsest of such ignimbrites, the 
products of innumerable super-eruptions. It holds aloft the 
discrete cones of active and dormant volcanoes whose mouths 
touch attenuated air at up to 6,800 metres above sea level (higher 
than Mount Denali in Alaska). Clefts in the ignimbrite deep 
enough to hide an apartment building, known as quebradas, give 
a sense of the scale of individual eruptions. Arriving in Talabre 
village, where we would be staying for the next two weeks, the 
telluric became domestic: the tin-roofed dwellings are all built 
from sillar. I discovered that Talabre had already been relocated 
further from the volcano in the 1980s owing to the threat of 
mudfl ows, but farmers still tended maize and vegetable gardens 
around the former settlement. They also kept herds of llamas 
for wool, which was woven into the rugs I’d seen hanging in San 
Pedro’s tourist shops.
We stayed at the village schoolhouse, laying out sleeping bags 
on the fl oor of the classroom, which we shared with soldiers on 
standby to assist should an evacuation order be issued. A picture 52 Mountains of Fire
of the Pope hung from the wall, and beside it an empty frame 
that had until recently ornamented Pinochet’s portrait. The air 
was frigid and gusty; the Chilean fl ag on the roof clattered all 
night. In the morning, the ground was icy, and white steam 
clouds wafted from Láscar’s snow-fl ecked summit. The school’s 
teacher, Manuel, was originally from Santiago. He was plainly 
disaff ected by his posting to such a remote and forlorn frontier, 
all the more so now it was menaced by an unruly volcano. He 
told us the recent blast had rattled the window for fi ve minutes.
One of Talabre’s oldest residents, Cornelius, shared a longer￾term perspective. He recalled many eruptions since the 1950s, 
including one in 1960 that had continued for three days, show￾ering the village with ash at night. That had been preceded by 
two months of ground shaking, he said, and since Láscar was 
now tranquil, he reckoned it would stop smoking soon and go 
back to sleep. This prediction was strikingly in accord with 
Moyra’s interpretation – pathways by which gas escapes from 
the magma are known to clog up with mineral growth, shutting 
down gas release. Pressure then accumulates to the point of a 
violent expulsion. Cornelius even described the present condi￾tion of the volcano as an ‘open crater’, consonant with the term 
‘open vent’ used by volcanologists to describe exposed magma 
that relieves its internal pressure by unrestrained emission of 
gas into the atmosphere.
While unconcerned about the volcano, the prospect of evacu￾ation of the village troubled Cornelius. ‘Water is our most 
precious commodity here – it comes from the spirits in the 
volcanoes,’ he explained. ‘Someone might take it if we are forced 
to leave. And if we move again, we will have to dig a new chan￾nel to carry the water, and this costs us in money and eff ort.’ 
Echoing the feelings of the octogenarian I met on Stromboli, 
Cornelius described the volcano as a friend and protector. 
‘Láscar announces the change of seasons by the clouds at its What Upsets Volcanoes? 53
peak; it tells us if the year will be good or bad, and watches after 
our animals.’ Cornelius had heard from various authorities in 
the preceding days that ‘the geologists will know when the 
volcano will erupt’, but in truth, without any monitoring equip￾ment, his direct familiarity with the volcano trumped our generic 
scientifi c experience.
Andean volcanoes have long been revered as sources of water, 
providers of fertility, guardians of animals and owners of miner￾als and obsidian, a volcanic glass used to make cutting tools. 
Cornelius’s faith in the supernature of Láscar echoes ancient 
beliefs. The most striking (and lurid) evidence of this dates to 
the Inca period (circa 1438–1532 CE), when human sacrifi ces 
(now more neutrally referred to as ‘deliberate installations’)21
were performed beside fuming craters. The chronicles of the 
Spanish conquistadors record that the most handsome children 
from the span of the empire were brought to Cusco, where they 
were fattened up and prepared for mountaintop immolations 
known as capacochas.22 Spectacular relics substantiating these 
accounts have been unearthed, including mummifi ed victims 
from what must be the world’s highest archaeological site at the 
summit of Llul laillaco volcano, to the south of Láscar. In 1999, 
three burial pits were discovered within a rough ceremonial 
platform just below the peak and more than 6,700 metres above 
sea level. A boy and girl, both aged four or fi ve, and an older girl 
of about thirteen, were exhumed. Though cause of death could 
not be ascertained, each child had been heavily sedated with 
maize beer. It is possible they were buried alive. Their clothed 
and hunched bodies were accompanied by jewellery, ceramic 
and wooden pots and plates, foodstuff s, and gold and silver 
fi gurines of llamas.
What led the Inca to perform such extreme rites is unclear. 
They worshipped the sun, which the craters brought them closer 
to, linking heaven, earth and underworld, but in propitiating 54 Mountains of Fire
local deities, it appears the capacochas were primarily intended 
to reinforce Cusco’s authority over far-fl ung parts of the vast 
Inca dominion. Given its altitude, sulphurous essence and prox￾imity to the Inca road, Láscar’s peak may well have been another 
site of ‘deliberate installations’, though any physical evidence 
would surely have been obliterated long ago by the volcano’s 
fi ery numen.
We spent several days geologising around Láscar. As a novice, 
especially in the fi eld identifi cation of young volcanic rocks, I 
experienced a kind of rapture in the company of Moyra and 
Steve, who is also an ignimbrite guru. They combed each 
outcrop for clues to interpret the emplacement or sedimenta￾tion of the various lavas and pyroclastics (meaning ‘broken by 
fi re’ and referring to the granular mixtures of ash and pumice 
generated by explosive eruptions). Steve routinely thought 
aloud, and would illustrate schematics of underlying physical 
processes in his notebook. I quickly recognised two central and 
related aspects of volcanology. First, understanding volcanoes 
means understanding fl uids – the same physics applies to 
anything that fl ows, whether water from a tap, oil in a pipe, 
blood in our veins, or magma, lava, mud and ash clouds moving 
below, across or above the ground. Second, the colour, thick￾ness, lamination and texture of the layers of pyroclastic rocks 
and lavas faithfully record the nature of the eruptions that 
produced them: how high the ash cloud reached in the atmos￾phere; how intense the explosions were; how long they contin￾ued for; which way the wind was blowing. All this can be deci￾phered for any past eruption given decent exposure of the 
deposits and knowledge of how things fl ow. If you know how to 
read the signs, it is all written in the rocks.
The road climbs from Talabre to a dizzying 4,500 metres 
altitude, winding around the southern foot of Láscar. Here, 
tussock grass – resembling oversized porcupines and equally What Upsets Volcanoes? 55
uncomfortable to sit upon – grows in profusion, adapted to the 
hyperaridity, and complementing the burnished patina of 
cinereal and russet lava rock of older volcanoes. Via this route, 
which leads to the Argentine frontier, we accessed the east side 
of Láscar, an astonishing landscape and ecosystem at the 
southern margin of La Pacana caldera. We sighted many rheas 
and vicuña (wild cousins of domesticated alpaca), while vizca￾chas (leporine rodents) watched us inquisitively from behind 
blocks of lava. I imagined the ancient Atacamanians hunting in 
this place.23
Láscar loomed beyond a dark green lake, Laguna Lejía, 
whose motionless surface perfectly refl ected the volcano, now 
shrouded in iridescent lenticulars. Pink and white fl amingos 
shimmered beside the salt-fringed shore before taking fl ight, bill 
to tail, above the water. The stony plain stretching north of the 
lake was pockmarked by the hail of projectiles from the recent 
eruption. Each hollow contained grey fragments of a shattered 
lava bomb.
Since hardly anyone ever looked directly into the crater of 
Láscar, some of the most detailed insights into its activity had 
come from satellites in space.24 In particular, the sensors on the 
U.S. Landsat orbiters had kept an eye on the volcano. The 
Landsat programme, operational since 1972, was the fi rst to 
bring into the public domain the kinds of Earth imagery we are 
now so familiar with from online digital globes. I was particularly 
interested in the satellites’ capability of detecting very hot ground 
but I wanted an image collected at night so that only volcanic 
glow would light up the pixels – by daytime, sunshine refl ected 
off the ground would swamp the signal. Since there wasn’t much 
of a market for views of the Earth in darkness, I’d had to make a 
special request for Landsat’s data recorder to be switched on at 
the right moment. My plan was to be at the crater’s edge by dusk, 
shortly before the satellite would whizz overhead.56 Mountains of Fire
At noon that day, Steve dropped me off where the road passed 
closest to the volcano. In my backpack were my trusted infrared 
thermometers, veterans of the Stromboli campaign. Steve would 
return for me at 10pm.
In terms of terrain, there was nothing challenging or technical 
to the climb. There was no route or path to follow, and though 
this was before the era of commercial GPS, it was obvious 
enough that the destination lay upwards. However, starting at 
around 3,800 metres above sea level, and unacclimatised, the 
thin air throttled my vitality. By 4,500 metres, I could manage 
two steps up before having to catch my breath, during which 
time I would slide back in the loose cinders. It was gruelling, 
heart-pounding work, and a bothersome headache was brew￾ing. As the afternoon wore on, the volcanoes cast great shadows 
across the plateau, until just the snow-dusted peaks glowed 
cherry-blossom pink against a silvery sky.
At last, around dusk, I approached the crater’s edge at close 
to 5,400 metres altitude. But there was little respite, as what the 
air lacked in oxygen it made up for with sulphur emanating 
from the pit. Feeling sick, I peered into the great maw of the 
crater and, through the fumes swirling within, discerned a 
constellation of red-hot glowing gas vents arranged in clusters 
and arcs on and around a circular pile of lava, about the size of 
a baseball fi eld. The lava surface looked wrinkled, like an under￾baked cake that has sagged. Some vents beyond its margin 
roared like jet engines. By now, I was not on top form and was 
shivering in the sub-zero air, but it was thrilling to know that, 
hurtling in orbit above me, Landsat was about to be activated to 
capture the scene. It would include a sub-pixel sized human 
who knew exactly what the volcano was up to at that moment.25
Keeping an eye on time, I hurriedly took temperature read￾ings, notes and photographs. I did not want to miss my appoint￾ment with Steve. Unfortunately though, as I began the descent, What Upsets Volcanoes? 57
my torch batteries expired (maybe they’d got too cold), and I 
had to fi nd the way down in the dark. While ascending a 
volcano leads you to a singularity in space, descending does 
not: it was essential to retrace my steps or risk ending up at 
the foot of the mountain miles from the roadhead – this was 
not easy by the light of the stars alone. My legs ached; I was 
exhausted and nauseous, and soon dealing with diarrhoea and 
vomiting, all clear signs of acute mountain sickness. I felt an 
overwhelming urge to lie down and rest despite the cold, but 
knew I must continue or risk raising the alarm and having a 
search party out for me in the morning.
Several times I reached the head of a gully and was unsure of 
which side to descend. After more than three hours, I reached 
the Talabre quebrada, somehow only a quarter of an hour late for 
the rendezvous. But I could not see any vehicle. I was about to 
sink to my knees when full beams fl ashed on, and Pink Floyd’s 
The Dark Side of the Moon unexpectedly resounded across the 
valley.
I spent another week in Talabre and climbed Láscar twice 
more, but from the east and with absolute ease thanks to adapted 
blood chemistry. One morning, an elderly woman stopped by 
the schoolhouse and shared her opinions on the crisis. ‘The 
volcano did a little thing,’ she said, ‘like it has done many times 
before. Now it is all quiet.’ Moyra had reached the same conclu￾sion and recommended calling off the alert. The soldiers 
retreated to San Pedro. Only Manuel, the teacher, looked sorry 
– he had privately hoped for an evacuation to bring an early end 
to his lonesome secondment. He was given charge of a seismo￾graph, though, and trained in its maintenance. I like to imagine 
that through listening to Láscar’s subterranean whispers, he 
came to fi nd a friend in the volcano.
*58 Mountains of Fire
Back in the UK, I eagerly awaited delivery of the Landsat 
images. Since I was interested in developing ways to apply the 
satellite remote-sensing techniques to routine volcano monitor￾ing, I obtained more than a dozen additional images of the 
volcano spanning a seven-year period. The temperatures and 
hotspot sizes calculated from the scene acquired the evening I 
spent at the summit were reassuringly consistent with my fi eld 
observations. But most interesting, the trends that emerged 
from my analysis of the data correlated with eruptive activity. 
Láscar’s largest blast was preceded, somewhat counterintui￾tively at fi rst glance, by two years of steady cooling. This can be 
explained by the sealing of cracks and fractures in the lava and 
surrounding host rock, cutting off gas fl ow, pretty much as 
Cornelius surmised. In this scenario, pressure in the magma 
conduit escalates until a threshold for rock fracture is reached, 
triggering an explosion. Blasting off the carapace of the lava 
dome depressurises the underlying magma, kindling a runaway 
process due to violent expansion of gas bubbles in the molten 
rock. The fresh magma rising up in the waning stage of the 
explosion cools, sealing up the conduit, acting like a valve near 
the top of the volcano, and resetting the cycle.
More recently, a connection has been drawn between power￾ful steam blasts, known as phreatic eruptions, and rare rain and 
snowfall events on Láscar – in other words, weather can trigger 
eruptions. This was recognised in 2015, when rainwater infi l￾trated the lava dome and came into contact with hot rock, gener￾ating steam and rock blasts like a faulty pressure cooker blowing 
its lid.26 Such activity, recognised at volcanoes worldwide, typi￾cally poses no threat to communities beyond the fl anks of the 
volcano, but the consequences can be tragic for tourists (and 
volcanologists) who are in the wrong place at the wrong time.27
This possibility is often on my mind when I do fi eldwork on 
active volcanoes. Until we fi nd reliable ways to forecast such What Upsets Volcanoes? 59
relatively weak events, the simplest way to reduce the risk of 
getting hurt is to limit time spent in hazardous areas.
Some of the methods I developed during my PhD studies are 
still in use and being applied to routine monitoring of Láscar. A 
study in 2020 presented an analysis of hundreds of Landsat 
images of the volcano spanning almost four decades, revealing 
with much greater clarity its cycles of lava-dome construction 
and explosive destruction, and corroborating the idea that seal￾ing and pressurisation of the lava dome initiates eruptions.28
Landsat 9 was successfully launched in 2021, a year before 
the programme’s fi ftieth anniversary. No other satellite remote￾sensing system comes close to providing such continuity and 
consistency. The breadth of Earth observation and change 
detection studies it has tackled is equally unrivalled. For scien￾tists devoted to synopsis, it is a formidable ally. There have even 
been calls for a dedicated orbiting volcano observatory capable 
of monitoring the world’s volcanoes and detecting when their 
fuses are lit.29 The Inca looked up to the heavens from Andean 
volcanoes; now we watch the lofty peaks from above. I still 
believe, though, that the spaceborne imagers, as well as the 
robots, drones and machines, have got a way to go before they 
eclipse a trained fi eld volcanologist huffi ng and puffi ng up and 
down the mountain on foot, with cases of sensors and samplers 
strapped to her back, in search of ‘ground-truth’.Emerald Isle
Mr Frank A. Perret listening to the subterranean 
roar of a volcano at Pozzuoli, Italy.1
‘I look up at the mountain. She is still there. Disturbing the 
leaves, the trees, the fl owers, the sea, the animals, and all human 
kind.’
– Yvonne Weekes, Volcano: A Memoir 2Friday 9 May, 1902. One can only imagine the dread that 
must have overcome Mr Outerbridge, owner of the Quebec 
Steamship Company, as he read the following cable:
WE NOTIFY YOU THAT STEAMSHIP RORAIMA 
HAS BEEN LOST. WE DO NOT KNOW WHETHER 
PASSENGERS WERE ABOARD OR NOT. VOLCANIC 
ERUPTION. LOSS TERRIFIC.
What befell the vessel emerged later from the traumatic testi￾mony of Edward Freeman, captain of another ship, the Roddam. 
Freeman had dropped anchor near the Roraima, on the morn￾ing of 8 May, in the sweeping bay of St Pierre, the vivacious 
commercial and cultural hub of Martinique island. Landmarks 
of this jewel of the French colonies included a court of justice, a 
cathedral, a grand theatre and botanical gardens. On this occa￾sion, Freeman was struck by the sight of Montagne Pelée, the 
normally peaceful volcano that overlooked the city: ‘The smoke 
came pouring out like big rolls of wool from all sides . . . curling 
up in the shape of great caulifl owers.’3
 But despite a light fallout 
of white ash that dusted the ship, the sun still shone on the pretty 
red-roofed houses and sugar estates, and on the other steamers 
and sailing boats at anchor. Church bells were pealing for early 
Mass – it was Ascension Day.
Then, all of a sudden, Pelée sounded a shattering blast and 
unleashed a ‘column of fl ashing fl ame’. At fi rst, Freeman 
watched spellbound, but then with mounting horror as a ‘black 64 Mountains of Fire
pillar of cloud’ raced down the fl ank of the volcano like a tornado. 
Within two minutes, it had cleared the foothills, fanned out and 
swallowed St Pierre from north to south. Freeman barely had 
time to question the fate of the 27,000 townsfolk before the 
raging cloud lashed the sea, triggering waves that knocked 
several boats straight to the bottom. He hurled himself into the 
chartroom just before the Roddam was struck and nearly 
capsized. Those on deck were thrown overboard and drowned 
in a ‘boiling sea’.
But Freeman could not escape the terrible cloud. As it envel￾oped him, it felt as if handfuls of red-hot dust were being pressed 
into his face and hands, but worse still, each breath fi lled his lungs 
with scorching ash. Suff ocating, burned inside and out, the ship 
still jostled by violent seiches, he managed to grope his way to the 
bridge, tripping over bodies. Searing ash plastered the deck and 
ignited fi res. Lifeboats and rigging were afl ame; dying men 
shrieked and groaned in agony; some ran around ‘like raving 
maniacs’, while others jumped into the water in forlorn hope of 
escaping the ‘blazing, blinding shower’. Using his elbows on the 
telegraph handle, Freeman signalled ‘full speed astern’. Spotting 
the chief engineer, he asked if the anchor was fast, but the offi cer 
was incapacitated and soon succumbed to his injuries.
Only the assistant engineers, who had been in the engine 
room, were unharmed. Freeman mustered a crew of walking 
wounded and attempted to steam out of the bay, playing the 
anchor out until it snapped. But the ship lurched like a ‘wounded 
monster’, with the starboard steering gear jammed with wreck￾age and pumice. Waves kept rolling them to shore, and at one 
point they almost collided with the Roraima, blazing furiously at 
her stern while smoke billowed from below. Survivors crowded 
her forward decks, but it was impossible to help them.
At last, Freeman gained control of the ship, and aimed for 
open water. Breathing was excruciating. A crew member spent Emerald Isle 65
the next hours wiping the captain’s scorched and weeping eyes 
so he could navigate.
At last, the smouldering vessel, ‘blistered and baked to a crisp’ 
and coated in what looked like bluish-grey cement, limped into 
Castries harbour on St Lucia. One onlooker recalled wonder￾ing, with astonishment, how it was possible ‘for a ship to get into 
such a terrible condition and then fl oat’.4
Freeman recovered in hospital. His recollections provide a 
rare and vivid account of immersion in volcanism’s most pitiless 
manifestation, nuées ardentes, or ‘burning clouds’. The fate of St 
Pierre and its 27,000 victims is further memorialised in the 
name given to this variety of eruption, ‘peléan’.5
It is said that the only survivor in the direct path of the nuées
was a prisoner, Cyparis, held in solitary confi nement for bad 
behaviour. Even in his bunker-like cell, he sustained dreadful 
burns. A few of the Roraima’s crew and passengers were rescued 
when a French cruiser, the Suchet, arrived on the scene. But there 
was no sign of the captain. Like many others, he had jumped into 
the sea. His body was never recovered. Sharks saw to that.
Martinique’s tragedy was front-page news across the world. 
Some geologists noted the parallel destinies of St Pierre and 
Pompeii, not realising how germane the comparison was, since 
there was then no scientifi c understanding of nuées ardentes.
6
For a thir ty-four-year-old engineer, convalescing at home in 
Brooklyn after a period of depression, empathy for the victims 
behind the grim newspaper headlines, and the scientifi c bewil￾derment concerning what exactly the volcano had done, sparked 
an extraordinary career change. Formerly a designer of eleva￾tors, fans and pumps, Frank Alvord Perret became the foremost 
volcanologist of his generation, observed peléan eruptions from 
the verge of nuées ardentes, and foretold the enduring volcanic 
crisis that would befall Martinique’s neighbour, Montserrat, 
half a century after his death.766 Mountains of Fire
Perret’s volcanic epiphany coincided with his physician’s 
advice to turn his back on the past and rehabilitate somewhere 
warm, fragrant and diverting. Somewhere like Naples, the 
doctor off ered. And so Perret followed in Sir William Hamilton’s 
footsteps, becoming as infatuated with Vesuvius as had the 
British diplomat and collector. It did not take long for Perret to 
befriend the volcano observatory’s director, Raff aele Matteucci, 
who in turn realised the American’s scientifi c acumen and inge￾nuity might be put to good use. Matteucci, an incurable volcano￾lover who lived ‘in mysterious and terrible solitude . . . bound 
together forever’ with Vesuvius,8
 also saw a kindred spirit in 
Perret, another man ready to devote his life to lava.
Perret thought of Vesuvius as the perfect ‘cabinet volcano’ on 
account of its ‘small size, accessibility . . . diversity of eruptive 
phenomena [and] rich mineralogy’.9
 Just an hour’s walk from 
the observatory, the hissing crater was a natural laboratory. Over 
the next two years, he honed his skills of volcano observation, 
using a camera, sketchbook and simple devices of his own 
construction to record earthquakes, gases and sounds.10 He 
relied, too, on his senses. A well-trained nose, he asserted, could 
analyse a range of volcanic gases, including sulphur dioxide and 
hydrogen chloride. In March 1906, sensing a constant buzzing 
from below, he bit the metal frame of his bed to amplify the 
tremors with his skull. It told him change was afoot. Not much 
later, Perret spied the merest hint of ash in the steam plume 
emanating from the volcano. No one else would have noticed, 
but for him it was ‘the signature of a new power’. Sure enough, 
by nightfall, a fi ssure had opened near the summit, spewing 
dark clouds that showered Naples with ash. The eruption inten￾sifi ed over the following days; lava inundated towns on the 
south-east fl ank of the volcano, while communities to the north￾east bore the brunt of ash fallout. In the town of San Giuseppe, 
more than 100 people sheltering overnight in the church were Emerald Isle 67
killed when the roof collapsed under the weight of ash. In all, 
more than 200 lives were lost, and the economic losses crippled 
Italy.
Throughout the eruption, Matteucci and Perret faithfully 
remained at the observatory, which was perched on a hill not far 
from the crater. Here were two utterly absorbed observers – so 
attuned to the volcano through their instruments and senses 
that no variation in the activity or possible connection between 
phenomena escaped their attention. They recorded events and 
sent telegrams to the authorities with advice on evacuations.11 In 
the small hours of 8 April, the seismic shocks became so strong 
they left the building and watched and listened in awe as a 
towering column of fi re roared high above. Bolts of lightning 
discharged to earth from it and ‘fi re avalanches’ of incandescent 
lava bombs slid down the steep cone. The men pulled overcoats 
across their heads to protect them from the hail of red-hot 
stones. Perret recognised an ‘infi nite dignity’ in the sublime 
performance. ‘Each rapid impulse’, he wrote, ‘was the crest of 
something deep and powerful and uniform which bore it, and 
the unhurried modulation of its rhythmic beats sets this erup￾tion in the rank of things which are mighty, grave and great’.12
Perret continued to work on Italian volcanoes, studying 
Stromboli during an eruptive crisis in 1907 (when he dissuaded 
the navy from an unnecessary evacuation of the population), 
and Etna in 1912 (where he was badly burned and bruised by 
volcanic projectiles). By then, his colleague Matteucci had died, 
his lungs infl amed from inhalation of so much volcanic ash.
Eager to expand his knowledge of the variety of volcanic 
activity, Perret went on to work in Japan, Hawaiʻi and Tenerife. 
On the Big Island of Hawaiʻi, he helped to establish the fi rst 
U.S. volcano observatory. Its inaugural director, Thomas Jaggar, 
wrote later: ‘I knew at once [Perret] was the world’s greatest 
volcanologist. His skill was taking pictures. Mine was making 68 Mountains of Fire
experiments  . . . these two skills in action would accomplish 
what theories never could approach.’13 Perret did far more than 
operate a camera, though. To understand how volcanoes work, 
it was ‘absolutely necessary to be at the crater at the time of 
eruption’.14 Accordingly, Perret would construct huts or shelters 
as close to the action as possible. Then he would set up an array 
of monitoring equipment and fi ll notebooks with his own corpo￾real and sensory ‘measurements’. He mostly worked alone, and 
likened his skills to those of a physician. As his experience grew, 
he became convinced that science could forestall volcanic disas￾ters. But he took increasing risks: he was often too close to his 
patient.
Inevitably perhaps, Perret would confront the volcano whose 
calamitous eruption had recast his destiny: Montagne Pelée. He 
was in Puerto Rico when it reignited in 1929. He gathered his 
instruments and made hastily for ‘the very theatre of the fright￾ful catastrophe of 1902’. In no time, with help from the men, 
women and children who had rebuilt St Pierre, he had erected a 
hut close to the summit and overlooking the treacherous valley 
that had funnelled the fateful glowing clouds or nuées ardentes.
15
‘Excursion, observation, photography and intermittent sleep 
were the observer’s lot,’ wrote Perret. His investigation was ‘as 
far as possible, lived on the mountain itself, day and night . . . 
amid penetrating ash, incessant noise and pungent smells’.
From his outpost, Perret observed hundreds of nuées ardentes. 
He even walked into a very minor example to ascertain its 
temperature and odour. He interpreted them as hot avalanches, 
explosively generated by pressurised gases that frothed the lava. 
It was the thorough dispersion of energy within the moving 
mass of rock, dust and gas, he argued, that enabled them to 
shapeshift and move with ominous silence.
Since we can only ever see the exterior of nuées ardentes, the 
deposits they leave and the damage they do, there remain gaps Emerald Isle 69
in knowledge of their physics to this day. Perret’s deductions, 
made nearly a century ago, remain coherent with modern think￾ing, though we now refer to ‘pyroclastic fl ows’ and ‘surges’, or 
‘block and ash fl ows’ rather than the more lyrical nuées ardentes. 
They are rather typical of subduction zone volcanoes, like Pelée 
and its neighbours in the Caribbean, and several processes can 
generate them, including the collapse of perched lava domes, or 
violent explosions whose plumes of rock and gas are too dense 
to stay aloft and so plummet back to earth. In both these cases, 
topography then plays the decisive role in channelling the sear￾ing hurricanes of gas, ash, pumice and blocks of lava down the 
volcano. Speeds can exceed thirty miles per hour, and pillars of 
hot dust shoot up, ingesting and heating air (a point recognised 
by Perret), to form caulifl ower clouds. As the pyroclastic mixture 
travels downslope, larger rocks gather at the base, forming a 
dense ‘block and ash’ fl ow that traces the valley fl oor, fanning 
out where it hits fl atter ground. The dilute mix of ash, pumice 
and hot air and gases above can be much more mobile, capable 
even of jumping from one valley to the next. Turbulent and 
dilute, or dense and confi ned, nuées ardentes are extremely 
destructive owing to their heat and force. What isn’t crushed or 
asphyxiated may yet go up in fl ames.
One evening, Perret had a very narrow escape at his fi eld 
station. Alerted by a strange noise, he rushed to the cabin door 
as a towering spine of rock on the dome crumpled, issuing a 
nueé of ‘inky blackness’. Shortly, an explosion propelled a second 
avalanche and an accompanying cloud ‘white as snow’. The two 
columns were hurtling towards him; there was no time to fl ee. 
He calculated he might be dead within four minutes. He wrote 
later of ‘a sense of utter isolation; awe in the face of overwhelm￾ing forces of nature so indiff erent to my feeble self’. As he darted 
inside the hut, the blast hit with ‘swirling gusts of ash-laden 
wind’. Despite his immersion, Perret continued observing, 70 Mountains of Fire
applying his trained nose to gas detection. It may be question￾able how reliable sense of smell is when one is suff ocating in ash 
clouds, but Perret claimed the nueé was odourless, and he 
excluded the presence of any acid gases. The ‘spectacular 
onrush’ was also mute: nuées look tumultuous, clamorous, terri￾fying, but they are deathly quiet. There was no questioning the 
unpleasant physiological eff ects, however; Perret’s airways were 
scorched, and he was left short of breath for weeks. The doctors 
injected him with horse serum, a cure that sounds as unpleasant 
as the affl iction.
*
As well as a profound physical connection with volcanoes, Perret 
was strongly motivated by humanitarian instincts. Like his 
friend Thomas Jaggar, he thought of volcanoes as living organ￾isms, and was convinced that through systematic observations, 
eruptions could be predicted, and death and disaster avoided. 
As an internationally renowned volcanologist, he was now often 
called upon to opine on unfolding volcanic crises.
It was while on Martinique in April 1934 that Perret received 
a telegram from Henry Meagher, the British consul on the 
island. Meagher was enquiring about Pelée, but added enigmat￾ically ‘Montserrat asking’. He was referring to the neighbouring 
island, which was under British administration, and had a 
volcano of its own. Perret followed up and discovered that 
earthquakes had been rattling Montserrat, whose capital, 
Plymouth, was even closer to the top of Soufrière Hills volcano 
than St Pierre was to Pelée. The vigour of the hot springs and 
sulphurous vents that gave the Soufrière Hills their name had 
also intensifi ed. Similar increases in activity had preceded the 
1902 eruption of Pelée, knowledge of which understandably 
unsettled the people of Montserrat. Perret arrived in Plymouth Emerald Isle 71
the following month and felt at once that the situation ‘might 
become serious’. There were those who saw the famed volcan￾ologist’s very appearance on the island as a sign of impending 
doom.
Perret did not stop long, though. He had to go to New York to 
assemble the equipment – vacuum tubes, thermometers, 
cameras, binoculars, gas syringes, pressure gauges and pendu￾lums (to detect earthquakes) – that he would need to formulate 
more than a hunch about Montserrat’s stirrings. Back on the 
island, he quickly established a fi eld station near a zone of sput￾tering vents and boiling pools that mineralised into milky and 
inky streams. The tremors continued, some damaging build￾ings, while the fumarolic emanations grew more insuff erable 
downwind.
Volcanic activity generates acoustic as well as seismic energy. 
Perret placed microphones in contact with the ground and 
listened to the volcano’s pulse through earphones. He also 
installed air-reception microphones and tracked a glissando of 
gas vents at the soufrières – one that roared a B fl at in December 
was trilling F sharp by March. With all this change and excite￾ment, it annoyed Perret that he had to sleep sometimes – he 
might miss a signifi cant shift in the activity. And though he had 
trained local observers to assist in documenting the activity of 
the volcano, they would instinctively take fl ight during an earth￾quake rather than write careful notes on the vibrations of the 
seismoscope. Clearly, round-the-clock surveillance demanded 
automation. Accordingly, Perret improvised a clockwork system 
to expose fi lter papers sensitive to changing gas concentrations, 
and designed a recorder for his microphones. He even grew 
sensitive plants whose leaves drooped when disturbed, and kept 
caged parrots to see if they might detect earthquake precursors, 
but neither fl ora nor fauna proved to have foreknowledge of 
volcanic activity.1672 Mountains of Fire
Other patterns emerged in his data, though, and Perret was 
convinced that the complex rhythms of volcanoes arose from 
subterranean and astronomical forces acting in concert. He 
noted, for instance, that seismic and volcanic crises in the 
Caribbean developed at roughly thirty-year intervals and linked 
shifting tidal forces (tuned by the positions of Earth, moon and 
sun) to the cadences of eruptions.17 He was certainly on the 
right track – there is evidence for all manner of cycles in volcanic 
behaviour – but his explanations have not been verifi ed nor 
have more general causes been identifi ed.18
One night, a new gas vent opened with an explosion followed 
by wailing and whistling. Perret’s thermometers were so 
corroded by acid gases they fell apart. He suff ered severe nose￾bleeds and his salivary glands swelled to the size of eggs, prompt￾ing him to remark that ‘volcanologists require a great deal of 
their instruments, even as they do of themselves’. But despite 
the escalating unrest, especially a terrifying tremor on 12 
December 1934, Perret announced publicly that an eruption 
was unlikely. There wasn’t enough evidence for him to reach 
clear conclusions, and he did not want to fuel panic unnecessar￾ily. Instead, he shared his concerns privately with the governor, 
advising that plans be drawn up for a rapid evacuation of 
Plymouth, since an eruption on so small an island ‘might well be 
cataclysmic’, engulfi ng the whole place in minutes.
The crisis rumbled on through 1935. One earthquake, on 10 
November that year, triggered landslides and demolished a 
church. Another left Perret with an ‘indescribable feeling of 
there being an immense power behind it’, an echo of Darwin’s 
emotions on sensing the Chilean earthquake a century earlier. 
But more importantly, he realised that these shocks had deeper 
origins, signalling that the volcanic threat at the surface was 
waning. Sure enough, the unrest subsided. It had all been a 
‘subvolcanic’ aff air: rising magma had provoked the tremors Emerald Isle 73
and reheated the soufrières, but had failed to open conduits to 
the surface. Their rehearsal was over – the Soufrière Hills went 
back to sleep.
*
Perret’s identifi cation of a thirty-year cycle in the Caribbean has 
been remarkably borne out on Montserrat. The 1933–1935 
crisis he studied so closely had been preceded by a similar aff air 
in 1897–1899. Another came in 1966–1967, and yet one more in 
1992–1995. It was this last episode that culminated in magma 
reaching the surface. Geophysicists at the University of the West 
Indies described it as ‘the most long-expected and clearly￾signalled eruption [of] the twentieth century’.19
You might think that this level of anticipation would have 
prepared the people of Montserrat for what seemed an inevi￾tability. Sadly though, the authorities and public on the island 
were not ready to act when the Soufrière Hills shifted gear 
from ‘subvolcanic’ to volcanic in July of 1995. The scale of 
disruption, dislocation and loss of life that followed was, argu￾ably, avoidable.
In fact, a detailed report on Montserrat’s volcano had been 
presented to the island’s government eight years earlier.20 The 
report enumerated scenarios for future eruptions, indicating 
where devastating nuées ardentes would likely travel. It also 
highlighted the extreme vulnerability of Plymouth, situated in 
a valley that led straight to the volcano’s craggy summit. But 
it was ignored or misunderstood, perhaps even lost. Some 
said it was washed into the sea when hurricane Hugo ravaged 
the island in 1989, leaving ninety per cent of the population 
homeless.
Allegedly, the three people most responsible for disaster 
preparedness on the island at the time – the governor, chief 74 Mountains of Fire
minister and head of police – had not even realised they were 
living on a volcano. Everything envisaged in the report became 
real.
Before the eruption, Montserrat’s moniker was ‘the Emerald 
Isle’. It celebrated its Irish heritage, gave us Arrow’s bubbly 
(and dissonantly prophetic) calypso hit, ‘Hot Hot Hot’, and 
was the holiday destination of choice for those seeking calm. 
Windsurfers, parasailers and speedboaters went elsewhere. 
Many ‘snowbirds’ from North America built homes on the 
island, where they would spend the winter. In contrast, visitors 
today come to see the ‘Pompeii of the Caribbean’. The emerald 
is caked in grey grit.
From the fi rst powerful steam explosions that showered 
Plymouth with ash on 18 July 1995, Montserrat was set for 
irrevocable change. While many Montserratians fl ed the island, 
a host of development and aid organisation managers, contrac￾tors and consultants, as well as social scientists, fi lm crews and 
volcanologists converged there. The eruption had been going 
on for a year when I joined the mêlée.
It was a sticky tropical evening when I arrived, and too dark 
to make out where the volcano was or gauge the lie of the land. 
I went straight to the observatory, but struggled to hear anyone 
above a hubbub of whistling frogs and a high-pitched porta￾mento coming from a bank of seismographs frenetically tran￾scribing, with ink pens, messages from seething magma. Over 
the preceding months, lava had been extruding gradually at the 
summit, building a gigantic dome of shifting rock, but it had just 
begun growing at a much more alarming rate. This mound was 
buttressed on three sides by toothy remnants of an ancient 
collapse scar known as English’s Crater, but it was unsupported 
to the east, where the terrain simply fell away to the sea down 
the Tar River valley. Red-hot rock continuously sloughed off the 
ever-expanding steep face of the dome, feeding a hot, unstable Emerald Isle 75
scree. Every few weeks, whole segments of the accumulating 
mass disintegrated, generating nuées ardentes. All of us were 
aware that it was the explosion and destruction of a lava dome 
on Pelée that had sealed the fate of St Pierre in 1902. The situa￾tion was very volatile, and I sensed a supercharged mood of 
excitement and trepidation.
I was staying at a villa in Old Towne rented by the observa￾tory. There was a veranda with wicker chairs overlooking an 
exuberant garden and a swimming pool – quite an upgrade 
from my college apartment in Cambridge, where I had recently 
been hired as a lecturer. The lawn was well tended, the fl ame 
trees in bloom – only the ash in the pool hinted at abandonment. 
Most mornings, my breakfast on the terrace was interrupted by 
a call of, ‘Buy my juicy mangoes!’ from Beryl Grant, known to 
all on the island, and then in her early seventies. She didn’t 
bother to conceal the act of harvesting the fruit on the property, 
but it was impossible to refuse her sales pitch. Like many other 
farmers on Montserrat, Beryl had been relocated from the east 
side of the island, where much of the produce was grown. So 
many lives and livelihoods had been turned upside down, and 
no end to the crisis was in sight, yet most remained resolute, 
sustained by deep Christian faith.
My role at the observatory was to support the surveillance of 
gas emissions from the lava dome.21 Working alongside my new 
colleagues, I used an ultraviolet spectrometer called a Cospec to 
measure the output of sulphur dioxide from the volcano, and an 
infrared spectrometer to determine the proportions of several 
diff erent gases.22 The Cospec was connected to a chart recorder, 
and a telescope, which I directed up at the sky out of a car 
window. I would drive back and forth beneath the plume drift￾ing from the lava dome while keeping an eye on the pen 
registering the sulphur dioxide overhead by its absorption of 
ultraviolet light. After a few traverses, I would head for St 76 Mountains of Fire
George’s Hill, overlooking Plymouth, and stand on tiptoes to 
hold aloft a simple anemometer to measure windspeed, which 
factored into the calculations. Ashfalls sometimes hindered the 
work, but I aimed to make daily surveys, which took a couple of 
hours. The real labour, though, was the subsequent number 
crunching, which involved counting thousands of tiny graph 
paper squares beneath the ink trace of each run. At last, I would 
have an estimate of how many tonnes of sulphur dioxide were 
coming out of the volcano each day. (It was the toil of using the 
Cospec that motivated me to trial a new generation of compact 
digital spectrometers a few years later at Masaya volcano in 
Nicaragua.)
Operation of the infrared spectrometer was even more 
demanding and required two people. It had to be aligned 
precisely with the light from an infrared lamp positioned some 
distance away – this could take a frustrating hour of ‘left a bit, 
up a bit’ instruction over walkie-talkies. We needed volcanic gas 
to drift between the lamp and spectrometer, and so sought 
places where some of the airborne plume was grounding leeward 
of the summit. This took us to Plymouth, by now a ghost town 
with light ashfall drifting up empty streets taken over by dogs. 
Eerier still, we operated the equipment in deserted rural areas 
inland from Plymouth. One location where we were suitably 
fumigated was Upper Amersham, near an old sugar mill tower. 
The abandoned farms looked inexpressibly godforsaken. All 
vegetation had been poisoned and metal roofs eaten away by the 
gases we were trying to measure. We encountered a depressed 
pig that had turned yellow, presumably from the acidifi ed rain 
falling through the gas plume. But the fact it was tethered and 
still alive meant that someone was coming regularly into the 
exclusion zone.
I felt a bit envious of the seismologists, whose sensors, once 
installed in the ground, continuously transmitted readings by Emerald Isle 77
radio link to the volcano observatory. But it was worth the eff ort 
to obtain the gas measurements as they were yardsticks for the 
depth and volume of magma still below ground. I would present 
my latest fi ndings at tense staff meetings, which took place in 
the observatory three times a week. Many signals were picking 
up dramatically, including earthquake activity, expansion of the 
lava dome and sulphur dioxide emissions. It was obvious that 
the volcano was becoming more active, but what did that mean 
for how things might play out over the next days and weeks? 
Was it prudent to expand the exclusion zone around Soufrière 
Hills? The discussion was often heated and I have never felt 
greater responsibility or urgency to fi gure out the meaning of 
my data.
I was aware, too, of situations where scientists had clashed 
over the evaluation of volcanic hazard – famously during a crisis 
in 1976 on the island of Guadeloupe, situated between 
Martinique and Montserrat. Another outpost of France’s Outre 
Mer territories, Guadeloupe’s La Soufrière volcano had begun 
simmering in July that year, with escalating seismicity, and 
explosions that plunged the capital into darkness as ash clouds 
drifted over.23 Haroun Tazieff (whom we left on Stromboli with 
the dying Muratori in his arms) was there, leading a team of 
scientists recording gas emissions and earthquakes. While more 
given to popularisation than Perret, he shared the same deeply 
empirical and experiential approach to reading volcanoes’ 
moods. Based on what he’d observed, Tazieff announced that, 
though the situation demanded ongoing surveillance, a major 
eruption was not imminent. But another group, led by a special￾ist on the (inactive) volcanoes of the Auvergne, and backed by 
Claude Allègre, the new young director of Tazieff ’s institute in 
Paris, feared a ‘monstrous’ and ‘catastrophic’ eruption on the 
scale of Pelée’s in 1902.24 When a hint of fresh magma was iden￾tifi ed in the ashfalls, the precautionary view prevailed, and the 78 Mountains of Fire
prefect of the island ordered the evacuation of 70,000 residents 
– a quarter of the island’s population.25 A vitriolic duel ensued 
over the prolongation of the evacuation.
The acrimony between Tazieff and Allègre fi lled columns of 
French print media.26 Sadly, it pitted experience, intuition and 
empiricism against models, probability and uncertainty, when 
these diff erent perspectives and paradigms might have been 
integrated and harnessed to the benefi t of the threatened 
community. After several months, La Soufrière went back to 
sleep, and the refugees were sent home. For many, Tazieff was 
vindicated. He once wrote that volcanologists should keep ‘as 
cool as a cucumber’ in a crisis.27 But Allègre surely pickled 
Tazieff over the Guadeloupe stand-off , removing him from the 
post of head of volcanology at the institute.
It might seem sensible always to err on the side of caution as 
an operational plan, but displacing a population from their 
homes and livelihoods – even at the smallest scale of a village 
like Talabre in Chile, when it was threatened by Láscar volcano 
– is immensely disruptive. The cost of the Guadeloupe crisis 
was estimated at $500 million USD, and left the economy in 
tatters with much of the population reduced to ‘utter want’.28
Eruption forecasts are highly uncertain, sometimes contested. 
Managing the menace – and ultimately, perhaps, facing the 
dilemma of whether or not to evacuate thousands of people – 
demands clear-headed understanding of scientifi c uncertainties 
on the part of the authorities, and an eff ective and lasting co -
operation of state and society.
The case of ‘La Soufrière ’76’, with its duelling scientists, is 
considered a masterclass in how to mismanage a volcanic 
crisis.29 On Montserrat decades later, I was shocked, then, to 
discover rifts and enmities between scientists at the observa￾tory.30 The memory of Pelée had hung over Guadeloupe and 
the memory of both overshadowed Montserrat. At the same Emerald Isle 79
time, the confrontations revealed another facet of the chal￾lenges of dealing with a volcanic emergency: personality 
clashes, and diff erences in background, management style or 
risk tolerance can make it very diffi cult to reach consensus. 
Who are the authorities and public to believe when the scien￾tists disagree and engage in character assassination? Whose 
expertise counts most?
While interpersonal friction fuelled tensions in the observa￾tory, the coexisting peril and excitement of the crisis surely 
heightened everyone’s emotional state. One of the distinctions 
of volcano observers is that they usually belong to the commu￾nities they serve to protect. During emergencies, they may well 
fear for their own safety when they enter exclusion zones to 
deploy instruments or collect rocks. For the Montserratian staff , 
their own families were, in a sense, under their safeguarding. 
These personal, potentially existential circumstances bring a 
unique frisson to the work.
Some of the discussion at observatory meetings focused on 
hazard zonation on the island. This determined where people 
could live or work, and where was altogether off limits. After a 
year of crisis, several thousand Montserratians had settled 
elsewhere in the Caribbean, in Canada or in the UK. Only 
7,500 people remained on the island. With such a prolonged 
aff air, some argued it was time to make fi ner-tuned decisions 
concerning access to allow the lingering population to ‘live 
with the volcano’. There were also practical and political 
considerations that somehow trumped objective safety 
concerns. For instance, there was no appetite to close the 
airport – a lifeline to the outside world – despite its proximity 
to the Tar River valley. The outcome was a ‘microzonation’ of 
territory and a complex map delineating gradations in esti￾mated risk. This was used in conjunction with a system of six 
alert levels. With frequent updates refl ecting evolution of the 80 Mountains of Fire
volcano’s behaviour, this scheme became increasingly chal￾lenging for anyone to understand.
The observatory was already engaging a wide range of 
surveillance techniques. These included GPS surveys and laser 
ranging to track subtle expansions and contractions of the 
volcano, and use of seismometers sensitive to diff erent vibra￾tion frequency bands. Paradoxically, while miniscule move￾ments of the crust could be detected, and earthquakes located 
with precision deep underground, the most mundane but vital 
requirement – visual observation of the dome – was near impos￾sible. This was because the summit was sheathed in cloud much 
of the day. Fortunately, the senior scientists had occasional 
access to military satellite radar images that revealed promi￾nences and scars on the dome, and the extent of new deposits 
in the Tar River valley. But it remained frustrating not to know 
hour-by-hour which parts of the dome were propagating. Later, 
one of the observatory staff hit upon the simple but brilliant 
idea of setting up a camera connected to the observatory by a 
radio link. It took a photograph every minute. While no observer 
could sit and watch for twenty-four hours, waiting for a brief 
clear view, the automated system would capture those rare 
moments.
The populous west and windswept east sides of the island 
seemed like diff erent worlds. From Old Towne to Cork Hill in 
the west, the road was fringed by tropical palms, breadfruit 
trees, hedgerows of bougainvillea and hibiscus. Mango trees 
dripped overripe fruit on to the road. But approaching Harris, 
across the corrugated backbone of the island, and on to Bethel, 
there were vegetable gardens and pasture grazed to millimetre 
length by scrawny brown and white goats. What few shrubs and 
trees grew here were stunted and bowed by ceaseless wind. The 
sea, too, was leaden, merging into haze. Lately, the nuées ardentes
had been crossing the shoreline, skimming with remarkable ease Emerald Isle 81
over the waves and leaving behind a steaming delta of lava boul￾ders. Plymouth occupied some of the only level ground on the 
island, hence its situation, but this very fl atness arose from the 
same processes of debris accumulation during past episodes of 
volcanism. With hindsight, the mere fact it looked ripe for settle￾ment was a geological warning sign.
Working on the dome itself was out of the question, but I 
persuaded the observatory chief to allow me some helicopter 
time to operate a spectrometer from the air to capture stronger 
gas readings. We made several passes close enough to feel fi erce 
radiance through the open window. The steep face of the dome 
was a precarious jumble of car-sized angular and scaly blocks of 
grey lava. Dust trickled off it continuously, and a rocky spire 
protruded from the top of the unstable cupola. These overactive 
pinnacles formed within a day from focused extrusion of the 
ultra-viscous magma, but usually collapsed another day or two 
later. I was acutely aware that I needed to be quick. The pilot 
advised me there was no safety margin to deal with an engine 
failure – we’d plummet into the hot pyroclastic deposits. In 
hindsight, I chalk up this experiment alongside my fi rst meas￾urements at the edge of Stromboli’s crater – not worth the risk. 
The results showed some promise but ultimately made no 
contribution to the monitoring eff orts.31
Soon after, the eruption entered a yet more ominous phase. A 
new spine had been seen, rising as high as the Tower of Pisa, and 
chunks of lava as big as a bus had travelled a long way down the 
valley. Nuées ardentes were reaching the sea with greater ease, 
since much of the tree cover had been stripped off the lower 
fl anks of the volcano. All this commotion was accompanied by 
menacing ash clouds, which didn’t go unnoticed by the remain￾ing residents. People sensed change. I encountered an eighty￾one-year-old woman in Plymouth, who told me: ‘I never seen 
this before – it is the world coming to an end. If it can happen 82 Mountains of Fire
here on Montserrat, it can happen in another place – we must 
trust in Jesus.’ The island governor, Frank Savage, was not one 
to cede oversight of the crisis, however. He was alarmed by the 
latest growth spurt of the dome, which was now higher than the 
old crater wall, beyond which there were still many people farm￾ing on the north fl ank of the volcano in an area called Farrel’s. 
Would there be time to evacuate them if the dome collapsed in 
that direction?
Savage also felt the observatory’s hazard bulletins were being 
misunderstood or ignored. ‘They’re too bland,’ he argued. 
‘They need to be written in layman’s terms giving the gist of 
the situation. If people don’t listen, we’re wasting our time.’ 
One of the Montserratian staff , Pops, countered that many on 
the island no longer wanted to hear what the scientists were 
saying anyway – they just wanted to stay in their homes.32
As many as 500 people were then living in hazardous areas. 
They reasoned that their farms were still there, and govern￾ment agencies were still buying their produce to distribute in 
shelters for evacuees. Pops knew of a farmer who insisted he 
would only move when he saw the rockfalls coming at him. 
People were monitoring the volcano for themselves, he contin￾ued, adding that ‘to get people out we will have to enforce it’.33
I encountered this mindset in the Tar River Estate, on the 
north-east fl ank of the volcano and overlooking the valley. I had 
joined a TV documentary crew from Canada who were fi lming 
right at the margin, which had been scorched by nuées ardentes
the previous day.34 In the valley below, shrubs were raked over 
in the direction of the fl ows, and trees blasted fl at, only their 
stumps remaining. The dome felt unnervingly close – I have 
never had a stronger sensation of looking down the barrel of a 
gun. Nuées could have reached us in thirty seconds. Astonishingly, 
we found a farmer there. His name was Prince, and he had been 
relocated to the north of the island, where he was working on Emerald Isle 83
construction of temporary shelters. ‘I lost fi ve cows yesterday,’ 
he lamented, as he led us to their bloated, charred and ash￾coated corpses. ‘They usually know if the volcano is going to 
blow, and run. I can’t complain to no one. I just have to survive.’
Compounding the problem on Montserrat was the protrac￾tion of the crisis and stop-start behaviour of the volcano. One of 
the chief scientists who worked on Montserrat observed, ‘the 
island is exactly the wrong size for an eruption’. Any smaller, 
and it would have been the obvious choice to evacuate the entire 
population; any larger, and there would have been better options 
to resettle people away from the volcanic threat and rebuild the 
economy. Instead, an unstable compromise between man and 
magma has prevailed on Montserrat more or less ever since the 
eruption began.
Around noon one day, I had fi nished lunch at the villa and 
was about to walk back to the observatory when I heard chatter 
on the walkie-talkie about an eruption cloud – I raced to the 
veranda and saw a towering black plume almost directly over￾head. Small accretions of ash were already falling out. Then I 
spotted a diff use white mist expand very rapidly outwards and 
downwards. I didn’t know what to make of it, and it momentar￾ily terrifi ed me. But I recalled Perret’s description of ‘fl ashing 
arcs’ that he had seen accompanying explosions, and realised it 
was a shockwave. Heavy ashfall ensued, accompanied by thun￾der and lightning, and I raced around the house, closing doors 
and windows. The power cut out and it was instantly pitch black 
– I could make out nothing. I stood in the dark and waited. 
When the cloud dispersed, I looked at the garden: so lush 
minutes before, it was now greyed out by a fi lm of fi ne ash. The 
air smelled like bleach and damp burned stubble.
Seen from the airport on the other side of Montserrat, the 
cloud had towered over the island and several nuées ardentes had 
reached the sea. This was the biggest event yet of the entire 84 Mountains of Fire
episode. So much rock had crumbled from the dome, the crater 
looked like a grin with a missing tooth. Huge boulders had 
reached the tongue of debris stretching into the sea. In upper 
parts of the Tar River valley, the erosive force of the fl ows had 
planed down ridges and hills, whereas downslope they had 
infi lled gullies and channels with lava blocks and ash. For a 
while, it felt like the end of the world, but as the dust settled it 
emerged that no one had been hurt. In a matter of days, the 
giant wound in the dome had healed with new simmering lava.
*
A year on, and a full two years since it began, the eruption was 
still showing no signs of easing up. The volcanologist Thomas 
Jaggar once defi ned geology as ‘a sense of slow motion’, but 
here on Montserrat the pace of geological change was frenetic. 
Plymouth looked like it had been set in concrete. Only the upper 
storeys of buildings stood proud of an alluvion of boulders and 
grit; you could only guess where streets had been.
In May 1997, a team from the observatory made a daring 
mission to deploy a device called a tiltmeter on the old summit 
of Soufrière Hills. Such sensors are now everywhere – for 
instance in smartphones, to tell what orientation they are being 
held in. Highly sensitive tiltmeters can measure changes in incli￾nation equivalent to raising a one-mile-long bar by less than two 
millimetres at one end. The tiltmeter the team installed was 
connected by radio link to the observatory and gave a continu￾ous measure of the subtle swelling and sagging of the volcano. 
This revealed a remarkably regular oscillation every six to nine 
hours: the volcano had a pulse.35 Nothing like this had been 
observed before on such an explosive volcano. I couldn’t help 
thinking of Perret, who was always seeking design in data – 
he would have been mesmerised by these observations! The Emerald Isle 85
rhythm became so routine that the observatory could plan 
fi eldwork around it and make reliable short-term forecasts of 
explosions and nuées ardentes, which followed dome infl ation.
The pattern continued until shortly before 1pm on 25 June 
1997. Another dome collapse was underway, but this time it 
excavated deep enough to trigger a runaway process that 
exposed highly pressurised, gas-rich lava, which made for far 
more mobile nuées. Additionally, the dome at this time had 
already begun spilling over the old ramparts of English’s Crater 
– the debris shed from it was no longer confi ned to the Tar River 
valley. Over the next ten minutes, three successive nuées pulsed 
down the north and north-east slopes of Soufrière Hills at up to 
fi fty miles per hour. They overran farmland and villages which I 
had often passed through, razing buildings to their foundations 
and igniting fi res that blazed for hours. Eighty people were in 
the exclusion zone at the time; nineteen of them perished. 
Among them was Beryl Grant.36 I wasn’t on the island at the 
time, but the news came as a great shock.
Of the survivors who were interviewed, almost all commented 
on the acute silence of the lethal fl ows. This account from one 
eyewitness captures the experience:
Ash . . . came down sly and sneaky. It travelled faster than a 
car . . . The pieces of fi re were small and it was there before 
the place turned black. Was grey and black, one mighty 
cloud . . . No hear a thing before I saw it . . . Start to feel hot, 
hot, hot, like I was in an oven. The whole place turn black for 
about 20 minutes, heavy ash falling  . . . black like black 
cloth . . . Smelt strong, like lighting matches smell . . . Fire was 
pitching on the pavement by the school. Fire was pitching in 
the air as well. The whole of my body felt hot. There was a 
heavy rushing wind with it . . . I think it must be the end of the 
world.3786 Mountains of Fire
While the nuées ardentes may have been mute at the surface, the 
ground reverberated to the percussion of fracturing and collid￾ing rock and the chorus of magma rising to fi ll a new chasm in 
the dome. A colleague made seismic signals recorded on 
Montserrat audible by shifting their frequencies. It makes for an 
extraordinary symphony of sirens, whipcracks and drumrolls. 
Perhaps this is what Perret (who, more than anyone, listened to 
volcanoes) could hear when he connected his earphones to the 
earth-contact microphone.
The case histories of both Pelée and Soufrière Hills provide 
tragic illustrations of how science is not enough to protect 
communities menaced by volcanoes. If it is to benefi t society, it 
has to be translated into eff ective decisions; authorities must be 
persuaded to listen, absorb, react. Perret’s brilliant monograph 
on the Soufri ère Hills’ earlier crisis was forgotten, and the pres￾cient 1980s hazard report ignored.38 In the case of Pelée, a 
‘scientifi c commission’ of sorts had been set up before the 1902 
calamity, but despite unease on account of the volcano’s mount￾ing agitation, the committee’s public statement was bland 
enough for an op-ed in a popular newspaper to downplay the 
threat. ‘Where could one be safer than in St Pierre?’ it quipped, 
actually prompting hundreds of anxious countryfolk to seek 
refuge in the doomed city.39 They, along with the paper’s press, 
its proprietor, its journalists, and 27,000 others, were wiped out 
the next day.
While opportunities for mitigating disaster were missed, the 
scientifi c attention subsequently directed at the two Caribbean 
volcanoes turbo-charged volcanology as a discipline, stimulat￾ing developments both technological and humanistic. Following 
Pelée’s eruptions, nuées ardentes were scientifi cally recognised 
and described for the fi rst time. On both Pelée and Soufrière 
Hills, Perret pioneered ‘multiparameter monitoring’, the combi￾nation of geophysical and geochemical tools for volcano Emerald Isle 87
surveillance. This is standard practice today: the most reliable 
eruption forecasts draw on simultaneous observations of earth￾quakes, topography and gas emissions.
Perret also believed that to understand volcanoes required 
‘the wholly indescribable feeling which experience alone can 
give’. Although this speaks to the truth that scientists are not 
detached observers and theorists, but rather people with instincts 
passionately trying to understand the world, it is also the point 
where dangerous ground looms – feelings humanise us, but they 
can also remould opinions as convictions, supplant impartiality 
with infallibility. Haroun Tazieff , whose experience can justly be 
compared with Perret’s (but whose self-belief far outstripped 
the American’s), felt vindicated in his call to end the evacuation 
on Guadeloupe in 1976. Some (with hindsight) agreed, yet we 
can also sympathise with Claude Allègre’s dilemma, when he 
said ‘I don’t want to play Russian roulette with the lives of 
70,000 people.’40
There have been many situations in which biased or sloppy 
judgements of risk or ulterior motives swayed decision-making. 
To counter these problems and avoid turf wars between scien￾tists, a method called ‘expert elicitation’ has been used to harness 
subjectivity and uncertainty when enumerating volcanic risk. 
In fact, its application was pioneered on Montserrat by a 
geophysicist, Willy Aspinall, who had witnessed fi rst-hand the 
venomous clash of scientifi c opinion on Guadeloupe in 1976.41
The method involves tasking a panel of specialists to draw 
on their experience and intuition to estimate probabilities for 
diff erent scenarios of how a volcanic crisis might unfold (from 
relaxation to escalation). Statistical techniques are then applied 
to combine all the viewpoints. The skill (and obstinacy) of indi￾vidual experts is gauged in advance through a test (for which 
answers are known), so that their infl uence on the calculations 
of risk can be weighted appropriately. Colleagues who took part 88 Mountains of Fire
told me: ‘It isn’t quite what I would have come up with, but I can 
sign up to it.’ Such collective responsibility takes some weight 
off a chief scientist’s shoulders, too. That must be a good thing 
– even with the degree of answerability I felt as an intern at the 
Montserrat observatory, I cannot imagine the stress of the job at 
the top.42 Commenting on the moral quandary he experienced 
during the 1930s crisis, Frank Perret confi ded that ‘such anxiety 
and responsibility . . . cannot be imagined by those who do not 
know’.43
Perret was an optimist, though. Late in his career, having 
established a Centre for Volcano Study in St. Pierre, he wrote 
that: ‘an enormous amount of valuable research has been, and is 
being, eff ected . . . giving the directly essential power of diagno￾sis and prediction [of eruptions]’.44 While the vagaries of volca￾noes will always defy easy pronouncements concerning their 
future conduct, progress continues.45 What gave Perret deep 
satisfaction in his vocation is still felt by volcanologists today – 
the worldly desire to answer ‘humanitarian needs’, but also the 
personal revelation of our beating Earth.Night Market of the Ghosts
Propitiating the spirit of the volcano.1
‘Their story is buried in the forests that lie silent as the sleeping 
crater’s mouth.’
 – Franz Wilhelm Junghuhn, Java, seine Gestalt2Being closer to the heavens, capturing life-giving water from 
the clouds, mountains have long been considered sacred 
places. Volcanoes, whose singular peaks soar above fertile plains 
and valleys to pierce the clouds, are also abodes of ancestors 
and souls, and sites of miracles – but more than that, they are 
portals to infernal realms of gods and spirits whose supernatu￾ral interventions in human aff airs manifest in ash, fume and 
fl ame. Where nightly fi re glow tinges the starry sky and thun￾dering gases reverberate the air, it is no wonder igneous nature 
is engrained in indigenous knowledge.
Nowhere is this more true than in Indonesia, which straddles 
a section of the Pacifi c plate’s subduction zone, and is home to 
more active volcanoes than any other nation. Here, wild nature 
sweeps skyward from dense, entangled urban and rural fabrics.3
In Indonesian, they are gunung api, ‘fi re mountains’. The anthro￾pologist Peter Boomgaard explained their signifi cance simply: 
‘We can, without exaggeration, regard the mountains of Java as 
the basis for its society and its culture . . . Indonesia as a whole 
is shaped by its mountains, its volcanoes.’4
 More than seventy 
have blazed in past centuries; each home to ghosts and spirits, 
venerated and feared in equal measure. I came to know several 
of them – my fi rst encounters with volcanoes – during gap year 
travels between high school and university. For me they inspired 
wonder, not dread.
That curiosity was elevated by reading the one book I had 
brought with me from home: Volcanoes, by Peter Francis. I did 
not guess then that fi ve years later Peter would be my PhD 92 Mountains of Fire
advisor, but his writing brought another layer of meaning to the 
sheer spectacle of volcanoes. Crossing the Indonesian archipel￾ago, I saw nature and culture collide in landscape, belief and 
custom, sensitising me to the charisma and mystique of volca￾noes. But it was thanks to Peter’s book that I also began connect￾ing culture, economy and drama with rocks, resources and 
topography.
Near the end of my trip, I crossed Flores in the country’s 
south-eastern islands, which look like roughly-fi tted jigsaw 
pieces on a map. They are laced with volcanoes built up from 
the sea. I had been moving east for months, and now, riding a 
bus to the coastal town of Larantuka, I neared my trail’s 
apogee. The road was in terrible condition and the driver had 
to repair several punctures. Halfway, we approached an 
imposing double-coned volcano, Lewotobi, its pin nacles 
named laki laki (men) and perempuan (woman). At the foot of 
the volcano, a nun got off the bus to visit a seminary partly 
concealed behind coff ee bushes and shade trees. I noticed 
their leaves were fi lmed with a pale powder, but thought noth￾ing of it at fi rst.5
I took a ferry to Weiwerang on Adonara island the next day. 
The vegetation was dustier still, and a market stall owner 
explained that the nearby volcano, Ili Boleng, had recently 
exploded, with clouds of ash and fi ery rock. At once I under￾stood what I had been observing was not the result of passing 
vehicles stirring up road dust. I resolved to scale the mountain 
in the morning. A family – seemingly with underworld connec￾tions, since their surname was Demon – put me up in the 
village of Lamalouk.6
 A nourishing breakfast of green pea 
porridge in my belly, I aimed for the volcano, whose summit, 
sometimes poking through cloud, loomed beyond a nearby 
stand of tall hardwoods. In the next village, a woman implored 
me to turn back: ‘There is danger up there,’ she said. But I had Night Market of the Ghosts 93
tackled higher volcanoes on Java, I told myself, and could 
handle this.
The path faded quickly, ending in thickets of lacerating alang￾alang grass coated in dew-soaked ash. My legs and arms soon 
stung from wounds infl icted by the weed’s barbed blades, and I 
diverted towards a gully. I imagined vast quantities of muddy 
ash sweeping down it in the rainy season, imparting nutrients to 
soils. This was easy terrain to follow at fi rst – a layer of soft ash 
on bedrock – but as the slope increased, the ash concealed not 
solid ground but mobile scree. I could only advance by scurry￾ing on all fours slightly faster than I was sliding back. The gully 
became more of a canyon, with unscalable sidewalls revealing 
generations of ash layers, and I was now dislodging disturbingly 
large masses of rubble. Damp clouds shrouded the slopes, and I 
felt the cold, dressed in shorts and a T-shirt. It wasn’t the best￾planned expedition.
Retracing my steps was the only option, but not far below an 
uprooted tree that had tumbled down was leaning close enough 
to the top of the channel for me to escape. Reaching the end of 
the bole, I found a ghostly, petrifi ed scene – thick ash underfoot 
and a thin forest of spindly tree stems stripped of foliage, 
branches, bark and all. I continued up, but again ran into steeper 
slopes of ash and gravel on which I could get no purchase. I 
persisted on hands and knees and, after another hour of toil, 
reached the crater rim.
Wind gusts fl ung ash in my eyes, lustreless clouds swirled, 
and more dust fell from grey vapours lofting from the chasm as 
I skirted the rim. Only fl eetingly, I wondered about the village 
woman’s premonition. I had a stronger feeling, though, of reach￾ing a turning point. I had been journeying east for months, and 
now it was time to backtrack, to return home for the start of the 
university year. But the signifi cance went beyond a geographical 
pivot: to have reached the summit of a far-fl ung erupting 94 Mountains of Fire
volcano, to see my footprints in pristine cinereous powder that 
a day before had been viscous magma in the Earth’s interior, 
and to sense my own transition from childhood to adulthood, 
brought a self-awareness that was new to me. A nomadism and 
curiosity that still infl uence my career were ignited beside this 
expressive, mysterious crater. Volcanoes were now engrained in 
my story.
*
Indonesia was also the right place for another aspiring scientist, 
Franz Junghuhn, to be switched on to volcanoes. Born in 1809, 
the same year as Charles Darwin, Junghuhn’s early challenge 
was to sidestep the medical career mapped out for him by his 
father, for his true passions were botany and mycology.7
 He was 
so precocious that by age twenty, he had published a creditable 
work on fungi of the Harz mountains (written in Latin) in the 
era’s leading botanical journal.8
After many travails, Junghuhn enrolled at the Royal University 
in Berlin in 1830. He would have been thrilled at the prospect of 
attending lectures by Alexander von Humboldt and getting his 
hands on the great naturalist’s collection in the herbarium. But 
it was not to be; soon after matriculating, Junghuhn found 
himself duelling with pistols after an altercation with another 
student in a beer garden. Junghuhn took a bullet in the leg while 
missing his opponent, who subsequently killed himself, so great 
was his sense of dishonour. That might have been the end of the 
matter, but news of the shoot-out reached the authorities. 
Duelling was rigidly prohibited, and Junghuhn was handed 
down a ten-year sentence to be served at Ehrenbreitstein 
Fortress, built following Napoleon’s defeat (and just a stone’s 
throw from Laacher See, the site of a huge volcanic eruption 
13,000 years ago).9
 Twenty months into his sentence, his pleas Night Market of the Ghosts 95
for clemency unanswered, and now ensnared by a more alarm￾ing botanical fi xation – opium – a desperate Junghuhn could 
endure no more. He fl ed one night through a window in the 
laundry room, likely with inside help. Ironically, just days later, 
Junghuhn’s captors received a royal decree stating that their 
erstwhile inmate had served suffi cient time and should be 
released. But by this time, the fugitive had reached France.
Following a stint as a sergeant with the French Foreign Legion 
in Algeria, which opened his eyes to the evils of colonialism, 
Junghuhn returned to Europe. Back in Prussia, he was reunited 
with the one man, a teacher and botanist, who had befriended 
him during his confi nement at the fortress (and who had prob￾ably procured the key to the laundry room). The pair made an 
excursion to Laacher See, whose ‘wild melancholy’ and ‘traces 
of chaotic devastation’ aroused Junghuhn’s romantic spirit. 
Perhaps this Feuerberge (fi re mountain) sowed a seed, just as my 
climb of Ili Boleng did.10
A year later, in 1835, Junghuhn arrived in Indonesia, with a 
commission as a medical offi cer. His spirit soared as he sighted 
Java’s tropical vegetation from the ship. But soon he would 
become equally passionate about the volcanoes. He mapped 
them, took rock samples, measured temperatures and altitudes, 
and evaluated soil types and vegetation zones. He also docu￾mented the Javanese veneration of volcano gods. Indeed, as one 
historian has said, ‘Looking into a volcano was, for Junghuhn, 
essentially looking God right in the face.’11 He recognised the 
duality of volcanoes in cycles of destruction and regeneration – 
the prolifi c biodiversity and agricultural fertility conferred by 
volcanic soils and ashfall, but also the terror and split-second 
devastation of a pyroclastic eruption. Finding, at the feet of 
volcanoes, ruined pantheons with statues of the gods to whom 
they were dedicated lying shattered and forsaken, tangled in 
fi gs, Junghuhn understood, too, how the lives and shifting 96 Mountains of Fire
cosmologies of the Javanese are bound up in transformative 
nature.12 Volcanoes, he was told, were guarded by tigers and 
snakes – real threats to be sure, but also, I suspect, metaphors 
for stealthy nuées ardentes and serpentine smoke trails rising 
from fumaroles.
Vision was Junghuhn’s critical sense; his eyes were bright and 
sharp like a raptor’s.13 Accentuated yet further with a trusted 
telescope, his acute eyesight helps to explain the quality of his 
surveying and cartography. His nature writing, too, is both 
visual and expressive, described by the author Eric Beekman as 
alternating ‘between seduction and instruction . . . closer to an 
art than a technique’.14 Junghuhn’s published syntheses of the 
geology, fl ora and fauna, and culture of Java are encyclopaedic 
landmarks, and his belief in the unity of nature is inspiring. 
Moreover, he was sympathetic to local knowledge, recognising 
that historical events are veiled in stories attached to land￾marks.15 Above all, I admire his sketches – some transformed 
into enthralling lithographs for his ‘Java-Album’.16 Their 
aesthetic and scientifi c qualities recall the illustrations in Sir 
William Hamilton’s Campi Phlegræi, but go beyond the natural￾istic precision of the Italian scenes, employing subtle artifi ce to 
elevate their fi delity, through a bird’s-eye view, for instance.17
Merapi, in central Java, was the fi rst active volcano both 
Junghuhn and I climbed. It is among the most dangerous and 
signifi cant in Indonesia, with over a million people living in its 
shadow. The country’s last Sultanate, a relic of the former king￾dom of Mataram, radiates from the volcano’s peak. The sultan’s 
palace, the kraton, lies on an axis connecting the spirit realms of 
sea and volcano with the sublunary world, linking the eternal 
and ephemeral. It is only twenty miles south of the summit, in 
the heart of Yogyakarta, a city of half a million people. In an 
echo of ancient temple architecture, the kraton is a miniature 
replica of the cosmos. Merapi’s eruptions are often deadly owing Night Market of the Ghosts 97
to the high population density on the volcano’s fl anks. Two very 
diff erent approaches – spiritual and scientifi c – seek to lessen 
the menace.
For many Javanese, Merapi is a kingdom of ghosts. Afterlife 
is a mirror of the material world, but it exists below ground – a 
rice farmer here will be a rice farmer there. The underworld 
spirits, watched by their overlords Empu Romo and Empu 
Parmadi, can warn the living of an impending eruption. An 
earthly gatekeeper, the juru kunci, is appointed by the sultan to 
read the omens. He lives in the village of Kinahrejo, dignifi ed by 
its purpose as portal, but perilously close to the crater. His daily 
observances are meant to sustain an equilibrium in nature. Once 
a year, a more elaborate ceremony takes place, involving dozens 
of the kraton’s courtiers, with off erings of fl owers, rice, incense 
and money made beside a sacred rock in the forest above 
Kinahrejo. If these performances aren’t done correctly, the gods 
will be displeased and an eruption might follow.
From 1980, Merapi’s mediator, then fi fty years of age, was 
Mbah Maridjan. He had followed his father’s vocation and 
conducted his formal aff airs with the invisible world with solem￾nity. His popularity soared after he refused to evacuate during a 
lethal eruption of Merapi in 2006, despite appeals from the 
national volcanological agency, the Sultan of Yogyakarta and 
even the vice president of the country. He lived to tell the tale, 
which was relayed with relish by the media. Mysticism had 
trumped modernity (though that did not prevent Maridjan 
from accepting a commission to appear in commercials for an 
energy drink).18
Merapi soon regained its composure, defl ating after its evac￾uation. But just a few years later, in mid-September 2010, seis￾mometers on the mountain recorded an uptick in tremors, 
precise surveys revealed a bulging summit, and geochemical 
sensors registered escalating gas emissions. Magma was on the 98 Mountains of Fire
ascent, and the volcano alert level was raised from ‘normal’ to 
‘on guard’. At this time, I was involved in research on Merapi 
with French and Indonesian scientists. I provided one of our 
bespoke ultraviolet spectrometers from Cambridge to measure 
sulphur dioxide emissions from the crater, and my colleague, 
Marie Boichu, trained local observatory staff in its operation. 
My Indonesian collaborator, Sri Sumarti, who was responsible 
for gas-monitoring at Merapi, told me later that the equipment 
played an important role in assessing the volcanic threat. With 
both increasing gas fl uxes and shaking of the earth, the alarm 
was raised further on 20 October (to ‘be prepared’), and to the 
highest level on 25 October, signifying an imminent eruption. 
During all this build-up, Sri and her team at the observatory 
stepped up their engagement with the communities on the 
mountain to explain the signals and their implications. ‘We call 
this socialisation of volcanology,’ Sri explained.19
Tens of thousands of people were evacuated, but once more 
Mbah Maridjan refused to leave his post. This was his last stand; 
on the following day, blistering nuées ardentes swept through 
the village with hurricane force. His body was found in the atti￾tude of prayer, fi xed by the intense heat.20 The destruction 
of the village of Kinahrejo was near total, yet so transient was 
the passage of the nueé that Mbah Maridjan’s batik clothing was 
unburned. A veneer of fi ne ash covered the scene. An even 
larger eruption followed just over a week later but by then 
more than 400,000 people had sought refuge beyond the danger 
zone.
I visited Kinahrejo two years later and found a booming dark 
tourism scene, with off -road jeep trips to the devastation zone 
and other attractions.21 In another twist of modernity, Mbah 
Maridjan’s widow, who had not been in Kinahrejo on the fateful 
day, was sitting in a kiosk selling instant noodles and T-shirts 
depicting her late husband.Night Market of the Ghosts 99
I spoke with the new gatekeeper, Mbah Maridjan’s son, Pak 
Asih. Standing beside his incinerated motorbike, displayed for 
the tourists, and close to his father’s tomb, he explained it 
remained his duty to communicate information on the volcano 
from the spirit world. However, he saw this as complementing, 
not negating, scientifi c data analysis and knowledge. He seemed 
to accept that during the 2010 crisis, observation had bettered 
observance. The evacuations had saved tens of thousands of 
lives. In fact, there were even calls for the director of the national 
volcanological agency, Pak Surono, to be made the new juru 
kunci, a standout moment in the culture clashes between science 
and spiritism.
But years later, Surono was close to tears as he told me of the 
profound responsibility he still felt for the losses: ‘Despite our 
diff erences, I cried when they told me Mbah Maridjan was 
killed. Science is for the head, but the heart also has to under￾stand the sentiments of the people. Volcanology is about the 
people.’22
*
The underworld spirits are not universally placated; the signs 
of disquiet may go unheeded. So it was in 1815 on Flores 
island’s neighbour to the west, Sumbawa. But this was an 
eruption up to 1,000 times larger than that of Merapi in 2010. 
Junghuhn described it as ‘one of the most terrible ever to have 
occurred on the whole earth according to human memory’. 
Two centuries on, this epithet holds. Its grim eff ects were felt 
not only across the Indonesian archipelago but also in Europe 
and North America, where it impacted millions of lives by 
giving rise to ‘the year without a summer’ of 1816. The unsea￾sonable chill and its consequences kindled fresh folklore 
across the world.100 Mountains of Fire
The protagonist, Tambora, forms a peninsula on the north 
coast of the island, and may have been the highest peak of the 
whole archipelago before the cataclysm. Indonesia had become 
embroiled in the Napoleonic wars, following the defeat of its 
colonial masters, the Dutch, by France. This compelled the 
British, whose imperial possessions included the Malay penin￾sula, to launch a brief and successful naval assault. So, when 
Tambora exploded, the lieutenant governor of Java was Sir 
Thomas Stamford Raffl es, a luminary of the British Empire, 
and as enthusiastic about butterfl ies and other natural wonders 
as he was adept at military engagement and colonial administra￾tion. Thanks to his attention and interventions, along with other 
testimonies, we can piece together the events and their conse￾quences in the region.23
At the end of the 1990s, I was researching a book, Erupt -
ions that Shook the World. For a change, I put the spectrometers 
away, eased back (a little) on fi eldwork and spent days in the 
university library. Had any of my friends or colleagues been 
looking for me then, they would never have suspected I was in 
the rare books room of the library. But that was where the trail 
to any and all intelligence on Tambora had led me.
Among the accounts, I found a fascinating vignette attributed 
to Raffl e’s colleague John Crawfurd, resident governor of 
Surabaya province in north-east Java. In 1814, he had sailed past 
Tambora and noted dark, threatening clouds coming from its 
direction. He misread them for an approaching squall until ash 
began settling on the deck.24 With hindsight, this activity signi￾fi es the reawakening of the volcano from prolonged slumber. 
Magma that had accumulated in a deep reservoir had been pres￾surising due to bubble formation and was now rising, unlocking 
sealed conduits, seeking escape.25 Perhaps the communities on 
the volcano’s fl anks were moved to make off erings to the restless 
mountain.Night Market of the Ghosts 101
The action escalated dramatically on the evening of 5 April 
1815, with a violent pumice eruption whose concussions 
reverberated across Java, where they were universally 
mistaken for hostile fi re. In Surabaya, it was thought a 
merchant ship was under attack from pirates, and gunboats 
were launched to intervene. Only the next day, when ash 
settled across the land, was the mystery solved. Things were 
much worse around the volcano, with crops fl attened beneath 
ash. The colonial Resident of Bima, fi fty miles from Tambora, 
dispatched a deputy named Israël to gauge the situation. But 
the recent explosions had tapped just a fraction of Tambora’s 
compressed magma – the real paroxysm came fi ve days 
later.26 Crawfurd, two islands away, was forced to conduct his 
daily aff airs by candlelight as a gigantic ash cloud plunged 
the whole region into Cimmerian gloom. Poor Israël was 
never heard from again.
The scale of the catastrophe can be partly gauged by how 
little information reached Batavia (Jakarta) afterwards. 
Eventually, Raffl es sent an envoy, Owen Philipps, to Sumbawa 
to distribute foodstuff s and ascertain the facts of the eruption 
and plight of the people. The emissary met the head of one of 
the villages closest to Tambora, whose survival is remarkable as 
it’s likely almost all on the peninsula perished. He told Philipps 
that at around 7pm on 10 April, three columns of fl ame burst 
from the mountain, uniting above it at great height ‘in a trou￾bled and confused manner’. Then:
In a short time, the whole mountain  . . . appeared like a 
body of liquid fi re, extending itself in every direction  . . . 
and soon after a violent whirlwind  . . . blew down nearly 
every house in the village  . . . tearing up by the roots the 
largest trees and carrying them into the air, together with 
men, horses, cattle.102 Mountains of Fire
In light of the scientifi c studies following the tragic 1902 erup￾tion of Montagne Pelée, it is certain this is a description of nuées 
ardentes. Now the magma reservoir was uncorked and the erup￾tion on track to its once-in-a-millennium ranking. So much 
molten rock was disgorged that the mountain toppled in on itself 
above the voiding chamber, leaving an immense yawning hole in 
the ground. An apocalyptic fallout of ash across Indonesia’s 
south-eastern islands stifl ed crops and razed dwellings.
Franz Junghuhn was only fi ve when Tambora burst open, but 
the disaster remained fresh in the collective memory of the East 
Indies when he landed in Java twenty years later, and he was 
among the fi rst to synthesise the available information. As many 
as 12,000 people were annihilated instantly by the nuées ardentes, 
but over the following months many tens of thousands more 
perished – as far away as east Java – from starvation and disease. 
Before the eruption, Sumbawa had been famed for its lush 
valleys, coff ee and honey, fi ne horses and timber.27 After, it was 
a scene of unimaginable misery, roadsides littered with corpses 
and shallow graves, villages deserted and derelict, desperate 
survivors seeking food. Even decades later, much of the western 
lowlands of Sumbawa remained knee-deep in ash. Some sold 
their children to slave traders to buy rice; others migrated to the 
rugged interior of the island where rainfall washed away the ash 
more rapidly.28 The abandoned coastal towns were rebuilt by 
slaves from Sulawesi island. The traces of these profound demo￾graphic shifts are still evident today, preserved in toponymy, 
dialect and custom. The catastrophe is remembered, too, in 
folktales. One, recorded on the Tambora peninsula in 1982, 
attributes the eruption to God’s wrath after an imam was fed 
dog meat during a visit to the island.29
While Indonesia was reeling in the months after the eruption 
in 1815, across the world people marvelled at spectacular 
twilight glows orange-red near the horizon, purple-pink above, Night Market of the Ghosts 103
sometimes streaked with dark ‘rays’. In the eastern United States 
the following year, many noted a persistent ‘dry fog’ that 
dimmed the sun, and which neither wind nor rain dispersed. No 
one connected these atmospheric optics with the Tambora erup￾tion, nor did anyone foresee their shocking consequences for 
food production, which aff ected the lives of many millions of 
people, especially in Europe. The dust generated by Tambora 
had encircled the planet and was diminishing the sunlight reach￾ing the surface – the driver of photosynthesis, on which most 
life on Earth depends.
To understand these impacts, it makes sense to fast-forward 
to 1991. That year, a then almost unheard-of volcano, Pinatubo, 
in the Philippines, surprised the world with a monumental erup￾tion. Like 1815, remarkable sunsets were widely reported around 
the globe in the following months. Unlike 1815, there were 
sophisticated sensors on satellites able to quantify what was 
going on in the atmosphere and on the ground: the eruption 
opened up a new scientifi c horizon as it cast unfamiliar light on 
the earthly skyline.30
The most crucial discovery was that the dust girdling the 
planet was not fi ne volcanic ash, as had once been thought, but 
sulphur-rich particles. These had formed in the stratosphere 
(the layer of the atmosphere that begins around the height that 
aircraft fl y at) from nearly twenty million tonnes of sulphur 
dioxide gas (that’s the weight of ten million cars) emitted during 
the Pinatubo eruption. The gas had been suff used in the magma 
deep in the Earth’s crust; now it was on the loose in a very 
oxidising environment – air – and it slowly transformed into 
specks known as sulphate aerosol. Samples were even collected 
up in the stratosphere by NASA’s high-altitude ER-2 research 
aircraft (descended from the CIA’s U2 spy plane). At massive 
magnifi cation, they look like wrinkled plant seeds.31 Owing to 
their tiny dimensions – somewhere between those of a virus and 104 Mountains of Fire
a pollen grain – these motes stayed aloft for many months before 
settling out of the atmosphere. More importantly, they were just 
the right size to refl ect a fraction of visible light back into space, 
cooling the Earth’s surface for a few years, with the peak eff ect 
in the landmasses of the Northern Hemisphere, the summer 
after the eruption.32 You might expect that volcanoes, with burn￾ing fl ames, spewing molten hot lava and searing ash, would heat 
up the planet, but in fact they do the opposite.
Though several factors, including a volcano’s latitude, infl u￾ence how much an eruption cools the climate, it is the amount 
of sulphur blasted into the stratosphere that is critical. But how 
can we ever know how much of the stuff was exhaled by erup￾tions, like Tambora’s, that happened before satellites were moni￾toring the Earth? It was glaciologists, not volcanologists, who 
found the answer – in the ice sheets of Greenland and 
Antarctica.33 After a particularly large eruption, a little of the 
sulphurous dust settles imperceptibly over the polar regions and 
becomes locked in the accumulating ice. A core drilled from the 
ice can reach back 100,000 years or more in time. Measure the 
sulphur present in the ice down the length of the core and, like 
activating invisible ink, a sensational record of past global 
volcanism materialises.34 In this way, it is estimated that Tambora 
emitted three times more sulphur to the stratosphere than 
Pinatubo. No wonder its eff ects on climate were profound.35
Indeed, they led to the kinds of lived experience that become 
folklore. In North America, the year 1816, when Tambora’s 
summertime chilling bit hardest, was remembered as ‘1800 and 
Froze to Death’.36 One famed fabulist of the period was 
Oregonian trapper and mountain guide, Black Harris. In a yarn 
ascribed to him, he describes weather ‘so all-fi red cold, it froze 
icykels on to the star rays, and stopped ‘em comin down; and 
the sun froze so he couldn’t shine; and the moon didn’t git up 
at all, she didn’t’.37 On the other side of the continent, New Night Market of the Ghosts 105
England newspapers, diaries, registers and letters paint a more 
prosaic picture of the eruption’s global ripples.38 For instance, 
on 6 June 1816, bricklayers in Bath, New Hampshire, had to 
down tools because their mortar had iced up. Two days later, 
eighty-four-year-old Joseph Walker lost his way in the woods of 
Peacham, Vermont, and spent the night in the open. It cost him 
a big toe through frostbite. Northerly squalls left nearby Cabot 
knee-deep in snow, while across the state, farmers who had just 
sheared their Merinos were tying the fl eeces back on to the shiv￾ering sheep.
These icy conditions devasted the main staple, corn, as well 
as the hay crop, leaving one farmer in Rochester, Vermont, 
pulling the thatch off his roof for fodder.39 Tens of thousands 
of other back-country folk gave in, abandoned their farms, 
and headed for Ohio, Indiana and Illinois in covered wagons 
or on foot, with whatever goods and chattels they could carry. 
Many perished on the long journey. The population of 
Cleveland swelled from a handful to seventy-four in 1817, 
mostly refugees from New England (briefl y among them the 
father of Rutherford Hayes, nineteenth president of the 
United States). The exodus left some more upland and remote 
areas of New England depopulated for a generation, a very 
distant echo of the abandonments on Sumbawa itself, all the 
more remarkable since no one then could contrive the connec￾tion in circumstances.
It was a similar story the other side of the Atlantic. For 
instance, on 20 July 1816, the Times of London recorded ‘very 
unseasonable weather  . . . scarcely remembered by the oldest 
inhabitant’ and foretold that ‘the corn will inevitably be laid’. 
Referring to the aftermath of the Napoleonic wars (concluded 
at the Battle of Waterloo two months after Tambora exploded), 
the report added that ‘the eff ects of such a calamity at such a 
time cannot be otherwise than ruinous to the farmers and even 106 Mountains of Fire
to the people at large’.40 After a decade of confl ict, Western 
economies were shattered, and countless former combatants 
jobless and penniless. Things were worse still on the continent. 
While crossing the volcanic Eifel region in spring 1817, the 
Prussian general Carl von Clausewitz, famed for writings on 
warfare, recounted seeing ‘ruined fi gures, scarcely resembling 
men, prowling around the fi elds searching for food’.41 Hikes in 
grain prices aff ected millions, and many took to the streets in 
protest or emigrated.42 In parts of eastern England, rioters 
rampaged demanding ‘bread or blood’ and committed acts of 
arson and sabotage. The unrest was met with a sometimes lethal 
response from the authorities.43
In the following years, typhus epidemics erupted across 
Europe. A doctor at Belfast’s Fever Hospital estimated 800,000 
people were affl icted in Ireland, of whom as many as 65,000 
perished from ‘the joint ravages of famine, dysentery, and fever’. 
Astutely, he linked the contagion to malnutrition following the 
poor harvest of 1816 and the throngs gathering in soup kitch￾ens. Between 1816 and 1817, mortality increased four per cent 
in France, six per cent in Prussia, and over twenty per cent in 
Switzerland and Tuscany, where many starved to death. In 
Europe, 1817 became remembered as ‘the year of beggars’.44
Unsurprisingly, the famine only accentuated inequalities and 
political tensions. Anti-Semitic protests erupted in the Bavarian 
city of Würzburg in August 1819, the violence quickly spread￾ing to Copenhagen, Amsterdam and Krakow.45 While New 
Englanders were heading west in the United States, tens of 
thousands of Irish men and women were emigrating to North 
America (pre-empting what hundreds of thousands would do 
during the Great Famine thirty years later). The conditions 
aboard ship during the Atlantic crossing were hardly conducive 
to quelling the spread of typhus, and many were found sick on 
arrival and placed in quarantine.Night Market of the Ghosts 107
Tambora has been implicated in many other manifestations, 
trends and innovations of the period, including cholera outbreaks 
in India, opium addiction, the writing of Frankenstein, the blos￾soming of the art songs of Beethoven and Schubert, J. M. W. 
Turner’s intense sunsets, three decades of mostly futile, often 
lethal pursuit of the Northwest Passage, and even the invention 
of the bicycle. But the problem with any claim of causality is the 
implied counterfactual. Can we say that if Tambora had not 
erupted when it did, Mary Shelley would not have penned her 
Gothic masterpiece, the farmers of Yunnan province would not 
have switched from rice to poppy cultivation and Sir John 
Franklin might have enjoyed a long life on his naval pension? In 
the case of Tambora, the links to climatic change and thereby to 
agronomic impacts in Europe and North America are convinc￾ing. But any knock-on consequences must surely have a great 
deal to do with the eruption’s post-war timing, and the extent to 
which authorities and institutions acted wisely to alleviate depri￾vation. When contemporary observers themselves drew connec￾tions – as they did in the years after 1815 – between weather, 
crop yields, uprisings, public health and disease, this, for me, 
strengthens our interpretations of aff airs.46
*
As a volcanologist, I am often asked: ‘Isn’t Yellowstone overdue 
for “the big one”?’ Before the BBC’s 2005 fi lm Supervolcano, 
which envisioned the reawakening of Yellowstone, you would 
only have had the misfortune to hear the expression ‘super￾eruption’ at the dentist. Thanks to the TV drama, however, 
volcanologists quickly appropriated the term, later defi ning it as 
an eruption producing 1,000 cubic kilometres or more of 
pumice and ash. It is not easy to picture such a volume of rock, 
but it would be equivalent to burying all of Greater London to 108 Mountains of Fire
double the height of its tallest skyscraper (the Shard), all of 
France surpassing head height, or the entire United States well 
above the ankles.
Yellowstone’s last super-eruption took place 640,000 years 
ago, long before our species emerged. More interesting to 
consider, I would argue, is Sumatra’s ‘Youngest Toba Tuff ’ 
eruption, just 74,000 years ago. By that time, our ancestors were 
using advanced stone tool technologies, and likely knew how 
to tell a good yarn, too. This was a blast 150 times bigger still 
than Tambora’s, disgorging enough pyroclastic rock to cover the 
whole of the United States to the depth of a one-storey home. 
About a third of the deposit piled up on northern Sumatra, and 
much of the rest lies beneath the fl oor of the Indian Ocean.47
Given its great scale and period, close to both the onset of the 
last Ice Age and the time when Homo sapiens dispersed out of 
Africa, this ‘super-eruption’ has become entwined in debates 
concerning climate change and human prehistory.
The clearest topographic trace of the super-eruption is an 
elliptical crater lake, sixty miles long, amidst the peaks, forests 
and rice terraces of the Batak region of northern Sumatra, an 
area explored extensively by Franz Junghuhn in the early 
1840s.48 The caldera is so vast that from the ground it is hard to 
get the sense of being on a volcano – the scalloped rim and blue￾grey water simply dissolve in haze and skylight far short of the 
distant margin. Pumice deposits from the eruption dazzle in 
canyon walls and extend deep below ground, but perhaps more 
exceptional is the mostly unseen veneer of dust that mantled a 
fi fth of the Earth’s surface.
While there are only minor quibbles about the quantity of 
pumice and ash involved in this cataclysm, there is no consen￾sus on how much sulphur it released into the atmosphere – the 
estimates are more like guesses and vary enormously. Some 
sulphur layers in the polar ice cores have been suggested as Night Market of the Ghosts 109
possible candidates, but none has yet been defi nitively attrib￾uted to Toba. This hasn’t prevented climate scientists from 
running computer models to gauge the super-eruption’s global 
repercussions – they are interesting in their own right, but none 
can be claimed to provide a reliable picture of what actually 
happened until we properly constrain Toba’s sulphur potency.49
However, even the most extreme model scenarios investigated 
do not simulate widespread glaciation, so one thing that’s clear 
is that Toba did not trigger the last Ice Age.
Toba was on my gap year tour before going to university – I 
stayed for several days on Samosir island (an uplifted block of 
the 74,000-year-old ignimbrite rising from the centre of the 
crater lake). My temporary home was a Batak house with tradi￾tional saddle-shaped roof, surrounded by plots of rice, cassava 
and vegetables, and a grazing buff alo or two. I ate my fi rst 
avocado there (this really was a journey of self-discovery – I 
took to them at once and consumed around four a day), drank 
the local liquor (made from sugar palm sap), coughed my way 
through a homespun cigar and swam in the placid lake water, 
oblivious then, in my pre-volcanologist naivety, of the immense 
amount of magma below me.50 But despite this early acquaint￾ance with Toba, I ended up studying the eruption more closely 
by going further away – halfway across the Indian Ocean to 
southern India.
The site lay between a dry riverbed and the village of 
Jwalapuram in Andhra Pradesh. A local cottage industry had 
sprung up to mine a layer of ash just below the surface. It was 
sold as an abrasive for use in detergents. There are no volcanoes 
anywhere nearby, and its chemical make-up is an exact match 
for Toba: this is the fallout from the pall of fi ne ash carried by 
stratospheric winds across the Indian Ocean from Sumatra.
Even more exciting, the ancient soil layers sandwiching the 
thick bed of ash contained many prehistoric tools: fl akes, 110 Mountains of Fire
scrapers and cores made from chert, chalcedony, quartz and 
limestone. I was working in a team with archaeologists, and 
while they painstakingly recovered every piece of worked stone, 
I used DIY-store trowels, knives and paintbrushes to reveal 
subtle variations in the deposits and to exhume the soil surface 
on which they rested. The stifl ing heat, humidity and dust in the 
pits were overwhelming. Biting fl ies tormented me. But these 
discomforts were eclipsed by the thrill of exposing the moment 
the ancestors witnessed darkness at noon and the earth turned 
to powder. While my typical fi eldwork – pointing spectrometers 
at drifting gas clouds – addresses the here and now of volcanic 
action, revealing terrain buried for 74,000 years felt like time 
travel.
The sugary deposits preserved remarkable details, such as 
the tunnels through which bugs had escaped their rude burial 
in fallout. I also found a level in the ash with abundant leaf 
impressions – I guessed that the trees were defoliated by the 
veneer of dust. When the sky cleared 74,000 years ago, the 
toolmakers and hunter-gatherers must have gazed in horror at 
the infi nite carpet of blinding white powder; perhaps, some￾where, their footprints are preserved in it. Above this layer 
were several much thicker stripes of ash with tell-tale signs of 
mud cracks. This matter must have settled out on the surround￾ing hills but was then washed downslope by monsoon rains. If 
so, that would mean the eruption did not greatly disrupt the 
cycle of wet and dry seasons, as some have suggested. The 
deluge of wet ash had set like concrete around tree trunks and 
branches, helping to petrify them. It’s hard to imagine human 
populations continuing to inhabit such shifting ground. 
Perhaps they left their formerly wooded homeland and sought 
resources and cave shelters on higher ground. What stories did 
their descendants tell of dislocation and survival? Certainly 
none are still preserved over such a span of time, but is it Night Market of the Ghosts 111
possible that ancestral experiences of such crises helped to 
shape what we call ‘human instinct’?
We know that humans were in India when the ash fell because 
of all the implements, but two key questions remain: what 
species were they and did they endure the catastrophe? Since 
there are no human fossils at this site nor of this period from 
anywhere on the subcontinent, the only clues are the stone tools. 
Unfortunately, it is not easy to attribute one fl ake or scraper 
to Neanderthal manufacture and another to Homo sapiens. 
After much measurement and characterisation, the specialists 
concluded they most resembled tools found with Homo sapiens
fossils in southern Africa, and so credited the Indian samples to 
the handiwork of our species. If correct, this implies ‘we’ had 
reached the subcontinent more than 74,000 years ago. But 
others disagree.51 Resolving the matter would have profound 
implications for understanding the drivers of migration of our 
species from Africa to Asia and beyond, as well as our encoun￾ters with other extant humans, including Neanderthals and 
Denisovans.
But might the eruption mean more than a convenient marker 
pen for archaeological dating? Could it have chilled global climate 
enough to infl uence the human trajectory? In 1998, the anthro￾pologist Stanley Ambrose proposed that Toba’s paroxysm 
sparked worldwide environmental devastation on the scale of a 
‘nuclear winter’, the Armageddon some consider might follow 
nuclear warfare. Ambrose reckoned that Toba’s climate change 
almost eradicated our ancestors.52 Though his argument inspired 
and provoked a great deal of debate and further study, it has not 
been substantiated. Indeed, the evidence emerging from archaeo￾logical studies and analyses of ancient environments in Africa, in 
places where the Toba ash has been found in sediments, argue 
against universal and lasting depletion of water, food or shelter.53
Despite its great magnitude, the Toba super-eruption may have 112 Mountains of Fire
released comparatively little sulphur into the atmosphere, limit￾ing any global climatic reverberations.
The case of Toba urges us to think forwards, too: will the 
next super-eruption pose an existential threat? Will Yellow -
stone annihilate us all one day? The chances of such extreme 
volcanism are not so remote as one might think. The last 
example that we know of convulsed the North Island of New 
Zealand (Aotearoa) 25,000 years ago, and the global return 
period of such large events looks to be as short as 17,000 
years.54 That equates to around a 1 in 200 chance there will 
be another before this century is out. But the likelihood 
Yellowstone will be next in the frame is remote. What’s more, 
the popular trope that the Wyoming hotspot is running behind 
schedule stems from a misreading of its super-eruption score 
card: past events occurred 2.1 million, 1.3 million and 640,000 
years ago. Somehow, this has been taken to imply 600,000-year 
intervals. Even taking the average of the two intervals between 
events (730,000 years) is unhelpful, as there is no reason to 
expect Yellowstone to behave like a clock. Volcanologists with 
the United States Geological Survey regard the likelihood of 
another large caldera-forming eruption of the volcano as ‘below 
the threshold of useful calculation’.55
Lake Toba remains as tranquil as it was when I saw it as a 
nineteen-year-old backpacker, but a deadly eruption of nearby 
Sinabung volcano has recently tapped the super-volcano’s 
magma store.56 Until it reawakened, sulphur was still being 
mined from its fuming craters. In this case, no folk tales or oral 
tradition hinted at ancient calamity – the last eruptions presum￾ably occurred beyond the reach of memorialisation in myth. 
Nor did science prepare the population – no sensors were track￾ing the volcano’s pulse before it kindled. Even the eagle-eyed 
Junghuhn neglected to mention Sinabung in his travels in Batak 
country. So its revival in August 2010 (just two months before Night Market of the Ghosts 113
Merapi’s paroxysm on Java) took the communities at the foot of 
the volcano completely by surprise, the more so since the fi rst 
blasts occurred at night as people slept.
It is possible the magnitude 9.3 ‘Boxing Day’ earthquake in 
2004 (which triggered the catastrophic Indian Ocean tsunami) 
aggravated Sinabung’s magma reservoir, but we don’t really 
know what roused the volcano. The activity picked up in 2013, 
prompting the authorities to declare an exclusion zone around 
the foot of the juddering mountain. Its boundary was porous, 
though, and sixteen people were killed a few months later by 
nuées ardentes, among them several climbers who were on the 
mountain despite the warnings.
I visited Sinabung with a fi lm crew in 2016. With permits 
from the national geohazards agency, we drove towards the 
volcano through empty villages. Pullulating weeds festooned 
walls and homes, and had colonised the ash-plastered road, 
jumping at their chance to overwrite brick, asphalt, galvanised 
metal and satellite TV antennae. But stretched across the yard 
beside one house, I spotted a washing line hung with recently 
laundered clothes. In this mundane detail, I understood the 
challenge of protecting people from volcanic disaster – even 
when the alarm has sounded, even when neighbours have 
perished, it is very, very hard to leave home.
We stopped at the edge of the village, where nuées ardentes
had scorched a small clapboard home. The metal roof had 
corroded away; a singed soft toy lay on the ground, half￾concealed by bindweed; a jacket hung from a hook – signs of 
intense but momentary heat as the nuées raced through. Looking 
up to the volcano instantly took me back twenty years to 
Soufrière Hills on Montserrat. In fact, the resemblance was 
uncanny: rock crumbling off the lava dome at the top and clat￾tering down a pink-grey scar in the volcano’s side; the once￾verdant fl anks bleached by acid fumes; former roads and farm 114 Mountains of Fire
terraces now just ghosts in the topography. I felt, too, the same 
sense of immediate menace, and kept a very close eye on the 
chunks of lava falling off the dome. In another echo of 
Montserrat’s long-lived crisis, Sinabung’s crater continues to 
simmer and spit, to this day.
My encounters with Merapi, Tambora and Toba, and collab￾orations with historians, archaeologists and geographers, have 
brought home to me that a wide range of conditions – socioeco￾nomic, political, cultural, environmental, chance – infl uence 
human agency, whether at individual, community or global 
scale. History is story (the shared etymology of the words is no 
accident) and storytelling is an essence of humanity. Folklore, 
myths and stories help us make sense of the world, and of our 
past, present and future. Though they are often set apart, the 
indigenous or local knowledge of communities can go hand in 
hand with science, something that Junghuhn understood. 
Narrative pervades science as much as it does fable, albeit its 
rhetoric is more dialectic than lyrical. Good science can raise 
the level of historical arguments, and society could do more to 
value the public and educational value of interdisciplinarity.
Nowhere have I more profoundly experienced the magical 
side of volcanoes than in Indonesia. It’s where I realised how 
climbing a volcano diff ers from scaling a regular mountain – 
there is always a mystical nature you cannot discover until you 
reach the crater and peer in. I once scrambled up the highest 
and holiest mountain in Java, Semeru. According to tradition it 
is formed from the peak of Mount Mahāmeru, sacred in Hindu 
cosmology, and was brought to Java to stop the island from 
shaking. While I watched from a safe distance, a sagging dome 
of lava exploded every ten minutes or so, launching grey-brown 
caulifl ower clouds that coiled into the sky. This was impressive 
enough, but the accompanying noise was unlike anything else I 
have ever heard. It was a siren, a blizzard and a wailing child all Night Market of the Ghosts 115
at once – an animal, really – and it was followed by a sonorous 
chugging, like a steam train gathering speed. The timbres and 
tones and resonances were incredible and moving. Later, an 
Indonesian colleague pointed to a saddle near the summit of the 
neighbouring volcano and said it was known locally as ‘the night 
market of the ghosts’ where spirits congregate, dine and gossip. 
Thinking of those unworldly sounds, recalling, too, the ethereal 
blue light of burning sulphur at Kawah Ijen, and nocturnal glow 
of Bromo, it strikes me that volcanoes must have always been 
wellsprings for the imaginary.White Mountain, Heaven Lake
Paektu, the ‘white-headed mountain’ and 
source of the ‘dragon’s vein’.1
‘We greet the sun at Paektu, and greet the unifi cation at Halla.’
– Ri Sol-Ju, Reuters2Hands clasped and held aloft, Moon Jae-in and Kim Jong 
Un smile for the camera in front of Heaven Lake atop 
Mount Paektu. The ‘fi rst ladies’ beside them are clapping. It is a 
picture of celebration and ceremony. But why choose a crater 
formed by one of history’s largest eruptions for such a momen￾tous reunion of the leaders of North and South Korea, two 
countries technically still at war? Was it for the joy of wordplay, 
a summit at the summit? Or the frisson of an earth-shaking 
encounter where the Earth shook?3
The choice of backdrop for this historic moment in 2018 
comes down to the fact that this volcano is the source and 
soul of the Korean people. Mount Paektu, it is said, radiates 
the spirit that will one day reunite Korea. The volcano has 
become a symbol: it emanates revolutionary spirit; its name 
is sung in kindergartens and schools; its leaders draw their 
legitimacy by posing beside its crater; it fi lls the dreams of a 
divided people.
Paektu is also well known to volcanologists, thanks to a nota￾ble Japanese expert on ash deposits, Hiroshi Machida. But his 
work, in the 1980s, started neither in the Democratic People’s 
Republic of Korea (DPRK), nor in China – the two countries 
that share the territory of the volcano – but far away in northern 
Honshu, Japan, where he found two prominent bands of ash 
amidst fossiliferous sediments.4
 At fi rst, he thought they must 
have come from the nearby Towada volcano. But chemical anal￾ysis revealed that the upper layer, as thick as a couple of paper￾backs, did not match any of Japan’s volcanoes. The ash was also 120 Mountains of Fire
present on Japan’s northernmost island, Hokkaido, and here 
what startled Machida was that its depth was the same: this 
could only mean the volcano was very distant.5
He turned next to sediment cores from the seabed west of 
Japan, and there, once more, was the mysterious ash – but now 
it was thicker. This clue led to a 1940s geological survey of 
Mount Paektu, which mentioned deep pumice deposits and a 
buried forest near the volcano’s peak. The report included 
chemical data for the rocks – they matched the ash in Japan! 
Machida had solved the puzzle, and estimated that the eruption 
took place around 1000 CE, based on historical dates for other 
ash layers in the sediments. Ever since, it has been known as the 
‘Millennium Eruption’.6
 Subsequent work on the distribution of 
ash and pumice ranks it among the two or three largest erup￾tions of the past two millennia.
Mount Pae ktu (meaning ‘white-headed mountain’ in Korean) 
is only one of the volcano’s names, which at once speaks to its 
location in a region long contested by diff erent polities and 
empires; it is Golmin Sanggiyan Alin (‘long smoky mountain’) 
to Manchurians, and Changbaishan (‘long-white mountain’) to 
the Chinese.7
 For Koreans, it is the site where King Tang’un, the 
progeny of gods and a she-bear, was said to have been born in 
2333 BCE. According to a thirteenth-century Buddhist source, 
King Tang’un established the fi rst Korean nation and ruled for 
1,500 years. The volcano’s importance was more spiritual than 
political, however, during the period of the powerful Koryŏ 
kingdom (918–1392 CE). Mount Paektu was then considered 
the wellspring of the Earth’s invisible inner energy, p’ungsu, 
which was dispersed through the ‘dragon’s vein’ of mountain 
ridges that hold the Korean peninsula together like vertebrae. 
The mountain spirits, called sansin, who took the form of benev￾olent old men, were venerated at shamanic shrines and Buddhist 
and Daoist temples.8White Mountain, Heaven Lake 121
While spiritualists saw a magical realm within the rocks, 
emperors had more political concerns above ground, not 
least concerning where the frontier – such an imaginary 
construct – should run between Manchuria and Korea. In 
1712, a border commission of sorts demarcated it along the 
courses of two rivers, the Yalu (the Amrok in Korea), which 
originates as a waterfall high up on Mount Paektu, and the 
Tumen, thereby sharing the volcano between the two empires. 
The Manchu emperor Quianlong would write later: ‘To 
ascend to the primitive source of our August Race  . . . we 
must carry ourselves to that mountain, distinguished in like 
fashion for the size and for the colour with which it shines.’9
Everyone in the region, it seems, had an ancestor story tied 
to the volcano.
The 1712 treaty might have settled the question of where 
one state ended and another began, but the position of the 
upper reach of the Tumen proved ambiguous and fresh nego￾tiations took place in 1887. At this time, the Romanovs and 
Japan were also taking an interest in the region. In 1904, after 
the Russo-Japanese War, Korea came under the control of 
Tokyo. Five years later, in 1909, Japan ceded the summit of 
Paektu to China in a border agreement. This stoked Korean 
nationalism and the old myths surrounding the volcano were 
revived and repurposed. King Tang’un was promoted as a 
historical fi gure; a calendar rooted in his supposed birthdate 
was proposed, and festivities staged to mark his anniversary. 
A new religion of ‘the divine progenitor’ even sprang up. Since 
Paektu was Tang’un’s birthplace, the volcano itself became a 
sacred symbol for Koreans. A small stele said to date from this 
period stands at the crater’s edge on the DPRK side of the 
volcano. It is inscribed with a text calling on the netherworld 
spirits of Heaven Lake to liberate Korea and bring prosperity 
and happiness to the people.122 Mountains of Fire
That appeal was answered in the form of Kim Il Sung, who, 
in the 1930s and 1940s, launched off ensives against Japanese 
forces from ‘secret camps’ on Paektu’s slopes. His son, Kim 
Jong Il, was, by repute, born in one of them. In 1962, Mao 
Zedong seemingly accepted that the DPRK had been wronged 
in the 1909 boundary negotiations, and signed a new treaty that 
put the frontier through the centre of the crater.10 The mountain 
became a beacon of the struggle against imperialism, and the 
founding of the nation, by extension linking the Kim family 
irrevocably to both King Tang’un and the volcano; out of revo￾lution, the ‘Paektu bloodline’ was forged.
This notion was reinforced in 1993, when North Korean 
archaeologists claimed to have found Tang’un’s tomb. An elabo￾rate mausoleum to house his bones was built on a hill half an 
hour’s drive from Pyongyang. More than ever, Mount Paektu 
became a sacred ancestral site of pilgrimage for North Koreans. 
Meanwhile, South Koreans could only visit the mountain from 
the Chinese side – as a geographical reminder of the division of 
the peninsula, Paektu came to symbolise the dream of reunifi ca￾tion. It is hardly surprising the volcano’s name is sung in the 
national anthems on both sides of the Demilitarised Zone that 
divides North from South.
*
As the site of one of the largest eruptions in history, Mount 
Paektu had been on my radar for some time,11 but I assumed 
the sensitive border region crossing the volcano was off limits 
for foreigners, and had never contemplated going there. 
Strangely, it was the massive ‘Tōhoku’ earthquake in Japan in 
March 2011 that opened the door to my visit. The temblor 
generated a powerful tsunami and claimed thousands of lives 
in Japan. Further shockwaves were felt around the world as White Mountain, Heaven Lake 123
the shaking and fl ooding led to reactor meltdowns at the 
Fukushima nuclear power plant, releasing radioactive materi￾als into the environment. Some seismologists in China 
suggested the earthquake was so powerful it could have 
disturbed the magma beneath Paektu volcano.12 The Chinese 
had also been investing in volcano surveillance ever since 
thousands of tiny tremors jangled the mountain between 2002 
and 2005.13 These developments concerned the North Korean 
geoscientists, who worried that their volcano-monitoring 
equipment wasn’t up to scratch.14
It was a friend and science journalist with the American 
Association for Advancement of Science, Rich Stone, who fi rst 
told me of Pyongyang’s interest in hosting a volcanologist.15 In 
turn, he’d got wind of the North Koreans’ wishes through 
Kosima Liu, co-director of an NGO in Beijing, where Rich was 
then based. Rich and Kosima would be central to the whole 
enterprise. Meanwhile, I contacted James Hammond, a special￾ist in fi nding magma underground using earthquake data. His 
experience would be invaluable, but I also knew that if anyone 
would agree to join me on a trip to Pyongyang with a few weeks’ 
notice, it would be James.
We started making arrangements, but hit an immediate prob￾lem – we couldn’t contact our counterparts in Pyongyang. I’d 
had to overcome all kinds of logistical challenges with fi eldwork 
elsewhere in the world – trouble with equipment, supplies, 
transport, permits – but one thing I’d always taken for granted 
was being able to email, fax or phone my collaborators. In our 
dealings with the DPRK, however, I had to communicate 
through a chain of intermediaries, starting with Kosima, who 
was, in turn, in touch with Ryu Kum-Ran, who works for an 
agency called PIINTEC. She would then relay messages to and 
from the scientists in Pyongyang.16 It was through this ping￾pong exchange that we planned our trip.17124 Mountains of Fire
We arrived in the North Korean capital full of expectation, 
but I had not anticipated seeing Kim Jong Un, as well as his 
father and grandfather, all within twenty-four hours. It was 9 
September 2011, the sixty-third anniversary of the founding of 
the DPRK, and there was to be a military parade in Kim Il Sung 
Square. We found ourselves on the guest list.
The human and hardware superabundance was eye-popping, 
and the martial music clamorous. At the end of the processions 
of goosestepping soldiers at arms, and motorcades of combat 
vehicles and rocket launchers, 100,000 human pixels generated 
vast collective mosaics like a gigantic TV screen. The thunder￾ous presentation of coloured placards involved synchronisation 
to the millisecond, presenting image after image of revolution￾ary slogans, characters and scenes. Mount Paektu was a recur￾ring feature. At the end, to a reverberating roar of cheering party 
members, Kim Jong Il and Kim Jong Un stood at their balcony 
overlooking the raked stands of spectators and waved in our 
general direction. A little later, we were driven to the mausoleum 
of the Palace of the Sun for an audience with the embalmed 
remains of Kim Il Sung, the founder of the DPRK.
Everywhere we went in Pyongyang, Mount Paektu confronted 
us – it featured in propaganda posters, in effi gy atop the Arch of 
Triumph (a fraction taller than the Arc de Triomphe in Paris), 
in a giant mosaic behind the statue of Kim Il Sung at Mansu 
Hill, on food labels and on murals depicting the Eternal Leader, 
Kim Il Sung, and his son and successor, Kim Jong Il, on a visit 
to the crater rim. It was dawning on me that the volcano was 
much more than a physicality, and that in encountering all three 
Kim leaders, I had come face to face with the Paektu bloodline.
Interspersed with our tour of sites and monuments of 
Pyongyang, we met our new colleagues, all of whom wore loyalty 
badges depicting the DPRK fl ag or the image of Kim Il Sung. It 
felt claustrophobic not to be able to step out into the city, justly White Mountain, Heaven Lake 125
famed for its utopian architecture, and wander freely, but we 
understood implicitly that to do so would be to violate a trust.
We fl ew to Samjiyon, near the foot of the volcano, in a 
Soviet-era Antonov. Apparently, the plane was given to Kim Il 
Sung by Nikita Kruschev, so it wasn’t the latest model, but it 
got us there in style. A farm tractor pulled a trailer with our 
luggage as we waited outside the airport building. Our fi rst 
stop was another grand monument beside Lake Samji, domi￾nated by a commanding bronze of a young Kim Il Sung clasp￾ing binoculars.18 In military dress, with jodhpurs and boots, 
he stood on a white granite plinth in the form of Paektu, whose 
actual peaks were visible in the distance. We then settled into 
our base for the next days, the Bae Gae Bong Hotel, set in a 
clearing in larch forest.
Nourished on noodles, kimchee and boiled fern, we set off 
the next morning, driving through Samjiyon, a pretty town with 
steep-roofed houses. Pedestrians wearing combat fatigues, fl at 
caps and rubber boots fi led along the pavement carrying bulg￾ing cloth knapsacks. Above them, posters depicted workers in 
hard hats, their fi sts clenched in revolutionary fervour. Once 
out of town, we followed a corrugated dirt road into a dense 
forest of Korean pines, ash and oak. There was little traffi c, save 
for army trucks bringing pilgrims to and from the crater, though 
we saw many people emerge on foot from the woods toting 
buckets of blueberries or baskets full of yellow mushrooms. 
Here and there in clearings were cabbage patches or scurrying 
piglets. Were it not for the pumice spilling into the roadside 
where disturbed by tree roots, it would have been easy to forget 
in these dense woodlands that we were climbing a volcano.
After an hour on the road, we stopped at a volcano observa￾tory near an eroded volcanic cone, Mudu Peak. The director of 
the Volcano Institute, Kim Myong Sung, welcomed us and, 
while showing us seismographs and geochemical equipment, 126 Mountains of Fire
said we were the fi rst foreign visitors he’d ever received. He 
explained, through our interpreter, that there are six satellite 
observatory posts on the mountain. ‘But our power supply can 
be interrupted and there are uncertainties in our measure￾ments,’ he admitted, ‘so we welcome more international co￾operation to improve our monitoring eff ort.’ His colleague, 
Professor Kim, described the seven stages of an alert system 
used to characterise the level of volcanic threat. ‘We are at stage 
three, which means there is uplift of the volcano and anomalies 
in hot springs.’ I asked, apprehensively, what stage seven indi￾cated. ‘A full-blown disaster,’ he replied. ‘But we do not see any 
worrying signs now.’
It soon became clear that our hosts were hoping we might 
help to equip their fi eld stations as well as spark international 
collaboration after working for so long in isolation. Professor 
Kim noted that there was a great deal of interest in fi nding out 
exactly when the Millennium Eruption had occurred, and 
whether there had been any subsequent activity on the moun￾tain. As a fi nal word before we left, he reminded us: ‘Mount 
Paektu represents the soul of our nation and our ancestral home. 
You should have a strong heart to climb it.’
In fact, the ascent required no exertion at all on our part, 
since the road led all the way to the top. Before long, the conifer￾ous forest gave out in favour of a thin cover of beech and birch 
trees, already tinged with autumn colours. Then, ten minutes 
later, we were truly in the open, crossing an alpine tundra, the 
pumice-cloaked slopes ahead rising to an undulating ridgeline 
that marked the caldera’s edge. Anyone anticipating a scene like 
Mount Fuji, with fl owering cherries and concave slopes steep￾ening to a pinnacle, would be disappointed. The Silk Road 
explorer and mystic, Francis Younghusband, who climbed 
Paektu in 1886, was among those underwhelmed by the topog￾raphy: ‘I cannot say . . . it inspired us with awe commensurate White Mountain, Heaven Lake 127
with the mystery . . . attached to it . . . it was not the snow-clad 
monarch we had expected to see.’19
The plant life, though, was extraordinary: creeping rhodo￾dendrons, bilberries, moss and open grasslands formed a 
gorgeous patchwork of russet, crimson, umber, rust, pale gold 
and bronze in the afternoon sunshine.20 Despite this profusion, 
there was nothing you could really call a soil – just slowly weath￾ering pumice. The only living trees were stunted and twisted, 
yet along the roadside we saw many thick trunks poking out of 
the pumice. We realised these were all that remained of a verdant 
forest extinguished and entombed by the Millennium Eruption. 
A little excavation around the stems revealed intact bark – it was 
hard to believe these trees were so old. I tried to imagine the 
forest that had once thrived here, and thought how gradual the 
pace of ecological recovery has been compared with what I had 
seen on tropical volcanoes, where as soon as it rains, rampant 
vegetation rebounds. Even with the passage of a thousand years, 
this place looked nothing like it must have done before the 
eruption.
Ecologists have learned a lot about how life reboots after 
major disturbances by studying developments after large 
volcanic eruptions, which instantly sterilise a landscape. 
Recovery turns out to be a complex process dependent on inter￾woven aspects of climate, ecology and landscape, as well as 
chance events. One survival lesson from the 1980 eruption of 
Mount St Helens in Washington state, U.S.A., was that being 
small was good. Burrowing animals fared best of all, and gophers 
were the star regenerators. Not only did they withstand the 
violent pyroclastic blasts below ground, their industrious 
tunnelling mixed buried soil and pumice and ash, bringing 
nutrients, seeds and spores back to the surface. But a thick layer 
of pumice does more than displace fl ora and fauna; it changes 
the shape of the land, and the way water runs off it. Lakes, rivers, 128 Mountains of Fire
and coastal waters can all be choked by the quantities of sedi￾ment mobilised during heavy rains.21
Re-establishment of the ecology of Krakatau in Indonesia 
after its 1883 eruption was also rapid, thanks to seabirds and 
ocean currents and the biodiverse shores of Java and Sumatra. 
Within a year, a solitary spider had found its way to the remnants 
of the island volcano, and within a decade, dozens of plant 
species were re-established. Twenty-fi ve years later, 200 animal 
species, mostly insects, were thriving, and as time went on, the 
forest matured.22
In the case of Paektu, several variables hindered recovery. 
First, the great thickness of pumice permanently sealed the 
seedbanks in the original soil. Second, the summer growing 
season is short, and the summit area remains under snow for 
up to eight months of the year; the annual mean temperature is 
well below freezing, and most of the precipitation falls as snow 
or hail. And third, the pumice is nutrient-poor, so porous it 
does not hold water well, and constantly shifting in the swirling 
winds that scour the mountain. This is why the summit area 
today looks more like the Arctic than the densely forested land 
that was once there.
The last section of road up to the Paektu summit negotiated 
the crater rampart by several switchbacks. We were dropped off 
at the foot of Janggun Peak, the highest point on the mountain, 
and escorted into a small building, which we realised was a cable 
car station. Our main contact, Ryu Kum-Ran, ushered us into 
one of the red cabins and we waited for the mechanism to fi re up. 
But she shortly reappeared, popped the door open and advised: 
‘It is better to walk. There are more than 2,000 steps, so it is hard, 
but there could be a power cut and we cannot guarantee your 
life in the gondola.’ This was persuasive, though the zigzagging 
aerial staircase of hefty granite treads on scaff olding anchored 
in the steep inner caldera wall also proved intimidating where White Mountain, Heaven Lake 129
the handrails had broken or where steps had slipped through the 
girders to crash on to the boulders below.
If the fl anks of the volcano seemed unimposing, the interior, 
forged in the convulsions of the Millennium Eruption, evoked 
all the drama of Korean history. The pinnacles and serrated 
ridge of the crater rim from this aspect were sheer-faced bluff s 
plunging into sweeps of coppery, slabby stone and brown and 
grey scree. The streaks of colour were softly refl ected in Lake 
Chon – Heaven Lake – a stunning counterpoint to the rucked, 
scarred, sculpted cliff s and raw rock strata. Even Francis 
Younghusband had been impressed:
At last we reached the saddle, and then, instead of the pano￾rama we had expected, we looked down in astonishment on a 
most beautiful lake . . . held in on every side by rugged precip￾itous cliff s . . . Like a sapphire in a setting of rock.
We passed groups of uniformed Korean People’s Army soldiers 
on their way up, their expressions turning from exhaustion to 
curiosity at the sight of us. Reaching the lake shore, following 
the cue from our Korean colleagues, we removed shoes, rolled 
up trousers and stepped into the limpid, icy water in a gesture 
of reverence to the sacred ground and the sansin.
Our hosts then led us through a doorway in a bunker housing 
an austere outpost of the Volcano Institute. Remarkably, the 
small observatory is manned year-round – the dedicated crew 
of four is cut off for months through the long, harsh winter. 
They might as well have been in Antarctica. A slogan painted on 
the wall read: ‘Great Leader Kim Il Sung lives together with us’, 
and I couldn’t help thinking, as we sat in a circle on the fl oor to 
eat packed lunches, so does the magma, probably not so far down. 
The observatory chief outlined the monitoring eff ort, which 
included regular boat trips across the lake to sample hot springs 130 Mountains of Fire
and underwater fumaroles for chemical analysis. ‘When the lake 
freezes over,’ he explained, ‘we go on foot.’
Back at the crater rim, cloud was swirling around its crags 
and crowns. The sun was low and turning the grasslands on the 
serried slopes to a burnished copper. In the next days, we visited 
more sites of cultural interest, another of the observatories, and 
discussed what we had learned from each other. We shared 
thoughts on research priorities, and James and I pledged to 
seek funding to nourish our exciting new collaboration. The key 
scientifi c questions that emerged were: is magma present 
beneath the volcano, and if so, where? And when did the 
Millennium Eruption happen?
*
It took us two years to fulfi l our promise of further coopera￾tion, and much advocacy from supporters in Washington DC, 
London and Beijing, as well as Pyongyang. Among our expe￾rienced backers was Norm Neureiter, a senior advisor to the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science. Norm, 
a formidable polyglot with a long career in industry and 
government service, had worked in the White House Offi ce 
during Nixon’s presidency as a go-between with the Soviet 
Union and China on scientifi c cooperation. This Cold War￾era experience convinced him of the possibilities for scientifi c 
collaboration to provide new room for action, even when 
offi cial diplomatic and political channels are severed. For 
instance, dialogue between individual scientists is often cred￾ited with paving the way for the meetings between presidents 
Reagan and Gorbachev that led to nuclear arms control 
between the USA and USSR. Norm helped us get funding, 
while James became a shuttle diplomat on top of his day job 
as geophysicist, travelling to Berlin, Paris and Beijing to lay the White Mountain, Heaven Lake 131
groundwork for our ambition, a two-year deployment of seis￾mometers and geological fi eldwork on Mount Paektu.
A key issue we had to grapple with was compliance with the 
strict sanctions imposed on the DPRK. Anything we might 
bring into the country – hardware, software, even the know-how 
in our heads – had to conform to stringent international regula￾tions. Some of our plans had to be shelved because the associ￾ated kit was considered ‘dual use’ – that is, it could conceivably 
be used for military purposes. In particular, we wanted to bring 
equipment for measuring electrical and magnetic fi elds in the 
earth, but some of its components could, in principle, be used 
for submarine detection. Another headache for us was money 
– too much of it (for a change). There are no international bank￾ing arrangements with the DPRK, so we had to travel around 
with anxiety-inducing quantities of euros. Finally, with all our 
export licences approved, and wads of cash in our pockets, we 
returned to Pyongyang on 1 August 2013.
This time our team included Kayla Iacovino, who then 
worked at the U.S. Geological Survey. I had supervised her PhD 
studies on Mount Erebus in Antarctica, which has some geolog￾ical affi nities with Paektu. Her expertise would bring a new 
dimension to our enterprise. On the PIINTEC side, we were 
joined, too, by the boyish and jovial Mr Kim, who proved to be 
an accomplished accordion player and sedulous escort. Kim 
Jong Il had died at the end of 2011, and now there were two 
towering bronzes at Mansu Hill, father and son side by side, and 
two portraits on the loyalty badges.
As an American citizen on her fi rst visit to DPRK, Kayla was 
informed in detail by our hosts about North Korea’s tenets of 
self-reliance and ‘military-fi rst’ policy, of the imperialist aggres￾sion of the U.S., atrocities committed during the Korean War, 
the hostile ‘war games’ going on south of the Demilitarised 
Zone, and what North Koreans regard as a U.S.-led sanctions 132 Mountains of Fire
regime aimed to cripple them economically. She handled, with 
aplomb, both the lecturing and the general air of surprise exhib￾ited by our DPRK colleagues at fi nding themselves in the 
company of an independent female scientist.
The six seismometers, which had been separately air￾freighted, arrived safely. This was a great relief, especially for 
James, but the most symbolic moment for us was to sit around 
the table with the PIINTEC director to sign the memorandum 
of understanding that laid out the rules of engagement of our 
‘Mount Paektu Geoscientifi c Group’. Spearheaded by James, it 
had been teased out through tireless negotiations and amend￾ments, and was the formal centrepiece of our ground-breaking 
alliance. A few days (and several surreal karaoke evenings) later, 
we were back in the by-now familiar surroundings of the Bae 
Gae Bong Hotel in Samjiyon.
Professor Kim joined us again, along with more than a dozen 
of his colleagues. Among them were Dr Kim Ju Song, an engi￾neering geologist, and Dr Ri Kuk Hun, a geophysicist and 
remote-sensing specialist with the State Academy of Sciences. 
Both men were in their forties.23 Dr Ri had a canny expression 
and a twinkle in his eye; his khaki shirt was invariably unbut￾toned, revealing a well-fi lled, low-necked white vest. The leaner 
and well-groomed Dr Kim looked more intent. Many of our 
Korean scientifi c colleagues smoked a great deal, indoors and 
out, and at meal times would knock back quantities of soju, a 
strong distilled spirit, and sometimes an equally potent brew 
euphemistically labelled as blueberry wine.
Kayla and I accompanied Dr Kim on hikes to his favourite 
rock exposures. He had studied the volcano for twelve years, 
spending most of his summers on the mountain, searching for 
clues to its eruptive history. It was a month earlier in the year 
than my previous trip, and Paektu’s alpine fl ora were in full 
summer bloom: delicate yellow Arctic poppies, aquilegia and White Mountain, Heaven Lake 133
many varieties of herb abounded. Since the Millennium 
Eruption, there has been limited human disturbance, and no 
grazing high up the mountain, so this is quite an untouched 
ecosystem.24 My joy at being back on the mountain was accen￾tuated by the contrast between hotel confi nement or escorted 
visits, and comparatively liberal rambling across Paektu’s blos￾soming wilderness.
The most exciting site Dr Kim showed us was located in a 
small valley cutting into the Millennium Eruption deposits. In 
general, ash and pumice beds stay in place after the dust settles, 
so the basic law of stratigraphy applies: oldest rocks at the 
bottom, youngest at the top. Here, a blanket of black pumice 
and ash was draped on a very thick bed of white pumice, which 
we had seen for miles around. Whereas the pumice fragments in 
the white unit were sharp-edged, the fi st-sized lumps of black 
pumice were rounded. These rocks were all from a single erup￾tive episode likely to have played out over a period of a few days. 
As the eruption progressed, it tapped a deeper and chemically 
distinct magma. (A very similar transition is seen in the deposits 
of the 79 CE eruption of Vesuvius.) The angular fragments 
indicate fallout from soaring ash clouds, but at some point the 
eruption column collapsed, generating ground-hugging nuées 
ardentes, whose violent and chaotic internal collisions abraded 
their rocky cargo.
Dr Kim led us next into a short tributary and pointed excit￾edly at the base of the white pumice, which lay on brown clay. 
‘You are the fi rst people I have shown this site,’ he said, proudly. 
Here was an amazing geological time capsule like the one I had 
studied in India, where the Toba ash covered ancient soil. 
Everything directly beneath the pumice had been a thriving 
habitat; now it represented a ‘kill layer’ of organic debris. 
Meanwhile, the ash immediately above off ered clues to the 
opening salvo of the eruption. I excavated carefully to unveil 134 Mountains of Fire
more of the boundary, exposing a fallen birch tree. Its trunk was 
scorched on one side and had toppled in the direction away 
from the crater. These were hallmarks of the kind of violent 
horizontal blast of hot ash that had knocked down and seared 
trees during the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens.
Over several days, we scoured numerous valleys and peaks, 
and collected more than a hundred rock samples. As we looked 
out across Heaven Lake from the crater rim one afternoon, Dr 
Kim stared into the future: ‘There are 200 million tonnes of 
water down there. What will happen to it when the next erup￾tion happens?’
Communication was easy enough through our interpreter, 
but much was still lost in translation. Owing to North Korea’s 
isolation, Dr Kim and his colleagues lacked exposure to the 
cutting edge of volcanology. They had little more than a hammer 
and a microscope to study the rocks, whereas Kayla could 
subject samples to penetrating micro-analysis with state-of-the￾art lab instruments. Beyond the technical mismatch, interna￾tional volcanology is, today, a melting pot of natural and social 
sciences, arts and humanities – it has extended well beyond the 
boundaries of the traditional observatory. Our new friends from 
Pyongyang could not attend the regular volcanological confer￾ences, or access the subject’s journals. Most tellingly, perhaps, 
they had not seen a volcano erupt. Multisensory experience of 
diff erent volcanoes doing diff erent things is what made Perret 
and Tazieff great volcanologists. I have enjoyed the opportuni￾ties to travel freely, to access the latest knowledge through the 
internet, and the academic currency of unfettered exchange of 
ideas and knowledge with colleagues around the world. I greatly 
admired Dr Kim and Dr Ri’s achievements with such limited 
resources, but I also scratched my head sometimes, for instance 
when they asked me about drilling into the magma chamber to 
relieve pressure on it and forestall eruptions. This is science White Mountain, Heaven Lake 135
fi ction for me – one of several topics of conversation that made 
me realise how science can suff er in seclusion.25
Meanwhile, James had been with the Korean seismologists 
setting up the earthquake sensors every six miles or so in a line 
outwards from Janggun Peak. There were six, each the size of a 
large paint tin and linked to a small GPS antenna and a data 
logger, all powered by a car battery and solar panel. I tagged 
along to watch one of the installations in a village called 
Sinmusong near the foot of the volcano. A small underground 
vault had been built for it in a potato fi eld by a farmhouse, whose 
steeply pitched roof testifi ed to the expectations of winter snow￾fall. James checked the instrument was working by stamping the 
ground, activated data capture and closed the vault lid. He 
wasn’t interested in any rumblings of Paektu itself, but rather in 
picking up the vibrations transmitted through the Earth from 
large worldwide earthquakes. Seismic waves alter slightly if they 
pass through regions containing liquid, so James hoped to locate 
any molten rock beneath the volcano. But the sensors had to be 
in the ground for two years to register enough events to fi ll in 
the picture – a long period of nail-biting for James. His main 
worry was that the farmers might divert the seismometer’s 
power to watch TV during power cuts.
*
I hadn’t foreseen that when we would return to collect the 
sensors two years later, we’d be in the company of a sound engi￾neer, a cinematographer and one of the world’s most invincible 
fi lmmakers, Werner Herzog. In the intervening time, I had 
started working with Werner on a documentary fi lm, Into the 
Inferno, an exploration of the nature and culture of volcanoes.
Though we were spoilt for choice with locations around the 
globe, we didn’t begin production with the low-hanging fruit; 136 Mountains of Fire
instead our fi rst location was the DPRK. No Western fi lm crew 
had ever been permitted to fi lm on Mount Paektu, so this was a 
big deal for our colleagues at PIINTEC. Ms Ryu and her 
colleague, Mr Ri, worked miracles behind the scenes to organise 
fi lm permits, transportation and interviews, and above all to win 
over concerned parties anxious about our intentions. I wanted 
to tell the story of the Millennium Eruption, and allow people to 
see James and the Korean seismologists at work, but above all I 
hoped to reveal how a volcano can embody the spirit of a people 
like a reverberation of the heart. Meanwhile, Werner’s most 
ardent wish was to fi lm schoolchildren singing in praise of the 
Paektu bloodline.
We had an even larger entourage in the Bae Gae Bong Hotel 
this time. As well as our colleagues and friends from the geologi￾cal community and PIINTEC, there were two ecologists, a 
historian from the DPRK’s Academy of Social Sciences, a 
representative of the Nature Conservation Federation, and the 
country’s best interpreter, the kindly Han Myong Il. We all gath￾ered in a meeting room, where I explained our hopes for fi lm￾ing. Werner then spoke of growing up playing amidst ruins in 
Germany after the Second World War. He talked about how, 
when Germany was divided, it became his passion to see reuni￾fi cation. When political eff orts to this end failed, he had walked 
along the borderline ‘to hold the country together’. Five years 
later, the Berlin Wall fell. Werner concluded by saying: ‘My deep 
wish is that your country will be reunited. I don’t know when it 
will happen, but I know it will.’ It was a stirring homily and did 
much to win the confi dence of our Korean friends.26
Clearing the treeline, on the way up the mountain with the 
fi lm crew, I pointed out the summit. In an echo of Francis 
Younghusband, Werner exclaimed: ‘This is not a volcano! It 
looks like somewhere in the Vosges mountains.’
‘Wait until you see the crater,’ I off ered.White Mountain, Heaven Lake 137
Twenty minutes later, we reached the lookout on the crater 
rim; even under a grey sky, he saw in all its hues and asperities 
the tumult of revolution. We fi lmed fi rst with James and his 
Korean counterpart at Janggun Peak. James was delighted to 
fi nd the seismometer still running after two winters. As we 
were set to move on, we heard a chorus of patriotic singing, 
and a marching procession of thirty or so young men in khaki 
uniforms emerged from the mist, their leader carrying a large 
red fl ag. They were not soldiers but students on a pilgrimage to 
the sacred mountain. As we fi lmed, they waved their red note￾books, threw their peaked caps into the wind, and sang heartily:
Let us go to Mount Paektu in spring and in winter!
Mount Paektu is the native home of my heart.
Back in Pyongyang, we fi lmed at a kindergarten, where all was 
purposefully choreographed. The visit culminated with a troupe 
of children on stage, singing: ‘Mount Paektu is calling us, we will 
go there . . . even in dreams . . . to victory, until the end, follow￾ing the Party!’ Werner left the DPRK a happy man.
James was satisfi ed, too. With the seismometers recovered 
and the data backed up, he had a sensational haul. Several of the 
Korean geophysicists visited us in the UK to process and inter￾pret the recordings, which proved exciting. First, they revealed 
a thickening of the Earth’s crust under the volcano, testament to 
the millions of years of magma refuelling. More importantly, 
they identifi ed a wide region containing molten rock about four 
miles down. This is the magma that might feed Paektu’s next 
eruption.27
I was focused on a diff erent problem – trying to tie down 
when, exactly, the Millennium Eruption happened. It puzzled 
me there was no historical date for it since there is no shortage 
of religious and bureaucratic records from Manchuria and 138 Mountains of Fire
Korea dating to the medieval period. Why hadn’t the zealous 
scribes of the era taken note of such a monumental event? Some 
historians had even suggested the eruption might have had 
something to do with the collapse in 926 CE of the Bohai king￾dom, which spanned a vast area around Paektu until it fell to the 
Khitan armies of the Liao dynasty.
In fact, many attempts had been made to date the eruption 
from radiocarbon measurements of the trees entombed in the 
pumice deposits on the mountain. But these were imprecise, 
spanning at least the tenth and eleventh centuries. Then, I came 
across a remarkable study led by Japanese specialist on solar 
activity, Fusa Miyake, that made me think it might be possible 
to pinpoint the date to within a matter of months.28
Radiocarbon dating uses the decay of radioactive carbon as a 
timer. Radiocarbon is made in the atmosphere as a result of the 
Earth’s continuous bombardment by cosmic rays from the sun 
and stars, and is taken up by living plants and animals. When an 
organism dies, its radiocarbon clock starts ticking down with a 
half-life of 5,730 years (meaning it takes that long for half of the 
radioactive carbon in the organism to decay). If you are starting 
to feel an inner glow, don’t worry – only one in a trillion carbon 
atoms is radioactive, so you’re safe.
You might think that all we need to do to work out the age of 
a biological sample is take a measurement of its remaining radi￾ocarbon. That would be true, except that the fl ux of cosmic rays 
changes over time, so the production of radiocarbon in the 
atmosphere is not constant. This variation needs to be accounted 
for, and introduces a good deal of uncertainty in the dates. What 
Miyake and her colleagues did was to analyse the radiocarbon, 
ring-by-ring, in a 1,859-year-old cedar tree from Japan. The 
rings could be exactly dated to the year simply by counting back 
in time – one ring, one year – starting from the year the living 
tree was sampled.White Mountain, Heaven Lake 139
As foreseen, the radiocarbon did not decrease straightfor￾wardly back in time, but the team uncovered an exceptional 
shift in amount between 774 and 775 CE. The only explanation 
was that a massive fl are from the sun briefl y bathed our planet 
in X rays, generating a pulse of radiocarbon in the atmosphere. 
A fraction of this excess ended up in the living cells of the tree. 
Subsequent observations revealed the signature of the event in 
tree rings from around the world, pinning the timing of the 
event down to the Northern Hemisphere summer of 774 CE.29
Such an intense episode of ‘space weather’ today would threaten 
much of our electronics infrastructure.
Why is all this relevant to the Millennium Eruption? Because 
some of the trees killed by the eruption would have been alive in 
774 CE, in which case they could not fail to register the solar 
spasm. All I had to do was get hold of an old-enough tree from 
Paektu’s pumice deposits and locate the radiocarbon off set – 
this would then anchor the year the tree died.
I eventually obtained the sample I needed – a larch tree, 264 
years old when it died beneath a hail of Millennium Eruption 
pumice – and sent it to a specialist facility in Zurich. We hit the 
jackpot with our fi rst round of measurements, pinpointing the 
ring formed in 774 CE. Then it was simply a question of count￾ing the succeeding rings as far as the bark. In this way, we could 
say defi nitively that the last ring, which was complete, had 
formed in the year 946 CE. That meant the tree was killed 
between the summers of 946 and 947 CE. This was a huge step 
forward, but I thought we might do better still, as fallout from 
the Millennium Eruption had been reported in ice cores from 
Greenland. While their absolute dating is questionable, they 
record a very consistent seasonal pattern in sea-salt concentra￾tion, related to winter storms in the North Atlantic. This showed 
that the volcanic dust fell in early winter, narrowing the erup￾tion window to late 946 CE.140 Mountains of Fire
We could already reject the idea that the eruption triggered 
the fall of the Bohai kingdom – that had happened twenty years 
earlier. But I wasn’t done. The trail now led back to Hiroshi 
Machida, who had been the fi rst to draw attention to the 
Millennium Eruption. He had noted an entry in the chronicles 
of a renowned Buddhist temple, Kōfukuji, near Osaka in Japan. 
Dated 3 November 946 CE, it records that ‘white ash fell gently 
like snow’. The scribes make no mention of any of Japan’s volca￾noes erupting at this time, and the temple is not far from Lake 
Suigetsu, where ash fallout from the Millennium Eruption was 
recently identifi ed in sediments. Further, the Millennium 
Eruption ash is white – it is in the name Paektu (‘white-headed’), 
referring to the deposits at the top of the mountain. Taking in all 
the evidence, and allowing twenty-four hours for ash clouds to 
reach Japan, I’ll stick my neck out and state that the Millennium 
Eruption took place on 2 November 946 CE.30
With a fi rm date, there is now one record that stands out in 
the history of the Koryŏ dynasty. It says that in the year 946 CE, 
at the palace in Kaesŏng (280 miles southwest of Paektu, and a 
stone’s throw from the Demilitarised Zone), ‘the sky rumbled 
and cried out, and there was an amnesty’. We know from more 
recent eruptions, such as those of Tambora in 1815, that volcanic 
explosions are heard over huge distances. I think this is what 
created such alarm in the Koryŏ capital, leading King Chŏngjong 
to pardon prisoners. He is also said to have established twelve 
granaries, perhaps a state response to a food crisis after blankets 
of ash ruined winter crops.
Why isn’t there more concrete information in contemporary 
Korean or Manchurian texts? One explanation, surely, is Mount 
Paektu’s remoteness from the centres of power. Even in the late 
nineteenth century, at the time of Francis Younghusband’s trav￾els, it was hard to reach, surrounded by peatlands, criss-crossed 
by swollen rivers, snowed-in during the long winter, and its thick White Mountain, Heaven Lake 141
forests inhabited by man-eating tigers. Younghusband struggled 
to obtain food supplies, sunk to his knees in bogs that were 
impassable for pack animals, ached from traversing the endless 
succession of ridges, and was bedevilled by murderous midges, 
mosquitoes and gadfl ies. Apart from rare encounters with 
ginseng farmers and hunters, who knew the mountain’s moods, 
he ‘never saw anything but the trunks of trees’.
But another reason for the chronicles’ silence on the 
Millennium Eruption could be that no eyewitnesses survived to 
tell the story, leaving only rocks, ice sheets and sentient trees to 
speak on their behalf.
*
Our collaboration with North Korean scientists continues, 
though all plans went on hold when the Coronavirus pandemic 
hit. With funding from the U.S. Government, James and our 
colleagues in Pyongyang plan an even more ambitious deploy￾ment of seismometers that will form a bigger network, with 
sensors installed across the border in China. This, James hopes, 
will help to answer a remaining question – why is Mount Paektu 
there in the fi rst place? The volcano sits far from the nearest 
tectonic plate boundary, which runs east of the Japanese islands. 
It might have something to do with subduction, but that is far 
from clear. Meanwhile, I hope to explore some of the other 
volcanoes around Paektu, about which very little is known.
I imagine some will raise an eyebrow at the thought of any 
collaboration with the DPRK. We go to Mount Paektu because 
there are scientifi c questions to tackle, some of them with a 
direct bearing on volcanic hazards and humanitarian matters. 
We go there with the goodwill and direct support of many inter￾national partners in governmental agencies, learned societies 
and NGOs – in the United States, United Kingdom and China, 142 Mountains of Fire
as well as both North and South Korea. We go there because 
we have built a unique collaboration that shows it is possible to 
work across very diff erent political systems and do good science. 
There are other kinds of international partnership and exchange 
involving the DPRK, but there is no comparable project work￾ing at our level, at least in geoscience. We go there because, 
despite the communication issues and other challenges that 
make collaboration anything but straightforward, we have built 
friendships and trust with colleagues who have a great thirst for 
knowledge. Everything we do stands or falls on the quality and 
impact of the research. We listen to each other.
The historian Ruth Rogaski has described Mount Paektu as 
‘sentient’, and there is no question its history – and future – are 
entangled with territorial claims, foundation myths and 
geomancy. The volcano’s meanings are multiple and malleable. 
But we should take a step back: these are all human constructs 
and projections – a stele thrust into the peak, imaginary drag￾ons, unfeasible sexual unions  . . . Kosima, who has visited 
Pyongyang more than fi fty times over three decades, once said 
to me:
Human entities have no impact on the volcano – if we can 
elevate our timelines and our quest and recognise science as 
something that helps understand the environment and 
ourselves, then politics just becomes a factor in the mystery 
story of our own short lives. It is not a challenge for a volcano 
to sit on a border or to be part of a divided country! It belongs 
to no one. We’re all only guests there.
She is right, of course: the physical, geographical masterpiece 
of the volcano stands aloof from all the attention it gets. But . . . 
I return to that picture of two joyously beaming men, framed as 
if being raised on a plinth from the crater into an immaculate White Mountain, Heaven Lake 143
sky. This is not feigned emotion – this reunion was miraculous, 
the actualisation of a deep desire. I recall the historian who 
accompanied us to Janggun Peak saying: ‘The dream of all 
Korean people will be realised when they can climb to this spot 
on Mount Paektu.’
There is such a thing as a geographical destiny of a country. 
One day, surely, peaceful reunifi cation will come to the Korean 
peninsula. An utterly indiff erent – but emblematic – volcano 
might just be what it takes to show the way.Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames
The great geyser at Hekla, Iceland.1
‘You cannot count how many volcanoes there are in Iceland – 
some are the size of frogs.’
– Werner Herzog2I
celand is nothing short of a volcanologist’s paradise. You 
cannot fi nd a stone in the country that wasn’t expressed 
through a volcanic orifi ce. The country is a gigantic volcano. 
One or another of the island’s innumerable craters erupts every 
few years: over 200 events are catalogued for the period since 
the Vikings (and a few Celts) settled there around the year 870 
CE, and the true fi gure may be closer to 300. With so much 
opportunity for igneous encounters, it is unsurprising that 
human fantasy and frailty are deeply engrained with experience 
of volcanic vistas and convulsions.
The island straddles Earth’s longest mountain belt, the 
Mid-Atlantic Ridge, which spans the dark ocean between the 
polar regions. The ridge is forged from a partnership of volcan￾ism and tectonics that continuously renews the Earth’s crust.3
In the North Atlantic, it divides the Eurasian and North 
American plates, which move apart two centimetres per year, 
creating a rent that is fi lled in by eruptions of lava along the 
sea fl oor. Worldwide, the new seabed created every year by this 
process of ‘sea-fl oor spreading’ adds up to an area about the size 
of Central Park in New York City. The Earth isn’t expanding, so 
a comparable amount of ocean plate is consumed at subduction 
zones like the one off shore from Chile.
Beneath Iceland, the volcanism is supercharged by the melt 
expressed from a hot current of solid rock, known as a mantle 
plume, that rises slowly through the Earth.4
 Instead of lying one 
mile below the waves, as does much of the ocean ridge, Iceland’s 
peaks reach as far above sea level. The result is an exposed 148 Mountains of Fire
tectonic plate boundary revealing parallel and cross-cutting 
fault escarpments, lava plains and countless volcanoes.
Icelandic volcanism achieved global notoriety in 2010 with 
the explosions of Eyjafjallajökull in the country’s south. The 
intermingling of red-hot magma and glacial meltwater gener￾ated uncommonly violent blasts that shattered lava into powder. 
The ensuing clouds of fl oury dust headed for European airspace. 
Ever since a British Airways jumbo jet lost power in all four 
engines as it fl ew through an ash cloud over Java in 1982, the 
International Civil Aviation Organization has been braced for 
similar encounters.5
 It established nine Volcanic Ash Advisory 
Centres, hosted by national weather services around the world 
to monitor and advise on the threat.6
 All the same, the 
Eyjafjallajökull eruption caused global disruption to fl ights with 
economic losses counted in the billions of dollars.7
While this ‘ashpocalypse’ raised awareness of the airborne 
menace of explosive eruptions, we should take note of a more 
insidious peril of Icelandic volcanoes: lava fl oods. They armour 
the cone of a volcano but then ooze into lowlands, ravaging vast 
areas of farmland and pasture, infi lling the nooks and crannies 
of a landscape like a gigantic road resurfacing project gone 
horribly wrong.8
 While explosive eruptions can begin abruptly 
and end in hours, giving little time to react, lava fl ows and fl oods 
tend to be more staggered and prolonged aff airs, impacting fi rst 
one locale, then another. This has elicited a variety of invoca￾tions and confrontations intended to stem or divert lava, or even 
to stop it bursting out of the Earth in the fi rst place. The 
outcomes, though, have not always desirable.
Lava fl ows seldom kill people directly – they don’t move at 
the speeds of nuées ardentes, and you’d have to be incredibly 
stubborn or unlucky for one to outrun you.9
 But they can pump 
phenomenal quantities of gases into the air, which can scorch 
and poison a much wider area with acid rain and fl uorine (a Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 149
little of this in your toothpaste is benefi cial, but it is extremely 
toxic at high levels). This can despoil productive land, and it is 
in this way that lava eruptions have claimed far more lives 
through famine and disease than any explosive eruption in 
Iceland. More than that, the sulphur emissions from the largest 
Icelandic lava fl oods in history have cooled climate and trig￾gered food shortages across the Northern Hemisphere in much 
the same way that Mount Tambora did in 1816, despite being 
very diff erent kinds of eruption.10
The best understood example of a lava fl ood in Iceland is 
the Laki eruption. Its noxious emissions of gas and ash and 
the great tongues of lava that fl owed into the lowlands devas￾tated the food economy of southern Iceland. A fi fth of the 
country’s population perished from malnourishment and 
disease during what Icelanders refer to as the ‘haze famine’.11
The eruption persisted for months, and the haze became a 
‘universal fog’ that spread over Europe and beyond in the 
summer of 1783. The statesman and polymath, Benjamin 
Franklin, attributed the severe European winter that followed 
to the airborne dust, while his contemporary, Erasmus 
Darwin (Charles’s grandfather), thought it responsible for an 
‘epidemic cough’.12
Iceland’s volcanoes were known to the outside world long 
before Eyjafjallajökull and Laki exported their effl uvium. For 
centuries, Europe had been importing sulphur, mined from the 
country’s geothermal spots. It was initially sought out for medic￾inal purposes, but its use in the manufacture of gunpowder 
made it increasingly popular.13 Oddly enough, those dispatched 
by the fi rearms that made use of this explosive would, according 
to medieval theologians, have ended up in Iceland – in death 
that is – within one of its most active volcanoes, Hekla. Situated 
north of Eyja fjallajökull, it was regarded as the authentic loca￾tion of purgatory.14150 Mountains of Fire
When Hekla itself reawakened on 2 September 1845, after a 
seventy-seven-year slumber, news spread to Europe with the 
ash clouds feathering the sky. In the Orkney islands, north of 
Scotland, a correspondent wrote of the people’s astonishment at 
‘a great fall of dust’. A nuisance for those who’d hung out the 
laundry, but terrifying for the fi shermen, who refused to go to 
sea the next day.15 Near the volcano, the ashfall was so thick and 
the sky so black that farm workers lost their way home. That 
night, the mountain was lit with pillars of fi re, and glowing lava 
spilled down its west fl ank from a string of apertures on the 
summit crest. Lava overran the water supplies of several farms, 
while more ash and clinker fell from the billowing plume, turn￾ing good pasture into a reeking mass of grit, acid and bleached 
grass. To make matters worse, the volcanic fallout carried so 
much fl uorine that thousands of farm animals were poisoned.16
Since Iceland was a Danish dependency, the Hekla eruption 
caught the attention of leaders in Denmark. Acceding to the 
throne in 1839, King Christian VIII may qualify as the most 
ardent rock-hound of a ruler ever. He had a superb collection of 
minerals, knew Vesuvius well from his visits with the scientist 
Humphry Davy, and hosted scientifi c conferences. So it is less 
of a surprise that he assembled a small team of experts to inves￾tigate the Icelandic aff air – this may even count as the fi rst inter￾national scientifi c response to a volcanic eruption. The head of 
the expedition was the German geologist Sarto rius von 
Waltershausen, who had recently fi nished a lengthy study of 
Mount Etna in Sicily yielding the fi rst detailed geological map 
of a volcano.17 The most famed scientist in the party, though, 
was his compatriot and celebrated chemist, Robert Bunsen. 
While better known for his research on gases and spectroscopy, 
he, too, had a passion for rocks.18
A fact-fi nding mission suited Bunsen well. He was an almost 
militant empiricist with a contempt for hypothesising, and was Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 151
well prepared to undertake volcano fi eldwork, since a gas chem￾ist’s profession then was beset with occupational hazards. He 
had only just escaped death by cyanide poisoning a year before 
while measuring effl uent from a blast furnace in Derbyshire, 
England.19 For Bunsen, volcanoes were just chemical engineer￾ing at a grander scale.
Before leaving for Iceland on a naval brig, Bunsen prepared 
a mobile fi eld laboratory, taking care to ruggedise all his appa￾ratus for rough travel and hostile conditions.20 Arriving in 
Reykjavik, the fi rst problem was to fi nd good horses, since 
many were malnourished owing to burial of meadowlands 
beneath Hekla’s lava and ash. But after two weeks, the party of 
scientists, guides and horses set off , crossing ‘frightful lava 
fl ows, piled up in the wildest shapes, sometimes in clumps as 
high as a house, sometimes in masses . . . like cold, stiff dough, 
covered with countless wrinkles, and shot through with many 
fi ssures and hollows’. They fi rst visited the mud volcanoes and 
sulphur mines of Krýsu vík before continuing to the northern 
side of Hekla, where they camped for ten days. Braving dust 
storms, treacherous cliff s and a thick, poisonous fog, Bunsen 
twice scrambled over cooling lava fl ows to the top of the glacier 
at the volcano’s summit, the ice steaming under a blanket of 
ash. From there, he clambered down into the newly excavated 
crater to sample and experiment on fumaroles amidst heaps of 
fresh ejecta.
Bunsen’s fi ndings from his mission are impressive, including 
an explanation for geysers, a forerunner of the classifi cation of 
lavas by silica content that remains the standard today, and 
recognition that some volcanic rocks are a blend of diff erent 
magmas, like two diff erently coloured paints stirred together.21
The lavas Bunsen encountered were basalts – their very high 
temperatures make them runny like honey or tar. However the 
fl ow top cools quickly and becomes as sluggish as peanut butter, 152 Mountains of Fire
forming rucks and folds at the surface as the movement contin￾ues.22 This forms a crust that insulates the lava beneath, allow￾ing it to overrun a much wider area than it might otherwise.23
When the last gasp of magma drains away, tunnels remain.
Such tubes, or ‘pyroducts’ (your challenge: try to use that 
word in conversation today), off er unique underground experi￾ences. They can be accessed where roof sections have collapsed, 
creating cavities. It was through one such chink that I climbed 
down into Iceland’s most spectacular and intriguing lava cave 
system, Surtshellir. On this subterranean adventure, I was in the 
company of farmer and local historian Árni Stefánsson24 and 
Michael Dunn, founder of 4th Planet Logistics, a company 
looking to facilitate human settlement of the solar system. 
According to the company website, their mission is to ‘create 
and test habitats from naturally occurring terrestrial lava tubes 
analogous to the Moon and Mars in order to allow humans to 
fi nd a new home in the future’. Michael told me he’d travelled to 
all but one of the countries of the world. Hard to trump, but it 
turned out I’d been to the only one not on his list: the Democratic 
People’s Republic of Korea.
Surtshellir lies within the Hallmunda rhraun plain in western 
Iceland. It was around the turn of the tenth century when the 
torrents of lava spewed from the foot of a vast volcanic table 
mountain stretching to the Langjökull ice cap, setting the stage 
for the Vikings’ fi rst serious magmatic encounter. A wide tract 
of good pasturage and fertile lowlands was obliterated. Five 
farms in the area recorded in Landnámabók, Iceland’s medieval 
equivalent of the Domesday Book, are never mentioned again. 
Most likely they were swallowed up by the pitiless lava. If so, it 
is unlikely they will ever be unearthed from their basalt sepul￾chre.25 Today, the hummocky plain is brightened with miniature 
clumps of crimson-leaved blueberries, and dressed with the 
same pale mint-green plush of moss that covers much of the Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 153
lava terrain of Iceland. Like a memory foam, it invites you to lie 
down and leave your impression on the landscape.
The lava tunnel entrance was hidden from view until we were 
more or less on top of it – its roof here was an arch of thick 
sheets of basalt. As we scrambled down a jumble of prismatic 
blocks into the gloomy vault, we found ourselves within a 
subway-sized passage. Michael explained his interest in the site: 
‘Lava tubes have all kinds of advantages for an extra-terrestrial 
home: you’ve got a ready-made primary structural shell that 
protects from cosmic radiation and meteorite strikes.’ I was 
wondering how you would make them airtight, but he was on to 
that, and explained how habitable enclosures could be made by 
sealing the caves with infl atable membranes. He was evidently 
expecting Homo sapiens to become cavemen again.26 He contin￾ued: ‘We’ve got a great collaboration here with Árni; we’ll test 
design concepts in this tube, just like the Apollo astronauts came 
to Iceland to experience something like lunar geology before 
leaving Earth.’27
Shining a torch around the underground cavity, Árni added, 
‘My great uncle, who lived on the nearby farm, found this exten￾sion to Surtshellir a century ago. The cave was decorated with 
beautiful lava stalactites – “lava straws”, we call them. But sadly, 
nearly everything has been destroyed – look.’ He directed his 
light at the ceiling, revealing a stucco of remnant stumps of lava 
‘icicles’. ‘It was like gold fever – people took the straws and drip￾stones as souvenirs. That’s why we use this cave for the Mars 
project – it’s too late to protect it.’
Just as visitors in the modern era, whether tourist, volcanolo￾gist or space coloniser, are drawn to this cave, so too were the 
Vikings, more than a thousand years ago. But what prompted 
them seems to have much more to do with the underworld giant 
they saw as responsible for the eruption that formed it. The 
archaeologist who found their traces, Kevin Smith, reckons the 154 Mountains of Fire
cataclysm ‘must have scared the bejesus out of people’, and they 
wanted to make sure nothing like it ever happened again.28
Smith had known of Surtshellir for years.29 A boat-shaped 
drystone enclosure of Viking style, said to have been an outlaws’ 
hideout, had been discovered deep inside the tunnel. But what 
prompted him to survey the site urgently were reports that tour￾ists were taking animal bones from a pile in the cave. In 2001, he 
salvaged the leftovers with Icelandic colleagues, and soon 
confi rmed their Viking age. It was what he didn’t fi nd that led 
him to question the site’s accepted interpretation. If rustlers or 
bandits had lived in the tunnel, they would have needed heat, 
light, water, some kind of dormitory, a latrine; all of which 
should have left residues: ash, soot, wax, bedding, nightsoil. The 
team returned in 2013, and this time recovered a veneer of soil 
on the cave fl oor. They found none of the evidence they would 
have expected had the caves been occupied; instead, the signs 
spoke of the occult.
Firstly, there were abundant chips of jasper used as fi re-start￾ers. Their chemical composition could be traced to distant 
Icelandic sources of the rock: the visitors to the cave had trav￾elled from afar. Other fi nds were sourced from even more 
distant parts of the Viking realm – glass beads from Norway, 
and fl ecks of orpiment (an arsenic ore) from the borderlands of 
Iran and Turkey.30 These were prestige materials that would 
have belonged to the pillars, not pillagers, of Icelandic society.
Radiocarbon dates show that the lava tunnel was entered 
as soon as it had cooled suffi ciently, around 920 CE, and that 
it was used up to the fi rst decade or two after Iceland’s offi cial 
conversion to Christianity in 999/1000 CE. This coincides 
strikingly with the year 1016, when pagan rituals were banned 
by law. In the centre of the boat structure, Smith and his team 
found a hearth with charred bones. On top of the fi re ash 
were four small lead objects, including a cross. Since lead Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 155
melts in a fi re, they must have been placed after the last 
embers had extinguished.
Smith was now sure the cave wasn’t an outlaws’ refuge. For 
starters, Icelandic brigands and desperados had short life 
expectancies – they were usually hunted down in a matter of 
years. The new evidence was clear – the cave had been in use 
for a century before someone placed a Christian symbol on 
the fi re pit. Further clues were found in the style of cut marks 
on the bones, and evidence for butchery in early spring (rather 
than the usual timing in autumn). These suggested sacrifi cial 
slaughter.
Then Smith realised the answer had been staring him in the 
face all along: the cave’s name, Surtshellir. Surt’s cave. Surt was 
a primeval giant who smote the goddess of fertility and agricul￾ture, Frey, with a sword of fi re before engulfi ng the world in 
fl ames. In another medieval source, Surt commanded hypogean 
fi re creatures to rouse volcanoes. Signifi cantly, he is only referred 
to in Icelandic literature: he is a unique character born of the 
Viking colonists’ volcanic experiences, not a Germanic or 
Scandinavian import.31 The earliest reference to Surtshellir, 
found in Landnámabók, relates a visit by a chieftain’s son, 
Thorvaldur ‘the hollow-throat’, who travelled across Iceland’s 
desert interior to chant a poem dedicated to Surt.
It seems clear now that the reason the Vikings entered the 
cave was to propitiate Surt, the personifi cation of the lava fl oods 
that had engulfed the lowlands, and the murderer of Frey on 
whom harvests and prosperity depended. The animals were 
killed and dismembered at the cave entrance, and the bones 
were then carried to the liminal space by the hearth, where they 
were cremated to placate Surt and curb his destructive impulses. 
Generations of gatekeepers and offi ciators kept the ritual alive 
until paganism was forbidden.32 Strikingly, no residues or arte￾facts from the cave date between the late eleventh and late 156 Mountains of Fire
seventeenth centuries, when the fi rst explorers entered. It is as if 
people intentionally forgot Surt’s address.
*
As if further to affi rm their connection to the lively earth, 
Iceland’s colonists established their parliament and court, the 
Althing, right on the tectonic plate boundary at Thingvellir 
(which translates as ‘assembly fi elds’). Chieftains from across 
the country fi rst gathered there in June 930 CE, a practice that 
continued in various guises until 1798. Sentences were handed 
out from the Law Rock at the foot of a prominent escarpment 
in the basaltic rock. Close by were pools where adulterers were 
drowned. Today, it is tourists that fl ock to Thingvellir National 
Park, titillated by the notion of planting one foot in America and 
the other in Europe (tectonically speaking).
Within a decade of establishing the Althing, an even more 
dramatic lava fl ood than that which moulded Surt’s cave 
occurred in southern Iceland at Eldgjá (the Fire Gorge). Since 
the rituals at Surtshellir were likely underway by then, it seems 
that Surt had either found the burned off erings of mutilated 
sheep defi cient, or he had got bored and relocated. Fed from a 
magma reservoir beneath Katla volcano (Eyjafjallajökull’s 
larger, icier neighbour), basaltic lava spurted from multiple 
craters along a canyon-like fi ssure fi fty miles long. It then spread 
out, like molasses, across the land, covering an area half the size 
of London.33 As well as the immense carpet of clinkery lava, an 
even wider region was blanketed in frothy cinders that fell from 
ash clouds. Today, the landscape still leaks: water spills from the 
hillsides and cliff s through numberless clefts and spouts.
There are no direct historical references to the eruption. One 
of the fi rst settlers in the area, Ásbjǫrn Reyrketilsson, was said to 
have dedicated part of the territory to the god Thor, naming it Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 157
‘Thor’s wood’. This suggests it was once a fertile, forested area, 
but in later medieval texts the area is described as a ‘wasteland’, 
implying a lasting transformation of the landscape. The best 
estimate for the year of the eruption was 934 CE, based on the 
approximate timescale of Greenland ice cores that contained 
fallout from Eldgjá. But the imprecise date made it tricky to 
identify any worldwide impacts. Then, by a stroke of luck, I 
managed to date it precisely.34 Though I never expected it, the 
key was fi xing the date of another eruption, of a volcano halfway 
around the world; once again I found myself face to face with 
Mount Paektu’s Millennium Eruption. Or at least the record 
of its fallout in a Greenland ice core, which assigned the year 
946 CE to that layer. Along with sporadic volcanic fallout, the 
ice cores also preserve a seasonal pattern of sea spray carried 
inland by winter storms. By counting how many rises and falls 
in sea salt there were between the Millennium Eruption and 
Eldgjá signals, I could tell the Icelandic eruption had fi red up 
by the spring of 939 CE. What’s more, the sulphur trace in the 
ice indicated the eruption may have persisted up to the fall of 
940 CE. Some of the earliest settlers on Iceland, brought there 
as children, probably lived to witness the Fire Gorge afl ame.
The destruction of prime upland grazing and lowland agri￾culture by lava and ash must have been disastrous enough. But 
greater distress and harm would have resulted from a more 
pernicious emission: the gases released into the atmosphere 
from the magma, including prodigious amounts of sulphur 
dioxide.35 Acid rain likely corrupted a wide area of productive 
land, killing livestock and leading to widespread hunger and 
disease. Survivors would have fl ed the affl icted region in desper￾ate hope of fi nding untainted food. While direct evidence of this 
is lacking in Iceland, further afi eld there are numerous entries in 
medieval chronicles that tally with the expected long-range 
impacts of Eldgjá’s sulphur emissions. With the earlier date of 158 Mountains of Fire
934 CE, none of these indications could be attributed to the 
eruption, but with the new fi rm timing of 939 CE, cause and 
eff ect snapped into place.
One of the most striking hints was a testimony in the Chronicon 
Scotorum, an Irish monastic chronicle of events and aff airs from 
the earliest times up to the year 1135. Instead of the usual report￾age – a battle here, a plague or the death of a king there – the 
entry for 939 CE begins: ‘The sun was of the colour of blood 
from the beginning of one day to the middle of the following 
day.’ Similar sightings of ruddy sunlight were recorded at an 
abbey near Rome, and another east of Paderborn in Germany. 
Almost certainly, these widespread accounts point to the lofty 
passage of Eldgjá’s sulphurous dust veil. Such celestial marvels, 
including sightings of fi reballs in the sky, had biblical connota￾tions. They were regarded as dire portents, and faithfully 
recorded. A dark moon seen in eclipse is another sign of volcanic 
dust in the stratosphere. It tickles me to think that the monks 
who kept these annals could never have imagined how valuable 
their observations would be for those of us studying the impacts 
of volcanoes on climate and society a thousand years later.36
I wondered next if the dust might have chilled the globe. I 
turned to my tree-ring colleagues for help here, as there was no 
such thing as a medieval thermometer. The idea that tree-rings 
can tell us about past climate goes back to the 1940s, but the 
science of ‘dendroclimatology’ has developed tremendously over 
the past decade. The widths of individual rings, as well as their 
density variations and cell structure, can reveal much about 
growing season temperatures and rainfall. Quantitative records 
are built with reference to modern times, when we can measure 
the rings and compare them with reliable climate observations 
from satellites, weather stations and models. Importantly, tree￾rings can be dated precisely to the year; so tracing your fi nger 200 
rings from the edge of a tree sampled today takes you precisely Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 159
two centuries back in time. The oldest living tree is a bristlecone 
pine in the White Mountains along the California–Nevada 
border. It germinated two centuries before the Great Pyramid of 
Giza was built. Dead trees that have been preserved in peat bogs, 
or simply exposed on the ground for centuries or even millennia, 
can also be fi tted into a precise chronological framework, push￾ing back some tree-ring records to the end of the last Ice Age.37
When we looked at the tree-ring data for the mid-tenth 
century CE, we found a clear signal of stunted growth across 
Central Europe, Scandinavia, the Canadian Rockies, Alaska 
and Central Asia for the year 940 CE, during the Eldgjá erup￾tion. It added up to one of the coldest Northern Hemisphere 
summers of the last 2,000 years. Turning back to the chronicles, 
there was indeed plenty of evidence for a time of hunger and 
famine across the world. For instance, accounts from Sicily tell 
of a food crisis and abandonments of fortresses and country￾side, while a Lombard historian mentions devastating food 
shortages in Italy. Further accounts of starvation are found in 
sources from France, Switzerland, Germany, Iraq, the Maghreb 
and China. Collectively, many thousands of lives may have been 
lost, and though human factors and failures usually go a long 
way towards explaining famine, the sulphur unbound from the 
Earth by Eldgjá likely had a hand, too, in these calamities.
But what still seemed odd to me was that in Iceland itself, it 
appeared that nothing was written of such an exceptional 
episode – the eff ects had to have been felt over much of the 
country. I then came across a text in the Poetic Edda, also known 
as the Codex Regius, Iceland’s most important medieval manu￾script. The fi rst poem in the collection, Vǫluspá, sees the god 
Odin wake an ancient seeress from the dead. She recounts the 
history of the world before foretelling the fate of the gods and 
giants. When I read the following lines portraying Ragnarök, the 
Nordic version of the end times, my jaw dropped:160 Mountains of Fire
Comes Surt from the South with the singer-of-twigs,
. . .
’Neath sea the land sinketh, the sun dimmeth,
from the heavens fall the fair bright stars
gusheth forth steam and gutting fi re,
to the very heaven soar the hurtling fl ames.
. . .
will grow swart the sunshine in summers thereafter,
the weather, woe-bringing: do ye wit more, or how?38
Could they describe volcanic fi re fountains blasting skywards 
while palls of ash obscure the sun and heavenly bodies? We 
already know what Surt can do – and ‘singer-of-twigs’, though 
it sounds rather genial, refers to ‘fi re’. The link between volcanic 
dust veils and cool summers is well understood, so the refer￾ence to woeful weather is also striking. Do these lines connect 
volcanoes and climate eight centuries before Benjamin 
Franklin’s perceptive remarks? The poem also tells of ‘drops of 
poison’ coming through roofs, which is reminiscent of acid rain 
falling from a volcanic cloud. Everything here speaks to me, 
with almost eyewitness clarity, of the apocalyptic scale of the 
Eldgjá eruption – this verse is not describing run-of-the-mill 
volcanic activity.
The seeress ends by explaining that a ‘great godhead’ comes 
down to govern all after the dust settles. This is highly sugges￾tive of the Christianisation already underway in Iceland at the 
time of the eruption. Is it possible that the poem set out purpose￾fully to rekindle harrowing memories of a volcanic haze famine 
to loosen the hold of paganism? If so, a volcano may have helped 
convert a people to Christianity.
*Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 161
Volcanoes don’t observe lockdowns – on the contrary, they 
continued to unlock their potency throughout the Covid-19 
pandemic. This meant that many of my colleagues in observat￾ories had to fi gure out how to continue monitoring and hazard 
assessment from home. The episode that had me transfi xed 
during the UK’s third national lockdown was an eruption near 
Reykjavik. It began on 19 March 2021 in the southern Reykjanes 
peninsula, where the volcanoes had slept since the end of the 
last Ice Age, around 12,000 years ago.39 Even the northern half 
of the peninsula had not been resurfaced by lava since 1240. 
Thanks to live internet streaming, I tuned in frequently to follow 
the creation of the new volcano, named Fagradalsfjall. In the 
fi rst week, magma boiled and spattered into a snowy sky from 
an elfi n black chimney while vividly sanguine lava oozed 
downslope. So petite was the tableau, I imagined relocating it to 
my garden at home (though it might have menaced next door’s 
gazebo).
To my mind, this eruption off ered a unique opportunity to 
monitor gas emissions that would be the closest you could feasi￾bly get to a mid-ocean-ridge volcano. It is extremely challenging 
to measure volcanic fl uids on the deep sea fl oor, for understand￾able reasons, but here was a proxy on land, less than an hour’s 
drive from the Icelandic capital. Seeing people in their hundreds 
gathered at the spectacle – among them chefs sizzling hot dogs 
on hot lava, troubadours, and partners taking marriage vows – it 
was evidently easy to reach the site (often half the battle of fi eld￾work). Over the next three months, I worked with the University 
of Iceland and the Icelandic Meteorological Offi ce to support 
gas-monitoring eff orts while still at home in the UK. They sent 
me photos and data from Fagradalsfj all so I could work out the 
gas composition. I could almost smell the sulphur!
Of course, doing this in my loft offi ce was a poor substitute 
for being there but I was still thrilled to feel part of the action 162 Mountains of Fire
again after such a long hiatus. When Iceland was designated a 
‘green list’ country for travel, I took my chance. Even as a 
volcanologist, it is not every day you get to see lava fl ooding the 
landscape, and I was itching to see an eruption like Eldgjá’s, 
albeit a scaled-down version.
I arrived on the summer solstice. The sun set after midnight 
and rose three hours later, though hidden behind a low cloud 
deck. At this time, there was no community transmission of 
Covid-19 in Iceland and there were very few restrictions. I was 
collected mid-morning by colleagues from the Icelandic 
Meteorological Offi ce and University of Iceland. Climbing into 
their Land Rover, I couldn’t help grinning and blabbering owing 
to the frisson of being in an enclosed space with people after 
such an extended period of isolation.
Our fi rst undertaking was to measure the fl ux of sulphur 
dioxide coming from the volcano. The equipment was the same 
as that my group had developed twenty years earlier at Masaya 
volcano in Nicaragua – an ultraviolet spectrometer pointing up 
at the sky and recording continuously, and a GPS unit tracking 
position as we drove along a quiet road skirting the shore of the 
pretty lake Kleifarvatn, searching for the plume. When my nose 
caught the fi rst whiff of sulphur I blurted out, ‘That must be it!’ 
One of the volcanologists, Melissa, corrected me: ‘No, that’s the 
fumaroles at Krýsuvík, just over there.’ She pointed to clouds of 
steam emanating from the foot of a nearby ridge. I remembered 
this was where Robert Bunsen had measured volcanic gases 175 
years earlier. He and von Waltershausen had camped beside a 
bellowing steam vent that served as both bath and kitchen range, 
as well as yielding valuable samples.40 Once again, I had the 
strong sense of following in the footsteps of volcanology’s 
trailblazers.
After several runs back and forth beneath the plume and 
alongside the lake, we continued to the new eruption site not far Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 163
away. A rough track led to a crest overlooking the wilderness of 
newborn lava. Stepping out of the Land Rover, I was beaten 
back by a bitter and drizzly wind coming straight off the North 
Atlantic. It was clear at once I was underdressed, and I whined 
that the forecast had looked favourable. ‘This is good weather,’ 
my local accomplices replied.
We couldn’t get close to the erupting vent owing to the great 
apron of fresh lava spread around it, but we found a line of sight 
to the glowing magma, which was spilling from a breach in the 
cone to feed a zigzagging lava fl ow. The moving lava disap￾peared into hidden pools and tubes, insulating it and enabling it 
to engulf all the low ground as far as I could see. This was an 
uninhabited area, but I could imagine the economic catastrophe 
if instead farmland and pasture were being consumed beneath 
the burning rock.
The surface was mottled and textured with blooms of sulphur 
and other minerals, and brick-red patches of ‘a’ā lava in a grey 
sea of the smoother variety known as pāhoehoe. Both sorts get 
their names from Hawai‘i. They are easy to distinguish and 
present diff erent challenges for the hiker – crossing a solidifi ed 
pāhoehoe lava is a bit like walking on a greenhouse roof, while 
the loose clinker of ‘a’ā is perilously unstable. How such diff er￾ent fabrics arise from the same molten stuff remains only partly 
understood.
We were aiming to measure gases with an infrared spectrom￾eter, just as I had on Montserrat. Once the equipment was set 
up, one of the geochemists, Andri, said, ‘Watch the lava in the 
crater.’ After a few minutes, I noticed the level rising and magma 
surging into the channel. ‘It has been doing this for a month and 
a half,’ he continued, ‘but for the fi rst weeks it was much more 
spectacular with a pulsing lava fountain. It was so high, we could 
see it from Reykjavik.’ Indeed, I had seen photographs taken 
from the capital with the cathedral’s white steeple looming in 164 Mountains of Fire
the foreground and a similarly shaped red spire of lava shooting 
above distant hills. It drove home the proximity of the volcano 
to the capital city, and oddly juxtaposed heavenly and infernal 
emblems. Andri added: ‘What’s more remarkable is the gas 
composition changes rhythmically with the fountaining episodes. 
There may be a cavity under the cone that periodically fi lls with 
bubbly magma, empties like a geyser and refi lls. It’s as if the 
volcano is breathing.’41
After measuring for an hour, we packed up and drove down 
a saddle in the ridge until the track expired in a wall of fresh 
lava. ‘This should warm you up – it looks like you need it,’ Andri 
said, grinning. ‘We used to drive this way to get near the crater, 
but now it is impossible’. I jumped out and walked right up to 
bulbous lobes of silver-grey basalt that had recently congealed 
against a stony incline. The lava was about chest-high and 
mostly solidifi ed, but I still felt the fi erce radiance from fi ery 
gleams within fractures in the rocky bulk. A chorus of clinks 
rang out as razor-thin shards of volcanic glass splintered off the 
fl ow’s cooling and wrinkling rind, here resembling tree bark, 
there a slop of entrails. The distant slopes and peaks shape￾shifted in heat shimmer above the fresh igneous mass.
We returned to collect another set of data a few days later, 
joined this time by Gro Pedersen, a geologist leading the eff ort 
to survey the expanding tract of lava. Her work is critical to 
identifying where the fl ow might head next. Gro and her team 
were mainly working with aerial photographs, but she also 
needed to take survey points with GPS on the ground.42 Now 
and then a gas monitor clipped to her backpack beeped: ‘That’s 
carbon monoxide coming off the soil and vegetation cooking 
under the lava,’ she explained. ‘It’s odourless but poisonous, so 
I have to carry this alarm.’ As we skirted the edge of the fl ow, 
walking upslope, Gro summarised how the lava had initially 
been confi ned in one valley, but had now poured into several Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 165
others in the corrugated terrain. Lately, the output of lava had 
almost doubled to ten cubic metres per second, which would fi ll 
four average houses in a minute.
After half an hour, we rounded the crest over which the lava 
had spilled into the valley, and came face to face with a battle 
– not quite Ragnarök, but an echo of it perhaps. The operators 
of an excavator and bulldozer were pushing up earthen barri￾ers to hem in the lava and prevent it from spouting over the 
other side of the ridge, against which it was lapping. Gro 
pointed behind us towards the sea: ‘If it overfl ows here, then 
the road to Grindavík will be cut.’ Looking at how much terrain 
the lava had already swallowed, it seemed pretty clear who 
would win if the eruption went on much longer. It turned out 
later that the lava supply cut off before the ridge was over￾topped. But prior eruptions on the Reykjanes peninsula had 
lasted, in fi ts and starts, for centuries, so no one thought it was 
all over. Sure enough, the fi re giant, Surt, renewed the blaze 
the next year.
*
Obstructing lava is one way to counter a volcano; oblations are 
another, but more off ensive interventions have also been prac￾tised. In 1669, Mount Etna was threatening the city of Catania 
on the Sicilian coast, with lava fl ows issuing from a vent low 
down on the fl ank of the volcano. Several villages had already 
been destroyed when some fi fty Catanese citizens – equipped 
with picks and axes, and shielding themselves from the furious 
heat with water-soaked hides – hacked open the wall of a lava 
channel to redirect the fl ow. They succeeded, but then ten times 
as many angry townsfolk from nearby Paternò showed up, 
armed to the teeth and demanding the breach be stemmed: the 
lava was now headed towards their neighbourhood. The lava 166 Mountains of Fire
channel healed itself, though, and the basaltic slag resumed its 
inexorable passage to the sea. It partly surmounted Catania’s 
city walls but the damage within them was relatively contained. 
Afterwards, it was declared that anyone who tried to divert lava 
would be liable for unintended damages, an edict later written 
into law.43
Three centuries later, in 1973, a new volcano, Eldfell, was 
spewing lava torr ents towards the only town on the Westman 
island of Heimaey, off the south-west coast of Iceland. It threat￾ened to ruin the harbour, and most of the population was evacu￾ated to the mainland as cinders buried their homes.44 Earth 
barriers were quickly constructed to blockade the lava, but then 
more direct action was taken to extinguish it. With the help of 
fi refi ghters and volunteers, seawater was pumped onto the 
advancing fl ows. The idea was to stiff en the molten rock, making 
it pile up rather than spread out. In the end, the harbour was 
spared – and, if anything, improved – thanks to a tongue of lava 
that exuded along the seabed and formed a breakwater. Moreover, 
when the refugees returned, they extracted the geothermal 
energy in the fresh rock to heat their properties. But volcanolo￾gists were divided on the infl uence of the water cooling – some 
thought the eruption had just stalled of its own accord.45
If sprinkling water on a lava fl ow is wasted eff ort, and turning 
up with agricultural tools will only infl ame the neighbours, 
what’s next? Incredibly, even aerial bombardment has been 
tried as a means to stop an eruption in its tracks. In 1911, Frank 
Perret was writing routine bulletins on Kīlauea’s activity in 
Hawai‘i. They were published in the newspaper of an infl uential 
Honolulu businessman, Lorrin Thurston, who helped to fund 
the volcano observatory. Thurston also wanted to make money 
out of a hotel at the crater’s edge, and took a close interest in 
countering the threat of lava fl ows. He proposed detonating 
explosives lowered through apertures in lava tubes to stem the Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 167
current, forcing lava to the surface. If this were done high up the 
volcano, he argued, then the fl ow would start over on a new 
path, buying time downhill.
In late December 1935, an eruption of Mauna Loa on the Big 
Island of Hawai‘i had been underway for a month when it took 
a turn towards the city of Hilo. Thanks to a well-developed lava 
tube, the front of the fl ow was advancing so fast it looked as if it 
would reach Hilo within two weeks. Thomas Jaggar, the director 
of the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory, wondered if it was time 
to try out Thurston’s plan. He put in a request to the U.S. Army 
to bomb the lava fl ow from the air. The next day, a telegram 
arrived from Franklin Roosevelt that read: ‘Planes authorized. 
Good luck . . .’
Ten Keystone biplane bombers arrived, along with observ￾ing aircraft; targets were selected, and 600-pound bombs 
were loaded. Jaggar watched from a safe distance as they 
were dropped in pairs. Five direct hits were recorded, squirt￾ing glowing lava into the air like ‘a geyser of blood’. One 
bomber’s wings were pierced by the liquid shrapnel. The 
flow came to a stop the following day, and Jaggar felt vindi￾cated in calling in the military, but in truth the eruption had 
already run out of puff.
In his last book, which was published posthumously, Jaggar 
speaks often of the notorious Caribbean volcano, Pelée, but 
oddly overlooks Pele, the sometimes vengeful goddess who 
animates the Hawaiian volcanoes. Before Europeans arrived on 
the Big Island, a priesthood and temples were dedicated to her 
veneration and propitiation. For centuries, it seems, people lived 
in harmony with her caprices. The bombing of the lava shocked 
many in the native Hawaiian community – it violated the sanc￾tity of Pele’s realm. Some people were not surprised when, less 
than a month later, two of the Keystones touched wings and 
burst into fl ames while fl ying low over the airfi eld in Pearl 168 Mountains of Fire
Harbour. Six men died; the two who miraculously survived 
were the only crew members who had not been on the Mauna 
Loa mission.46
*
It was just one day after Fagradalsfjall stopped erupting on 18 
September 2021, that magma reached the surface on La Palma 
in the Canary Islands. Fifty years had passed since the touristic 
island had last witnessed an eruption and the new episode gave 
just a week’s warning. Whereas Fagradalsfjall served as a festival 
venue and tourist attraction, onlookers at La Palma’s Tajogaite 
eruption witnessed entire communities – homes, shops, churches, 
schools, roads, everything – consumed by lava. By the end of the 
aff air, nearly 3,000 buildings were obliterated.
A maelstrom of human activity mirrored the volcano’s turbu￾lence. Dozens of local, national and international organisations 
– civil defence, police, fi re brigades, scientists, refugee agencies, 
journalists – fl ocked to the scene to monitor, manage and report 
on the crisis. I was among this mêlée soon after the eruption’s 
onset, with a small team there to sample lavas, and despite my 
years studying volcanoes arrived underprepared for the scale of 
unfolding ruination and human suff ering.47
Only on Montserrat have I witnessed such destruction of the 
built environment. But there it was the result of pyroclastic fl ows 
and mudfl ows in a crisis that spanned years. Here on La Palma, 
everything happened in a matter weeks – some residents got out 
with minutes to spare as their homes were engulfed in red-hot 
slag, from foundations to roofs. This overpowering spectacle 
became yet more apocalyptic beneath black plumes that devel￾oped as acres of plastic sheeting covering banana farms went up 
in fl ames. Meanwhile, evacuees were further aff ronted by wide 
circulation of drone footage of their smouldering properties.Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames 169
As the eruption dragged on, the faithful rallied for a Mass 
then joined a procession led by a local priest bearing the statue 
of the island’s patron saint. Prayers were off ered for the volcano 
to calm. Though the eruption continued for another two months, 
and despite the immense dislocation and disruption, only one 
resident is known to have died. He fell to his death while clean￾ing ash from the roof of a building.
La Palma is a very diff erent place to Iceland but seeing people 
lose every material thing that had meaning to them made me 
think more deeply of the trauma of those dispossessed by the 
lava fl oods of Hallmundarhraun, Eldgjá, Laki and Hekla, or by 
similar eruptions of Etna, Kīlauea, and many other volcanoes. 
In the tally of endeavours to put out the fi res of the Earth, it is 
unclear how eff ective any of the methods are, whether interces￾sions or interventions. I’d tended to think that trying to stem or 
defl ect such a merciless geological force is futile but now I see 
why people are prepared to put up a fi ght against the volcano.Red Sea, Black Gold
Neolithic stone implements from the East African Rift Valley.1
‘. . . nature run amok also makes culture, makes artifacts.’
– Susan Sontag, The Volcano Lover 2As I watched fl amingos skimming the ruddy water of Lake 
 Langano against the hazy backdrop of the rift escarpment, 
a jet-black object in the sand, about the size of a razor blade, 
caught my eye. I picked it up and recognised it as a fl ake of 
obsidian. There was plenty of the glassy rock to be found in lava 
outcrops on nearby Aluto v olcano. However, this piece had been 
deliberately fashioned into a tool. One side had beautiful ripples 
from a single conchoidal fracture; the other displayed several 
prismatic facets running lengthways. These caught the sunlight 
as I turned the piece round.
To discover and hold a stone artefact is at once thrilling and 
evocative. It sparks a mystical connection between your hand 
and that of its manufacturer and user across thousands, even 
millions, of years. Stone tools are far more durable than wood or 
shell or hide; they are not predated on like fl esh and bone. It is 
rocks that survive to tell us what humans were doing and even 
thinking a long, long time ago – where they lived, what they ate, 
how they interacted, and how they solved problems.3
 The blade 
I had found in the Ethiopian Rift Valley was probably made by 
a Neolithic pastoralist around 4,000 years ago.
Obsidian comes from eruptions of viscous lavas that lose all 
their gas and congeal without crystallising – it lacks bubbles and 
minerals. A chunk bashed off an outcrop splinters like glass 
because it is glass, just a natural rather than manufactured vari￾ety. Bash a bit more carefully, and you have an edge far sharper 
than a medical scalpel, suitable for slicing most foodstuff s. Some 
archaeologists refer to obsidian as ‘black gold’ owing to its 174 Mountains of Fire
prestige in prehistoric times. It is among the resources that 
volcanoes off er up.
While archaic humans already exploited obsidian a million 
years ago, it was our own species that learned to fashion it with 
fl air in Africa in the Middle and Later Stone Age over the last 
quarter of a million years. The very word ‘obsidian’ has an 
African connection, as we learn from Pliny’s Natural History: it 
derives from Obsidius, a Roman consul who is said to have 
discovered the rock in Ethiopia.4
 Figuring out how to turn brit￾tle obsidian into precision implements may even have helped to 
drive wider social, cultural and behavioural change. I wonder if 
our Stone Age ancestors loved it for its lustre and gleam as 
much as its keen edge.
Obsidian is extremely useful, too, for modern-day archaeolo￾gists, who use it to reveal the human geography of the unwritten 
past. A magma reservoir in the Earth’s crust evolves chemically 
and physically over time. It cools and slowly crystallises. Denser 
minerals settle out, depleting the remaining molten rock in 
magnesium and iron, while enriching it in silicon. The magma 
can also melt the rock at its walls, and sometimes two diff erent 
magmas connect and mingle. These myriad processes impart a 
particular bouquet to the molten rock – like wine, magma is 
defi ned by its terroir. The equivalent of a sommelier for magma 
is an igneous geochemist. A skilled one could immediately 
discriminate between a full-bodied Californian andesite and a 
fruity Auvergne mugearite.
However, most volcanic rocks contain assemblages of common 
minerals, such as olivine, quartz and feldspar. If handed a piece 
of lava and its bulk chemical composition, our connoisseur would 
struggle to identify the individual volcano that gave birth to it. 
Crystal-free obsidian, on the other hand, has a unique geochem￾ical fi ngerprint defi ned by the amounts of diff erent elements. If 
two obsidian tools have the same print, they were made with the Red Sea, Black Gold 175
same source rock; if a tool’s print matches that of an outcrop, 
that is where the raw material came from.
The technique was pioneered in the 1960s for the 
Mediterranean, where rich obsidian sources are found on 
Sardinia, Lipari and Melos. For an archaeologist fi nding obsid￾ian tools in Tunisia, for example, it is as if they are stamped 
‘Made in Italy’. Obsidian sources are found in most of the 
volcanic belts of the world – including the Americas, Oceania, 
the near East, and Northeast and Southeast Asia – so the method 
is widely applicable. It provides direct evidence for the ranges 
over which people could exchange ideas as well as pieces of 
stone, yielding unique insights into prehistoric human culture, 
mobility and cooperation, even in the absence of a single human 
fossil.5
 For a volcanologist, it off ers a perfect point of collabora￾tion with archaeologists.
And there is more to volcanoes and human prehistory than 
obsidian. As the archaeologist Mary Leakey wrote in her autobi￾ography, Eastern Africa is a place ‘where nearly every exposure 
[of rock reveals] some archaeological or geological excitement’.6
The Rift Valley is a palimpsest of the sediments of volcanoes, 
wind, lakes and rivers along with faunal relics and traces – it is a 
time machine that can take us back to the world of humans 
before humanity. Picture, for instance, three short fi gures walk￾ing together across a blanket of gritty brown ash recently blasted 
from a vent on the fl anks of Ngorongoro volcano. This is the 
image conjured up thanks to Leakey and her team unearthing 
their tracks at Laetoli in Tanzania, some 3.7 million years later.7
Their age was impressive enough but most astonishing was the 
lack of any indentations from knucklebones – whoever left these 
traces walked upright. The footprints were attributed to 
Australopithecus afarensis, the closest known relative of our genus, 
and named after the Afar region of Ethiopia, where the bones of 
‘Lucy’, the emblem of her species, were discovered.8176 Mountains of Fire
But how do we date this prehistoric vignette in the fi rst place? 
The answer is in potassium-rich crystals contained within the 
ash. A tiny fraction of the potassium is radioactive and decays 
gradually into argon gas – the half-life of the process (the time 
taken for half the potassium present to decay) is more than a 
billion years.9
 As soon as a volcanic rock is erupted and cooled, 
the argon generated starts building up in the crystal. By meas￾uring how much is there, the age of the eruption can be calcu￾lated. This is an extremely powerful way to piece together the 
deep volcanic history of a region, bearing in mind that radiocar￾bon dating can only reach a few tens of thousands of years 
back.10 Just as importantly, it indicates the age of archaeological 
materials, including stone tools and human fossils, which are 
not readily dated themselves. We know Lucy’s antiquity not 
from her skeleton or teeth, but from the estimated ages of ash 
fallout found above and below her level in the sediments.11
Sometimes ash deposits far from their volcanic source are too 
fi ne-grained to contain any crystals. There is still a way to date 
them, though, using the same method of chemical fi ngerprint￾ing applied to obsidian. Most of such a fi ne-grained ash deposit 
will consist of tiny pieces of volcanic glass, whose composition 
can be measured and compared with ash deposits nearer the 
volcano that are coarse enough to contain datable crystals. If a 
chemical match is found, then the far-fl ung ash has the same 
age. I was part of the team that used this approach to show that 
the oldest uncontested Homo sapiens fossils, which come from 
southwestern Ethiopia, are 30,000 years older than once 
thought.12
What emerges from these studies is that individual volcanoes 
have long lifespans – often hundreds of thousands of years, 
most of which they pass by slowly crumbling apart through the 
action of earthquakes and weather. Homo sapiens only emerged 
as a species within the last 300,000 years, which means that Red Sea, Black Gold 177
where people have long lived in the shadows of volcanoes, the 
volcanoes were in most cases there fi rst. They inspired and 
enabled our ways of life, and sometimes brought devastation. 
Our stories are intertwined.
*
The Rift Valley of Eastern Africa is one of Earth’s greatest 
geological features. It spans the tropics from Mozambique to 
the Red Sea – the distance between Los Angeles and New York 
– and ranges in height from the glaciated crater of Kilimanjaro 
to the searing lava plains of Afar. The Rift’s shoulders funnel 
rainfall to vast freshwater lakes. This manifold geographic 
template, shaped by tectonic and volcanic forces over the past 
forty million years, enabled ecosystems to accommodate the 
climate teleconnections of successive ice ages, leaving us today 
with one of the most biodiverse regions on Earth. Some schol￾ars even think the variegated landscape and its sporadic rejuve￾nation by eruptions and earthquakes helped to stimulate human 
evolution by providing abundant fresh water, rock shelters, and 
natural lava barriers for corralling prey.13 Others look at the Rift 
Valley and Red Sea coastline as natural migration corridors that 
enabled our ancestors to expand beyond Africa around 70,000 
years ago, either through the Levant or Southern Arabia.14
One of the fi rst to grasp that this topographic rent resulted 
from ‘rifting’, or stretching, of the Earth’s crust was the 
geologist John Walter Gregory, who explored Kenya in 1893. 
He integrated geological fi ndings with botanical, zoological 
and ethnographic observations in his masterpiece, The Great 
Rift Valley, published three years later. In recognition of his 
pioneering work, he had one of the world’s largest topographic 
features named after him: the Gregory Rift, which stretches 700 
miles from northern Tanzania to northern Kenya. 15178 Mountains of Fire
But the rifting does not end there – to the north it cuts through 
Ethiopia’s high plateau then becomes more diff use in the scari￾fi ed volcanic and hyper-arid lowlands of the Danakil Desert of 
Afar. Here it bifurcates, one branch connecting to the Red Sea 
through Eritrea, the other to the Gulf of Aden through Djibouti. 
Studies of this region in the 1960s helped to propel plate tecton￾ics theory into mainstream thinking.16 Why this tectonic mother 
lode developed right here is still not fully understood, but several 
factors seem to have conspired, including pre-existing fault 
lines that buckled due to the force of hot rock upwelling from 
the deep Earth. This so-called ‘mantle plume’ has been at work 
for a long time: thirty million years ago, it sourced the incalcu￾lable volumes of basalt lava now exposed in the dissected high￾lands of both Ethiopia and Yemen.17
Although geologists recognised the importance of Afar for 
understanding the birth of oceans from the incision of conti￾nents, it was not until 1971 that the fi rst comprehensive scien￾tifi c survey of the area was undertaken, co-led by none other 
than volcanologist Haroun Tazieff .18 With a combination of heli￾copter support, camel caravans and legwork, and the backing of 
Afar’s sultan, his team obtained the fi rst picture of the region’s 
volcanism and tectonics. A highlight of the expedition was the 
discovery of bubbling lava lakes within the crater of a volcano 
called Erta ‘Ale.19 But just as the studies were gathering pace, 
the toppling of Emperor Haile Selassie in 1974 and the installa￾tion of a barbarous military junta, the Derg, abruptly ended 
foreign access to the region.
My visit to Lake Langano during a six-week tour of Ethiopia 
came about thanks to a window of opportunity (also known as 
unemployment) in 1993. The Derg had been overthrown a 
couple of years earlier, so travel was becoming possible again. 
But my main inspiration had been a charismatic geologist, Seife 
Berhe, with whom I shared an offi ce. His stories of growing up Red Sea, Black Gold 179
in Addis Ababa, the Ethiopian capital, and recollections of 
adventures with the Geological Survey of Ethiopia, thrilled me 
so much I had to see the place for myself. After my fi rst visit, I 
soon wanted to go back in order to rekindle the long-stalled 
volcanological studies in the Danakil Desert in north-eastern 
Ethiopia, and returned the following year with funding for a 
small-scale expedition. Maybe it was too soon after the years of 
confl ict; Eritrea, which shares the territory of the Danakil, had 
also just gained independence from Ethiopia, destabilising the 
border zone we were headed for. Maybe it was just bad luck. 
Whatever the reasons, this would prove to be a near-disastrous 
mission.
Things didn’t start off too badly. Seife joined me in Addis 
Ababa, along with some of his former colleagues from the 
geological survey. We planned to collect rock samples, perhaps 
even of molten lava from Erta ‘Ale’s fi ery lake, and to carry out 
a very precise GPS survey that, when repeated, would reveal the 
pace of Afar’s tectonic stretching.20 After several days in the 
capital obtaining permits, and stocking up on supplies, we set 
off . We stopped for the night in Metehara, at the foot of Fentale 
volcano, then tracked the course of the Awash river in the morn￾ing, passing close to where Lucy had been unearthed twenty 
years earlier. By late afternoon, we arrived in Asaita, the tradi￾tional seat of the Sultanate of Aussa, and straddling the Awash, 
where hippos and crocodiles played vanishing acts. The daunt￾less British explorer, Wilfred Thesiger, came this way as a young 
man in 1933, three years after attending Haile Selassie’s corona￾tion. The Danakil Desert was still, even then, little known to 
Europeans, and Thesiger was seeking the terminus of the Awash 
river, which puzzled foreigners since there was no sign of it 
reaching the Red Sea.21 We called by the regional government 
offi ce, where we secured the services of two guides, Mahé and 
Mohammed, and obtained typed letters of introduction for each 180 Mountains of Fire
of the fi ve local administration zones through which we would 
pass.
Vultures eyed us from telegraph poles as we climbed into 
the cars at sunrise the next day, while doves idling in the road 
shied as they sensed our approach, then fl ew beside us like 
porpoises chasing a ship. Before long, we were off the main 
road and following a rough trail between long basalt bluff s, 
from which rust-coloured boulders had spalled. The rocks, 
fault scarps and volcanic landforms were so exposed and vivid 
it felt like crossing a three-dimensional geological map. We saw 
no one, but passed many rock tombs of the Afar, built from 
slabs of lava and circled with stones. According to Thesiger, a 
couple of pillars at the top indicated an avenged death. In his 
day, the Afar were renowned for castrating their enemies and 
keeping the ‘trophies’. Seife asked the guides over our camp 
dinner if the custom prevailed. Mahé shook his head, but one 
of Seife’s colleagues, with more precognition than we realised 
at the time, suddenly exclaimed that we must be crazy to 
undertake such a journey.
By lunchtime the following day, we reached the Danakil 
Depression, the harshest part of the desert. Ever since leaving 
Addis Ababa on the Ethiopian plateau, we had been gradually 
descending, and we were now below sea level. It was ten degrees 
hotter, up to 40°C (104°F), and the sky had bleached with the 
thickening air, from azure in Addis to bright powder blue. The 
vehicles waltzed over fault-cleaved basalt lava fi elds until the 
trail emerged on to a playa encircling Lake Afdera. Even though 
I was expecting it, the sight of such a vast body of water in one 
of Earth’s fi ercest deserts took me aback. From a distance, the 
water looked milky, bleached by haze, but it turned aquamarine 
and then turquoise as we neared it. By mid-afternoon, after 
resolving an encounter with quicksand, we had reached the 
shore and found a shady spot for our camp.Red Sea, Black Gold 181
In the morning, an elderly Afar man appeared out of nowhere, 
carrying a plastic teapot and listening to a radio slung around 
his shoulder. He introduced himself as Ibrahim, the chief of the 
area. We showed our paperwork and explained our business and 
he agreed to help us, though he made clear he would not accom￾pany us to Erta ‘Ale on account of its jinn – evil spirits. We 
wanted to scout out a route to the volcano and headed north 
across the plain, passing a wide cone whose truncated top spoke 
of wave action. It had formed when the sea fi lled the Depression, 
which it did until around 30,000 years ago, when magma intru￾sions and eruptions of Alid volcano to the north formed a barrier 
to the Red Sea.
After an hour, we reached lava fl ow lobes emerging from 
windblown sands, their ropy surface burnished by centuries of 
desert exposure. These marked the southernmost extent of the 
volcanic range. I felt like I was exploring anatomised basalt 
tracts of the seabed on a planet where a baking sun had evapo￾rated all the oceans – which was, essentially, what had happened 
right here after the Danakil was cut off from the Red Sea. 
Beneath the plain lies an immensity of salt, the residue of the 
sea’s desiccation. It amazed me, then, when Ibrahim showed us 
a freshwater spring where the Afar bring their goats. Our water 
supplies were limited, so we did not hesitate to slake our ever￾present thirst, despite the carpet of goat poo around it.
The GPS measurements involved fi nding suitable open-air 
sites where we would bang survey nails into the rock and record 
their position with pinpoint precision. While setting up the 
equipment on an ancient lava fl ow, two fi gures shivered into 
view in the glittering air and approached us across the plain. 
The two men, when they reached us, claimed to be representa￾tives of the Afar Revolutionary Democratic Unity Front. Both 
carried AK-47s on their shoulders and wore traditional curved 
daggers in their belts. One of them, Habib, fi dgeted with a hand 182 Mountains of Fire
grenade, while the other cleaned his teeth with a miswak twig. 
They were agitated and demanded to speak with Ibrahim. A 
prolonged and heated negotiation followed. I recalled an account 
by Werner Munzinger, the fi rst European to cross the Danakil 
in 1867, a journey all the more remarkable for taking place in the 
suff ocating heat of summer. He wrote of his encounters with 
tribesmen:
Scientifi c ends are not understood . . . They think we should 
never encounter all these dangers without some strong motive, 
such as treasure to be found, &c., so that we cannot be aston￾ished when they make us pay heavily. 22
No one comes from so far away for nothing, and we agreed a 
fee with Habib. Nevertheless, I felt uneasy, recalling that 
Munzinger, his wife and a small army were later massacred by 
the Sultan’s men on another crossing of the Danakil.
The following day, just as we were preparing to go to work, 
Habib and his companion appeared unexpectedly in our camp. 
Along with Ibrahim and our guides, they formed a circle in the 
shade of the palms. Each sat on his haunches, carbines and 
Kalashnikovs to hand. What followed I gleaned from transla￾tions via Seife and body language – it boiled down to an 
attempted kidnapping. At one point, Habib suddenly jumped 
up, shouting and brandishing his gun. Mahé, who was also 
armed, immediately faced him off . The others urgently gestured 
to both to sit down, and the passion passed.
The argument continued after it got dark, until Ibrahim 
announced that we should abandon our mission and head 
back in the morning. We readily agreed. I crawled into my 
sleeping bag anxious we might be strafed with machine-gun 
fi re in our sleep, but the high suspense had been exhausting 
and, after ten minutes of wild imaginings (swimming across Red Sea, Black Gold 183
the lake to safety as bullets fl ew overhead), I slept surprisingly 
soundly.
We turned tail after a hurried breakfast – any feelings of 
dejection from cutting our mission so short were tempered by 
the sense that we had got out by the skin of our teeth. It was a 
shame, though – we had made the best arrangements possible 
for the mission, had all formal authorisations and the service of 
resolute chaperones. I had been concerned all along about 
Mahé’s rifl e – it hadn’t seemed in the right spirit to go into a 
land I didn’t know with a lethal weapon on display – but in 
retrospect, I believe it helped to avert a more unpleasant 
outcome. Seife thought we were lucky to be alive: ‘Those men 
are used to killing,’ he said. On the other hand, having read the 
accounts of Munzinger, Thesiger and others who had travelled 
in the Danakil over the past century and a half, our experience 
seemed typical to me. The Danakil’s environment is extremely 
harsh, the resources few. When outsiders have come, it has often 
resulted in appropriation of land, water or minerals. Xenophobia 
is a natural adaptation – and it is true that we, too, were seeking 
something of value.
What would have happened in the distant past, I wondered, 
when survivors were fl eeing eruptions that inundated whole 
sections of the Rift Valley with ignimbrite? Did they end up 
amongst communities with diff erent customs? And, if so, 
could this have been one of the ways we honed our social 
networking skills, and innovated our material and spiritual 
culture?
Sadly, I didn’t complete the GPS measurements. If the few 
survey nails are still in the ground, they should have shifted 
around a stride apart after thirty years of ongoing stretching of 
the crust.23
*184 Mountains of Fire
Despite the failure of my mission to Erta ‘Ale, I was not put off 
studying the Danakil’s volcanoes. For a while, though, I did it 
more safely, using Landsat images and declassifi ed spy satellite 
photos, from which, in the comfort of my offi ce in Cambridge, 
I compiled a timeline of Erta ‘Ale’s activity since the 1960s.24 It 
was while pouring over these data that a volcano east of Erta 
‘Ale, near the Red Sea coast in Eritrea, caught my eye. There are 
innumerable volcanoes in the region, but most are armoured in 
dark basaltic lavas. This one, called Dubbi, had prominent lava 
fl ows, too, but they were superimposed on a bright terrain that 
looked like an apron of pumice or ash. Pretty soon, I found what 
I was looking for in the archive of the Times of London, a brief 
report from 1861 relayed by Captain Lambert Playfair, assis￾tant Resident at the British colony of Aden (now part of Yemen):
On the night of the 7th or morning of the 8th of May, the 
people of Edd were awakened by the shock of an earth￾quake . . . At sunrise . . . fi ne white dust fell over the village like 
rain . . . it increased to such an extent that . . . the whole place 
was covered with the dust nearly knee deep . . . At night we 
saw fi re and dense smoke issuing from a mountain called 
Jebel Dubbeh . . . Nothing of the kind had ever been heard of 
before, and the people were exceedingly frightened.25
Thunderous detonations were heard for hours around the 
southern Red Sea, including in the Eritrean entrepôt of 
Massawa. Although the Suez Canal was not yet constructed, the 
seaway was already of great strategic and commercial signifi -
cance, and contested by Ottoman, Arabian, Egyptian, Abyssinian 
and European powers. Given the prevailing atmosphere of 
international rivalry and intrigue, it’s hardly surprising the 
explosions were widely misapprehended as artillery bombard￾ments.26 Ships were launched to confront the enemy but soon Red Sea, Black Gold 185
they were plunged into darkness by the ash cloud spreading 
above. The captain of one steamer described encountering a 
‘London fog’ of white dust and being unable to see the length of 
the ship.
In a later report, Captain Playfair communicated the vivid 
account of two Somali brothers who climbed the volcano while 
it was still agitated. Guides led them to the foot of the mountain 
but were too frightened to go on. At the summit, the brothers 
found more than a dozen fuming and fi ery craters. One pit 
blasted out rocks, while water spurted from other orifi ces like 
‘waves of the sea’. As I continued reading the report, I came to 
a passage that surprised me greatly:
The names of the villages burned which were located near the 
mountain, are Moobda and Ramlo. One hundred and six 
men and women were killed and their bodies were not found. 
The number of animals killed is unknown.
The region has always been very sparsely populated and pumice 
falling from the sky is a discomforting experience but seldom 
lethal – how could so many have perished? Looking again at the 
satellite image, I was sure now that the pale ground was the fall￾out from the 1861 eruption, but the lava fl ows were clearly on 
top of it, so must have occurred later. This was beginning to 
look like a very signifi cant eruption that could even have resulted 
in much wider climatic impacts. I discovered that the worst 
recorded fl ooding in California took place in January 1862 – 
could that have been linked to Dubbi’s stratospheric dust? But I 
couldn’t go any further with historical sources. Nor could the 
space images tell me how thick the deposits were – essential 
information for any calculations of the size of the eruption or 
scale of its gas emissions. Without being able to map and meas￾ure the pyroclastic layers, there was no more that could be said 186 Mountains of Fire
of the nature of the explosions. I would have to go to the volcano 
itself to fi nd these things out.
Captain Playfair’s last letter published in The Times on the 
Dubbi eruption included a plea for more concerted investigation 
of the volcano ‘to give to the scientifi c world an accurate descrip￾tion of this interesting phenomenon’. Getting on for 140 years 
later, in 1998, I did my best to fulfi l that wish, in the company of 
Pierre Wiart, one of the fi rst PhD students that I supervised. Our 
aims were to investigate the deposits on and around Dubbi to get 
a clearer picture of what had transpired in 1861, as well as to 
collect rocks that might help us understand the volcano’s exist￾ence – with its record of explosive activity, it was clearly a diff er￾ent beast from most of the volcanoes in Afar, like Erta ‘Ale, which 
produce lava fl oods. The journey would only sharpen my interest 
in the intersections of social and physical landscapes.
The capital of Eritrea, Asmara, is perched at the crest of the 
Ethiopian plateau. The country had been an Italian colony, and 
Asmara retains a fabulous legacy of 1930s Art Deco architecture. 
There is the FIAT Tagliero, perhaps the world’s most important 
gas station, and the Cinema Impero, which was screening the 
1965 epic Battle of the Bulge on my fi rst visit, and whose bar still 
serves perfect espresso. With help from Eritrea’s Ministry of 
Mines and Energy, and Seife’s brother, we obtained the services 
of a driver, Mesfi n, and a four-wheel-drive vehicle, as well as all 
the necessary documents authorising our passage as far as Asseb 
in the far south of the country. Despite the experiences of my last 
excursion to the Danakil, I didn’t feel any anxiety to be returning 
– I was just excited to be heading into another area I’d become 
familiar with but only from the vantage point of a satellite’s eye.
We left Asmara late, reaching Massawa well after midnight 
and checking into a hotel that was inexplicably overrun with 
frogs. By lunchtime the next day, we could see the Gulf of Zula 
and clusters of dark cinder cones. This is precisely where the Red Sea, Black Gold 187
Red Sea’s oceanic ridge propagates inland through the Danakil 
Depression to connect with the Erta ‘Ale range. Sandwiched 
between this arm of the Rift and the southern Red Sea lie the 
Danakil Alps, a range of metamorphic rocks estranged in the 
tectonic break-up of Arabia and Africa. Nearby, at Abdur, we 
stopped to inspect an ancient limestone reef that now lay above 
sea level. It had formed around 125,000 years ago, and encased 
countless obsidian fl akes and blades, along with disarticulated 
fossil oyster and crab shells – the trash from a Middle Stone Age 
beach party. 27
The route now followed the mangrove-fringed Red Sea coast. 
The air sizzled, and the plastic jerrycans we’d bought in Asmara 
were proving to be a terrible false economy. They were deform￾ing between the scorching metal struts of the roof rack, splitting 
at the seams. Water and fuel trickled down the windows, attract￾ing so much dust we had to use the windscreen wipers. After 
repositioning the containers several times, everything reeked of 
diesel. By the time we stopped for the night at the coastal outpost 
of Gelalo, the vehicle was squalid inside and out; all our food 
boxes, cutlery and supplies were sullied.
Three years had passed since my brush with Habib and his 
comrade, but the memories were fresh. So my heart sank when, 
as we were packing up in the morning, I spotted someone 
approaching us on foot, a rifl e across his shoulders. I braced 
myself for confrontation. But the gun turned out to be a shep￾herd’s stick, and on reaching us its elderly bearer simply asked 
if we had broken down and needed help.
By day’s end, we emerged from the other side of the Danakil 
Alps onto a powdery plain. We pulled up beside a lonely cinder 
cone and clambered to the top. In front of us stretched a volcanic 
desert fantasy in pastel shades from grey to pink, fl ecked with 
clumps of acacia trees that traced dry watercourses. Most 
imposing (and enticing) on the horizon was Nabro, the Danakil’s 188 Mountains of Fire
largest and highest volcano, truncated by a sloping caldera rim. 
But Dubbi’s appearance did not disappoint. To lay eyes for the 
fi rst time on a volcano you have come to know well but only 
from space images is thrilling. There is the rush of instant famil￾iarity, but only now do you perceive its aura – the nexus of 
terrain, sky, past paroxysms and social landscape. And we were 
not the fi rst to survey the scene from this spot, judging by the 
abundance of obsidian tools caught in the volcanic gravel.
We made for the toe of one of the lava fl ows on Dubbi’s west 
fl ank that I had marvelled at in the satellite data. It’s thickness – 
about the height of a fi ve-storey building – was impressive. We 
noted the details and started collecting rock samples. A bluff of 
pristine pyroclastic rocks at the foot of an eroded cinder cone also 
caught our eye. There was no doubt these were ash and pumice 
deposits of the 1861 eruption: the archives of the eruption we 
were looking for. A Chilean colleague once said to me that such 
an outcrop is like the black box fl ight recorder on a plane – the 
depths and angles of layers, the shape, roughness, orientation, 
dimensions and composition of constituent particles – all speak 
to the intensity, duration and magnitude of the eruption.
The deepest bed was the uppermost, and it was a meshwork 
of angular, walnut-sized white pumices. It was easy to dislodge 
pieces. This was surely the sediment from the most intense 
phase of day one of the explosive eruption, which had piled ash 
upon Edd and turned day to night. We eagerly set to work, 
measuring, sieving and weighing the deposits; taking notes and 
photographs; and bagging representative samples. Two Afar 
men came over, curious to know our purpose. One said his 
great grandfather had been killed by the 1861 eruption, adding 
that the mountain is still haunted by jinn.
Impressive as the thick fallout of pumice at the top of the 
section was, the underlying deposits were even more striking. 
They featured thinner beds of rounded pumices and laminated Red Sea, Black Gold 189
ash. The smoothness of the fragments indicated they had rubbed 
against each other, knocking off any edges, which meant this 
was the deposit of a fl ow and not another layer of fallout from 
the sky. We realised we were looking at the deposits of nuées 
ardentes, which at once explained the high mortality and lack of 
traces of victims during the 1861 eruption. Nuées ardentes sweep 
across the ground too rapidly for anyone to escape, and often 
bury what they engulf. Somewhere beneath the surface must lie 
the remnants of the villages of Moobda and Ramlo, and the 
bones of the herdsmen and women who dwelt there.
When we summited Dubbi itself, we found the Somalis’ testi￾mony from 1861 fi tted with the view before us of an inverted 
backbone of vents and rents from which lava had poured. What 
surprised us more was our estimate of the lava volume, which 
easily ranks the eruption as the largest in the recorded history of 
Africa.28
I had one more day before fl ying out of Asseb (Pierre and 
Mesfi n would stay on for another week). I’d felt the nearby 
volcano Nabro calling me the whole time – its presence was 
powerful, and I felt an urge to see what lay within the caldera 
and beyond. A little reconnaissance could do no harm, I thought, 
and would pave the way perhaps for future study. Judging the 
distance to the top, I felt confi dent there was time to take a peek 
and make it back before sundown. Pierre and I set out at fi rst 
light, following a dry streambed cut into grey lava. Here and 
there, collected in indentations in the rock were small pools of 
water – always a miracle in the desert. Then we followed a spur 
leading to the peak of Nabro’s wide crater rim. Now there were 
patches of open woodland and squat palm trees prospering in 
rocky niches – it seemed a diff erent world to the scorching plain 
below.
Pierre was taking his time to inspect the rocks, and I was soon 
some way ahead. By around 10am, as I was approaching the 190 Mountains of Fire
brow of the caldera, a brilliant white cube perched on dazzling 
drifts of pumice came into view. I was taken aback and could 
only think of the monolith in 2001: A Space Odyssey. I’d not seen 
any structures on the mountain in the satellite images, and was 
perplexed. Then I noticed an aerial, an encampment, and soon 
a dozen soldiers. They were just as startled to see me.
I broke into a grin. They smiled back, and one of the men 
brought me hot tea in an enamel mug. But the cheerful welcome 
quickly soured: why was I there? Why alone? Where were my 
papers? (They were in the car.) I explained the circumstances 
of my visit and expected Pierre to arrive at any moment. But he 
didn’t – I would fi nd out later that he had run out of puff and 
returned to camp. I asked the soldiers to contact the Department 
of Mines or send someone to locate Mesfi n. Instead, they 
contacted the Ministry of Defence in Asseb. Worrying about 
Pierre, and impatient to move the situation on, I started walking 
back down. But two soldiers grabbed my arms and another 
raised his machine gun, shouting, ‘You see what this is? When 
you come here, your programme is cut!’
I was furious and exasperated. I was also baffl ed as to why 
there should even be a military command post on a volcano in 
the middle of nowhere. Had they got the idea from the Bond 
fi lm, You Only Live Twice? It was not the ideal moment to ask. 
Nor to appreciate the breathtaking view across the caldera as I 
was led away. In spite of the circumstances and the thick desert 
haze, I could make out the Erta ‘Ale range and the peak of Ale 
Bagu volcano, and even the distant crest of the Ethiopian escarp￾ment rising the other side of the Danakil Depression.
I was kept under guard in a rudimentary barrack room by 
two teenage conscripts for seven hours, all the while simmering 
with resentment, concerned about Pierre’s whereabouts, and 
wondering if I would make the weekly fl ight from Asseb. 
Eventually, an offi cer arrived. He placed his revolver on a table, Red Sea, Black Gold 191
sat beside me, and asked about my mission. Shortly, he 
announced that I was free to go, but since it was late to walk 
down, I would be escorted by vehicle. I was fl abbergasted that a 
road existed – it was hidden from view, carved into the sheer 
rock wall of the caldera. My new friend confi ded that he had 
always hoped to study in England, and asked if I might help him 
get to the British military academy, Sandhurst. It was an aff able 
denouement to a frustrating episode. After a round of hand￾shakes with my captors, I was led to a waiting Hilux. With the 
light fading, I made mental notes of the roadside geology as we 
descended into the crater by a series of switchbacks, aiming for 
a low point the other side. Crossing the rugged terrain in the 
centre of the caldera, I spied an alluring outcrop of burnished 
obsidian. I had to come back one day.
Just fi ve months later, Eritrea and Ethiopia went to war 
following a border dispute – now I understood why there was a 
military post on the highest point along the frontier, and why a 
1960s war movie featuring defensive lines, spies, tanks and 
infantry was being screened in Asmara. The confl ict was cruel 
and profi tless, and left a legacy of landmines and enduring 
enmities. It would take an entirely unexpected turn of events to 
present the possibility of returning to Eritrea.
*
Although we had barely sampled any rocks on Nabro, Pierre 
Wiart and I wrote a paper in which we speculated on the volca￾no’s origins and nature of its lavas. It had to draw mostly on 
analysis of satellite images, and left me wondering what else we 
might have found had we been allowed more than a glimpse of 
Nabro. In a way, it mattered little – no one else was working in 
the area, so hardly anyone read our article. Until 12 June 2011, 
that is, when Nabro suddenly and violently exploded.29192 Mountains of Fire
One of the fi rst scientists on the scene was Seife Berhe, who 
had relocated to Asmara. A colossal lava fl ow was snaking across 
the plain beyond the fl anks of the volcano when he arrived, and 
dark ash clouds were mushrooming from the caldera. This 
event, the fi rst-ever recorded eruption of Nabro, opened a 
window of opportunity to resume fi eld research in the region, 
which had been impossible for foreigners since the border war. 
This time, I teamed up with three Eritrean geologists and the 
British seismologist, James Hammond – it had only been a few 
weeks since James and I had returned from North Korea. We 
obtained authorisation from the Eritrean government to make 
an urgent survey of the volcano and to install a network of seis￾mic sensors to record ongoing rumbles. But in addition to our 
studies of the fresh eruption,30 I found an opportunity to connect 
the present with the deep past of Nabro – the answer was to be 
found in the glittering obsidian I had spied under military escort.
We reached the site two months after the eruption ended and 
found an astounding scale of impact on the landscape. Lava 
fl ows had inundated a huge tract along the border with Ethiopia, 
engulfi ng many homesteads. Several new cones had formed, 
some still glowing at night, and a wide apron of black clinker 
had buried two villages inside the caldera, displacing thousands 
of people. Acacia trees that would have towered over me were 
almost completely buried – only the outermost twigs of their 
crowns poked above the grey cinders. Somehow they had 
survived, for new leaves were already unfolding.
As we sampled the freshly erupted rocks, I also kept my eye 
out for ancient obsidian. This was because I’d recently worked 
the other side of the Red Sea in Yemen, with the archaeologist 
Lamya Khalidi. She was studying Neolithic and Bronze Age 
sites in southern Arabia, and most of the tools uncovered there 
were obsidian. My assignment in Yemen had been to locate the 
volcanic sources. Since obsidian lavas are extremely viscous on Red Sea, Black Gold 193
eruption, they pile up into stubby lobes. This makes them easy 
to spot in satellite images, and I had readily identifi ed several 
candidates on the Yemeni plateau. Sure enough, when we visited 
our targets on the ground, we discovered spectacular outcrops 
of obsidian, and even a prehistoric quarry where the raw mate￾rial had been mined.31
From the chemical make-up of our Yemeni samples, measured 
back in the lab, we found clear matches with scores of tools from 
Neolithic and Bronze Age sites across the southern Arabian high￾lands – and, impressively, as far as 600 miles away in Oman.32
That is a phenomenal range of human interaction, not least given 
the aridity of the region, and speaks to the high status of good￾quality obsidian. But oddly, we found few matches with any of 
the implements that Lamya had collected from surveys and exca￾vations along the Red Sea coast of Yemen. Even though they 
would have been just a few days’ walk from our sources, lowland 
peoples had sought most of their obsidian from elsewhere.
With my fi xation for the vitreous rock now verging on the 
obsessive, and better able to recognise an artefact thanks to work￾ing with Lamya, I couldn’t help noticing stone tools and pris￾matic ‘cores’ (from which blades had been struck) almost every￾where on and around Nabro. In some places, a scatter of fl akes 
on the ground suggested that someone had sat down and spent 
a while whittling the rock. It mystifi ed me to think that this Stone 
Age refuse had lain at the surface undisturbed, perhaps for tens 
of thousands of years. I made a modest collection of the arte￾facts, and knocked fi st-sized samples off the geological outcrops 
with my hammer, in an echo of the prehistoric miners who must 
have done much the same to obtain their raw material.
I sent the tools to Lamya. Though unimpressed with my less 
than systematic survey, she was still able to classify a range of 
scrapers, blades and cores, and suggest they were made by 
Neolithic people 4,000 –5,000 years ago. Some, she explained, 194 Mountains of Fire
had been ‘retouched’ – this meant the margins had been care￾fully serrated to make them suitable for cutting or scraping 
wood, bone or hide. Comparing how shiny the edge was to the 
rest of the stone surface, this had evidently been done at a much 
later time, probably after the tool was worn out and had been 
discarded by its original owner. The green economy has deep 
roots.
Again, we had the tools as well as the geological obsidian 
samples fi ngerprinted in the lab. The analyses revealed three 
chemical groups amongst the archaeological samples, all of 
which corresponded to local sources on the volcano. This was 
no surprise – many of the implements had probably been made 
expediently on the spot. But to our astonishment, we also 
matched Nabro obsidian to nearly half the tools from the coastal 
sites in Yemen that Lamya had been puzzling over for years.33 As 
the crow fl ies, these were 120 miles away – not so far compared 
to some of the other ranges we had uncovered, but no one swims 
across the Red Sea carrying hunks of obsidian, nor does the 
volcanic glass fl oat. The only way it could make the journey is 
by some kind of boat. By linking the tools in Yemen to lava fl ows 
on Nabro we had demonstrated the existence of a seafaring 
people capable of transporting the ‘black gold’ from Africa to 
Arabia more than 4,000 years ago. This illustrates the power of 
obsidian provenancing – it is very unlikely a Neolithic or Bronze 
Age raft will ever be found at the bottom of the Red Sea, but the 
presence of ‘Made in Eritrea’ tools in coastal Arabia decisively 
reveals prehistoric maritime interaction.
More than that, Lamya believes that the availability of obsid￾ian stimulated the growth of this network, helping a new culture 
– the Neolithic lifestyle of pastoralism and pot-making – roll out 
across the Horn of Africa. At the same time, African traditions 
of tool design and manufacture extended into Arabia – it was 
a two-way diff usion of knowledge, technology and culture.34Red Sea, Black Gold 195
The trading opportunities of the Red Sea fought over by impe￾rial powers in the time of Dubbi’s eruption seem like a distant 
echo of the reordering of the prehistoric world through the 
interactions of distant peoples and the exchange of a sought￾after volcanic commodity.
Had I looked harder, I think there would have been evidence 
for exploitation of Nabro’s lustrous obsidian at much earlier 
times. I sent several of the pumice samples to a lab in New 
Mexico for argon dating. The results paint a picture of the key 
stages in the life history of the volcano, stretching back 400,000 
years, before the emergence of Homo sapiens. The most workable 
obsidian lavas were erupted 160,000 years ago on the fl ank 
of the volcano. I cannot say if they were quarried then, but at 
around the same time, further south in the Kenyan Rift, people 
were already using and carrying obsidian over long distances.35
Any extraction of Nabro’s obsidian would have been curtailed 
for a long time, though, after the volcano exploded 130,000 years 
ago, forming the ample caldera and plastering the surrounding 
lowlands with ignimbrite.
The volcano had another convulsion 62,000 years ago. This 
was responsible for the banks of pumice at the summit where I 
had stumbled upon the military post. Soldiers posted there had 
helped with the emergency evacuation during the volcano’s 
2011 eruption, which began at around midnight after fi ve hours 
of ground shaking. Of the more than 10,000 people who were 
displaced, most had been living in the villages within the caldera, 
whose elevation high above the roasting plains provided a cool 
sanctuary and attracted rain clouds. They had stored rainwater 
in cisterns covered with sticks, irrigated food crops, kept sheep 
and goats, and even soothed aches and pains by bathing in warm 
fumaroles. The Red Sea and its marine resources were a day’s 
walk away. Now, their villages are a Pompeii of the Danakil; 
their footprints preserved under piles of scoriae. How many 196 Mountains of Fire
earlier human traces might lie within older layers of ash and 
lava? As I have so often found, risk and reward go hand in hand 
on volcanoes.
Given the antiquity of obsidian use in the region, and Nabro’s 
commanding aspect, I feel sure the volcano has attracted atten￾tion since the fi rst humans laid eyes on it – just as it lured me up 
to its sky-high crater. In the later prehistoric period, it anchored 
a regional economy and stimulated cultural innovation. Today, 
it is not obsidian that draws prospectors but the geothermal 
energy stored in superheated groundwaters circulating beneath 
the volcano.36
Working there – close to the sparkling (and actually turquoise￾coloured) Red Sea, amidst both steaming lavas and ancient 
ignimbrites, meeting refugees who had fl ed their buried homes 
within the caldera, stumbling across so much hand-crafted 
obsidian, and encountering ageless rock tombs and the rusting 
residue of modern warfare – gave me a profound sense of the 
physical, social and even political prominence of the volcano. It 
had grown, collapsed, mutated, eroded, healed and regrown 
over hundreds of thousands of years, during which our own 
species evolved, perhaps even driving our evolution down 
particular paths. With its eruption in 2011, it had petrifi ed 
history before my eyes.
But this was only the beginning of what Africa would reveal 
to me about our ancestral reliance on volcanic landscapes – it 
was in another scorching African desert that I found even more 
extraordinary evidence of volcanoes sustaining, and even 
nurturing, human life.Water Tower of the Sahara
Trou au Natron, Tibesti mountains of Chad.1
‘In the desert, life’s pleasures are simple but very real: a long 
drink of clean water.’
 – Wilfred Thesiger, ‘A camel journey to Tibesti’2I
t’s not every day that you meet an astronaut, especially one 
who turns out to have had a hand in your research. But it 
happened to me entirely unexpectedly in the early 2000s aboard 
a sailboat in the Gulf of Mexico. The encounter was with 
Captain Michael Baker, veteran of four space missions. I was 
excited to be able to tell him that I was studying experimental 
radar imagery recorded from the Space Shuttle. His reply took 
me aback: ‘I commanded that mission and operated the radar. I 
collected those data!’
Radar devices both transmit and receive electromagnetic 
energy using an antenna. Think of air-traffi c control radar, for 
example: a rotating aerial beams out microwave energy, and the 
illuminated display shows the location of planes that refl ect some 
of the signal back. The strength of the ‘echo’ depends on the size 
and shape of the aircraft.3
 But radar does more than this – it is 
also sensitive to the target’s ‘roughness’. A smooth-topped ash 
deposit looks dark in a radar image because most of the micro￾waves are scattered away, while a bouldery lava fl ow refl ects 
more of the beam back to the sensor and appears bright. NASA 
was interested in this capability for mapping the geology of the 
inner planets, notably the spectacular igneous terrain of Venus.4
The region I had been looking at via this radar imagery wasn’t 
on Earth’s sister planet, but it might as well have been, since it 
was barely easier to reach: the Tibesti massif of the eastern 
Sahara desert. Although one of the largest volcanic hotspots on 
our planet – ten times the area of the Big Island of Hawai‘i, or 
about the size of Switzerland – the region remains barely known 200 Mountains of Fire
scientifi cally, owing to decades of confl ict and a legacy of land￾mines.5
 I was curious to understand how the Tibesti volcanoes, 
like Mount Paektu, had formed so far from a tectonic plate 
boundary, and this required understanding their geological 
history.6
 As I explained my interests to Captain Baker, he smiled 
and added, ‘That range is the most striking land feature I ever 
saw from space – a huge, dark smudge in the largest hot desert 
on Earth, right in the heart of Africa.’
I had long felt a calling to desert travel, fuelled by reading 
books such as Wilfred Thesiger’s Arabian Sands, and seeing 
movies like The Flight of the Phoenix and Werner Herzog’s Fata 
Morgana. I’d even looked into taking a Land Rover maintenance 
course in my twenties, contemplating a trans-Sahara trip. But 
my particular fi xation on the Tibesti arose from conversations 
with a retired colleague, Dick Grove, who had travelled there in 
1957. Dick’s reminiscences thrilled me; he spoke of travel by 
camel, ambitious volcano ascents, nights so quiet you could 
hear shooting stars, and stumbling across spectacular ancient 
rock art.7
 On top of that, as impressive as it can be to tour the 
Earth from a computer, you can’t collect geological specimens 
that way. And Dick had none for me to work with: ‘All my rock 
samples were lost – our army drivers tossed them out of the 
Land Rovers, for some reason.’ I was desperate to follow in 
Dick’s footsteps, to hammer the rocks, to see the volcanic strata, 
but the security situation on the ground only ever seemed to 
deteriorate, with continual violence and political unrest making 
the region near impossible to access.
I was astonished, then, in 2015 when I spotted the following 
report on the website of the scientifi c journal, Nature8
:
Fears of terrorism and political instability put some scientists 
off joining geologist Stefan Kröpelin on his latest expedition 
to unlock the secrets of the Sahara desert. One of the most Water Tower of the Sahara 201
experienced Sahara researchers in the world, the 63-year-old 
geologist from the University of Cologne in Germany sets out 
on 19 February [2015] on a six-week trip to the remote Tibesti 
mountains in northern Chad . . . But the mountains are also 
close to the Libyan border where terrorists are rumoured to 
be operating training camps.
I was agog. Not only was Kröpelin bound for the Tibesti, but 
according to the article he planned to reach its most emblematic 
volcano, Emi Koussi, the highest point in the Sahara and with 
a caldera colossal enough to enclose a city the size of Boston. 
It brought back memories of drooling over it in space images, 
which have often been my gateway drug to real-world adven￾ture. I was so impressed by Kröpelin’s plans that my instant 
reaction was to write an email wishing him success.
I wouldn’t have to salivate much longer; the following year, I 
found myself substituting for a scientist who had been put off 
joining Kröpelin on a follow-up mission. And, this time, Kröpelin 
was keen to have a volcanologist on the team. Until now, I had 
only thought of the Tibesti as an unreachable geological wonder 
– the chance for me to go was the fulfi lment of a fever dream. I 
would soon discover that the dark smudge in the Sahara has a 
human signifi cance as profound as its geological roots.
*
The extent to which climate has shaped world history has 
become something of an academic quarrel. Many natural scien￾tists studying past climatic fl uctuations recognise the infl uence 
of environmental change on pre-industrial societies. On the 
other hand, most historians explain the rise and decline of states 
and empires in terms of political, economic, social and cultural 
factors. Both perspectives are valid, but anyone who denies that 202 Mountains of Fire
environment plays any role in human aff airs needs only to 
compare maps of world population density and agricultural 
productivity: societies fl ourish where there is food and water. 
And there is very little of either of these in deserts.
While few people live in the Sahara, a region as vast as the 
U.S., tens of thousands of migrants traverse it annually, hoping 
to fi nd a new life in Europe. Some do not make it – their vehicles 
break down in the sand. Without water, human survival can be 
counted in days. In 2017, more than forty men, women and 
children perished when the truck they were travelling in broke 
down in northern Niger.
But the Sahara has not always been so inhospitable. Today’s 
desperate migrants follow prehistoric trails established when the 
Sahara was less arid. In the eastern Sahara, these converge in the 
Tibesti mountains, strategically connecting northern and central 
Africa and the Nile Valley. Dick Grove had been one of the fi rst 
to recognise the geological evidence for a once-wetter Saharan 
climate in ancient lake and river sediments in the Tibesti – lakes 
and rivers only exist if there is rain or snow. But radiocarbon 
dating in the 1960s was still in its infancy, and it was unclear 
if these deposits were younger or older than the last Ice 
Age, which ended around 12,000 years ago.9
 Thanks to Stefan 
Kröpelin’s research, it is now clear that the rocks Dick studied 
date to between 8500 and 5300 BCE.10 This interval is now 
referred to as the ‘African Humid Period’ – or, more lyrically, 
‘the green Sahara’ – and it came about through shifts in tropical 
rainfall belts, largely driven by a 26,000-year-cycle in the orienta￾tion of the Earth’s axis that made for wetter summers.11 But think 
not of the Sahara transformed into lush jungle; imagine instead 
an open savannah landscape like the Sahel today: good for hunt￾ing and grazing.
Today, beyond the banks of the Nile and a few scattered 
oases, the eastern Sahara is so devoid of moisture that it is almost Water Tower of the Sahara 203
completely unpopulated. The mere presence, then, of a stone 
tool or fragment of pottery in the sand bears witness to a once 
more favourable climate. The onset of the ‘green Sahara’ was 
fast-paced: dunes turned to scrubland over, at most, a few 
centuries, providing subsistence for hunter-gatherers. By 7000 
BCE, nomads arrived, bringing sheep and goats. But things 
shifted back around 5000 BCE, when the desert reclaimed its 
territory. By 3500 BCE, the rains had all but stopped. Human 
survival demanded mobility – the pastoralists and foragers had 
to keep moving to follow the rains. Stefan Kröpelin thinks the 
resulting ‘climate migration’ stimulated the rise of civilisation 
along the Nile in Egypt and Sudan.12
But even in the hottest latitudes, a few ecological niches 
remained, most notably in the Tibesti, the Sahara’s largest and 
loftiest massif, whose stature still brings rainfall to this day. Flora 
and fauna, including people, found refuge there when hyper￾aridity gripped the region, as it has done repeatedly during past 
ice ages. When the Sahara greened they could extend their 
ranges again.
The inhabitants of the Tibesti are known as the Tubu. Their 
ancestry is not found in chronicles – it is inscribed in rockfaces. 
The rugged terrain of their mountain stronghold helped to 
forge their skills in raiding and defence.13 It was the lure of a 
region ‘all but unvisited and unknown to the outside world’ that 
brought the British explorer, Wilfred Thesiger, to the Tibesti in 
1938.14 While it remains mysterious and inscrutable for outsid￾ers even today, the Tibesti’s importance as a trans-Saharan 
nexus saw the Tubu interact with whomsoever showed up over 
the centuries – Arabs, Ottomoans, Germans, French, Italians, 
British – as colonial, expansionist and religious spheres waxed 
and waned.
Being situated at the north-western frontier of Chad, the 
Tibesti lie closer to Libya, Niger, Algeria, Sudan, Egypt, Nigeria 204 Mountains of Fire
and Cameroon than to the levers of central governance in 
Chad’s capital N’Djamena. Confl ict has plagued the region 
since the country’s independence from France in 1960. 
Following the Arab Spring and downfall of Muammar Gaddafi 
in Libya, the situation on the ground only became more unsta￾ble, with the rise of extremist groups in neighbouring countries. 
A gold rush in the Miski valley, which bisects the south-eastern 
Tibesti, added to tensions, with thousands of migrant miners 
skirmishing with the Tubu over scant water resources. The 
Tibesti is now a hub for gangs, rebels, mercenaries, kidnappers 
and traffi ckers; a conduit for weapons, drugs and people.15
Given this violent backdrop, the UK Foreign Offi ce advised 
against all travel to northern Chad. This was a challenge for me 
in planning my trip to join Stefan Kröpelin’s team, as I had to 
have a risk assessment for the expedition approved by my 
university. I emailed Stefan for help and was amused by his 
reply: ‘I have never done a risk assessment in my life.’ Somewhat 
reassuringly, he added: ‘But you don’t need to worry about 
terrorism except in the capital.’ I formulated a suitable evalua￾tion of threats: snake bites, heatstroke, landmines, kidnapping, 
vehicle breakdowns, and so on. It was formally approved, though 
it was made clear to me that my insurance policy would not 
cover hostage negotiations. After experiences like my brush 
with Habib and his friend in the Danakil, and aware of the rise 
in kidnappings elsewhere in the Sahara, there was, naturally, a 
knot of anxiety amidst the excitement and anticipation I felt to 
be bound for the mountains of my mind.
Arriving in N’Djamena, we were met off the plane by Baba 
Mallaye, Stefan’s long-time partner at Chad’s National Centre 
for Research and Development.16 Joining us were botanist Frank 
Darius, archaeologist Jan Kuper and fi lmmaker Srdan Keca. 
Our transport on to the Tibesti was a twin-engine military plane 
piloted by a Ukrainian who had ended up in Chad because his Water Tower of the Sahara 205
eyesight no longer qualifi ed him to fl y in his native country. 
That wasn’t a circumstance foreseen in my risk assessment, but 
we were in safe hands. Half an hour into the fl ight, I looked out 
the crazed window in the old Antonov’s fuselage: the fawn 
desert plain was featureless but for arcs of darker scrub that 
traced out meanders of the dry Bahr el Ghazal riverbed. There 
was no sign of roads, though here and there the tin roof of a 
dwelling would momentarily fl are with refl ected sunlight. Until 
5,000 years ago, this vast area is said to have been covered by a 
‘mega-lake’ the size of Germany; the area of present-day Lake 
Chad is less than half a per cent of what was once here.
After a refuelling stop in the oasis settlement of Faya, we were 
soon above the Tibesti’s south-eastern corner.17 It was an inef￾fable thrill to lay eyes on the volcano summits for the fi rst time 
– even from this distance, through a smeary window and desert 
haze. Just calling their names out to the others above the din of 
the engines was enough to make me almost delirious with excite￾ment: Emi Koussi, Tarso Yega, Pic Toussidé . . . I couldn’t believe 
my luck.
*
Stefan (who bears more than a passing resemblance to Peter 
O’Toole in David Lean’s 1962 fi lm Lawrence of Arabia) was just 
eighteen when, in 1970, he bought an old Volkswagen microbus 
and drove from Munich to Kathmandu. The arid landscapes of 
south-west Asia captivated him. Later, as a student in Berlin, he 
chaperoned guests of the city’s renowned fi lm festival, including 
Martin Scorsese, Robert De Niro and David Bowie. But while 
most would be starstruck amongst such celebrities, Stefan’s 
polestar was by now the sense of freedom he experienced in 
rocky deserts. ‘That’s where I feel at home,’ he told me, ‘and in 
this place, where nobody thinks anybody ever set foot, you fi nd 206 Mountains of Fire
Palaeolithic hand axes, Neolithic pottery, meteorites, strange 
minerals, ancient traces. In the vastness, your existence has no 
meaning and yet every drop of water becomes unbelievably 
precious.’
Stefan’s footprint in the Tibesti maintains a tradition of 
German exploration of the region. The fi rst European to visit 
the massif and tell the tale was a Prussian physician, Gustav 
Nachtigal, who began his odyssey in 1869 in Tripoli, then under 
Ottoman control. Five years and 6,000 miles later he re-emerged 
from the interior of Africa in El-Obeid (Sudan) after the adven￾ture of a lifetime. His assignment was to deliver a gift to the 
Sultan of Bornu, near Lake Chad, from the King of Prussia. But 
his real motivation was to follow the example of his hero, 
Heinrich Barth, ‘one of the greatest African explorers of all 
time’, who had crossed the Sahara in the 1850s.18 Upon reach￾ing a fork in the trail north-west of the Tibesti in June 1869, 
Nachtigal saw his chance for glory and succumbed to the ‘irre￾sistible lure of the unknown’– he diverged from the direct route 
to Bornu.19 If only he’d done a risk assessment fi rst.
For days, he and his guides struggled in merciless summer 
heat across stony plains, and rocky ravines. What little water 
they carried was evaporating through the goat-skin water bags. 
None could be found to restock, nor was there any fodder for 
the camels. Worse still, Nachtigal had a suppurating eye infec￾tion and could barely see where he was going. As they drank the 
last drops of water, the ‘fate most dreaded by desert travellers’ 
was close. Too debilitated to walk, the explorers abandoned their 
baggage and heaved themselves onto the camels. An hour after 
sunrise, the intensifying heat felt like a ‘sea of fi re’. Nachtigal’s 
airways were parched, his eyes burned, and he experienced 
severe strangury. For such a meagre adventure, he could not 
even draw grim satisfaction from the prospect of posthumous 
distinction.Water Tower of the Sahara 207
On the brink of death, Nachtigal began hallucinating. A 
colossal horned goat was bounding towards him, a man on its 
back. As it approached, the goat transformed into a camel; the 
man into one of his guides, Birsa, who was miraculously bring￾ing two full water bags, collected from a nearby water source, in 
the nick of time.
Surprisingly unfazed – or at least undeterred – by this brush 
with death by desiccation, it didn’t take long for Nachtigal to 
fi nd himself in another life-threatening situation. Arriving in 
Bardai, the main settlement of the Tibesti, he was promptly 
detained in his tent while the Tubu elders argued over whether 
or not to disembowel him. After a month in captivity, during 
which he was tormented daily by girls who pelted him with 
stones if he tried to sneak out for water, he escaped with his 
guides during the night. Later, he would have to abandon his 
rock samples in favour of carrying water. His barometers, 
thermometers and hypsometers were uncalibrated; his maps, 
made without astronomical observations, were inaccurate. He 
later wrote: ‘If my sojourn there did not yield the scientifi c 
results to be desired, this is explained by the unfortunate 
circumstances in which I made the journey.’ But he is overly 
dismissive of his achievements, which include many insightful 
observations of the topography of the Tibesti and customs of 
the Tubu.
My own experience of Bardai was quite the reverse of 
Nachtigal’s. We were welcomed warmly by the local governor 
and ushered to a campground next to his residence. Here, we 
assembled our vehicles and met Mehdi, who would be our guide 
throughout the journey. We fi lled up on water and fuel, and 
bought all the dates we could carry. Our fi rst destination would 
be the most prominent volcano of the Tibesti, Pic Toussidé. 
Surpassing 3,200 metres above sea level, it is the second-highest 
point in the Sahara, and a beacon on the trans-Saharan routes 208 Mountains of Fire
between Libya, Niger and Chad. Dick Grove had reached its 
summit in 1957 and had written notes on its geology in a paper, 
in which he added hints of the personal experience: ‘[The lava 
fl ows] are bounded by high lateral ridges of large rough blocks. 
These can be negotiated without much climbing skill, but are 
very sharp and abrasive, damaging to boots and knees.’20 From 
its unblemished conical form and patina of its lavas, Toussidé 
appears to be the youngest volcano of the Tibesti. In space 
images, it looks very much like a black octopus – the tentacles 
formed from snaking lava fl ows, the head an apron of lava 
confi ned within the subdued rim of an ancient caldera.
Our route to Toussidé followed closely that taken by Nachtigal 
as he fl ed Bardai. Crossing the volcanic plateau, his feet were 
cut by sharp rocks, and he shivered at night since most of his 
garments and bedding had been stolen. Four-wheel-drive vehi￾cles and sleeping bags made for an easier journey by far, but the 
going was still slow owing to the rough ground. We only made it 
about fi fteen miles beyond the oasis before pitching camp in a 
ravine of orange-pink ignimbrite that put me very much in 
mind of the Altiplano in Chile, with its knife-cut quebradas. The 
Tubu describe this landscape aptly with the word tarso, which 
translates as a steep-sided plateau, ‘diffi cult to reach but easy to 
traverse’.21
It was late the following afternoon as we approached Toussidé 
across an intricately gullied stony plain dotted with ancient rock 
tombs and stone circles. Each wrinkle in the topography was 
accentuated by a drape of pink pumice, the dregs of the last 
large explosive eruption here. The looming volcano was precisely 
demarcated by its skirt of lava fl ows, as if an enormous quantity 
of pitch had spread around its base. We set up camp right at the 
toe of this endless bulwark of jagged black rock. As the sun set 
and the air chilled, we explored an Ottoman-era fort with a wide 
enclosure and sentry posts.22 Situated well over 2,000 metres Water Tower of the Sahara 209
above sea level, on the route to Zouar, the Tibesti’s second larg￾est outpost, this would have been a strategic spot.
We were up at dawn to climb Toussidé, eager to get going 
while it was cool. As the sun rose, the volcano glowed an intense 
brick orange, with sinuous shadows tracing the paths of untold 
lava fl ows. Once we had clambered up the fl ow front, we faced 
an immense rampart of blocky lava, like an endless accumula￾tion of washing-machine-sized shrapnel. It looked somewhere 
between daunting and impenetrable. Each step had to be 
perfectly placed to avoid a twisted ankle or worse. There was no 
soil, no vegetation. I stopped often to fi lm the scene and soon 
fell behind the others.
The only way up was via the lava channels, which were sepa￾rated by high barricades of loose rock. These ducts invariably 
culminated in an unscalable cliff , with the only option being to 
clamber up the crumbling side walls in the hope the adjacent 
channel would lead further. Again and again, I found myself 
having to cross the grain of the volcano – just as Dick Grove had 
described it. Reaching another precarious ridge, I paused for 
breath, and smiled when I saw it was the last. On the other side 
was a steep tract of pink pyroclastic gravel. But disconcertingly, 
there was no sign of the others. Had they got that far ahead? 
Then I spotted a fi gure near the summit, leaning forwards, as if 
looking through binoculars or taking a picture. I was sure it was 
Stefan and waved, but he did not respond. A moment later, he 
was gone. I pressed on, but the gravel rested on fi rmer rock and 
I might as well have been trying to climb a tower of ball bear￾ings, my purchase on the ground all the less controlled thanks to 
an unwieldy backpack, camera gear and tripod. I could only 
keep going on all fours.
Seven hours after setting out and having taken little rest, I 
reached the peak, elated. But Stefan was nowhere to be seen, 
nor any of our team. I was baffl ed. Had I been hallucinating, like 210 Mountains of Fire
Nachtigal? Had they dropped down the other side of the cone 
to fi nd a more sheltered spot to camp? In any case, the best 
option was to stay put. I only had half a bottle of water left and 
didn’t need further exertion. To add to my concern, there was 
no answer when I tried reaching Stefan by satellite phone.
The summit crater was roughly the size of a soccer fi eld, with 
a sloping rim of toughened pink ash on one side and a mound 
of dark lava on the other. The fl oor was sparsely vegetated with 
sagebrush, sedge and grass. There was not a single trace of 
human presence – no rusted tins, no hearths, no stone tools or 
cairns, no graffi ti. Several steaming grottos in the lava nurtured 
terrariums of ferns, herbs and liverworts. I stuck my hands in 
one to warm them up. Meanwhile, the setting sun cast a shadow 
of Toussidé’s perfect cone across the tarso, pinnacles and castel￾lated ridges poking above desert haze. In the near distance, the 
gaping caldera of another volcano, Trou au Natron, was fi lled 
with a tenuous mist. I suddenly felt compelled to reach for the 
phone again, this time to call Dick Grove at his home in 
Cambridge. The line was broken, but I think I managed to 
explain how he’d inspired me to follow in his footsteps to the 
top of Toussidé, nearly sixty years after his scramble up the 
mountain.
By twilight, I spotted a torch fl ash at the base of the summit 
cone. I shouted, and to my great relief, established contact with 
the others. I couldn’t understand how I had got ahead, but it 
made no sense to descend in the dark. After a meal of dry-as￾dust dates, I slid into my sleeping bag. I needed it – the air 
temperature fell well below freezing. It was so still, all I could 
hear was my heartbeat.
In the morning, I scurried down the cone. Stefan was over￾joyed; he’d feared I might have broken a leg amidst the lava 
fi elds. I explained sighting him at the summit and he laughed. 
‘Maybe you saw a barbary sheep.’Water Tower of the Sahara 211
‘But it was taking photographs!’ I protested.
Clearly I was dehydrated, and so looked for water to refi ll my 
bottles. But there was none; the guides had brought far less than 
we’d agreed in camp. This was devastating news, as the descent 
on this ground was unlikely to be a breeze, especially with my 
extra burden of rock samples.
Had the guides not found a far easier route down, I would 
have been in real trouble. But the heat only increased as the 
morning wore on and as we lost altitude. I took a few drops of 
my remaining water every twenty minutes. Feeling increasingly 
debilitated, I struggled to keep moving. The infi nitesimal relief 
each next dash of water would bring was my incentive. It was 
after dusk when we reached the vehicles, seven hours later. 
Though I wasn’t near the state that Nachtigal had found himself 
in, this remains the closest I’ve been to reaching a standstill. 
Looking back I had put myself and my colleagues in danger by 
abandoning three key principles of exploration: time spent in 
reconnaissance is rarely wasted; don’t get separated from your 
group; and never, ever take it for granted that someone else is 
bringing your food or water.
*
While Toussidé has archetypal volcano form – it is classically 
conical and covered in lava – Trou au Natron, our next destina￾tion, is a gaping orifi ce, and a very large one – fi ve miles across 
and more than half a mile deep. Peering into the maw, it was 
hard to believe there was anything but a freefall route to the 
bottom. But Mehdi knew of a trail cut into the jointed cliff s of 
beige-pink ignimbrite that formed the upper strata of the 
volcano. The crater fl oor, veined with dry watercourses, 
appeared so far below I had the impression of looking down 
from an aeroplane window. Patches of white, pink and grey soda 212 Mountains of Fire
deposits shimmered at its centre, punctuated by three dark￾brown cones – one of them perfectly symmetrical, like an open 
parasol.
We came to a small cavern in a grey-pink band of lava; it had 
clearly been hewn out artifi cially. The path was strewn with 
fragments of grey obsidian, and I realised this was a prehistoric 
quarry, where seams of the vitreous rock had been mined as raw 
material for stone tools. It was an extraordinary and unexpected 
vestige of the Tubu’s ancestral culture. Further down, we 
reached a shelf in the caldera wall scattered with patches of 
chalky white rock. These deposits were double my height and 
distinctly layered. They sat on the same lava rubble we were 
crossing, and were evidently vestiges of a much younger veneer. 
I would have taken them for volcanic ash, but Stefan, already at 
the outcrop and examining a piece with his hand lens, called out 
that they were ‘diatomites’. So, not an igneous rock at all, but a 
biological one: diatomites are accumulations of the miniscule 
silicic fossils of diatoms, a variety of freshwater algae found in 
lakes. This was astonishing because we were still 500 metres 
above the crater fl oor – the implication was that a lake at least 
that deep and nearly four miles across had once existed here. 
That is a phenomenal amount of water to contemplate in the 
middle of the Sahara.
Stefan read my thoughts: ‘It is impossible to believe there was 
such a big lake here, even in the green Sahara time.’ Today, 
annual rainfall in the Tibesti mountains amounts to a few centi￾metres, a fraction of what Las Vegas, one of the driest cities in 
the U.S., receives. Even had there been ten times as much rain 
in the past, it would have taken centuries to fi ll the crater. And 
with evaporation equivalent to a centimetre or two of water per 
day, how could any rainfall ever accumulate? On the other hand, 
it was hard to see how these could be mere localised sediments 
– there was nothing to hold water here except the cliff s on the Water Tower of the Sahara 213
opposite side of the caldera. The only alternative explanation is 
that the crater has deepened substantially since the lake was 
present, leaving the diatomite high and dry. But that, too, seems 
far-fetched.
Stefan, Frank and Jan set about taking samples, while I imag￾ined a scene like present-day Crater Lake in Oregon, with obsid￾ian miners coming to the shoreline to fi ll their water containers. 
Continuing along the trail, Mehdi located a guelta, a freshwater 
pool, in a deep cleft in the rockface. Shrikes fl itted at the water’s 
edge as we fi lled our bottles using a bucket on the end of a rope. 
I’d not go thirsty on this volcano.
Over the course of our expedition, I’d heard Stefan frequently 
refer to the Tibesti as ‘the water tower of the Sahara’. After we 
had set up camp on the crater fl oor, I got the chance to probe 
what he meant by that. He explained that 10,000 to 5,000 years 
ago during the green Sahara period, the Tibesti massif, because 
of its great height and extent, drew rain from monsoonal air. 
Over the millennia, this charged a vast aquifer. The largest lake 
of the Sahara is 250 miles away, where there is no rainfall now, 
and where the evaporation rate is equivalent to six metres per 
year. Many thousands of people fl ock to the oases there for work 
in the date-harvesting season. ‘The only explanation for such 
unbelievable amounts of water,’ he explained, ‘is the rain that 
fell on the Tibesti thousands of years ago, that was stored 
beneath the mountains, and still fl ows underground. If the 
volcanoes never existed, all you would fi nd here would be baking 
sand where no human set foot for 5,000 years.’23
We were back on the road for the next week, heading for the 
east side of the massif, and hoping to explore Tiéroko volcano, 
of which next to nothing is known. Wilfred Thesiger described 
it as ‘the most magnifi cent of all the Tibesti mountains’, but 
even Britain’s most indomitable twentieth-century explorer 
could not reach it. The only visit by outsiders that we knew of 214 Mountains of Fire
had been made by three mountaineers on Dick Grove’s expedi￾tion in 1957. We were really going off the map, and I probably 
felt the same kind of wild excitement Nachtigal had experienced 
as he headed into the unknown at the fork in the trail a century 
and a half earlier.
Along the way, if I spotted an intriguing rock outcrop from the 
car window, I would ask to stop, dash out with my hammer, bag 
a sample, take a photo and GPS reading as quickly as possible, 
and jump back into my seat. Stefan’s approach, meanwhile, was 
both systematic and opportunistic, since he continuously 
recorded our position, while frequently taking photographs and 
writing notes. He often consulted a photocopy of the copious 
fi eldnotes he had written on his previous mission to the Tibesti 
(like Oscar Wilde’s Lady Bracknell, perhaps he enjoyed having 
something sensational to read on the long journey). It was very 
impressive practice – Stefan wouldn’t even go for a pee behind a 
sand dune without taking his camera and notebook, just in case 
he might fi nd a curiosity. Every bird in fl ight, each rock engrav￾ing or unusual landform, was imaged and logged. I am always 
advising students to work like this in the fi eld; you never know if 
you will get the chance to return, and I have often kicked myself, 
months after a volcano trip, when a pattern starts to emerge in 
the data but there is a missing piece of the puzzle – a rock sample 
I could have collected, or a lacuna in my gas measurements just 
when things were about to boil. My students laugh when they see 
my sample bags with cryptic labels like ‘from near the place we 
had lunch’ instead of GPS coordinates.
Each day on our journey, we would set up camp wherever 
we’d got to by sundown, when it was time for our Chadian 
colleagues to observe maghrib. One evening, we camped close 
to a particularly large rock tomb at the foot of a bluff of ignim￾brite. This was the far northern limit of a vast shield of tuff 
spread around Voon volcano, whose caldera is fi ve times larger Water Tower of the Sahara 215
even than that of Trou au Natron. I clambered up the rockface 
and realised we were at a confl uence of two dry valleys. There 
was abundant evidence that Neolithic people came here: every￾where I looked on the ground, there were pottery fragments and 
worked fl akes and chipped cobbles of obsidian and other rock 
types. Jan, visibly excited by the archaeological potential, 
described it as a ‘lithic workshop’. ‘This would have been a stra￾tegic location to watch animals and people following the water￾courses,’ he explained. ‘And this isn’t just somewhere people 
stopped overnight; this is where they produced tools and likely 
stayed for long periods.’ I collected some of the obsidian pieces, 
wondering if some might prove to match the raw material we 
had seen in the crater wall of Trou au Natron. Once again, I felt 
we’d come to a portal between present and deep past. None of 
these symbols of human presence and mobility would be here 
but for the volcanoes – without them, this would just be another 
barren tract of sand.
Despite the long days of driving, the itinerary continually 
presented new wonders. I sometimes felt I’d passed through 
several countries in a matter of hours – from wadis fi lled with 
tamarisks and acacia with clumps of cistanche in yellow bloom at 
their trunks, to basalt plains and stony desert. Sometimes the 
scenery seemed straight out of photographs taken by NASA’s 
Mars rovers. The extra-terrestrial reverie might then be abruptly 
punctured at the sight of a rusting tank, a relic of the Chad-Libya 
confl ict, its gun barrel aimed impotently at featureless haze.
The largest community we saw on the eastern side of the 
Tibesti was Yebi Bou, still pockmarked with bomb craters from 
the war. One of our drivers hailed from the village, and we 
paused so he could visit his family. The cluster of oval dwellings, 
made from mudbricks and palm mats, overlooked a gorge fi lled 
with date palms: another oasis fed by the Tibesti’s 10,000-year￾old fossil water.216 Mountains of Fire
The village had been the starting point for the three alpinists 
who surveyed Tiéroko in 1957. They had travelled by camel, 
adept in such a landscape as they are able to step delicately 
between rocks. It was going to be trickier to get our unwieldy 
vehicles to the caldera. The mountain is twenty miles across at 
the base, but lacks the conical form of a pristine volcano, its 
fl anks being scored by deep ravines, or enneris, and its rim 
defi ned by serrated ridges, sheer-faced towers and toothy pinna￾cles. The climbers had given them names like Hadrian’s Wall 
and Battleship – but these were inept monikers for the imposing 
ramparts that soon confronted us.
We had to hike the last stretch up and once inside the 
caldera I felt I was in the sandpit of giants. I set about cover￾ing as much ground as possible and collecting the most inter￾esting rocks. The state of erosion and immense banks of 
layered gravels reminded me of a formerly glaciated land￾scape. Could ice have once capped the volcano, I wondered? 
I wish there’d been more opportunity to explore, but we were 
now under time pressure, with more than a week’s driving, all 
the way back to N’Djamena, ahead of us. We had achieved 
what we’d set out to do, but I felt almost bereft at having to 
turn around so quickly.
Our route bore south, through the Miski valley, the great 
whaleback profi le of Emi Koussi in the distance. After a near 
miss with an abandoned minefi eld (the only time I saw Mehdi 
lose his cool), we reached the Sahara of my imagination – dunes, 
Fata Morgana, torrid by day and frigid at night. Some distance 
beyond the settlement of Faya, we spied an empty palm-thatched 
shelter and took the chance of a rest in shade. Within minutes, 
overcome by the torpefying heat, all my companions were 
asleep. One of the drivers lay motionless within the splinter of 
shadow cast by his Landcruiser. Anyone stumbling across the 
scene might have suspected a catastrophe.Water Tower of the Sahara 217
Not much later we encountered one in the making. We had 
not been back on the route long when we saw something 
inconceivable: two faltering fi gures crossing the sand on foot. 
We drove up and found them to be young men carrying a 
couple of empty detergent bottles. They were gravely dehy￾drated and explained they had broken down and were looking 
for a water hole. We gave them water and went in search of 
their car, which was several miles away. It astonished us that 
they had managed to walk so far in the middle of the day. But 
more staggering, they had come to this desolate place in a Kia 
compact city car. It was tipped forwards, its front end embed￾ded in sand. To the side was a boy of ten, suff ering from heat 
stroke, and an elderly man. We gave them water, and asked 
why they were out here, risking all. They explained they were 
fl eeing Libya, hoping to reach N’Djamena and then Europe. 
They had several days’ driving still ahead. We pushed the car 
backwards and slid traction boards under the tyres to get past 
the dip where it had grounded. They were freed but ten minutes 
later, had snagged in the sand again. We extracted them again, 
and so this continued until we reached the safety of a defi nite 
trail the next day.
It is very likely the refugees would have perished had we not 
come along when we did – we saw no other vehicles and there is 
no clear route across the sand. I cannot imagine how desperate 
their circumstances in Libya must have been for them to 
contemplate such an ill-equipped journey. I recalled Stefan 
explaining to me the choices faced by Neolithic people as the 
Sahara expanded again 7,000 years ago. ‘Survival means mobil￾ity,’ he had said. The vignette we had witnessed of the fl ight and 
plight of contemporary migrants seemed like an echo of ancient 
passages via the crossroads of the Tibesti.
*218 Mountains of Fire
Thankfully, unlike Dick Grove and Gustav Nachtigal, I didn’t 
mislay or abandon my rock specimens. The work on them 
continues, and we have already made fresh discoveries and are 
understanding more about the origins of the Tibesti. Several of 
the pyroclastic samples have been dated, giving a sense of the 
history and longevity of volcanism here – Voon’s caldera formed 
eight million years ago, while the pumice drifts near Pic Toussidé 
are the traces of an eruption that took place just 100,000 years 
ago. The meaning of Toussidé – ‘which killed Tubu people by 
fi re’ – hints at much more recent eruptions that occurred within 
the span of oral history.24
Another puzzle I wanted to solve was how this volcanic region 
had formed so far from any tectonic plate boundary. From anal￾ysis of the lavas, it appears the answer lies in an uncommonly 
hot region of the mantle under the Tibesti, and localised stretch￾ing of the plate, which provoked rock melting by releasing pres￾sure.25 The resulting magma gathered in chambers in the crust, 
sporadically feeding eruptions large and small.
Meanwhile, geochemical fi ngerprints of the obsidian I 
collected connect the artefacts from near Toussidé, Bardai and 
Tiér oko, revealing that the timeworn trails we followed across 
the massif have been in use for many thousands of years. I 
suspect Tibesti obsidian was prized even further afi eld – in 
Sudan, southern Libya, Niger, and perhaps as far away as Egypt 
– but it will need new fi eld surveys and lab analysis of any fi nds 
to prove it.
Stefan’s dating of the lake deposits from Trou au Natron 
shows that water fi lled the crater between 8000 and 3500 BCE, 
fi rmly within the ‘green Sahara’ period.26 But we remain baffl ed 
by the freshwater sediments found so high above the crater fl oor 
– scientifi c questions often elude easy answers.27 I continue, 
though, to marvel at the idea of a vast lake in the middle of what 
is now the largest desert on Earth.Water Tower of the Sahara 219
Following our expedition in 2016, violence escalated signifi -
cantly in the Tibesti, with deadly confrontations between armed 
non-state fi ghters and government forces, and between rival 
gangs of artisanal gold miners. In 2021, an insurgent group, 
FACT, based in the Tibesti region, began advancing south. The 
Chadian president, Idriss Déby, was among those killed on the 
frontline in the ensuing combat. During our climb of Toussidé, 
I had remarked to Mehdi that it was sixty years since Dick 
Grove was there. He had replied that it might be another sixty 
before the next researcher would come. I had taken it as a joke, 
but with hindsight, it may well be a realistic prediction. This 
weird and wonderful land is likely to remain very seldom seen 
by the outside world for the foreseeable future. I thank my lucky 
stars I got to see it when I did.
I had gone to the Sahara seeking rocks and stratigraphic 
sections, but our expedition opened my gaze not only to a spec￾tacular, extra-terrestrial landscape, but also to the vital signifi -
cance of the mountains for human life. Had the Tibesti never 
existed, there would be no rain, no aquifer, one less haven in the 
desert, and the eastern Sahara would be much harder to cross. 
The tarsos at fi rst appear desolate, devoid of human traces, yet 
look closely and it becomes clear that mounds of boulders are 
actually prehistoric tombs; scratches in cliff faces are engravings 
of cheetahs, elephants, cattle; and fl ecks of glassy black rock 
glinting in the sand are Stone Age tools. This human footprint, 
along with the evidence in the rocks, such as the lake sediments, 
for cycles of expansion and contraction of the Sahara, affi rms 
the transience and persistence, the fragility and mobility of life. 
And it all plays out where extraordinary volcanic forces prefi g￾ured environment and habitability, above all by attracting and 
storing abundant fresh water. The desert appears empty only to 
those who do not understand it.Flame in a Sea of Gold
At the edge of the crater, Antarctica.1
‘. . .  scientists walk the boundary between sensory, intimate 
experience and objective, universal knowledge as embodied 
people in the world.’
– Jessica O’Reilly, ‘Sensing the ice’2Mount Erebus is unpopulated. No fl owers bloom on the 
 Antarctic volcano, no mice hide in the rocks; its icy form 
baffl es the fl ow of Earth’s purest air while adding to it a stream 
of its own aged brew of effl uent. Ice sheets waxed and waned 
during a million years as its stature took on the world’s largest 
volcanoes. No rain falls, no groundwater fl ows; only the hiss of 
its primal lava lake and strange twang of icequakes break the 
silence of a still day . . .
It is a lonely place but for me it brings an intense joy: an 
intoxicating solitude that comes from immersion in an unfath￾omable icescape.
The geologist Tannatt Edgeworth David, who was the leader 
of the fi rst party to peer into the volcano’s sibilant maw in 1908, 
exalted its ‘incomparable grandeur and interest’. For him, 
Erebus was among ‘the fairest and most majestic sights that 
Earth can show’. Having spent a year of my life living near the 
volcano’s summit, plus collective years on a hundred other 
volcanoes, I can say Erebus is the most sublime and imposing 
sight I ever beheld. More people have been in space, and many 
more have summited Mount Everest, than have looked upon 
Erebus’s fi re pit.
Though Mount Erebus is new to myth-making, the mythical 
associations of its name tie it to human imagination of the distant 
past and the land of gods. In Greek legend, mighty Erebus was 
born of Chaos, and associated with the beginning of time, with 
darkness and the shadowy realm of the underworld.3
 Thanks to 
Romanticism, this symbolism grew: Erebus evoked literary or 224 Mountains of Fire
metaphoric blackness, the abyss, the afterlife. Following the 
volcano’s discovery, the idea of a lofty and sublime Erebus, of 
fi re and ice, ignited the public imagination of Earth’s extremities. 
All this proves the inspiration in so naming the mountain, which 
came about through a quirk of the British Navy.
The volcano was discovered in 1841 during the Antarctic 
voyages of Captain James Clark Ross, whose mission was 
dubbed ‘by far the greatest scientifi c undertaking . . . the world 
has ever seen’ by the polymath William Whewell (who coined 
the term ‘scientist’).4
 That same year, Franz Junghuhn was 
exploring the territory around the Toba super-volcano in 
Indonesia, Sartorius von Waltershausen was mapping Mount 
Etna in Italy, and Charles Darwin was working on his books 
about coral reefs and volcanic islands. It was also the year that 
volcanology began as a modern science, with the founding of 
the observatory on Vesuvius, an exemplar of the era’s systema￾tisation of scientifi c training and the gathering of data through 
institutions. The affi nity between the Antarctic and Neapolitan 
volcanoes goes deeper still, since both erupt a particular variety 
of magma known as phonolite or clinkstone, owing to its bell￾like ring when struck. They are more like distant cousins than 
twins, though – Vesuvius was born yesterday in comparison and 
has a lot of growing to do to reach the prominence of Erebus.
Ross’s Antarctic expedition came about after the Napoleonic 
wars, when Britain retained the world’s most powerful naval 
force but lacked an enemy to engage. That freed up its singular 
resources for an era of exploration.5
 The mission’s motive was 
to improve navigation at sea by compass, since the vagaries of 
weather meant it was often not possible to chart a course by 
sightings of sun or stars. It was thought that new observations of 
the Earth’s magnetic fi eld in the Southern Hemisphere would 
establish a theoretical framework for terrestrial magnetism along 
the lines of Newton’s law of gravity. A veteran of Arctic Flame in a Sea of Gold 225
exploration, Ross had been fi rst to reach the north magnetic 
pole and was desperate to bag its southerly counterpart. He was 
given overall command of the expedition, two warships – Erebus
and Terror – and a hundred pages of instructions from the Royal 
Society of London on how to collect the data required.
But why Erebus? Why Terror? A ship bound for frozen seas 
had to be sturdy enough to overcome pack ice. Such strength 
was found in the navy’s ‘bomb vessels’, so-called because they 
were built to withstand the recoil from fi ring mortars. Refi tted 
for scientifi c endeavour and capacious enough to carry boats 
and provisions, these ungainly but unshakable craft stood the 
best chance of reaching the ends of the world. Refl ecting their 
original purpose for shore bombardment, the Royal Navy 
routinely gave them explosive or hellish names, like Strombolo, 
Aetna, Volcano, Blast, Convulsion, Infernal and Belzebub. The 
abyssal connotations of HMS Erebus implied where those in her 
gunsights were headed.6
Each ship had a full complement of sixty-four men as they 
left England at the end of September 1839. Over the next year, 
they called at a succession of oceanic volcanoes during a wind￾ing voyage south: Madeira, Ten erife, Cape Verde, Trinidade, St 
Helena, the Kerguelen Islands. If only Ross had had a compe￾tent geologist with him – someone like the pioneering volcan￾ologist George Poulett Scrope, perhaps.7
 This would have been 
such an extraordinary opportunity to study a variety of volca￾noes. Instead, the role was taken by Robert McCormick, a 
mediocre naturalist and surgeon who had sailed with Charles 
Darwin on the second voyage of HMS Beagle, and a man far 
more interested in ornithology than rocks. McCormick’s biog￾raphers have found little to celebrate his intellect or character, 
but one has to acknowledge the genius of fi lling his geological 
collection with stones recovered from the crops of birds on his 
dissecting table.8226 Mountains of Fire
During a long stopover in Hobart, Tasmania, Ross learned 
that French and American expeditions had sailed south the 
previous summer on the same meridian he’d announced he
would take. But this ignominy would turn out to be a stroke of 
luck. At this time, almost nothing was known of Antarctica save 
for some scraps of coastline spied by James Cook and a few 
sealers. So heading into the southern ocean and hoping to fi nd 
something was like playing the game Battleships: the polar map 
was an act of imagination. Since it would be ‘inconsistent with 
the pre-eminence [England] has ever maintained’ to follow 
others, Ross decided to go south on a much more easterly 
meridian (170˚E, which cuts through the South Island of New 
Zealand). The gamble paid off , since, on this trajectory, Ross 
was able to sail much further, owing to the vast embayment in 
the Antarctic continent later named after him: the Ross Sea.
The ships encountered pack ice soon after New Year’s Day 
1841, sustaining ‘very heavy blows’ that could easily have sent 
ships and men to the seabed. They became trapped until the 
wind slackened and the ice loosened. Then, quite suddenly, they 
broke through and entered a vast sea with not a particle of ice 
ahead. Ross, his excitement at fever pitch as the lines of magnetic 
force steepened, steered towards the estimated position of the 
pole. But two days later ‘land-blink’ dashed his hopes. While 
most would have rejoiced at the sight of the yellowy gloom that 
signals looming land, for Ross it forestalled a direct passage to 
the pole under sail. As they drew closer, a mighty range of glaci￾ated mountains came into view, and at least he had the satisfac￾tion of naming its peaks and running up the British fl ag to take 
possession of some islands on behalf of Queen Victoria (bemus￾ing the penguins in the process).
Southerly winds and tides slowed their advance, and sea spray 
froze to the bows and running ropes, but at noon on 27 January, 
further south than anyone had ever been, the crew sighted a Flame in a Sea of Gold 227
‘High Island’. At fi rst, Ross mistook the vapour trail emanating 
from the summit of the island for snow drift. But while the men 
took sightings, a ‘dark cloud of smoke, tinged with fl ame’ burst 
from the summit, rising in ‘a perfectly unbroken column, one 
side jet-black, the other giving back the colours of the sun’. By 
now, all offi cers and crew on deck were transfi xed by the sight of 
a towering, ice-clad, active volcano. For Joseph Hooker, the 
young botanist aboard the Erebus, it was an awesome sight 
‘surpassing everything that can be imagined’.
Until now, Ross had named topographic features after lumi￾naries of the Royal Society, the admiralty and government, as 
well as benefactors and friends. But this volcano he named after 
his ship, and its extinct neighbour after the Terror. Perhaps 
naming a smoking volcano after a Lord of the Admiralty or the 
Queen could have been misconstrued and cost him a peerage. 
Maybe he was inspired by the ships’ volcanic associations – 
Erebus was a Hecla-class vessel (Hekla is the Icelandic volcano 
that Robert Bunsen investigated), while Terror belonged to the 
Vesuvius class. Or was it the mythological and plutonic associa￾tions of Erebus and Terror (Diemos) with the underworld, dark￾ness and threat? Whatever the commander’s motivations, the 
ships had surely earned the honour after their colossal 
circumnavigation.9
Ross still hoped to fi nd a way to sail closer to where the 
magnetic pole should be, but the coastline was unbroken, nor 
could he get through ice pack to reach a natural harbour on the 
mainland where he might overwinter.10 There was no option but 
to retreat north.
Even Ross knew few would understand his ‘deep feelings of 
regret’ at being thwarted in reaching an aspect of the globe 
beyond human sensibility, one signifi ed only by a vertically 
dipping magnetised needle. It’s probably a good thing he didn’t 
know the magnetic poles are not even stationary. In any case, 228 Mountains of Fire
what he discovered is far more signifi cant than he could ever 
have dreamed. The Transantarctic Mountains and West 
Antarctic Rift System (which rivals the East African Rift in 
scale) are features of global signifi cance for understanding 
magmatic, volcanic and tectonic processes. The island on which 
Erebus rises is now named after him, and home of the largest 
scientifi c hub in Antarctica. Captain Robert Falcon Scott later 
said of Ross’s achievements: ‘[he] wrested an open sea, a vast 
mountain range, a smoking volcano, and a hundred problems of 
great interest to the geographer’.11 This success was born of 
experience, good planning, an open mind, and a good dose of 
audacity, valour and resolve. Sure, Ross had a huge team behind 
him on board the vessels and back in Britain, and he got lucky 
– but he also made his luck.12
*
Many of the great explorers, like Ross, were military men. I 
wasn’t cut from such cloth. Perhaps closer to my mark is the 
Welsh-Australian geologist Tannatt Edgeworth David, who 
became known by his comrades as ‘the Professor’.13 He was a 
member of Ernest Shackleton’s Nimrod expedition when he 
trekked to the top of Erebus in 1908.14 What impresses me 
about David is his proclivity, even in late career, to change 
tack at the drop of a hat. Imagine: Shackleton learns of the 
Professor’s reputation, tracks him down in Sydney and says 
something like, ‘Do you fancy joining an Antarctic expedi￾tion for a month or so? It will take a while to get there, and I 
can’t guarantee plain sailing, but you’ll be back by next 
semester.’ David accepts the invitation. Then, on the voyage 
south, during which David turns fi fty (on the day Erebus is 
sighted), Shackleton (‘the Boss’) persuades him to join the 
shore party rather than return with the ship. David agrees, Flame in a Sea of Gold 229
and writes a letter to his superiors requesting exceptional 
academic leave, knowing his decision is a fait accompli since 
he cannot possibly receive a reply, favourable or otherwise, 
for another year.15
What I also admire in David is his resilience and honesty. 
Though the oldest man of the shore party and a respected 
university professor, he did not shirk manual labour or extreme 
footslogs, but he also didn’t try to hide the rigours with a smile 
for the camera. There is a famous photograph of David and his 
companions at the south magnetic pole. It was a terrible journey 
both there and back, and almost utterly pointless. You can see 
David holding the thread to activate the camera’s shutter. He 
looks comprehensively shagged, half human, and somehow 
cognisant that he had endured it all only to reach a point of no 
permanence or meaning.
The Nimrod reached Ross Island in February 1908, and the 
shore party threw themselves into building their winter quarters 
at Cape Royds on the western fringe of Erebus. It was a choice 
spot near penguin and seal colonies, which meant a ready supply 
of food and fuel. And it aff orded a spectacular view of the ice￾gripped smoking volcano, whose allure was potent. David wrote: 
‘For us, living under its shadow, the longing to climb it, and 
penetrate the mysteries beyond the veil soon became irresistibly 
strong.’ On 4 March, just a month after landing, Shackleton 
yielded to that urge, and the next day a party of six set off : 
David and his protégé Douglas Mawson (a geologist, but serv￾ing as the expedition’s physicist), Dr Alistair ‘the Mate’ Mackay 
(assistant surgeon), Lieutenant Jameson Adams (meteorolo￾gist), the multi-talented Dr Eric Marshall (surgeon, surveyor, 
cartographer and photographer) and the twenty-year-old Sir 
Philip Brocklehurst (appointed assistant geologist by Shackleton, 
though untrained in the subject and valued more by the leader 
for his physical strength and his mother’s wealth). Another 230 Mountains of Fire
young geologist with the shore party, Raymond Priestley, was 
left behind. He probably felt peeved, but his chance to summit 
would come.
The party harnessed up to the sledge, which was piled high 
with instruments and supplies, and set off from Cape Royds at 
8.45am. They skirted crevassed ice by following rock outcrops 
and moraines, but soon encountered a vexing tract of glassy 
blue ice thinly disguised beneath soft snow. Then, as more snow 
began falling, they hit a stretch of sastrugi, a stiff -peaked 
meringue of wind-sculpted snow, all the more diffi cult to cross 
with a ponderous sledge in a whiteout. The men cursed freely as 
they slipped and tripped; feet scrunched the ice while the sledge 
runners sawed it. But when they paused to rest, and once they 
had got their breath back, the silence was intense.
They made their fi rst camp near an outcrop of lava. Starving, 
they tucked into their fi rst bowls of hot, greasy ‘hoosh’, an 
Antarctic staple consisting of boiled pemmican (dehydrated 
beef and fat), chipped Plasmon biscuit (made with dried milk) 
and emergency rations. The Professor, more accustomed to 
polite meals in the faculty hall at the university, recorded that: ‘A 
man after such a meal, in any but a polar climate, would have 
seen in his sleep “more devils than vast hell can hold”.16
One man’s devils would likely have been another’s – it was 
three to a sleeping bag. Whenever one stirred, all were awoken 
by showers of tiny ice crystals formed when their breath froze 
on the reindeer-hair lining the bags. It was -23˚C (-9˚F) outside 
the tent. After more hoosh for breakfast, it was time for another 
trudge across sastrugi – but, with the gradient steepening, the 
eff ort was even more back-breaking. The sledge capsized repeat￾edly and had to be repacked – hot work, despite the freezing air. 
By late evening, they pitched camp amongst ‘fresh volcanic 
slag’, indicating recent explosive eruptions. The thermometer 
read -33˚C (-27˚F) overnight.ERUPTIONS
Clockwise from top left: Vesuvius (Italy) with lava flows in 1756, 
from William Hamilton’s Campi Phlegræi. Stromboli (Italy) snapped 
from a safe distance in 2008. Lava dome atop Merapi (Java, Indonesia), from 
Franz Junghuhn’s Java Album. Nuées ardentes descending Soufrière Hills 
(Montserrat) and feeding ash clouds.CREATION
Top left: Champagne Pool at Waiotapu (New Zealand) is acidic and 75°C, 
yet teems with microbial life, as do the fumarolic ice caves of Erebus 
(Antarctica), below. Top right: Fertile volcanic soils near Mount Sinabung 
(Sumatra, Indonesia). DESTRUCTION
Above: Advancing lava during 2021 eruption on the island of La Palma 
(Canary Islands). Below: Photographs taken a year apart from the same spot on 
Soufrière Hills (Montserrat) – note slope on right for orientation. The church 
pictured was obliterated by nuées ardentes.GLOBAL REPERCUSSIONS
Clockwise from top left: Sulphur (here being mined on Ijen volcano, Java) is the 
volcanic effluent that can change global climate. Sulphurous dust from the 1883 
Krakatau eruption caused dramatic sunsets, as seen in this drawing made beside 
the River Thames in London. The ‘blue ring’ in this stained section of a pine 
tree signals very cold late summer weather in Central Asia in 536 CE (photo 
courtesy of Ulf Bűntgen). The author (at his sweatiest) inspecting 74,000-year￾old ash deposits in India sourced from the Toba super-eruption. IN THE FIELD
Clockwise from top left: The author, singed on Momotombo (Nicaragua) 
and frozen on Erebus. The author with an infrared spectrometer on Masaya 
(Nicaragua). A colleague of the author’s installing a bespoke radar to measure 
lava lake height at the edge of Halema‘uma‘u crater (Hawai‘i).ORIGIN STORIES
Top left: Stairway to ‘Heaven Lake’ on Paektu volcano, Korea’s 
ancestral mountain. Top right: Ancient rock engravings on lava at Pu’uloa 
(‘hill of long life’) in Hawai‘i connect genealogy with geology. 
Below: Ruapehu Crater Lake (New Zealand) brought life to Mother Earth, 
according to local Māori belief. TRACES AND ARTEFACTS
Above: Trou au Natron volcano (Chad) hosted an ancient lake and 
obsidian quarry. Bottom left: Centuries-old footprints in ash on Kīlauea 
volcano (Hawai‘i). Bottom right: Obsidian implements the author found 
on Nabro (Eritrea). PORTALS TO OTHER REALMS
Top left: The animated lava lake of Ambrym volcano (Vanuatu). Top right: 
Offerings beside Bromo crater (Indonesia). Below: Easter Islanders considered 
Ranu Kao crater the entrance to the underworld for the souls of the departed.Flame in a Sea of Gold 231
The next morning brought a change of plan – only David, 
Mawson and the Mate were supposed to summit, but having 
made it this far, it was decided all would go for it. But there 
weren’t enough crampons to go round, so they had to cut 
steps into the ice. Feeling the thinning air, they stopped for 
the night near a rocky ravine. So far, the weather had been 
kind, but as they slithered awkwardly into their sleeping bags, 
and pulled the tent canvas over the top, menacing cloud was 
gathering. In an hour, the wind was howling, fi lling their sleep￾ing bags with snow.
The blizzard still raged in the morning and the party had to 
stay put. Brocklehurst and the Mate got up in the afternoon, 
perhaps for a pee, and were instantly knocked down by the force 
of the gale. Marshall, now their sleeping bag’s only anchor, 
struggled not to vanish like his companions until they remateri￾alised from the whiteout on hands and knees. Brocklehurst was 
in a bad way, but a little biscuit and Bovril chocolate lifted his 
spirits. There was nothing to wash it down, as it was impossible 
in the lashing wind to light the stoves to melt ice.
At around 4am, the atmosphere calmed. They got the stove 
burning, ate a hearty breakfast and pushed on after sunrise. 
Their skyline was the rim of an ancient caldera, behind which 
the summit cone lay. At last, they reached the crest and gazed 
upon the steam-crowned summit crater of Erebus they had so 
often marvelled at through the telescope from below. Also 
prominent were dozens of curious ice mounds. Later, they real￾ised these formed where steam emissions from the ground froze 
in the air, forming bizarre ice sculptures – one looked just like a 
lion. Frozen fumaroles like this had not been documented 
before. Recent studies on Erebus have revealed they are biologi￾cal refuges where bacteria and fungi fl ourish in the volcanic 
heat and gases. Some ecologists think they might provide clues 
as to where else in the solar system life might lurk.17232 Mountains of Fire
The exhausted party clambered down the caldera wall, pitched 
camp in a rocky gully and prepared lunch. Brocklehurst confi ded 
that he’d lost feeling in his toes. Marshall inspected them, and 
found several had turned black with severe frostbite.
The morning greeted them with the spectacle of the bluish￾grey shadow of Erebus cast on a ‘rolling sea’ of golden cloud far 
below – a scene of such ‘transcendent majesty and beauty’ that 
David was lost for words. Although the route to the summit 
looked easy, the altitude made for a ‘painfully slow’ ascent, 
except for poor Brocklehurst, who stayed in the camp. At last, 
the men stood at the crater rim, a ‘vast abyss’ fi lled with steam. 
David observed: ‘After a continuous loud hissing sound, lasting 
for some minutes, there would come from below a big dull 
boom, and immediately afterwards a great globular mass of 
steam would rush upwards . . .’
This cycle of frothing and booming continued throughout 
their time at the crater. They set about collecting rock samples, 
and taking readings and photographs, but couldn’t stay long – 
they had to get Brocklehurst to Cape Royds. Back at the camp, 
they ate, packed and started down, following again the spurs of 
rubbly lava. But the last rib petered out abruptly above a peril￾ous ice slope. Too tired to go back up and fi nd another way, they 
took a gamble with gravity, launching their packs, then their 
bodies, and hoping to come to rest gently rather than smash into 
rocks. Somehow, their ‘wild career’ paid off , though their cook￾ware took a beating and some instruments were lost or broken. 
They reached Cape Royds the following day, where David 
wrote that the adventure would ‘never fade from memory’. Even 
if it did for Brocklehurst, he would have been reminded by the 
regular sight of the big toe of his right foot in a jar on the mantel￾piece at home.18
The haul of measurements, photographs, visual observations 
and samples that David and his companions brought back from Flame in a Sea of Gold 233
this fi rst ascent of Erebus is extraordinary – it includes descrip￾tions of the ice towers and explanation of their formation; recog￾nition of the similarities between the rocks of Erebus and those 
of the volcanoes in eastern Africa (an astute conclusion since 
Erebus, too, is located in a tectonic rift related to a mantle 
plume); and evidence for explosive eruptions.19 They had pene￾trated some of the mysteries ‘beyond the veil’ of the mountain, 
setting the stage for all who would follow. Referring to the climb, 
the historian Edward Larson wrote that it showed ‘how science 
gave meaning to adventure’.20
*
On day one of my PhD studies, I had discovered a stack of half￾inch computer tapes on my desk. A note beside them read: 
‘These are satellite images of Mount Erebus in Antarctica. It has 
a lava lake and should show up in the infrared channels. Take a 
look – see if you can do anything with them.’ Our image-process￾ing system was a large workstation, and reading a tape took 
hours, so I would mount them in the afternoon, hoping to fi nd 
the scene loaded to the computer in the morning, rather than a 
plastic tagliatelle in a heap on the fl oor.
I had little feel for where Erebus was, and individual pixels 
corresponded to areas equivalent to several city blocks. Most of 
the surface was covered in snow and ice, so there was little detail 
to discern. But the strangeness of the images somehow made 
them all the more evocative – like glimpsing something extraor￾dinary through a fogged-up window. They transported me to an 
alien world of my imagination.
What I could make out was the irregular shape of Ross 
Island, and the slopes of Mounts Bird, Terror and Erebus, the 
latter crowned by a hot pixel or two. These registered the 
intense thermal radiation emitted from the lava lake. I analysed 234 Mountains of Fire
these data for a few weeks, then had to focus on preparations 
for my fi rst fi eldwork on Stromboli. While my research then 
took me to fuming craters and cones in Nicaragua and Chile, 
I couldn’t shake an embryonic longing to see the polar volcano 
in the fl esh.
Then, in 1993, the prospect loomed through a chance 
encounter with a geochemist, Phil Kyle, amongst the frozen 
volcanoes of Kamchatka in the Russian Far East, where I was 
part of a joint NASA and Russian Academy of Sciences fi eld 
campaign. Phil, a professor at New Mexico Tech in the U.S., 
was there to measure sulphur emissions from the volcanoes 
with a Cospec, the same device I would use a few years later 
on Montserrat. He had been going to Antarctica annually since 
his fi rst geological mission there as a student (in his home city 
of Wellington, New Zealand), and had lately been using the 
Cospec to monitor Erebus. As we reconnoitred the area around 
the beautiful ice-clad Kliuchevskoi volcano, Phil remarked casu￾ally that I should join him on the polar volcano someday.
A decade later, he emailed me out of the blue off ering me a 
place on his team with the U.S. Antarctic Program, due to head 
south in November that year. He had come across my then 
recent work with a new line of pocket-sized ultraviolet spec￾trometers. I had shown they could emulate Cospec’s function 
for a fraction of the cost, and Phil was keen to see the devices in 
action for himself. It felt like my long-held dream was coming 
true.21
Despite my excitement, I had a couple of anxieties regarding 
the mission. Both came up in discussions on logistics with Phil 
when we had a chance to meet in Cambridge that spring. We’d 
already talked for a couple of hours when he looked me in the 
eye and said, ‘You’re not vegetarian or anything like that, are 
you?’ Two potential responses fl ashed in my mind: I could say, 
‘Certainly not – I think they’re weirdos, too,’ or I could come Flame in a Sea of Gold 235
clean. I fi gured it was better to confess than to get there and be 
served hoosh three times a day. I was relieved when Phil said, 
‘That’s OK – so’s my student, and she’s keen to take charge of 
mealtimes.’ Then the more alarming query: ‘You’ve had your 
wisdom teeth out, haven’t you?’
I knew the national Antarctic programmes were pretty hot on 
health and dental qualifi cation for participants owing to the 
limited medical facilities on the bases, and the complications 
often encountered when patients needed to be urgently repatri￾ated. My wisdom teeth had not been extracted; they had not 
even erupted. Truth be told, I hadn’t been to the dentist since 
my teens, but in spite of my phobia I booked an appointment. 
My apprehension festered, and on the day I almost couldn’t 
walk to the clinic. I know – Brocklehurst and his colleagues 
would have had a good laugh. But I made it to the padded chair: 
blinding bulbs, my fi sts tight balls. To my great relief, the dentist 
reported my teeth were in good shape, adding, ‘And you don’t 
have wisdom teeth.’ So now nothing could stop me – I was really 
going to Erebus.
What I didn’t know at the time was that after my fi rst trip, I 
would go back to Erebus twelve more times. That makes me 
sound hardier than I am – circumstances are very diff erent to 
Ross’s or Shackleton’s day and I have never really had to rough it. 
There were no crossings of the furious Southern Ocean; no man￾hauling of sledges loaded with life-support systems and survey￾ing tools up a gigantic volcano; no amputated digits or enforced 
consumption of hoosh.22 Instead of weeks at sea, I reached Ross 
Island in eight hours by military transport plane from 
Christchurch, New Zealand. We landed on sea ice close to 
McMurdo station (named after Lieutenant Archibald McMurdo, 
who had sailed with the Terror).
Mac Town as it is locally known, feels like a cross between a 
bustling frontier town, a university and a cargo-handling 236 Mountains of Fire
facility. In the austral summer it is home to around 1,000 people 
and an occasional Emperor penguin. Attractions included 
‘cookie Wednesdays’, science lectures on Thursdays and Latin 
dancing on Fridays. Or to get away from it all, there was the 
‘Ob Tube’ – a vertical pipe with internal rungs providing 
access to an observation chamber beneath the sea ice where 
you could listen to the harmonic trills of Weddell seals, once 
taken for the music of mermaids. There were many amenities, 
too: a hair salon, fi re service, ecumenical church and an ATM 
if you ran out of cash to spend in the souvenir store or any 
of the three bars on station. There were dormitory buildings 
(one known ominously as Hotel California), a huge open-all￾hours canteen, which served midnight rations, and a sprawling 
complex of laboratories and offi ces for scientists, who were 
more or less aff ectionally known as ‘beakers’. Helpfully, there 
were ice machines on every corridor.23
At the start of each fi eld season, our Erebus research team 
would typically spend a week in Mac Town, gathering tents, 
sleep kits, crampons, radios and provisions. When it came to 
foodstuff s, if it was dried, frozen or tinned, it was probably avail￾able – muesli, bagels, chocolate (two bars per person per day), 
iced guacamole, pasta, chopped tomatoes  . . .24 A surprising 
array of options were available once we were out there, and I 
was clearly not going to suff er as a vegetarian.25
Alongside these logistical preparations, we also had to take a 
series of classes for all of the ‘what-if’ scenarios we might encoun￾ter. There was instruction on survival, in case we became stranded 
in the fi eld; on recognising and treating hypothermia; on snow￾mobile maintenance and safety on sea ice; and on how to avoid 
decapitation by helicopter rotor. These sessions seemed quite 
abstract in a warm seminar room, but then, walking McMurdo’s 
dusty streets, often gurgling with streams of muddy meltwater, I 
would spy Captain Scott’s memorial cross atop Ob Hill, or Flame in a Sea of Gold 237
Discovery Hut, where he had overwintered with Shackleton, and 
remember where we were.
*
Mac Town is at sea level, where the summer temperature hovers 
around freezing. It’s crowded, and everything that happens is 
purposeful and punctual or recreational. It is far from exotic. 
But jumping from the helicopter at nearly 3,000 metres eleva￾tion, surrounded by blinding whiteness on the side of Erebus, 
and taking that fi rst gulp of thin, bracing air at -30°C (-22°F) is 
when the strangeness envelops and invades. What took David 
and his men fi ve days, we covered in twenty-fi ve minutes. But 
that doesn’t diminish the joy of being there; it just guarantees 
you keep your fi ngers and toes.
We didn’t go straight to the summit. Instead, the plan was to 
spend a couple of days acclimatising to the altitude before head￾ing further up the mountain. At fi rst, the idea of this enforced 
stay challenged my patience – I just wanted to get stuck in with 
work. But as the helicopter lifted away to return to McMurdo, 
and the silence thickened, I took notice of my new surround￾ings. It was as if we had landed on an ethereal, sculptural, blue￾white chiaroscuro exoplanet. The feeling was like no other: I 
was utterly spellbound.
The temporary camp was located at the head of the Fang 
glacier, so-called because of the toothy remnant of an ancient 
crater wall that buttresses it to the north. Three yellow pyramid 
tents (the one nod to Captain Scott’s era), a bamboo stick with 
a fl ag marking the communal urinal and a snow-wall enclosure 
sheltering a bucket awaited us (the fi eld support staff at 
McMurdo had set up the refuge ahead of our arrival).26
Snowmobiles were parked nearby with jerrycans of fuel leaning 
against them. The summit cone of Erebus was hidden from 238 Mountains of Fire
view by the steep shield looming to the south, but its plume of 
sulphurous gas – my scientifi c quarry – snaked mischievously 
overhead.
The rocky Fang ridge overshadowing the glacier bevelled off 
to a corniced snow ridge, which one could walk right up to. The 
swoop of ice on the other side gave me vertigo – one slip would 
start a wild glissade ending in impact with a hard rock nunatak, 
or a hair-raising chute all the way to the frozen sea. Somewhere 
down there, too, lay a real impact site: Crash Nunatak. This was 
hallowed ground, where an Air New Zealand tourist fl ight had 
cruised into the side of Erebus in 1979, with the loss of all on 
board.
In the morning, the air was perfectly still. I savoured the hint 
of warmth in the sun, which lit up the sea with a brilliant golden 
glint. The majestic sweep of Mount Terror also gleamed and 
glistened where facets of icefalls and crevasses refl ected the 
sunlight, making part of the mountain look like glass. It was 
almost too much to take in. Each time I returned to Erebus since 
that fi rst season, I found myself looking forward to this period 
of adjustment at Fang, even if it invariably entailed an unrelent￾ing altitude headache.27 The slowness of it – offl ine, and seri￾ously off -grid – signalled the start of reliving the most exciting 
time of my life.
Lower Erebus Hut, referred to as LEH or simply ‘the Hut’, 
our home for the next weeks, was a short but steep snowmobile 
ride above us. At 3,500 metres above sea level, more than twice 
the altitude of Denver, it lies within the ancient caldera wall, at 
the foot of the summit cone, not far from where the Professor 
and his comrades must have spent the night. There are, in fact, 
two huts – both squat wood-framed buildings, weather-blasted 
and bristling with radio antennae. The Hut served as kitchen and 
living area; the other, ‘the Garage’, was a workshop and store￾room. The entrances to both were like oversized refrigerator Flame in a Sea of Gold 239
doors – not easy to open against the wind. I’d picked up a NO 
JUNK MAIL letterbox sign in a store in New Zealand, and stuck 
it on the front of the Hut.
I was eager to get my fi rst sighting of the crater, but for the 
fi rst two weeks we were grounded by an unremitting blizzard. 
But eventually, the wind and humidity dropped; we set out for 
the summit under a sky so crystalline it felt as if we were touch￾ing outer space.
We used snowmobiles to get closer to the crater, but the last 
stretch was too steep for them so we had to continue on foot – a 
free rhythm of limbs and lungs, heart beating fast in thin air. A 
loose bed of grey feldspar crystals, as long as a fi nger, shifted 
and scrunched to each footfall. Icicles formed from my humid 
breath and stiff ened my eyebrows, while snotsicles sprouted 
from my nostrils.
Rounding the crest of the crater at last, I gingerly stepped to 
the precipice to look Erebus in the eye for the fi rst time. Or 
better to say ‘mouth’ as the chasm before me, shaped like an 
upturned boat shell, was also huffi ng and puffi ng. The plunging 
walls were striped and mottled with snow, pale yellow sulphur 
and dark bands of rubble freed of ice by steam vents. The hori￾zontal layering intersected with vertical trails of dust that had 
spilled from scars in the rock face. Sunken into a slope of hard￾ened scree at the far wall of the crater was another shaft, and at 
the bottom of this I could make out the famed lake of lava. Its 
surface was rent with fi ery scars and rifts, and folded and wrin￾kled like elephant hide. Bluish fumes streamed out from the 
seething mass, which looked so stiff and viscous that I couldn’t 
help thinking that anyone who fell in would go splat rather than
splash, meeting a cartoonish end.
When you look at a lava lake you are seeing the top of a 
column of magma connected to much larger pods and pipes of 
molten rock deep down. The heat and gases emanating from the 240 Mountains of Fire
lake off er direct clues to that underworld. I knew at once I had 
found the ideal natural laboratory to study volcanic behaviour. 
For Sir William Hamilton it was Vesuvius; for Franz Junghuhn, 
Merapi; for Frank Perret, Montagne Pelée . . . I, too, now met 
my muse.
*
My scientifi c purpose on this fi rst mission was to measure the 
sulphur dioxide fi zzling from the lava lake. This would tell us 
how much magma had to be rising up to supply the gas.28 The 
answer was about two bathtubs of molten rock per second 
(these are not our conventional units, mind). The data also 
helped to understand how Erebus’s emissions might impact 
the pristine Antarctic atmosphere. Back in the 1980s following 
the discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole, some challenged the 
view that the ozone loss resulted from manufactured 
compounds widely used as refrigerants and spray-can propel￾lants. They argued instead that Erebus was responsible. While 
we found localised ozone depletion in the plume snaking 
downwind from the crater, there is no way this can account for 
the continental scale of the ‘hole’.29
When I came back to Erebus the following year I also wanted 
to measure other gases exhaled from the lava lake, as these could 
give clues to the temperature of the magma and depth of its 
source.30 To do this, I brought the same infrared spectrometer 
I had used on Montserrat and with my Icelandic colleagues at 
Fagradalsfjall. The instrument needs a heat source behind the 
gases to work, and I was sure the incandescent lava lake would 
cover that – I would just need to train the attached telescope at 
its surface from the crater’s edge. Since the device could record 
a spectrum every second, I could amass tens of thousands of 
measurements in a few hours. This enabled me to track each Flame in a Sea of Gold 241
exhalation of the volcano. There were no samples to take back to 
the lab for analysis – I could process the infrared spectra on my 
laptop in the Hut during a spell of bad weather and have the 
results in a few hours.
Of course, in the fi eld, things don’t always go to plan, espe￾cially in Antarctica, where the environment is as inimical to elec￾tronics as it is to the body’s extremities. I often had to take my 
gloves off to use screwdrivers or type instructions in -40°C 
(-40°F) of windchill, and my fi ngers would tingle for hours 
afterwards. The more or less daily eff ort to bring the spectrom￾eter, automotive batteries, tripods, generators, scaff olding bars 
(on which to mount equipment) up and down the hill was back￾breaking – imagine hauling the white goods in your kitchen up 
a sand dune in a double helping of winter clothing, and you get 
an idea of what it was like.
Once the spectrometer was running, it needed topping up 
with liquid nitrogen three times a day. I would rescue it if a 
storm was coming, but otherwise it would run autonomously 
for days. I couldn’t know what the volcano would do, so relied 
on a continuous data record to capture unexpected events. 
In the words of an eighteenth-century engineer, François￾Gabriel Courrejolles (who wrote a lost masterpiece on the 
triggering of eruptions and earthquakes): ‘Nature often spon￾taneously unveils herself: but a long time is necessary to 
collect good observations.’31
Of the seven diff erent volcanic gases I could measure, the 
most diagnostic were carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide and 
water vapour, since their proportions depended on the temper￾ature and pressure of the magma. When I made a time plot of 
their quantities, an entirely unexpected repeating pattern 
emerged: the amount of carbon dioxide went up and down, 
while that of water vapour went down and up, roughly every ten 
minutes. It was so baffl ing, I thought it must be an artefact of 242 Mountains of Fire
my data processing – how could the diff erent gas emissions vary 
so rhythmically? There was nothing to see in the crater that 
suggested anything other than a constant renewal of fresh lava 
at the surface of the lake.
While I could analyse an hour or so of measurements in the 
Hut, I couldn’t process two or three weeks’ worth of data – that 
required months of computing time. Then there were millions of 
datapoints to plot in dozens of diff erent combinations, deriva￾tions of chemical conditions and temperatures, and mathematical 
analysis to quantify any trends. I could make a coff ee in the time 
it took simply to open one of my spreadsheets. I had also recorded 
long sequences of heat images of the lava lake (technology had 
advanced enormously since my days spent pointing an infrared 
thermometer at Stromboli’s vent). These showed how the magma 
was churning, and revealed the same ten-minute cycle – as if the 
lava were going on and off the boil. The gas composition and lake 
vigour were completely diff erent characteristics measured using 
independent methods, so the pattern couldn’t be spurious. I was 
amazed, even ecstatic – I had never seen anything like it before. It 
really did seem that Erebus had a beating heart.
Once home, I wrote up these fi ndings for a scientifi c paper, 
but struggled to explain them.32 You might wonder why that 
matters, and why anyone would get worked up about a volcano 
that is only ever threatening when scientists approach it. For 
me, the answer is that a repeating signal like this implicates 
underlying causes, the fundamental driving processes that lead 
a volcano to erupt in the way it does, and when it does, just as 
Frank Perret thought. If we can’t explain such oscillations, or 
why the cycle repeats every ten minutes rather than every hour, 
there are basics of how volcanoes work that we are missing, 
undermining our prospects of forecasting volcanic activity. 
Looked at the other way around, though, if we can explain the 
behaviour, then we can develop better predictive tools.Flame in a Sea of Gold 243
On my last fi eld mission to Erebus, in 2016, still trying to 
tackle the root causes of the cycles, we took a bespoke radar 
device. It was designed and built by a colleague, and the elec￾tronics fi tted in a small case that was wired up to two large satel￾lite dishes. These transmitted and received pulses of microwave 
energy and by aiming them at the lake we could measure the 
lava level. We found that it heaved up and down by a metre or 
two every ten minutes, as if the magma were breathing in and 
out.33 It was the same cycle! I have never had a stronger sense of 
a volcano being an organic system.
Despite dozens of missions to Erebus by Phil and his 
colleagues over three decades, no one had ever spotted this 
behaviour – from the crater rim, the lava surface is just too 
far away to discern the pulsing by eye. It took sophisticated 
processing of data obtained with care using innovative equip￾ment to reveal the rhythm of Erebus. And it took some more 
years to fi gure out what is behind the repeated and constant 
inhalation and exhalation of the volcano.34
It seems the key to Erebus’ rhythm is an intermittent switch 
in the direction of magma fl ow between the lava lake and its 
underlying feeder pipe. As the bubbly molten rock rises up to 
the crater, the lava lake fi lls and gases fi zz into the air. But all the 
while, the pressure at the bottom of the lake is rising because of 
the increasing weight of lava above – at a critical point, the fl ow 
reverses and lava drains out of the lake, back down the conduit 
supplying it. Now, the pressure below builds up, eventually 
forcing lava up again, and so the cycle repeats.
Thinking more about this explanation, it dawned on me that 
Professor David, in recognising a cadence to the sounds coming 
from the crater more than a century ago, was probably hearing 
these very reversals: when the lava was louder, it was rising, with 
bubbles sputtering; when it was quiet, the magma was sinking. 
More remarkable still, Shackleton’s scientists seem even to have 244 Mountains of Fire
spotted the phenomenon from Cape Royds at the foot of the 
mountain. They took weather observations every two hours, and 
whenever it was clear, they looked at the Erebus smoke plume, 
since it served as a high-altitude weathervane. One winter’s night, 
Shackleton recorded seeing the glow from the crater ‘waxing and 
waning at intervals of a quarter of an hour through the night’.
Two of Shackleton’s party, Professor David and the geologist 
Raymond Priestley, also drew a comparison between Erebus 
and Stromboli, noting that both erupted more often when 
atmospheric pressure was low. It’s an enigmatic observation that 
I don’t have an explanation for, but it perfectly demonstrates 
the value of observing and recording data. You never know what 
could be the key piece of information that slots into place, tell￾ing you something entirely new and unimagined. There are less￾contested resemblances between the Eolian volcano and Erebus, 
though: they are similar in size (recalling that Stromboli rises 
from the deep seabed), and Erebus is also prone to strombolian 
eruptions, which result from the violent rupture of large gas 
bubbles. In fact, Erebus is the only volcano where I have actually 
caught a lava bomb – admittedly a small one, and it was tumbling 
down the side of the cone rather than falling through the air 
(and, having learned from my fi rst experience with projectiles 
on Stromboli, I had gloves on).
On Erebus, these explosions can be very dramatic, with 
bubbles the size of the cupola of St Paul’s Cathedral in London 
distending the lake, then popping dramatically, fl inging huge 
dollops of lava over the crater rim. When they thud to the 
ground, they look like the turds of giants. They have a stunning 
golden lustre for a few days before the glassy strands that coat 
them start to corrode in the acid plume, spilling their cargo of 
feldspar crystals. Strangely, they are hollow, like tennis balls. 
Break one open, and the interior, with its bubbly texture and 
sinews of glass, resembles a human heart.Flame in a Sea of Gold 245
Conveniently, these explosions provide us with fresh lava 
samples that we can bring to the lab for analysis.35 Like Lazzaro 
Spallanzani who carried out experiments on his rocks from 
Stromboli, we have pulverised and pressure-cooked our speci￾mens to recreate the conditions the magma experienced below 
ground.36 They’ve been further subjected to high-energy X-ray 
beams capable of nanoscale chemical measurements.37 All this 
work has helped us to reveal the volcano’s secret life below 
ground. For instance, we have traced the origins of carbon diox￾ide emissions from the lava lake to beneath the Earth’s crust – in 
the mantle, as much as 15 miles down.38 Given how carbon 
dioxide in the atmosphere regulates climate, it is vital to under￾stand the volcanic source of the gas. What’s more, we’ve shown 
how carbon dioxide drives profound chemical and physical 
changes in the magma it permeates, acting in a way to control 
the most fundamental traits of the volcano – it’s size, shape and 
eruptive displays.
We also analysed the feldspar crystals, and found that the 
largest took decades to form. Like tree trunks thickening with 
each summer’s ring, the crystals had grown as a result of multi￾ple transits between deep magma reservoir and lava lake.39 Such 
magma recycling had been invoked to explain the puzzling 
behaviour of other volcanoes, including Stromboli and Masaya, 
that belt out gas and heat, but not much lava. Now we had 
shown it really happens.40 Although we had travelled to the end 
of the world to a volcano as remote from humankind as seems 
possible, we had proven a theory of general importance.
*
I think often of the ‘heroic era’ scientist-explorers who lived on 
Ross Island, surveying its terrain and fauna, sampling its rocks, 
measuring the air and tracking the weather. It was not so long 246 Mountains of Fire
ago – my grandparents’ generation. The two world wars that 
followed claimed the lives of some of those men, and delayed 
lab work on the samples and collation of results – it was decades 
before all of the fi ndings were published.41
Four years after Professor David’s team reached the crater of 
Erebus, it was Raymond Priestley’s turn to summit. He had 
been part of the original group that arrived in Antarctica with 
Shackleton, but had missed the chance to climb the volcano. 
Now twenty-six, he was a geologist on Captain Scott’s Terra 
Nova expedition. He led a team of six, including another young 
protégé of David’s, Frank Debenham (Deb), on the second 
ascent of Erebus.
On 2 December 1912 (the year the Hawaiian Volcano 
Observatory was founded), Priestley and Debenham set off 
with Tryggve Gran, a Norwegian ski specialist, Frederick 
Hooper, formerly a steward on the Terra Nova, and two navy 
men, Harry Dickason and George Abbott. They followed a 
similar route to David’s at fi rst, but then diverted to skirt up the 
side of the Fang glacier, close to where we pitch our acclimatisa￾tion camp. After ten days’ toil, on the 12th day of the 12th month 
of 1912, they reached the crater.42 Peering in, they may have 
been disappointed, for the volcano’s depths were veiled by steam 
clouds. Unbeknownst to them, the team left traces that I would 
stumble upon, one hundred years later to the day.
As well as being fascinated by previous Erebus visitors (it 
is, after all, an exceptionally small club), my career had crossed 
over with Priestly and Debenham in other ways. After their 
work in the fi eld, both moved to Cambridge to continue their 
studies and work on the wealth of data from Antarctica. 
Debenham helped to found the Scott Polar Research Institute 
in my university in 1920, and was appointed Cambridge’s 
fi rst Professor of Geography in 1931. So when I was back 
in Antarctica in 2012 I found myself scrolling through Flame in a Sea of Gold 247
photographs of the ascent in the Scott Polar Research 
Institute’s online archive. In one, entitled ‘Highest camp in 
Antarctica’, the men are seen erecting their tipi-style tent in 
front of a ridge of lava. Wouldn’t it be a thrill, I thought to 
myself, to fi nd exactly where they had been?
Not long after, I was fi ring up a snowmobile, with the image 
of the site fi xed in my mind. It was a needle in a haystack mission 
and I doubted there would still be signs of their presence given 
the severity of Antarctic blizzards. But I was excited all the same 
and set off towards the old caldera wall, a section of which 
seemed to be in the background of the photograph.
The white ground was so brilliant and lacking contrast that it 
was hard to discern the gradient ahead. It would have been easy 
enough to nosedive into an icy ravine. After spotting a secluded 
valley in between two rocky crests, my gaze fi xed on a crag with 
a diagonal fracture – it looked very familiar. I checked the photo￾graph on the laptop, and scrutinised each nook and cranny and 
serration: a tower-like projection to the right, the shapes of 
tumbled boulders embedded in the snow. This was surely the 
site! I switched off the engine, stepped off the snowmobile and 
took a dozen paces closer. Then I noticed a semi-circle of rocks 
poking above the snow. Their orientation was too regular to be 
a chance scatter of eroded boulders from the low cliff . And there 
were three or four other rocks that fi tted into the imaginary 
circle. They had to have been used to secure the fl aps of the 
men’s tent. Tingles ran up my spine.
I saw, in my mind’s eye, Priestley, Abbot, Hooper and Gran 
fussing around their tent, congratulating each other for making 
it to the top. I couldn’t help smiling, and instinctively called out, 
‘Hello boys!’ I had the most intense feeling of reaching across 
the void and touching the past.43 These men stepped on a truly 
pristine continent. They made the fi rst maps, collected the fi rst 
rock samples, and they had to fi nd their way across treacherous 248 Mountains of Fire
sea ice, glaciers and mountains without any knowledge of what 
lay ahead. Our own work here is completely grounded in their 
legacy forged from courage, curiosity and unimaginable 
endurance.
*
I have listened attentively to Erebus, and would not like to guess 
how many days, months and years I have spent analysing and 
plotting and puzzling over the data we have collected there. Of 
all the volcanoes I have spent time with, Erebus has been the 
most persuasive in showing the importance of careful observa￾tions in underpinning new knowledge of the Earth. One hundred 
years ago, Debenham wrote that polar science is critical to 
understanding ‘a globe of infi nite diversity of form, climate, and 
process, all parts of which are interrelated’.44 Having followed in 
his footsteps, I know exactly what he meant.
‘Hypothesis-driven science’ is a phrase that often appears in 
the academic world. When applying for grants for research, 
funding bodies want to know what you’re setting out to prove. 
And this is why I always found it diffi cult to write proposals for 
our work on Erebus. Phil once joked to me, ‘Our hypothesis is 
that Erebus is a volcano.’ Erebus is an ever-changing yet reliable 
laboratory – each year we would innovate, bring new sensors 
and refi ne our questions and aims based on what we had learned 
the previous season.45 We also brought and supported students 
and post-docs, artists, writers and fi lmmakers. I truly believe we 
did some amazing science and outreach work, but all this is 
impossible to capture in a hypothesis. Ross, Shackleton and 
Scott did not go to Antarctica to evaluate a proposition – they 
went there for the prospect, joy and signifi cance of discovery.
On my fi rst expeditions to Erebus, I merely eavesdropped on 
the volcanic activity. On later trips, I went there to listen, as Flame in a Sea of Gold 249
carefully as I could, to the volcano’s vibrations. I had to be 
ready in a moment to adapt my strategy according to the wind, 
humidity, temperature and magmatic menace. In this way, 
the measurements revealed many striking – and some still￾perplexing – phenomena. I learned from Erebus what Frank 
Perret had discovered a century before: the inner Earth has a 
pulse.
At Erebus, I have come closer to perceiving the arcane mecha￾nisms and mysteries of a volcano than anywhere else I have 
worked. And I increasingly came to understand how so much of 
what we do follows in the footsteps of pioneers. One of them, 
an unnamed offi cer aboard HMS Erebus, wrote the following 
180 years ago:
Nowhere is it more apparent that Nature herself is the 
greatest of artists than in the polar regions. And it is there, 
confronting the limits of human endurance in seeking to 
penetrate the mysteries of Nature, that the art of observa￾tion, experimentation and theorising itself becomes Sublime 
and magnifi cent.
The forerunners of Antarctic exploration learned things 
beyond their imaginations – and they did so by probing the 
unknown, without hypotheses, without preconceived notions 
or foregone conclusions, by bringing together people from 
diff erent fi elds.
The end of each fi eld season on Erebus was, for me, marked 
by a wrenching pang of loss as we were lifted into the bright sky 
aboard the helicopter, and eff ortlessly banked round the side of 
Erebus, a spectral cloth of cloud spreading in its lee, sun glint 
blazing the icy sea. Within fi fteen minutes, we would be back in 
McMurdo; in twenty-four hours, New Zealand; in three days, 
home. Each time, I felt the heartache of leaving a lover I might 250 Mountains of Fire
never set eyes on again. Even now, years since my last Erebus 
mission, whenever I see a piercing low sun on a crisp winter’s 
morning my thoughts turn again to the mountain and the 
wonder of being there. I think Shackleton must have felt the 
same for he wrote this in a poem titled ‘Erebus’46:
With icefi eld, cape, and mountain height, fl ame rose in a sea of 
gold.
Oh! Herald of returning Suns to the waiting lands below;
Beacon to their home-seeking feet, far across the Southern snow.
In the Northland in the years to be, pale Winter’s fi rst white sign
Will turn again their thoughts to thee, and the glamour that is 
thine.The Volcano and You
Breakfast at the crater.1
‘I am 3½ years old. I really like studying volcanoes with my 
parents. I want to know what it feels like to see a volcano.’
– Lucy, Rogersville, Tennessee (2020)2I
f you are one of the billion or so people settled within fi fty 
miles of an active volcano – defi ned as one that has erupted 
within the past 12,000 years – then you may already know its 
aura.3
 In Seattle, Quito, Naples, Tokyo, Auckland and many 
other cities lying close to latent magma, the urban skyline is 
embellished with one or more cratered peaks. Such volcanoes 
are invariably entwined with the history and culture of the 
region – what would Naples be without Vesuvius, Seattle with￾out Mount Rainier, or Tokyo without Fuji?
But for most people, encounters with volcanoes are rare and 
represent journeys into realms where nature feels at once primal, 
temporary and fragile. There seems to be something almost 
universally attractive about volcanoes; a magnetism that speaks 
to an ancestral enchantment – like the feeling we get seeing 
colour gleam through stained-glass windows. Children often 
have a volcano phase, repeatedly drawing the satisfying cone 
shape with sparks bursting out, and for many of us that curios￾ity never goes away. For those who still feel the pull and are 
ready to immerse themselves in these landscapes, there have 
never been better opportunities – the title of this chapter is an 
overture not an omen.
The human urge to experience volcanoes goes way back – 
one of the earliest well-documented examples of volcano tour￾ism dates from the 2nd century BCE when well-heeled Romans 
began thronging the seaside resort of Baiæ, situated within the 
Campi Flegrei caldera near Naples. Sulphurous thermal pools 
were the main attraction – bathing in them was reputed to cure 254 Mountains of Fire
ailments and rejuvenate the body.4
 Recreational soaks were still 
popular in Sir William Hamilton’s time – one of the illustrations 
in his Campi Phlegræi shows a bather at Solfatara. But by the 
British envoy’s time, the Grand Tour was in full swing, the fl am￾ing Vesuvius its climax. Some, like the chemists Sir Humphrey 
Davy and Robert Bunsen, brought their portable laboratories to 
study the gushing gas and lava but most came for the frisson of 
a perilous encounter with the untamed fi re mountain. It was 
arguably the beginning of mass geotourism.
For those unwilling or unfi t to climb, mules could be hired for 
part of the journey, and for the last steep stretch on unbound 
cinders, visitors could pay to be hauled up with the aid of a rope 
tied around the waist. Breakfast or lunch would be prepared 
over hot crevices beside the crater ‘and eaten with a greater 
relish in the very jaws of possible destruction’, as one corre￾spondent put it.5
Today many volcanoes are ‘drive-ins’ with catering facilities, 
obviating the need to be dragged up the mountain or cook your 
dinner in a fumarole. Among the most iconic are a super￾volcano that also has the distinction of being the world’s fi rst 
national park: Yellowstone, formally protected as a ‘pleasuring￾ground for the benefi t and enjoyment of the people’ on 1 March 
1872.6
 Alternatively, if you are looking for something at the 
other end of the explosivity scale then the Hawai‘i Volcanoes 
National Park is for you. Both are immensely popular: Hawai‘i 
welcomed 1.3 million visitors in 2021, Yellowstone an astonish￾ing 4.9 million, according to the National Park Service.7
Yellowstone and Hawai‘i Volcanoes National Park are both 
UNESCO World Heritage Sites, another eighty of which boast 
volcanic features.8
 UNESCO also maintains a list of Global 
Geoparks, an initiative that helps communities marry the often 
confl icting goals of developing tourism while protecting the 
environment. As well as their biological and geological The Volcano and You 255
signifi cance, volcano geoparks might celebrate mining heritage, 
or commemorate catastrophe.9
 They include the Reykjanes 
peninsula of Iceland, Toba caldera in Indonesia and Ngorongoro 
in Tanzania.10 In total there are nearly 200 geoparks, spread 
across nearly fi fty countries – all invite you to unfetter your 
feet.11
If you don’t reside near a sleeping giant, extinct volcanic 
terrain may yet be close at hand. The British Isles, for example, 
abound in igneous attractions, including the Giant’s Causeway 
in Northern Ireland, Snowdon in Wales, Glencoe in Scotland, 
Scafell in the Lake District and Arthur’s Seat in the centre of 
Edinburgh. While these landmarks might lack Mount Fuji’s 
stature and symmetry, they invite deep geological time travels, 
and with the help of interpretative guides their former pyroclas￾tic vigour can be imagined. At an altogether grander scale, the 
Deccan Traps in western and central India span an area the size 
of Spain. This huge volume of basalt lava, erupted at the end of 
the Cretaceous Period, epitomizes the risk and reward of volcan￾ism – it spelt the end for the dinosaurs but opportunity for 
mammals.12 It is fi tting that temples hewn into the lava 1,500 
years ago were dedicated to Shiva, the god of destruction and 
regeneration.13
With their disarrayed tracts of lava, pumice and slag, many 
might consider volcanoes barren ground. In reality they form 
ecosystems rich in fl ora and fauna adapted to their singular 
habitats, such as Darwin’s fi nches on the Galápagos islands, 
the spectacular red-fl owering buglosses of Teide volcano on 
Tenerife and the Japanese macaques famed for ‘taking the 
waters’ in geothermal pools.14 Even some of the most severe 
volcanic environments such as the ice caves of Erebus or the hot 
acid crater lake of Ijen on Java teem with extremophile microbes, 
some of which may one day fi nd use in medicine, or for the 
clean-up of pollutants.15256 Mountains of Fire
In wet and warm climates, volcanic deposits quickly degrade 
to mineral-rich soils that nourish rampant cloud forests and 
bountiful crops.16 This is one reason why Central Java in 
Indonesia, home to Merapi volcano and its subterranean king￾dom, is among the most densely populated regions of the 
world. So even if home for you is far from the volcanic belts, it 
is likely some of the grains, fruits and nuts, wines, pulses and 
coff ee in your kitchen cupboards were nourished by volcanic 
soil. Consuming these foods enmeshes you with the great 
geochemical cycles of carbon, water and nutrients that inter￾lace with the Earth’s geophysical pulse of eruptions, rifting 
and subduction.17
As well as being rich in agricultural terms, volcanoes have 
long been fertile ground for spiritual life. The German botanist 
and volcanologist Franz Junghuhn, wrote of Java that ‘Nothing 
reveals the harmony of creation so clearly as a journey from the 
high volcanic interior of a tropical country to the coast’.18 He’d 
experienced the magic and menace of volcanoes close up but 
saw, too, how they cradle the soul of a place and its people; how 
they are gateways to other worlds; why the gods call the moun￾tains home.
We give meaning to volcanoes through our attention, whether 
cultural, spiritual, aesthetic, extractive or scientifi c. For commu￾nities such as those of Java, so deeply connected with their vola￾tile volcanic neighbours, culture is bound with landscape, 
memory with unfathomable time, cosmology with underworlds. 
In Campania in southern Italy, to look upon the alternating 
layers of pumice and archaeological materials at Herculaneum 
or Pompeii is not to stare into the past but into the mirror.
The entanglements of people and place, of nature and culture, 
run deep at Yellowstone and on Hawaiʻi, too. The super-volca￾no’s prolifi c obsidian outcrops were utilised by Native Americans 
for more than 11,000 years,19 while Native Hawaiians regard The Volcano and You 257
Kīlauea and Mauna Loa volcanoes as their own kith and kin.20
It is such genealogy that requires conservationists and park 
services to work together with ancestral custodians of the land, 
to ensure simultaneous protection of biodiversity, ‘geodiversity’ 
and traditions.21
‘Geoheritage’ has a growing status in volcanology. As a focal 
point for conversations and collaborations spanning the natural 
and social sciences, the arts and humanities, it’s a reminder that 
anyone can get involved in the study of volcanoes. This was true 
for many extraordinary people who had no formal training in 
geology yet who sought to understand the positions of volca￾noes on the globe and to probe their infernal realms, often at 
Promethean risk. Among them were priests, doctors, chemists, 
biologists, explorers, soldiers and, not least, a college dropout 
who caught the volcano bug in his mid-thirties, Frank Perret.
Like Junghuhn before him, Perret was a visionary whose gaze 
went beyond science: for him, volcanoes made the world fi t for 
human purpose. ‘It is in the operations of its persistent volcan￾ism’ he wrote, ‘that we can best observe the adjustments of the 
living earth in its progress toward a perfect habitation for 
man’.22 Even if we don’t fully subscribe to this view, there is no 
doubt that volcanoes mean more to us that disaster, doom and 
destruction. In their long and varied lives they have actually 
sustained humanity, shaped the evolutionary paths we have 
taken and inspired us to ask bigger questions about our place 
in the universe. Should our descendants colonise a forbidding 
Mars with the help of 4th Planet Logistics (whose CEO I met 
in Iceland), they might be hunkered down in lava tubes, breath￾ing oxygen extracted from basaltic rock.23 It might not be 
long before they are venerating the spirits of lofty Olympus 
Mons.
Earthlings becoming Martians might be one thing, but could 
life start on a planet without volcanoes? There are several 258 Mountains of Fire
reasons to think not – on Earth, at least, volcanoes seem to have 
been essential to the origins of life. Among the fi rst to wonder 
how chemistry might have become biology was none other than 
Charles Darwin. He wrote to his friend, Joseph Hooker (thirty 
years after the botanist had laid eyes on Erebus volcano with 
Captain Ross): ‘if (& oh what a big if) we could conceive in 
some warm little pond with all sorts of ammonia & phosphoric 
salts,—light, heat, electricity &c present, that a protein 
compound was chemically formed, ready to undergo still more 
complex changes . . .’.24
It was in the 1950s that the American geochemist Stanley 
Miller actually synthesised possible ingredients of Darwin’s 
primeval pool in the laboratory. By injecting water vapour, 
carbon monoxide, ammonia, and hydrogen sulphide into a glass 
fl ask and discharging a 60,000 volt electrical spark across the 
gas mixture, Miller manufactured numerous complex organic 
molecules including amino acids, the foundations of proteins.25
What makes this experiment so interesting is that spectacular 
lightning often scintillates swelling ash clouds, as Sir William 
Hamilton recorded after witnessing an eruption of Vesuvius in 
1779:
the black smoke and ashes issuing continually from so many 
new mouths, or craters, formed an enormous and dense body 
of clouds over the whole mountain, and which began to give 
signs of being replete with the electric fl uid, by exhibiting 
fl ashes . . . of zig-zag lightning . . .26
This is one way that the organic precursors of life could have 
originated but they would still have needed to interact in a hot, 
watery environment such as we fi nd today in the geysers and 
hot springs of Yellowstone, or perhaps the pores of fl oating 
pumice,27 in which molecules could interact, complexify and The Volcano and You 259
take on functionality.28 Other scientists trace the origins of life to 
the dense grey-black plumes of hot, mineralised water that jet 
from vents along the volcanically active ocean ridges. Almost as 
soon as they were discovered in the 1970s, there was speculation 
that these ‘hydrothermal vents’ represented factories for life’s 
building blocks.29
Whether or not we can trace our evolutionary roots back to it, 
volcanism certainly helped to sustain creation and drive it 
forwards. The American volcanologist Thomas Jaggar wrote 
that ‘Man is largely a puff of hydrogen’. In fact, humans are 
made up of around 10% hydrogen by mass, but Jaggar’s confl a￾tion of our bodily composition and the breath of volcanoes is 
not so wide of the mark. Our other main constituents are oxygen 
(65%) and carbon (18%). These proportions are quite similar to 
those found in volcanic gases such as blow from the lava lake of 
Mount Erebus. The similarity is not entirely surprising – both 
the body and volcanic gases are water-rich – but it goes deeper 
than this. Although we are ultimately made of ‘star stuff ’ as Carl 
Sagan explained, that stuff ended up coalescing into planets, 
and on our mobile Earth it was kept in a state of fl ux through 
tectonic and volcanic action. The emissions from our moun￾tains of fi re regulated climate and charged the Earth’s water 
towers to make the world habitable for billions of years.
In an Anthropocene world that seems increasingly out of 
kilter, volcanoes off er opportunities beyond geotourism. Their 
resources have attracted us since our ancestors fashioned the 
fi rst obsidian tools in the shadows of volcanoes of the East 
African Rift Valley. Today it is their heat that we tap. Geothermal 
energy yields signifi cant fractions of national supply in several 
volcanically endowed countries, including Kenya, Iceland, the 
Philippines and New Zealand. Volcanic terrain could even help 
to rebalance the carbon cycle. One idea is to capture carbon 
dioxide and store it in basalt, the most abundant rock on Earth. 260 Mountains of Fire
As well as oxygen, basalt is rich in calcium, magnesium and 
iron, all of which react with carbon dioxide to make carbonate 
minerals – up to 70kg of the greenhouse gas could realistically 
be stored in a cubic metre of basaltic rock.30 It might sound 
unfeasible to accelerate the rock weathering cycle in this way, 
but a plant in Iceland has already been doing it for more than a 
decade.31 Given the extensive basalt terrains of the Earth, such 
as the Deccan Traps in India, if the process can be replicated at 
scale it could help to alleviate global warming.32
Volcanoes, then, are not simply sites of disasters or of spec￾tacular beauty or purveyors of awe-inspiring pyrotechnics. They 
are places that connect past, present and future; where land, 
water and sky animate custom, belief and knowledge, and vice 
versa. They helped fashion the human condition – our spirit, 
beliefs, respect for nature, resilience, adaptability and fear. 
Those shamans, explorers and scientists who were motivated to 
observe and study volcanoes across the world made their discov￾eries and adventures part of their own stories – and their legacy 
of knowledge helps to anchor the whole human narrative. 
Through the climate change wrought by the largest eruptions, 
our world history is entangled with volcanoes more than we 
realise. We may all feel the repercussions of the next really big 
event. Seeing the world through this lens gives us new perspec￾tives on agency, causation and correlation.
Volcanoes make us aware, not just to feel and sympathise 
with the story of humankind, but to draw us all into the bigger 
mysteries of the soul and the cosmos. They remind us we’re not 
just bodies hurtling through the universe – we’re something 
beyond what we know. This doesn’t make volcanoes less danger￾ous to live alongside, but having a greater understanding does 
make them less strange.
Volcanoes made us what we are, and long after we are gone 
they will hold the memory of our existence.Acknowledgements
I received an email in April 2020 asking if I’d consider writing 
a book on volcanoes. I might have politely declined had not 
Anna Baty at Hodder and Stoughton elaborated that she had in 
mind ‘a tapestry of science and culture and adventure that 
shows us how the science interacts with the social and what it 
means to live on a planet that is enthral to these powerful 
forces . . .’. I sensed at once a shared fascination for the multiple 
meanings of volcanoes and the diversity of knowledge systems 
by which they are understood.
I received brilliant feedback, counsel and enthusiasm on the 
text at many stages from Anna, as well as from her colleagues 
Izzy Everington, Joe Calamia (at University of Chicago Press) 
and Zakirah Alam. Tara O’Sullivan expertly copyedited the 
manuscript, and Holly Ovenden designed the magmatastic 
cover. I thank them and all those behind the scenes at the 
publishing houses.
I am very grateful to Valeria Amoretti, John Binns, Simon 
Schaff er, Jenni Barclay and Ross Mitchell for their comments 
and suggestions on the draft manuscript, and to Kosima Weber￾Liu, Lamya Khalidi, Nicola Di Cosmo, Rich Stone, Willy 
Aspinall and James Hammond for guidance on specifi c points.
Volcanoes inspire me, of course, but so do my colleagues, 
none more so over the past years than my friend Ulf Bűntgen. 
Among many initiatives he involved me with is the disciplinary 
melting pot he curated at the Centre for Interdisciplinary 
Research (Zentrum für interdisziplinäre Forschung, ZiF) at the 
University of Bielefeld. I am grateful to the staff at ZiF and all 262 Mountains of Fire
the meeting participants, whose manifold perspectives suff use 
this book.
One of the joys of being a volcanologist is belonging to a 
worldwide community, and the reward of being an educator is 
seeing students and early career researchers fl ourish. There are 
so many I am grateful to for their collaboration and inspiration 
spanning the many years since Peter Francis and David Rothery 
set me off on my journey. Here (in addition to the aforemen￾tioned) I name those I’ve worked most closely with: Amy 
Donovan, Andy Woods, Anja Schmidt, Bill Rose, Bruno Scaillet, 
Céline Vidal, Christine Lane, David Pyle, Evgenia Ilyinskaya, 
Gezahegn Yirgu, Giuseppe Salerno, Jan Esper, Letizia 
Spampinato, Lori Glaze, Marie Edmonds, Markus Stoff el, Mike 
Burton, Nial Peters, Patrick Allard, Phil Kyle, Philipson Bani, 
Pierre Delmelle, Séb Guillet, Seife Berhe, Stefan Kröpelin, 
Tamsin Mather, and Yves Moussallam.
From the humanities and other branches of sciences, the 
following have all inspired me: Anna Guðjónsdóttir, Anil Seth, 
Armin Linke, George Finlay Ramsay, Ilana Halperin, Jane 
Munro, Jemila MacEwan, Karen Holmberg, Lena and Werner 
Herzog, Malena Szlam, Michael Bravo, Michael Madsen, Nana 
Pohjanpalo, Peter Baxter, Peter and Silvia Zeitlinger, Philip 
Ursprung, Sara Dosa, Terry Glaze, Tim White and Tom Adams. 
I also thank Agnès Berthin-Scaillet, Alice and Roger Barford, 
Anna and Paul Krusic, Anne and Michael Herzog, Catherine 
and Nico Leroy, Chief Mael Moses, Christiane Büntgen, Franc 
and Bill Adams, Maria and Ben Goodall, Jamie Coello Bravo, Ri 
Kum Ran, and Shimrit and Over Ziv for friendship and 
collaboration.
My research and fi lmmaking has been funded by various 
organisations but for more recent support I am extremely grate￾ful to the Leverhulme Trust, the National Science Foundation’s 
U.S. Antarctic Program, the European Union, the Simons Acknowledgements 263
Foundation, the Diamond Light Source and the UK Natural 
Environment Research Council.
At home, I thank Anna Barford for enduring love, and Poppy 
and Maya for ensuring the writing wasn’t rushed. 
I dedicate Mountains of Fire to my colleagues, old and new, and 
to all the volcanologists to come.Notes
Epigraph
1 R. Rogaski, ‘Knowing a Sentient Mountain: Space, science, and 
the sacred in ascents of Mount Paektu/Changbai’, Modern Asian 
Studies 52 (2018): 716–752.
Dreamland of the Living Earth
1 J. Ogilby, ‘America: being the latest and most accurate description of 
the New World’, (London, 1671).
2 J. Oliver, ‘Earthquake seismology in the plate tectonics revolu￾tion’, in N. Oreskes (ed) Plate Tectonics: An insider’s history of the 
modern theory of the Earth (Boulder, Westview: 2003), 155–166.
3 T. A. Jaggar, My Experiments with Volcanoes (Honolulu: 
Hawaiian Volcano Research Association, 1956). One year before 
the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory opened (the fi rst in the 
United States), Japan’s fi rst volcano observatory was inaugu￾rated on Mt Asama – at 2,000 metres (more than a mile) eleva￾tion. Being close to the crater it was snowed in over winter and 
within range of lava projectiles.
4 A great example of phenomena we can record at the surface, 
helping us to visualise the unseen world beneath, is how obser￾vations of the seabed, of earthquake distributions, and of the 
magnetism and age of rocks led to the ‘plate tectonics revolu￾tion’ in the 1960s. Most volcanic and seismic activity is associ￾ated with the motion of tectonic plates, which is driven by deeper 
fl ows of heat and rock. The new understanding of our dynamic 266 Mountains of Fire
planet solved many puzzles, including the long-standing conun￾drum of why the coastlines of Africa and South America look 
like adjoining puzzle pieces – they had been part of a larger 
continent until the Cretaceous period, when they split into indi￾vidual plates that have separated ever since at about the same 
rate at which fi ngernails grow. For representations of global 
plate models, see: D. Hasterok et al., ‘New maps of global 
geological provinces and tectonic plates’, Earth-Science Reviews
231 (2022): 104069. For more on what plates get up to, see 
R. Mitchell, The Next Supercontinent: solving the puzzle of a future 
Pangea (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2023).
5 J. Carrillo, ‘From Mt Ventoux to Mt Masaya: The rise and fall of 
subjectivity in early modern travel’, in Voyages and Visions: 
Towards a Cultural History of Travel, eds. J. Elsner and J. P. Rubiés 
(London: Reaktion Books, 1999): 57–73.
6 D. Turner, ‘Forgotten treasure from the Indies: the illustrations 
and drawings of Fernández de Oviedo’, The Huntington Library 
Quarterly 48 (1985): 1–46.
7 Among other wonders, Oviedo’s drawing of a pineapple was the 
fi rst picture of the fruit to be published. On Oviedo’s contribu￾tions, see: A. C. de la Rosa, ‘Representing the New World’s nature: 
Wonder and exoticism in Gonzalo Fernández de Oviedo y 
Valdes’, Historical Refl ections/Réfl exions Historiques (2002): 73–92.
8 One of his senior offi cers, Diego de Ordás, begged to tackle the 
snowy summit. Cortés consented, bidding him to take two other 
soldiers for company. Local guides led the group halfway up the 
volcano, to where a cluster of temples had been constructed, but 
they refused to go further, explaining that the spirits of tyrants 
dwelt there. Undeterred, the Spaniards continued, but had not 
got far when the ground shook violently and ‘huge fl ames of fi re, 
half burnt and perforated stones, with a quantity of ashes’ shot 
from the peak. After an hour, the outburst subsided and the 
men resumed the ascent. Eventually, they reached the fuming Notes 267
crater. Peering in, they spied in its depths a fi re that seethed like 
a furnace of molten glass. Away from the smoke, the air was 
crystal clear, and Ordás admired the sweeping view of the Valley 
of México, which encompassed Tenochtitlan, the Aztec capital, 
on an island connected by bridges to the shore of Lake Texoco. 
Ordás knew the view constituted valuable military intelligence 
and committed it to memory. When they could bear the fumes, 
thin air and cold no more, the men retraced their steps. Their 
turnaround was timely, as another belch from the crater 
assaulted them with ‘boulders of burning fi re’, but they found 
protection below a protruding rock. The men’s return was met 
with astonishment and celebration. On his return to Spain, 
Ordás was granted a coat of arms featuring a smoking volcano. 
(I want one, too.) Considering the volcano’s altitude (well over 
5,000 metres) and vertiginous snowy slopes, for which the 
climbers were ill-equipped (they wore sandals and used swords 
as ice axes), it is remarkable they summited. The epic adventure 
is the focus of the 2015 fi lm Epitafi o.
See: Bernal Diaz del Castillo, The Memoirs of the Conquistador 
Bernal Diaz del Castillo, Vol 1 (of 2), trans. J. Ingram Lockhart 
(London: Hatchard, 1844); F. Cervantes de Salazar, Crónica de la 
Nueva España, (Madrid: The Hispanic Society of America, 1914), 
Book 3, Chapter 58; Ismael Arturo Montero-García, ‘Arqueología 
e historia de los volcanes Popocatépetl e Iztaccíhuatl, México’, 
Revista de Arqueología Americana 34 (2016): 187–222.
9 The Spaniards quickly reached Tenochtitlan, where they infi l￾trated the Aztec palace and took Moctezuma hostage. But 
Cortés was running low on gunpowder, without which he could 
neither defend himself nor conquer more of the New World. Of 
its ingredients, charcoal was readily obtained, and saltpetre 
available in bat caves. Cortés recalled seeing sulphur atop 
Pico de Teide volcano on Tenerife, and his mind turned to 
Popocatépetl. He summoned his gunner, Montaño, and another 268 Mountains of Fire
soldier, Mesa, inciting them: ‘It is your destiny to preserve what 
we have gained and to acquire great kingdoms and lordships!’ 
Montaño replied: ‘We will bring back the sulphur or die trying.’
He chose three further companions, and the party had 
slogged part way up the volcano by nightfall the next day. At 
sunrise, they resumed the battle. There was no clear pinnacle to 
aim for, just an interminable trudge, each footfall on yielding 
cinders or slick ice. After several hours, suff ering from altitude 
sickness and snow blindness, they reached the summit. Peering 
into the crater, below cliff s striped with sulphur deposits, they 
spied a fi erce glow ‘like a natural fi re’. They scouted for a way to 
get at the precious seams, and drew lots to resolve who would 
enter fi rst: Montaño! He made seven descents before handing 
over, advising, ‘Whatever you do, don’t look down!’ Their 
baskets full, all that remained was to get back safely, and by 
dawn they were marching into the Spanish headquarters at 
Cuyoacán. The sulphur was refi ned and furnished fi fty kegs of 
gunpowder, enough fi repower to continue subjugating the 
indigenous peoples of Mesoamerica.
The Spanish chronicler Cervantes considered the conquest 
owed much to the courage of Montaño, who, for his part, vowed 
never to return to the crater, ‘not even for all the treasure in the 
world’. It seems no one set foot at the summit again until 1827, 
a few years after México’s independence. This ascent took four 
days of toil. It rekindled interest in the sulphur deposits, and 
between the 1850s and 1870s a modest extractive industry 
resumed. The miners, volcaneros, descended into the crater 
using a windlass, and piled rocks around gas vents to condense 
sulphur vapours. It was terrible work at altitude with a constant 
threat of rockfalls. Many died riding the sacks fi lled with sulphur 
like sleds down the icy fl anks of the volcano.
See: Cervantes de Salazar, Crónica de la Nueva España, Book 
6, Chapters 7–11; J. Norman, ‘Sulphur from Popocatépetl’, Notes 269
Journal of Chemical Education 11 (1934); and M. C. LaFevor, 
‘Sulphur mining on Mexico’s Popocatépetl Volcano (1820–
1920): origins, development, and human-environmental chal￾lenges’, Journal of Latin American Geography (2012): 79–98.
10 Vulcano is one of several volcanoes beneath which, it was said, 
Zeus’s weapons were forged by Cyclopes. Thank goodness we 
didn’t end up with ‘Popocatépetl’ or ‘Eyjafjallajökull’ as the generic 
term for mountains of fi re. See: P. Aebischer, ‘Esp. volcan, it. vulcano, 
fr. volcan: une conséquence de la découverte de l’Amérique 
centrale’, Zeitschrift für Romanische Philologie 67 (1951): 299–318; 
K. L. Taylor, ‘Before volcanoes became ordinary’, Geological Society, 
London, Special Publications 442 (2017): 117–126.
11 Translated in: J. G. Viramonte and J. Incer-Barquero, ‘Masaya, 
the “Mouth of Hell”, Nicaragua: Volcanological interpretation 
of the myths, legends and anecdotes’, Journal of Volcanology 
and Geothermal Research 176 (2008): 419–426.
12 Oviedo had settled in León, the old capital of Nicaragua, by the 
late 1520s. The account of his expedition and commentary on 
Blás de Castillo is from: Fernández de Oviedo and Gonzalo 
Valdés, Historia general y natural de las Indias, islas y tierra-fi rme 
del mar océano, Vol. IV (Madrid: Imprenta de la Real Academia 
de la Historia, 1855), Book 42, Chapters 5–10. Translations into 
English of parts of Oviedo’s account of Masaya can be found in: 
E. G. Squier, Nicaragua: Its People, Scenery, Monuments, and the 
Proposed Interoceanic Canal: in two volumes (London: Longman, 
Brown, Green and Longmans, 1852). A project is underway to 
translate the entire Historia into English for the fi rst time – 
search for ‘The Oviedo project at Vassar’ online. The resem￾blance of the name Masaya to ‘Messiah’ is odd given the history 
of European attitudes to the volcano, but coincidental. Oviedo 
tells us the Chorotegans called the volcano Popogatepe and that 
it meant ‘mountain that boils’. He also says ‘Massaya’ [sic] 
means ‘burning mountain’. The etymology seems uncertain, 270 Mountains of Fire
though. One theory is that it comes from mazatl-yan – ‘place of 
deer’ – and another that its linguistic roots are in México and 
that it signifi es ‘where it rains fi re’. See: J. Incer, Toponimias indí￾genas de Nicaragua (San José: Libro Libre, 1985).
13 Now there is a sealed road that winds up to the crater, but I have 
made the mistake in the past, when walking up, of attempting 
‘shortcuts’ across the blocky lavas. It is forbidding terrain that 
could off er the ultimate challenge for an endurance race.
14 Apologies, I couldn’t fi nd any online calculator to convert these 
fi gures to imperial or metric units. Oviedo made the fi rst map of 
the crater region, showing the lava pit within nested craters.
15 Nicaragua’s former President Somoza is said to have liquidated 
political opponents in the same way in the 1960s.
16 In Europe, thanks to Oviedo, Masaya became the best-known 
volcano in the Americas for a long time. George Poulett Scrope, 
in his 1825 ‘textbook’ on volcanoes, likened the persistent activ￾ity of Masaya, which he called ‘the Devil’s Mouth’, to that of 
Stromboli in Italy. G. P. Scrope, Considerations on Volcanos
(London: Phillips, 1825).
The updated 1862 edition of Scrope’s work has as good a 
defi nition of an ‘eruption’ as any to be found: ‘the forcible expul￾sion of heated matters, gaseous, fl uid, or solid (usually of all 
three together), from the interior of the earth upon its surface’.
17 A thriving colonial city, until ruined by earthquakes in 1610 and 
then entombed in ash spewed from nearby Momotombo volcano. 
León Viejo was inscribed in the World Heritage list in 2000 and 
uniquely preserves the early colonial Spanish architecture.
18 S. Winchester, Krakatoa: the day the world exploded (New York: 
Viking Press, 2003).
19 There is a great example of this in the outskirts of the Nicaraguan 
capital. It was brought to international attention by Dr Earl 
Flint. Though a physician, he spent much of his time procuring 
antiquities for Harvard University’s Peabody Museum. In 1883, Notes 271
just as his own home was being sprinkled with ash from the 
neighbouring volcano, he heard that footprints had been uncov￾ered in a bed of ‘volcanic detritus and ash’ by working quarry￾men. Flint attributed the tracks to ‘pre-Adamite’ humans living 
200,000 years ago, and hailed them as ‘the most important 
discovery touching man’s antiquity’. Another American contem￾porary of Flint living in Nicaragua, geologist John Crawford, 
wrote ‘the footprints indicate haste, confusion and excitement 
[as if seeking shelter] from a storm of burning hot volcanic ashes 
and cinders’ . This notion is corroborated by more recent analy￾sis, which attributes the eruption to Masaya volcano. But the 
prints are much younger than Flint reckoned, being closer to 
2,000 years in age. The site, known as Las Huellas de Acahualinca, 
is open to the public and makes a worthwhile side-trip on any 
visit to Managua.
See: E. Flint, ‘Human foot prints in Nicaragua’, The American 
Antiquarian and Oriental Journal 6 (1884): 112; E. Flint, 
‘Human foot prints in Nicaragua’, The American Antiquarian 
and Oriental Journal 7 (1885): 156; E. Flint, ‘Pre-Adamite foot￾prints’, The American Antiquarian and Oriental Journal 8 (1886): 
230; J. Crawford, ‘Neolithic Man in Nicaragua’, The American 
Antiquarian and Oriental Journal 13 (1891): 293; M. G. Lockley 
et al., ‘America’s most famous human footprints: history, 
context and fi rst description of mid-Holocene tracks from the 
shores of Lake Managua, Nicaragua’, Ichnos 16 (2009): 55–69; 
W. Perez et al., ‘The Masaya Triple Layer: a 2,100 year old 
basaltic multi-episodic Plinian eruption from the Masaya 
Caldera Complex (Nicaragua)’, Journal of Volcanology and 
Geothermal Research 179 (2009): 191–205; and H. U. Schmincke 
et al., ‘Walking through volcanic mud: the 2,100 year-old 
Acahualinca footprints (Nicaragua) II: the Acahualinca people, 
environmental conditions and motivation’, International Journal 
of Earth Sciences 99 (2010): 279–292.272 Mountains of Fire
20 Take carbon dioxide, for example, which is formed from a carbon 
atom bonded on either side to an oxygen atom, like this: O=C=O. 
When infrared radiation falls on the gas, it absorbs precisely 
defi ned wavelengths of the light, causing the atoms to shift in rela￾tion to each other and warming up the molecule (hence carbon 
dioxide’s ‘greenhouse’ eff ect). A spectrum of infrared light that 
has passed through CO2 will reveal a complex pattern of dark 
lines and bands, that both identify the gas and quantify how much 
is present. This is how the ‘Keeling curve’ (https://keelingcurve.
ucsd.edu/) – the historical time series of atmospheric measure￾ments of CO2 made at the Mauna Loa Observatory on the Big 
Island of Hawaiʻi – is obtained. Since 1958, when data collection 
began, atmospheric CO2 abundance has risen by a third.
This increase has nothing to do with volcanoes. The CO2
emitted by all the world’s volcanoes, on land and in the oceans, 
is at most two per cent of that generated by fossil fuel use. The 
last time volcanoes and humans were on a par for CO2 output 
was in the mid-nineteenth century. See: T. M. Gerlach, ‘Present￾day CO2 emissions from volcanos’, Eos, Transactions American 
Geophysical Union 72 (1991): 249–255. M. R. Burton et al., 
‘Deep carbon emissions from volcanoes’, Reviews in Mineralogy 
and Geochemistry 75 (2013): 323–354.
21 ‘Proclivity’ shares its etymology with ‘Clive’, from the Old Norse 
klîfa, which means to climb. I ended up in the right profession! 
The word ‘observation’ also has interesting origins. In Latin 
obseruatio meant, among other things, the inspection of omens, 
as well as keeping a watchful eye on potential threats.
22 Of course, inequalities, inequities and injustices prevail, for 
instance in career progression and access to resources, and 
tensions still brew when pure and applied research priorities 
clash, in post-colonial contexts, and where local communities are 
threatened both by a volcano and enforced resettlement. For 
some perspectives on contemporary debates in volcanology, see: Notes 273
J. L. Kavanagh et al., ‘Volcanologists—who are we and where are 
we going?’ Bulletin of Volcanology 84 (2022): 53. J. Barclay et al., 
‘Disaster aid? Mapping historical responses to volcanic erup￾tions from 1800–2000 in the English-speaking Eastern Caribbean: 
their role in creating vulnerabilities’, Disasters 46 (2022): S10–
S50. S. Saha et al., ‘A place-based virtual fi eld trip resource that 
refl ects understandings from multiple knowledge systems for 
volcano hazard education in Aotearoa NZ: Lessons from collab￾orations between Māori and non-Māori’, Journal of Geoscience 
Education (2022): doi: 10.1080/10899995.2022.2109397. 
R. Christie et al., ‘Fearing the knock on the door: critical security 
studies insights into limited cooperation with disaster manage￾ment regimes’, Journal of Applied Volcanology 4 (2015): 19.
23 For a thoughtful discussion, see: F. Mazzocchi, ‘Western science 
and traditional knowledge: Despite their variations, diff erent 
forms of knowledge can learn from each other’, EMBO reports
7 (2006): 463–466.
24 The eruption of Mount Mazama around 5700 BCE formed the 
deepest lake in the United States: Crater Lake in Oregon. It 
ranks among the largest eruptions of past millennia – similar in 
scale to that of Tambora in 1815. Ancestral knowledge of the 
eruption and its distant impacts has been preserved amongst 
Native American communities through sacred storytelling. See 
E. E. Clark, Indian Legends of the Pacifi c Northwest (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1953). G. A. Oetelaar, ‘Natural 
disasters and interregional interactions: La Longue Durée in 
Northern Plains historical developments’, Plains Anthropologist
66, no. 257 (2021): 1–33. See also: P. Nunn, The Edge of Memory: 
Ancient stories, oral tradition and the post-glacial world (London: 
Bloomsbury Publishing, 2018).
25 See, for example: S. Ramos Chocobar and M. Tironi, ‘An inside 
sun: Lickanantay volcanology in the Salar de Atacama’, Frontiers 
in Earth Science 10:909967 (2022).274 Mountains of Fire
Land of God
1 L. Spallanzani, ‘Viaggi alle due Sicilie e in alcune parti 
dell’Appennino’, vol. 2, Plate 3 (Pavia: Baldassare Comini, 1792).
2 H. Tazieff , Craters of Fire (Hamish Hamilton: London, 1952): 
185.
3 Just three weeks into the nearly four-month-long production, 
Bergman received a letter from the vice-president of the Motion 
Picture Association of America, Hollywood’s moral police, 
warning that the aff air would destroy her career, and urging her 
to deny the rumours she was leaving her husband and ten-year￾old daughter. It’s diffi cult to imagine how Bergman completed 
the fi lm in the grip of such a profound personal crisis; perhaps 
she was able to channel her emotions into conveying the isola￾tion and opprobrium Karin experiences.
4 Johnson called for federal censorship legislation to control the 
private behaviour of actors, directors and producers. The 
Washington Star’s critic typifi es contemporary reviews of the 
fi lm: ‘a miserably inept work, meaningless as to story, grotesque 
in performance, confused in direction, and profoundly dull’. 
See: O. Gelley, ‘Ingrid Bergman’s star persona and the alien 
space of “Stromboli” ’, Cinema Journal 47 (2008): 26–51. Also: 
I. Bergman and A. Burgess, Ingrid Bergman: My Story (London: 
Michael Joseph, 1980). There is a good documentary feature 
telling the story of the making of Stromboli and a rival fi lm, 
Vulcano (starring Rossellini’s spurned lover, Anna Magnani): La 
guerra dei vulcani, directed by Francesco Patierno (2011).
5 M. Wyke, ‘Mobilizing Pompeii for Italian Silent Cinema’, 
Classical Receptions Journal 11 (2019): 453–475.
6 My fi rst encounter with a volcano was with a simulacrum of 
Mount Etna in eruption, complete with red glow, at the 
Geological Museum in London. I must have been around ten 
years old when I fi rst marvelled at it. N. Andrews, ‘Volcanic Notes 275
rhythms: Sir William Hamilton’s love aff air with Vesuvius’, AA 
Files 60 (2010): 9–15. See also: N. Daly, ‘The volcanic disaster 
narrative: from pleasure garden to canvas, page, and stage’, 
Victorian Studies 53 (2011): 255–285.
7 He was honoured with the Royal Society’s most prestigious 
award, the Copley Medal, in 1770. Goethe’s extraordinary 
talents stretched to geological scholarship. He is said to have 
amassed nearly 18,000 rock specimens during his life. H. J. 
Sullivan, ‘Collecting the rocks of time: Goethe, the romantics 
and early geology’, European Romantic Review 10 (1999): 
341–370.
8 There’s little to suggest he was considered a wit, but given his 
disdain for rationalists, perhaps the double-entendre of ‘closet’ 
satisfi ed him. In her novel, Susan Sontag paints Hamilton as a 
‘heroic depressive’ who ‘ferried himself past one vortex of 
melancholy after another by means of an astonishing spread 
of enthusiasms’: S. Sontag, The Volcano Lover: A Romance
(London: Random House, 1993). Hamilton regarded ‘objects 
and people alike [as] collectible’. His second wife, Emma, a 
socialite and artist’s model, appears to have been no exception: 
G. Morson, ‘Hamilton, Sir William (1731–1803), diplomatist 
and art collector’, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, 
accessed 23 June 2022, www.oxforddnb.com.
9 For example, the depiction of Etna in Athanasius Kircher’s 
Mundus Subterraneus (1665). See: D. Hollis, ‘Aesthetic experi￾ence, investigation, and classic ground: Responses to Etna from 
the First Century CE to 1773’, Journal of the Warburg and 
Courtauld Institutes 83 (2020): 299–325. For more on the 
role of Vesuvius in the development of volcanology, see: 
S. Cocco, Watching Vesuvius (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 2012).
10 M. A. Cheetham, ‘The taste for phenomena: Mount Vesuvius 
and transformations in late 18th-century European landscape 276 Mountains of Fire
depiction’, Wallraf-Richartz-Jahrbuch 45 (1984): 131–144. Also: 
J. Von der Thüsen, ‘Painting and the rise of volcanology: Sir 
William Hamilton’s Campi Phlegræi’, Endeavour 23 (1999): 
106–109. J. Munro, ‘Volcanoes’, in ‘True to Nature: Open-air 
painting in Europe 1780–1870’ (Washington: National Gallery of 
Art, 2020).
11 Spallanzani was a protégé (and relative) of the celebrated 
experimental physicist Laura Bassi (one of the fi rst women 
to hold a professorship). He dressed frogs in trousers to iden￾tify the fundamentals of animal reproduction, and blinded 
bats to show that a sense other than vision must enable night 
fl ight. He is also known for arriving at the fi rst correct under￾standing of the physics of skipping stones. There is some 
review of his geological contributions in: E. Vaccari, ‘Lazzaro 
Spallanzani (1729–1799): un naturaliste italien du dix￾huitième siècle et sa contribution aux sciences de la terre’, 
Travaux du Comité français d’Histoire de la Géologie 3 (1996): 
77–95.
12 J. Senebier, ‘Historical memoir of the life and writings of 
Spallanzani’, The Edinburgh Magazine (1800): 323–328, 
409–416. Taken from the preface of Senebier’s French transla￾tion of Spallanzani’s work: L. Spallanzani, Mémoires sur la respi￾ration (Geneva: Paschoud, 1803).
Jean Senebier also wrote an interesting treatise on experi￾mentation and observation. There’s a passage in it that reminded 
me of Haroun Tazieff ’s call for volcanologists to stay ‘as cool as 
a cucumber’ under pressure (p.78). Referring to two contempo￾raries who had ‘sought truth at pain of death’ on Vesuvius, 
Senebier explained they deserved his admiration, ‘for keeping 
their cool in the midst of the whirlwinds of fl ame and smoke 
spewing from the volcano, and for having taken the best precau￾tions to preserve their days  . . .’: J. Senebier, L’art d’observer, 
(Geneva: Philibert et Chirol, 1775).Notes 277
13 Homer, The Odyssey with an English Translation by A.T. Murray, 
in two volumes (London: William Heinemann, 1919).
14 R. King and S. Young, ‘The Aeolian Islands: Birth and death of 
a human landscape’, Erdkunde 33 (1979): 193–204.
15 J. D. Friedman et al., ‘Infrared surveys in Iceland in 1966’, US 
Geological Survey Professional Paper 650-C (1969): C89–105.
16 They feature in a surreal conversation in Nanni Moretti’s 1993 
movie, Caro Diario.
17 Tazieff joined Cousteau aboard the Calypso to explore the Red 
Sea in 1954: H. Tazieff , L’eau et le feu (Paris: Arthaud, 1954).
18 C. M. M. Oppenheimer and D. A. Rothery, ‘Infrared monitor￾ing of volcanoes by satellite’, Journal of the Geological Society 148 
(1991): 563–569.
19 Another Italian highbrow, Francesco D’Arezzo, had argued as 
much after witnessing Mount Etna’s great eruption of 1669. 
D’Arezzo noticed that when he pushed a stick into Etna’s lava, 
it resisted like molten glass. He then burned nearly fi fteen 
pounds of sulphur in Palermo, causing a public outcry as the 
plume of tearing gas spread. Since no similar gas arose as the 
lava fl ows inundated the outskirts of the city of Catania, how 
could they consist of sulphur, he reasoned? See: W. E. K. 
Middleton, ‘The 1669 eruption of Mount Etna: Francesco 
d’Arezzo on the vitreous nature of lava’, Archives of Natural 
History 11 (1982): 99–102.
20 See, for instance, fi gure 11 in: N. Métrich et al., ‘Paroxysms at 
Stromboli volcano (Italy): source, genesis and dynamics’, 
Frontiers in Earth Science 9 (2021): 45. This article also discusses 
the rare larger explosive eruptions that rattle Stromboli.
21 In the 1862 edition of his book, Scrope even draws an analogy 
between explosive volcanism and uncorking a bottle of soda￾water. He also likens magma to hot syrup with crystallising 
sugar, prefi guring the predilection of some of my colleagues for 
golden syrup as a lava proxy in laboratory simulations of 278 Mountains of Fire
volcanic phenomena. (Another material I have seen used is 
hair gel.) G. P. Scrope, Volcanos (London: Longman, 1862): 
42–45.
22 M. Burton et al., ‘Magmatic gas composition reveals the source 
depth of slug-driven Strombolian explosive activity, Science 317 
(2007): 227–230.
23 Evidence for the role of crystals in Strombolian eruptions 
stems from experiments, fi eld observations and studies of the 
ejected rock. See: J. Woitischek et al., ‘Strombolian eruptions 
and dynamics of magma degassing at Yasur Volcano 
(Vanuatu)’, Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 
398 (2020): 106869; J. Oppenheimer et al., ‘Analogue experi￾ments on the rise of large bubbles through a solids-rich 
suspension: a “weak plug” model for Strombolian eruptions’, 
Earth and Planetary Science Letters 531 (2020): 115931; 
A. Caracciolo et al., ‘Textural and chemical features of a “soft” 
plug emitted during Strombolian explosions: A case study 
from Stromboli volcano’, Earth and Planetary Science Letters
559 (2021): 116761.
24 J. Taddeucci et al., ‘High-speed imaging of strombolian explo￾sions: The ejection velocity of pyroclasts’, Geophysical Research 
Letters 39 (2012).
25 R. Cioni et al., ‘Understanding volcanic systems and their 
dynamics combining fi eld and physical volcanology with petrol￾ogy studies’, in Forecasting and Planning for Volcanic Hazards, 
Risks, and Disasters (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2021), 285–328.
26 See note 12.
27 In turn, Scrope infl uenced his friend Charles Lyell, whose 
Principles of Geology proved highly stimulating reading for a 
young Charles Darwin aboard the Beagle. In the 1862 edition of 
his book, Scrope also makes the case for ‘laboratory volcanoes’, 
suggesting Stromboli as an exemplar. True, though I can’t agree 
with him when he says the crater can be approached and ‘its Notes 279
interior viewed at leisure with complete impunity’. See G. P. 
Scrope, Volcanos (London: Longman, 1862):30–31.
28 H. Davy, ‘XIII. On the Phænomena of volcanoes’, The 
Philosophical Magazine 4, no. 20 (1828): 85–94. Davy is mostly 
remembered as a chemist but he also studied and lectured on 
geology. See: R. Siegfried and R. H. Dott. ‘Humphry Davy as 
geologist, 1805–29’, The British Journal for the History of Science
9 (1976): 219–227. In a lecture he gave in London in 1812, he 
simulated volcanic pyrotechnics by adding water to potassium 
that he had placed at the top of a cone of clay and stones. See: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nxRHQ1xfnWc
Davy was almost overcome by gases on one fi eldtrip to 
Vesuvius and took a month to recover. Mary Shelley drew inspi￾ration from Davy’s work while writing Frankenstein during the 
‘year without a summer’, 1816, as did Jules Verne for Journey to 
the Centre of the Earth. See: A. A. Debus, ‘Re-framing the science 
in Jules Verne’s “Journey to the Center of the Earth” ’, Science 
Fiction Studies 33 (2006): 405–420. D. M. Pyle, ‘Visions of 
volcanoes’, 19: Interdisciplinary Studies in the Long Nineteenth 
Century 25 (2017).
29 T. Monticelli and N. Covelli, Storia de’fenomeni del Vesuvio
avvenuti negli anni 1821, 1822 e parte del 1823 (Naples: Gabinetto, 
1823). Monticelli, himself a resolute empiricist, generously 
facilitated the Vesuvius investigations of many visiting savants 
including Humphry Davy, Alexander von Humboldt, Charles 
Lyell and Christian, Crown Prince of Denmark. See: J. Brewer, 
‘Scientifi c networks, Vesuvius and politics: the case of Teodoro 
Monticelli in Naples, 1790–1845’, Incontri. Rivista europea di 
studi italiani 34 (2019): 54–67. See also: F. Obrizzo et al., 
‘Cultural climate in Naples between the birth and development 
of volcanology’, Rendiconti Online della Società Geologica Italiana
43 (2017): 64–78.280 Mountains of Fire
30 Mercalli wrote a veritable textbook on volcanoes, Vulcani 
Attivi della Terra, published in 1907. The work includes 
dramatic photographs and first-hand accounts of the deadly 
eruption of Vesuvius in 1906, whose economic impacts were 
so great for Italy that the 1908 Olympic Games, which should 
have taken place in Rome, were instead hosted by London.
31 For context, see: L. Wilson and J. W. Head, ‘A comparison of 
volcanic eruption processes on Earth, Moon, Mars, Io and 
Venus’, Nature 302 (1983): 663–669.
32 For a collection of essays on Mercalli, see: M. A. Di Vito et al., 
‘Giuseppe Mercalli da Monza al Reale Osservatorio Vesuviano: 
una vita tra insegnamento e ricerca’, Istituto Nazionale di 
Geofi sica e Vulcanologia 24 (2014). Mauro Di Vito became direc￾tor of the Vesuvius Observatory in 2022.
33 Apparently, during a large eruption in 1927, lava was pouring 
towards the village rather than down the Sciara del Fuoco. The 
people put the statue of Bartholomew in front of it and the lava 
stopped.
What Upsets Volcanoes?
1 Die Illustrirte Welt: Blätter aus Natur und Leben, Wissenschaft und 
Kunst (Stuttgart: Hallberger, 1858): 164.
2 ‘Qué cosa irrita a los volcanes, que escupen fuego, frío y furia?’ 
P. Neruda, The Book of Questions, translated by W. O’Daly (Port 
Townsend: Copper Canyon Press, 1991).
3 Of Darwin’s copious Beagle fi eld notes, 1,383 pages are on 
geological matters, whereas 368 are devoted to biology. If he 
referred to himself (professionally) as anything, it was as a geol￾ogist. The Sedgwick Museum in Cambridge holds his collection 
of igneous rocks and a number of his notebooks. See: H. E. 
Gruber and V. Gruber, ‘The eye of reason: Darwin’s develop￾ment during the Beagle voyage’, Isis 53 (1962): 186–200.Notes 281
4 F. H. T. Rhodes, ‘Darwin’s search for a theory of the earth: 
symmetry, simplicity and speculation’, The British Journal for 
the History of Science 24 (1991): 193–229. Darwin’s ideas were 
presented to the Geological Society of London in 1838 and 
subsequently published in: C. Darwin, ‘On the connexion of 
certain volcanic phenomena in South America; and on the 
formation of mountain chains and volcanos, as the eff ect of the 
same power by which continents are elevated’, Transactions of 
the Geological Society of London 2 (1840): 601–631. Rhodes 
described them as ‘a remarkable attempt to develop a global 
tectonic synthesis’.
5 L. E. Lara et al., ‘The AD1835 eruption at Robinson Crusoe 
Island discredited: Geological and historical evidence’, Progress 
in Physical Geography 45 (2021): 187–206.
6 The reason why volcanoes develop at subduction zones, where 
old, cold oceanic plate plummets back into the mantle, is coun￾terintuitive. The answer is water. When new ocean plate is 
created by undersea volcanism, it reacts with seawater circulat￾ing in the new hot crust. This hydrates minerals, turning basalt 
into a slippery rock called serpentinite. At a subduction zone, 
the oceanic plate feels increasing pressure as it sinks. Eventually, 
this forces out the water, which percolates into the overlying 
rocky layer of the Earth known as the mantle. This addition of 
water provokes a partial melting of the mantle, and the molten 
rock produced, along with the watery fl uids, rises up to accumu￾late in the Earth’s crust, where it can stew and brew for millen￾nia before feeding an eruption at the surface.
The origins of the coastal cordillera have been much debated. 
See: A. Encinas et al., ‘Tectonosedimentary evolution of the 
Coastal Cordillera and Central Depression of south-Central 
Chile (36°30'-42° S)’, Earth-Science Reviews 213 (2021): 103465.
7 G. Seropian et al., ‘A review framework of how earthquakes trig￾ger volcanic eruptions’, Nature Communications 12, 1004 (2021).282 Mountains of Fire
8 C. Mora-Stock et al., ‘Comparison of seismic activity for Llaima 
and Villarrica volcanoes prior to and after the Maule 2010 earth￾quake’, International Journal of Earth Sciences 103 (2014): 
2,015–2,028.
9 M. E. Pritchard et al., ‘Subsidence at southern Andes volcanoes 
induced by the 2010 Maule, Chile earthquake’, Nature Geoscience
6 (2013): 632–636.
10 Many of their homes were ravaged by slurries of wet ash that 
sloughed off the mountain during rainstorms. The government 
proposed to relocate the population permanently, but the citi￾zens resisted, reoccupied and rebuilt.
11 C. Wicks et al., ‘The role of dyking and fault control in the rapid 
onset of eruption at Chaitén volcano, Chile’, Nature 478 (2011): 
374–377. Cordón Caulle also erupted within two days of the 
Valdivia earthquake in 1960.
12 Only since the eruption has radiocarbon dating of charcoal 
fragments found in pumice deposits around the volcano 
revealed that several eruptions occurred in the past 5,000 
years, and one as recently as the mid-seventeenth century: 
L. E. Lara et al., ‘Late Holocene history of Chaitén Volcano: 
New evidence for a 17th century eruption’, Andean Geology 40 
(2013): 249–261.
13 The volcanic clouds also spread into the Antarctic circle, where 
they amplifi ed that year’s spring ozone hole: S. Solomon et al., 
‘Emergence of healing in the Antarctic ozone layer’, Science 353 
(2016): 269–274.
14 F. Arzilli et al., ‘The unexpected explosive sub-Plinian eruption 
of Calbuco volcano (22–23 April 2015; Southern Chile): trig￾gering mechanism implications’, Journal of Volcanology and 
Geothermal Research 378 (2019): 35–50.
15 F. Vilches, ‘From nitrate town to internment camp: the cultural 
biography of Chacabuco, northern Chile’, Journal of Material 
Culture 16 (2011): 241–263.Notes 283
16 C. Oppenheimer, ‘Mines in the sky’, Geology Today 9 (1993): 
66–68.
17 D. Blumenstiel et al., ‘Exposure to geogenic lithium in ancient 
Andeans: Unraveling lithium in mummy hair using LA-ICP￾MS’, Journal of Archaeological Science 113 (2020): 105062.
18 J. Rougier et al., ‘The global magnitude–frequency relationship 
for large explosive volcanic eruptions’, Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters 482 (2018): 621–629.
19 W. J. Malfait et al., ‘Supervolcano eruptions driven by melt 
buoyancy in large silicic magma chambers’, Nature Geoscience 7 
(2014): 122–125; L. Caricchi et al., ‘Frequency and magnitude 
of volcanic eruptions controlled by magma injection and buoy￾ancy’, Nature Geoscience 7 (2014): 126–130.
20 M. Gardeweg and C. F. Ramírez, ‘La Pacana caldera and the 
Atana ignimbrite—a major ash-fl ow and resurgent caldera 
complex in the Andes of northern Chile’, Bulletin of Volcanology
49 (1987): 547–566.
21 A. S. Wilson et al., ‘Archaeological, radiological, and biological 
evidence off er insight into Inca child sacrifi ce’, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 110 (2013): 13,322–13,327.
22 A. S. Wilson et al., ‘Stable isotope and DNA evidence for ritual 
sequences in Inca child sacrifi ce’, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 104 (2007): 16,456–16,461.
23 Like the present-day residents of Talabre, the ancestors had 
cultivated maize and quinoa in the quebradas here.
24 The origin of my PhD project was a clever study by my advisors 
at the Open University, Peter Francis and David Rothery. Peter 
had worked in the central Andes since the late 1960s, and loved 
to be in the fi eld. But he also recognised that for such a vast, 
harsh and diffi cult-to-access region, satellite images could 
provide a wealth of information on past eruptions and even 
ongoing activity. For Peter, the Landsat scenes were instant 
geological maps – there is so little vegetation in the central 284 Mountains of Fire
Andes that it was enough to tweak the contrast of the images 
to diff erentiate rock types. What remained was to classify 
them. Peter pioneered this work, integrating fi eld, laboratory 
and remote-sensing studies to reveal the deep histories of 
volcanoes.
See: P. W. Francis and D. A. Rothery, ‘Using the Landsat 
Thematic Mapper to detect and monitor active volcanoes: An 
example from Láscar volcano, northern Chile’, Geology 15 
(1987): 614–617.
25 I recorded a maximum temperature of 940°C, but more impor￾tantly could see that the luminous vents would represent only 
tiny fractions of image pixels, as expected, verifying an approach 
to estimating temperatures and sizes of hot features from 
Landsat images. C. Oppenheimer et al., ‘Infrared image analysis 
of volcanic thermal features: Láscar Volcano, Chile, 1984–1992’, 
Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth 98 (1993): 
4,269–4,286.
26 Rainfall has long been considered as a potential trigger of erup￾tions. See, for example: H. J. Johnston-Lavis, ‘The relationship 
of the activity of Vesuvius to certain meteorological and astro￾nomical phenomena’, Proceedings of the Royal Society of London
40 (1886): 248–249.
27 Cases include the eruptions of Mount Ontake, Japan, in 2014, 
and Whakaari (White Island), New Zealand, in 2019, which 
claimed dozens of lives. A burst of earthquakes within a day of 
the 2019 disaster at Whakaari might have been a sign of the 
impending explosion: D. E. Dempsey et al., ‘Automatic precur￾sor recognition and real-time forecasting of sudden explosive 
volcanic eruptions at Whakaari, New Zealand’, Nature commu￾nications 11 (2020): 1–8.
28 S. Layana et al., ‘Volcanic Anomalies monitoring System 
(VOLCANOMS), a low-cost volcanic monitoring system based 
on Landsat images’, Remote Sensing 12 (2020): 1589.Notes 285
29 It’s an alluring concept – the use of a common tool to monitor 
volcanoes around the world. But it is a far cry from an observa￾tory embedded within the community it seeks to protect. It 
would also raise some thorny issues that would need much 
thought. For instance, if it detected unrest of a volcano, how and 
with whom should that information be shared? You can’t go 
round predicting eruptions in other people’s countries. M. S. 
Ramsey et al., ‘Volcanology 2030: will an orbital volcano obser￾vatory fi nally become a reality?’, Bulletin of Volcanology 84 
(2022): 1–8.
Emerald Isle
1 F. Perret, ‘The Day’s Work of a Volcanologist’, The World’s Work
(November, 1907): 9,544–9,554.
2 Y. Weekes, Volcano: A Memoir (Leeds: Peepal Tree, 2006).
3 E. W. Freeman, ‘The awful doom of St. Pierre: an extract of 
an account by Captain Freeman’, The Argus, Melbourne, 
11 October 1902, https://trove.nla.gov.au/newspaper/article/
9088896#.
4 ‘Clouds of sand at sea’, New York Times, 19 May 1902.
5 As an example of how eruption observations inform interpreta￾tion of volcanic rocks, features of some of the strata exposed on 
Mount Snowdon in Wales were soon recognised as products of 
ancient peléan eruptions: J. R. Dakyns and E. Greenly, ‘III.—On 
the probable pelean origin of the felsitic slates of Snowdon, 
and their metamorphism’, Geological Magazine 2 (1905): 
541–549.
6 For a terrifi c review of the infamous Vesuvius eruption, see: 
D. M. Doronzo et al., ‘The 79 CE eruption of Vesuvius: A 
lesson from the past and the need of a multidisciplinary 
approach for developments in volcanology’, Earth-Science 
Reviews 231 (2022): 104072.286 Mountains of Fire
7 Aged nineteen in 1886, Perret had dropped out of college to join 
Thomas Edison’s laboratories. He helped to develop battery 
technologies, but soon left to start his own electric motors enter￾prise. By the late 1890s, he was constructing electric cars – sadly, 
a century too soon for market. As a child, he had been capti￾vated by a coloured lithograph given to his father that depicted 
Pompeii’s destruction. And in his teens, he witnessed the spec￾tacular sunsets resulting from the stratospheric dust from the 
eruption of Krakatau in 1883. See: H. E. Belkin and T. Gidwitz, 
‘The contributions and infl uence of two Americans, Henry S. 
Washington and Frank A. Perret, to the study of Italian volcan￾ism with emphasis on volcanoes in the Naples area’, in Vesuvius, 
Campi Flegrei, and Campanian Volcanism (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 
2020): 9–32.
My brief account here unforgivably overlooks pioneering 
work of others, not least French volcanologist Alfred Lacroix. 
See: A. Lacroix, La Montagne Pelée et ses Eruptions (Paris: 
l’Académie des Sciences sous les Auspices des Ministères de 
l’Instruction Publique et des Colonies, 1904).
8 Raff aele Matteucci, Director of the Royal Vesuvius Observatory, 
1903–1909: ‘Io amo la mia montagna, io e lei viviamo in una soli￾tudine misteriosa e terribile, non potrei lasciarla, le sono legato per 
sempre; i miei pochi amici dicono che il suo respiro brucerà e farà 
appassire la mia povera vita’. Quoted in: L. Civetta et al., Vesuvio 
negli occhi: storie di osservatori (Unità funzionale Vulcanologia e 
Petrologia, 2004).
9 F. A. Perret, The Vesuvius Eruption of 1906: Study of a volcanic cycle, 
Publication 339 (Washington: Carnegie Institution, 1924): 15.
10 He considered that microphones in contact with the ground 
and air would provide a windfall for volcano science, and impro￾vised fi eld-ready equipment by cannibalising telephone receiver 
parts and hearing aids, connecting them to metal horns and 
cones.Notes 287
11 Giuseppe Mercalli, who would succeed Matteucci as observa￾tory director in 1909, also played a key role in advising the 
authorities and public on the prognosis of the eruption, though 
he and Matteucci had fallen out years earlier. Among the many 
geologists who visited Naples soon after the eruption was 
Thomas Jaggar, then assistant professor at Harvard and head 
of geology at MIT. He spent three weeks with Perret. Jaggar 
was no neophyte in volcanological matters; he had joined a 
scientifi c team on Martinique after the Pelée tragedy. With 
Mercalli’s violent death in 1914, it was left to Perret to write 
the defi nitive monograph on the 1906 Vesuvius eruption. It is a 
narrative and technical masterpiece.
12 F. A. Perret, ‘The Vesuvius eruption of 1906: study of a volcanic 
cycle’, No. 339, Carnegie Institution of Washington (1924): 46.
13 Jaggar continued: ‘[Perret’s] books set a standard for all time for 
what the fi eld science of volcanoes shall be’. T. A. Jaggar, My 
Experiments with Volcanoes (Honolulu: Hawaiian Volcano 
Research Association, 1956).
14 New York Times, 1 July 1912.
15 F. A. Perret, The Eruption of Mt. Pelée 1929–1932, Publication 
458, (Washington: Carnegie Institution, 1935).
16 The idea that plants might register what magma is up to is not 
so fanciful. Diff use carbon dioxide emissions from volcanoes 
can kill vegetation, and since CO 2 is the fi rst gas to fi zz out of a 
rising magma body, an otherwise unaccounted-for die-back of 
trees in a volcanic region could signal future unrest.
17 Perret would write up his account in his third monograph: 
F. A. Perret, The volcano-seismic crisis at Montserrat 1933–37, 
Publication 512, (Washington: Carnegie Institution, 1939). 
Throughout his volcanological career, he worked mostly alone 
without a regular salary, and never settled down in a conven￾tional sense. He was wedded to the volcano and devoted his last 
years to establishing a museum on Martinique. His fi nal major 288 Mountains of Fire
work, published posthumously, is a grand synthesis drawing on 
four decades of unparalleled scrutiny of volcanic behaviour: 
F. A. Perret, Volcanological Observations, Publication 549 
(Washington: Carnegie Institution, 1950).
18 See, for instance: V. C. Pinel et al., ‘On the relationship between 
cycles of eruptive activity and growth of a volcanic edifi ce’, 
Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 194 (2010): 
150–164; B. G. Mason et al., ‘Seasonality of volcanic eruptions’, 
Journal of Geophysical Research 109, B04206 (2004).
19 J. B. Shepherd et al., ‘Precursory activity to the 1995 eruption of 
the Soufrière Hills volcano, Montserrat’, Seismic Research Unit, 
The University of the West Indies, St. Augustine, Trinidad 
(2002).
20 The so-called ‘Wadge and Isaacs report’ of 1987. A condensed 
version was also published: G. Wadge and M. C. Isaacs, 
‘Mapping the volcanic hazards from Soufriere Hills Volcano, 
Montserrat, West Indies, using an image processor’, Journal of 
the Geological Society 145 (1988): 541–551.
21 In his tome on Pelée, Perret wrote ‘next to the actual capture of 
the gases, spectroscopic observations seem to be the most prom￾ising method of research in this fi eld’. Almost a century later, 
that’s what we do.
22 Sulphur dioxide is one of the most important volcanic gases to 
track. For decades, this was done with the Cospec. It is such a 
stalwart of volcano monitoring, it even features in the 1997 
disaster movie Dante’s Peak starring Pierce Brosnan. One of the 
fi rst times it was pointed at a volcano was at Masaya in the early 
1970s, and it played a key role in numerous volcanic crises, 
including the build-up to the largest eruption of the past century, 
that of Pinatubo, in the Philippines, in 1991. Increasing sulphur 
dioxide emissions from the then almost unheard-of volcano 
indicated rising magma, prompting evacuations that saved tens 
of thousands of lives.Notes 289
The Cospec was emblematic of 1960s engineering: it was 
practical and sturdy but also pricey and power hungry. Advances 
in digital imaging paved the way for a new generation of cheaper 
miniature ultraviolet spectrometers, and in 2001 I tried one out 
at Masaya with my colleagues. It worked better than I could 
have dreamed, and our approach is now used for routine hazard 
assessment at volcanoes from Vanuatu to Iceland, from Hawaiʻi 
to the Democratic Republic of Congo. It has also provided esti￾mates for the large-scale outputs of sulphur dioxide from volca￾noes, helping to understand their role in shaping the Earth’s 
atmosphere.
See: A. S. Daag et al., ‘Monitoring sulphur dioxide emission 
at Mount Pinatubo’, Fire and Mud: Eruptions and lahars of 
Mount Pinatubo, Philippines (Quezon City: Philippine Institute 
of Volcanology and Seismology, 1996): 409–414; D. Thompson, 
Volcano Cowboys: The rocky evolution of a dangerous science
(London: Macmillan, 2002): 231; C. Oppenheimer, ‘Ultraviolet 
sensing of volcanic sulphur emissions’, Elements 6 (2010): 
87–92.
23 Soufrière comes from the French soufre for sulphur, with a nod 
to the Italian Solfatara – a site of sulphurous emissions and 
encrustations in the Campi Flegrei near Naples. Owing to the 
French infl uence in the West Indies, several volcanoes, fuma￾rolic areas and even villages adopted the moniker, including 
Soufrière St Vincent.
24 The Times, 17 August 1976.
25 In mid-August 1976 when the evacuation decision was made, 
Tazieff was uncontactable as he was on another mission – to 
5,300-metre-high Sangay in Ecuador. He was on the volcano 
when members of a British army-led expedition were blasted 
with rock from a violent explosion very close to the summit. 
Peter Francis, my PhD advisor, was to have joined this mission 
at a later date. Back on Guadeloupe at the end of August, Tazieff 290 Mountains of Fire
came close to losing his own life at the crater’s edge on La 
Soufrière with a party of a dozen scientists. Their helmets spared 
them serious injuries. As the population fl ed their homes, 
another man and his cinematographers went in the opposite 
direction: Werner Herzog, to make his fi lm La Soufrière.
26 Tazieff said to one journalist that Allègre and his team had only 
ever seen volcanoes in books. See this excellent summary by 
Francois Beauducel, former director of the Gaudeloupe volcano 
observatory: F. Beauducel, ‘À propos de la polémique: Soufrière 
1976’, IPGP (http://www.ipgp.fr/~beaudu/soufriere/forum76.
html). There is also a 2015 fi lm directed by Eric Beauducel on 
the controversy: E. Beauducel (dir.), Tazieff /Allègre: la guerre des 
volcans (Duels, France 5: 2015).
27 H. Tazieff , ‘La Soufrière, volcanology and forecasting’, Nature
269 (1977): 96–97.
28 H. Tazieff , ‘Volcanological forecasting and medical diagnosis: 
similarities’, in Forecasting Volcanic Events, eds. H. Tazieff and 
J. C. Sabroux (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1983), 3–7.
29 See: R. S. Fiske, ‘Volcanologists, journalists, and the concerned 
local public: a tale of two crises in the eastern Caribbean’, in 
Explosive Volcanism: Interception, Evolution, and Hazard 
(Washington DC: National Academy Press, 1984): 170–176.
30 Some of the tensions stemmed from poor communication. For 
instance, fi eldworkers felt they were not always advised when 
the observatory seismometers registered increasing activity on 
the lava dome; on the other hand, staff at the observatory were 
unclear as to whom was authorised to enter dangerous areas. At 
least in this case, a solution was found – a whiteboard. Semantics 
were also hotly contested – one argument hinged on whether 
to describe the week’s developments on the volcano as an ‘esca￾lation’ or a ‘change’ in activity. Such points were not, however, 
pedantic, because much depended on how the observatory’s 
pronouncements were interpreted by the community.Notes 291
31 C. Oppenheimer et al., ‘Volcanic gas measurements by helicop￾ter-borne Fourier transform spectroscopy’, International Journal 
of Remote Sensing 19 (1998): 373–379.
32 In her account spanning the early years of the volcanic emer￾gency, Yvonne Weekes (ibid) writes ‘I am sick of hearing “and 
now for your daily volcano report”  . . . I am sick of hearing 
the Government telling us that we are safe . . . I am sick of the 
noise of the [observatory] helicopter waking me up every 
morning.’
33 For an account of the fi rst years of the crisis from a scientifi c 
perspective, see: R. E. A. Robertson et al., ‘The 1995–1998 
eruption of the Soufrière Hills volcano, Montserrat, WI’, 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series A
358 (2000): 1,619–1,637. For a broader view, see: P. Pattullo, 
Fire from the Mountain: The Tragedy of Montserrat and the Betrayal 
of its People (London: Constable, 2000). And for further perspec￾tives on evacuations during volcanic crises, see: J. Barclay et al., 
‘Livelihoods, wellbeing and the risk to life during volcanic erup￾tions’, Frontiers in Earth Science 7 (2019): 205.
34 The episode can be found online: ‘Volcano! When it all Began 
– Montserrat Blows its Top – 1995’, Journeys with Lauren Millar, 
YouTube, uploaded 4 February 2022 (https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=ESYjE2FVGT4).
35 Superimposed on this was a more gradual trend of infl ation that 
would abruptly reset with larger collapses of the dome. The 
more rapid oscillations probably refl ect a stop-start ascent of 
magma in the feeder pipe. When magma squeezed into the 
dome, its expansion would trigger rockfalls and small nuées 
ardentes. Gas would escape and the depressurisation would 
cause the summit to sag. But with gas loss, minute crystals form. 
This made the magma less fl uid, and it stuck in the conduit, 
building up gas pressure and, now, causing infl ation. At 
some threshold, the blockage cleared, resetting the cycle. See: 292 Mountains of Fire
B. Voight et al., ‘Magma fl ow instability and cyclic activity 
at Soufriere Hills volcano, Montserrat, British West Indies’, 
Science 283 (1999): 1,138–1,142.
36 Yvonne Weekes (ibid) writes of the ‘fateful dark day’ of 25 June 
1997: ‘At night I am haunted by the faces of the people I know 
who have lost their lives, their homes, their loved ones.’ I still 
remember fondly the incorrigible Beryl Grant with her basket of 
fruit.
37 S. C. Loughlin et al., ‘Eyewitness accounts of the 25 June 1997 
pyroclastic fl ows and surges at Soufrière Hills Volcano, 
Montserrat, and implications for disaster mitigation’, Geological 
Society, London, Memoirs 21 (2002): 211–230.
38 Refl ecting on the Soufrière Hills disaster, a UK parliamentary 
commission concluded in 1997 that ‘Montserrat would have 
been immeasurably more prepared for the crisis [if the report] 
had been carefully read and digested . . . This sorry account 
must be a signal example of failure in communication, political 
leadership and responsibility.’ International Development 
Committee, ‘International Development: First Report’, Session 
1997–98, 18 November 1997 (https://publications.parliament.
uk/pa/cm199798/cmselect/cmintdev/267i/id0102.htm).
39 See: P. Francis, and C. Oppenheimer, Volcanoes, 2nd edition 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004).
40 One analysis has suggested the evidence available at the time 
was insuffi cient to call it either way. See: T. K. Hincks et al., 
‘Retrospective analysis of uncertain eruption precursors at La 
Soufrière volcano, Guadeloupe, 1975–77: volcanic hazard 
assessment using a Bayesian Belief Network approach’, Journal 
of Applied Volcanology 3 (2014): 1–26.
41 G. Wadge and W. P. Aspinall, ‘A review of volcanic hazard and 
risk-assessment praxis at the Soufrière Hills Volcano, Montserrat 
from 1997 to 2011’, Geological Society, London, Memoirs 39, 
(2014): 439–456; W. Aspinall, ‘Reminiscences of a Classical Notes 293
Model expert elicitation facilitator’, in Expert Judgement in Risk 
and Decision Analysis (New York: Springer, 2021): 389–399.
42 I heard that on one occasion when the experts met on Montserrat 
for their routine risk analysis, they found the volcano subdued 
and were set to conclude the eruption was over when a loud 
explosion rattled the windows. Looking out, they saw dark ash 
shooting from the volcano’s summit, quietly returned to their 
seats and revised the numbers.
43 T. A. Jaggar, ‘Work of F. A. Perret on Montserrat’, The Volcano 
Letter, no. 449, Department of the Interior, National Park 
Service (July 1937).
44 F. A. Perret, ‘The Living Earth: a presentation of volcanology as 
a new and greater science’, Caribbean Center for Volcano Study, 
Publication No. 1, 1940.
45 ‘. . . the non-linear complexity of volcano dynamics precludes 
the possibility of predicting deterministically the outcome of a 
volcano crisis, irrespective of the sophistication, resolution and 
extent of volcano monitoring instrumentation’. W. Aspinall and 
G. Woo, ‘Counterfactual analysis of runaway volcanic explo￾sions’, Frontiers in Earth Science 7 (2019): 222. Put another way, 
anyone who claims to know with certainty what a restless or 
erupting volcano will do tomorrow is either deluded or a liar.
Night Market of the Ghosts
1 In The Graphic (21 September 1895), 360. From a sketch by 
W. B. D’Almeida.
2 F. W. Junghuhn, Java, seine Gestalt, Pfl anzendecke und innere 
Bauart, vol. 2 (Leipzig: Arnold, 1857): 749. My own translation.
3 On one visit to the country’s national volcano-monitoring centre 
in Bandung, I was amazed to fi nd that seven volcanoes, scat￾tered across the archipelago, were at the highest alert level, indi￾cating ongoing or imminent eruption. Even a single volcanic 294 Mountains of Fire
crisis, for instance that on La Palma in 2021, stretches human 
and logistical resources. Eff ective management of multiple 
simultaneous crises – some necessitating disruptive evacuations 
of threatened communities, others requiring additional moni￾toring assets – demands extraordinary preparedness, command 
and control.
4 P. Boomgaard, ‘The high sanctuary: Local perceptions of moun￾tains in Indonesia 1750–2000’, in Framing Indonesian Realities: 
Essays in Symbolic Anthropology in Honour of Reimar Schefold
(Leiden: KITLV Press, 2003): 295–314. Boomgaard writes: 
‘The “holy trinity” of mountain, forest, and water, with the 
mountain as the supreme deity, symbolized, and in some areas 
still symbolizes, the forces that make life possible.’
5 Nor was I aware then that the traditional landowners, the Puku, 
hold a ceremony to honour the ancestors and earth spirits at a 
cave on the cone’s fl ank, laying off erings of cotton wound with 
red thread (symbolising smoke and lava), tobacco and rice, 
before slaughtering a goat with bare hands. The performance 
ends with a ritual meal and the thrusting of an iron lance into 
the ground. These acts bind and protect the community. 
See U. U. Frömming, ‘Volcanoes: symbolic places of resistance. 
Political appropriation of nature in Flores, Indonesia’, Violence 
in Indonesia (Hamburg: Abera Verlag, 2001): 270–281.
6 Demon is, in fact, a clan name.
7 For a brilliant biography of Junghuhn, see: R. Sternagel, Der 
Humboldt von Java: Leben und Werk des Naturforschers Franz 
Wilhelm Junghuhn 1809–1864, (Halle: Mitteldeutscher Verlag, 
2013).
8 The article leads with an epigraph taken from Goethe’s Faust, 
foreshadowing the amalgam of transcendentalism and empiri￾cism that characterises much of Junghuhn’s oeuvre: ‘Inscrutable 
at broad day, nature does not suff er her veil to be torn from her; 
and what she does not choose to reveal to thy mind, thou wilt Notes 295
not wrest from her by levers and screws.’ J.W. Von Goethe, 
trans. A. Hayward, Faust: A Dramatic Poem (London: E. Moxon, 
1834.)
9 I was part of a team that dated the Laacher See eruption with 
astonishing precision through radiocarbon measurements of 
trees carbonised by the nuées ardentes: F. Reinig et al., ‘Precise 
date for the Laacher See eruption synchronizes the Younger 
Dryas’, Nature 595 (2021): 66–69.
10 Sternagel, ibid, 67.
11 U. Bosma, ‘Franz Junghuhn’s three-dimensional and transcen￾dental Java’, in The Role of Religions in the European Perception of 
Insular and Mainland Southeast Asia (Cambridge: Cambridge 
Scholars Publishing, 2016): 175–206.
12 Architecturally, both Prambenan and Borobudur temples were 
designed as refl ections of sacred mountains and the cosmic 
order.
13 Sternagel, ibid, 50.
14 E. M. Beekman, ‘Junghuhn’s perception of Javanese nature’, 
Canadian Journal of Nederlandic Studies 12 (1991): 136.
15 Junghuhn was also an ardent critic of colonialism, and a defender 
of universal human freedoms. He wrote an astonishing dialectic 
on colonialism and religion, which was so controversial that his 
authorship was only disclosed after his death: F. W. Junghuhn, 
Licht-en Schaduwbeelden uit de Binnenlanden van Java
(Amsterdam: F. Günst, 1867).
16 F. W. Junghuhn, Java-Album: Landschafts-Ansichten von Java 
nach der Natur aufgenommen (Leipzig: Arnoldische 
Buchhandlung, 1856). Some volcanologists still cite his research 
today. For instance, the accuracy and detail of a sketch of the 
crater of Gede, which Junghuhn witnessed in eruption in 1843, 
provided historical perspective for: A. Belousov et al., 
‘Volcaniclastic stratigraphy of Gede Volcano, West Java, 
Indonesia: how it erupted and when’, Journal of Volcanology and 296 Mountains of Fire
Geothermal Research 301 (2015): 238–252. Contemporaries 
such as Scrope were also cognisant and complimentary of 
Junghuhn’s observations, but his reputation was eclipsed, in 
Britain, certainly, by Alfred Russel Wallace, and very little of his 
work has ever been translated into English.
17 Junghuhn’s most iconic illustration is based on sketches from 
his fi rst expeditions, in 1836, to Merapi. These may be the earli￾est accurate depictions of a lava dome: F. Junghuhn, 
Topographische und naturwissenschaftliche Reise durch Java
(Madgeburg: Emil Baensch, 1845).
18 E. D. Inandiak and H. Dono, Merapi Omahku (Babad Alas: 
Yogyakarta 2010).
19 The importance of this cannot be downplayed – science and 
technology are insuffi cient by themselves to prevent disasters. 
The disaster following a landslide of Krakatau into the sea in 
2018 illustrates the point. The results of a study published six 
years earlier had demonstrated the threat of just such a partial 
collapse of the cone. Based on a computer simulation, it 
predicted tsunami wave heights of a few metres along the 
Sunda coastline in the event of such a scenario. The authors 
concluded: ‘Owing to the high population  . . . the tsunami 
might present a signifi cant risk. However, as the travel time of 
the tsunami is several tens of minutes . . . a rapid detection of 
the collapse by the volcano observatory, coupled with an effi -
cient alert system on the coast, could prevent this hypothetical 
event from being deadly’. The science did not translate into 
eff ective action, however, and more than 400 people were 
killed on 22 December 2018. The correspondence between 
modelled and actual tsunami characteristics is remarkably 
close. T. Giachetti et al., ‘Tsunami hazard related to a fl ank 
collapse of Anak Krakatau Volcano, Sunda Strait, Indonesia’, 
Geological Society, London, Special Publications 361, (2012): 
79–90. L. Ye et al., ‘The 22 December 2018 tsunami from fl ank Notes 297
collapse of Anak Krakatau volcano during eruption’, Science 
Advances 6, eaaz1377 (2020).
20 Thirty-four others perished with him, including a journalist. A 
larger blast during the night of 4–5 November claimed well over 100 
lives. For an account of the eruption, see: Surono et al., ‘The 2010 
explosive eruption of Java’s Merapi volcano – a ‘100-year event’, 
Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 241 (2012): 121–135.
21 Refl ecting on changing attitudes towards volcanoes in Indonesia, 
Boomgaard (ibid) noted: ‘tourists rush in where once believers 
feared to tread’.
22 He confi ded that, as the activity escalated, he had resisted great 
pressure to meet with Mbah Maridjan: ‘It would have changed 
nothing and just been entertainment for the newspapers,’ 
he told me. ‘I was much more concerned with deciding the 
evacuation zones. It was terrible pressure.’ I met Surono in 
Kinahrejo during the labuhan in 2016 – I had invited him to join 
us during fi lming of Into the Inferno. When he was spotted, he 
was accorded the honour of introducing the all-night shadow 
puppet performance, wayang kulit, accompanied by a full 
gamelan orchestra.
For more on Merapi’s extraordinary complexity, see: 
A. Bobbette, ‘The pulse of the Earth: political geology in Java’, 
(Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2023).
23 T. S. Raffl es, The History of Java (London: Black, Parbury & 
Allen, 1817); T.S. Raffl es, Memoir of the life and public services of 
Sir Thomas Stamford Raffl es, F.R.S. &c., particularly in the govern￾ment of Java, 1811–1816, and of Bencoolen and its dependencies, 
1817–1824: with details of the commerce and resources of the eastern 
archipelago, and selections from his correspondence (London: John 
Murray, 1830). There is also the record in the rocks: H. 
Sigurdsson and S. Carey, ‘Plinian and co-ignimbrite tephra fall 
from the 1815 eruption of Tambora volcano’, Bulletin of 
Volcanology, 51 (1989): 243–270.298 Mountains of Fire
24 J. Crawfurd, A Descriptive Dictionary of the Indian Islands and 
Adjacent Countries (London: Bradbury and Evans, 1856).
25 I. Suhendro et al., ‘Magma chamber stratifi cation of the 1815 
Tambora caldera-forming eruption’, Bulletin of Volcanology 83, 
no. 63 (2021).
26 This poses a critical question for contemporary volcanic risk 
management. The 5 April explosion was itself comparable to 
the 18 May 1980 eruption of Mount Saint Helens in the 
United States. Imagine experiencing an eruption of that 
scale, but being unaware it is just the throat-clearing event 
preparing the way for something a hundred times larger. In 
such a scenario, all ground-monitoring equipment near the 
volcano will be destroyed – how could volcanologists recognise 
that such a colossal event is a mere appetizer for the main 
course?
27 Especially sappanwood, once widely traded for its medicinal 
benefi ts and as a red dye. This rosy picture, though, overlooks 
the fact that for labourers life was surely harsh owing to the 
excesses of the island’s native nobility and external greed for 
products.
28 P. R. Goethals, Aspects of Local Government in a Sumbawan 
village (Eastern Indonesia), Cornell Modern Indonesia Project 
(New York: Cornell University, 1961).
29 M. J. Hitchcock, ‘Is this evidence for the lost kingdoms of 
Tambora?’, Indonesian Circle 33 (1984): 30–35.
30 The fi rst concrete steps towards understanding the connections 
between volcanism and climate were made following the erup￾tion of Krakatau in 1883, a disaster that claimed 36,000 lives. 
People around the world remarked on vivid sunsets and 
prolonged twilights, among them Reverend Sereno Bishop in 
Honolulu, Hawaii. He wrote of a white aureole around the sun 
and a diff usion of light by fi ne particles, an eff ect named after 
him: ‘Bishop’s rings’. In 1888, the Royal Society of London Notes 299
published a landmark study of the global eff ects of Krakatau’s 
haze, drawing on worldwide reports of dry fogs, red twilights 
and blue suns following known volcanic eruptions back to 1500. 
I think of it as the fi rst product of ‘crowd science’ in volcanology. 
The Eruption of Krakatoa, and Subsequent Phenomena: Report of 
the Krakatoa Committee of the Royal Society, ed. G. J. Symons 
(London: Trübner, 1888).
The eruption of Katmai in Alaska in 1912 shed further light 
on the matter: C. G. Abbot and F. E. Fowle, ‘Volcanoes and 
climate’, Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections (1913). Later 
that decade, the American meteorologist William Humphreys 
made a more systematic assessment of the impacts of global 
volcanism on climate: W. J. Humphreys, ‘Factors of climatic 
control’, Journal of the Franklin Institute 188 (1919): 775–810 
and 189 (1920): 63–98.
Hubert Lamb, a British meteorologist inspired by studies 
that emerged after the 1963 eruption of Agung volcano in Bali, 
and let loose in the dusty archives of the Meteorological Offi ce 
in London in the 1960s, had more data to hand, and wrote an 
immense paper that introduced the fi rst measure of an erup￾tion’s climate-changing potential: the ‘dust veil index’: H. H. 
Lamb, ‘Volcanic dust in the atmosphere; with a chronology and 
assessment of its meteorological signifi cance’, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London: Series A, Mathematical 
and Physical Sciences 266 (1970): 425–533. On Agung, see: 
S. C. Mossop, ‘Stratospheric particles at 20 km altitude’, 
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 29 (1965): 201–207.
31 R. F. Pueschel, ‘Stratospheric aerosols: Formation, properties, 
eff ects’, Journal of Aerosol Science 27 (1996): 383–402.
32 Whenever I give a talk on volcanoes and climate, I always show 
a sequence of satellite images revealing dust in the stratosphere 
from Pinatubo. Nothing better reveals how volcanic aerosol can 
envelop the entire planet – and how long it stays up there. I 300 Mountains of Fire
usually hear gasps of astonishment from the audience as the 
animation runs. I also show a photo taken by a Space Shuttle 
astronaut over South America a few months after the eruption. 
Two dusky layers stand out, more than twelve miles above the 
surface. It’s then easy to imagine the dust fi ltering out some of 
the sunlight falling on the Earth and how that must cool the 
climate. Additional observations from satellites and weather 
observatories show the impacts on global temperatures, includ￾ing a pronounced summertime cooling across swathes of North 
America and Eurasia in 1992. See: V. Aquila et al., ‘Impacts of 
the eruption of Mount Pinatubo on surface temperatures and 
precipitation forecasts with the NASA GEOS subseasonal-to￾seasonal system’, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres
126 (2021): e2021JD034830.
One of the ideas to counter global warming is to simulate the 
eff ect of volcanic aerosol, for instance by burning sulphur in the 
stratosphere, but there are numerous arguments not to go down 
this path. See: A. Robock, ‘20 reasons why geoengineering may 
be a bad idea’, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 64 (2008): 14–18.
33 C. U. Hammer et al., ‘Greenland ice sheet evidence of post￾glacial volcanism and its climatic impact’, Nature 288 (1980): 
230–235.
34 Ice cores can be dated a bit like tree rings, by identifying seasonal 
layers. The sulphur alone cannot pinpoint the source volcano, 
but sometimes it is accompanied by volcanic ash particles, 
which can be analysed geochemically to provide a signature for 
which a match with a known volcano can be sought. One of the 
earliest studies of this method was made by my Erebus colleague 
Phil Kyle: P. R. Kyle and P. A. Jezek, ‘Compositions of three 
tephra layers from the Byrd Station ice core, Antarctica’, Journal 
of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 4 (1978): 225–232. Ice 
core records of volcanism are fabulous now – see, for example: 
M. Sigl et al., ‘Volcanic stratospheric sulphur injections and Notes 301
aerosol optical depth during the Holocene (past 11,500 years) 
from a bipolar ice-core array’, Earth System Science Data 14 
(2022): 3,167–3,196.
35 The relation between the quantity of sulphate aerosol in the 
stratosphere and climatic change is complex and non-linear. 
Very high amounts of sulphur are thought to result in formation 
of larger aerosol particles, which are less eff ective at fi ltering out 
sunlight and settle out of the stratosphere more rapidly. So, the 
surface cooling eff ect should approach some kind of a limit.
36 C. A. Stephens, ‘1800 and Froze to Death’, in The Children’s 
Book of Thanksgiving Stories, ed. A. D. Dickinson (New York: 
Doubleday, Page & Company, 1915).
37 V. Bright, ‘Black Harris, Mountain Man, Teller of Tales’, Oregon 
Historical Quarterly 52 (1951): 3–20. Bright writes: ‘Numerous 
of these tales have survived to this day, and many a factual 
history of events is embellished with the fanciful dreamings of 
such men as Black Harris’. The yarn in question, attributed to 
Harris, is recounted in: E. Bennett, The Prairie Flower; or 
Adventures in the Far West (Cincinnati: U. P. James, 1852): 29.
38 I’ve drawn here on an illuminating and off beat paper by journal￾ist, magician and local historian June Barrows Mussey (alias 
Henry Hay): B. Mussey, ‘Yankee chills, Ohio fever’, New England 
Quarterly (1949): 435–451. Mussey, aware of the teleconnection 
with Tambora, wrote lyrically: ‘that thin chain of cause and eff ect 
seems almost like superstition’. See also: H. M. Stommel and 
E. Stommel, Volcano Weather: the story of 1816, the year without a 
summer (Newport, Rhode Island: Seven Seas Press, 1983).
39 A sense of ordinary people’s despair echoes in this account from 
North Carolina, where the grain fi elds also languished because 
of the volcano weather: ‘It was with sorrowful and troubled 
hearts that we gathered our second crop of hay and our corn 
crop, which were so scanty that we reaped only a third of what 
we usually get, and wondered how we could subsist until next 302 Mountains of Fire
year’s harvest.’ ‘Records of the Moravians in North Carolina 
1752–1879’, ed. A. L. Fries, (Raleigh: State Department of 
Archives and History, vol. VII, 1947): 3,294–3,318.
40 At least the British could draw comfort from Napoleon’s exile 
on the remote volcanic island of St Helena in the South Atlantic 
ocean.
41 C. von Clausewitz, Politische Schriften und Briefe, ed. Hans 
Rothfels (Munich: Drei Masken Verlag, 1922): 189–191.
42 R. Glaser et al., ‘Climate of migration? How climate triggered 
migration from southwest Germany to North America during 
the 19th century’, Climate of the Past 13 (2017): 1,573–1,592.
43 Starving protestors in the towns of Littleport and Ely, not far 
from my hometown of Cambridge, were arrested and fi ve 
hanged on 28 June 1816 to serve as an example to others who 
might be tempted to take to the streets.
44 J. D. Post, ‘The economic crisis of 1816–1817 and its social and 
political consequences’, The Journal of Economic History 30 
(1970): 248–250.
45 Clearly, over the past century, many scholars from diverse fi elds 
have thought and written about Tambora and its long-range 
impacts. A whirl of publishing accompanied the bicentenary of 
the eruption. For me, though, the seminal work remains the 
historian John Post’s classic: J. D. Post, The Last Great Subsistence 
Crisis in the Western World (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Univ -
ersity Press, 1977). For a dramatised version of events, see: 
G. Glasfurd, The Year Without Summer (London: John Murray 
Press, 2020). For more on volcano forensics and other case 
studies, see: C. Oppenheimer, Eruptions That Shook the World
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011).
46 I’ve thought a lot about how far we can push interpretations of 
history and how confi dent we can be in them. For every state￾ment such as ‘the Tambora eruption contributed to the rise of 
Fascism in Europe’, there is a counterfactual along the lines of Notes 303
‘Fascism may not have reared its head at this time had Tambora 
not erupted when it did’. Turning the statement around high￾lights the multitude of other factors – social, political, economic, 
cultural – likely to be implicated, too. I feel the best we can do is 
attempt to off er the most rational arguments in the light of the 
often very diverse strands of evidence available to us. Those 
arguments may end up being substantiated or negated but likely 
never proven. I came to this viewpoint while considering expla￾nations of contemporary world aff airs. The Arab Spring strikes 
me as a good example. Some have linked the uprisings, which 
got underway in 2010, to climate change, food insecurity in 
China and soaring prices of staples in northern Africa. Others 
see failures of governance as driving factors. If we cannot know 
for sure the causes of events that happened under our noses, as 
it were, in our own time, with all the immensity of information 
to hand, how much more challenging it is to impute causality to 
historical episodes dating back centuries or millennia. J. Schilling 
et al., ‘Climate change vulnerability, water resources and social 
implications in North Africa’, Regional Environmental Change
20(15) (2020).
47 Toba’s ash has been traced as far as eastern and southern Africa. 
See: E. I. Smith, et al., ‘Humans thrived in South Africa through 
the Toba eruption about 74,000 years ago’, Nature 555 (2018): 
511–515.
48 His was the fi rst detailed ethnographic, cartographic and botan￾ical survey of the district: F. W. Junghuhn, Die Battaländer auf 
Sumatra: Im Auftrage Sr. Excellenz des General-Gouverneurs von 
Niederländisch-Indien Hrn. P. Merkus in den Jahren 1840 und 
1841 (Berlin: Druck und Verlag von G. Reimer, 1847).
49 A popular scenario assumes Toba emitted 100 times as much 
sulphur as did Pinatubo in 1991. See for example: A. Robock et 
al., ‘Did the Toba volcanic eruption of ~74 ka BP produce wide￾spread glaciation?’, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres304 Mountains of Fire
114 (2009); B. A. Black et al., ‘Global climate disruption and 
regional climate shelters after the Toba supereruption’, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 (2021); C. 
Timmreck et al., ‘Climate response to the Toba super-eruption: 
Regional changes’, Quaternary International 258 (2012): 30–44.
While the models may give reasonable insights into the 
impacts of such a sulphur loading, I have long argued they have 
limited relevance for understanding the Youngest Toba Tuff 
eruption until we have a better handle on the sulphur output. 
Furthermore, climate impacts of volcanic eruptions depend on 
the prevailing climate state (sensitivity to forcing, atmospheric 
circulation), which we cannot fi x in this case. Where Toba fall￾out is found in seasonally resolved sedimentary deposits (as in 
Jawalapuram in India), then there is a basis for interpreting 
aspects of the eruption’s climate and environmental impacts. 
Identifying Toba in polar ice core records would represent a 
great advance; progress is being made: L. Crick et al., ‘New 
insights into the ~74 ka Toba eruption from sulphur isotopes of 
polar ice cores’, Climate of the Past 17 (2021): 2,119–2,137.
50 Estimated around 34,000 cubic kilometres. A few days later, I was 
getting lost in dense forest trying to fi nd a way up Sibayak volcano, 
just north of Lake Toba. It was precisely 100 years after the 1883 
eruption of Krakatau, which I knew of from Peter Francis’ 
Volcanoes book. I came across a sulphur miner and accompanied 
him up a trail to the top. For the fi gure on the region containing 
melt beneath Toba today, see: J. Stankiewicz et al., ‘Lake Toba 
volcano magma chamber imaged by ambient seismic noise 
tomography’, Geophysical Research Letters 37 (2010).
51 For a forceful rejection of the interpretations and arguments, 
see: P. Mellars et al., ‘Genetic and archaeological perspectives on 
the initial modern human colonization of southern Asia’, 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (2013): 
10,699–10,704. Discussion of the migration of Homo sapiensNotes 305
from Africa has to account for increasingly early dates for the 
presence of the species in Australia. See: C. Clarkson et al., 
‘Human occupation of northern Australia by 65,000 years ago’, 
Nature 547 (2017).
52 S. H. Ambrose, ‘Late Pleistocene human population bottle￾necks, volcanic winter, and diff erentiation of modern humans’, 
Journal of Human Evolution 34 (1998): 623–651.
53 C. Lane et al., ‘Ash from the Toba supereruption in Lake Malawi 
shows no volcanic winter in East Africa at 75 ka’, Proceedings 
of the National Academy of Sciences 110 (2013): 8,025–8,029; 
C. Clarkson, et al., ‘Human occupation of northern India 
spans the Toba super-eruption ~74,000 years ago’, Nature 
Communications 11, no. 961 (2020).
54 J. Rougier et al., ‘The global magnitude–frequency relationship 
for large explosive volcanic eruptions’, Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters 482 (2018): 621–629.
The last super-eruption occurred at Taupō: C. J. N. Wilson 
et al., ‘The 26·5 ka Oruanui eruption, Taupo volcano, New 
Zealand: development, characteristics and evacuation of a large 
rhyolitic magma body’, Journal of Petrology 47, (2006): 35–69. 
(The date has since been revised to circa 25,600 years ago.)
55 R. L. Christiansen et al., ‘Preliminary assessment of volcanic and 
hydrothermal hazards in Yellowstone National Park and vicinity’, 
U. S. Geological Survey, Open-fi le report 1071 (2007).
So, it is more likely that some other volcano will launch the next 
super-eruption. It could well be one of Indonesia’s, given the 
country’s plenitude in fi re mountains. But I do not believe volca￾noes will destroy the world, for two reasons. Firstly, although the 
societal consequences of such a high magnitude event may be 
very severe regionally, and amplifi ed worldwide by vulnerabilities 
in the global food system, the climatic eff ects will not shut down 
agriculture altogether, and they will diminish over a period of 
years. Secondly, and rather sadly, I think social media, 306 Mountains of Fire
demagoguery and other existential threats are more likely to undo 
the human enterprise before volcanoes get another go. See: C. 
Sagan, ‘Nuclear war and climatic catastrophe: Some policy impli￾cations’, Foreign Aff airs 62 (1983): 257–292. A. E. Snyder-Beattie 
et al., ‘An upper bound for the background rate of human extinc￾tion’, Scientifi c Reports 9, no. 11054 (2019). A. Donovan and C. 
Oppenheimer, ‘Imagining the unimaginable: communicating 
extreme volcanic risk’, in Observing the Volcano World (New York: 
Springer, 2016): 149–163. H. Lin, ‘The existential threat from 
cyber-enabled information warfare’, Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists
75 (2019): 187–196.
56 Based on several lines of geochemical and isotopic evidence in 
the rocks. See: A. E. Mucek et al., ‘Post-supereruption recovery 
at Toba Caldera’, Nature Communications 8, no. 15,248 (2017).
White Mountain, Heaven Lake
1 C. Kim, ‘Taedong yŏjido’ [1864]. Original image from Harvard￾Yenching Library, Harvard College Library, Harvard University. 
https://iiif.lib.harvard.edu/manifests/view/drs:15388328$14i
2 The ‘First Lady’ of DPRK is quoted as saying this atop Mount 
Paektu in 2018. H. Shin and J. Lee ‘Fulfi lling a dream, South 
Korea’s Moon visits sacred North Korean mountain with Kim’, 
Reuters, https://www.reuters.com/article/us-northkorea-south￾korea-summit-mountain-idUSKCN1M006F [2018].
3 Earlier that year, 2018, Kim Jong Un had crossed the military 
demarcation line that divides the countries, the fi rst DPRK 
leader to do so since 1952. As a symbol of peace, he and Moon 
Jae-In ceremonially planted a pine tree, placing around it soil 
from both Mount Paektu and Mount Halla volcano (on Jeju 
Island in South Korea). It’s astonishing to me that a mountain 
ripped apart in one of the most dramatic eruptions in history 
has become a symbol both for revolutionary defi ance and Notes 307
healing – a geopolitical refl ection of the Jekyll-and-Hyde nature 
of volcanoes.
4 H. Machida et al., ‘Historical eruptions of the Changbai volcano 
resulting in large-scale forest devastation (deduced from wide￾spread tephra)’, in H. Yang et al., ‘The temperate forest ecosystem’, 
ITE symposium NERC/ITE, Cumbria (1987), 23–26.
5 The thickness of an ash deposit falls off more or less exponen￾tially with distance away from the volcanic vent.
6 Another benchmark study was performed by Sarah Horn and 
Hans-Ulrich Schmincke, who did fi eldwork on Paektu both 
sides of the border: S. Horn, and H. U. Schmincke, ‘Volatile 
emission during the eruption of Baitoushan Volcano (China/
North Korea) ca. 969 AD’, Bulletin of Volcanology 61 (2000): 
537–555. They estimated the size and volatile release of the 
eruption and its date from radiocarbon measurements.
7 I’ve drawn on numerous sources, including: K. Kwon and P. H. 
Kim, ‘Will the dormant volcano erupt again? Mt. Paektu and 
contemporary Sino-Korean relations’, Asia-Pacifi c Journal￾Japan Focus 17 (2019); V. Ten, ‘Mt. Paektu and Sŏndo (仙道 the 
way of immortality) in contemporary South Korea: The case 
of GiCheon (氣天)’, Situations 10 (2017): 145–170; V. Ten 
and R. Winstanley-Chesters, New goddesses on Mt. Paektu: 
Transformation, myth and gender in Korean landscape, (2020), 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3755038; A. Schmid, Korea 
Between Empires, 1895–1919, (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2002); K. Pratt, ‘Portrait of a volcano: the paradox of 
Paektu (Changbaishan)’, in TephroArchaeology in the North 
Pacifi c, eds. G. L. Barnes and T. Soda (Oxford: Archaeopress, 
2019): 114–139; A. Donovan, ‘Politics of the lively geos: volcan￾ism and geomancy in Korea’, in Political Geology (London: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2019): 293–343; S. Haeussler, ‘Descriptions 
of the Baekdusan and the surrounding area in Russian and 
German travel accounts’, The Review of Korean Studies 13 (2010): 308 Mountains of Fire
151–186; R. Rogaski, Knowing Manchuria: environments, the 
senses, and natural knowledge on an Asian borderland (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2022).
8 E. R. Canda, ‘The Korean mountain spirit’, Korean Journal
20-9 (1980): 11–16.
9 H. E. M. James, The Long White Mountan: or, a journey in 
Manchuria, with some account of the history, people, administration 
and religion of that country (London: Longmans, Green, and 
co., 1888): 454.
10 Z. Shen and X. Yafeng, ‘Contested border: A historical investi￾gation into the Sino-Korean border issue, 1950–1964’, Asian 
Perspective 37 (2013): 1–30. Today, around a quarter of the 
volcano is in North Korea. Despite ceding territory, there has 
been a strong push in China on its side of the border to 
strengthen Chinese identity in what is a largely ethnically 
Korean community.
11 I had even (incorrectly) estimated its age: C. Oppenheimer, ‘Ice 
core and palaeoclimatic evidence for the timing and nature of 
the great mid-13th century volcanic eruption’, International 
Journal of Climatology 23 (2003): 417–426.
12 F. Wang et al., ‘Infl uence of the March 11, 2011 Mw 9.0 Tohoku￾oki earthquake on regional volcanic activities’, Chinese Science 
Bulletin 56 (2011): 2,077–2,081.
13 J. Xu et al., ‘Recent unrest of Changbaishan volcano, northeast 
China: A precursor of a future eruption?’, Geophysical Research 
Letters 39, L16305 (2012).
14 There have also been rumours that North Korean nuclear tests 
might destabilise the volcano, though these seem to verge on the 
intentionally scurrilous rather than scientifi cally based. One 
study led by South Korean seismologists concluded: ‘North 
Korean nuclear explosions are expected to produce pressure 
changes of tens to hundreds of kilopascals, causing concern 
over the possible triggering of volcanic eruption.’ However, Notes 309
analysis of the seismicity of Mount Paektu after past tests has 
revealed nothing. T. K. Hong et al., ‘Prediction of ground motion 
and dynamic stress change in Baekdusan (Changbaishan) 
volcano caused by a North Korean nuclear explosion’, Scientifi c 
reports 6, no. 21477 (2016); G. Liu et al., ‘Detecting remotely 
triggered microseismicity around Changbaishan Volcano follow￾ing nuclear explosions in North Korea and large distant earth￾quakes around the world’, Geophysical Research Letters 44 
(2017): 4,829–4,838.
15 R. Stone, ‘Vigil at North Korea’s Mount Doom’, Science 334 
(2011): 584–588; R. Stone, ‘Sizing up a slumbering giant’, 
Science 341 (2013): 1,060–1,061.
16 The Pyongyang International Information Centre of New 
Technology and Economy (PIINTEC) was established in 2003 
to foster knowledge exchange in science and technology and 
build international partnerships with DPRK institutions. One of 
its main branches is the Environmental Information Media 
Centre, with which we work. Their remit includes raising aware￾ness of environmental issues and sustainable development 
(green economy, water resources, environmental protection, 
ecosystem restoration).
17 One instruction I received read: ‘Dr Clive to carry the necessary 
tools for geological research in the fi eld including the rope 
ladder for climbing up and down.’ I found a three-storey escape 
ladder through a fi re-safety retailer, but later realised something 
ten times longer was being sought to access the vertical wall of 
Paektu’s crater. That sounded terrifying and I quietly dropped 
the matter.
18 There is a remarkable clip of its unveiling shown in Into the 
Inferno, dir. W. Herzog (Netfl ix, 2016).
19 F. E. Younghusband, ‘The heart of a continent: a narrative of travels 
in Manchuria, across the Gobi desert, through the Himalayas, the 
Pamirs, and Chitral, 1884–1894. (London: John Murray, 1896): 15.310 Mountains of Fire
20 Both China and the DPRK have UN-designated biosphere 
reserves on the volcano that abut each other at the international 
border. Despite the protection aff orded by the reserves, the 
ecosystem is changing as the climate warms and snow melts 
earlier in the year. S. Zong et al., ‘Upward range shift of a domi￾nant alpine shrub related to 50 years of snow cover change’, 
Remote Sensing of Environment 268 (2022): 112773.
21 See: C. M. Crisafulli and V. H. Dale, Ecological Responses at 
Mount St. Helens: Revisited 35 years after the 1980 Eruption (New 
York: Springer, 2018).
22 I. Thornton, Krakatau: the destruction and reassembly of an island 
ecosystem (Harvard: Harvard University Press, 1997).
23 Kim Ju Song was especially keen to investigate the eruption 
history. ‘This will help us predict the next eruption,’ he explained. 
‘We expect it will be smaller than the Millennium Eruption, but 
we have to plan for the worst case. The rhythm of the volcano 
suggests there could be a small eruption in our generation.’ As 
we had heard on our previous visit, there was still a dearth of 
reliable modern monitoring equipment and data processing 
software: ‘We cannot import it because of sanctions. And 
because of the intensifi cation of the situation in Korea, people 
are afraid to invest in science. A Japanese geologist promised 
core research but was not allowed by his government to come to 
DPRK and the equipment he promised was blocked. As a scien￾tist he was eager to collaborate but sanctions prevented this.’
24 For a picture of the vegetation, see: J. W. Kim et al., ‘Alpine 
vegetation on the Paekdu-san (Changbaishan) summit of the 
north-east China’, Journal of Plant Biology 62 (2019): 436–450.
25 There have been a few accidental encounters with magma 
during geothermal drilling, notably one in 2009 in Iceland at 
Krafl a volcano. The magma quickly solidifi ed in the drill hole 
forming a plug – there was no runaway eruption! But the idea of 
drilling into magma to depressurize a whole reservoir of the Notes 311
stuff is very far-fetched in my opinion (but perhaps I just can’t 
think outside the box on this one). There is an ambitious 
proposal for scientifi c drilling into the Krafl a chamber, the 
Krafl a Magma Testbed – ‘a journey to molten Earth’ as they 
describe it on their website: https://www.kmt.is/
See also: J. Eichelberger, ‘Planning an international magma 
observatory’, Eos, 100, doi:10.1029/2019EO125255 (2019).
26 Tensions were running high at the time, following the wounding 
of two South Korean soldiers by landmines south of the DMZ. 
In retaliation, Seoul had started belting out propaganda from 
massive loudspeakers aimed across the border. There had just 
been an exchange of shells, thankfully without casualties.
27 K. S. Ri et al., ‘Evidence for partial melt in the crust beneath Mt. 
Paektu (Changbaishan), Democratic People’s Republic of 
Korea and China’, Science advances 2 (2016): e1501513. James 
strengthened the observations in a follow-up study in collabora￾tion with Chinese and DPRK colleagues: J. O. S. Hammond et 
al., ‘Distribution of partial melt beneath Changbaishan/Paektu 
Volcano, China/democratic people’s Republic of Korea’, 
Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems 21 (2020): e2019GC008461.
28 F. Miyake et al., ‘A signature of cosmic-ray increase in AD 
774–775 from tree rings in Japan’, Nature 486 (2012): 240–242.
29 Given such severe solar activity can intensify aurora and extend 
them to lower latitudes, it may be no coincidence that the prom￾inent Japanese Buddhist priest Kūkai, born in 774 CE, was 
named Henjō Kōngō, which translates as ‘worldwide shining 
diamond’. See: U. Büntgen, et al., ‘Tree rings reveal globally 
coherent signature of cosmogenic radiocarbon events in 774 
and 993 CE’, Nature Communications 9, no. 3605 (2018).
30 We also studied the rings of trees from around the Northern 
Hemisphere to see if there was any indication of summer cool￾ing. Despite the eruption’s size, there is little evidence it had any 
signifi cant impacts on climate, probably due to a low sulphur 312 Mountains of Fire
output and winter timing. See: C. Oppenheimer et al., ‘Multi￾proxy dating the ‘Millennium Eruption’ of Changbaishan to late 
946 CE’, Quaternary Science Reviews 158 (2017): 164–171.
Lava Floods and Hurtling Flames
1 C. Strahlheim (J. K. Friederich), ‘Die Wundermappe oder sammtli￾che Kunst- und Natur-Wunder des ganzen Erdballs’ (Frankfurt: 
Comptoir für Literatur und Kunst, 1837).
2 Werner Herzog, personal communication, 2015.
3 Despite being utterly devoid of sunlight so far below sea 
level, the ridge still teems with life: at the base of the food 
chain are bacteria nourished by hot, mineralised fl uids venting 
from fi ssures; at the top, a frenzy of weird molluscs and 
crustaceans.
4 The Earth is hot inside from primordial bombardments by 
asteroids and radioactivity. The only large region of liquid in the 
interior is the iron-rich outer core. Above, the silicate mantle is 
solid, but it can still deform and convect, with hotter regions 
rising and colder ones sinking. Most of Earth’s volcanoes lie on 
the seabed, and they exist because the ascending mantle starts 
melting at a depth of around 100 km due to the reducing weight 
(and pressure) of overlying rock. But only the minerals with the 
lowest melting points liquify, generating droplets of basalt. The 
molten rock is focused by pressure upwards and accumulates a 
few kilometres below the seabed to form magma chambers, 
which feed the eruptions at mid-ocean ridges.
Mantle plumes similarly feed volcanoes through this ‘decom￾pression melting’, but more prodigiously because their higher 
temperatures produce more molten rock. Volcanoes appear 
where mantle plumes blowtorch through tectonic plates – this is 
how the Hawaiian Islands and the trail of seamounts that stretch 
to the north formed over the last seventy million years. When Notes 313
mantle plumes impinge on continents, they can cause rifting, as 
seen in eastern Africa. If sustained, the stretching can eventually 
break apart the continent and heal the rift with new ocean fl oor, 
as it did in the Red Sea and North Atlantic. Iceland is consid￾ered to be the end result of hotspot volcanism that originally 
began around sixty million years ago, shortly before the opening 
of the North Atlantic.
See: K. Yuan and B. Romanowicz, ‘Seismic evidence for 
partial melting at the root of major hot spot plumes’, Science 357 
(2017): 393–397.
5 It was the night of 24 June 1982, and fl ight BA009 from Kuala 
Lumpur to Perth was at 37,000 feet. There were 247 passengers 
on board and nearly 100 tonnes of fuel. The full story of Captain 
Eric Moody’s calm in a terrifying crisis makes for excellent 
reading: See: J. Diamond, ‘Down to a sunless sea: the anatomy 
of an incident’, The Log, April 1986: 13–16.
6 The Volcanic Ash Advisory Centres (VAACS) are located in 
Anchorage, Buenos Aires, Darwin, London, Montreal, Tokyo, 
Toulouse, Washington DC and Wellington. Their situation 
within meteorological agencies is a reminder of the entwined 
histories of meteorology, volcanology and climatology.
7 Despite this infamy, Icelandair, the national carrier, proudly 
names its aircraft after the country’s volcanoes. I’ve fl own on 
Öræfajökull and Hekla, and there is one called Eyjafjallajökull. 
The explosive phase of the eruption began on 14 April 2010. 
Winds blew the ash towards Europe and the airspace was closed 
down. Residents near airports such as London Heathrow heard 
birdsong in their gardens for the fi rst time. While geologists, 
meteorologists and the International Civil Aviation Organization 
(ICAO) had taken the threat seriously, it seems the aviation 
industry had not – little if any research had been done, for 
instance, on how much ash an engine can tolerate. Airlines were 
up in arms over ICAO’s precautionary stance. Ryanair’s chief 314 Mountains of Fire
executive said it was ‘frankly ridiculous’ that fl ight plans were 
being disrupted by ‘an outdated, inappropriate and imaginary 
computer-generated model’. Even British Airway’s boss was 
only somewhat less infl ammatory in his criticism.
8 The most immense lava fl oods on Earth, such as the sixty-six￾million-year old Deccan Traps of India, coincide with mass 
extinctions evident from the fossil record. There are many 
hypotheses for the ‘kill mechanisms’, but most incriminate the 
gases spewed into the atmosphere and then dissolved in the 
oceans. For a review, see: M. E. Clapham and P. R. Renne, 
‘Flood basalts and mass extinctions’, Annual Review of Earth 
and Planetary Sciences 47 (2019): 275–303.
9 Nyiragongo in the Democratic Republic of Congo produces 
extremely fl uid lavas that sometimes drain rapidly from a 
summit lava lake. Lava fl ows reportedly killed several hundred 
people in 1977, and several dozens of people were killed in a 
similar episode in 2002: J. C. Komorowski et al., ‘The January 
2002 fl ank eruption of Nyiragongo Volcano (Democratic 
Republic of Congo): chronology, evidence for a tectonic rift 
trigger, and impact of lava fl ows on the city of Goma’, Acta 
Vulcanologica 14 (2003): 27–62.
10 They may have aff ected air quality in northern and western 
Europe. I participated in a couple of exercises to evaluate the 
risk of Icelandic lava fl ood eruptions for the UK’s National Risk 
Register. See: C. Witham et al., ‘UK hazards from a large 
Icelandic eff usive eruption: Eff usive Eruption Modelling Project 
fi nal report’, Met Offi ce, 2015. https://core.ac.uk/display/
33453938
11 C. E. Wieners, ‘Haze, hunger, hesitation: disaster aid after the 
1783 Laki eruption’, Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal 
Research 406 (2020): 107080. K. Kleeman, A Mist Connection: 
An Environmental History of the Laki Eruption of 1783 and its 
Legacy (Berlin: De Gruyter, 2023).Notes 315
12 Darwin’s view was quite apocalyptic: ‘At some future time 
contagious miasmata may be thus emitted from subterranean 
furnaces, in such abundance as to contaminate the whole atmos￾phere, and depopulate the earth!’ While there were petitions for 
external aid to help the starving, there was no concerted scien￾tifi c response to the eruption.
13 N. Mehler, ‘The sulphur trade of Iceland from the Viking Age to 
the end of the Hanseatic period’, Nordic Middle Ages-Artefacts, 
Landscapes and Society. Essays in honour of Ingvild Øye on her 
70th birthday, UBAS-University of Bergen Archaeological 
Series 8 (Bergen: Universitetet i Bergen, 2015).
14 K. Poole, ‘When hell freezes over: Mount Hecla and Hamlet’s 
infernal geography’, Shakespeare Studies 39 (2011): 152.
15 ‘Orkney – supposed volcanic eruption’, Dundee Courier, 16 
September 1845, Issue 1515.
16 As they did during further eruptions of Hekla in 1947 and 
1970. Danish scientist Jørgen Christian Schythe joined the 
expedition of Bunsen and von Waltershausen in an independ￾ent capacity. His account of the 1845 eruption is foresighted in 
including sections on precursory phenomena (among them a 
reduction in milk yields!) and on the impacts of ashfalls on fl ora 
and fauna. Five years later (and fi fteen years since Charles 
Darwin had gazed awestruck on its ruins) Schythe emigrated 
to Concepción in Chile. J. C. Schythe, Hekla og dens sidste 
Udbrud den 2den September 1845 (Copenhagen: Trykt i Bianco 
Lunos Bogtrykkeri, 1847).
17 Beside its cartographic precision, it uniquely captured Etna’s 
notable mutability. Inspired by Goethe’s theory of colours, von 
Waltershausen represented the ages of the myriad lava fl ows 
enfolding the mountain in separate shades of green, a technique 
which remains the norm today (albeit without the fi xation on a 
single colour). The map, however, has dated – it shows many 
features whose traces have since been swallowed up by more 316 Mountains of Fire
than a century and a half of lava eff usion and urban straggle. 
S. Branca and T. Abate, ‘Current knowledge of Etna’s fl ank 
eruptions (Italy) occurring over the past 2500 years. From the 
iconographies of the XVII century to modern geological cartog￾raphy’, Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 385 
(2019): 159–178.
18 Bunsen’s wider studies helped to build the foundations of spec￾troscopy that much of my approach to gas analysis has relied 
on, and he laid groundwork for understanding sulphur chemis￾try. R. Bunsen, Gasometry: comprising the leading physical and 
chemical properties of gases (London: Walton & Maberly, 1857).
19 He recovered and later reported that three-quarters of the 
energy from charcoal fuel was wasted due to incomplete oxida￾tion. Great effi ciencies and cost-savings could be achieved, he 
argued, if fl ue gases were reintroduced into the furnace. Had he 
obtained a patent for the process, it would have made him a 
great deal of money. At the time he was invited on the Icelandic 
expedition, Bunsen was Professor of Chemistry at the University 
of Marburg.
20 By the time the team reached Reykjavik, Hekla had fi nished 
raging – an occupational hazard for a volcanologist. Volcanoes 
don’t wait for you to turn up.
21 This fi nding was reinforced by his analysis of samples from the 
Beagle voyage, sent to him by Darwin, who was so impressed 
with Bunsen’s work that he persuaded Lyell to revise Principles 
of Geology in light of it. Frank Perret was also a fan of Bunsen’s 
approach. R. Bunsen, ‘Über den innern Zusammenhang der 
pseudovulkanischen Erscheinungen Islands’, Justus Liebigs 
Annalen der Chemie 62 (1847): 1–59. For an excellent account of 
Bunsen’s work on Icelandic volcanism, see: C. Wentrup, ‘Bunsen 
the geochemist: Icelandic volcanism, geyser theory, and gas, 
rock and mineral analyses’, Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition 60 (2021): 1,066–1,081.Notes 317
Alexander von Humboldt drew on the volcano work of all our 
heroes – Oviedo, Hamilton, Spallanzani, Darwin, Scrope, 
Bunsen, von Waltershausen – in the fourth volume of his master￾piece, Kosmos, written late in his life. See: A. von Humboldt, 
‘Comsos: Sketch of the physical description of the universe’, trans. 
E. Sabine (London: Longman, 1858).
22 Yes – its nature has been experimentally determined as reported 
here, with attention paid to both smooth and crunchy varieties; 
G. P. Citerne et al., ‘Rheological properties of peanut butter’, 
Rheologica Acta 40, (2001): 86–96.
23 F. Sauro et al., ‘Lava tubes on Earth, Moon and Mars: A review 
on their size and morphology revealed by comparative planetol￾ogy’, Earth-Science Reviews (2020): 103288.
24 See: A. B. Stefánsson and G. Stefánsdóttr, ‘Surtshellir in 
Hallmundarhraun: Historical overview, exploration, memories, 
damage, an attempt to reconstruct its glorious past’, International 
Symposium on Vulcanospeleology (2016).
25 Radiocarbon evidence suggests it initiated between around 880 
and 910 CE. With an estimated volume of up to 8.5 cubic kilo￾metres, it ranks as the third-largest eruption in Iceland since 
settlement.
26 For my money, the epitome of a domestic lava tunnel is the 
subterranean home of the Canarian artist and architect César 
Manrique (1919–1992) on Lanzarote.
27 N. Mari et al., ‘Potential futures in human habitation of martian 
lava tubes’, in Mars: A Volcanic World (New York: Springer, 
2021): 279–307.
28 K. P. Smith, ‘Of monsters and men: literary, mythic, and archae￾ological views of Surtshellir Cave, Iceland’, Think UHI, 
YouTube (uploaded 16 September 2016), https://www.youtube.
com/watch?v=orRPQsHUEI8.
29 K. P. Smith et al., ‘Ritual responses to catastrophic volcanism in 
Viking Age Iceland: Reconsidering Surtshellir Cave through 318 Mountains of Fire
Bayesian analyses of AMS dates, tephrochronology, and texts’, 
Journal of Archaeological Science 126 (2021): 105316.
30 Orpiment was used as a pigment: the brightest yellow in illumi￾nated manuscripts of the period.
31 M. Nordvig, Volcanoes in Old Norse Mythology: Myth and 
Environment in Early Iceland (Leeds: Arc Humanities Press, 2021).
32 Though the cave would have been accessible, no Viking-age 
artefacts were found deeper in the tunnel – as if there were a 
borderline that mortals should not cross.
33 An estimated 844 km2
 compared with 242 km2
 for 
Hallmundarhraun; see S. Sigurðardóttir et al., ‘Mapping of the 
Eldgjá lava fl ow on Mýrdalssandur with magnetic surveying’, 
Jökull 65 (2015): 61–71.
34 C. Oppenheimer et al., ‘The Eldgjá eruption: timing, long-range 
impacts and infl uence on the Christianisation of Iceland’, 
Climatic Change 147 (2018): 369–381.
35 Th. Thordarson et al., ‘New estimates of sulphur degassing and 
atmospheric mass-loading by the 934 AD Eldgjá eruption, 
Iceland’, Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal Research 108 
(2001): 33–54.
36 It is even possible to gauge the altitude of the dust from these 
medieval accounts. See Guillet et al., ‘Lunar eclipses illuminate 
timing and climate impact of medieval volcanism’, Nature, 616 
(2023): 90–95. 
37 Trees can also record other stresses and disturbances, such as 
fl ood events, pest infestations and fi res. It is an absolutely fasci￾nating subject – for a primer, see: V. Trouet, Tree Story: The 
History of the World Written in Rings (Baltimore: John Hopkins 
University Press, 2020). Much of my recent work has been done 
in collaboration with Ulf Bűntgen. His research has helped to 
show that, whereas individual eruptions might lead to a few 
years of cooling, clusters of eruptions in time can lead to much 
more prolonged cool periods that we see in ‘little ice ages’. It Notes 319
also looks like the warmer episodes of the past two millennia 
(excluding the recent warming period connected with fossil fuel 
use) coincide with intervals of statistically less volcanism. See: 
U. Büntgen et al., ‘Cooling and societal change during the Late 
Antique Little Ice Age from 536 to around 660 AD’, Nature 
Geoscience 9 (2016): 231–236; U. Büntgen et al., ‘Prominent role 
of volcanism in Common Era climate variability and human 
history’, Dendrochronologia 64 (2020): 125757.
38 L. M. Hollander (trans.), The Poetic Edda (Austin: University of 
Texas Press, 2nd edition, revised. Copyright © 1962, renewed 
1990). Vǫluspá was already thought to have been fi rst composed 
in the tenth century – if our interpretation is correct, then we 
can date it after 939 CE.
39 There were clear signs of the reawakening: uplift of the area was 
detected in the fall of 2020, followed in February 2021 by thou￾sands of earthquakes signalling the surfacing of a sheet of 
magma, fi ve miles long and a metre wide. Hundreds of tremors 
were felt in Reykjavik and, during the peak, more rattled the 
Reykjanes Peninsula in a single day than the average for a year. 
The eruption began with the opening of a 180-metre-long 
fi ssure at the surface.
40 Bunsen enjoyed enveloping his companions in fog by blowing 
cigar smoke into the steam vents. See Wentrup (ibid) and 
Bunsen’s joyful letters home: R. E. Oesper and K. Freudenberg, 
‘Bunsen’s trip to Iceland. As recounted in letters to his mother’, 
Journal of Chemical Education 18 (1941): 253.
41 It put me in mind of Þríhnúkagígur (good luck with the pronun￾ciation) in the east of the Reykjanes Peninsula, a huge, vault-like 
vertical lava tube. It has a narrow opening at the top of a cinder 
cone formed 3,500 years ago during a fi ssure eruption, similar 
to that of Fagradalsfjall. I visited it once – it is open to the public 
– descending to the fl oor in an open elevator.
42 G. B. M. Pedersen et al., ‘Volume, eff usion rate, and lava 320 Mountains of Fire
transport during the 2021 Fagradalsfjall eruption: Results from 
near real-time photogrammetric monitoring’, Geophysical 
Research Letters (2022): e2021GL097125.
43 D. K. Chester et al., Mount Etna: the anatomy of a volcano, 
(London: Chapman and Hall, 1985).
44 Some years ago, I met the director of Eldheimar, a ‘museum of 
remembrance’ on Heimaey. She was thirteen when the island￾ers’ lives were inverted. ‘I did not want to talk about the experi￾ence for twenty years – I felt so embarrassed to be a refugee,’ she 
confi ded. ‘I came back here after twenty years living in Germany. 
Like many, I did not fi nd it amusing to dig up my story, to exca￾vate memories.’
45 Haroun Tazieff , still smarting from his recent dismissal as direc￾tor of volcanology in Paris, considered it a worthless eff ort: 
‘Persuaded by a somewhat inexperienced foreign volcanologist, 
Icelandic authorities agreed to use fi re-boats to sprinkle water 
on a tongue of the thick lava fl ows  . . . No arguments could 
prevent the exercise’. The ‘inexperienced’ volcanologist he 
refers to is Steve Sparks, who defended his position in print, 
branding Tazieff as subjective rather than informed. H. Tazieff , 
‘La Soufrière, volcanology and forecasting’, Nature 269 (1977): 
96–97. H. Sigurdsson and S. Sparks, ‘What happened at 
Heimaey?’, Nature 271 (1978): 108.
46 R. I. Tilling et al., ‘The Hawaiian Volcano Observatory: A natu￾ral laboratory for studying basaltic volcanism’, US Geological 
Survey Professional Paper 1,801 (2014); J. P. Lockwood and A. 
Torgerson, ‘Diversion of lava fl ows by aerial bombing – lessons 
from Mauna Loa volcano, Hawai‘i’, Bulletin Volcanologique 43 
(1980): 727–741; J. Dvorak, The Last Volcano: A man, a romance, 
and the quest to understand nature’s most magnifi cent fury (New 
York: Pegasus Books, 2015). T. A. Jaggar (1956, ibid).
47 F. R. Pulido and F. J. B. Delgado, ‘La Palma: Un volcán sin 
nombre y sin olvido’, Norte de Salud Mental 18, 66 (2022): 11–21.Notes 321
Red Sea, Black Gold
1 J. W. Gregory, The Great Rift Valley, (London: John Murray, 
1896): 324.
2 S. Sontag, The Volcano Lover: A Romance, (London: Random 
House, 1993).
3 See, for example: S. F. Hodgson, ‘Obsidian: sacred glass from 
the California sky’, Geological Society, London, Special Publications
273, (2007): 295–313.
4 Pliny the Elder, The Natural History, trans. J. Bostock and H. T. 
Riley (London: Henry G. Bohn, 1855): Book 36, Chapter 67. 
Available online at Perseus Digital Library, Tufts University. 
https://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Ate
xt%3A1999.02.0137%3Abook%3D36%3Achapter%3D67
5 I like the way archaeologist and skilled knapper John Sea 
describes stone tools as the ‘residue of behavior’: J. J. Shea, Stone 
Tools in Human Evolution: Behavioral diff erences among techno￾logical primates (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2016). The pioneers of geochemical provenancing were Colin 
Renfrew and Joe Cann, working in the mid-1960s. Colin said to 
me once: ‘When you can identify precisely where the obsidian 
came from – if you can really pin that down – you are getting 
close to analysing the very origins of human mobility and the 
scale of it.’ For a review, see: Y. V. Kuzmin et al., ‘Global perspec￾tives on obsidian studies in archaeology’, Quaternary 
International 542 (2020): 41–53.
6 M. Leakey, Disclosing the Past: An autobiography (New York: 
Doubleday, 1984).
7 Apparently, the tracks were fi rst found by accident as two 
members of the team were playfully fl inging elephant dung at 
each other (as you do). One jumped into a gully and almost 
stepped on the prints. Recent research reveals that another 322 Mountains of Fire
hominin taxa also left tracks at Laetoli. See: R. L. Hay, and 
M. D. Leakey, ‘The fossil footprints of Laetoli’, Scientifi c 
American 246 (1982): 50–57; E. J. McNutt et al., ‘Footprint 
evidence of early hominin locomotor diversity at Laetoli, 
Tanzania’, Nature 600, 468–471 (2021): 1–4; M. Leakey (ibid, 
1984).
8 Her Ethiopian name is Dinkenesh. Her anatomy also indicated 
bipedal gait: D. C. Johanson, and M. Taieb, ‘Plio-pleistocene 
hominid discoveries in Hadar, Ethiopia’, Nature 260 (1976): 
293–297.
9 After nitrogen and oxygen, argon is the atmosphere’s third most 
abundant constituent. It is derived from decay of radioactive 
potassium.
10 The radiocarbon clock ticks much faster – the half-life of 
carbon-14 is 5,730 years.
11 R. C. Walter, ‘Age of Lucy and the fi rst family: single-crystal 
40Ar/39Ar dating of the Denen Dora and lower Kada Hadar 
members of the Hadar Formation, Ethiopia’, Geology 22 (1994): 
6–10.
12 C. M. Vidal et al., ‘Age of the oldest known Homo sapiens from 
eastern Africa’, Nature 601 (2022): 579–583.
13 G. C. P. King and G. N. Bailey, ‘Dynamic landscapes and human 
evolution’, Geological Society of America Special Paper 471 (2010): 
1–19.
14 The dispersal history is uncertain but certainly complex. Some 
favour a southern route via the Bab el Mandab straits at the 
southern end of the Red Sea, others the Levant. See: A. Beyin, 
‘The Bab al Mandab vs the Nile-Levant: an appraisal of the two 
dispersal routes for early modern humans out of Africa’, African 
Archaeological Review 23 (2006): 5–30. A. Beyin, ‘The western 
periphery of the Red Sea as a hominin habitat and dispersal 
corridor: marginal or central?’, Journal of World Prehistory 34 
(2021): 279–316.Notes 323
The southern route would have required swimming or raft￾ing: J. Hill et al., ‘Sea-level change, palaeotidal modelling and 
hominin dispersals: The case of the southern Red Sea’, 
Quaternary Science Reviews 293 (2022): 107719.
15 Gregory developed the ideas of the Austrian geologist, Eduard 
Suess, who had analysed surveys and rock samples collected in 
the 1880s by the Hungarian explorer Count Teleki. While Suess 
realised the Rift must result from the stretching of the Earth’s 
crust in the direction perpendicular to the valley, it took 
Gregory’s fi eld observations to confi rm that the movements on 
opposing parallel faults dropped the intervening strip of crust, 
forming the valley fl oor. Gregory further identifi ed multiple 
generations of fault escarpments, with former lake beds now 
uplifted. The whole structure of the Rift, he argued, had to be 
geologically young.
Bailey Willis, an American seismologist, prominent in his day, 
appears to be one of the fi rst to coin the term ‘Gregory Rift’. 
See: B. Willis, Studies in comparative seismology: East African 
plateaus and rift valleys, Publication 470, (Washington: Carnegie 
Institution, 1936).
16 D. P. McKenzie et al., ‘Plate tectonics of the Red Sea and east 
Africa’, Nature 226 (1970): 243–248; E. Bonatti et al., ‘The Red 
Sea: birth of an ocean’, in The Red Sea, eds. N. Rasul and 
I. Stewart (Heidelberg: Springer Berlin, 2015), 29–44.
17 This is one of the world’s youngest and best-preserved ‘large 
igneous provinces’. Additionally, the region was stretched by 
doming of the plate. Fault lines developed separating blocks of 
the crust that then tilted like books collapsing on a shelf. This 
extension resulted in development of the great rifts on the 
African continent, but even more spectacularly, proceeded all 
the way to the separation of Africa and Arabia along the Red 
Sea and Gulf of Aden. As the crust thinned and subsided, volca￾noes started sprouting along the seabed around fi ve million 324 Mountains of Fire
years ago, generating new ocean fl oor. Today, the Red Sea is 
1,200 miles long and up to two miles deep. The ongoing diver￾gence of Africa and Arabia is nearly two centimetres per year. In 
contrast, the dilation of the East African Rift is just a tenth as 
fast. It will be many millions of years before an ocean splits 
Ethiopia in half.
18 H. Tazieff , ‘The Afar triangle’, Scientifi c American 222 (1970): 
32–41; F. Barberi et al., ‘Long-lived lava lakes of Erta ‘Ale 
volcano’, Revue de Géographie Physique et de Géologie Dynamique
15 (1973): 347–351.
19 H. Tazieff , L’odeur du soufre: expédition en Afar (Paris: Stock, 
1975). H. Tazieff at al., ‘Tectonic signifi cance of the Afar (or 
Danakil) depression’, Nature 235 (1972): 144–147. For an 
overview of his scientifi c contribution in this period, see: 
J. H. Varet, ‘H. Tazieff (1914-1998) Des années Afar au secré￾tariat d’État (1967-1986): la diffi cile mutation institutionnelle’, 
Travaux du Comité français d’Histoire de la Géologie 3 (2009): 
115–145.
20 As anticipated, all this kit was impounded in customs on arrival, 
and my immediate task was to extricate it.
21 Before reaching Asaita, Thesiger received a ‘far from friendly’ 
reception from a band of warriors, but references to a non-exist￾ent machine gun helped them to reach an understanding: 
W. Thesiger, ‘The Awash river and the Aussa sultanate’, The 
Geographical Journal 85 (1935): 1–19. See also: W. Thesiger, The 
Danakil Diary: Journeys Through Abyssinia, 1930–34 (Toronto: 
HarperCollins Canada, 1996).
22 W. Munzinger, ‘Journey across the Great Salt Desert from 
Hanfi la to the foot of the Abyssinian Alps’, Proceedings of the 
Royal Geographical Society of London 13 (1868): 219–224. The 
fi rst European to hear of Erta ‘Ale may have been the Irish￾Basque geographer and polyglot Antoine D’Abbadie, who 
spent twelve years exploring Abyssinia, covering enormous Notes 325
distances barefoot in local dress so as to blend in. He surveyed 
long tracts of the Red Sea coastline, compiled a 40,000-word 
dictionary of Amharic and mapped an area the size of Italy. 
While in Afar, he heard of ‘une montagne qui fume toujours’. 
The fi rst European to climb Erta ‘Ale was botanist Johannes 
Hildebrandt in 1873. His guides warned him of jinn that 
circled the summit on fl ying horses, and refused to accom￾pany him, so he went alone. When he fi nally reached the top, 
the view into the chasm astounded and moved him: ‘It is as if 
a pitch black sea churned up by a mighty hurricane has broken 
against the cliff s, forming towers of foam that run and twist 
and suddenly freeze stiff . Thus lies the deserted mass of rock 
like a tombstone to some great primeval force.’ J. M. 
Hildebrandt, ‘Erlebnisse auf einer Reise von Massûa in das 
Gebiet der Afer und nach Aden’, Z. Ges. Erdkunde Berlin 10 
(1875): 1–38.
23 Eight years later, I made it to Erta ‘Ale with a French expedition 
led by Jean-Louis Cheminée (French for ‘chimney’, another 
great name for a volcanologist), a veteran of the Tazieff 
expedition.
In 2005, I joined an Ethiopian team to investigate the erup￾tion of Dabbahu volcano – possibly the smallest volcanic episode 
I have ever come across! It had produced a veneer of ash, and a 
fuming spiny dome of lava had protruded from a great fi ssure 
in the ground. The local herders said several camels had been 
swallowed up when the ground opened. This event was part of 
an extended episode representing an increment in the widening 
of Afar. See: D. J. Ferguson et al., ‘Recent rift-related volcanism 
in Afar, Ethiopia’, Earth and Planetary Science Letters 292 (2010): 
409–418.
24 I assembled an archive of Landsat images going back to 1972, 
and declassifi ed spy satellite photographs from the mid￾1960s. This revealed when lava had overfl owed the crater, 326 Mountains of Fire
and established a timeline of heat output from the volcano. 
C. Oppenheimer and P. Francis, ‘Remote sensing of heat, 
lava and fumarole emissions from Erta ‘Ale volcano, Ethiopia’, 
International Journal of Remote Sensing 18 (1997): 1,661–1,692.
25 Playfair’s dispatches were communicated by his friend, Charles 
Beke, who had also travelled in Abyssinia. Playfair led a distin￾guished diplomatic service and was a prolifi c writer.
26 The authorities in Massawa, then in Ottoman hands, suspected 
French perfi dy and dispatched messengers to discover the 
perpetrators. Four years later, Massawa was annexed by Egypt, 
and Werner Munzinger was the British consul there.
27 R. C. Walter et al., ‘Early human occupation of the Red Sea 
coast of Eritrea during the last interglacial’, Nature 405 (2000): 
65–69.
28 We were not able to estimate the sulphur output of the eruption, 
but did identify a modest summer cooling in tree-ring datasets. 
P. Wiart and C. Oppenheimer, ‘Largest known historical erup￾tion in Africa: Dubbi volcano, Eritrea, 1861’, Geology 28 (2000): 
291–294.
29 There was no volcano monitoring in Eritrea. There was not 
even a single seismometer operating in the whole country.
30 B. Goitom et al., ‘First recorded eruption of Nabro volcano, 
Eritrea, 2011’, Bulletin of Volcanology 77 (2015): 1–21.
31 Little is published on the region’s volcanic geology, though there 
are reports of an eruption as recently as 1937.
32 This suggested distinct spheres of interaction on the highlands 
and lowlands. Lamya was struck by how little evidence there 
was for Neolithic exploitation of obsidian outcrops on Jebel Isbil 
volcano. We dated an explosive eruption to 6,000 years ago. 
Perhaps this had kept Neolithic people away. L. Khalidi et al., 
‘Obsidian sources in highland Yemen and their relevance to 
archaeological research in the Red Sea region’, Journal of 
Archaeological Science 37 (2010): 2,332–2,345.Notes 327
33 C. Oppenheimer et al., ‘Risk and reward: explosive eruptions 
and obsidian lithic resource at Nabro volcano (Eritrea)’, 
Quaternary Science Reviews 226 (2019): 105995.
34 L. Khalidi et al., ‘Obsidian use and interaction across Arabia and 
the Horn of Africa during the Holocene’, in Sourcing Obsidian, 
eds. F. X. Le Bourdonnec et al. (New York: Springer 2023).
35 N. Blegen, ‘The earliest long-distance obsidian transport: 
Evidence from the ~200 ka Middle Stone Age Sibilo School 
Road Site, Baringo, Kenya’, Journal of Human Evolution 103 
(2017): 1–19.
36 E. Yohannes, ‘Geothermal exploration in Eritrea—country 
update’, Proceedings, World Geothermal Congress, 2015, 
Melbourne, Australia, International Geothermal Association 
(2015).
There is a vast potential geothermal resource in the Rift 
Valley and Afar. See: N. Burnside et al., ‘Geothermal energy 
resources in Ethiopia: Status review and insights from hydro￾chemistry of surface and groundwaters’, Wiley Interdisciplinary 
Reviews: Water, 8(6), e1554 (2021).
Water Tower of the Sahara
1 G. Nachtigal, Sahara et Soudan, vol. 1, trans. J. Gourdault 
(1881): 176.
2 W. Thesiger, ‘A camel journey to Tibesti’, The Geographical 
Journal 94, (1939): 433–446.
3 Radar instruments carried in space operate by the same basic 
principle, but look sideways and build two-dimensional images 
with very fi ne-scale detail. The acuity of the radar depends in 
part on the dimensions of its antenna – the longer it is, the more 
detailed the imagery. From the great distance of Earth orbit, 
an antenna might need to be miles long to resolve small features 
at the surface. This is impractical but, amazingly, such an 328 Mountains of Fire
antenna can be simulated with a very modest aerial thanks to a 
satellite’s motion, in eff ect by combining multiple consecutive 
images, each of which has been acquired a bit further along in 
the orbit.
4 For a great overview of Magellan’s discoveries of Venusian 
volcanoes, see: J. W. Head et al., ‘Venus volcanism: Classifi cation 
of volcanic features and structures, associations, and global 
distribution from Magellan data’, Journal of Geophysical Research: 
Planets 97 (1992): 13,153–13,197. There is evidence that 
volcanic activity persists today on Venus. See: R. H. Herrick and 
S. Hensley, ‘Surface changes observed on a Venusian volcano 
during the Magellan mission’, Science (2023): doi:10.1126/
science.abm7735.
5 French geologists reconnoitred the volcanoes in the 1930s and 
then again in the 1950s. The most recent work, carried out in 
the 1970s, was based on interpretations of satellite images. It 
compared the massive shield and caldera of Emi Koussi with 
the Elysium volcanoes on Mars. The scientist behind this work, 
Mike Malin, went on to design the camera that provided stun￾ning images of Mars and revealed the former presence of 
water. Today, it is safe to say we know more about the geology 
of the Red Planet than of the Tibesti. See: M. C. Malin, 
‘Comparison of volcanic features of Elysium (Mars) and 
Tibesti (Earth)’, Geological Society of America Bulletin 88 
(1977): 908–919.
6 At the time, I was supervising a PhD student, Jason Permenter, 
who was building sophisticated computer-animated fl y-bys of 
the Tibesti’s volcanoes using all the best space imagery and digi￾tal topography we could lay our hands on. His studies might 
have been revolutionary but for the unanticipated launch of 
Google Earth. See: J. L. Permenter and C. Oppenheimer, 
‘Volcanoes of the Tibesti massif (Chad, northern Africa)’, 
Bulletin of Volcanology 69, (2007): 609–626.Notes 329
7 After wartime service training pilots to fl y one of the Royal Air 
Force’s fastest bombers in Canada, Dick returned to Cambridge 
to complete a degree in Geography. He studied under Frank 
Debenham, a veteran of Captain Scott’s fi nal Antarctic 
campaign. Between stories of polar adventure, Debenham 
lectured on his current interest, water resources in Africa. It was 
through Debenham’s connections that Dick was invited a few 
years later to join a mission to the Sahara. For a fascinating 
recorded conversation with Dick Grove, see: ‘Dick Grove’, 
Voices of Science, British Library, https://www.bl.uk/voices-of￾science/interviewees/dick-grove.
8 Q. Schiermeier, ‘Exposing Sahara science in the shadow of 
terrorism’, Nature News (2015).
9 A. T. Grove and A. Warren, ‘Quaternary landforms and climate 
on the south side of the Sahara’, The Geographical Journal 134 
(1968): 194–208.
10 R. Kuper and S. Kröpelin, ‘Climate-controlled Holocene occu￾pation in the Sahara: motor of Africa’s evolution’, Science 313 
(2006): 803–807.
11 Hotter Northern Hemisphere summers drove moisture off the 
Atlantic Ocean, intensifying the western African monsoon and 
bringing rain further north. There have been multiple earlier 
humid periods, including one around 125,000 years ago, which 
established a vegetated corridor across northern Africa, facili￾tating migration of both archaic and modern humans as far as 
the Mediterranean coast – and potentially, into Europe. The 
Tibesti, in particular, provided a refuge for fl ora and fauna, 
including humans, during hyper-arid phases, while also acting 
as a ‘centre of propagation’ when the Sahara greened. On the 
orbital mechanics that infl uence climate of northern Africa, see: 
L. Menviel et al., ‘Drivers of the evolution and amplitude of 
African Humid Periods’, Communications Earth & Environment
2, no. 237 (2021). On the multiplicity of humid periods, see: 330 Mountains of Fire
J. Larrasoaña et al., ‘Dynamics of green Sahara periods and their 
role in hominin evolution’, PloS One 8 (2013): e76514.
12 The conventional view sees the stimulus arriving from south￾west Asia. Want to experience Stefan Kröpelin for yourself? There 
is a great presentation he gave for the Long Now Foundation that 
is available online: S. Kröpelin, ‘Civilization’s Mysterious Desert 
Cradle: Rediscovering the Deep Sahara’, the Long Now 
Foundation, https://longnow.org/seminars/02014/jun/10/civiliza￾tions- mysterious - desert - cradle - rediscovering - deep - sahara/.
13 J. Brachet and J. Scheele, ‘Remoteness is power: disconnection 
as a relation in northern Chad’, Social Anthropology 27 (2019): 
156–171.
14 W. Thesiger, ‘A camel journey to Tibesti’, The Geographical 
Journal 94 (1939): 433–446.
15 In 2011, $60 million USD of funding was pledged by the central 
government for development projects in the Tibesti, but violence 
and lawlessness, combined with embezzlement and weak 
management, led to the collapse of the programme.
16 Together, they steered successful proposals for both of Chad’s 
UNESCO World Heritage Sites – the Ennedi Plateau and 
Ounianga lakes.
17 Faya was the base for the geographer and military commander 
Jean Tilho (1875–1956), who explored the Tibesti in 1916. At 
this time, the Sanūssiyya, a Sufi movement fi ghting colonial 
expansion in northern Africa, controlled the mountains. Tilho 
had captured Faya in 1913, probably playing a decisive role in 
shielding French and British protectorates south of the Sahara 
from German and Turkish forces during the First World War. 
He later set off with a detachment of men and camels on a ten￾week expedition in the Tibesti, with the aim of wresting control 
from the Sanūssiyya. Their fi rst adventure was the ascent of Emi 
Koussi. The scene of ‘wild magnifi cence’ seen from the summit 
stayed with Tilho for the rest of his life. See: J. Tilho, ‘The Notes 331
exploration of Tibesti, Erdi, Borkou, and Ennedi in 1912–1917: 
A Mission entrusted to the author by the French Institute 
(Continued)’, The Geographical Journal 56 (1920): 161–183.
18 R. M. Prothero, ‘Heinrich Barth and the western Sudan’, The 
Geographical Journal 124 (1958): 326–337.
19 G. Nachtigal, Sahara and Sudan. Vol. I: Tripoli and Fezzan, Tibesti 
or Tu, trans. A. G. B. Fisher and H. J. Fisher (London: C. Hurst 
and Co, 1974). See also H. Fisher, ‘Dr. Gustav Nachtigal in 
Modern Chad’, Itinerario, 9 (1985): 145–156, in which the 
author presciently notes that the Tibesti ‘is likely to prove a 
singularly ill-fi tting piece for the mosaic of any wider national 
state’.
20 A. T. Grove, ‘Geomorphology of the Tibesti region with special 
reference to western Tibesti’, The Geographical Journal 126 
(1960): 18–27.
21 As we prepared to break camp, a group of Chadians pulled up 
in a Hilux. I noticed a couple of metal detectors in the back. 
They showed us a sack full of spectacular meteorites they had 
found in the mountains, curious to know what we thought they 
were worth.
22 Ottoman administration came briefl y to the Tibesti in the early 
twentieth century, somewhat in alliance with the Sanūssiyya. 
See: G. Joff é, ‘Chad: Power vacuum or geopolitical focus’, 
Geopolitics 2 (1997): 25–39.
23 For more on the concept of mountains as water towers, see: 
W. W. Immerzeel et al., ‘Importance and vulnerability of the 
world’s water towers’, Nature 577 (2020): 364–369.
24 C. Deniel et al. ‘The Cenozoic volcanic province of Tibesti 
(Sahara of Chad): Major units, chronology, and structural 
features’, Bulletin of Volcanology 77 (2015): 1–21.
25 P. W. Ball et al., ‘Quantifying asthenospheric and lithospheric 
controls on mafi c magmatism across North Africa’, Geochemistry, 
Geophysics, Geosystems 20 (2019): 3,520–3,555.332 Mountains of Fire
26 A range of studies of the diatomites have yielded new insights 
into the hydroclimate of the Sahara: A. N. Yacoub et al., ‘The 
African Holocene Humid Period in the Tibesti mountains 
(central Sahara, Chad): Climate reconstruction inferred from 
fossil diatoms and their oxygen isotope composition’, Quaternary 
Science Reviews 308 (2023): 108099.
27 Large calderas are formed by subsidence of the ground above 
a magma reservoir when a large quantity of the molten rock is 
expelled, either by eruption or via dikes that squeeze magma 
laterally into the surrounding crust, potentially over great 
distances (this occurred at Miyakejima volcano in Japan in 
2000). There is no evidence for a very large eruption of Trou 
au Natron in the past millennia, so the remaining question is 
whether dikes could have withdrawn magma from beneath 
the volcano, triggering deepening of the existing caldera. But 
looking at the topography of the caldera fl oor, this is as 
unlikely a scenario for me as a 500-metre-deep lake is for 
Stefan.
Flame in a Sea of Gold
1 ‘At the edge of the crater’, by George Marston in Aurora 
Australis (Cape Royds: British Antarctic Expedition, 1908).
2 J. O’Reilly, ‘Sensing the ice: fi eld science, models, and expert 
intimacy with knowledge’, Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute 22 (2016): 27–45.
3 In Aristophanes’ 414 BCE play Birds: ‘At the beginning there 
was only Chaos, Night, dark Erebus, and deep Tartarus. Earth, 
the air and heaven had no existence. Firstly, black-winged Night 
laid a germless egg in the bosom of the infi nite deeps of Erebus, 
and from this, after the revolution of long ages, sprang the 
graceful Eros with his glittering golden wings, swift as the whirl￾winds of the tempest.’ Aristophanes, Birds, in The Complete Notes 333
Greek Drama, vol. 2., W. J. Oates and E. O’Neill, Jr. (New York: 
Random House, 1938). Available online at Perseus Digital 
Library, Tufts University. https://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/
text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0026%3Acard%3D685
4 R. Yeo, Defi ning Science: William Whewell, natural knowledge and 
public debate in early Victorian Britain (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2003).
5 F. Fleming, Barrow’s Boys (New York: Grove Press, 2001).
6 Bomb vessels were the weapons of mass destruction of their day 
– their conversion for science was a real case of ‘swords
to ploughshares’. See: N. Robins, From War to Peace: The conver￾sion of naval vessels after two world wars (Barnsley: Seaforth 
Publishing, 2021); A. W. H. Pearsall, ‘Bomb vessels’, Polar Record 
16 (1973): 781–788.
7 Though by this time, he was a Member of Parliament and writ￾ing on economics as much as on geology.
8 The mineralogist George Prior examined the rocks collected by 
McCormick, whose ‘so-called geological accounts’ he found, in 
most cases, to ‘resolve themselves into exasperating (from a petro￾logical point of view) descriptions of birds, for the doctor appears 
to have been a more enthusiastic ornithologist than geologist’. 
G. T. Prior, ‘Petrographical notes on the rock specimens collected 
in Antarctic regions during the voyage of HMS Erebus and Terror
under Sir James Clark Ross, in 1839–43’, Mineralogical Magazine
12 (1899): 69–91. See also: M. J. Ross, Ross in the Antarctic: the 
Voyages of James Clark Ross in Her Majesty’s Ships Erebus & Terror, 
1839–43 (Whitby: Caedmon of Whitby, 1982); J. C. Ross, A Voyage 
of Discovery and Research in the Southern and Antarctic Regions, 
during the Years 1839–43, vol. 1 (London: John Murray, 1847).
9 Thank goodness Ross had not sailed to Antarctica in some other 
naval ships of the era that were associated with polar explora￾tion, such as HMS Racehorse or HMS Carcass. An astonishing 
testament to the accuracy of naval surveying is that Ross and his 334 Mountains of Fire
crew estimated Mount Erebus to be 12,400 feet (3,780 metres) 
high, which is almost spot on. Refl ecting on how far off they 
were at sea on a lurching sail ship, it really is remarkable.
10 I, too, dreamed of over-wintering on Erebus – my fi eldwork, 
though, was only ever possible in the austral summer, when the 
sun does not set. How often I imagined the spectacle of the 
frosted cone of Erebus touching a night sky of scintillating star￾light and glaucous auroral phosphorescence, steam billowing 
from the crater diff using the bright red glow of the lava lake.
11 R. F. Scott, The Voyage of the Discovery, vol. 1 (London: Smith, 
Elder & Co, 1907).
12 Knowledge of Mount Erebus swiftly permeated the scientifi c 
literature of the day. Hooker beat Ross to press with Botany of 
the Antarctic Voyages in 1844, followed by Ross’s account, 
published in two volumes in 1847. Humboldt mentions the 
volcano’s discovery in a section on terrestrial magnetism in the 
1854 edition of Kosmos. And at the fi rst opportunity, the volcano 
is introduced in Lyell’s Principles of Geology (in its seventh 
edition, 1847). Lyell mentions Mount Erebus in a section on 
polar climate, noting that all of Victoria Land above 4,000 feet 
was covered in perpetual snow, ‘except a narrow ring of black 
earth surrounding the huge crater of the active volcano’. 
Similarly, the second edition of George Poulett Scrope’s classic 
work on volcanoes draws on Ross’s observations, though some￾what embellishes them. J. D. Hooker, The Botany of the Antarctic 
voyage of HM Discovery Ships Erebus and Terror in the Years 
1839–1843: Under the command of Captain Sir James Clark Ross,
vol. 1 (London: Reeve Brothers, 1844).
13 Edgeworth David was one of Professor John Wesley Judd’s 
students at the Royal School of Mines in London. Judd, in turn, 
was mentored by George Poulett Scrope (who, when he was no 
longer active enough to do his own fi eldwork, commissioned the 
younger man to survey the volcanoes of Europe). Judd helped Notes 335
to establish the study of volcanic rocks under the microscope, 
and wrote a popular book on volcanoes, as well as the geological 
sections of the Royal Society’s Krakatoa report of 1888. He 
counted Charles Lyell and Charles Darwin among his friends.
My collaborators at University of Chicago Press would have 
liked a chapter or two on volcanoes of the United States in 
Mountains of Fire. I’ve loved working on Kīlauea with colleagues 
at the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory but my experiences there 
didn’t really sum up to a whole chapter’s worth of adventure. I 
have also seen Mount St Helens, Crater Lake, Mammoth 
Mountain, the Inyo volcanic chain, Yellowstone and the Valles 
caldera of the Jemez mountains – all magnifi cent and instructive 
but these encounters were geotouristic and not dedicated fi eld 
missions. I hope, despite the thin coverage on the nation’s 
immense volcanic heritage, to avoid a review like the one the 
American geologist, Alexis Julien, penned for Judd’s volcano 
book: ‘The little hills of England, Wales and Scotland aff ord 
excellent illustrations of extinct volcanic vents for the British 
public; but why, O why, should not discreet reference be vouch￾safed to transatlantic localities for the benefi t of Prof. Judd’s 
thirty odd millions of cousins?’ Julien continued: ‘[There are] 
eighty-two great volcanic vents in action on our continents, to 
only thirty-fi ve in Europe, Asia and Africa . . . this fact . . . indi￾cates that America is the grandest fi eld in the world for the study 
of volcanic phenomena; and this little book, excellent as it is, 
with the limited fi eld of observation from which it has been 
mainly written, gives a suggestion of the magnifi cent mono￾graph on this subject which is yet to come from some American 
hand.’ J. W. Judd, Volcanoes: What they are and what they teach, 
(New York: Appleton and co., 1881). Julien’s review is in: Science
77 (1881): 600–601.
14 Carsten Borchgrevink, a Norwegian in command of the 
Southern Cross Expedition, was fi rst to land on Ross Island, 336 Mountains of Fire
eight years earlier, at the foot of Mount Terror. He was speaking 
of his exploits in New York in 1902 as a guest of the National 
Geographic Society. It was shortly before the Montagne Pelée 
disaster, following which the Society funded a scientifi c team to 
investigate. Probably exaggerating his credentials as a volcanol￾ogist, Borchgrevink was invited to join, along with geologists 
Israel Russell and Bob Hill. Thomas Jaggar, who would found 
the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory a decade later, and Edmonds 
Hovey, from the American Museum of Natural History, also 
travelled to Martinique. They arrived there on 21 May, a day 
after another violent eruption of Pelée had killed 2,000 people. 
Back in New York, Borchgrevink made numerous exaggerated 
claims that moved Hovey to denounce him in print so as to 
scupper the Norwegian’s chances of fundraising for another 
Antarctic expedition. It worked.
Among the last to know of the Pelée disaster was Shackleton, 
who was overwintering on Ross Island with Captain Scott’s 
Discovery Expedition of 1901–1904. John Gregory (of East African 
Rift fame) was slated to be scientifi c director of that expedition, 
but refused to go there under naval command and resigned.
15 Shackleton was clearly charmed by David. In a letter to his wife, 
he described the Professor as: ‘a powerful intellect . . . a charm￾ing companion and a tower of strength . . . he could charm a 
bird off a bough’. M. E. David, ‘Professor David: The life of Sir 
Edgeworth David’ (London: Edward Arnold, 1937).
16 David knew his Shakespeare; conjuring up A Midsummer Night’s 
Dream on the side of a frozen volcano is inspired.
17 B. M. Tebo et al., ‘Microbial communities in dark oligotrophic 
volcanic ice cave ecosystems of Mt. Erebus, Antarctica’, Frontiers 
in Microbiology 6 (2015): 179; C. Coleine and M. Delgado￾Baquerizo, ‘Unearthing terrestrial extreme microbiomes for 
searching terrestrial-like life in the Solar System’, Trends in 
Microbiology 30 (2022): 1,101–1,115.Notes 337
18 David, Mawson and Mackay were reunited as the party that 
located (as much as a moving target can be) the south magnetic 
pole, an exceptionally arduous and unaided trek of over 1,200 
miles. David, who suff ered terribly from exhaustion on the 
return journey, later described Mawson as ‘the real leader who 
was the soul of our expedition’. Mawson was back in Antarctica 
in 1911, leading the Australasian Antarctic Expedition. He was 
the lone survivor of an overland trek during which his two 
colleagues died. He later returned to the University of Adelaide 
as Professor of Geology and Mineralogy. He died in 1958. 
Mackay’s life was cut short in 1914, somewhere near Wrangel 
Island in the Siberian Sea, during a failed attempt to reach land 
following the sinking in pack ice of the Canadian Arctic 
Expedition’s brigantine Karluk. David, a man of ‘artistic 
temperament allied to scientifi c training’, died in 1934 and was 
given a state funeral. See: R. E. Priestley, ‘Sir Edgeworth David’, 
The Australian Quarterly 10 (1938): 34–39.
See also: E. J. Larson, An Empire of Ice: Scott, Shackleton, and 
the Heroic Age of Antarctic Science (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 2011); F. Spuff ord, I May Be Some Time: Ice and the 
English Imagination (London: Faber & Faber, 1996); E. J. 
Larson, ‘Public science for a global empire: The British quest 
for the south magnetic pole’, Isis 102 (2011): 34–59.
19 T. W. E. David and R. E. Priestley, ‘Glaciology, physiography, 
stratigraphy, and tectonic geology of south Victoria Land’, in 
Reports on the Scientifi c Investigations, British Antarctic Expedition 
1907–9, vol. 1 (London, William Heinemann: 1914).
20 E. J. Larson (ibid).
21 Someone else who leapt for joy on receipt of a similar invitation 
from Phil, but three decades earlier, was Haroun Tazieff , who 
wrote: ‘. . .  je reçus une lettre qui me laissa pantois: revenant de 
l’Erebus dont il avait avec ses compagnons tenté de descendre le 
cratère, le jeune géologue néo-zélandais Philip Kyle m’invitait à 338 Mountains of Fire
prendre l’année suivante la tête d’une nouvelle tentative! Je suis 
incapable de décrire l’espèce de cyclone qui a déclenchérent en moi la 
lecture de ce message, sa relecture à la recherche de quelque indice de 
canular possible, puis la lente, la progressive compréhension que se 
réalisait le rêve entretenu durant tant d’années.’ H. Tazieff , Erebus: 
volcan Antarctique (Paris: Arthaud, 1978).
22 The closest I came to it was one day at Lower Erebus Hut – I’d 
made myself a coff ee and thought, since I’d made a couple of 
strenuous trips up to the crater, that I’d add a spoonful of sweet￾ened condensed milk to it. There was a tin of the stuff sitting by 
the cooker. It really didn’t taste great but then we’ve got cans 
and packets of food up there whose ‘use by’ dates stretch back 
almost to Scott’s era. It turned out it was bacon fat.
23 Encounters at the End of the World (2007), Werner Herzog’s 
Oscar-nominated movie, gives a fl avour of the oddities populat￾ing Mac Town. It was atop Erebus that I met Herzog for the fi rst 
time, sparking our friendship and fi lm-making collaboration.
24 There was a whiteboard in our fi eld hut on Erebus on which 
we recorded any items we needed from McMurdo – food 
resupplies, snowmobile parts, another U-barrel (for urine – all 
human waste was collected). We’d call in with the list and the 
goods would arrive the next time the helicopter could fl y in. I 
laughed out loud one time (and thought of the Scott and 
Shackleton era) when I saw on the whiteboard someone had 
written beside a request for ‘Freshies’: ‘Could we not have 
Lollo Rosso this time?’
25 That being said, I learned during my fi rst year with the U.S. 
Antarctic Program that the coff ee provided on an American 
base is undrinkable – dispensed from a large and perpetually 
brewing cauldron, it mostly tasted of rubber gaskets. Thereafter, 
coff ee was the one foodstuff I insisted on bringing from home. 
My last mission to Antarctica was to South Korea’s Jang Bogo 
station, close to Mount Melbourne, another lofty frozen volcano. Notes 339
I loved it on-base – it was so quiet, with just fi fty residents, and 
there was a professional barista coff ee machine.
26 Pee fl ags were phased out to protect the environment in my later 
fi eld seasons with the U.S. Antarctic Program. All human waste 
had to be contained and shipped off the continent. Some say it 
is processed into fertiliser and biofuel in the U.S. Whatever 
happens, the barrels have to cross the equator on that voyage, 
and I wouldn’t want to walk past them aboard the ship.
27 We all noticed the altitude at Fang – just moving gear from the 
helicopter to the tents had me gasping for air.
Some took Diamox to prevent acute mountain sickness. I 
tried it once and can vouch for its diuretic action. It was quite 
unwelcome in my case as I was in my sleeping bag and using a 
‘pee bottle’ (standard equipment for all in fi eld parties, issued in 
McMurdo). I fi lled it at such an alarming rate that there was no 
time to pull back. After that, my pals thoughtfully made up a 
mini ‘spill kit’ for me, complete with a funnel, extra bottle and a 
folding containment berm.
28 D. Sweeney et al., ‘Sulfur dioxide emissions and degassing 
behavior of Erebus volcano, Antarctica’, Journal of Volcanology 
and Geothermal Research 177 (2008): 725–733.
29 P. J. Fraser, ‘Global and Antarctic ozone depletion: A rebuttal 
of the critics’, Clean Air: Journal of the Clean Air Society of 
Australia and New Zealand 24, no. 4 (1990): 139–143. C. 
Oppenheimer, ‘Atmospheric chemistry of an Antarctic 
volcanic plume’, Journal of Geophysical Research, 115, D04303 
(2010): doi:10.1029/2009JD011910.
30 In the 1970s, Phil had worked on Erebus with a brilliant German 
geochemist, Werner Giggenbach. His volcanic gas sampling 
apparatus became known as the Giggenbach bottle. I have lived 
by his creed: ‘Nature only reveals her secrets if we ask the right 
questions and listen, and listening in geochemistry means 
sampling, analyzing, plotting’. See: W. F. Giggenbach, ‘Magma 340 Mountains of Fire
degassing and mineral deposition in hydrothermal systems 
along convergent plate boundaries’, Economic Geology 87 (1992): 
1,927–1,944.
31 Courrejolles was an engineer living in Hispaniola. He lost a 
mass of unpublished manuscripts, ‘the fruit of thirty years 
labour in the arts and sciences’ during the Haitian revolution. 
‘Nothing but experience, observation, and comparison  . . . 
can conduct us with wisdom in our researches,’ he wrote. The 
title of his paper is inspired: F. Courrejolles, ‘Observations 
which seem to prove the Necessity of observing and meditat￾ing a long time before any decisive opinion is formed in 
Philosophy in general, and particularly in regard to the cause 
of earthquakes’, The Philosophical Magazine 12 (1802): 
337–346.
32 C. Oppenheimer et al., ‘Pulsatory magma supply to a phonolite 
lava lake’, Earth and Planetary Science Letters 284 (2009): 
392–398.
33 You might wonder why we couldn’t use a laser ranger for this – 
we tried, but we just couldn’t get a return off the lava surface due 
to the fumes. See: N. J. Peters et al., ‘Radar altimetry as a robust 
tool for monitoring the active lava lake at Erebus volcano, 
Antarctica’, Geophysical Research Letters 45 (2018): 8,897–8,904.
34 The explanation developed from the observations I was 
involved in of cyclic lava fountains at Fagradalsfjall, Iceland, in 
2021. See: S. Scott et al., ‘Near-surface magma fl ow instability 
drives cyclic lava fountaining at Fagradalsfjall, Iceland’, Nature 
Communications in review. 
35 I like how the Irish geologist, Edward Hull, put it in his volcano 
book: ‘Macroscopic and microscopic observations have to go 
hand in hand in the study of volcanic phenomena’. E. Hull, 
Volcanoes: past and present, (London: Walter Scott, 1892).
36 My studies took me to the labs at Arizona State University to 
initiate experiments on Erebus rocks with Kayla Iacovino. The Notes 341
aim was to fi gure out how much water and carbon dioxide the 
parent magmas beneath the volcano could hold. I’d spoon 
minute quantities of powdered lava, water and oxalic acid 
(which yields CO2 on heating) into miniscule gold capsules. 
Their lids had then to be sealed using a spot welder. A leaky join 
would ruin the experiment, as would overcooking the sample 
under the blinding arc. It took a while for me to fi nd the dexter￾ity needed to manipulate the electrode tip, seen through a binoc￾ular microscope. The tiny cans were then loaded individually 
into an apparatus called a piston cylinder capable of imposing 
phenomenal pressures and cooking at magmatic temperatures. 
Experiments were carried out at diff erent temperatures and 
pressures to determine how much water and CO2 dissolved into 
the molten rock in each case. K. Iacovino et al., ‘H2O–CO2 solu￾bility in mafi c alkaline magma: applications to volatile sources 
and degassing behavior at Erebus volcano, Antarctica’, 
Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology 166 (2013): 845–860.
37 Y. Moussallam et al., ‘Tracking the changing oxidation state of 
Erebus magmas, from mantle to surface, driven by magma 
ascent and degassing’, Earth and Planetary Science Letters 393 
(2014): 200–209.
38 C. Oppenheimer et al., ‘Mantle to surface degassing of alkalic 
magmas at Erebus volcano, Antarctica’, Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters 306 (2011): 261–271.
39 Y. Moussallam et al., ‘Experimental phase-equilibrium 
constraints on the phonolite magmatic system of Erebus 
volcano, Antarctica’, Journal of Petrology 54 (2013): 1,285–1,307; 
Y. Moussallam et al., ‘Megacrystals track magma convection 
between reservoir and surface’, Earth and Planetary Science 
Letters 413 (2015): 1–12.
40 I had speculated on this process with Peter Francis a long time 
ago. P. Francis et al., ‘Endogenous growth of persistently active 
volcanoes’, Nature 366 (1993): 554–557.342 Mountains of Fire
41 For example: D. Stewart, ‘Petrography of some erratics from 
Cape Royds, Ross Island, Antarctica’, American Mineralogist 44 
(1959): 1,159–1,168.
42 Bar Dickason and Debenham, who were suff ering from altitude 
sickness, and so remained at the Fang Glacier mapping and 
geologising.
Gran built a cairn on the crater rim in which they would leave 
a time capsule, and then he and Priestley started taking photo￾graphs. On the way back down, the men realised they had acci￾dentally put a tin containing exposed fi lms in the cairn. Gran 
went to retrieve it. Priestley was just approaching the base of the 
summit cone when there was an ear-splitting boom. Turning on 
his heels, he saw lava bombs whiz through the air then fi zz in the 
snow. Gran was not to be seen. Priestley raced back up fearing 
the worst. He had just reached the crater lip when a nonplussed 
but essentially unimpaired Gran appeared from a cloud of 
steam. The Norwegian later said of the experience that it was 
‘disagreeable in the extreme’.
43 The site, along with another that I located below the Fang 
Glacier camp, is now inscribed as a Historic Site and Monument, 
and protected under the Antarctic Treaty.
44 F. Debenham, ‘The future of polar exploration’, The Geographical 
Journal 57 (1921): 182-200.
45 We titled our research project ‘Mount Erebus Volcano 
Observatory’, another variation on the observatory theme.
46 In ‘the fi rst book ever written, printed, illustrated and bound in 
the Antarctic’: E. H. Shackleton et al., Aurora Australis, ‘printed 
at the sign of “the penguins” ’. See note 1 of this chapter.
The Volcano and You
1 Artwork by W. Simpson, ‘Sketches of Mount Vesuvius’, The 
Illustrated London News 60, No. 1706 (1872): 479–481.Notes 343
2 This was from a lovely card I received, decorated with Lucy’s 
painting of an erupting volcano.
3 Around 1,350 active volcanoes are documented. S. Freire et al., 
‘An improved global analysis of population distribution in prox￾imity to active volcanoes, 1975–2015’, ISPRS International 
Journal of Geo-Information 8, 341. (2019): doi:10.3390/
ijgi8080341
4 Admittedly, Baiæ also had a reputation for raucous beach parties 
and amorous encounters, and the lure of debauchery was perhaps 
as strong as that of therapy. L. Giacomelli and R. Scandone, 
‘History of the exploitation of thermo-mineral resources in Campi 
Flegrei and Ischia, Italy’, Journal of Volcanology and Geothermal 
Research 209 (2012): 19–32. A. Costa et al., ‘The long and inter￾twined record of humans and the Campi Flegrei volcano (Italy)’, 
Bulletin of Volcanology 84 (2022): 1–27.
Of course, we enjoyed our balneological experiences so 
much, we invented the bathroom – if you can’t get to the volcano, 
bring the volcano into your home.
5 The Illustrated London News 60, No. 1706 (1872): 479–481.
6 F. V. Hayden, ‘The Yellowstone National Park’, American Journal 
of Science and Arts 3 (1872): 294–297. R. Nash, ‘The American 
invention of national parks’, American Quarterly 22, (1970): 
726–735.
7 Attracting visitors to potentially dangerous volcanic areas 
demands that eff ective risk management operations are in place. 
There have been tragic incidents on active volcanoes, including 
the 2019 disaster at Whakaari (White Island), New Zealand, 
which claimed the lives of 22 tourists and guides. See: P. Erfurt, 
‘Volcano Tourism and Visitor Safety: Still Playing with Fire? A 
10-Year Update’, Geoheritage 14, 56 (2022).
8 T. J. Casadevall et al., ‘Protecting our global volcanic estate: 
review of international conservation eff orts’, International 
Journal of Geoheritage and Parks 7 (2019): 182–191.344 Mountains of Fire
9 E. Pijet-Migoń and P. Migoń, ‘Geoheritage and cultural
heritage—A review of recurrent and interlinked themes’, 
Geosciences 12(2) 98 (2022): doi:10.3390/geosciences12020098. 
T. A. Semeniuk, ‘The Hornsby Quarry geosite, NSW, 
Australia—A geoheritage treasure’, Land 11, 2124 (2022).
10 A nomination from Pyongyang for Mount Paektu is under 
consideration. The volcano’s biodiversity is already recognised 
with UNESCO Biosphere Reserves designated on each side of 
the frontier running through the crater.
11 In tandem with the geoparks movement, there are museums, 
exhibitions, festivals, fi lms and excursion guides that seek to 
elevate our understanding of volcanoes. There’s even a proposal 
to designate the 10th of April – the day of Tambora’s great convul￾sion – as an ‘international day of volcanoes’. And here are my top 
ten volcano fi lms: Stromboli (1949/50), La Soufrière (1977), 
Dante’s Peak (1997), El Valle sin Sombras (2015), Ascent (2016), 
Into the Inferno (2016), Volcano: what does a lake dream? (2019), 
Merapi (2021), The Fire Within (2022), Fire of Love (2022).
12 I know, you’re thinking ‘but wasn’t that the asteroid’s fault?’. It 
is quite a conundrum – the formation of the Chicxulub impact 
crater in Yucatan, México, and the peak volcanism of the 
Deccan Traps, and the mass extinction all happen at about the 
same time, 66 million years ago. But there are several extinction 
events recognized from the fossil record of the past few hundred 
million years, and all coincide with massive lava fl oods, impli￾cating the associated gas emissions and climatic impacts of the 
eruptions as the primary cause. In the case of the Deccan, it is 
even speculated that the impact played a role in triggering the 
volcanism. See: T. Mittal et al., ‘Deccan volcanism at K-Pg 
time’, Geological Society of America Special Paper 557 (2022): 
471–496
13 The Elephanta caves are also inscribed on the World Heritage 
List. H. Sheth et al., ‘The volcanic geoheritage of the Elephanta Notes 345
caves, Deccan traps, Western India’, Geoheritage 9 (2017): 
359–372. G. Kaur et al., ‘The late Cretaceous-Paleogene Deccan 
traps: a potential global heritage stone province from India’, 
Geoheritage 11 (2019): 973–989.
14 On the bathing monkeys, see: R. Takeshita et al., ‘Benefi cial 
eff ect of hot spring bathing on stress levels in Japanese 
macaques’, Primates 59 (2018): 215–225.
15 B. M. Tebo et al., ‘Microbial communities in dark oligotrophic 
volcanic ice cave ecosystems of Mt. Erebus, Antarctica’, 
Frontiers in Microbiology 6, 179 (2015); H. Murtiyaningsih 
et al., ‘Selection of polymerase-producing thermophilic bacteria 
from Ijen Crater, East Java’, Indonesian Journal of Biotechnology 
and Biodiversity 6, (2022): 26–32.
16 D. Cook et al., ‘Peering into the fi re–An exploration of volcanic 
ecosystem services’, Ecosystem Services 55 (2022): 101435.
17 As well as the lighter elements in our bodies, all the others are 
products of volcanism – some found in the rocks, such as 
calcium, sodium and phosphorous; others in the gases, includ￾ing sulphur and chlorine. We don’t eat volcanoes or their emis￾sions, of course, but everything we tuck into derives ultimately 
from rock, water and gas. We simply rely on a complex food 
chain to turn the raw elements into something palatable and 
nutritious.
18 F. W. Junghuhn, ‘Licht- en Schaduwbeelden uit de binnenlanden 
van Java’, (Amsterdam: Günst, 1867).
19 D. H. MacDonald et al., ‘Cougar Creek: quantitative assessment 
of obsidian use in the Greater Yellowstone ecosystem’, American 
Antiquity 84, (2019): 158–178.
20 D. P. McGregor, ‘Pele vs. geothermal: A clash of cultures’, in 
Bearing Dreams, Shaping Vision: Asia Pacifi c American Facing the 
1990s (Seattle: Washington State University Press, 1993): 45–60; 
A. Shih, ‘The most perfect natural laboratory in the world: 
Making and knowing Hawaii National Park’, History of Science346 Mountains of Fire
57 (2019): 493–517; R. Stoffl e and K. Van Vlack, ‘Talking with a 
volcano: Native American perspectives on the eruption of 
Sunset Crater, Arizona’, Land 11, no. 2, 196 (2022).
21 P. Migoń and E. Pijet-Migoń, ‘The role of geodiversity and 
geoheritage in tourism and local development, in L. Kubalíková 
et al., (eds) Visages of Geodiversity and Geoheritage, Geological 
Society, London, Special Publications 530, (2023): doi: 10.1144/
SP530-2022-115.
22 F. A. Perret, ‘The Living Earth: A presentation of volcanology 
as a new and greater science’, Caribbean Center for Volcano Study, 
Publication No. 1, 1940.
23 Basalt is made up of around forty per cent oxygen by mass – but 
it is not so easy to unleash it from the rock.
24 H. Follmann and C. Brownson, ‘Darwin’s warm little pond 
revisited: from molecules to the origin of life’, Naturwissenschaften
96, no. 11 (2009): 1,265–1,292.
25 S. L. Miller, ‘Production of some organic compounds under 
possible primitive earth conditions’, Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 77 (1955): 2,351–2,361. A. P. Johnson et al., ‘The 
Miller volcanic spark discharge experiment’, Science 322 (2008): 
404. A. Lazcano and J. L. Bada, ‘The 1953 Stanley L. Miller 
experiment: fi fty years of prebiotic organic chemistry’, Origins of 
Life and Evolution of the Biosphere 33 (2003): 235–242. I. Fry, ‘The 
origins of research into the origins of life,’ Endeavour 30 (2006): 
24–28. A. Lazcano, ‘Historical development of origins research’, 
Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 2 (2010): a002089.
26 W. Hamilton, ‘IV. An account of the late eruption of Mount 
Vesuvius’, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of 
London 85 (1795): 73–116. See also: C. Cimarelli and K. 
Genareau, ‘A review of volcanic electrifi cation of the atmos￾phere and volcanic lightning’, Journal of Volcanology and 
Geothermal Research 422 (2022): 107449.Notes 347
27 M. D. Brasier et al., ‘Pumice as a remarkable substrate for the 
origin of life’, Astrobiology 11, (2011): 725–735.
28 Another possibility is that the precursors of life were delivered 
to geothermal pools by meteorites. Some space rocks contain 
amino acids (which make up proteins), lipid molecules (precur￾sors of cell membranes) and even sugars. For a deeper dive into 
the alternative theories, see: N. Kitada and S. Maruyama, 
‘Origins of building blocks of life: A review’, Geoscience Frontiers
9 (2018): 1,117–1,153.
29 W. Martin et al., ‘Hydrothermal vents and the origin of life’, 
Nature Reviews Microbiology 6, no. 11 (2008): 805–814.
Science fi ction-like images of the giant worms and crusta￾ceans thriving around the hot vents have now become familiar. 
Outlandish as they are, they are just specialized species of more 
familiar organisms. Photosynthesis is impossible in such deep, 
stygian waters. Instead, the food chain is supported by bacteria 
that harvest chemical energy from sulphur. For fascinating 
insights into their discovery, see: N. Oreskes, ‘A context of moti￾vation: US Navy oceanographic research and the discovery of 
sea-fl oor hydrothermal vents’, Social Studies of Science 33 (2003): 
697–742.
30 S. R. Gislason and E. H. Oelkers, ‘Carbon storage in basalt’, 
Science 344 (2014): 373–374.
31 D. E. Clark et al., ‘CarbFix2: CO2 and H2S mineralization during 
3.5 years of continuous injection into basaltic rocks at more 
than 250°C’, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 279 (2020): 
45–66.
32 R. Shaw and S. Mukherjee, ‘The development of carbon capture 
and storage (CCS) in India: A critical review’, Carbon Capture 
Science & Technology (2022): 100036.Index
Adams, Jameson 229
Allègre, Claude 77–8, 87
Altiplano plateau 45, 47, 51
Ambrose, Stanley 111
Antarctica
 author’s visit to 233–50
 early studies of Erebus 
223–33, 333–4
Antuco 39
Arabian Sands (Thesiger) 200
Aristophanes 332–3
Asih, Mbah 99
Australopithecus afarensis 175
Aylwin, Patricio 46
Bachelet, Michelle 45
Baker, Michael 199
Baiæ 253, 343
basalt 151–2, 255, 346
 and carbon capture 259–60
 hydration of 281
 genesis of 312
oxygen extraction from 257
Bassi, Laura 276
Beekman, Eric 96
Bergman, Ingrid 15–16, 30, 274
Berhe, Seife 178–9, 180, 192
Birds (Aristophanes) 332–3
Bishop, Serano 298–9
Black Harris 104
Bobadilla, Francisco de 6
Bomb vessels 225, 333
Book of Questions, The (Neruda) 
39
Booth, Walter 17
Borchgrevink, Carsten 335–6
Brocklehurst, Philip 229, 231, 
232
Bunsen, Robert 150–1, 162, 227, 
254, 315, 316, 319
Bűntgen, Ulf 318–19
Calbuco 46
calderas 51, 108, 189–91, 192, 
195–6, 214–15, 332
Campi Flegrei 253–4
Campi Phlegræi: Observations on 
the Volcanos of the Two Sicilies
(Hamilton) 18–19, 20, 254
Canary Islands 168–9
Castillo, Blás de 8–9
Chad
 author’s visit to 200–1, 204–5, 
207–19350 Mountains of Fire
 and Tibesti mountains 
199–216
 and Trou au Natron 197, 
211–13
Chaitén 41–4
Charles V, Emperor 6
Cheminée, Jean-Louis 325
Chile
 author’s visit to 46–50, 51–9
 Charles Darwin in 41–3
 Inca beliefs about volcanoes 
53–4
 number of volcanoes in 44
 volcanic activity in 44–59
Chŏngjong, King 140
Christian VIII, King 150
Chronicon Scotorum 158
Clausewitz, Carl von 106
climate change 103–4, 259–60, 
272, 298–31, 318–19
Columbus, Christopher 5
Concepción 41, 42, 43
Considerations on Volcanos
(Scrope) 35, 270, 277–9, 
334
Corcovado 42
Cordón Caulle 44
Cortés, Hernán 6, 266, 267–8
Cospec 75–6, 234, 288, 289
Courrejolles, François-Gabriel 
241, 340
Covelli, Nicola 36
cowpat lava 26
Craters of Fire (Tazieff ) 13
Crawford, John 271
Crawfurd, John 100, 101
cycles in volcanic activity 59, 72, 
73, 242–3
da Vinci, Leonardo 5
D’Abbadie, Antoine 324
D’Arezzo, Francesco 277
Darius, Frank 204, 213
Darwin, Charles 41–3, 224, 225, 
258
Darwin, Erasmus 149
David, Tannatt Edgeworth 
228–9, 231, 232, 237, 243, 
244, 334–5, 336, 337
Davila, Pedrarias 6
Davy, Humphry 35–6, 150, 254, 
279
Debenham, Frank 246, 248, 329
Déby, Idriss 219
Deccan Traps 255, 260, 314, 
344
Democratic People’s Republic of 
Korea (DPRK)
 author’s visit to 122–39
 importance of Paektu 119–22, 
124
dendroclimatology 158–9, 
311–12, 318
Dubbi 184–6, 188–9
Dunn, Michael 152, 153Index 351
earthquakes 41–4, 113
 and plate tectonics 265
 ‘Boxing Day’ 113
 Dubbi 184
 eruption precursor 284, 319
 eruption trigger 43–4, 113, 
241
 in Nicaragua 270
 Maule 43
 on Montserrat 70–2, 77, 80
 seismology 76–7
 Tōhoku 121
 Valdivia 44, 282
ecological recovery 127–8
Edinburgh Magazine, The 35
Eldfell 166, 320
Eldgjá 156–60
Emi Koussi 201, 216
Erebus 221
author’s visit to 233–50
 early studies of 223–33, 
333–4
Erebus (ship) 225
Eritrea
 author’s visit to 186–96
 confl ict with Ethiopia 179, 191
 and Dubbi 184–6, 188–9
 and Nabro 189, 191–6
 rifting in 178
Erta ‘Ale 324–6
eruption triggers
 earthquakes as 41–4, 113
 weather as 58–9, 284
Eruptions that Shook the World
(Oppenheimer) 100
Ethiopia
 author’s visit to 178–86, 325
 human prehistory in 175, 176
 obsidian in 173, 174
Etna 67, 150, 165–6, 224, 277
Eyjafjallajökull 148, 149
Fabris, Pietro 19
Fagradalsfjall 161–5
Fata Morgana (fi lm) 200
Ferdinand, King 18
Flint, Earl 270–1
Flight of the Phoenix, The (fi lm) 
200
Francis, Peter 283–4
Franklin, Benjamin 149, 160
Freeman, Edward 63–5
Gardeweg, Moyra 47, 48, 49, 51, 
54, 57
geochemical fi ngerprinting 174, 
176, 218
Geoparks, Global 254–5
Giggenbach, Werner 339–40
Goethe, Johann 18, 275
González-Ferrán, Oscar 47, 48, 
49
Grant, Beryl 75, 85, 292
Great Rift Valley, The (Gregory) 
177
Gregory, John Walter 177, 323352 Mountains of Fire
Gregory Rift 177, 323
Grove, Dick 200, 202, 208, 209, 
210, 218, 219, 329
Guadeloupe 77–9
Guzmán, Patricio 48
Hamilton, Sir William 254
 studies Vesuvius 17–19, 258
 and Lazzaro Spallanzani 20
 Susan Sontag on 275
Hammond, James 123, 130–1, 
132, 135, 137, 141, 192
Han Myong Il 136
Hang Myong Kim 125, 126, 132
Hawaiʻi 67–8, 166–8, 254, 256–7
Hawaiian Volcano Observatory 
4, 67–8, 166, 336
Hayes, Rutherford 105
Hekla 145, 149–56
Herculaneum 17
Herzog, Werner 135–7, 145, 200
Hill, Bob 336
History of the New World (Oviedo 
y Valdés) 7
Hooker, Joseph 227, 258, 334
Hovey, Edmonds 336
human prehistory 175–7, 192–6, 
215, 270–1, 321–2
Iacovino, Kayla 131–2
ice core records 300–1
Iceland 
 author’s visit to 161–5
 and Eldfell eruption 166
 and Eldgjá eruption 156–60
 and Fagradalsfjall eruption 
161–5
 and Hekla eruption 150–6
 volcanic activity in 147–8, 149
 sulphur exports from 149
ignimbrite 50–1
 Toba 109
indigenous knowledge 22, 92, 
114
Indonesia 256
 author’s visit to 92–4, 113–15
 Franz Wilhelm Junghuhn in 
95–6, 102, 112, 295–6
 and Merapi eruption 96–8
 super–eruption in 108–9
 and Tambora eruption 99–102
infrared radiometer 24–5
infrared spectrometer 75–6, 
163
Into the Inferno (fi lm) 135
Italy
 eff ect of Eldgjá eruption 159
 and Etna 67, 150, 165–6, 224, 
277
 and Stromboli 20–35, 37–8
 and Vesuvius 17–19, 35–6, 
65–7, 258
Iztaccíhuatl 6
Jaggar, Thomas 259, 336
 description of geology 4–5, 84Index 353
 and Frank Perret 67–8
 and lava diversions 167
Java 96–8, 101–2, 114–15, 256
Java, seine Gestalt (Junghuhn) 
89
Johnson, Edwin C. 16
Judd, John Wesley 334–5
Junghuhn, Franz Wilhelm 89
 early life and career 94–5
 in Indonesia 95–6, 102, 112, 
224, 256, 295–6
 and Tambora eruption 99
Katla 156
Keca, Srdan 204
Khalidi, Lamya 192, 193–4
Khruschev, Nikita 125
Kīlauea 166, 257
Kilimanjaro 5
Kim Il Sung 122, 124, 125
Kim Jong Il 122, 124, 131
Kim Jong Un 119, 124
Kim Ju Song 132, 133–4, 310
Kim Myong Sung 125–6
Kim, Hang Myong 125, 126, 
132
Kliuchevskoi 234
Krafl a 310–11
Krakatau 9–10, 128, 296, 
298–9
Kröpelin, Stefan 200–1, 202, 
204, 205–6, 209–11, 212, 
213, 214, 217, 218
Krýsuvík 151
Kuper, Jan 204, 213, 215
Kyle, Phil 234–5, 248
La Soufrière 77–9
La Soufrière (fi lm) 290
Laki 149
Lamb, Hubert 299
Landnámabók 152, 155
Landsat programme 55, 56, 58, 
59, 184, 283, 284
Láscar 46–59, 78
Last Days of Pompeii (fi lm) 17
lava bombs 26
lava diversions 165–8
lava fl ows 148–9, 314, 315–16
lava tubes 151–2, 153–6
Leakey, Mary 175
lithium extraction 49–50
Liu, Kosima 123, 142
Llaima 44
Machida, Hiroshi 119, 120, 140
Mackay, Alistair ‘the Mate’ 229, 
231, 337
magma, movement of 33–4, 
277–8
Malin, Mike 328
Mantegna, Andrea 5
mantle plumes 147–8, 312–13
Mao Zedong 122
Maridjan, Mbah 97, 98, 297
Marshall, Eric 229, 231354 Mountains of Fire
Masaya 6–9, 43, 76, 245, 269–70, 
271, 288–9
Matsuo, Sadao 10
Matteucci, Raff aele 66, 67
Mauna Loa 167, 257
Mawson, Douglas 229, 231, 
337
Mazama 273
McCormick, Robert 225, 333
McMurdo, Archibald 235
Meagher, Henry 70
Merapi 96–8, 112–13
Mercalli, Giuseppe 36–7, 287
Michelangelo 5
Millennium Eruption 120, 124, 
127, 129, 130, 133, 136, 
137–41
Miller, Stanley 258
Minchinmávida 42, 44
Miyake, Fusa 138
Monticelli, Teodoro 36
Montserrat 65, 70–7, 79–87, 
287–8
Moon Jae-in 119
Mount St Helens 127–8, 134, 
298
multiparameter monitoring 
86–7
Munzinger, Werner 182
Muratori, Ludovico 30, 31
Nabro 189, 191–6
Nacatime 7, 8
Nachtigal, Gustav 206–7, 208, 
214, 218
Natural History (Pliny the Elder) 
22, 174
Nature (journal) 200–1
Nazca plate 43
Nelson, Horatio 19
Neruda, Pablo 39
Neureiter, Norm 130
Nimbus II 24
Nimrod expedition 228–33, 
243–4
Nostalgia for the Light (film) 
48
nuées ardentes (burning clouds) 
65, 68–70, 75, 80–2, 83–4, 
86–7, 96, 98, 101–2, 113, 
189
obsidian 173–5, 192–5
Oliver, Jack 1
Ordás, Diego de 266–7
O’Reilly, Jessica 221
Osorno 42
Outerbridge, Mr 63
Oviedo y Valdés, Gonzalo 
Fernández de 5–6, 7–8, 
269–70, 317
Paektu 117
 author’s visit to 122–39
 importance of 119–22, 124
pāhoehoe lava 163Index 355
Palmieri, Luigi 36
Pedersen, Gro 164, 165
peléan eruptions 37, 65
Pelée 63–5, 68–70, 75, 86–7, 167, 
228, 336
Permenter, Jason 328
Perret, Frank A. 61, 242, 286
on Hawaiʻi 67–8, 166–7
 on Montserrat 70–3, 83, 84, 
86, 287–8
 optimism of 88
 and origins of life 257
 multiparameter monitoring 
86–7
 studies Pelée 68–70
studies Vesuvius 65–7
phreatic eruptions 58–9
Phillips, Owen 101
Pinatubo 103, 299–300
Pinochet, Augusto 46
Planck, Max 24
plate tectonics 42, 43, 265–6, 
281, 323
Playfair, Lambert 184, 185, 
186
plinian eruptions 37
Pliny the Elder 22, 174
Poetic Edda 159–60
Pompeii 17
Popocatépetl 1, 6, 267–8, 269
Priestley, Raymond 230, 244, 
246
Prior, George 333
pyroclastic surge 17, 69, 168, 
255
pyroducts 152
Quianlong, Emperor 121
radiocarbon dating 138–9
Raffl es, Sir Thomas Stamford 
100, 101
Reyrketilsson, Ásbjǫrn 156–7
Ri Kuk Hun 132, 134, 136
Ri Sol-Ju 117
Rift Valley 177–96
rifting 177–8
Roddam (ship) 63–5
Rogaski, Ruth 142
Ross, James Clark 224–8, 333–4
Rossellini, Roberto 15–16, 23, 
30, 274
Royal Vesuvius Observatory 36
Russell, Israel 336
Ryu Kum-Ran 123, 128, 136
Sahara Desert 202–3
St Pierre 63–4, 65, 68, 75, 86
Savage, Frank 82
Schythe, Jørgen Christian 315
Scott Polar Research Institute 
246
Scott, Robert Falcon 228
Scrope, George Poulett 35, 270, 
277–8, 334
second boiling 46356 Mountains of Fire
Senebier, Jean 276
Shackleton, Ernest 228–9, 336
Shelley, Mary 279
Sinabung 112–13
Smith, Kevin 153–5
Solfatara 5, 34, 254, 289
Sontag, Susan 171, 275
Soufrière Hills 70–4, 77–80, 
81–7, 289–90, 291–2
Spallanzani, Lazzaro 13, 19–22, 
32–5, 276
Sparks, Steve 47, 48, 49, 54, 56, 
320
Stefánsson, Árni 152, 153
Stone, Rich 123
Stromboli 13
author’s visit to 22–9, 37–8
 Frank Perret studies 67
 Haroun Tazieff studies 29–32
 Lazzaro Spallanzani studies 
20–2, 32–5
Stromboli: Land of God (fi lm) 
15–17, 23, 30, 31
strombolian activity 36–7, 
278–9
Suess, Eduard 323
sulphate aerosol 103–4, 108–9, 
158
Sumarti, Sri 98
super–eruptions 107–13, 305–6
Supervolcano (fi lm) 107
Surtsey 24
Surtshellir cave system 152–6
ultraviolet spectrometer 98, 162, 
234, 289 (see also Cospec)
Tajogaite 168–9
Tambora 99–103, 104–7, 302–3
Tang’un, King 121
Tazieff , Haroun 13, 29–32, 77–8, 
87, 276, 289–90, 320
Tenochtitlan 6, 267–8
Terror 238, 336
Terror (ship) 225, 227
Thesiger, Wilfred 179, 180, 197, 
200, 203, 213
Thingvellir National Park 156
Thurston, Lorrin 166–7
Tibesti mountains 199–216
Tiéroko 213–17
Tilho, Jean 330–1
Toba super–eruption 108–12, 
224, 303–4
Toussidé 207–11
Towada 119
Trou au Natron 197, 211–13
United States Geological Survey 
112
Valdivia earthquake 44–5
Verne, Jules 279
Vesuvian Apparatus 17
Vesuvius
 Frank Perret studies 65–7
 Humphry Davy studies 35–6Index 357
 Sir William Hamilton studies 
17–19, 258
Volcanic Ash Advisory Centres 
148, 313
volcanic gases 10, 33–4, 240–2, 
259, 288–9
Volcano Lover, The (Sontag) 171
Volcano: A Memoir (Weekes) 61
volcanoes
 and climate change 103–4, 
259–60, 272, 298–31, 
318–19
 ecosystems around 255–6
 eruption triggers 41–59
 and human prehistory 175–7, 
192–6, 270–1, 321–2
 origin of word 6
 and origins of life 257–9
 popularity of 253–4
 public perceptions of 4
 religious beliefs about 8
volcanology
 as applied science 11
 fi rst used as term 35
 start of as science 224
Voon 214–15, 218
vulcanian eruptions 37, 
Vulcano 5, 6, 269
Walker, Joseph 105
Waltershausen, Sartorius von 
150, 162, 224, 315–16
weather as eruption trigger 58–9
Weekes, Yvonne 61
Yellowstone 107–8, 112, 254
Younghusband, Francis 126–7, 
129, 141
