Table of Contents
Cover
Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
About the Authors
Preface
1 Introduction to Fault-Tolerant Machine Drives
1.1 Background of Fault-Tolerant Machine Drives
1.2 Frequent Faults in Electric Drives
1.3 Design Requirements of Fault-Tolerant Machine Drives
1.4 Current State-of-the-Art Techniques of Fault-Tolerant
Machine Drives
1.5 Scope and Outline of This Book
References
2 Multiple 3-Phase Fault-Tolerant Machine Drive with Segregated
Windings
2.1 Introduction
2.2 PMA-SynRM with Segregated Windings
2.3 Fault-Tolerant Capability Assessment
2.4 Analysis of Fault Operation Behavior
2.5 Summary
References
3 Design Optimization of Multiple 3-Phase Fault-Tolerant Machine
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Design Specifications
3.3 Design Optimization Process3.4 Selected Design Alternatives and Performance Comparison
3.5 Test Setup of Fault-Tolerant Machine Drives
3.6 Test Under Healthy Conditions
3.7 Test Under Fault Conditions
3.8 Summary
References
Notes
4 General Modeling Technique for Multiple 3-Phase Machine Drive
4.1 Introduction
4.2 General Modeling Technique for 3-Phase Winding Sets
4.3 Study on Model Accuracy and Computational Efficiency
4.4 General Modeling of Turn Fault
4.5 Study on Model Accuracy and Computational Efficiency
Under Turn Fault
4.6 Model Validation by Experimental Tests
4.7 Summary
References
5 Fault Detection Techniques for the Multiple 3-Phase Machine Drive
5.1 Introduction
5.2 Analysis of Fault Signal Under Open Circuit of an Inverter
Switch
5.3 Open-Circuit Fault Detection Design
5.4 Experimental Validation on Open-Circuit Fault Detection
5.5 Analysis of Turn Fault Signature
5.6 Turn Fault Detection Design
5.7 Experimental Validation on Turn Fault Detection
5.8 High-Frequency Signal-Based Turn Fault Detection
Techniques
5.9 Summary
References6 Postfault Control Strategies for Fault-Tolerant Machine Drives
6.1 Introduction
6.2 Postfault Optimal Torque Control Strategies for Multiphase
FSCW PM Machines
6.3 Simulation Validation on the Optimal Torque Control Strategy
6.4 Turn Fault Mitigation by Current Injection
6.5 Simulation Validation on the Current Injection Technique
6.6 Experimental Validation on the Current Injection Technique
6.7 Summary
References
7 Novel Segregated Windings with Enhanced Fault Tolerance for
Multiple 3-Phase Machine
7.1 Introduction
7.2 Multiple 3-Phase Machines with Four Alternative Segregated
Windings
7.3 FE Analysis of Machines with Five Segregated Winding
Configurations
7.4 Experimental Assessments of Machines with Five Segregated
Winding Configurations
7.5 Summary
References
Index
End User License Agreement
List of Tables
Chapter 1
Table 1.1 Potential faults occurring in an electric drive.
Chapter 2
Table 2.1 Specifications of the PMA-SynRM.Table 2.2 Summary of the faults in the machine drives.
Chapter 3
Table 3.1 Machine specifications.
Table 3.2 Leading parameters and losses of the initial sample.
Table 3.3 Design constraints of the machine.
Table 3.4 Parameters to be optimized.
Table 3.5 Key features of samples A and B.
Table 3.6 Performance comparison of samples A and B.
Table 3.7 Design parameters of samples A and B.
Chapter 5
Table 5.1 Faulty synthesized vector in six sub-sectors.
Table 5.2 Diagnostic rule.
Chapter 6
Table 6.1 Parameters of 5-phase fault-tolerant PM machine.
Table 6.2 Injected currents and resultant turn fault currents in six
differe...
Table 6.3 Copper loss comparison between current injection,
denoted as CJ, a...
Table 6.4 Peak-to-peak value of residual flux linkage.
Chapter 7
Table 7.1 Comparisons of winding factors with star, delta, and
star-delta co...
Table 7.2 Machine specification and leading parameters.
Table 7.3 Performance comparison at rated healthy operation.
Table 7.4 Torque comparison under fault conditions
Table 7.5 Turn fault current, copper loss, and hotspot temperature.
Table 7.6 Overall performance comparison.List of Illustrations
Chapter 1
Figure 1.1 Illustration of a typical electric drive system.
Figure 1.2 Fault distribution in electrical drives: (a) machine side
and (b)...
Figure 1.3 3-Phase fault-tolerant machine drive: (a) full bridge
with DC mid...
Figure 1.4 3-Phase machine using open-end winding drive (a)
with independent...
Figure 1.5 Multiphase (5-phase for illustration) fault-tolerant
machine driv...
Figure 1.6 Multiple 3-phase fault-tolerant machine drive: (a) dual
3-phase a...
Figure 1.7 SRM machine drive.
Figure 1.8 Multiphase FSCW fault-tolerant machine drive.
Figure 1.9 Multiple 3-phase FSCW fault-tolerant machine drive.
Figure 1.10 Open-circuit fault illustration: (a) switch open-circuit
fault a...
Figure 1.11 Fault-tolerant control diagram of seven-phase motor.
Chapter 2
Figure 2.1 PMA-SynRM with conventional overlapped windings.
Figure 2.2 PMA-SynRM with segregated windings.
Figure 2.3 Torque and spectrum in healthy condition: (a) torque
waveform and...
Figure 2.4 Flux distribution in healthy condition.
Figure 2.5 Flux density distribution in healthy condition.
Figure 2.6 Phase flux linkages in healthy condition.
Figure 2.7 Efficiency map under rated power operation region.Figure 2.8 Torque with set ABC open-circuited (a) torque
waveforms and (b) t...
Figure 2.9 Flux distribution with set ABC open circuited.
Figure 2.10 Faulty phase flux linkages with set ABC open
circuited.
Figure 2.11 Healthy phase flux linkages with set ABC open
circuited.
Figure 2.12 Short-circuit phase currents.
Figure 2.13 Flux distribution with set ABC short circuited.
Figure 2.14 Faulty phase flux linkages with set ABC short
circuited.
Figure 2.15 Healthy phase flux linkages with set ABC short
circuited.
Figure 2.16 Torque with set ABC short-circuited (a) torque
waveforms and (b)...
Figure 2.17 Illustration of intraphase turn fault.
Figure 2.18 Coil location of the fault turn.
Figure 2.19 Turn fault current in coil B2 with 120 A load current
at 4000 rp...
Figure 2.20 Flux distribution with turn fault in coil B2.
Figure 2.21 Variations of RMS turn fault currents in six coils with
load cur...
Figure 2.22 Turn fault current and phase currents in ABC with
turn fault in ...
Figure 2.23 Flux distribution in turn fault condition after TSC.
Figure 2.24 Comparison of torque waveforms under healthy and
turn fault cond...
Figure 2.25 Variations of RMS turn fault currents in six coils with
load cur...Figure 2.26 Phase-to-phase insulation in the overhang region.
Figure 2.27 Interphase turn fault illustration.
Figure 2.28 Illustration of interphase fault (a) at the terminal end
and (b)...
Figure 2.29 Interphase faults at the neutral end with TSC
mitigation action....
Figure 2.30 Short-circuit currents of the interphase turn faults (a)
phases ...
Figure 2.31 Schematic of TN grounding system of an electric
drive.
Figure 2.32 Schematic of IT grounding system of an electric
drive.
Figure 2.33 Ground fault current path caused by single point
breakdown of ph...
Figure 2.34 Line back-emf at max speed 19,200 rpm.
Figure 2.35 Illustration of loss of inverter synchronization.
Figure 2.36 PM demagnetization BH curve.
Figure 2.37 Output torque after demagnetization fault.
Figure 2.38 Turn functions of the nine-phase winding coils.
Figure 2.39 Winding function of coil A1.
Figure 2.40 MMFs produced by each 3-phase set.
Figure 2.41 MMF produced by set ABC.
Figure 2.42 MMF in set ABC open-circuit condition.
Figure 2.43 dq0 axis flux linkages of set DEF with set ABC open
circuited.
Figure 2.44 Torque waveform with set ABC open circuited.
Figure 2.45 MMF and abs(MMF) offset component of set DEF
when set ABC open c...Figure 2.46 dq axis currents of set DEF with set ABC open
circuited.
Figure 2.47 dq axis voltages of set DEF with set ABC open
circuited.
Figure 2.48 Short-circuit currents in set ABC.
Figure 2.49 Positive and negative sequence components of the
short-circuit c...
Figure 2.50 Phase flux linkages of set ABC when it is terminal
short circuit...
Chapter 3
Figure 3.1 Required torque speed operation envelope.
Figure 3.2 Flow chart of SSO optimization process.
Figure 3.3 Flux maps of ψd
 and ψq
 versus id
 and iq
.
Figure 3.4 Flow chart of full machine model integration.
Figure 3.5 Illustration of spiral cooling jacket.
Figure 3.6 Evaluated temperature rise in Motor-CAD.
Figure 3.7 Lumped parameter thermal model of the machine.
Figure 3.8 Lumped parameter thermal model for turn fault.
Figure 3.9 Geometry parameter definitions of the PMA-SynRM.
Figure 3.10 Efficiencies of the design samples during design
iteration.
Figure 3.11 Cross sections of samples A and B.
Figure 3.12 Stator and rotor stack: (a) stator stack and (b) rotor
stack. Wa...
Figure 3.13 Machine windings and terminal leads: (a) segregated
windings and...
Figure 3.14 Terminal connection of the three 3-phase sets: (a) set
ABC, (b) ...Figure 3.15 Real test bench: (a) 9-phase PMA-SynRM with dyno
and (b) 9-phase...
Figure 3.16 Comparison of phase back-emf waveforms at 4000
rpm.
Figure 3.17 Comparison of line back-emf waveforms at 4000
rpm: (a) line back...
Figure 3.18 Phase currents of set ABC at 4000 rpm with three 3-
phase sets sh...
Figure 3.19 Phase currents of set ABC at 4000 rpm in healthy
condition, x-ax...
Figure 3.20 9-phase currents at 4000 rpm in healthy condition.
Figure 3.21 Illustration of current vector and gamma angle γ.
Figure 3.22 Torque variations with current magnitude and gamma
angle.
Figure 3.23 Torque comparison in healthy condition.
Figure 3.24 Reluctance torque ratio against the current
magnitude.
Figure 3.25 Measured machine efficiency map up to 12,000 rpm.
Figure 3.26 Comparison of measured and predicted machine
efficiency at 4000 ...
Figure 3.27 Thermal test results with 120 A at 4000 rpm in
healthy condition...
Figure 3.28 Healthy phase currents at 4000 rpm with set ABC
open circuited....
Figure 3.29 Torque comparison with set ABC open circuited.
Figure 3.30 Illustration of TSC in the inverter side.
Figure 3.31 Torque comparison with set ABC short circuited.
Figure 3.32 Short-circuit phase currents at 4000 rpm.Figure 3.33 Healthy phase currents at 4000 rpm with set ABC
short circuited....
Figure 3.34 Test setup of interturn short-circuit fault: (a) cable
leads and...
Figure 3.35 Turn fault current with 80 A load current at 1000 rpm.
Figure 3.36 Turn fault current variations in coil B2 and A1 at
1000 rpm in m...
Figure 3.37 Turn fault current in coil B2 and phase currents of set
ABC with...
Figure 3.38 Healthy phase currents with turn fault in coil B2
when load curr...
Figure 3.39 Turn fault current variations in coil B2 and A1 at
4000 rpm in m...
Figure 3.40 Thermal test results under single-turn fault in coil B2
with 120...
Chapter 4
Figure 4.1 Illustration of turn fault location in a slot and phase
winding....
Figure 4.2 MMF produced by set ABC.
Figure 4.3 MMFs produced by sets DEF and GHI.
Figure 4.4 One 3-phase module and its MMF in the air gap.
Figure 4.5 General modeling diagram.
Figure 4.6 Full machine model for 4D table generation.
Figure 4.7 General model integrated with voltage equations and
current contr...
Figure 4.8 Comparison of predicted torque by two models in
healthy condition...
Figure 4.9 Comparison of predicted phases ABC flux linkages by
two models in...Figure 4.10 Comparison of predicted torques by two models in
open-circuit co...
Figure 4.11 Comparison of predicted flux linkages of healthy
DEF set by two ...
Figure 4.12 MMF offset component of set ABC under open￾circuit condition.
Figure 4.13 Comparison of predicted torques by two models in
short-circuit c...
Figure 4.14 Comparison of predicted short-circuit currents by two
models.
Figure 4.15 Comparison of predicted flux linkages in the short￾circuit set b...
Figure 4.16 Comparison of predicted flux linkages in healthy
DEF set by two ...
Figure 4.17 MMF offset component under short-circuit condition.
Figure 4.18 Comparison of predicted flux linkages of set ABC by
two models....
Figure 4.19 Comparison of predicted torque in unbalanced current
operation b...
Figure 4.20 Comparisons of dq-axis quantities of (a) flux linkages
and (b) t...
Figure 4.21 Comparisons of dq-axis quantities with 50% increase
in phase res...
Figure 4.22 Schematic circuit for set ABC with turn fault in phase
B.
Figure 4.23 MMF phasors of phase B.
Figure 4.24 Derivation process of flux linkage of fault turn.
Figure 4.25 Flux linkage distribution induced by the MMF offset
component.
Figure 4.26 AC component phasors of flux linkages.Figure 4.27 Illustration of the slot position and leakage flux of the
fault ...
Figure 4.28 General model integrated with turn fault model.
Figure 4.29 Illustration of turn fault simulation in FE: (a) set ABC
without...
Figure 4.30 Comparison of predicted turn fault current when it
occurs in coi...
Figure 4.31 Comparison of predicted phase flux linkages when it
occurs in co...
Figure 4.32 Comparison of predicted torques when it occurs in
coil B2 withou...
Figure 4.33 Comparison of predicted turn fault current when it
occurs in coi...
Figure 4.34 Comparison of predicted turn fault current when it
occurs in coi...
Figure 4.35 Comparison of predicted phase currents with turn
fault in coil B...
Figure 4.36 Comparison of predicted torques with turn fault in
coil B2 with ...
Figure 4.37 Comparison of predicted turn fault current when it
occurs in coi...
Figure 4.38 Comparison of predicted phase currents of faulty set
with fault ...
Figure 4.39 Comparison of measured and predicted currents in
healthy mode.
Figure 4.40 Comparison of measured and predicted voltages in
healthy mode.
Figure 4.41 Comparison of measured and predicted torques in
healthy conditio...
Figure 4.42 Comparison of measured and predicted currents in
open-circuit mo...Figure 4.43 Comparison of measured and predicted dq voltages in
open-circuit...
Figure 4.44 Comparison of measured and predicted torques in
open-circuit con...
Figure 4.45 Comparison of measured and predicted short-circuit
currents.
Figure 4.46 Comparison of measured and predicted currents in
healthy DEF set...
Figure 4.47 Comparison of measured and predicted voltages in
healthy DEF set...
Figure 4.48 Comparison of measured and predicted torques in
short-circuit co...
Figure 4.49 Comparison of measured and predicted phase
currents in set ABC u...
Figure 4.50 Comparison of measured and predicted voltages
under unbalanced c...
Figure 4.51 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault
currents when a ...
Figure 4.52 Comparison of measured and predicted phase
currents in fault set...
Figure 4.53 Comparison of measured and predicted dq-axis
control voltages in...
Figure 4.54 Comparison of measured and predicted phase
currents in healthy D...
Figure 4.55 Comparison of measured and predicted dq-axis
control voltages in...
Figure 4.56 Measured and predicted turn fault current variations
with health...
Figure 4.57 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault
currents at 50 A...Figure 4.58 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault
current variatio...
Figure 4.59 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault
currents with tu...
Figure 4.60 Comparison of measured and predicted short-circuit
phase current...
Figure 4.61 Comparison of measured and predicted phase current
in DEF health...
Figure 4.62 Comparison of measured and predicted control output
voltages in ...
Figure 4.63 Comparison of measured and predicted rms turn fault
current vari...
Figure 4.64 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault
currents when it...
Figure 4.65 Comparison of measured and predicted rms turn fault
current vari...
Chapter 5
Figure 5.1 One 3-phase module with T1
 open-circuit fault.
Figure 5.2 Current flow paths under healthy condition and T1
open-circuit fa...
Figure 5.3 Space vectors in healthy condition and T1
 open circuit:
(a) healt...
Figure 5.4 The relative αβ coordinate systems with respect to the
...
Figure 5.5 Fault detection waveforms when T1
 is open circuited:
(a) phase cu...
Figure 5.6 Fault detection waveforms when T4
 is open circuited:
(a) phase cu...
Figure 5.7 Fault detection waveforms during a step increase in
load current:...Figure 5.8 Fault detection waveforms during a step decrease in
load current:...
Figure 5.9 Influence of machine parameters on the voltage
residuals during d...
Figure 5.10 Integrated test with fault mitigation strategy: (a)
phases ABC c...
Figure 5.11 Schematic circuit for set ABC with turn fault in phase
A.
Figure 5.12 Simplified dq-axis current control loops in a 3-phase
drive.
Figure 5.13 Comparison of 2nd harmonics in IAP and IRP: (a)
motoring mode an...
Figure 5.14 Comparison 2nd harmonics of faulty and healthy sets:
(a) IRP in ...
Figure 5.15 Fault detection diagram in motoring mode.
Figure 5.16 Turn fault current when the drive operates at 1000
rpm and 100 A...
Figure 5.17 Measured currents and voltages before and after turn
fault: (a)
Figure 5.18 IAP and IRP before and after turn fault: (a)
instantaneous value...
Figure 5.19 Measured IAP and IRP in generating mode: (a)
instantaneous value...
Figure 5.20 Detection ratio at 500 and 1000 rpm in motoring
(M500, M1000) an...
Figure 5.21 Detection zone under (a) motoring mode and (b)
generating mode....
Figure 5.22 idq response and 2nd harmonic of IRP in transient (a)
idq (b) 2n...Figure 5.23 idq response and 2nd harmonic of IRP in transient
with turn faul...
Figure 5.24 Current responses during fault detection and
mitigation test: (a...
Figure 5.25 Scheme of HF voltage injection.
Figure 5.26 Diagnosis process of turn fault under different
operating condit...
Chapter 6
Figure 6.1 Schematic of 5-phase 10s12p fault-tolerant FSCW PM
machine.
Figure 6.2 Measured and predicted waveforms of phase back-emf
and cogging to...
Figure 6.3 Output torque under open-circuit and short-circuit
conditions wit...
Figure 6.4 Current, voltage, back-emf, and torque waveforms
under a short-ci...
Figure 6.5 Current, voltage, emf, and torque waveforms under a
short-circuit...
Figure 6.6 Phasors of the subcoils in phase A.
Figure 6.7 MMF produced by the healthy set currents.
Figure 6.8 MMF produced by the fault set currents.
Figure 6.9 MMF AC and offset components in the fault set.
Figure 6.10 Illustration of current injection used in FE simulation
of turn ...
Figure 6.11 Fault current waveforms with current inject technique
when a sin...
Figure 6.12 Residual flux linkages under TSC application.
Figure 6.13 Residual flux linkages under current injection.
Figure 6.14 Illustration of the slot position of the fault turn.Figure 6.15 Turn fault currents when the fault occurs in two
different slot ...
Figure 6.16 Turn fault currents with four different numbers of
faulted turns...
Figure 6.17 Output torques under different mitigation strategies
considering...
Figure 6.18 Torque contribution of different set regions under two
mitigatio...
Figure 6.19 Simulated turn fault current in coil A1 at 19,200 rpm
under curr...
Figure 6.20 Schematic of the proposed current injection control
diagram.
Figure 6.21 Fault current and phase currents in set ABC (a) with
TSC and (b)...
Figure 6.22 Phase currents in sets DEF and GHI (a) with TSC and
(b) with cur...
Figure 6.23 Rms turn fault current variation with healthy set
currents with ...
Figure 6.24 Variations of torques with the load currents at 4000
rpm in diff...
Figure 6.25 Fault current and phase currents: (a) fault current and
phase cu...
Figure 6.26 Rms turn fault current variations with healthy set
currents with...
Figure 6.27 Variations of postfault torque with healthy set
currents with tu...
Figure 6.28 Current waveforms from integrated test of turn fault
injection, ...
Chapter 7
Figure 7.1 Triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM with star￾connected windings a...Figure 7.2 Phase flux linkages in phases A, B, and C after TSC
application: ...
Figure 7.3 Flux linkages of six subcoils in ABC set after TSC.
Figure 7.4 Star-delta winding connection, W3.
Figure 7.5 Triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM with mixed￾pitch windings, W4....
Figure 7.6 Turn functions of the six coils in the ABC set of W4.
Figure 7.7 MMF profile produced by ABC set of W4.
Figure 7.8 Triple 3-phase PMA-SynRM with concentric
windings, W5.
Figure 7.9 Space vectors of the six coils in phases ABC (a) W1
and (b) W5.
Figure 7.10 Comparison of no-load phase flux linkages of W1
and W5 configura...
Figure 7.11 Comparison of no-load coil flux linkages of W1 and
W5 configurat...
Figure 7.12 Line currents and induced zero-sequence currents.
Figure 7.13 Comparison of torque waveforms of the five
machines in rated hea...
Figure 7.14 Comparison of torque waveforms of the five
machines in open-circ...
Figure 7.15 Open-circuit fault in phase A winding for delta
configuration (W...
Figure 7.16 Phase current vectors in healthy and phase A open￾circuited cond...
Figure 7.17 Comparison of torque waveforms of the five
machines in short-cir...
Figure 7.18 Induced short-circuit currents for the five machines,
from top t...Figure 7.19 Variations of turn fault current with load current and
fault loc...
Figure 7.20 Variations of turn fault current with load current and
fault loc...
Figure 7.21 Variations of turn fault current with load current and
fault loc...
Figure 7.22 Variations of turn fault current with load current and
fault loc...
Figure 7.23 Variations of turn fault current with load current and
fault loc...
Figure 7.24 Turn fault current waveforms of the worst cases for
the five win...
Figure 7.25 Thermal distribution prediction of the five machines:
(a) W1, (b...
Figure 7.26 Stators and winding ptototypes of the five machines:
(a) W1 and ...
Figure 7.27 Established experimental test platform of the five
machines: (a)...
Figure 7.28 Measured phase back-emfs of the machines with
winding configurat...
Figure 7.29 Measured torque variations with current magnitude
and gamma angl...
Figure 7.30 Output torque variations with load current under
MTPA operation ...
Figure 7.31 Measured torque waveforms of five machines at 10
rpm with rated ...
Figure 7.32 Measured line currents of the five machines: (a) W1,
(b) W2, (c)...
Figure 7.33 Measured currents under rated healthy operation: (a)
phase curre...Figure 7.34 Measured line currents of the five machines with
winding configu...
Figure 7.35 Measured currents when phases ABC are open
circuited: (a) curren...
Figure 7.36 Variations of the output torques with the load currents
for the ...
Figure 7.37 Measured line currents of five machines with winding
configurati...
Figure 7.38 Measured currents when ABC phases are short
circuited: (a) phase...
Figure 7.39 Variations of the output torques with the load currents
for the ...
Figure 7.40 Measured line currents and turn fault current in five
machines w...IEEE Press
445 Hoes Lane
Piscataway, NJ 08854
IEEE Press Editorial Board
Sarah Spurgeon, Editor-in-Chief
Moeness Amin
Jón Atli
Benediktsson
Adam Drobot
James Duncan
Ekram
Hossain
Brian
Johnson
Hai Li
James Lyke
Joydeep
Mitra
Desineni Subbaram
Naidu
Tony Q. S. Quek
Behzad Razavi
Thomas Robertazzi
Diomidis SpinellisMultiple 3-Phase Fault Tolerant
Permanent Magnet Machine
Drives
Design and Control
Bo Wang
Southeast University
China
Jiabin Wang
The University of Sheffield
United KingdomCopyright © 2025 by The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either
the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate
per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923,
(978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher
for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 111
River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Trademarks: Wiley and the Wiley logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without
written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by sales
representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not be
suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Further, readers
should be aware that websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when
this work was written and when it is read. Neither the publisher nor authors shall be liable for any
loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental,
consequential, or other damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States
at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our web
site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Applied for:
Hardback ISBN: 9781394252015
Cover Design: Wiley
Cover Image: © Bo WangTo all our colleagues and collaborators, past and present, who contributed
to and supported the research of fault-tolerant machine drives.About the Authors
Bo Wang received a Bachelor’s degree and a Master’s degree, in Electrical
Engineering, from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Nanjing, China, in 2009 and 2012, respectively, and a PhD in Electronic
and Electrical Engineering from the University of Sheffield, Sheffield,
United Kingdom (UK), in 2018.
From 2012 to 2014, he was a Senior Engineer at Delta Electronics Co. Ltd,
Nanjing, China. From 2017 to 2018, he was a Research Associate at the
Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. Since 2018, he has joined the School of Electrical
Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing, China, and now he is a full
professor. From 2020 to 2022, he joined Hong Kong Polytechnical
University, Hong Kong, China under the Hong Kong Scholar program.
He received several awards from the Xiaomi Young Scholarship, Hong
Kong Scholarship, and Zhishan Young Scholarship funding programs. He
is, currently, an editor of several technical journals, including IET Power
Electronics, Power Electronics and Drives, Chinese Journal of ElectricalEngineering, CES Transactions on Electrical Machines and Systems. His
research interests include permanent magnet machine drives, electric
traction, and fault-tolerant systems.
Jiabin Wang graduated with a Bachelor of Engineering degree in 1982 and
a Master of Engineering degree in 1986 from Jiangsu University,
Zhengjiang, China, and a PhD from the University of East London, London,
United Kingdom (UK), in 1996, all in electrical and electronic engineering.
Since February 2023, he has been an emeritus professor in Electrical
Engineering at the University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. From 1986 to
1991, he was with the Department of Electrical Engineering at Jiangsu
University, where he was appointed a lecturer in 1987 and an associated
professor in 1990. He was a postdoctoral research associate at the
University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK, from 1996 to 1997, and a senior
lecturer at the University of East London from 1998 to 2001. In 2002 he
joined the Electrical Machines and Drives Research group at the University
of Sheffield as a senior lecturer, became a reader in 2007, and a professor in
Electrical Engineering in 2010.
His research encompasses novel rotary and linear electrical machines and
drives, advanced control techniques for electrical drives, electrical power
trains, and “more-electric” technologies, with a particular focus on highintegrity, fault-tolerant, and high-efficiency electric drives and associated
condition-monitoring techniques for applications in aerospace, automotive,
and renewable energy systems.
He is a fellow of the Institute of Engineering and Technology, UK, and a
senior member of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers,
USA.Preface
Due to their high efficiency, zero-emission, good controllability, simple and
flexible physical layout, electrical machine drives are increasingly used in
transportation electrification, such as electric vehicles, railway traction,
marine and aerospace propulsion, and their actuations. However, electronic
and electrical components and cable interconnections are susceptible to
adverse operation conditions and environmental stresses, such as high
temperatures, and high levels of mechanical vibration and chemical erosion.
The failures are usually abrupt and may lead to catastrophic consequences
and considerable economic losses. Thus, high reliability and fault tolerance
are essential for electrical machine drives in safety-critical applications.
To achieve high reliability and desirable fault tolerance, many novel
machine topologies, such as multiphase machines and multiple 3-phase
machines with innovative stator and rotor configurations and power
electronic control, have been developed to cope with various electric faults,
such as open-circuit faults, short-circuit faults, and winding interturn short￾circuit faults as a result of insulation breakdown. Comprehensive and
computationally efficient fault modeling techniques have also evolved to
gain an in-depth understanding of various fault behaviors and to facilitate
the development of fault detection and postfault control strategies. In this
regard, effective fault detection is essential to identify the fault type, isolate
it, and enable an appropriate mitigation action for continued postfault
operations.
However, very few materials exist in the literature, which present a
comprehensive and integrated treatment of the design and control of fault￾tolerant machine drives, including the selection of fault-tolerant machine
topology, fault modeling, fault detection, and post-fault control considering
failures in both the machine and power inverter. The existing body of
knowledge on fault-tolerant machine drives is fragmented, mainly in
numerous technical journals and conference papers, which makes it difficult
to apply them effectively in engineering designs and further developments.
Thus, this book aims to fill this knowledge gap and address the pertinent
issues on the design, operation, modeling, and control of fault-tolerantmachine drives, including fault detection and mitigation, in a
comprehensive and integrated manner.
While various fault-tolerant machine drive topologies and technologies are
reviewed and discussed, this book focuses on the design and control of
multiple 3-phase fault-tolerant permanent magnet machine drives. The
conventional overlapped distributed 3-phase winding is reconfigured as
multiple nonoverlapped 3-phase winding modules, each driven by a
standard 3-phase inverter. Due to the segregated winding configuration and
independent drive for each 3-phase module, physical, electrical, and
thermal isolations are obtained in the multiple 3-phase subsystems of the
electrical drive. As a result, a failure in one 3-phase subsystem does not
significantly affect the operation of other healthy 3-phase subsystems. The
modular approach minimizes the risk of fault propagation to the other
subsystems, providing tolerance to various electric faults. By exploiting
reluctance torque in a permanent magnet machine with a multilayer rotor
topology, high torque density and the ability to tolerate short-circuit faults
can be achieved. This book introduces the fault-tolerant machine drive
system, analyses various fault behaviors, and presents comprehensive
design and fault modeling techniques, including fault detection, postfault
control, and alternative winding configurations for further reduction in
short-circuit currents. The methods and approaches described in the book
also apply to developing other fault-tolerant machine drives.
The authors have worked on developing fault-tolerant machine drive
technologies at Southeast University and the University of Sheffield for
more than 20 years and published over 50 SCI/EI-indexed papers on this
topic. This book organizes a selected collection of the research outcomes
and is arranged into seven chapters as outlined below.
Chapter 1 introduces the background knowledge and current state-of-the-art
fault-tolerant machine drives.
Chapter 2 describes the multiple 3-phase permanent magnet-assisted
synchronous reluctance machine with segregated windings and its ability to
tolerate various electric faults. It also analyzes the mutual magnetic
coupling among the 3-phase subsystems in the machine.
Chapter 3 presents the global design optimization process of the fault￾tolerant machine drive to achieve performance requirements in healthyoperations and the ability to tolerate worst-case fault scenarios, namely
inter-turn short circuits, which lead to the largest possible fault current.
Chapter 4 establishes a general modeling technique for operations in
healthy and various fault conditions and outlines the key characteristics of
fault behaviors.
Chapter 5 develops fast and reliable fault detection techniques, particularly
focusing on the detection of inter-turn short circuits at low speed.
Chapter 6 devises post-fault control strategies for fault-tolerant machine
drives to minimize torque ripple and fault current in worst-case conditions.
Chapter 7 proposes several alternative winding configurations for the
multiple 3-phase machine drive to reduce fault current in worst-case
conditions further.
The authors thank professors Cheng Ming, Hua Wei, Deng Fujin, Antonio
Griffo, and Zhao Wenxiang for their valuable suggestions on this book. The
authors also thank postgraduate researchers Mr. Feng Xiaobao and Mr. Wei
Zihan for their support in preparing this book.
Finally, the authors thank their families for their love and support in the
research and writing of this book.
      Bo Wang
Nanjing, China
Jiabin Wang
Sheffield, United Kindom1
Introduction to Fault-Tolerant Machine Drives
1.1 Background of Fault-Tolerant Machine Drives
Advanced electric drive systems are increasingly being used in a wide range
of applications from industrial automation, household appliances, and
transportation to oil and gas, mining, and renewable energy industries,
where efficient and reliable electric-to-mechanical energy conversion or
vice versa is essential. Extensive research activities on electrical drives have
been undertaken in both academic and industrial organizations [1]. A typical
electric drive is composed of a power converter, a control unit, and an
electric motor, generally known as an electric machine, as shown in Fig.
1.1. The power converter contains typically power electronic devices (i.e.
Insulate Gate Bipolar Transistor (IGBT), Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor
Field-Effect Transistor (MOSFET), SiC, and diode), gate drives, and
passive components (capacitor and damping resistors, etc.), which are
responsible for driving the motor. The control unit consists mainly of
microprocessor and its associated electronic circuitry in addition to various
sensors. The electric motor delivers controllable torque to a mechanical
payload by converting electrical power into mechanical power or vice
versa.
As advances emerge fast in the areas of materials, electric machine design
and manufacturing, power electronics, microprocessors, and sensing,
electrical drives are capable of delivering desirable features such as high￾power density, high efficiency, low emission, and good controllability,
compared to other counterparts, namely, mechanical, hydraulic, or
pneumatic drive/actuation systems [2]. Aircraft employing electrical
actuators, electrical propulsion, and power generation in the form of more
electric, hybrid, and full-electric aircraft can leverage the merits of weight
saving, economical fuel consumption, low CO2
 emission, increased
functionality, and less maintenance [3]. Another emerging example is the
electric vehicle (EV) replacing traditional internal combustion engine (ICE)
for low CO2
 and low harmful pollutant emissions [4, 5]. However, highreliability is also an essential requirement for these safety critical
applications, which should be addressed at the system design stage [6].
Figure 1.1 Illustration of a typical electric drive system.
In the aforementioned safety critical applications, the electrical drives are
expected to continue operation if a fault occurs, or at least being fail-safe
without catastrophic damage [7]. Otherwise, the unexpected fault may
cause casualties and huge economic losses [8]. Thus, fault tolerance should
be considered to attain the reliability requirement for the targeted
applications.
Fault tolerance means that the system is capable of performing at a
satisfactory level of operation in the presence of fault. It is a common
requirement that has been investigated in various areas, such as fault￾tolerant computing systems [9], distributed power systems [10], and high
availability internet servers. In the scope of electrical drives, the fault
tolerance mainly means it is capable of maintaining the original or an
acceptable output torque or power level after a fault. The acceptable level
defines the minimum output, which should be considered at the primary
design stage of such systems.
1.2 Frequent Faults in Electric Drives
An electrical drive is a complex electromechanical system composed of an
electronic controller, a power converter, an electric motor, and sensors.
These components are exposed to electrical, thermal, mechanical, and
environmental stresses as well as chemical corrosion. Fault may occur in
each of these components. Studies in [11, 12] have been carried out to
investigate the failure distribution of electric machines. The results of thesurvey show the bearing faults account for the majority of the failures, as
much as 51%, followed by stator winding faults, up to 25%. Other faults
such as rotor bars and end rings in induction machines, shafts, and other
unidentified failures take up the remaining percentage in Fig. 1.2(a). The
investigation data in [13] also illustrates that electrical winding failures
amount to a failure rate of 1.4 × 10−7 failures per hour in military-grade
machines and 1.0 × 10−6 in industrial machines. Since these surveys are
mainly focused on induction machines, permanent magnet (PM) failure in
permanent magnet synchronous machines (PMSMs) is not included. In fact,
partial demagnetization is a frequent fault for PM machines due to a strong
armature reaction field, overheating, and excessive mechanical stress and
vibration [14].
Figure 1.2 Fault distribution in electrical drives: (a) machine side and (b)
converter side.
A similar industry survey was conducted on failures in converters in [15].
The survey indicates that the most vulnerable component is the switching
devices, followed by capacitors and gate drive circuitry. Open circuit in one
phase due to device and connection failures is also a frequent fault. Failures
associated with resistors and inductors are quite rare and only observed in a
few applications, as shown in Fig. 1.2(b). The survey result shows most
IGBT/MOSFET device failures result from thermal and power cycling, with
a typical failure rate of 2.78 × 10−6 failures per hour. Additionally, the
controller and sensors may also experience faults during operation.
Nevertheless, it should be noted that the probability of the microcontroller
and sensor faults is much lower.As mentioned above, many potential faults may occur in the system. In this
chapter, the principal device and electromagnetic faults under consideration
that may occur within an electric drive are shown in Table 1.1.
On the machine side, the winding insulation degrades gradually due to
electrical, thermal, and mechanical stresses and finally develops into open￾circuit or short-circuit failure. The short-circuit failure can be classified as
interphase and intraphase short circuit, which occur between phases or
within a single phase, respectively. The intraphase fault is usually caused by
turn-to-turn insulation failure. In particular, an intraphase fault involving a
few turns, also known as a turn fault, is reported as the worst-fault scenario
since only a few turns are short circuited. The resultant fault current is
massive and the excessive hotspot temperature may lead to catastrophic
failure. Partial demagnetization is another common fault in PM machines
due to the excessive armature reaction field, overheating, and a high level
of mechanical stress and vibration. It may cause torque reduction and
increased torque ripple, etc.
Table 1.1 Potential faults occurring in an electric drive.
Machine side Drive side
Winding open circuit Switch device open circuit
Winding interphase short circuit Switch device short circuit
Winding intraphase short circuit DC-link capacitor failure
Demagnetization Controller/sensor failure
Uncontrolled generation failure at high speed
On the drive side, the switch device is also subjected to open-circuit and
short-circuit failure due to electric and thermal–mechanical stress during
repeated switching on and off operations. DC-link capacitor is exposed to
combined electrical and thermal stress during inverter operation and hence
contributes to a considerable failure rate in electric drives [16]. Gate drive
failure gives rise to similar consequences of switching device failures and
may be incorporated into the switch device fault mechanism.
Besides, another possible fault is the uncontrolled generation, particularly
for PM machines. If the power converter fails when the machine is rotating
at high speed, the electromotive force (emf) may be much higher than theDC-link voltage and consequently cause uncontrolled rectification via the
freewheeling diodes in the power converter. This may damage the DC-link
components if the generated power is excessive and cannot be absorbed
[17, 18].
So far, most of the fault-tolerant electrical drives focus on the faults
described above [8, 13], since the most frequent bearing failure can be
significantly reduced by regular maintenance, online monitoring, and
replacement, whereas the controller and sensor faults are less likely.
1.3 Design Requirements of Fault-Tolerant
Machine Drives
The requirements for the fault-tolerant systems in distributed power systems
have been investigated in [10]. The methodology for fault-tolerant electrical
drives follows relatively similar principles. The principal guideline is one
fault in the system should be isolated in a subunit and has limited effect on
the remaining healthy part, which can be in place to maintain uninterrupted
operation. As extensively discussed in literature, four design criteria for
fault-tolerant electrical drives are summarized.
A. Partitioning and Redundancy: A fundamental specification for fault￾tolerant system is that a single fault would not disrupt the whole
system. Therefore, the fault must be confined to a relatively
independent subsystem. This implies the system should be partitioned
into several subunits. A fault would only disable the fault module,
which would not cause malfunction of the whole system. Then, the
remaining healthy modules could continue operation to meet the
output requirement in the faulty condition. The trade-off between the
redundancy number and cost is often debated at the design stage [3].
B. Fault Isolation: Partitioning alone is not enough to prevent the system
breakdown from a faulty module, since certain types of fault may
affect the remaining healthy subunits or even propagate to the whole
system. It may lead to more severe consequences. Thus, many
measures are employed to achieve fault isolation. Specifically,
magnetic, electrical, thermal, and physical isolations are required for
ideal fault-tolerant electrical drives to accommodate fault [19].C. Fault Detection: On one hand, fault detection can help the electrical
drive to isolate fault by taking appropriate fault mitigation action while
on the other hand, continued operation needs information on fault type
and location to perform appropriate postfault control. Fault must be
detected before severe consequences occur. Indeed, fault detections are
core techniques for fault-tolerant machine drives and require extensive
and in-depth investigations.
D. Postfault Control: After a fault, the machine drive changes its
physical behaviors and the control law under healthy conditions may
lose its effectiveness. For example, new voltage harmonics and
excessive fault current may arise, and consequently, the current
tracking quality with conventional control techniques deteriorates
significantly, resulting in excessive torque pulsation, etc. Thus, a new
postfault control strategy should be in place to protect the system and
maintain its operation for continued functionality.
In summary, the above four requirements should be taken into consideration
to design an integrated fault-tolerant electric machine drive system.
However, current research on the fault-tolerant machine drive is quite
fragmented, and most literatures only focus on one of them.
1.4 Current State-of-the-Art Techniques of
Fault-Tolerant Machine Drives
To achieve an integrated fault-tolerant machine drive, a number of effective
techniques have been developed, which include fault-tolerant machine drive
topology, fault modeling, fault detection, and postfault control. These
techniques are essential to accommodate various failures by transferring the
machine drive from healthy operation to postfault operation in a reliable
manner. The fault-tolerant machine drive topology enables the fault
isolation and postfault operation while the fault modeling technique
assesses machine performance in both healthy and faulty conditions and
also aids in fault detection. Fault detection can identify and classify the
faults and consequently trigger appropriate mitigation actions. After the
fault, the previous control law becomes invalid since the machine has
changed its physical behaviors. It requires a new postfault control strategyto accommodate the fault and suppress excessive and undesirable fault
current if present. Subsequently, these key techniques are reviewed and the
main challenges are highlighted.
1.4.1 Fault-Tolerant Machine Drive Topologies
Various fault-tolerant machine topologies have been reported and
investigated in literature. The most straightforward approach is to adopt two
or more redundant machine drive modules either in series or in parallel [7,
20]. In case of a failure in one module, the fault is isolated and the other
module can continue its operation. However, the use of multiple machine
modules for redundant operation occupies large space and necessitates
additional accessories to guarantee operation, resulting in low power
density and bulky size. Therefore, this approach becomes less attractive.
Alternatively, some level of fault tolerance may be achieved on a typical 3-
phase machine drive by employing a neutral connection of the 3-phase
winding to the midpoint of the DC link or to a fourth inverter leg as shown
in Fig. 1.3(a) and (b) [21], respectively. It can cope with an open-circuit
fault either in the inverter or in the 3-phase windings. By employing the
neutral connection, the two remaining phase currents can be controlled
independently. Zero-sequence current is utilized to generate the equivalent
rotating magneto-motive force (MMF) in the machine if one phase is open
circuited.Figure 1.3 3-Phase fault-tolerant machine drive: (a) full bridge with DC
midpoint and (b) four-leg inverter.
Figure 1.4 3-Phase machine using open-end winding drive (a) with
independent power supplies and (b) with single power supply.
Another common fault-tolerant approach for 3-phase machines is to employ
open-end winding drives as shown in Fig. 1.4. Both terminals of a 3-phase
winding are available (opened) for connections to dual 3-phase inverters.The dual drives can share one DC link or use independent power supplies
[22]. In addition to better fault-tolerant capability, they also bring the merits
of 3-level voltage output, lower DC-link voltage for a given rated voltage of
the machine and high efficiency. In case of a switch failure in one inverter,
drive operation can be sustained by appropriate control of the healthy side
inverter.
The access to the neutral point in Fig. 1.3 can be eliminated by employing
more than three phases in a single machine as shown in Fig. 1.5 [23, 24].
Depending on the number of phases, a multiphase machine is capable of
continuous operation when one or more than one phase has failed.
Multiphase machine is initially investigated for high-power applications. By
dividing the required power between multiple phases, higher power levels
can be realized with specific rated power electronic converter modules. It
can also reduce torque pulsation and lower DC-link harmonic current. As
described above, a neutral point connection is required for a 3-phase
machine after one phase is open circuited so that the current in the
remaining two phases can be controlled independently. However, it is
possible to take advantage of the additional degrees of freedom in a
multiphase machine where the number of phases is greater than 3. With
appropriate control of the power converter, a multiphase machine can
continue its operation in case of an open-circuit fault without connecting the
neutral point. Five-phase, six-phase, and seven-phase machines are most
extensively investigated for both induction machines and PM machines
[25–27]. Additionally, various control algorithms have been proposed to
achieve the maximum attainable torque or minimum torque ripple [28–31]
under fault conditions.Figure 1.5 Multiphase (5-phase for illustration) fault-tolerant machine
drive.
One common disadvantage of the 3-phase and multiphase fault-tolerant
machine mentioned above is the complex postfault control since the
machine no longer operates in a balanced manner after a fault. To alleviate
this problem, the machine windings can be configured as multiple 3-phase
windings with each driven by an independent inverter [32] as shown in Fig.
1.6. If a fault occurs in one set of 3-phase winding, the whole set will be
taken out of service. The remaining sets can continue their balanced
operation. The benefits of such fault-tolerant drives are that the postfault
control strategy can be much simpler as the operation of the remaining
balanced 3-phase windings can be easily maintained. It should be noted,
however, that the strong and undesirable magnetic coupling may still exist
in different 3-phase winding sets. Consequently, the short-circuit current
may still be excessive and torque ripple may increase due to the mutual
coupling. This concept has been realized in both induction machines,
synchronous machines, and PM machines [25, 26, 33–35]. However, the
majority of the above solutions cannot cope with excessive current in the
event of short-circuit fault.
To accommodate short-circuit fault in power electronic switches or phase
windings, alternative fault-tolerant drives are developed. Owing to its
rugged, magnet-free rotor structure and concentrated windings, the
switched reluctance machine (SRM) is inherently fault tolerant as shown in
Fig. 1.7 [36, 37]. Each phase winding can be magnetically, thermally, andelectrically isolated. Due to low mutual coupling between phases, the short￾circuit current can be limited in a safe region [38]. The electric isolation is
also carried out in the inverter, and each phase is excited by an independent
asymmetrical H-bridge. Thus, a failure in one phase either in the winding or
in the bridge would not influence the operation of the remaining healthy
phases. The faulty phase can be deactivated simply by disabling the active
switches. Additionally, the active switching devices in the bridge are in
series with a winding, so in case of switch misfiring, there is a delay in the
rise of current that prevents the shoot-through fault of the bridge. However,
an SRM drive exhibits high torque ripple, undesirable noise and vibration,
and inferior torque density/efficiency. These undesirable attributes are even
worse in fault condition. Furthermore, the SRM drive may lose its starting
capability due to a phase absence.Figure 1.6 Multiple 3-phase fault-tolerant machine drive: (a) dual 3-phase
and (b) triple 3-phase.Figure 1.7 SRM machine drive.
To enhance the torque performance of a fault-tolerant drive, a single layer,
fractional-slot concentrated winding (FSCW) PM machine is developed as
shown in Fig. 1.8 [39], which facilitates electrical, magnetic, thermal, and
physical isolations between phases. Each winding is wound on every
alternative tooth, so each slot only contains one phase coil, facilitating
thermal and physical isolation between phases. With the help of surface￾mounted magnet rotor and the unwound stator teeth, the magnetic isolation
between phases is also largely realized. The tooth tip and slot opening are
specially designed by controlling their depth and width to obtain per-unit
self-inductance in each phase in such a way that under a short-circuit fault,
the fault current is limited. Further, the modular design philosophy is
extended to the inverter with each phase excited by a single-phase H￾bridge, as shown in Fig. 1.8; thus, each phase is also electrically isolated.
The machine is fault tolerant to both winding open or short circuit and
switch open or short circuit. In an event of an interturn short-circuit fault,
the short-circuit current can be limited to an acceptable level by applying a
terminal short circuit (TSC) on the fault phase via H-bridge control. This
methodology has also been extended to switched flux, also known as flux
switching, PM machines in [40].Figure 1.8 Multiphase FSCW fault-tolerant machine drive.
Figure 1.9 Multiple 3-phase FSCW fault-tolerant machine drive.
Similarly, multiple 3-phase configuration can be employed for the FSCW
fault-tolerant machine as shown in Fig. 1.9, which facilitates the fast
integration of standard 3-phase inverters and simple control [41]. Each 3-
phase set winding is driven by an independent 3-phase inverter and can
tolerate open-circuit, short circuit, and interturn fault.
However, due to the concentrated windings, very little reluctance torque can
be exploited. The output torque of an FSCW PM machine purely relies on
the PM field and, consequently, an increase in torque capability leads to
higher flux linkage. The presence of a strong PM field poses a safety hazard
to the machine as it cannot be turned off in the event of a fault [42]. The
back emf may be much higher than the DC-link voltage at high speed and,
consequently, uncontrolled rectification via the diodes of a power converter
may occur in case of an inverter failure. Excessive regenerative power that
flows to the DC-link capacitor may cause catastrophic failure to the drive
system. Significant braking torque may also be imposed on the rotorcausing excessive stress to the mechanical system or a sudden reduction in
speed that may induce an accident. Thus, the maximum back emf should be
limited [43]. However, this is in conflict with the requirements for torque
production. Further, the use of concentric windings also gives rise to sub￾and high-order MMF space harmonics, which produce extra rotor loss.
Hence, the magnets need to be segmented axially or circumferentially to
avoid excessive rotor temperature [44]. The magnets are also subject to the
risk of demagnetization in high temperature and in case of a drive failure
[45]. The demagnetization leads to torque reduction and increase in
machine currents for closed-loop controlled drive under the same load
condition. The vicious cycle may continue, causing further increases in
temperature and demagnetization.
According to the foregoing review, it can be concluded that the
conventional 3-phase induction machine and PMSM drives are only fault
tolerant to open-circuit failure while SRM and FSCW PM machine could
tolerate open-circuit, short-circuit, and interturn fault. Multiphase machine
drive normally has better postfault torque capability compared to multiple
3-phase counterpart albeit requires more complex postfault control. PM
machine has the merits of high efficiency and high torque density; however,
the high back emf also poses challenges to the system design. In general, no
existing topology could achieve high performance as well as good fault
tolerance in a simple and cost-effective manner.
1.4.2 Fault Modeling Techniques
For fault-tolerant machine drive systems, the postfault behavior is notably
changed and should be carefully assessed to understand the fault behavior.
For example, maximum torque capability and torque ripple in postfault
operation should be assessed [46]. New voltage harmonics would appear
that pose an extra constraint on voltage if field weakening operation is
required [17]. In addition, in order to optimize the output capability in fault
condition, accurate fault modeling is necessary to guide machine design and
to facilitate postfault control in order to achieve high efficiency and high￾power density [7] in both healthy and postfault operations. Especially for
interturn fault, which causes excessive fault current and results in local
hotspots, its behavior should be captured to facilitate the development ofdiagnostic techniques and corresponding mitigation action [47]. Thus,
various fault modeling techniques are being actively investigated.
Lumped parameter-based modeling is commonly employed to describe the
machine in both healthy and fault conditions. Lumped parameters,
inductance values in particular may be extracted from analytical derivations
[48], finite element (FE) simulations [49], or experimental tests [50]. For
example, based on closed-form voltage equations established from this
process, the responses of an interior permanent magnet (IPM) machine
under single-phase open circuit [51] and symmetrical and asymmetrical
short-circuit faults [52] were investigated. An induction machine with one￾phase open circuit was modeled and its control behavior was accessed in
[53]. The fault modeling technique has been extended to multiphase
induction machines by using the inductance matrices [54]. With derived
lumped parameters, circuit-oriented method can also be employed to
investigate induction machine behavior [55] with faults in both stator and
rotor sides, such as broken rotor bar. A five-phase synchronous reluctance
machine with open-circuit faults was modeled in the synchronous frame in
[56] when the current was controlled in the synchronous frame with zero
steady-state error. A novel field reconstruction method was used to analyze
the machine performance and vibration [57] for an FSCW PM machine.
This method utilizes the fields produced by the current in a single slot and
the field from the magnets to reconstruct the field distribution along the air
gap with arbitrary current excitation.
It should be noted that most of the modeling methods above consider the
machine as a linear system, and hence compromise the model accuracy. The
postfault behavior can also be evaluated by FE simulations [58]. However,
the FE method is quite time consuming, and not suitable for developing
fault detection strategies, control methods and performing comprehensive
performance assessment over a wide operation region.
Accurate interturn fault modeling is very important to improve the
understanding of fault behavior, which is essential for the development of
fault detection algorithms [59]. A survey of stator turn fault modeling
techniques was presented in [60]. In [61], a transient model for an induction
machine with interturn fault was derived using reference frame
transformation theory. In [62], magnetic saturation was considered by using
modulation of air gap permeance at twice the fundamental frequency. Statorturn fault in surface-mounted PM machines was discussed in [49, 63–66].
The inductance values were derived by turn ratio (the ratio of partially
short-circuited turns to the total number of turns in a coil), permeance
network, and FE simulation. In addition, back emf harmonics were
considered in [50] to improve the model accuracy. An analytical approach
was proposed in [48] to capture the inductance and PM flux. Particularly,
variation of slot leakage inductances under interturn fault, which has a
significant impact on the turn fault current, was also investigated. It is
shown that the leakage inductance is strongly dependent on the position of
the fault turns in a slot, which will finally affect the fault current.
An important fact in a turn fault condition is that the winding distributions
are no longer symmetrical. To represent the winding distribution, and the
resultant MMF in such fault conditions, the winding function proves to be a
powerful tool. The inductances for the fault turns, fault phases, and other
healthy phases can be obtained by integrating the product of the
representative turn function, winding function, and airgap permeance as
described in [67, 68], assuming linear magnetic characteristics. The theory
has been applied in a salient pole synchronous machine with coils in series
and in parallel connections [69, 70]. However, for an IPM machine, the
magnetic saturation should be considered since it has a crucial influence on
the field distribution. In [59], a semi-analytical model of IPM with turn
fault was derived by using the healthy dq flux maps to deduce the flux in a
fault condition. The magnetic nonlinearity was considered in the healthy
flux map. Further, a high-fidelity model was developed in [71] based on the
inverse of a four-dimensional (4D) table extracted from FE simulation that
exhibits high accuracy. However, it can only deal with the turn fault with
fixed turns and fixed position (coil location and slot position). The
investigations in [47, 72, 73] show that both the slot location and coil
location of a turn faul affect the fault current. This location dependency
causes a significant difference in the fault current and consequently affects
fault detection and fault-tolerant machine design.
It follows that although various modeling tools are available for fault
behavior prediction, the accuracy, flexibility, and computational efficiency
are still limited. Particularly for interturn fault, the impact of fault turn
location on fault behavior is worth investigation in order to assess the
worst-case scenario in terms of fault current and detectability.1.4.3 Fault Detection Techniques
Fault detection is of key importance for fail-safe and fault-tolerant machine
drives in order to take appropriate fault mitigation actions. Timely and
reliable detection is essential to avoid false alarms and associated
unnecessary downtime. All possible failures in a machine drive, namely,
winding or device open-circuit, short-circuit, stator turn fault, etc., should
be well detected, classified, and located. Among them, detection of device
open-circuit in power converters and interturn short-circuit fault in machine
windings is most actively investigated due to their high failure rate. Thus,
they are reviewed and will be addressed subsequently in this chapter.
Open-Circuit Fault Detection
Open-circuit faults in motor drives often arise from overloading,
overheating, and aging [74–76]. In general, they disrupt current flow in one
phase, resulting in a rapid reduction in output torque [77, 78]. Furthermore,
postfault actions may lead to increased voltage or current stress on other
power switches, thereby posing a substantial safety risk to the motor drives
and potentially triggering secondary faults [79]. Thus, it is imperative to
explore effective methods for open-circuit fault detection and take
appropriate mitigation measures.
Open-circuit faults in machine drive systems can be broadly categorized
into two primary types, namely, inverter open-circuit fault and winding
open-circuit fault [80], as illustrated in Fig. 1.10(a) and (b), respectively.
The detection of winding open-circuit faults is relatively straightforward
through current sensors typically used in a drive system. Hence, existing
research mainly focuses on the detection of open-circuit fault of a switching
device in an inverter (typically, the active switch is open circuited while the
diode is normal). Currently, there are two predominant approaches for
detecting open-circuit fault, namely, signal-based detection methods and
model-based detection methods [81].
Signal-based detection methods typically rely on changes in current or
voltage signals following a fault occurrence to identify open-circuit fault.
The most apparent characteristics of an open-circuit fault is that the phase
current associated with the fault device during the response interval
becomes zero. Due to this feature, literature [82] utilizes variations in thecurrent vector slope to achieve open-circuit fault detection and localization.
However, current signals are susceptible to disruptions from load variations.
To mitigate this challenge, Peuget et al. [83] introduces the normalization of
Park vectors to reduce the impact of load fluctuations in the fault detection.
Similarly, literature [84] employs the average of normalized 3-phase
currents to detect open-circuit faults. Since the asymmetry of phase currents
after the fault can introduce harmonics components, literature [85] employs
the harmonic components of phase currents for open-circuit fault detection.
Additionally, depending on the installation positions of current sensors, DC￾link current [86] is also utilized for open-circuit fault detection. The
acquisition of current signals is relatively simple; however, it is prone to
load disturbances and long detection cycle.
Figure 1.10 Open-circuit fault illustration: (a) switch open-circuit fault and
(b) winding open-circuit fault.
By contrast, voltage signals normally offer faster detection. Literatures [87–
89] analyze open-circuit detection by examining changes in phase voltages,
line voltages, neutral point voltages, and the voltage between power device
collector and emitter. Reference [90] achieves μs-level detection of open￾circuit faults by monitoring the midpoint voltage of 3-phase bridge arm
with respect to the ground. Literature [91] uses zero-sequence voltage for
single-phase open-circuit detection and discrimination between inverter and
winding. However, measuring voltage signals usually requires additional
voltage sensors and high sampling rate hardware circuits.
Model-based methods detect the fault by analyzing the difference between
model-predicted signals and actual signals [92]. In literature [93–95], the
reference current of the motor is calculated using the reference voltage
output from the dq-axis controller, while the actual current is obtainedthrough physical sensors. During normal operation, the reference current
agrees well with the actual signal. However, when an open-circuit fault
occurs in a motor drive, a small interval with zero current will result due to
the fault. Therefore, a significant difference arises between the reference
and actual current, which can be utilized for open-circuit fault detection.
Similarly, an approach based on voltage residuals is employed in [96] and
[97]. The reference voltage is obtained from the dq-axis controller while the
actual voltage is calculated from a model with measured 3-phase currents.
Hence, by comparing the two signals, the open-circuit fault can be
diagnosed. Furthermore, a common mode voltage-based method is
developed in [98] for open-circuit diagnosis, which can also achieve quick
detection and localization. Model-based fault detection methods can
mitigate the influence of controller parameters and transient processes on
fault detection, as both reference and actual signals are affected by these
factors. However, it is worth noting that this approach requires more
knowledge of motor parameters, which may be subjected to variations due
to changes in operation conditions.
Interturn Short-Circuit Fault Detection
Interturn short-circuit fault, denoted as turn fault for short notation, as a
result of turn-to-turn insulation failure, is known as severer fault while it is
more challenging to detect. It usually only involves a few turns in a
machine winding, resulting in a benign fault signature as seen from
machine terminals and consequently low signal-to-noise ratio for detection.
However, excessive fault current flows in the fault turns, which requires fast
detection and mitigation action. This necessitates a rapid and
computationally efficient detection within a few tens of milliseconds before
developing into a catastrophic failure.
In terms of turn fault monitoring, a few standard offline methods including
the insulation resistance measurement, direct current test, alternating
current test, surge comparison test, and partial discharge test have been
discussed in [99, 100]. Online detecting schemes would be more preferred
since they provide continuous stator insulation monitoring and enable
appropriate mitigation actions. Benefiting from the features of noninvasive
and no additional sensors, most of the online turn fault detection techniques
are based on motor current signal analysis (MCSA) by inspecting the statorcurrent spectrum to spot the degradation [101]. In [99, 102], the induction
machine insulation failure was detected by tracking the negative sequence
current and impedance, which was insensitive to the machine slip. In fact,
the methods in [103, 104] based on Park’s Vector Approach were also
employed to monitor the negative sequence current. However, it was shown
in [61] that the negative sequence component was not a reliable fault
indicator since it does not change in a predictable manner when exposed to
the existing asymmetry or supply unbalance. Hence, a more robust fault
indicator was developed by making use of the off-diagonal term of the
sequence component in the impedance matrix [105, 106]. The disadvantage
of this method was that it is required to store two sets of test data under
different voltage unbalance conditions. An alternative way was introduced
in [107] by exploiting feedforward neural network to compensate for the
arbitrary supply voltage and nonidealities in the machine or
instrumentation.
Alternatively, model-based approaches were also investigated in [108–111]
for interturn fault by monitoring the estimation errors. It mainly follows the
same approach as the open-circuit fault detection by comparing the
measured signals and predicted values. This method required an accurate
online model, which was usually achieved by adaptive state observer or
online learning. In [112], the interturn short-circuit fault was alarmed by
tracking the back emf estimator for a PMSM. The temperature influence on
the winding resistance was compensated by a transient thermal model;
however, the influence on the PM flux variation was not considered, which
may compromise detection accuracy.
The feasibility of turn fault detection by injecting high-frequency signal
was analyzed in [113, 114] by measuring the high-frequency negative
sequence current and further investigated in [115] by monitoring the
incremental inductances. It should be noticed that high-frequency injection
introduces additional noise in the current and may reduce voltage operating
range at high speed. As a result, an advanced method was proposed in [116]
by comparing the inherent high-frequency PWM current ripple between
different phases, where the switching inverter was exploited as a natural
source of high-frequency signal injection into the motor. Therefore, there is
no need to inject additional high-frequency component, avoiding the
undesirable effects.It should be noted that for the fault detection techniques reviewed above,
the respective fault indicators vary with speed and load and this variation
should be compensated in order to improve sensitivity and robustness of the
detection. On the other hand, the speed and load transients usually cause
false alarm in harmonic-based fault detection techniques. It is important that
such false alarm or false positive is eliminated. Last but not least, the
classification and location identification of different faults are of paramount
importance in order to apply appropriate mitigation action.
1.4.4 Postfault Control Strategies
After a fault, the internal physical behavior of a machine drive is
significantly changed. Hence, the original control law is no longer
applicable. Further, once a fault has been detected and classified, some
forms of reconfiguration in the power converter and its connection to the
motor may be required in order to limit fault propagation and facilitate
postfault operation. Therefore, it becomes essential to adopt fault-tolerant
control strategy to achieve reliable operation. According to different
objectives and fault-tolerant schemes employed, the existing fault-tolerant
control strategies can be mainly divided into three categories, namely,
output torque control, postfault current tracking, and short-circuit current
suppression.
At present, output torque control is most extensively investigated. The basic
approach is to control the healthy phase currents to maintain a constant
rotating MMF after an open-circuit fault. Fu and Lipo [26] proposed a
general current calculation method for multiphase machines under open￾circuit fault condition [26] and presented a reduced-order fault-tolerant
control with decoupling in [117], which maintains the MMF on the
fundamental plane by compensating the asymmetry caused by the fault. It is
realized by controlling the special harmonic components in the stator
currents. However, the reduced order decoupling matrix introduces
asymmetric synchronous rotation voltage, which requires feedforward
compensation. An optimal torque control is proposed in [28] for five-phase
PM machines. The objective function is constructed for torque demand as a
constraint with the minimum power consumption, and the optimal currents
for postfault operation are obtained by the Lagrange algorithm. However,
the current commands contain high-order harmonic components, whichpose difficulties for current tracking at high speed. Parsa and Toliyat [33]
introduced a fault-tolerant operation strategy based on instantaneous power
theory for five-phase PM machine with third harmonic in back emf. Wang
et al. [118] studied a 15-phase induction motor with nonsinusoidal power
supply for integrated power system (IPS) in ship propulsion. The stator
windings are composed of three sets of five-phase windings. In such
designs, the utilization of the stator MMF can be enhanced by injecting the
third harmonic and hence the torque density is increased. The fault-tolerant
control strategy is studied in [119] under symmetric and asymmetric open￾circuited phase operation. Direct torque control of multiphase motor under
fault condition is also investigated in [120].
It should be pointed out that during postfault operation, voltage harmonics
will appear due to the presence of fault and asymmetric operation. The
voltage harmonics will deteriorate current tracking performance and lead to
current distortion. At high-speed operation, voltage harmonics will further
reduce the available voltage margin and affect the stability of the system
operation. Therefore, it is necessary to study the control algorithm of
current tracking in postfault operation. The current commands generated
from a fault-tolerant control algorithm can be tracked by the well-known
hysteresis control for its fast response speed and strong robustness.
However, this method has the disadvantage of variable switching frequency.
The work reported in [121] proposed a fault-tolerant control technique for a
seven-phase motor under open-circuit fault, and the current tracking errors
were reduced by multiple PI controllers operating in the synchronous
rotating coordinate system of different harmonic spaces, as shown in Fig.
1.11. However, due to the presence of the voltage harmonics and limited
bandwidth of the PI controller, the tracking performance for the AC current
commands may not be satisfactory. The authors in [24] studied model
predictive control for the postfault operation of a multiphase induction
motor, and the switching state is selected for minimum current error based
on a model predictive algorithm. However, the model predictive control
heavily relies on accurate mathematical model and requires intensive online
computation for the optimal solution, which increases the cost and
complexity of the digital processing units. In addition, field weakening
control algorithms are rarely investigated for postfault operation of machine
drives at high speed.Figure 1.11 Fault-tolerant control diagram of seven-phase motor.
Source: Tao et al. [122]/Proceedings of the Chinese Society of Electrical Engineering.
In case of a short-circuit fault, especially interturn short-circuit fault, it is
essential to adopt timely control to suppress the excessive fault current and
avoid further failures. TSC realized via the inverter is usually applied to the
whole phase winding where the fault turns are located to reduce the fault
current. However, its effectiveness in limiting the fault current is dependent
on the location of the short-circuit turns in the winding. Therefore, literature
[123] studies a short-circuit current suppression method based on current
injection into the healthy part of the winding, which cancels the flux linkage
of the faulty turns and consequently reduce the short-circuit current.
However, this method requires accurate information on the fault condition,
such as the number of short-circuited turns and their physical position in the
winding, which is practically impossible to determine. For the 3-phase
machine with open winding drive as shown in Fig. 1.4, the flux linkage of
the short-circuit turns can be actively reduced by controlling the currents in
the healthy phases as described in [124]. As a result, the fault current is
effectively reduced. Jiang et al. [125] proposed a technique for interturn
short-circuit current suppression for PM starter/generator in motoring and
generating modes, respectively. With this scheme, however, the torque
capability of the drive is significantly reduced.
In summary, although technical issues pertinent to design and operation of
fault-tolerant drive systems, such as fault-tolerant machine drive topologies,
fault modeling, fault detection, fault mitigation, and postfault operation,have been extensively investigated in literature, some key problems are still
remaining and worth further study. Further, the techniques for addressing
these issues should be considered at the system level and well integrated to
establish a complete machine drive system capable of fault-tolerant
operation.
1.5 Scope and Outline of This Book
1.5.1 Scope of this Book
This book is devoted to presenting a systematic and integrated approach to
the design and control of fault-tolerant machine drives, including fault￾tolerant machine topologies, design optimization, fault modeling, fault
detection, fault mitigation, and postfault control algorithm. For each of
these topics, the recent advances and current state-of-the-art will be
reviewed and the needs for further research in order to develop the
technology to sufficient level of maturity will be discussed. The
development of advanced fault-tolerant machine drive topologies is a key
step to provide a desired level of fault tolerance without significant
compromise on the machine drive performance in healthy conditions.
Appropriate machine design optimization should be taken to ensure that the
machine drive can meet the requirement for performance targets in both
healthy and postfault operating conditions. This will be facilitated by a
generic and comprehensive fault modeling technique for predicting the
machine fault behavior in a computationally efficient manner. The advanced
fault modeling technique will also provide a useful tool for the development
of fault detection techniques and postfault control strategies. Effective and
reliable fault detection techniques are indispensable for monitoring the
machine drive operations and for undertaking appropriate mitigation
measures when a fault occurs. Suitable postfault control strategy will finally
realize the fault-tolerant operation after a fault. Thus, all these technical
issues should be addressed, and suitable solutions developed and
implemented in order to realize an effective fault-tolerant machine drive
system.
In this book, the process of design, control, and development of high
reliability/availability fault-tolerant machine drives is described through aspecific example by incorporating all the above technical aspects for safety
critical applications. Generally, different fault-tolerant machine drive
topologies may be preferred for diversified applications. Depending on the
machine drive topology employed, the design optimization, modeling,
detection, and postfault control techniques may vary accordingly. However,
the general process and internal logic are the same for different types of
fault-tolerant machine drives. This book offers a generic methodology and
systematic approach to the design and control of a typical fault-tolerant
machine drive. It also intends to stimulate further developments of the core
technologies pertinent to fault-tolerant machine drives.
1.5.2 Outline of this Book
This book is arranged with seven chapters. Each chapter is briefly
introduced as follows:
Chapter 1 introduces the background knowledge and recent advances of
fault-tolerant machine drives. The frequent failure modes in electrical drives
are explained, and the measures and requirements to accommodate these
faults as well as to facilitate postfault operations are discussed. Current
state-of-the-art techniques for machine topology, fault modeling, fault
detection, fault mitigation, and postfault control are reviewed to provide a
comprehensive understanding and insight into the fault-tolerant machine
drive technology.
To establish an integrated fault-tolerant machine drive, a novel multiple 3-
phase PM machine with segregated windings is introduced in Chapter 2.
The key merits of the fault-tolerant drive topology are assessed against
other key state-of-the-art candidates. In particular, its performance is
compared against the conventional 3-phase drives in healthy operations,
and its ability to tolerate various faults is evaluated and discussed. The
machine fault behavior and mutual coupling mechanism are explained from
the viewpoint of MMF distribution.
Based on the proposed machine topology in Chapter 2, the design
optimization process of a 40 kW machine is described as a case study in
Chapter 3. An integrated design procedure is developed to consider both
the healthy and fault modes of operation while satisfying electrical, thermal,
and mechanical constraints. The optimized machine is prototyped andextensively tested for different operation modes in healthy and under fault
conditions.
A general modeling technique is developed in Chapter 4 considering the
healthy operation, open-circuit, short-circuit, and unbalanced operation
conditions. The model can also be adapted for turn fault with varying
numbers of faulted turns and fault location. The accuracy of the model is
verified by FE prediction and experimental tests.
Fast and reliable detection techniques are developed in Chapter 5 for the
most common faults, including device open-circuit and winding interturn
short-circuit fault. The open-circuit fault is detected by using the relative β￾axis residual voltage signals of the three phases. The second harmonics in
the instantaneous active power and reactive power are employed as fault
indicators for turn fault detection. The effectiveness of the detection
methods is evaluated with the proposed general modeling technique and on
prototype tests.
Chapter 6 describes optimal torque control strategy for fault tolerant
multiphase FSCW PM machines and develops a turn fault mitigation
strategy to minimize the fault current for the multiple 3-phase PMA￾SynRM drive. Optimal current control strategy is employed to deliver
smooth output torque during post fault operation for both constant torque
and constant power operating region. By making use of the additional
degree of freedom from the multiple 3-phase windings, appropriate phase
currents are injected to the fault 3-phase set to reduce the residual flux of
the fault turns, leading to a much lower turn fault current and enhanced
fault tolerance.
Winding configuration has a dominant impact on the machine performance
and its ability to tolerate faults. To further suppress potentially excessive
turn fault current, four new segregated winding configurations, namely,
delta-connected winding, star-delta-connected winding, mixed-pitch
winding, and concentric winding, are proposed in Chapter 7 to reduce the
residual flux linkage of the fault turns. With appropriate mitigation actions,
the fault current is reduced by changing the winding connection or
modifying the winding layout leading to more cost-effective solutions.References
1 Y. Song and B. Wang, “Survey on reliability of power electronic
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 28, no. 1, pp.
591–604, 2013.
2 J. A. Tegopoulos, “Electrical machines for electromotion and their
design,” in The 21st IEEE Convention of the Electrical and Electronic
Engineers in Israel. 2000, pp. 209–212.
3 W. Cao, B. C. Mecrow, G. J. Atkinson, J. W. Bennett, and D. J. Atkinson,
“Overview of electric motor technologies used for more electric aircraft
(MEA),” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 59, no. 9, pp.
3523–3531, 2012.
4 K. T. Chau, C. C. Chan, and C. Liu, “Overview of permanent-magnet
brushless drives for electric and hybrid electric vehicles,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2246–2257,
2008.
5 J. Wang, Z. P. Xia, and D. Howe, “Three-phase modular permanent
magnet brushless Machine for torque boosting on a downsized ICE
vehicle,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 54, no. 3, pp.
809–816, 2005.
6 A. Mohammadpour, S. Mishra, and L. Parsa, “Fault-tolerant operation of
multiphase permanent-magnet machines using iterative learning
control,” IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power
Electronics, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 201–211, 2014.
7 N. Bianchi and S. Bolognani, “Design of a fault-tolerant IPM motor for
electric power steering,” in IEEE 36th Power Electronics Specialists
Conference, 2005. PESC ’05, 2005, p. 2873.
8 A. Boglietti, A. Cavagnino, A. Tenconi, and S. Vaschetto, “The safety
critical electric machines and drives in the more electric aircraft: A
survey,” in 35th Annual Conference of IEEE Industrial Electronics,
2009. IECON ’09, 2009, pp. 2587–2594.9 D. A. Rennels, “Fault tolerant computing concepts and examples,” IEEE
Transactions on Computers, vol. C-33, no. 12, pp. 1116–1129, 1984.
10 R. V. White, “Fault tolerance in distributed power systems,” in IV IEEE
International Power Electronics Congress, 1995. Technical Proceedings.
CIEP 95, 1995, pp. 121–128.
11 MOTOR RELIABILITY WORKING GROUP. “Report of large motor
reliability survey of industrial and commercial installations, part I,”
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. IA-21, no. 4, 1985, pp.
853–864.
12 O. V. Thorsen and M. Dalva, “A survey of faults on induction motors in
offshore oil industry, petrochemical industry, gas terminals and oil
refineries,” in Petroleum and Chemical Industry Conference, 1994.
Record of Conference Papers., Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Incorporated Industry Applications Society 41st Annual,
1994, pp. 1–9.
13 B. C. Mecrow, D. J. Atkinson, A. G. Jack, S. Green, J. A. Haylock, and J.
Coles, “The need for fault tolerance in an aeroengine electric fuel control
system,” in IEE Colloquium on Electrical Machines and Systems for the
More Electric Aircraft (Ref. No. 1999/180), 1999, pp. 9/1–9/5.
14 A. Sarikhani and O. A. Mohammed, “Demagnetization control for
reliable flux weakening control in PM synchronous machine,” IEEE
Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 1046–1055,
2012.
15 S. Yang, A. Bryant, P. Mawby, D. Xiang, L. Ran, and P. Tavner, “An
industry-based survey of reliability in power electronic converters,”
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 1441–
1451, 2011.
16 P. Sun, C. Gong, X. Du, Q. Luo, H. Wang, and L. Zhou, “Online
condition monitoring for both IGBT module and DC-link capacitor of
power converter based on short-circuit current simultaneously,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 64, no. 5, pp. 3662–3671,
2017.17 N. Bianchi, S. Bolognani, and M. Zigliotto, “Analysis of PM
synchronous motor drive failures during flux weakening operation,” in
27th Annual IEEE Power Electronics Specialists Conference, 1996.
PESC ’96 Record., 1996, vol. 2, pp. 1542–1548.
18 A. M. E. Refaie, M. R. Shah, and K. K. Huh, “High-power-density fault￾tolerant PM generator for safety-critical applications,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 1717–1728,
2014.
19 A. G. Jack, B. C. Mecrow, and J. A. Haylock, “A comparative study of
permanent magnet and switched reluctance motors for high-performance
fault-tolerant applications,” in IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 889–895, July–Aug. 1996.
20 B. Vaseghi, N. Takorabet, J. P. Caron, B. Nahid-Mobarakeh, F. Meibody￾Tabar, and G. Humbert, “Study of different architectures of fault-tolerant
actuator using a two-channel PM motor,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 47–54, 2011.
21 M. B. de Rossiter Correa, C. B. Jacobina, E. R. C. da Silva, and A. M. N.
Lima, “An induction motor drive system with improved fault tolerance,”
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 873–879,
2001.
22 B. Wang et al., “Overall assessments of dual inverter open winding
drives,” in 2015 IEEE International Electric Machines & Drives
Conference (IEMDC), 2015, pp. 1029–1035.
23 N. Bianchi, S. Bolognani, M. D. Pre, and E. Fornasiero, “Post-fault
operations of five-phase motor using a full-bridge inverter,” in Power
Electronics Specialists Conference, 2008. PESC 2008. IEEE, 2008, pp.
2528–2534.
24 M. Bermudez, I. Gonzalez-Prieto, F. Barrero, H. Guzman, M. J. Duran,
and X. Kestelyn, “Open-phase fault-tolerant direct torque control
technique for five-phase induction motor drives,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 902–911, 2017.25 E. Levi, R. Bojoi, F. Profumo, H. A. Toliyat, and S. Williamson,
“Multiphase induction motor drives – a technology status review,”
Electric Power Applications, IET, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 489–516, 2007.
26 J.-R. Fu and T. A. Lipo, “Disturbance-free operation of a multiphase
current-regulated motor drive with an opened phase,” IEEE Transactions
on Industry Applications, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 1267–1274, 1994.
27 A. Tani, M. Mengoni, L. Zarri, G. Serra, and D. Casadei, “Control of
multiphase induction motors with an odd number of phases under open￾circuit phase faults,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 27,
no. 2, pp. 565–577, 2012.
28 J. Wang, K. Atallah, and D. Howe, “Optimal torque control of fault￾tolerant permanent magnet brushless machines,” IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 2962–2964, 2003.
29 S. Dwari, L. Parsa, and T. A. Lipo, “Optimum control of a five-phase
integrated modular permanent magnet motor under normal and open￾circuit fault conditions,” in Power Electronics Specialists Conference,
2007. PESC 2007. IEEE, 2007, pp. 1639–1644.
30 N. Bianchi, S. Bolognani, and M. D. Pre, “Strategies for the fault￾tolerant current control of a five-phase permanent-magnet motor,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 960–970,
2007.
31 H. Zhou, W. Zhao, G. Liu, R. Cheng, and Y. Xie, “Remedial field￾oriented control of five-phase fault-tolerant permanent-magnet motor by
using reduced-order transformation matrices,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 169–178, 2017.
32 L. Alberti and N. Bianchi, “Experimental tests of dual three-phase
induction motor under faulty operating condition,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 2041–2048, 2012.
33 L. Parsa and H. A. Toliyat, “Fault-tolerant interior-permanent-magnet
machines for hybrid electric vehicle applications,” IEEE Transactions on
Vehicular Technology, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1546–1552, 2007.34 Y. Fan, W. Zhu, X. Zhang, M. Cheng, and K. T. Chau, “Research on a
single phase-loss fault-tolerant control strategy for a new flux-modulated
permanent-magnet compact in-wheel motor,” IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–9, 2016.
35 M. J. Duran, I. G. Prieto, M. Bermudez, F. Barrero, H. Guzman, and M.
R. Arahal, “Optimal fault-tolerant control of six-phase induction motor
drives with parallel converters,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 629–640, 2016.
36 S. Gopalakrishnan, A. M. Omekanda, and B. Lequesne, “Classification
and remediation of electrical faults in the switched reluctance drive,”
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 479–486,
2006.
37 Y. Hu, C. Gan, W. Cao, W. Li, and S. J. Finney, “Central-tapped node
linked modular fault-tolerance topology for SRM applications,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 1541–1554, 2016.
38 B. Lequesne, S. Gopalakrishnan, and A. M. Omekanda, “Winding short
circuits in the switched reluctance drive,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 1178–1184, 2005.
39 B. C. Mecrow, A. G. Jack, J. A. Haylock, and J. Coles, “Fault-tolerant
permanent magnet machine drives,” IEE Proceedings – Electric Power
Applications, vol. 143, no. 6, pp. 437–442, 1996.
40 J. T. Chen and Z. Q. Zhu, “Comparison of all- and alternate-poles￾wound flux-switching PM machines having different stator and rotor
pole numbers,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 46, no.
4, pp. 1406–1415, 2010.
41 J. Chai, J. Wang, K. Atallah, and D. Howe, “Performance comparison
and winding fault detection of duplex 2-phase and 3-phase fault-tolerant
permanent magnet brushless machines,” in Conference Record of the
2007 IEEE Industry Applications Conference, 2007. 42nd IAS Annual
Meeting, 2007, pp. 566–572.
42 J. Dusek, P. Arumugam, C. Brunson, E. K. Amankwah, T. Hamiti, and C.
Gerada, “Impact of slot/pole combination on inter-turn short-circuitcurrent in fault-tolerant permanent magnet machines,” IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1–9, 2016.
43 S. H. Han, T. M. Jahns, M. Aydin, M. K. Guven, and W. L. Soong,
“Impact of maximum back-EMF limits on the performance
characteristics of interior permanent magnet synchronous machines,” in
Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE Industry Applications Conference
Forty-First IAS Annual Meeting, 2006, vol. 4, pp. 1962–1969.
44 J. Wang, K. Atallah, R. Chin, W. M. Arshad, and H. Lendenmann,
“Rotor eddy-current loss in permanent-magnet brushless AC machines,”
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 2701–2707, 2010.
45 V. I. Patel, J. Wang, and S. S. Nair, “Demagnetization assessment of
fractional-slot and distributed wound 6-phase permanent magnet
machines,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1–11,
2015.
46 W. Wang, M. Cheng, B. Zhang, Y. Zhu, and S. Ding, “A fault-tolerant
permanent-magnet traction module for subway applications,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 1646–1658, 2014.
47 D. C. Patel and M. C. Chandorkar, “Modeling and analysis of stator
interturn fault location effects on induction machines,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4552–4564,
2014.
48 B. Sen and J. Wang, “Analytical modelling of stator turn fault in surface
mounted permanent magnet machines,” in Energy Conversion Congress
and Exposition (ECCE), 2013 IEEE, 2013, pp. 4445–4452.
49 O. A. Mohammed, Z. Liu, S. Liu, and N. Y. Abed, “Internal short circuit
fault diagnosis for PM machines using FE-based phase variable model
and wavelets analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 43, no. 4,
pp. 1729–1732, 2007.
50 L. Romeral, J. C. Urresty, J. R. Riba Ruiz, and A. Garcia Espinosa,
“Modeling of surface-mounted permanent magnet synchronous motors
with stator winding interturn faults,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1576–1585, 2011.51 B. A. Welchko, T. M. Jahns, and S. Hiti, “IPM synchronous machine
drive response to a single-phase open circuit fault,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Electronics, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 764–771, 2002.
52 B. A. Welchko, T. M. Jahns, W. L. Soong, and J. M. Nagashima, “IPM
synchronous machine drive response to symmetrical and asymmetrical
short circuit faults,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 291–298, 2003.
53 A. M. S. Mendes and A. J. M. Cardoso, “Fault-tolerant operating
strategies applied to three-phase induction-motor drives,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1807–1817,
2006.
54 R. Kianinezhad, B. Nahid-Mobarakeh, L. Baghli, F. Betin, and G. A.
Capolino, “Modeling and control of six-phase symmetrical induction
machine under fault condition due to open phases,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1966–1977, 2008.
55 A. Pantea et al., “Six-phase induction machine model for electrical fault
simulation using the circuit-oriented method,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 494–503, 2016.
56 R. Hyung-Min, K. Ji-Woong, and S. Seung-Ki, “Synchronous-frame
current control of multiphase synchronous motor under asymmetric fault
condition due to open phases,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1062–1070, 2006.
57 Z. Weidong, B. Fahimi, and S. Pekarek, “A field reconstruction method
for optimal excitation of permanent magnet synchronous machines,”
IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 305–313,
2006.
58 M. Dai, A. Keyhani, and T. Sebastian, “Fault analysis of a PM brushless
DC Motor using finite element method,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
Conversion, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2005.
59 B. Sen, J. Wang, and P. Lazari, “A detailed transient model of Interior
Permanent Magnet motor accounting for saturation under stator turnfault,” in 2013 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition
(ECCE), 2013, pp. 3548–3555.
60 A. Gandhi, T. Corrigan, and L. Parsa, “Recent advances in modeling and
online detection of stator interturn faults in electrical motors,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1564–1575,
2011.
61 R. M. Tallam, T. G. Habetler, and R. G. Harley, “Transient model for
induction machines with stator winding turn faults,” IEEE Transactions
on Industry Applications, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 632–637, 2002.
62 S. Nandi, “A detailed model of induction machines with saturation
extendable for fault analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1302–1309, 2004.
63 I. Jeong, B. J. Hyon, and K. Nam, “Dynamic modeling and control for
SPMSMs with internal turn short fault,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Electronics, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 3495–3508, 2013.
64 B. Vaseghi, B. Nahid-mobarakh, N. Takorabet, and F. Meibody-Tabar,
“Inductance identification and study of PM motor with winding turn
short circuit fault,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 47, no. 5, pp.
978–981, 2011.
65 N. Leboeuf, T. Boileau, B. Nahid-Mobarakeh, N. Takorabet, F.
Meibody-Tabar, and G. Clerc, “Inductance calculations in permanent￾magnet motors under fault conditions,” IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 2605–2616, 2012.
66 F. Wu, P. Zheng, and T. M. Jahns, “Analytical modeling of inter-turn
short circuit for multiphase fault-tolerant PM machines with fractional￾slot concentrated windings,” in Energy Conversion Congress and
Exposition (ECCE), 2015 IEEE, 2015, pp. 6970–6977.
67 K. Kyung-Tae, P. Jun-Kyu, H. Jin, and K. Byeong-Woo, “Comparison of
the fault characteristics of IPM-type and SPM-type BLDC motors under
inter-turn fault conditions using winding function theory,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 986–994,
2014.68 T. Kim, H. W. Lee, and S. Kwak, “The internal fault analysis of
brushless DC motors based on the winding function theory,” IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 2090–2096, 2009.
69 X. Tu, L. A. Dessaint, M. E. Kahel, and A. O. Barry, “A new model of
synchronous machine internal faults based on winding distribution,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 1818–
1828, 2006.
70 X. Tu, L. A. Dessaint, N. Fallati, and B. D. Kelper, “Modeling and real￾time simulation of internal faults in synchronous generators with
parallel-connected windings,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1400–1409, 2007.
71 B. Sen, J. Wang, and P. Lazari, “A high-fidelity computationally efficient
transient model of interior permanent-magnet machine with stator turn
fault,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 63, no. 2, pp.
773–783, 2016.
72 Z. Sun, J. Wang, D. Howe, and G. Jewell, “Analytical prediction of the
short-circuit current in fault-tolerant permanent-magnet machines,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 4210–
4217, 2008.
73 P. Arumugam, “Design optimization on conductor placement in the slot
of permanent magnet machines to restrict turn-turn short-circuit fault
current,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 52, no. 99, pp. 1–8,
2016.
74 M. Alavi, D. Wang, and M. Luo, “Short-circuit fault diagnosis for three￾phase inverters based on voltage-space patterns,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 5558–5569, 2014.
75 S. Yang, D. Xiang, A. Bryant, P. Mawby, L. Ran, and P. Tavner,
“Condition monitoring for device reliability in power electronic
converters: a review,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 25,
no. 11, pp. 2734–2752, 2010.
76 B. Lu and S. K. Sharma, “A literature review of IGBT fault diagnostic
and protection methods for power inverters,” IEEE Transactions onIndustry Applications, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1770–1777, 2009.
77 X. Zhou, J. Sun, P. Cui, Y. Lu, M. Lu, and Y. Yu, “A fast and robust
open-switch fault diagnosis method for variable-speed PMSM system,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 2598–2610,
2021.
78 H. Tang, W. Li, and Z. Wu, “Influence of inverter open circuit fault on
multiple physical quantities in the PMSM,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Electronics, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 901–916, 2023.
79 X. Wu et al., “A fast and robust diagnostic method for multiple open￾circuit faults of voltage-source inverters through line voltage magnitudes
analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 35, no. 5, pp.
5205–5220, 2020.
80 J. Hang, J. Zhang, M. Cheng, and S. Ding, “Detection and
discrimination of open-phase fault in permanent magnet synchronous
motor drive system,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 31,
no. 7, pp. 4697–4709, 2016.
81 C. Song, X. Zhao, X. Sun, N. Diao, and J. Zhao, “Fast in-loop single￾tube open-circuit fault diagnosis for voltage source inverter based on
duality of current-time pairs,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 9572–9581, 2023.
82 H. Mesai-Ahmed, I. Jlassi, A. J. M. Cardoso, and A. Bentaallah,
“Multiple open-circuit faults diagnosis in six-phase induction motor
drives using stator current analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Electronics, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 7275–7285, 2022.
83 R. Peuget, S. Courtine, and J. P. Rognon, “Fault detection and isolation
on a PWM inverter by knowledge-based model,” IEEE Transactions on
Industry Applications, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 1318–1326, 1998.
84 H. Yan, Y. Xu, F. Cai, H. Zhang, W. Zhao, and C. Gerada, “PWM-VSI
fault diagnosis for a PMSM drive based on the fuzzy logic approach,”
IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 759–768,
2019.85 J. O. Estima and A. J. M. Cardoso, “A new approach for real-time
multiple open-circuit fault diagnosis in voltage-source inverters,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 2487–2494,
2011.
86 J. H. Choi, S. Kim, D. S. Yoo, and K. H. Kim, “A diagnostic method of
simultaneous open-switch faults in inverter-fed linear induction motor
drive for reliability enhancement,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 4065–4077, 2015.
87 H. Yan, Y. Xu, J. Zou, Y. Fang, and F. Cai, “A novel open-circuit fault
diagnosis method for voltage source inverters with a single current
sensor,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 33, no. 10, pp.
8775–8786, 2018.
88 R. L. d. A. Ribeiro, C. B. Jacobina, E. R. C. d. Silva, and A. M. N. Lima,
“Fault detection of open-switch damage in voltage-fed PWM motor
drive systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 18, no. 2,
pp. 587–593, 2003.
89 Z. Li, H. Ma, Z. Bai, Y. Wang, and B. Wang, “Fast transistor open-circuit
faults diagnosis in grid-tied three-phase VSIs based on average bridge
arm pole-to-pole voltages and error-adaptive thresholds,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 33, no. 9, pp. 8040–8051, 2018.
90 M. A. Rodríguez-Blanco et al., “A failure-detection strategy for IGBT
based on gate-voltage behavior applied to a motor drive system,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1625–1633,
2011.
91 Q. T. An, L. Z. Sun, K. Zhao, and L. Sun, “Switching function model￾based fast-diagnostic method of open-switch faults in inverters without
sensors,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp.
119–126, 2011.
92 M. Salehifar, R. S. Arashloo, M. Moreno-Eguilaz, V. Sala, and L.
Romeral, “Observer-based open transistor fault diagnosis and fault
tolerant control of five-phase permanent magnet motor drive for
application in electric vehicles,” IET Power Electron, vol. 8, no. 1, pp.
76–87, 2015.93 Q. T. An, L. Sun, and L. Z. Sun, “Current residual vector-based open￾switch fault diagnosis of inverters in PMSM drive systems,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 2814–2827, 2015.
94 I. Jlassi, J. O. Estima, S. K. E. Khil, N. M. Bellaaj, and A. J. M. Cardoso,
“A robust observer-based method for IGBTs and current sensors fault
diagnosis in voltage-source inverters of PMSM drives,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 2894–2905,
2017.
95 I. Jlassi, J. O. Estima, S. K. E. Khil, N. M. Bellaaj, and A. J. M. Cardoso,
“Multiple open-circuit faults diagnosis in back-to-back converters of
PMSG drives for wind turbine systems,” IEEE Transactions on Power
Electronics, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 2689–2702, 2015.
96 S. M. Jung, J. S. Park, H. W. Kim, K. Y. Cho, and M. J. Youn, “An
MRAS-based diagnosis of open-circuit fault in PWM voltage-source
inverters for PM synchronous motor drive systems,” IEEE Transactions
on Power Electronics, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 2514–2526, 2013.
97 N. M. A. Freire, J. O. Estima, and A. J. M. Cardoso, “A voltage-based
approach without extra hardware for open-circuit fault diagnosis in
closed-loop PWM AC regenerative drives,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4960–4970, 2014.
98 Y. Cheng, Y. Sun, X. Li, H. Dan, J. Lin, and M. Su, “Active common￾mode voltage-based open-switch fault diagnosis of inverters in IM-drive
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 68, no. 1,
pp. 103–115, 2021.
99 J. Sottile and J. L. Kohler, “An on-line method to detect incipient failure
of turn insulation in random-wound motors,” IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 762–768, 1993.
100 R. M. Tallam et al., “A survey of methods for detection of stator-related
faults in induction machines,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 920–933, 2007.
101 S. Nandi, H. A. Toliyat, and X. Li, “Condition monitoring and fault
diagnosis of electrical motors-a review,” IEEE Transactions on EnergyConversion, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 719–729, 2005.
102 J. Sottile, F. C. Trutt, and J. L. Kohler, “Experimental investigation of
on-line methods for incipient fault detection” in Conference Record of
the 2000 IEEE Industry Applications Conference, 2000, vol. 4, pp.
2682–2687.
103 S. M. A. Cruz and A. J. M. Cardoso, “Stator winding fault diagnosis in
three-phase synchronous and asynchronous motors, by the extended
Park’s vector approach,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications,
vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1227–1233, 2001.
104 A. J. M. Cardoso, S. M. A. Cruz, and D. S. B. Fonseca, “Inter-turn
stator winding fault diagnosis in three-phase induction motors, by Park’s
vector approach,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 14, no.
3, pp. 595–598, 1999.
105 L. Sang Bin, R. M. Tallam, and T. G. Habetler, “A robust, on-line turn￾fault detection technique for induction machines based on monitoring
the sequence component impedance matrix,” IEEE Transactions on
Power Electronics, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 865–872, 2003.
106 S. Cheng, P. Zhang, and T. G. Habetler, “An impedance identification
approach to sensitive detection and location of stator turn-to-turn faults
in a closed-loop multiple-motor drive,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1545–1554, 2011.
107 R. M. Tallam, T. G. Habetler, and R. G. Harley, “Stator winding turn￾fault detection for closed-loop induction motor drives,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 720–724,
2003.
108 C. H. D. Angelo, G. R. Bossio, S. J. Giaccone, M. I. Valla, J. A.
Solsona, and G. O. Garcia, “Online model-based stator-fault detection
and identification in induction motors,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 4671–4680, 2009.
109 M. Yi Lu, M. A. Masrur, C. ZhiHang, and Z. Baifang, “Model-based
fault diagnosis in electric drives using machine learning,” IEEE/ASME
Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 290–303, 2006.110 B. Sen and J. Wang, “A fast detection technique for stator inter-turn
fault in multi-phase permanent magnet machines using model based
approach,” in 7th IET International Conference on Power Electronics,
Machines and Drives (PEMD 2014), 2014, pp. 1–6.
111 S. Nadarajan, S. K. Panda, B. Bhangu, and A. K. Gupta, “Online
model-based condition monitoring for brushless wound-field
synchronous generator to detect and diagnose stator windings turn-to￾turn shorts using extended Kalman filter,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 3228–3241, 2016.
112 A. Sarikhani and O. A. Mohammed, “Inter-turn fault detection in PM
synchronous machines by physics-based back electromotive force
estimation,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 60, no. 8,
pp. 3472–3484, 2013.
113 F. Briz, M. W. Degner, A. Zamarron, and J. M. Guerrero, “Online stator
winding fault diagnosis in inverter-fed AC machines using high￾frequency signal injection,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications,
vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 1109–1117, 2003.
114 F. Briz, M. W. Degner, P. Garcia, and A. B. Diez, “High-frequency
carrier-signal voltage selection for stator winding fault diagnosis in
inverter-fed AC machines,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 4181–4190, 2008.
115 J. Arellano-Padilla, M. Sumner, and C. Gerada, “Winding condition
monitoring scheme for a permanent magnet machine using high￾frequency injection,” IET Electric Power Applications, vol. 5, no. 1, pp.
89–99, 2011.
116 B. Sen and J. Wang, “Stator interturn fault detection in permanent￾magnet machines using PWM ripple current measurement,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 3148–3157,
2016.
117 Y. Zhao and T. A. Lipo, “Modeling and control of a multi-phase
induction machine with structural unbalance,” IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 578–584, 1996.118 D. Wang, X. Z. Wu, and S. W. Cheng, “Steady state performance
analysis of multi-phase induction motor with non-sinusoidal supply,” Sci
SinTech, vol. 45, pp. 322–329, 2015.
119 X. Zheng, W. Ma, D. Wang, X. Yi, and H. Liu, “Fault-tolerant control
of fifteen-phase induction machine under asymmetrical fault condition,”
Proceedings of the CSEE, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1221–1298, 2018.
120 Y. Zhou, X. Lin, and M. Cheng, “A fault-tolerant direct torque control
for six-phase permanent magnet synchronous motor with arbitrary two
opened phases based on modified variables,” IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion, vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 549–556, 2016.
121 F. Locment, E. Semail, and X. Kestelyn, “Vectorial approach-based
control of a seven-phase axial flux machine designed for fault
operation,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 55, no. 10,
pp. 3682–3691, 2008.
122 T. Tao, Z. Wenxiang, C. Ming, and W. Zheng, “Review on fault-tolerant
control of multi-phase machines and their key technologies,”
Proceedings of the CSEE, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 316–326, 2019.
123 A. J. Mitcham, G. Antonopoulos, and J. J. A. Cullen, “Implications of
shorted turn faults in bar wound PM machines,” IEE Proceedings –
Electric Power Applications, vol. 151, no. 6, pp. 651–657, 2004.
124 B. A. Welchko, J. Wai, T. M. Jahns, and T. A. Lipo, “Magnet-flux-ing
control of interior PM machine drives for improved steady-state
response to short-circuit faults,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 113–120, 2006.
125 Y. Jiang, Z. Zhang, W. Jiang, W. Geng, and J. Huang, “Three-phase
current injection method for mitigating turn-to-turn short-circuit fault in
concentrated-winding permanent magnet aircraft starter generator,” IET
Electric Power Applications, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 566–574, 2018.2
Multiple 3-Phase Fault-Tolerant Machine
Drive with Segregated Windings
2.1 Introduction
While electrical machine drives possess enhanced functionality,
adaptability, and controllability compared with pneumatic, hydraulic, and
mechanical-based solutions [1], their relatively low reliability becomes an
apparent disadvantage for safety critical applications since an unexpected
fault in the machine or inverter would cause serious consequences or
economic losses. Thus, fault-tolerant machine drives are the key enabling
techniques to enhance their reliability or availability in safety critical
applications [2, 3].
The performance of a machine drive and its fault-tolerant capability are
mainly determined by the machine topology and the associated drive
configuration. While various solutions reported in literature have been
reviewed in Chapter 1 to strike a good balance between the two aspects, the
main challenge to achieve high performance and good fault tolerance with
attainable cost remains. In this regard, induction machine-based drives are
known as inferior in efficiency and power density and less tolerant to faults
due to the overlapped windings. While switched reluctance machine drives
are inherently tolerant to various electric faults in one phase owing to the
concentrated winding, they suffer from relatively poor performance in
torque controllability and high level of noise and vibration. For permanent
magnet (PM)-based machine drives, the main challenge is to accommodate
short-circuit fault, especially the turn fault in which only a few turns in a
coil are short circuited, since the magnetic field produced by the PM cannot
be turned off during the fault. Consequently, the excessive short-circuit
current will be induced and cause a rapid localized temperature rise, leading
to permanent damage to insulation and eventually catastrophic failures. By
employing tooth-wound and segregated winding configurations, it is
possible to limit the short-circuit current in the event of a terminal short
circuit (TSC) by employing per-unit phase inductance design. However, itis very difficult to limit the fault current in a few short-circuited turns to an
acceptable level because of the presence of strong magnetic coupling
between the rest part and faulted turns of the coil. Further, no significant
reluctance torque is produced in this type of machine. Consequently, a high
inverter VA rating is required with the per-unit phase inductance design and
the drives also suffer from poor field weakening capability. Recently,
synchronous reluctance machine-based drives have gained advantages over
induction machine counterparts while it is relatively easier to manage fault
current in the event of a turn fault because of the absence of PMs.
Thus, it is feasible to take advantages of high torque density, high efficiency
of PM machines, and low short-circuit current characteristics of
synchronous reluctance machines in the form of a PM-assisted synchronous
reluctance machine (PMA-SynRM). This type of machine is usually
equipped with distributed overlapping windings and a multilayer rotor with
magnets inserted inside to maximize the reluctance torque. The PM torque
usually accounts for about 1/3 of the total torque while the reluctance
torque contributes to 2/3. Due to the combined torque production
mechanism, the merits of high torque density, low PM usage, and low back
electromotive force (bemf) with extended field weakening capability are
maintained for the PMA-SynRM [4, 5], while the disadvantages of high
bemf, and excessive fault current associated with conventional PM
machines is eliminated. Especially, this machine features an inherent one
per-unit characteristic current, which is a unique superiority for fault￾tolerant machine design with a large safe margin. However, the distributed
overlapping windings used in this machine yield strong mutual inductive
coupling between phases. Windings of different phases are overlapped and
bundled together in the overhang region, which may give rise to interphase
short-circuit fault and facilitate fault propagation between phases and cause
other negative impacts [6–8]. Thus, it would be desirable if the overlapped
windings could be further separated to enhance fault tolerance.
Aiming for safety critical applications, this chapter is dedicated to develop a
machine drive with high performance and good fault tolerance by
employing a novel segregated, multiple 3-phase winding configuration for
the PMA-SynRM topology. It eliminates overlapping in different 3-phase
winding sets while having a modular structure to enhance fault tolerance
and maintain high torque density. Detailed theoretical analysis and finiteelement (FE) simulation have been conducted to assess its performance
under healthy and various fault conditions.
For the multiple phase or multiple 3-phase machine drives, mutual coupling
between different phases or different 3-phase modules is inevitable. Such
coupling is of key importance to understand the behaviors of a fault-tolerant
machine under fault and postfault conditions since such knowledge forms
the basis for fault-tolerant machine design, fault diagnostic, and
development of postfault control strategy. For this purpose, the mutual
coupling mechanism between different modules of the multiple 3-phase
PMA-SynRM drive is investigated by analyzing the magneto-motive force
(MMF) distribution of each module and their combined effect. The results
provide analytical means to assess the machine’s behavior under open￾circuit and short-circuit fault conditions.
2.2 PMA-SynRM with Segregated Windings
The standard distribution of 3-phase windings in a PMA-SynRM (as seen in
Fig. 2.1) produces a nearly sinusoidal MMF in the air gap, but it lacks fault
tolerance. To achieve redundant operation, the windings can be arranged as
three independent 3-phase sets, each driven by a standard 3-phase inverter.
However, the windings of these 3-phase sets are overlapped and bundled
together in the overhang region, which increases the risk of interphase
short-circuit fault. Additionally, there is a strong magnetic coupling between
the different 3-phase sets, and a fault in one 3-phase module can spread heat
to the other healthy sets through the overlapped windings. Therefore, a fault
in one part cannot be isolated and may potentially affect other healthy
phases.
To enhance the fault tolerance of the PMA-SynRM, a segregated triple
redundant 3-phase winding configuration is proposed in Fig. 2.2 [9]. This
configuration achieves physical, electrical, and thermal isolations. Unlike
the conventional overlapped windings, the triple redundant configuration
divides the windings into three separate 3-phase winding sets, providing
physical and thermal isolation by eliminating any physical contact between
different sets. The electrical isolation is achieved by adopting an
independent inverter for each 3-phase set.As shown in Fig. 2.2 and compared with the winding distribution in Fig.
2.1, the positions of the coils in phases C, F, and I are reversed, but the
induced voltages remain unchanged due to the periodic air gap flux density
distribution. This results in each winding set forming a balanced 3-phase
winding, maintaining the same MMF distribution and performance in
healthy operations as the original configuration in Fig. 2.1. The PMA￾SynRM’s advantages, such as reduced magnet usage, low bemf, inherent
large reluctance torque, high efficiency, and high torque density, are all
preserved. Additionally, the segregated windings and independent inverters
provide excellent fault tolerance by eliminating the risk of fault propagation
between different 3-phase winding sets and offering redundancy for various
faults [10].
In the event of an open-circuit fault in an inverter switch or windings, the
faulty 3-phase winding set can be deactivated by switching off all the
switches in that set. This allows the remaining two healthy 3-phase sets to
continue operation in a balanced manner, albeit with a reduction in output
torque or power. If a short circuit occurs in an inverter switch or 3-phase
winding, TSC can be applied to the faulty 3-phase set by switching on the
entire top or bottom switches of the 3-phase inverter. Due to the low PM
flux in the machine, the short-circuit current is limited below or close to the
rated value. In the case of an interturn short circuit, the current of the
faulted turn can be alleviated by applying TSC to nullify the flux linkage of
the faulted turns, and hence controlling the localized fault current to a
thermally sustainable level. The separation of the windings enables the fault
in one 3-phase system to be isolated so that the other two 3-phase systems
can continue to operate and generate torque or power. The multilayer rotor
core provides better protection for the magnets, and even if they are
partially demagnetized, the reduction in torque capability will be
insignificant since magnet torque only accounts for approximately 30% of
torque in this type of machine. The machine’s low bemf ensures that in the
event of inverter or control failure, there is no uncontrollable rectification
even at high speed, leading to the inverter fail-safe feature highly desirable
in many applications.Figure 2.1 PMA-SynRM with conventional overlapped windings.
Figure 2.2 PMA-SynRM with segregated windings.
The PMA-SynRM with segregated windings yields high performance and
strong fault tolerance without much-added costs or penalties. The
segregated windings require only a simple reconfiguration with a slight
increase in overhang length to create multiple 3-phase winding sets, each
driven by a standard 3-phase inverter. While the winding segregation is
developed primarily for PMA-SynRM, it can also be applied to other
machines with distributed windings, including synchronous reluctance
machines, surface-mounted PM machines, synchronous wound fieldmachines, and induction machines. The number of 3-phase modules can be
adjusted to meet the specific requirements of the application.
2.3 Fault-Tolerant Capability Assessment
During machine and drive operation, it is important to be aware of the
various faults that may occur. Understanding of these failure modes,
potential mitigating measures, and corresponding fault-tolerant capabilities
are crucial for developing a fault-tolerant drive system, including effective
modeling, control, and fault detection techniques. This section investigates
the fault-tolerant capabilities of the PMA-SynRM with segregated windings
against various types of most likely faults. To quantitatively examine these
failure modes and postfault operations, an example specification of the
proposed PMA-SynRM is given in Table 2.1 for FE analysis. The gamma
angle, which is defined as the angle between the current vector and the q￾axis of the synchronous reference frame, will be taken into account in all
simulations performed at a base speed of 4000 rpm with the rated current
excitation, unless otherwise stated.
2.3.1 Healthy Operation
First, the health condition of the machine is evaluated. The machine is
excited with the rated current of 120 A, and the optimal gamma angle for
maximum torque per Ampere (MTPA) operation is determined to be 51°.
The torque waveform obtained is depicted in Fig. 2.3(a), where the machine
produces an average torque of 89.2 N m at the rated operating point. The
torque ripple, mainly caused by the interaction of rotor saliency and stator
slotting, is assessed to be 14.1%, with the 6th and 12th harmonics being the
major contributors as shown in Fig. 2.3(b). The PM torque and reluctance
torque contribute 30% and 70% of the total torque, respectively [11].
Despite the relatively low PM usage, the machine still achieves a high
torque density of 31 (N m)/L (estimated based on active volume),
comparable to similar Surface-mounted permanent magnet (SPM) and
Interior-mounted permanent magnet (IPM) designs with similar cooling
conditions, owing to the significant contribution of the reluctance torque
component.Table 2.1 Specifications of the PMA-SynRM.
Specification Symbol Value
Base speed nb 4000 rpm
Maximum speed nm 19,200 rpm
Rated power Pr 35 kW
Rated current and gamma angle I
rated 120 A (51°)
Nominal DC-link voltage Vdc 270 V
Number of turns per coil N 8
Figure 2.3 Torque and spectrum in healthy condition: (a) torque waveform
and (b) torque spectrum.
Figures 2.4 and 2.5 present the magnetic flux distribution and flux density
under the rated conditions, respectively. It is noticeable that the distribution
repeats three times periodically over 360°. Therefore, the flux linkages of
the three 3-phase sets are identical in healthy conditions. For instance, Fig.
2.6 shows the flux linkage waveforms of set ABC, which exhibit 3-phase
symmetry despite some distortions due to space harmonics and magnetic
saturation.
Figure 2.7 provides an assessment of the efficiency map across the entire
speed range under rated torque and power. The machine demonstrates
superior efficiency in most areas, particularly at higher speeds owing to the
combination of PM torque and reluctance torque. At the base speed and
rated torque, the efficiency reaches 95.83%. This result confirms that themachine can maintain excellent performance when operating under healthy
conditions.Figure 2.4 Flux distribution in healthy condition.Figure 2.5 Flux density distribution in healthy condition.
Figure 2.6 Phase flux linkages in healthy condition.Figure 2.7 Efficiency map under rated power operation region.
2.3.2 One 3-Phase Set Open Circuit
If there is an open-circuit fault in any phase of a 3-phase winding set or in
the power switching devices, all switches in the 3-phase inverter can be
opened to deactivate the faulty 3-phase set. This will result in zero currents
in the faulty set, leading to open-circuit failure mode for that set. The
remaining two 3-phase sets will still be excited by the same currents, and
the resulting torque waveform is illustrated in Fig. 2.8. Under this
condition, the machine’s average torque is 50 N m. The open-circuit torque
capability ρoc, which is defined as the percentage ratio of the open-circuit
torque Toc to the rated torque Tr
, can be calculated as(2.1)
Figure 2.8 Torque with set ABC open-circuited (a) torque waveforms and
(b) torque spectrums.
The reduction in torque is slightly higher than 1/3 pu. Since the thermal
load is significantly decreased with one set open circuited, the remaining
two healthy 3-phase sets can increase their currents to compensate for the
loss of torque. Now the torque ripple is 15.8%. Besides the 6th and 12th
harmonic torque ripples, the 2nd harmonic becomes the major torque ripple
in the torque waveform. This phenomenon is caused by the electromagnetic
imbalance in the remaining two healthy 3-phase sets, due to the open-circuit
fault, as indicated by the flux distribution in Fig. 2.9.Figure 2.9 Flux distribution with set ABC open circuited.Figure 2.10 Faulty phase flux linkages with set ABC open circuited.
The resultant heavy distortion in the phase flux linkages of the ABC set is
shown in Fig. 2.10. This is due to notable mutual magnetic coupling
between the three 3-phase winding sets. Although the currents in the faulty
set are zero, the currents in the remaining two healthy sets generate a non￾zero MMF in the fault set region, leading to asymmetric MMF distribution
in the air gap. Further details will be explained subsequently. Consequently,
the flux linkages of all the 3-phase sets are no longer symmetrical under the
combined influence of the rotor magnets and the currents in the two healthy
sets.
Indeed, the flux linkage waveforms of the DEF and GHI sets, which are in
healthy condition, as depicted in Fig. 2.11, are also no longer symmetrical.
The distortion in the flux linkage waveforms resulting from the asymmetry
differs for each phase. Phases D, E, F, G, and I exhibit relatively minor
distortions, while more significant distortions are evident in phase H. This
phenomenon is linked to the interaction of the asymmetric armature
reaction field with that of the rotor magnets, leading to different levels of
saturation seen by each phase. Hence, the level of distortion in each phase
will be dependent on directions of rotation, current phase advance angle,
and modes of operation (motoring or generating).Figure 2.11 Healthy phase flux linkages with set ABC open circuited.
2.3.3 One 3-Phase Set Short Circuit
In the event of a switch in the inverter or phase winding being short
circuited, the affected 3-phase set should have all its top or bottom switches
turned on the inverter to create a TSC. However, the remaining healthy 3-
phase sets will still be powered by their inverters for uninterrupted
operation, similar to the one set open-circuit fault. The resulting short￾circuit phase currents, as shown in Fig. 2.12, are much lower than the rated
current due to the relatively low PM flux. Therefore, the faulty set will not
produce excessive heat to jeopardize the machine safe operation. This low
short-circuit current is an inherent feature of this type of machine, and there
is no penalty in the machine design to achieve this advantage. However, the
short-circuit phase currents are asymmetrical, which can be attributed to the
mutual coupling between the faulty set windings and the healthy sets of the
windings since they are not completely magnetically isolated.
Figure 2.13 shows the flux distribution during the short-circuit condition. It
can be observed that the region occupied by the short-circuited ABC set
experiences significantly lower flux density, as the short-circuit currents
nearly nullify the flux. The resulting flux linkage waveforms of the fault set,
plotted in Fig. 2.14, also indicate much lower flux linkages compared to the
healthy condition. The residual flux linkages mainly consist of zero-sequence components, which are of a similar waveform shape with very
little phase shift between each other. This is because there are no zero￾sequence currents in the star-connected 3-phase winding to nullify them.
Phase B exhibits the highest flux linkage, which is consistent with the
highest phase current observed in Fig. 2.12. In contrast, the flux-density
distribution in set DEF and GHI regions appears to be almost normal, as
evident from the flux-linkage waveforms shown in Fig. 2.15.Figure 2.12 Short-circuit phase currents.Figure 2.13 Flux distribution with set ABC short circuited.Figure 2.14 Faulty phase flux linkages with set ABC short circuited.
Under the short-circuit condition, the torque waveform is plotted in Fig.
2.16, with the average torque and torque ripple being 58 N m and 14%,
respectively. The short-circuit torque capability ρsc is evaluated to be 65%,
nearly two thirds of the rated torque and slightly higher than that in the
open-circuit scenario. The torque ripple is slightly lower than that in the
open-circuit case and mainly contains the 2nd and 12th harmonics. These
results demonstrate that the machine is capable of accommodating the
terminal short-circuit faults.Figure 2.15 Healthy phase flux linkages with set ABC short circuited.
Figure 2.16 Torque with set ABC short-circuited (a) torque waveforms and
(b) torque spectrums.
2.3.4 Intraphase Turn Fault
In mash or randomly wound machine windings, different turns of the same
phase winding are in direct physical contact with each other, and their
insulation relies mainly on very thin enamel coating of the magnet wire. As
such, the turn insulation is most vulnerable under combined mechanical,
thermal, electrical, and environmental stress. Hence, a short-circuit failure
involving in a few turns is most likely among other types of short-circuit
failure modes. Consequently, a turn insulation failure within a single phase
will lead to a short-circuit fault, known as an intraphase turn fault, asillustrated in Fig. 2.17. Such a fault generates a substantial fault current,
which increases as the number of short-circuited turns decreases, with the
short circuit of a single turn located near the slot opening being the most
critical case.
Assuming a generic case, a single turn situated at the top of the slot (close
to the slot opening) within coil B2 of the ABC set is depicted in Fig. 2.18.
All phase windings carry the rated load current of 120 A at a phase
advancing angle of 51° at 4000 rpm. FE simulation of this fault results in an
1100 A fault current i
f
 as shown in Fig. 2.19, whose rms value is 9.1 times
greater than the rated. Immediate detection and action are therefore required
to prevent a disastrous failure. Figure 2.20 illustrates the slightly reduced
flux distribution across coil B2 under fault conditions when compared to
healthy coils E2 and H2. The much greater fault current involving a small
number of short-circuited turns can be understood by the fact that the fault
current is roughly the PM flux linkage of the short-circuit turns divided by
the inductance. The former is proportional to the number of turns while the
latter is to the turns squared. Hence, the fault current is inversely
proportional to the number of short-circuited turns. Such understanding also
explains why a short circuit in a turn located close to a slot opening yields
the largest fault current because it carries a larger PM flux but has lower
leakage inductance.Figure 2.17 Illustration of intraphase turn fault.
Figure 2.18 Coil location of the fault turn.
To mitigate the fault current, TSC is deployed through the inverter
connected to the affected 3-phase set. This introduces short-circuit currents
within the healthy turns and coils of that set, which counters the externalflux to the faulted turns generated by magnets and currents in the healthy
sets. Therefore, the flux encompassing the faulted turn diminishes
significantly, resulting in much-reduced fault current.Figure 2.19 Turn fault current in coil B2 with 120 A load current at 4000
rpm.Figure 2.20 Flux distribution with turn fault in coil B2.
Analysis [9, 12] indicates that the fault current magnitude is influenced by
the coil location of the fault turn and the currents in the healthy 3-phase
sets. The altered flux linkage of the faulted turn after TSC reflects
combined influences from magnets and currents in both the faulty and
healthy sets. The imbalanced currents in the fault set modify the flux
linkage and result in differing fault currents at various coil locations. Given
that one 3-phase set comprises six coils, as seen in Fig. 2.18, the fault is
analyzed at six different coil locations with variation in currents in the
healthy sets under MTPA conditions. Figure 2.21 displays how the RMSfault currents in six coils of the ABC set after TSC varies with the load
currents in the healthy sets at 4000 rpm, indicating that the fault current in
coil B is the highest and rises with an increase in the load current. Thus, the
most severe case is ascertained to be a single-turn fault in coil B2 with a
120 A current in the healthy sets, which should pay special attention during
design optimization. It should be noted that if the currents in the healthy
sets are greater than the rated, the fault current will also increase. However,
such an operating condition is considered to occur only for a short period
and hence not sustainable even in healthy operations.
Figure 2.21 Variations of RMS turn fault currents in six coils with load
current in healthy 3-phase sets in motoring mode.
Figure 2.22 presents the current waveforms for the faulted turn and the
healthy turns in the ABC set following TSC application. The resulting phase
currents are unbalanced but considerably lower than the rated value. The
unbalanced currents, in conjunction with those from healthy sets, cause
variable fault currents when the fault occurs in different coils. Although the
faulted turn current reaches 2.6 pu in the severest case, the machine can still
dissipate the induced heat with the temperature in the fault turn below the
safe limit because the total heat generated by the ABC set under the TSC
application is lower than that of the rated. The flux distribution, as shown in
Fig. 2.23, indicates that short-circuit phase currents have effectively
reduced the external flux in the ABC region compared to the scenario inFig. 2.20, thereby reducing the turn fault current as the residual flux
diminishes. Figure 2.24 contrasts the torque waveforms under both the
healthy and fault conditions, confirming the machine’s ability to produce
approximately two-thirds of the rated torque after the TSC application.Figure 2.22 Turn fault current and phase currents in ABC with turn fault in
coil B2 set after TSC.Figure 2.23 Flux distribution in turn fault condition after TSC.Figure 2.24 Comparison of torque waveforms under healthy and turn fault
condition after TSC.
Figure 2.25 Variations of RMS turn fault currents in six coils with load
current in healthy 3-phase sets in generating mode.
It should be noted that the highest turn fault current occurs in coil B2,
which is the trailing coil of the ABC 3-phase set, when the machine
operates in an anticlockwise direction under motoring conditions. Should
the direction of rotation changes to clockwise direction, the worst casewould occur in the trailing coil A1. Conversely, in generating mode, the
severest turn fault occurs in coil A1 when rotating in the anticlockwise
direction as illustrated in Fig. 2.25. In this operating condition, coil A1 is
the leading coil of the ABC 3-phase set. The change to that seen in the
motoring operation is owing to the reversed current sequences in the
healthy sets in the generating mode. Therefore, depending on the mode of
operation and rotation direction, the most critical fault current after TSC can
be found in coils A1 or B2.
2.3.5 Interphase Turn Fault
Since the phases in one module of the triple 3-phase machine still overlap in
the overhang region, a short circuit between two different phases may occur
if the phase-to-phase insulation fails. In a mash wound machine, phase-to￾phase insulation is usually provided by the insulation paper known as phase
separator, as illustrated in Fig. 2.26. While this provides additional
insulation protection, the insulation breakdown between two phases cannot
be completely avoided due to high-level stresses in both the phase-to-phase
voltages and mechanical vibration in the overhang region.
A short circuit involving a few turns across two different phases is termed
as an interphase turn fault, as shown in Fig. 2.27. Short-circuit fault will be
induced in the fault turns and affect the phase currents. Considering the
extreme cases, the worst interphase turn fault would be a two-turn short
circuit involving one turn in each phase. As shown in Fig. 2.28, it may
occur at the input terminal end or at the neutral point end. In the case of the
former, excessive current will result and trigger current protection or even
damage the inverter. This will also lead eventually to an open-circuit
failure, which has been previously analyzed. It is therefore the interphase
faults at the neutral end become the worst scenarios which is worthy of
further investigation.Figure 2.26 Phase-to-phase insulation in the overhang region.Figure 2.27 Interphase turn fault illustration.
Since the interphase turn fault involves at least two turns in the short-circuit
loop, it is less severe compared with the single-turn intraphase fault.
Though the fault current is expected to be lower than the intraphase turn
fault, the same mitigation measure, namely, application of TSC via the
inverter, should be taken to limit the fault current to a sustainable level. It is
therefore the interphase faults at the neutral end with TSC application as
illustrated in Fig. 2.29 are simulated by FE analysis in order to assess the
resultant fault current.Figure 2.28 Illustration of interphase fault (a) at the terminal end and (b) at
the neutral end.Figure 2.29 Interphase faults at the neutral end with TSC mitigation action.
The above three extreme interphase faults are simulated when the drive
operates at 4000 rpm in the motoring mode and the two remaining 3-phase
sets are fed with the rated currents. The resultant fault turn currents and
phase currents in the faulted 3-phase sets are presented in Fig. 2.30. The
phase currents are similar to those under the one 3-phase set short-circuit
fault mode. However, the maximum RMS fault current is 99 A or 1.17 pu,
which is much smaller than that of the single-turn intraphase fault shown in
Fig. 2.22. The combined heating effect of the fault after the mitigation
measure is much lower than the worst scenario of the intraphase turn fault.
The lower fault current is attributed to two factors. First, the number of
short-circuited turns involved in the worst-case interphase fault is two while
that of the intraphase turn fault is one. This implies that loop inductance in
the worst-case interphase turn fault is larger. Second, the bemfs in each turn
of the two different phases have a phase shift. Hence, the net effect on each
turn is reduced. The foregoing analysis shows that the interphase turn fault
can be mitigated by TSC application, and the resultant fault current is lower
than the worst intraphase turn fault. Further, the torque response during the
postfault operation is very similar to that of the one 3-phase set TSC
condition shown in Fig. 2.16 and hence not repeated.2.3.6 Phase-to-Ground Fault
The insulation between phase conductors and stator lamination in electrical
machines is typically provided by slot liners aided with epoxy resin. Such
insulation component is also known as phase-to-ground insulation or
ground-wall insulation. When this insulation fails, a short circuit between
the phase conductors and the stator metallic housing takes place. The
consequence of this fault and its mitigation measure are, however,
dependent on the grounding system also known as the earthing system
employed in an electrical drive.
There are three typical grounding systems, insulatum terra (IT), terra
network (TN), and terra terra (TT), the details of which can be found in the
International Standard IEC60364. TN and TT grounding systems are similar
in that the live conductors of the power system are grounded to the earth
and they only differ whether the earth connection is provided locally or via
a protective earth (PE) conductor. Most electric drives used in stationary
industrial environments employ either TN or TT grounding system. A
typical example of the TN grounding in which the ground connection is
provided by a separate PE conductor is illustrated in Fig. 2.31, where the
star neural point formed by the live conductors of the 3-phase power supply
is connected to the ground (earth).
In an IT grounding system, no live conductors are connected to earth for
reference. Instead, voltage reference is provided by the metallic chassis of
the electric system components connected together. Such systems are
typical in mobile vehicular applications, such as electric vehicle traction
drives and electrical power systems in aircraft, where physical connection
to earth is not possible or feasible. IT systems are also used in applications
where better electromagnetic immunity is required. A typical IT-grounded
drive system is shown in Fig. 2.32.Figure 2.30 Short-circuit currents of the interphase turn faults (a) phases
AB fault, (b) phases BC fault, and (c) phases AC fault.
Figure 2.31 Schematic of TN grounding system of an electric drive.
Figure 2.32 Schematic of IT grounding system of an electric drive.
If any single point failure in the phase-to-ground insulation of the machine
in an IT grounding system, no current return path exists since no active
conductors are connected to the reference ground. Hence, no fault current
will result and the fault consequence is benign. Such a fault will however
change the relative phase voltages of the machine with respect to the
ground reference, and this change can be used to detect such a fault. In
general, the drive system will be able to continue its operation until the
earliest possibility of repair to restore its insulation system. If this repair
does not take place in time, catastrophic consequences may result if a
second point failure in the phase-to-ground insulation occurs.
In contrast, if the phase-to-ground insulation fails at any single point in the
electric machine in a TN or TT grounded system, as illustrated in Fig. 2.33,
a circulating path exists for the fault current in the grounding system, via
either earth connections or PE conductors. The fault current would causeserious deterioration of the drive performance and excessive thermal
loading to the machine and converter and may eventually lead to a
catastrophic failure.
The phase-to-ground insulation fault in a 3-phase drive with TN or TT
grounding can be detected when a residual current device (RCD) is installed
in the system. Upon detection of such a fault, the drive operation has to be
terminated in order to avoid further damage to the system and other
equipment. With the triple redundant 3 × 3-phase drive under study, the
drive operation in the faulted 3-phase set can be stopped by deactivating the
3-phase inverter, and hence the fault current path is blocked by the inverter
diodes. This leads to one 3-phase open-circuit fault as has been analyzed in
Section 2.3.2, where the drive can continue its operations with the two
remaining healthy 3-phase sets, albeit torque production is reduced by about
one-third.
Figure 2.33 Ground fault current path caused by single point breakdown of
phase-to-ground insulation in a motor drive in TN or TT grounding system
(protective earth (PE) conductor and cable shields are omitted for clarity).
2.3.7 Uncontrolled Rectification Fault
When operating at high speed, the machine line bemf could exceed the
voltage of the DC link, particularly in machine drives designed for a very
wide constant power operation range (CPOR). This typically is not an issue
if the inverter is functioning correctly, especially in field-weakening mode
[13]. Nonetheless, if the inverter fails or applies self-protection due to
device overheating or sensing errors, the gate drive signals may be
inhibited. Consequently, the emf could significantly surpass the DC-linkvoltage, leading to uncontrolled rectifier operation via diodes. This situation
might cause mechanical energy converted to electrical energy and fed back
into the DC link, which could potentially harm the entire drive system if
this regenerated power is not properly dissipated [14].
Imposing a limit on the maximum bemf in the design could negatively
impact the dimensions of the machine and the inverters’ VA capacity [15].
Therefore, there has been a compromise in design between the extent of
CPOR and avoidance of uncontrolled generation operation. It has been
established that machines with high rotor saliency are preferable because
they can achieve broad CPOR while maintaining lower bemf levels [16].
Figure 2.34 Line back-emf at max speed 19,200 rpm.
The PMA-SynRM, with high rotor saliency relying mainly on reluctance
torque, is particularly suitable for broad CPOR applications while ensuring
a lower bemf. This design minimizes the risk of uncontrolled generation
operation if an inverter malfunction occurs.
Testing has shown that at the top speed of 19,200 rpm, the machine’s line
bemf peaks at 262 V as shown in Fig. 2.34, less than the DC-link voltage of
270 V. As a result, diodes will not be subjected to positive bias voltage and
uncontrolled rectification is prevented, even in case of inverter failure, due
to the low PM field inherent in PMA-SynRM design. However, it is crucial
to note that not all PMA-SynRMs will have bemf lower than DC-linkvoltage, particularly in applications with wide CPOR. Therefore, the bemf
should be evaluated for each specific design to avoid the possibility of
uncontrolled rectification.
2.3.8 Demagnetization Fault
The PMA-SynRM’s magnets are also at risk of demagnetization from high
temperatures or strong armature reaction fields during heavy loads or fault
conditions [17, 18]. Such demagnetization can reduce torque and increase
currents within a closed-loop controlled drive, leading to a cycle that could
further raise temperatures and exacerbate demagnetization.
A major concern may take place when the inverter falls out of synchronized
control, resulting in voltages U that can be out of phase with the bemf E as
shown in Fig. 2.35, causing substantial transient currents that might
partially demagnetize the magnets. According to the PM demagnetization
BH curve in Fig. 2.36, if the flux density of any magnet element is lower
than the knee point during the fault process, it will operate on the recoil line
with reduced remanence in subsequent steps.Figure 2.35 Illustration of loss of inverter synchronization.Figure 2.36 PM demagnetization BH curve.
Simulations have shown that in severe fault conditions, magnets may
exhibit partial demagnetization [17, 18], reducing back EMF by roughly
31%, yet the torque declines by only about 9% as shown in Fig. 2.37. This
is because PM torque constitutes only 30% of the total torque, indicating
that the impact on torque capacity for the PMA-SynRM is relatively minor
in the event of magnet demagnetization. Comparative studies have
demonstrated that this configuration of PMA-SynRM has a stronger
resistance to demagnetization relative to other types of PM machines,
making it less susceptible to such faults [19].
2.3.9 DC Link Capacitor Fault
Within drive systems, the role of the DC link capacitor is to smooth out
fluctuations in voltage across the DC link and provide a temporary energy
buffer. This component is subjected to both voltage and thermal stresses
during the operation of the inverter, contributing significantly to the rate of
breakdowns in electrical drives [20].Figure 2.37 Output torque after demagnetization fault.
The predominant modes of capacitor degradation are the evaporation of the
electrolyte and the occurrence of open circuits [21]. When an open-circuit
fault develops, it is crucial to deactivate the relevant inverter because of the
deficient filtering on the DC link, which can cause the drive system to
become unsTable [22]. As capacitors age, there is an increase in equivalent
series resistance and a decrease in capacitance, both of which cause
elevated current ripples and temperature rise, impairing the performance of
the drive system. If significant changes in capacitor parameters are
detected, the inverter should be shutdown to prevent a complete system
failure. Similar to how the drive handles open or short-circuit faults in
switches, a machine drive can withstand a DC link capacitor failure in one
of the 3-phase inverters by maintaining approximately two-thirds of its
operational torque, due to the triple redundancy. To tolerate any failure in
the DC supply, each 3-phase inverter should have its own independent DC
power source. In such a configuration, if one 3-phase inverter experiences a
DC power loss, the system only suffers a one-third reduction in output
torque.Table 2.2 Summary of the faults in the machine drives.
Fault type Output torque Fault current
One set open circuit 56% NA
One set short circuit 65% 96 A
Intraphase short circuit ∼65% 340 A
Interphase short circuit ∼65% 135 A
Phase-to-ground fault 56% NA
Uncontrolled rectification fault 0 NA
Demagnetization fault 91% NA
DC link capacitor failure 56% NA
The faults discussed above are summarized as shown in Table 2.2 in terms
of postfault torque and resultant fault current. Therefore, it can be
concluded that the intraphase single-turn fault in coil B2 under motoring
mode is the worst fault case, which should be addressed in the machine
design process.
2.4 Analysis of Fault Operation Behavior
Understanding of the machine drive fault behavior is of key importance to
facilitate the fault modeling, diagnosis, control law design, and avoid
further damage. Thus, the fault operation behavior of the triple redundant 3-
phase PMA-SynRM is investigated. The mutual coupling mechanism of
different 3-phase modules is explained by deriving MMF distribution. It is
found that the 3-phase set module affects each other via an MMF offset
component, causing second harmonics in the dq axis currents, voltages, and
torque. The typical one 3-phase set open-circuit and short-circuit fault
operation behaviors are investigated.
2.4.1 Analysis of Machine Winding MMF
First, the MMF associated with the machine drive’s winding is calculated.
The whole winding consists of three separate modules each spanning a
mechanical arc of 360°, where one-third of this arc is allocated to one(2.2)
(2.3)
module. Each phase winding involves a pair of coils linked in series.
According to the winding layout, the turn functions of all nine-phase coils
are illustrated in Fig. 2.38. The turn functions for the phases C, F, and I
appear inverted against phases A, B, D, E, G, and H, as these possess a
reverse go-return polarity.
Subsequently, the average value is removed from the turn function to
generate winding function as demonstrated in equation (2.2). Here, nx
(α)
represents a specific coil’s turn function, and 〈nx
(α)〉 indicates the mean turn
function value of the coils, as referenced in [23]. The winding function for
coil A1, as an example, is depicted in Fig. 2.39.
The winding MMF, which is calculated by multiplying each coil’s winding
functions with their respective currents, is described according to equation
(2.3) [24].
To demonstrate the mutual coupling effect among the three 3-phase
windings, the MMFs for ABC, DEF, and GHI sets are evaluated separately
and depicted in Fig. 2.40. Here, a coil with nominal current represents one
per-unit value (1 pu). The phase currents are defined by equation (2.4) for a
given time instant.(2.4)
Figure 2.38 Turn functions of the nine-phase winding coils.
Figure 2.39 Winding function of coil A1.
Combining (2.3) and (2.4), the MMF distributions for the three 3-phase
sets, ABC, DEF, and GHI can be obtained as shown in Fig. 2.40. It is seen
that the three distributions are of the same shape with a phase displacement
of 120 mechanical degrees against each other. It can also be observed,
however, that the MMF distribution of one 3-phase set winding is not just
confined within the space occupied by the windings, but also extends to the
regions by the windings of the other two sets. This phenomenon suggests
that the MMF from one set will produce flux linkages in the windings of the
other two sets, meaning that the three 3-phase windings are magnetically
coupled.
Since the MMF profiles from all three sets are identical, the features of the
MMF distribution of the ABC set are further illustrated as an example in
Fig. 2.41. The distribution can be decomposed into an AC component and aDC offset component, denoted as and , respectively, over the space
of the ABC windings, and two DC offset components, denoted as over
the space of the DEF set windings and over the GHI set windings,
respectively. These features can be mathematically expressed as MMFABC
in (2.5).Figure 2.40 MMFs produced by each 3-phase set.(2.5)
Figure 2.41 MMF produced by set ABC.
An
 is the magnitude of the AC component associated with the nth space
harmonic. The represents the AC component in healthy state when all
the three sets of windings are loaded with the identical currents given in
(2.4) [25]. The induced flux linkages can be described by the dq axis
reference system in terms of inductance, currents, and rotor angle.
For notational convenience, set ABC, DEF, and GHI are denoted as set 1, 2,
and 3, respectively. Hence, the offset components represent the MMF
offset component of set i caused by set j, i, j ∈ (1, 2, and 3). The offset
components can be calculated as in (2.5), and they vary with the phase
currents.
During healthy operations, the current vectors or phasors are identical for
all the three sets. The cumulative MMF over the space of a given set of
windings is the sum of the MMFs of all three sets of windings. For instance,
the MMF over the space of the ABC set, labeled as F
1
, is given in equation
(2.6).(2.6)
It should be noted that the magnitude of the MMF AC component over a 3-
phase winding set is only dependent on the phase currents in the windings,
while the offset component is on the currents of all three sets.
When the machine operates in healthy conditions, the currents in each of
the three sets are identical, namely, iA = iD = iG, iB
 = iE
 = iH, and iC
 = iF
 = i
I
,
leading to cancellation of the offset components according to (2.6).
Therefore, the machine operates symmetrically and can be controlled by
classical PI current controller in the dq axis reference frame. Conversely, in
the event of a fault, the offset component of the MMF deviates from zero,
which interacts with the rotor magnetic field to produce a disturbance
torque component to the machine drive. In summary, the different 3-phase
sets experience mutual coupling through the MMF offset components,
which become zero in healthy operations but a disturbance under a fault or
during postfault operations. The above analysis serves as a knowledge base
for the understanding of the machine fault operation under open-circuit and
short-circuit conditions.
2.4.2 Analysis of Open-Circuit Fault
When an open-circuit fault in one phase is detected, all three phases in the
winding set will be open circuited via inverter control as a remedy action.
Consider the scenario where the open-circuit fault takes place in set ABC.
Thus, the phase currents in set ABC are zero. For the purpose of general
analysis, the currents in the remaining healthy sets are expressed by the
currents in dq axis reference system as (id
, iq
). The resulting currents in the
healthy phases with time variation are given in (2.7), where ω represents the
mechanical angular velocity of the machine, while p is the number of rotor
pole pairs. The resulting MMF distribution across the stator air gap over
360 mechanical degrees is depicted in Fig. 2.42 for a given time instant.(2.7)
It can be noted that only an MMF offset component exists over the
region occupied by the open-circuited set ABC windings. The absence of
phase currents in the fault set leads to a zero AC component in this area.
Conversely, the regions over the healthy sets are characterized by an AC
component and an offset MMF component. As previously stated, the
magnitude of the AC component is dependent on the currents in the healthy
sets, represented by (id
, iq
). The offset MMF components, , , ,
associated with the respective regions of the three sets of windings can be
evaluated using equation (2.8) according to equation (2.6).(2.8)
(2.9)
Figure 2.42 MMF in set ABC open-circuit condition.
By substituting equation (2.7) into (2.8), the following equations are
derived:
The flux density in the air gap is dependent on the MMF distribution and
hence determines the phase flux linkage. Since the MMFs of the set DEF
and GHI are the same, the flux distribution of set DEF is further analyzed
by way of example. While the MMF of the healthy set DEF consists of an(2.10)
(2.11)
AC component and an offset component, their resultant flux linkages are
analyzed separately because of the difference in their distribution patterns.
First, the dq axis flux linkages of set DEF produced by the MMF AC
component are denoted by , and can be expressed in terms of
the dq axis inductances (Ld
, Lq
) and the dq axis currents (id
, iq
) as shown in
(2.10). This relationship is the same as that in healthy conditions.
The phase flux linkages of the DEF set that arise from the offset MMF
component are proportional to the magnitude of . The relationships are
described in equation (2.11).
where k is a proportional constant associated with the permeance of the
magnetic field distribution over the winding set. When magnetic saturation
associated with the fundamental flux density components is not very high,
this coefficient can be considered invariant with respect to the rotor angle
due to the use of full-pitch distributed windings. Its value under a given
operating condition is determined via FE computations [26, 27]. Notably,
the flux linkage for phase F is reversely polarized, owing to the reverse turn
function with respect to those of phases D and E.
Then, the phase flux linkages described in equation (2.11) are transformed
to the dq0 axis components, ( , , ), given in equation
(2.12). It can be seen that the dq axis flux linkages contain a DC element
alongside a second-order harmonic, whereas the 0-axis flux linkage is
characterized solely by a component at the fundamental frequency. This is
different from that in healthy operations, where only DC elements are
present in the dq flux linkages and no 0-axis component exists. The(2.12)
presence of these harmonics is responsible for undesirable machine
performance under the fault conditions, such as increased current distortion
and torque ripple.
The impact of the open-circuit fault on machine performance has been
assessed through FE simulations. When the machine is with the rated
current of 120 A in the healthy sets, DEF and GHI at the base speed of 4000
rpm while set ABC experiencing an open circuit, the dq0 axis flux linkages
of set DEF are depicted in Fig. 2.43. The presence of the second-order
harmonics in the dq axes flux linkages and the component at the
fundamental frequency in the 0-axis flux linkage are confirmed, validating
the prior analysis. The flux linkages for the GHI set are similar, and thus,
their details are omitted for brevity.
The interaction of the second harmonic d- and q-axis component of the
DEF set with the constant rotor PM flux linkage produces the second-order
torque pulsation that is evident from the simulation results shown in Fig.
2.44, confirming the connection between the 2nd-order torque ripples and
the MMF offset component. The MMF offset component’s real-time value
and its absolute value are represented in Fig. 2.45 as rotor angle varies. It is
evident that the maximum value of open-circuit torque aligns with the zero
MMF offset component. On the contrary, the minimum value coincides
with the maximum value of MMF offset component.Figure 2.43 dq0 axis flux linkages of set DEF with set ABC open circuited.
Figure 2.44 Torque waveform with set ABC open circuited.Figure 2.45 MMF and abs(MMF) offset component of set DEF when set
ABC open circuited.
It should be noted that the foregoing evaluations are performed with the
assumption of ideal sinusoidal current inputs. During actual operations,
each 3-phase set of windings of the machine is typically driven by a 3-phase
inverter under closed-loop proportional and integral (PI) current regulation.
Thus, because of the limited bandwidth of the conventional PI controllers,
the second harmonics in the dq axis flux linkages and the induced voltages
under the open-circuit operation will interact with the PI current regulators,
leading to further distortions in the currents and voltages. To appreciate this
effect, further simulations are conducted considering the machine drive
under a representative PI current controller. The resulting dq axis currents
and voltages are displayed in Figs. 2.46 and 2.47. As anticipated, the
disturbance caused by the MMF offset gives rise to the second-order
harmonics in both the currents and voltages, which may undermine the
drive stability during postfault operations. With the presence of the second￾order harmonics in the dq axis flux linkages, the conventional PI
controllers, which are designed to compensate only DC disturbances,cannot track the current commands satisfactorily. Consequently, there is a
need for more sophisticated control strategies, such as negative sequence
control or proportional resonant control, to enhance current tracking
performance and ensure system stability during operations following an
open fault.
Figure 2.46 dq axis currents of set DEF with set ABC open circuited.
Figure 2.47 dq axis voltages of set DEF with set ABC open circuited.(2.13)
(2.14)
2.4.3 Analysis of Short-Circuit Fault
In the event of a short-circuit fault, either in an inverter switch or in a phase
winding of the machine, an effective mitigation strategy is to apply TSC on
the fault set via inverter control. Meanwhile, the healthy sets continue their
operation with appropriate currents required by the load. Consequently, the
MMF generated by the currents in the healthy phases can be established in
the same way as what has been described for an open-circuit fault. As
discussed earlier, the currents in the healthy phases produce an MMF offset
component over the fault set region, which can be evaluated by (2.9). The
phase flux linkages ( , , ) induced by the MMF offset
component in the fault set ABC windings due to the currents in the healthy
phases can be similarly deduced in (2.13) as in (2.11).
Converting the above flux linkages to dq0 axis, the following equation can
be obtained:
where ( , , ) are the d, q, and 0 components of the flux
linkages in (2.13). In addition, the magnetic field produced by the PM rotor
will also link with the faulted 3-phase set of windings. The resultant flux
linkages can be expressed in (2.15),(2.15)
(2.16)
(2.17)
where ψm is the magnitude of the PM flux linkage. (ψmA, ψmB, ψmC) denote
the flux linkages in phases A, B, and C due to the rotor PM field,
respectively. When they are expressed in the dq axis reference, only the d￾axis flux linkage exists as the d-axis is aligned with PM field.
where ( , , ) denotes the d-axis, q-axis, and 0-axis
components of the flux linkage in phases A, B, and C due to the rotor PM
field. Therefore, the total external flux linkages of the fault 3-phase set
windings, due to the currents of the healthy sets and the rotor PM field, can
be derived and given in (2.17), where ( , , ) denotes the total d￾axis, q-axis, and 0-axis flux linkages of the ABC set. It is well known that
in the dq axis framework, the DC element corresponds to the positive
sequence component of the flux linkages at the fundamental frequency
while the second harmonics represent the negative sequence component at
the fundamental frequency. This understanding provides a useful insight
into the short-circuit currents, which are induced in the ABC set of
windings after TSC.
According to Lenz’s law, the induced short-circuit currents in the ABC set
tend to reduce the external flux linkages given in (2.17). However, since the
neutral point of the ABC windings is isolated, no 0-axis current will be(2.18)
present and the 0-axis flux linkage remains unchanged in the ABC phases.
The resultant d-axis and q-axis currents, , , can be determined by
(2.18). Owing to the presence of both the positive and negative sequence
flux linkage components in the ABC windings, the resultant currents will
contain similar sequence components [7]. Consequently, both the positive
and negative sequence flux linkage components in the ABC phases will be
much reduced.
The machine behavior under a representative post short-circuit fault
operation is evaluated by FE simulation. The analysis is carried out with the
rated load currents applied to the healthy DEF and GHI phases, while the
ABC set undergoes a TSC at 4000 rpm. Figure 2.48 shows the resultant dq
axis short-circuit currents of set ABC. These currents exhibit significant
second harmonics, corresponding to the negative sequence components. For
a more obvious illustration, the dq axis currents are transformed into the
positive and negative sequence components shown in Fig. 2.49.Figure 2.48 Short-circuit currents in set ABC.Figure 2.49 Positive and negative sequence components of the short-circuit
currents in set ABC.
Figure 2.50 displays the residual flux linkages of the ABC set. It is evident
that the flux linkages under the combined effect of the short-circuit currents
and external flux linkages predominantly consist of zero-sequence
components. This occurs as the positive and negative sequence components
of the external flux linkage have been significantly reduced by their
respective currents in Fig. 2.49, while the zero sequence component
remains owing to the absence of the 0-axis current path in the ABC
windings.
Figure 2.50 Phase flux linkages of set ABC when it is terminal short
circuited.
It should be noted that the machine may also experience a turn fault [28]
and phase-to-ground fault [29] if the turn-to-turn (or strands) insulation and
the ground wall insulation degrade gradually to a sufficiently poor level.
While these specific types of faults have not been evaluated in the
foregoing analysis, the principles outlined offer useful insights into the
potential behaviors of these fault types following the application of TSC as
a mitigation measure.2.5 Summary
In this chapter, a triple redundant 3 × 3-phase machine drive based on PMA
SynRM with segregated windings has been described and its performances
under healthy, fault, and postfault operation have been evaluated. The
extensive performance evaluations show that the machine drive exhibits a
very good balance between high performance in healthy operations and
ability to tolerate various faults, including one set open circuit, one set short
circuit, intraphase turn short circuit, interphase turn short circuit, single
point phase-to-ground insulation fault, uncontrolled rectification,
demagnetization, and DC capacitor failure. If any of these faults except for
demagnetization occur to one 3-phase set drive, the output torque will just
reduce by about one-third following the application of an appropriate
mitigation measure. The reduction in torque under partial demagnetization
is much lower. These desirable performances are mainly attributed to the
combined torque mechanism of the machine topology with a high level of
rotor saliency and low PM field, the segregated windings design, and the
use of independent drives for each 3-phase winding set. In-depth physical
understanding of the machine drive behaviors under open- and short-circuit
fault operations has also been established by the mutual coupling
mechanism through MMF distributions of each 3-phase winding. It has
been shown that dominant second-order harmonics in the machine voltages,
currents, and torque are caused by the MMF offset components through the
mutual coupling mechanism.
References
1 Cao, W., Mecrow, B.C., Atkinson, G.J. et al. (2012). Overview of electric
motor technologies used for more electric aircraft (MEA). IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics 59 (9): 3523–3531.
2 A. Boglietti, A. Cavagnino, A. Tenconi, and S. Vaschetto, “The safety
critical electric machines and drives in the more electric aircraft: A
survey,” in 35th Annual Conference of IEEE Industrial Electronics,
2009. IECON ’09, 2009, pp. 2587–2594.3 Yu-Seok, J., Seung-Ki, S., Schulz, S.E., and Patel, N.R. (2005). Fault
detection and fault-tolerant control of interior permanent-magnet motor
drive system for electric vehicle. IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications 41 (1): 46–51.
4 Ferrari, M., Bianchi, N., Doria, A., and Fornasiero, E. (2015). Design of
synchronous reluctance motor for hybrid electric vehicles. IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications 51 (99): 3030–3040.
5 P. Guglielmi, N. G. Giraudo, G. M. Pellegrino, and A. Vagati, “P.M.
assisted synchronous reluctance drive for minimal hybrid application,”
in Industry Applications Conference, 2004. 39th IAS Annual Meeting.
Conference Record of the 2004 IEEE, 2004, vol. 1, pp. 1–306.
6 Q. Dinyu, L. Xiaogang, and T. A. Lipo, “Reluctance motor control for
fault-tolerant capability,” in Electric Machines and Drives Conference
Record, 1997. IEEE International, 1997, pp. WA1/1.1–WA1/1.6.
7 Welchko, B.A., Jahns, T.M., Soong, W.L., and Nagashima, J.M. (2003).
IPM synchronous machine drive response to symmetrical and
asymmetrical short circuit faults. IEEE Transactions on Energy
Conversion 18 (2): 291–298.
8 Welchko, B.A., Jahns, T.M., and Hiti, S. (2002). IPM synchronous
machine drive response to a single-phase open circuit fault. IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics 17 (5): 764–771.
9 B. Wang, J. Wang, and A. Griffo, “A fault tolerant machine drive based on
permanent magnet assisted synchronous reluctance machine” in Energy
Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), 2016 IEEE, Milwaukee,
WI, 2016, pp. 1–8.
10 O. V. Thorsen and M. Dalva, “A survey of faults on induction motors in
offshore oil industry, petrochemical industry, gas terminals and oil
refineries,” in Petroleum and Chemical Industry Conference, 1994.
Record of Conference Papers., Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers Incorporated Industry Applications Society 41st Annual,
1994, pp. 1–9.11 Chen, Q., Liu, G., Zhao, W. et al. (2014). Design and comparison of two
fault-tolerant interior-permanent-magnet motors. IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics 61 (12): 6615–6623.
12 Patel, D.C. and Chandorkar, M.C. (2014). Modeling and analysis of
stator interturn fault location effects on induction machines. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics 61 (9): 4552–4564.
13 Jahns, T.M. and Caliskan, V. (1999). Uncontrolled generator operation of
interior PM synchronous machines following high-speed inverter
shutdown. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 35 (6): 1347–
1357.
14 Chong-Zhi, L., Soong, W.L., Welchko, B.A., and Ertugrul, N. (2005).
Uncontrolled generation in interior permanent-magnet machines. IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications 41 (4): 945–954.
15 S. H. Han, T. M. Jahns, M. Aydin, M. K. Guven, and W. L. Soong,
“Impact of maximum back-EMF limits on the performance
characteristics of interior permanent magnet synchronous machines,” in
Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE Industry Applications Conference
Forty-First IAS Annual Meeting, 2006, vol. 4, pp. 1962–1969.
16 Pellegrino, G., Vagati, A., and Guglielmi, P. (2011). Design tradeoffs
between constant power speed range, uncontrolled generator operation,
and rated current of IPM motor drives. IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications 47 (5): 1995–2003.
17 Patel, V.I., Wang, J., and Nair, S.S. (2015). Demagnetization assessment
of fractional-slot and distributed wound 6-phase permanent magnet
machines. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 51 (6): 1–11.
18 Nair, S.S., Patel, V.I., and Wang, J. (2016). Post-demagnetization
performance assessment for interior permanent magnet AC machines.
IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 52 (4): 1–10.
19 Fasolo, A., Alberti, L., and Bianchi, N. (2014). Performance comparison
between switching-flux and IPM machines with rare-earth and ferrite
PMs. IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 50 (6): 3708–3716.20 Sun, P., Gong, C., Du, X. et al. (2017). Online condition monitoring for
both IGBT module and DC-link capacitor of power converter based on
short-circuit current simultaneously. IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics 64 (5): 3662–3671.
21 T. Kamel, C. Diduch, Y. Bilestkiy, and L. Chang, “Fault diagnoses for
the DC filters of power electronic converters,” in 2012 IEEE Energy
Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), 2012, pp. 2135–2141.
22 Wang, J. and Howe, D. (2008). A power shaping stabilizing control
strategy for DC power systems with constant power loads. IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics 23 (6): 2982–2989.
23 Wang, B., Wang, J., Griffo, A., and Sen, B. (2018). A general modeling
technique for a triple redundant 3 × 3-phase PMA SynRM. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics 65 (11): 9068–9078.
24 Faiz, J., Ardekanei, I.T., and Toliyat, H.A. (2003). An evaluation of
inductances of a squirrel-cage induction motor under mixed eccentric
conditions. IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion 18 (2): 252–258.
25 Chen, X., Wang, J., Patel, V.I., and Lazari, P. (2016). A nine-phase 18-
slot 14-pole interior permanent magnet machine with low space
harmonics for electric vehicle applications. IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion 31 (3): 860–871.
26 B. Sen, J. Wang, and P. Lazari, “A detailed transient model of Interior
Permanent Magnet motor accounting for saturation under stator turn
fault,” in 2013 IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition
(ECCE), 2013, pp. 3548–3555.
27 Wang, B., Wang, J., Griffo, A., and Hua, W. (2019). Effective turn fault
mitigation by creating zero sequence current path for a triple redundant 3
× 3-phase PMA SynRM. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 34
(11): 11080–11089.
28 Ullah, Z. and Hur, J. (2020). Analysis of inter-turn-short fault in an
FSCW IPM type brushless motor considering effect of control drive.
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 56 (2): 1356–1367.29 L. Wei and Z. Liu, “Identifying ground fault location in High Resistance
Grounded systems for Adjustable Speed Drive at low speed,” in 2012
IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), 2012, pp.
3609–3616.3
Design Optimization of Multiple 3-Phase
Fault-Tolerant Machine
3.1 Introduction
This chapter describes a design optimization process for multiple 3-phase
fault-tolerant machines based on the chosen permanent magnet-assisted
synchronous reluctance machine (PMA-SynRM) topology with segregated
windings for aerospace application as a case study. The design process of a
fault-tolerant machine is more complex than that of a conventional machine
since it is required to achieve desirable performance and enhanced fault
tolerance while satisfying the electrical, thermal, mechanical, and
volumetric constraints for all operation conditions. Especially for aerospace
applications, the machine drives often operate in extremely harsh
environment with limited space, high level of vibration, high temperature,
and heavy load cycles, all of which make the design more challenging.
The design optimization of a fault-tolerant machine has attracted much
attention in academia and industry. Various machine winding and
redundancy configurations were analyzed in [1] for electrification in more
electric aircraft to attain required reliability. In applications that require high
power density and high efficiency, permanent magnet (PM) machines are
usually the choice of design. By limiting the PM flux and choosing proper
rotor saliency ratio, the undesirable braking torque and short-circuit current
can be restricted at an acceptable level for applications such as electric
power steering [2]. To limit short-circuit current to a thermally sustainable
level, PM, or flux switching machines with fractional slot, single-layer
concentrated windings may be employed and designed to have per unit
phase inductance [3, 4]. However, excessive fault current may occur in the
event of interturn short-circuit fault as a result of turn insulation failure,
depending on the fault location in the slot. Further attempts have been made
on the advanced conductor material, optimized conductor placement, and
different slot pole combinations [5–7] to limit the turn fault current. While
these measures have some effects on limiting the short-circuit currents, theyalso increase AC losses in the machine windings and compromise
performance in healthy operations. In general, the design of a fault-tolerant
machine is more complex, requiring optimal trade-offs against performance,
ability to tolerate various faults, and cost.
In this chapter, a comprehensive design methodology is presented and
discussed for a fault-tolerant machine. The optimization process
incorporates diverse design tools that evaluate electrical, magnetic, and
thermal behaviors of candidate designs. Each design sample undergoes a
dual assessment for performances under both healthy and fault-tolerant
operations. The optimization aims to maximize the machine’s efficiency at
the rated operation point while ensuring sustainable postfault operation for
the worst-fault case. The optimized machine is prototyped and tested under
healthy and various fault modes of operation.
3.2 Design Specifications
Without loss of generality, a fault-tolerant machine required for aerospace
application is considered and its specifications together with the cooling
condition and volumetric constraints are listed in Table 3.1. The torque￾speed envelope is shown in Fig. 3.1. This application requires high torque at
low speed and a wide constant power operating range at high ambient
temperature. The ratio of the base speed to the maximum speed over which
the machine operates in the constant power mode is 4.8.Table 3.1 Machine specifications.
Specifications Symbol Value
Base speed nb 4000 rpm
Maximum speed nm 19,200 rpm
Peak power Pp 50 kW
Peak torque below base speed Tp 120 N m
Rated power at base speed Pr 40 kW
Rated torque below base speed Tr 95 N m
DC-link voltage Vdc 270 V
Max phase current Im 200 A
Ambient temperature Tam 100 °C
Cooling medium Aeroshell oil
Coolant inlet temperature Tin 110 °C
Max axial length <400 mm
Max diameter <220 mm
Redundancy Triple or quadrupleFigure 3.1 Required torque speed operation envelope.
To meet the high torque requirement at the high ambient temperature, it is
necessary to employ oil cooling and class-R insulation for the windings.
The anticipated lifespan for aerospace applications is around 300,000 hours,
necessitating a maximum winding temperature limit of approximately 180
°C based on the chosen insulation class. Given the ambient temperature of
100 °C and a coolant inlet temperature of 110 °C, the allowable temperature
rise is limited to 70 °C. This requires a carefully designed oil cooling
system to prevent excessive temperature increase.
To facilitate fault-tolerant operations against all failure modes described in
Chapter 1, a triple or quadruple redundancy is necessary for which the
machine consists of three or four independent modules. Further, it is
essential that all fault behaviors are thoroughly analyzed and appropriate
measures are taken to prevent complete system failure. Consequently, the
machine design must not only focus on maximizing the objective function,
such as efficiency in healthy operations, but also meet the requirements for
sustainable postfault operations against a range of potential faults, while
satisfying electrical, mechanical, and thermal constraints in both normal and
fault conditions. The need for this multifacet approach significantly adds to
the complexity of the design process.3.3 Design Optimization Process
Following a trade-off study for postfault performance against system
complexity, a triple redundant fault-tolerant PMA-SynRM is selected and
its design optimized through a comprehensive design optimization process.
The main design objective is to maximize efficiency at the rated operation,
while meeting the required torque-speed operating range in healthy
conditions and being able to sustain various potential faults during postfault
operation under the specific electrical, thermal, mechanical, and volumetric
constraints.
The machine must be capable of withstanding all fault scenarios outlined in
Chapter 1. As discussed in Chapter 2, accommodating an open circuit or
terminal short circuit (TSC) fault is relatively straightforward because even
under the short-circuit condition, the short-circuit currents and resultant
thermal load are lower than the rated owing to the low back electromotive
force (back-emf). The output torque and power will be reduced roughly by
one-third, which is acceptable during postfault operations. As has been
identified in Chapter 2, however, the severest fault is an interturn short
circuit in a specific coil depending on modes of operation and direction of
rotation, which occurs in the turn close to the slot opening, when the
machine operates with the rated current. Although the probability of
occurrence of the worst case is relatively low, it is prudent to analyze the
behavior of the most critical fault and to ensure at the design stage that the
machine can sustain such faults during postfault operations when TSC has
been applied by the inverter as the mitigation measure. Additionally, the
machine’s back-emf must be limited against the available DC-link voltage
to prevent unintended uncontrollable regeneration under inverter faults. The
complex design process will be dealt with by employing an integrated
design tool and methodology discussed subsequently.
3.3.1 Optimization Tools
To expedite the design process, the use of effective optimization techniques
and computationally efficient tools becomes indispensable [8]. The
integration of Cedrat’s Flux electromagnetic analysis tool with the
optimization tool GOT-It1
 creates a robust platform for electrical machine
design optimization process. At the time of writing this book, Cedrat’s FluxFE tool has been integrated into Altair’s electromagnetic tools and design
optimization platform,2
 which has become even more powerful and
convenient. However, the principle and process are generic, and hence the
optimization process described in this book is based on the combination of
Cedrat FE tools and GOT-It optimization tool. GOT-It is a reliable and
powerful optimization tool capable of addressing constrained or
unconstrained optimization problems with one or multiple objectives. It
offers a wide range of optimization algorithms, including genetic algorithm
(GA) and sequential quadratic programming, allowing users to choose the
most suitable method for their specific application.
First, a parametrized finite element (FE) model of the machine is built in
Flux2D and it communicates with GOT-It during the optimization process.
In GOT-It, the parameters to be optimized, their ranges, objective functions,
and constraints are flexibly defined by users in Python scripts. Each time
the optimizer requests a run of the FE model, GOT-It feeds the geometry
parameters to the model, initiating the solving process automatically. The
results, in terms of objectives and constraints, are then returned as functions
of the geometry design parameters. Subsequently, an optimization
algorithm assesses these results to determine the global optimum point for
the FE-based optimization problem involving multiple geometry parameters
[9].
A sequential surrogate optimization (SSO) process is adopted for the
design. The SSO analyzes the objectives and constraints of each design
derived from the FE model by constructing two response surfaces – one for
the constraints and one for the objectives. These surfaces capture the
estimated behaviors of the objectives and constraints and are then combined
to create a surrogate. As this surrogate is an analytical function, the SSO
can utilize GA or sequential quadratic program to refine the parameter
search region, bringing it closer to the global optimum design. This iterative
process continues, typically converging to the optimum design within a
defined level of tolerance after about three generations of iterations. The
entire optimization process is depicted in the flow chart shown in Fig. 3.2.Figure 3.2 Flow chart of SSO optimization process.
3.3.2 Flux Linkage Machine Model Based on FE
Computation
Typically, an FE machine model takes currents as the input and produces
torque and induced voltages, etc., as the outputs. Direct FE solutions of
such a model are not convenient if the voltage constraints during constant
power operations are satisfied by iterative FE solutions with varying current
vectors. Further, in the design process of interior permanent magnet (IPM)
machines such as the PMA-SynRM, it is necessary to determine the optimal
current vector for a given torque and speed command. To satisfy these
requirements in a computationally efficient manner, a flux linkage machine(3.1)
model is established first through FE analysis and used to determine the
optimal current vector for a specified torque-speed input, enabling
performance evaluation of the design sample at any specific torque and
speed combinations [8, 9], including those of constant power operation.
To build the model, static electromagnetic FE computations are performed
to obtain the d-axis and q-axis flux linkage maps against the d-axis and q￾axis currents (id
, iq
) as shown in Fig. 3.3. For the studied machine design,
an array of (6 by 7) is selected for the (id
, iq
) currents. Thus, the dq-axis
flux linkage variations as functions of the dq-axis currents are established.
Subsequently, the flux linkages at any operating point of (id
, iq
) can be
determined through the flux linkage map. By employing equation (3.1), it
becomes possible to derive the torque and voltage as functions of the
current vector.
To determine an optimal (id
, iq
) for a specified torque-speed command, a
search algorithm is devised, based on the torque function and voltage
constraint. This algorithm aims to minimize power loss while ensuring that
the voltage remains at or below the DC-link voltage limit if the speed
exceeds the base speed. Notably, this search algorithm is entirely analytical
and does not rely on FE computations, thus being very efficient.
Consequently, this approach significantly accelerates the machine design
process.
3.3.3 Full Model Integration for Interturn Fault Current
Prediction
For the design of the fault-tolerant machine, it is necessary to evaluate
performances in the healthy and fault-tolerant operations of each design
sample during the optimization. As discussed previously, by imposing a
limit on the TSC current, the machine will be capable of sustained
operations with the two remaining 3-phase healthy sets in the event of an
open-circuit or TSC in one 3-phase set. Hence, when a feasible design hasbeen produced, no additional evaluation is necessary for sustainable
operations in these two failure modes. Other types of faults, such as DC￾link capacitor or inverter fault in one 3-phase set, would also lead to either
an open circuit or TSC as a means of mitigation. The uncontrollable
regeneration operation at high speed in the event of inverter failures can be
avoided or limited by imposing a limit on the back-emf as a constraint in
the design process. However, the most severe fault is a single-turn short￾circuit fault, and the consequent application of the mitigation measure has
to be evaluated in the design process. While the location of the worst-case
scenario depends on modes of operation and directions of rotation, a
representative single-turn short circuit that occurs in the turn close to the
slot opening in coil B2 during motoring mode can be assumed. The
resultant turn fault current would be the highest, leading to the most
thermally demanding case. To obtain a feasible design, it is imperative to
ensure that the turn fault current and currents in the other part and phases
when TSC as the mitigation measure has been applied are within the
defined thermal limit. Hence, as part of the optimization process, the worst￾turn fault current in B2 coil after application of TSC on the ABC phases
should be evaluated for each candidate design. To reduce computation time,
the machine performance under healthy conditions is evaluated using the
1/6 model by leveraging its symmetry. However, the prediction of turn fault
current necessitates the use of the full machine model due to the
asymmetric condition. Consequently, the optimization process utilizes both
the 1/6 model and the full model for each design, enabling evaluation of
performances under both healthy and faulty operation modes, as illustrated
in Fig. 3.4.Figure 3.3 Flux maps of ψd
 and ψq
 versus id
 and iq
.
Figure 3.4 Flow chart of full machine model integration.
3.3.4 Cooling Design
For the selected thermal class of insulation and required service lifetime of
300,000 hours, it is necessary to limit the maximum winding temperature
below 180 °C under continuous healthy operation. Given the demanding
operating conditions and the high ambient temperature, effective heat
dissipation via oil cooling is required. Spiral cooling jackets, housing ducts,
and slot ducts are three common cooling solutions [10]. Among them, thespiral cooling jacket in the stator housing is commonly used for liquid
cooling and has been chosen for this machine design.
The spiral cooling jacket can be integrated on the housing frame as shown
in Fig. 3.5. The grooves are cut out on the cooling chamber to carry the
coolant oil all around the stator housing surface and fins. The cooling sleeve
fits outside of the cooling chamber, making it a sealed environment for the
coolant fluid. Coolant oil is flowing in the path determined by the grooves
to cool the machine. An external pump and cooling system cool the coolant
oil and provide the circulating pressure. Since the diameter for the machine
including housing is limited to 220 mm, the maximum available diameter
for the stator lamination is set as 180 mm, leaving 40 mm for the spiral
cooling jacket space. The stator is inserted into the housing frame by
thermal fitting. To have a better cooling effect, the windings are potted with
a high thermal conductivity material (Stycast 2676FT, 1.3 (W m)/K, service
temperature, 185–260 °C) to enhance the heat dissipation capability. The
grooves in the jacket are appropriately designed to maximize the cooling
effect while ensuring structural integrity in Motor-CAD.3
The cooling effect of the spiral cooling jacket is evaluated in Motor-CAD.
The leading parameters and losses of a representative design are listed in
Table 3.2. The losses are evaluated with the rated torque at the base speed,
which is the worst case for the cooling system in continuous operations
over the torque speed range. The losses are loaded to the thermal model in
Motor-CAD. The coolant oil flow rate is set to a minimum of 6 L/min. The
resultant temperature distribution in the stator is shown in Fig. 3.6. The
average and maximum winding temperatures are 148.2 and 167 °C,
respectively.Figure 3.5 Illustration of spiral cooling jacket.
Table 3.2 Leading parameters and losses of the initial sample.
Parameter Spiral housing jacket
Stator outer diameter 180 mm
Housing diameter 220 mm
Air gap 0.75 mm
Copper loss (at 160 °C) 1234 W
Iron loss 324 WFigure 3.6 Evaluated temperature rise in Motor-CAD.
It is seen that the maximum temperature, which occurs in the winding
overhang region close to the inner bore of the lamination side, is under the
defined thermal limit (180 °C) with ∼13 °C headroom. This demonstrates
the required continuous output torque and power with the spiral cooling
jacket design can be achieved under the volumetric limit.
3.3.5 Lumped Parameter Thermal Model
The spiral housing jacket has been designed as the cooling solution for this
machine in Motor-CAD environment. However, the Motor-CAD model
cannot be incorporated into the automated optimization process for each
design sample. To circumvent this problem, a lumped parameter thermal
model is developed for fast temperature prediction as shown in Fig. 3.7
[11].The thermal dissipation in the machine is assumed to be predominant in the
radial direction, and hence the thermal dissipation in the axial direction is
neglected. The thermal network models only half a tooth pitch due to
symmetry. In the thermal network, the thermal resistances of each part can
be derived using the governing principle of the heat conduction [12]. The
thermal resistance of the stator housing shown in Fig. 3.7 is evaluated in
Motor_CAD, which captures the cooling capability of the spiral cooling
jacket. Therefore, the average slot winding temperature of the machine can
be predicted by this lumped parameter thermal model during design
optimization in the form of Python script. As seen in Fig. 3.6, the maximum
temperature is located in the winding overhang region rather than in the
middle slot. Thus, 15° is added to the estimated average slot winding
temperature to account for the maximum temperature rise in the windings.
The result is sent to the GOT-IT software to determine the next step
optimization.
The single-turn fault close to slot opening in B2 coil has been identified as
the worst-fault scenario and the fault current as well as the currents in other
parts of the windings during postfault operations are evaluated with the full
machine model during optimization. The resultant hotspot temperature
under this extreme fault condition should also be estimated to assess the
feasibility of a candidate design. For this purpose, a lumped parameter
thermal model representative of this fault condition is developed as shown
in Fig. 3.8, where an additional node and two thermal resistances are used
to model the heat generation and dissipation in the short-circuited turn. The
thermal analysis can therefore be performed against this condition. It should
be noted that TSC has been applied under this turn fault condition, only the
current of the faulted turn is noticeably higher than the rated but it has
minor thermal influence on the other regions because the high heat intensity
is confined with the one turn volume. Thus, the temperature of the stator
yoke Ty
 is mainly determined by the phase currents in the healthy parts of
the windings under the TSC condition, which are close to the characteristic
currents. To predict the hot spot temperature in the faulted turn, the stator
yoke Ty
 is first determined with the model shown in Fig. 3.7, where the
total losses under the TSC condition are injected as the input. Subsequently,
the temperature rise of the faulted turn against the stator yoke can be
calculated by the adapted model in Fig. 3.8, where the winding is dividedinto two parts, i.e. the healthy and faulty parts. The copper loss associated
with each part is injected into its representative node while the stator yoke
temperature is set as the reference temperature.
Figure 3.7 Lumped parameter thermal model of the machine.
Figure 3.8 Lumped parameter thermal model for turn fault.(3.2)
Finally, the temperature rise of the faulty turn, ΔTf
, with respect to the stator
yoke is estimated by the thermal model for postfault operations under the
turn fault with TSC application. Thus, the actual temperature of the faulty
copper winding is obtained by (3.2).
The temperature rises in both healthy and the worst-fault conditions will be
fed to the GOT-IT optimizer as constraints. If any of the temperatures have
exceeded the maximum permissible limit, the design sample will be
discarded. It should be noted that sustainable postfault operation is usually
required for a short period of time only. Hence, the maximum permissible
temperature in the faulted turn can be slightly higher than the maximum
continuous temperature of the selected thermal class of insulation.
3.3.6 Optimization Objective, Constraints, and
Parameters
In the optimization tool GOT-IT, the optimization objective is set to
maximize the efficiency at the rated operating point. The efficiency is
evaluated for each design sample when the copper loss and iron loss are
quantified by the FE tools. From the torque-speed envelope, the peak torque
at the base speed point is 120 (N m)/4000 rpm and the peak torque at the
maximum speed is 25 (N m)/19,200 rpm. These two points determine the
bas shape of the envelope under the current and voltage constraints shown
in Table 3.3. The maximum current density shown in the table is used just
as initial gauge and indeed the maximum winding temperature is imposed
as a strict constraint during the design process. The maximum current limit
is imposed to facilitate the use of a predetermined power module.
To increase power density and reduce iron loss, 0.2 mm thick Cobalt iron
laminations are used. The stator lamination is optimized for high saturation
flux density while the rotor lamination is optimized for good mechanical
strength. To ensure rotor integrity of the multilayer embedded design shown
in Fig. 3.9, the Von Mises stress in the rotor lamination at 150% above the
maximum speed is limited to 450 MPa. The selection of the three embedded
layers and cutout in the rotor is beneficial for high saliency ratio, and hence
high reluctance torque capability, while ensuring good structural integrityand manufacturability. In addition, as has been discussed previously, the
maximum back-emf is also limited below the available DC-link voltage,
while the short-circuit current after TSC application is limited below its
rated current for a feasible design.
Table 3.3 Design constraints of the machine.
Name Value
Max current 200 A
DC-link voltage 270 V
Maximum current density 12.5 A/mm2
Max temperature in the windings 180 °C
Von Mises stress 450 MPaFigure 3.9 Geometry parameter definitions of the PMA-SynRM.
After taking into account the space for stator housing and spiral cooling
ducts, the maximum available stator outer diameter of 180 mm is selected
for the purpose of fully exploiting the reluctance torque capability, while
facilitating a low current density in the slots. The airgap is fixed to 0.75 mm
for a good balance between high rotor saliency and the ability to tolerate
mechanical unbalance and bearing eccentricity. The axial length should be
preliminarily scanned within its maximum available range to produce a
reference design with a minimum length that satisfies the performance
requirements, thermal limit, and other design constraints.Table 3.4 Parameters to be optimized.
Name Symbol Initial value Search range
Back iron thickness Hj 10 mm 8–14
Tooth width Tw 6 mm 4.5–7
Rotor radius R1 42 mm 45–55
Magnet thickness lm1, lm2, lm3 3, 2.5, 2 mm *(1.2–0.8)
Magnet width wm1, wm2, wm3 18, 12, 8 mm *(1.2–0.8)
Middle flux barrier thickness fb1, fb2, fb3 4, 3, 2 mm *(1.2–0.8)
Middle flux barrier width fbw 10 mm 7–12
Magnet layer’s angular span βm 160° 140–175
Magnet layer’s depth d0 8 mm 6–15
Turn number TN 8 6–10
*The geometry parameters are varied between (0.8–1.2) times of the initial value.
The leading design parameters to be optimized for the PMA-SynRM are
illustrated in Fig. 3.9, and they are also listed in Table 3.4 together with
their initial values and search ranges. The initial values are obtained from
the reference design of the preliminary scan. These parameters are selected
as they have a significant influence on the performance and the ability of
the machine to tolerate various faults. The stator tooth width Tw and the
yoke thickness Hj
 affect both the electric and magnetic loadings of the
stator, and hence an optimal balance between the two loadings would
maximize its efficiency or torque capability. Likewise, the rotor radius R1
determines the split ratio between the rotor and stator diameters and
consequently provides a trade-off for the rotor magnetic loading and the
stator electric loading. Best designs are often achieved when an optimal
balance of the two loadings is reached. The remaining parameters mainly
influence the rotor saliency and the torque production mechanism (i.e. the
ratio of PM torque to the reluctance torque). They also control the magnetic
saturation level in the rotor bridges and back iron and affect the mechanical
stress of the bridge, hence the rotor mechanical integrity. An optimalcombination of these parameters would yield the best designs while
satisfying all performance requirements and electric, thermal, and
mechanical constraints, including the ability to tolerate various faults.
The techniques discussed in Sections 3.3.2–3.3.5, namely, the machine flux￾linkage model, the turn fault current prediction, and lumped parameter
thermal models are all integrated to speed up computations in the global
optimization platform through Python scripts. The objective is to maximize
the efficiency at the rated operating point, while satisfying the required
torque-speed operating range and the design constraints listed in Table 3.3
as well as those required to tolerate various faults, such as the maximum
back-emf limit and the limit on TSC current. The optimization process
starts from the initial design parameters and searches in the design
parameter space through a few generations of iteration controlled by the GA
within Got-It until the objective function converges to the global maximum
within a specified tolerance range.
3.4 Selected Design Alternatives and
Performance Comparison
The efficiency evolution of 405 candidate designs after three generations of
GA iterations during the optimization is shown in Fig. 3.10. It is seen that
after each generation of iterations, the design samples move toward a higher
efficiency range. The efficiency of the final design increases from the initial
95.10% to 96.23%.
It can be observed from Fig. 3.10 that the differences in efficiency of the
designs in the third round of GA iterations are very small. This implies that
there are many designs that yield similar efficiency. After examination of
these design samples, two designs, namely, sample A and sample B as
shown in Fig. 3.11 appear to be most promising. Sample A exhibits ∼0.5%
higher efficiency than sample B. The key features of the two samples are
compared in Table 3.5. Sample A utilizes 18% more magnets than sample B
while sample B has a larger stator inner bore. The different geometries lead
to more PM torque production in sample A with higher back-emf while
more reluctance torque is exploited in sample B due to the higher saliency
ratio. Due to higher magnets usage, the back-emf of sample A at themaximum speed is greater than the DC-link voltage 270 V; therefore,
uncontrolled rectification may occur if the inverter fails. This would violate
the back-emf constraint while it is used to illustrate the trade-off in the
designs. Further, the high back-emf will incur a higher fault current in case
of a turn fault. In contrast, the back-emf of sample B is 30% lower, which
eliminates the possibility of uncontrolled regeneration in an event of the
inverter failure. Its fault current in case of the worst-case turn-to-turn short
circuit is also much lower.
Figure 3.10 Efficiencies of the design samples during design iteration.
Figure 3.11 Cross sections of samples A and B.Table 3.5 Key features of samples A and B.
Sample A Sample B
No. of turns/coil 8 8
Magnets usage 1.02 kg 0.86 kg
Rotor radius 49.3 mm 51.75 mm
Peak line back-emf at 19,200 rpm 356 V 257 V
Inductance difference (Lq
 − Ld
) 0.85 mH 0.93 mH
Characteristic current 108.6 A 75.5 A
The electrical and thermal performances of the two candidates at the rated
operation point are further compared in Table 3.6, where an iron loss built
factor of 1.3 is considered. Sample A requires less current with the help of a
stronger PM field while sample B exhibits a larger gamma angle which is
beneficial for reluctance torque. The current density and the copper loss of
sample A are 15% and 25.8% less than those of sample B, respectively. As a
result, the efficiency of sample A is ∼0.5% higher. The predicted maximum
winding temperature is 166 and 179 °C for samples A and B, respectively.
Table 3.6 Performance comparison of samples A and B.
Sample A Sample B
Efficiency 96.23% 95.65%
Current and gamma angle 113 A/48.9° 120 A/54.5°
Current density 8.8 A/mm2 10 A/mm2
Phase resistance 21.3 mΩ 22.6 mΩ
Copper loss 1223 W 1464 W
Iron loss (1.3×) 266 W 275 W
Copper temperature 166 °C 179 °C
Turn fault current (RMS) 320 A 266 A
Fault turn temperature 295 °C 232 °C
Since the machine is aimed for fault-tolerant application, the performances
during postfault operation against the worst-case fault scenario are alsoexamined. Assuming the worst-fault scenario of single-turn short circuit
occurs in B2 coil, the RMS currents in the faulted turn after TSC
application are 320 and 266 A for samples A and B, respectively. They are
significantly higher than the rated value. The predicted hotspot temperatures
in the faulted turn are 295 and 232 °C for samples A and B, respectively.
Clearly, the hotspot temperature in sample A is 75 °C higher than the
maximum continuous operation temperature 220 °C of class-R insulation.
This high temperature would degrade the winding insulation quickly and
lead to further damage over a short period of time. As for sample B, it is
only 13 °C higher and the insulation can sustain a much longer time, at least
a few hundred hours. As has been pointed out previously, sustainable
postfault operation is usually required for a short period of time only.
Postfault repair or replacement will be carried out such that the system
recovers to its full capacity.
Based on the foregoing discussions, the fault-tolerant capability of sample A
is not satisfactory. Hence, sample B is selected as the final design whose
leading design parameters are listed in Table 3.7. The trade-off of the two
candidates is quite common in fault-tolerant machine design. The ability to
tolerate fault usually requires some form of compromise on performances
during healthy operations. The goal of the foregoing fault-tolerant machine
design optimization is to find the best design with the highest efficiency and
acceptable levels of fault tolerance.Table 3.7 Design parameters of samples A and B.
Name Symbol Sample A Sample B
Back iron thickness Hj 11.7 mm 10.25 mm
Tooth width Tw 4.55 mm 5.1 mm
Rotor radius R1 49.3 mm 51.75 mm
Magnet thickness lm1, lm2, lm3 2.8, 2.3, 2 mm 2.8, 2.3, 2 mm
Magnet width wm1, wm2,
wm3
19.4, 13.6, 7.8
mm
14.9, 12, 6.9
mm
Middle flux barrier
thickness
fb1, fb2, fb3 4.4, 3.3, 2.6 mm 3.75, 2.8, 2.25
mm
Middle flux barrier
width
fbw 7.26 mm 10.64 mm
Magnet layer’s angular
span
βm 160.6° 157.6°
Magnet layer’s depth d0 7.05 mm 9.83 mm
Turn number TN 8 8
3.5 Test Setup of Fault-Tolerant Machine
Drives
The above-optimized machine is manufactured as shown in Fig. 3.12 for the
stator lamination stack and rotor stack with the magnets assembled. The
stator stack is skewed with one stator slot to reduce the torque ripple and
voltage harmonic, as a result, the output torque is also lower compared with
the designed value in previous sections. One key feature of the fault￾tolerant machine is the segregated windings for three electrically
independent 3-phase systems as illustrated in Fig. 3.13(a). It can be seen
that the windings of the different 3-phase sets have been separated in the
winding configuration with no overlapping. K-type thermocouples have
been buried in the slots and end windings to monitor the winding
temperatures during test operations. The cable leads are shown in Fig.3.13(b), where the thinner cables are the leads of the 9-phase windings,
which carry the phase currents. To emulate the worst-interturn fault case, a
single-turn tap is brought out in coil B2 of 3-phase set ABC. The fault
emulation tap and the neutral point have been connected to two thick cables
to minimize the additional impedance in the emulated short-circuit loop.
The thick cable leads are connected to a high current relay to emulate the
interturn fault in a controlled manner. The terminal connections of the 9-
phase PMA-SynRM windings are plotted in Fig. 3.14 for a more clear
illustration. It is worth noting that the fault turn located in coil B2
represents the worst-case scenario in motoring operations when the rotor
rotates anticlockwise. However, as discussed in Chapter 2, the result is
equivalent to the worst-fault location in coil A1 if the rotor rotates
clockwise. Hence, tests with the emulated turn fault cover the two worst
cases.Figure 3.12 Stator and rotor stack: (a) stator stack and (b) rotor stack. Wang
et al. [17]/With permission of IEEE.
Figure 3.13 Machine windings and terminal leads: (a) segregated windings
and (b) terminal leads. Wang et al. [17]/With permission of IEEE.Figure 3.14 Terminal connection of the three 3-phase sets: (a) set ABC, (b)
set DEF, and (c) set GHI.Figure 3.15 Real test bench: (a) 9-phase PMA-SynRM with dyno and (b) 9-
phase inverter. Wang et al. [17]/With permission of IEEE.
The manufactured prototype is mounted on the testbed and connected to the
AVL dynamometer via couplings with a torque transducer as shown in Fig.
3.15. The dynamometer is operated in speed control mode at a given speed
command. The machine is fed by a DSP-based 9-phase inverter, which is
configured as three 3-phase inverters in torque control mode. Machinetemperatures are recorded by the preinstalled thermocouples embedded in
the slots and end windings. During tests, the phase currents in the machine
windings are measured by the current sensors in the inverters and the
current data are stored in the DSP RAM. More accurate measurements of
the currents can be taken with high-bandwidth current probes connected to
high-resolution, high-bandwidth oscilloscopes. However, the number of
available current probes is insufficient to measure all 9-phase currents
simultaneously.
3.6 Test Under Healthy Conditions
3.6.1 No-Load Test
First, the phase back-emfs of ABC phases are measured and compared with
the predictions, as shown in Fig. 3.16, when the rotor speed is 4000 rpm. It
is observed that the measured and predicted waveforms match very well
albeit the measured magnitude is ∼2% lower than the prediction. This is
mainly caused by deviations in material properties and manufacturing
tolerances. Further, the line back-emfs of the other two 3-phase sets DEF
and GHI are also measured and compared with the predictions in Fig. 3.17.
In the machine under study, the phase back-emfs of the three 3-phase sets
are in phase with each other. Since the star neutral points of the DEF and
GHI sets are not connected to any external terminal, direct measurements of
their phase back-emfs are not possible. Thus, only the line back-emfs are
measurable in sets DEF and GHI. Likewise, the line back-emfs across
phases AB, phases DE, and phases GH are in phase and of the same
magnitude. Similar relations hold for the line back-emfs across phases BC,
phases EF, and phases HI, etc., as is evident in Fig. 3.17. The nearly
identical phase and line back-emfs observed in the three 3-phase sets
confirm good symmetry in the three 3-phase systems.Figure 3.16 Comparison of phase back-emf waveforms at 4000 rpm.(3.3)
Figure 3.17 Comparison of line back-emf waveforms at 4000 rpm: (a) line
back-emf UAB and (b) line back-emf UAC.
Based on the measurements shown in Fig. 3.17, the line back-emf at the
maximum speed 19,200 rpm can be derived as 246.5 V, which is lower than
the DC-link voltage. Therefore, uncontrolled rectifier operation will not
occur even if the inverter fails. This fail-safe feature is desirable for the PM
machine drives, which are required to operate at high speed under field
weakening control.
The characteristic current I
ch represents the induced short-circuit currents
when all 3-phase windings are directly short circuited at their terminals. It
can be inferred by (3.3), where ψm is the phase PM flux linkage and Ld
 is
the d-axis inductance for each 3-phase set. For the triple 3-phase machine
under study, it can also be measured by short circuiting all three 3-phase
sets.
Figure 3.18 presents the characteristic currents measured at 4000 rpm. It
can be seen that the peak current is 53.6 A, which is slightly lower than the
predicted value. This difference could be attributed to two factors, slightly
lower measured back-emfs and the additional impedance introduced by the
terminal cables. The low characteristic current is primarily a result of the
low PM field, an important feature of the selected machine topology and
design. A lower characteristic current than the rated current is crucial for
achieving the required fault tolerance since the mitigation measure against
all modes of turn-to-turn short circuit, including intraphase and interphase
short circuit, and inverter short circuit is to apply TSC. The resultant short￾circuit currents in the healthy phases pose no thermal risks to the machine if
they are lower than the rated.Figure 3.18 Phase currents of set ABC at 4000 rpm with three 3-phase sets
short circuited.
3.6.2 On-Load Test
Load tests on the prototype machine are performed when it is fed by three
independent 3-phase inverters. As shown previously, the electric and
magnetic behaviors of the three 3-phase winding sets in healthy conditions
are virtually identical and also similar to that of a conventional 3-phase
machine. Hence, conventional vector control, also known as field-oriented
control, is employed to regulate the currents in the three 3-phase inverter
drives. The current references for the three-inverter drive modules are taken
from the speed controller if present, but each inverter module tracks its
references independently using its individual current controller. As a result,
if a failure occurs in one 3-phase set, it does not significantly impact the
operation of the other sets. Each drive can independently respond to
accommodate the fault.Initially, the test is performed at 4000 rpm when each 3-phase drive
operates with the rated current. By way of example, the measured phase
currents of set ABC with high-bandwidth current probes under this
condition are depicted in Fig. 3.19. Since the available number of such
high-bandwidth probes is not enough to measure the 9-phase currents
simultaneously, the phase currents measured by the inverter current sensors
in each 3-phase drive and stored in the DSP memory are shown in Fig. 3.20.
It is seen that the motor currents are effectively controlled in all three phase
drives while exhibiting minimal distortion near their peaks. Switching
harmonics are observable in the waveforms measured by the high￾bandwidth probes, but they are not visible in those measured by the current
sensors in each 3-phase drive. This is because the current measurement in
the drive is performed at 10 kHz switching frequency, and as such the
measurement is not able to capture any transient within a switching interval.
In addition, anti-aliasing filters with a corner frequency of 5 kHz are also
deployed in the current measurement channels of the inverters. Thus, high￾frequency components are also attenuated by these filters. Furthermore, Fig.
3.20 shows that the phase currents of each 3-phase drive essentially overlap,
demonstrating good symmetry of the machine operation. Overall, the load
tests have validated performance of the triple redundant machine drive in
healthy operations.Figure 3.19 Phase currents of set ABC at 4000 rpm in healthy condition, x￾axis, 1 ms/div, y-axis, 50 A/div.
Figure 3.20 9-phase currents at 4000 rpm in healthy condition.
For PM machines with a high saliency ratio, such as IPM and PMA-SynRM
under this study, it is important to operate at the maximum torque perAmpere (MTPA) condition. Hence, load tests are performed to determine
the current vector angle with respect to the q-axis for MTPA operation. For
a given current magnitude, the MTPA point is determined by varying the
current vector angle in the drive, denoted as gamma angle γ, with respect to
the q-axis as shown in Fig. 3.21 at 500 rpm. The tests are repeated over a
range of current magnitudes from 20 to 120 A, and the measured torque
versus gamma angle loci is shown in Fig. 3.22. As can be seen, the
optimum gamma angle, which corresponds to the MTPA condition for a
given current magnitude, increases with the current magnitude (or load
torque).Figure 3.21 Illustration of current vector and gamma angle γ.
Figure 3.22 Torque variations with current magnitude and gamma angle.Further tests under MTPA operations with varying current magnitude are
performed. Figure 3.23 compares the measured and predicted torque
variations with load current under the MTPA conditions. The measured
torque is approximately 5% lower than the predicted values. The prediction
error is mainly due to the discrepancies in material properties (such as BH
curves, remanence of magnets, etc.) and manufacturing tolerances. The
prediction error is also evident in the comparison of the measured and
predicted back-emfs shown in Fig. 3.17.
While it is impossible to separate the PM torque and reluctance torque in
the torque measurements, based on the measured optimal gamma angles,
the ratio of reluctance torque to total output can be determined using the
frozen permeability method [13], and its variation with load current is
illustrated in Fig. 3.24. It is observed that when the current magnitude
exceeds 50% of the rated value, the reluctance torque becomes dominant.
This indicates that even in the unlikely event of partial demagnetization, the
machine has the capability to output substantial torque by leveraging the
reluctance torque.Figure 3.23 Torque comparison in healthy condition.
Figure 3.24 Reluctance torque ratio against the current magnitude.
The efficiency of the motor drive is measured by a Yokogawa power
analyzer. This is possible because the voltages and currents in each 3-phase
drive are essentially identical. Hence, by measurement of the input power to
one 3-phase drive and multiplying the result by three, the input power to the
machine can be measured by the power analyzer. For the output power, thespeed and torque measured in the torque transducer are fed to the power
analyzer as usual. The efficiency map of the machine up to 12,000 rpm has
been obtained and is illustrated in Fig. 3.25. Under the base speed, the
machine operates in accordance with the previously determined MTPA
condition, while in the high-speed region, field weakening control is
employed to reduce phase voltages within the voltage limit. Observing the
efficiency map, it is notable that the machine achieves an efficiency
exceeding 95% across most torque ranges. Furthermore, Fig. 3.26 presents
a comparison of the measured and predicted efficiency at 4000 rpm when
the load torque varies up to 80 N m. The measured efficiency exhibits
similar trends to the predicted values, albeit slightly lower. The lower
measured efficiency can be attributed to the lower measured torque
capability than the prediction shown in Fig. 3.23. In addition, imperfect
winding formulation and insertion as well as connection leads result in an
increase in the phase resistance and hence in the copper loss.
Figure 3.25 Measured machine efficiency map up to 12,000 rpm.3.6.3 Thermal Test in Healthy Condition
The thermal test is performed when the machine drive operates at the rated
conditions for 2 hours, with oil cooling provided at a flow rate of 7 L/min.
The temperature variations at the oil inlet, oil outlet, and windings are
recorded using the embedded thermocouples, as depicted in Fig. 3.27. Due
to the limited capacity of the heat exchanger, the temperatures at the oil
inlet and outlet experience an increase from 24 to 44 °C and from 25 to 57
°C, respectively. It is observed that the temperatures in the slots,
specifically in B1 slot, E2 slot, and B2 slot (where a tap for emulating a
single-turn short circuit is placed), are relatively close, with differences of
less than 4°. The measured temperature of 142 °C in the end winding region
of the ABC set is about 13° higher than those in the slots. However, the
temperature in the end winding of the DEF set is 11° higher than that in the
ABC set. This disparity is likely attributed to the loss caused by the neutral
connection. For ABC set, the neutral is connected outside the machine for
easy access, while the neutral of the DEF set is terminated within the end
winding region. The connection of the neutral is achieved through soldering
the 3-phase terminals, resulting in additional resistance and loss.
Consequently, the thermocouple located close to the neutral point of the
DEF set indicates a higher temperature rise in the end winding region. Upon
updating the Motor_CAD thermal model with the measured copper loss, the
predicted maximum temperature is determined to be 138 °C, which closely
aligns with the measurement of the ABC set. This emphasizes the
significance of accurately incorporating copper loss data into thermal
models for precise temperature predictions.Figure 3.26 Comparison of measured and predicted machine efficiency at
4000 rpm.
Figure 3.27 Thermal test results with 120 A at 4000 rpm in healthy
condition.
It should be noted that the ambient temperature of the testing is different
from that of the design. Hence, the temperature rise would be more
appropriate for the comparison with the prediction. The measured
temperature rise against the ambient (cooling oil) in the windings embeddedin slot regions is about 58 °C, quite close to the prediction. However, the
measured temperature rise in the end winding regions, the DEF set in
particular, is ∼12 °C higher than the prediction. Therefore, if the machine
drive operates in the ambient temperature specified in the design, the
maximum temperature is likely to reach 190 °C. While this temperature is
much lower than the maximum permissible continuous operating
temperature of class R insulation, the estimated lifetime of the machine will
be reduced to 150,000 hours. The higher measured temperature than the
prediction can be attributed to a number of factors. First, the measured
efficiency is lower than the prediction, which implies the losses are greater,
and hence higher temperature. Further, additional leads and resistance to
form the star connection result in additional losses in the end winding
region, where thermal dissipation is less effective. As the prototype machine
is manually wound, the measured phase resistance is 10% larger than the
FE prediction, which leads to an increase in copper loss. The foregoing
assessments and discussions show that a small discrepancy between
predictions and measurements may have a large impact on thermal life of
the machine. For machine drives that require a long lifetime, it is essential
that all these discrepancies are accounted for through designs and tests.
3.7 Test Under Fault Conditions
In this section, the machine fault behaviors and its torque capability during
postfault operations are investigated experimentally for open-circuit, short￾circuit, and interturn short-circuit faults over a wide operation range.
3.7.1 Test Under One 3-Phase Set in Open Circuit
First, the prototype drive system is tested with one 3-phase set in an open￾circuit configuration. During the test, set ABC was open circuited by
deactivating all the IGBTs of the inverter, while the two remaining 3-phase
sets, DEF and GHI, were fed by their inverters and controlled
independently via the current controllers in each inverter. The reference
currents maintained the same as in normal operation. The waveforms of the
measured currents at the base speed are depicted in Fig. 3.28. Notably, these
waveforms reveal more distortions than those observed in healthy
conditions caused by imbalances stemming from magnetic couplingbetween the open-circuited set and the healthy sets and the limited current
control bandwidth. Furthermore, the measured torque variation with current
magnitude under the open circuit configuration is compared in Fig. 3.29
with that of the healthy condition. It demonstrates the drive is capable of
continuous operation and able to deliver 58% of healthy torque when one 3-
phase set is open circuited. Given that the total thermal loading for a given
current magnitude is reduced under the open circuit condition, it is possible
to increase the current magnitude in the healthy 3-phase sets so that the
torque reduction is smaller.Figure 3.28 Healthy phase currents at 4000 rpm with set ABC open
circuited.
Figure 3.29 Torque comparison with set ABC open circuited.
3.7.2 Test Under One 3-Phase Set in Short Circuit
In the event of a short circuit occurring in either the inverter switches or the
windings of one 3-phase set, it is important to apply TSC to prevent further
damage. To test postfault operation under this failure mode, a short circuit iscreated in set ABC via its inverter switches, as shown in Fig. 3.30, while the
current excitations in the healthy sets DEF and GHI are varied from 20 to
120 A at the rated speed of 4000 rpm. The resulting torque variation is
illustrated in Fig. 3.31, alongside those measured under healthy conditions.
Comparatively, the torque capability under this failure mode is also about
two-thirds of the rated, slightly higher than that of the open circuit mode. It
is worth noting that the machine exhibits a small braking torque when the
currents in the two healthy sets are zero because of the losses incurred in
the short-circuited phases.
Figure 3.32 shows the induced short-circuit currents in set ABC when the
two healthy sets are excited with a current of 120 A. The currents in phases
A, B, and C display a high degree of imbalance due to the magnetic
coupling in the three 3-phase sets. Notably, the RMS current in phase A is
significantly lower than that in phases B and C. However, due to the low
PM field, they are all below the rated value. As a result, the machine drive
can withstand the short-circuit fault without any thermal risks. Furthermore,
Fig. 3.33 displays the phase currents in the healthy 3-phase sets, where
slight distortion caused by the imbalance can also be observed.Figure 3.30 Illustration of TSC in the inverter side.
Figure 3.31 Torque comparison with set ABC short circuited.Figure 3.32 Short-circuit phase currents at 4000 rpm.
Figure 3.33 Healthy phase currents at 4000 rpm with set ABC short
circuited.
3.7.3 Interturn Short-Circuit Test
An interturn short-circuit fault may occur in any of the six coils of one 3-
phase winding set as shown in Chapter 2. For the machine under tests, a
single-turn short circuit in coil B2 can be performed with the additional tapand connection leads as shown in Figs. 3.13(b) and 3.14(a). The selection of
the fault emulation is based on the foregoing theoretical analysis, which has
shown that a representative worst-case scenario, leading to the largest short￾circuit current, occurs when a single turn located in coil B2 is short
circuited during motoring operation in anticlockwise direction of rotation.
First, a test is performed without TSC application when the machine rotates
anticlockwise. To avoid the damage due to excessive fault current, the turn
fault is tested at 1000 rpm when all 3-phase sets are excited with 80 A load
current and the fault is injected by closing the relay connected to the fault
emulation cables, as shown in Fig. 3.34 for 0.2 second. A current probe is
employed to measure the fault current during the test, and the result is
shown in Fig. 3.35. It is seen that the turn fault current reaches 440 A.
Clearly, the fault current is ∼4 times greater than the rated, and without a
mitigation measure the insulation in the surrounding region can be quickly
damaged due to a rapid increase in temperature. The tests are repeated with
a variation of load currents from 10 to 80 A at 1000 rpm. By rotating
anticlockwise in both motoring and generation modes, the emulated turn-to￾turn short circuit corresponds to one-turn short-circuit fault in coil B2.
Conversely, by rotating clockwise in motoring and generation modes, it
represents one-turn short-circuit fault in coil A1. The measured variation of
the RMS fault currents with the load currents is plotted in Fig. 3.36 for the
four fault modes. As can be seen, the RMS fault currents under the four
modes are similar and increase with the load currents.Figure 3.34 Test setup of interturn short-circuit fault: (a) cable leads and (b)
control relay. Wang et al. [17]/With permission of IEEE.
Figure 3.35 Turn fault current with 80 A load current at 1000 rpm.Figure 3.36 Turn fault current variations in coil B2 and A1 at 1000 rpm in
motoring and generating modes.
As predicted, small differences in the fault currents between the motoring
and generating modes are present because of the differences in the
interaction of the armature reaction field with the PM field in the two
operating modes. It is seen that even if with a very light load of 20 A, the
short-circuit current is notably greater than the rate value. The tests show
that such types of faults are impossible to be tolerated without a mitigation
action. It is also essential to emphasize that the fault current would escalate
even further if either the load current or speed increases. Consequently,
application of mitigation measures becomes crucial in order to reduce the
fault current under such fault conditions.
Subsequently, the reduction of the turn fault current with the application of
TSC to the ABC set via its inverter switches is tested at 4000 rpm when the
healthy 3-phase sets are excited with the rated current of 120 A. The fault
current in the short-circuited turn and the currents in the rest of the 3-phase
windings are shown in Fig. 3.37. It is seen that the peak fault current has
been reduced to 220 A and its RMS value to 130 A while the phase currents
in the rest of the faulted 3-phase windings are very close to those observed
under the TSC of the three phases shown in Fig. 3.32. During the test, the
currents in the healthy sets remain well controlled, as shown in Fig. 3.38.
This represents postfault operation after the TSC mitigation measure isapplied against the interturn short-circuit fault and demonstrates the ability
of the drive to tolerate such faults with reduced output torque and power.
Figure 3.37 Turn fault current in coil B2 and phase currents of set ABC
with 120 A load current at 4000 rpm in motoring mode after TSC.
Figure 3.38 Healthy phase currents with turn fault in coil B2 when load
current is set to 120 A in motoring mode at 4000 rpm after TSC.
To investigate the mitigation effect of TSC application against the turn
faults, further tests with the emulated turn fault when the machine operatesat 4000 rpm are conducted by varying the healthy sets currents from 20 to
120 A, for the faults in coil B2 and coil A1 in both motoring and generating
modes. The variations of the measured RMS currents in the faulted turns
with the load current in the healthy phases are depicted in Fig. 3.39. It is
evident that in motoring mode, the fault current in coil B2 is much greater
than that in coil A1, whereas the opposite is observed in generation mode.
These findings are consistent with the results discussed in Chapter 2. The
worst-case scenario in motoring mode occurs with a single-turn fault in coil
B2 when the other healthy 3-phase sets are excited with the rated current. A
similar conclusion can be drawn for the worst case in coil A1 in the
generating mode.
Figure 3.39 Turn fault current variations in coil B2 and A1 at 4000 rpm in
motoring and generating modes after TSC.
The drive output torques during the postfault operations under the emulated
turn fault after TSC applications have also been measured and assessed in
the tests, and the results are very similar to those shown in Fig. 3.31 under
the TSC of one 3-phase set. That is, the drive is capable of delivering
approximately 2/3 of the torque compared to healthy operations.
3.7.4 Thermal Test Under Turn Fault Condition with TSC
To assess the sustainability of the drive to tolerate the most severe turn
fault, the temperature rises in various parts of the windings are measuredwith the embedded thermal couplers. A 2-hour test is performed with a
single-turn fault injected in coil B2 and TSC applied while the remaining
two healthy 3-phase sets carry the rated current of 120 A. The recorded
temperatures in different parts of the machine are presented in Fig. 3.40. It
is seen that the measured temperatures in the slot and end winding sections,
where the fault turn is located, are lower than those in the healthy DEF
windings, despite the current in the faulted turn being 1.5 pu. In addition,
the temperatures of coil B1 and the ABC end winding are also lower than
those of the DEF windings. By comparing Figs. 3.27 and 3.40, it can be
observed that the temperatures of the DEF windings are even lower than
those in the healthy condition. This is attributable to the fact that after TSC
application, the RMS currents in the healthy parts of the ABC windings are
considerably lower than the rated as is evident in Fig. 3.37. Therefore,
despite the higher current in the faulted turn, the total thermal loading of the
ABC windings and the machine is reduced, leading to the reduction in
temperature rise in comparison to the healthy condition. The thermal tests
further confirm that the machine drive can sustain the most severe turn fault
with TSC application without any thermal risk, albeit the output torque will
be reduced by approximately 1/3.Figure 3.40 Thermal test results under single-turn fault in coil B2 with 120
A at 4000 rpm in motoring mode after TSC.
Compared with the predicted maximum temperature rise of 122 °C in the
faulted turn against the ambient temperature of 110 °C for the worst-case
scenario as discussed in Section 3.4, the measured temperature rise of ∼52
°C is considerably lower. This is mainly due to the factor that the measured
fault current in the short-circuit turn is much lower than the prediction for
the reasons discussed previously. Further, there is not guarantee that the
measurement captured the maximum temperature in the faulted turn. Under
the fault condition, indeed, the temperature distribution in the machine no
longer exhibits per slot-pitch symmetry, and hence more sophisticated
modeling techniques are required. Further information on this can be found
in [11, 14].
It should be noted that other faults, such as mechanical failure,
demagnetization fault, interphase turn fault, and DC capacitor failure, may
also occur in the machine drive which are not tested. Mechanical failures,
including bearing failure and broken rotor, are usually avoided by vibration
monitoring or by regular maintenance and replacement. Demagnetization
under worst-fault conditions has been fully analyzed using the techniques
reported in [15, 16]. It has been shown that no demagnetization will take
place under any interturn short circuit and TSC conditions. This is because
although interturn fault current can be many times of the rated, it flows in afew turns, and its overall effect on the magnets which are partly protected
by the rotor core is insignificant. The repeated tests with one turn short
circuit partly support the above findings as no partial demagnetization is
seen, although the measured fault current is much lower than the prediction
due to the reasons discussed previously. As pointed out earlier, the PMA￾SynRM mainly relies on the reluctance torque. Hence, the machine drive
can still output considerable torque even if an unlikely demagnetization
fault occurs. The interphase turn fault is not tested since it is less severe
than the single-turn intraphase fault. The DC capacitor failure is also not
tested but the resultant behavior is similar to open circuit in one 3-phase set.
Obviously, it can be sustained by the triple redundant machine drive with
appropriate condition monitoring techniques in place.
3.8 Summary
In this chapter, a 40 kW triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM has been
designed for aerospace application. Various computationally efficient
prediction techniques and tools are integrated into an optimization platform
for the machine design to maximize objective functions while satisfying all
the electrical, thermal, and mechanical constraints. The machine is
optimized to exhibit high efficiency and good fault tolerance against
different faults. A machine prototype is built and comprehensive
experimental tests have been performed on an established test bench under
healthy and various fault modes. The measured results confirm the
optimized machine drive exhibits good performance and excellent fault
tolerance, including the worst-fault case single-turn short circuit.
References
1 J. W. Bennett, G. J. Atkinson, B. C. Mecrow, and D. J. Atkinson, “Fault￾tolerant design considerations and control strategies for aerospace
drives,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 59, no. 5, pp.
2049–2058, 2012.
2 N. Bianchi and S. Bolognani, “Design of a fault-tolerant IPM motor for
electric power steering,” in IEEE 36th Power Electronics Specialists
Conference, 2005. PESC ’05, 2005, p. 2873.3 B. C. Mecrow et al., “Design and testing of a four-phase fault-tolerant
permanent-magnet machine for an engine fuel pump,” IEEE
Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 671–678, 2004.
4 T. Raminosoa, C. Gerada, and M. Galea, “Design considerations for a
fault-tolerant flux-switching permanent-magnet machine,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 2818–2825,
2011.
5 P. Arumugam, “Design optimization on conductor placement in the slot of
permanent magnet machines to restrict turn-turn short-circuit fault
current,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 52, no. 99, pp. 1–8,
2016.
6 J. Dusek, P. Arumugam, C. Brunson, E. K. Amankwah, T. Hamiti, and C.
Gerada, “Impact of slot/pole combination on inter-turn short-circuit
current in fault-tolerant permanent magnet machines,” IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1–9, 2016.
7 P. Arumugam, T. Hamiti, C. Brunson, and C. Gerada, “Analysis of
vertical strip wound fault-tolerant permanent magnet synchronous
machines,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 61, no. 3,
pp. 1158–1168, 2014.
8 L. Chen, J. Wang, P. Lazari, and X. Chen, “Optimizations of a permanent
magnet machine targeting different driving cycles for electric vehicles,”
in Electric Machines & Drives Conference (IEMDC), 2013 IEEE
International, 2013, pp. 855–862.
9 L. Chen, J. Wang, P. Lombard, P. Lazari, and V. Leconte, “Design
optimisation of permanent magnet assisted synchronous reluctance
machines for electric vehicle applications,” in 2012 XXth International
Conference on Electrical Machines (ICEM), 2012, pp. 2647–2653.
10 V. I. Patel, J. Wang, W. Wang, and X. Chen, “Analysis and design of 6-
phase fractional slot per pole per phase permanent magnet machines
with low space harmonics,” in 2013 IEEE International Electric
Machines & Drives Conference (IEMDC), 2013, pp. 386–393.11 P. H. Mellor, D. Roberts, and D. R. Turner, “Lumped parameter thermal
model for electrical machines of TEFC design,” IEE Proceedings B,
Electric Power Applications, vol. 138, no. 5, pp. 205–218, 1991.
12 J. Wang, W. Wang, K. Atallah, and D. Howe, “Design of a linear
permanent magnet motor for active vehicle suspension,” in 2009 IEEE
International Electric Machines and Drives Conference, 2009, pp. 585–
591.
13 Q. Chen, G. Liu, W. Zhao, L. Sun, M. Shao, and Z. Liu, “Design and
comparison of two fault-tolerant interior-permanent-magnet motors,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 6615–
6623, 2014.
14 Y. Shi, J. Wang, and B. Wang, “Electromagnetic-thermal coupled
simulation under various fault conditions of a triple redundant 9-phase
PMASynRM,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 56, no.
1, pp. 128–137, 2020.
15 S. S. Nair, V. I. Patel, and J. Wang, “Post-demagnetization performance
assessment for interior permanent magnet AC machines,” IEEE
Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1–10, 2016.
16 V. I. Patel, J. Wang, and S. S. Nair, “Demagnetization assessment of
fractional-slot and distributed wound 6-phase permanent magnet
machines,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1–11,
2015.
17 B. Wang, J. Wang, A. Griffo, and B. Sen, “Experimental Assessments of
a Triple Redundant Nine-Phase Fault-Tolerant PMA SynRM Drive,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 772–
783, 2017.
Notes
1 http://www.cedrat.com/en/software/got-it.html.
2 https://altair.com/flux/.
3 https://www.ansys.com/products/electronics/ansys-motor-cad.4
General Modeling Technique for Multiple 3-
Phase Machine Drive
4.1 Introduction
Electrical machine drive behaviors under a fault condition are notably
different from those in healthy operations due to physical changes arising
from the fault and the influence of fault current in case of any type of short￾circuit faults. Therefore, an effective fault modeling technique is essential
for developing a fault-tolerant machine drive to assess its behaviors and
fault impacts in a computationally efficient way and to facilitate the
development of suitable fault detection and postfault control techniques.
However, since occurrence of a fault in a machine drive will break the
symmetrical operating conditions as well as periodic boundary conditions,
conventional modeling techniques for electrical machines, such as lumped
parameter circuit and the techniques based on the synchronous rotating
reference frame, are not applicable. Numerical techniques, such as finite
element (FE) analysis, are often used to assess machine performance under
a fault condition. However, since the periodic boundary condition is no
longer true in a faulted machine, a FE model of the full machine geometry
is required for the performance predictions, which leads to considerable
computational resources and times. Further, since there are not only various
failure modes (or fault types) but also many influential factors in each fault
type, numerical analysis-based techniques would consume vast amounts of
resources and effort to cover all possible fault scenarios, and hence become
ineffective for developing fault detection techniques and postfault control
strategies. In addition, such techniques do not provide much insight into the
underlying physical behavior of a machine under fault conditions. Effective
fault modeling is, therefore, a key challenge for the development of a fault￾tolerant machine drive.
For the triple 3-phase permanent magnet-assisted synchronous reluctance
machine (PMA-SynRM) drive under study, although the different 3-phase
modules are physically, thermally, and electrically isolated, they are notmagnetically isolated. Indeed, the three 3-phase sets are mutually coupled
and cannot be regarded as independent when the machine operates in a fault
mode. In addition, the winding inductance cannot be considered constant
due to the nonlinear magnetic circuit of the complex rotor geometry. The
machine drive could operate in healthy, open-circuit, and short-circuit
conditions. More generally, the magnitude and phase angle of the currents
in the three winding sets may be all different and this condition is referred
to as unbalanced current operation mode. For the triple 3-phase drive, it has
six independent current variables in dq axis. Together with the rotor
position, the machine flux linkages are nonlinear functions of seven
variables. The current state-of-the-art modeling techniques are not sufficient
to describe this complex machine drive in a computationally efficient
manner. Hence, it is valuable to develop a modeling technique that can
represent the machine behavior and capture its main characteristics.Figure 4.1 Illustration of turn fault location in a slot and phase winding.
More specifically for an interturn short-circuit fault which only involves a
few turns, very large current is induced in the short-circuit path [1]. It leads
to uneven currents in the faulty turns, which further increases the difficulty
level of modeling [2, 3]. The turn fault current is not only affected by the
currents in the fault set but also influenced by the currents in the healthy
sets. In addition, it is also dependent on the number of faulted turns, their
position in a slot, and the location of the coil in which the fault occurs as
shown in Fig. 4.1 since the flux linkage of the fault turns change
accordingly. After the remedial terminal short-circuit (TSC) action, the
resultant current in the faulted turns is critical and needs to be predicted
accurately when the currents in each 3-phase set are all different. However,
it is computationally expensive to evaluate all the possible fault scenarios toidentify the worst case by repeated FE simulations. While accurate fault
modeling is a great challenge for the triple 3-phase machine drive, a fast￾modeling technique that accounts all factors affecting the fault behavior,
including the currents in each 3-phase set, the number of faulted turns, and
the associated coil location and slot position, will be of great value.
To this end, a general modeling technique is established for the triple 3-
phase PMA-SynRM considering various fault scenarios, including the
healthy, open-circuit, short-circuit, and unbalanced current operation. The
model can be adapted for interturn fault accounting the factors described
earlier. In this way, the machine performance and behavior under healthy
and fault conditions can be predicted in a flexible and computationally
efficient way.
4.2 General Modeling Technique for 3-Phase
Winding Sets
4.2.1 MMF Analysis for 3-Phase Winding Sets
According to the magneto-motive force (MMF) analysis in Chapter 2, the
MMF across the air gap produced by the currents in set ABC windings
when the stator and rotor laminations are assumed to be infinitely
permeable is replotted in Fig. 4.2. The currents in set ABC produce the
MMF not only in its own spatial region but also in the regions of the other
two sets of windings. It has been shown that the MMF in set ABC region
consists of an AC component and an offset component while only an offset
component exists in the other regions. Likewise, the MMFs produced by the
currents in the other two winding sets can be obtained with appropriate
phase shifts as shown in Fig. 4.3.Figure 4.2 MMF produced by set ABC.
Figure 4.3 MMFs produced by sets DEF and GHI.(4.1)
(4.2)
(4.3)
It is seen that the currents in each 3-phase winding set produce an AC
component only in the region occupied by its own winding while they
contribute to the offset component in the regions occupied by the other
windings. The total MMF in one 3-phase set region can be obtained by
adding the MMF contributions of all three sets. Thus, the total MMF over
set ABC, denoted as F
1
, can be expressed as
where denotes the net MMF offset component in the region occupied
by the ABC windings and N is the number of series connected turns per
coil. According to (4.1), the total MMF in one 3-phase set is also composed
of an AC component and an offset component . The AC component
is purely determined by the currents in its own set and rotor angular
position while the offset component is the combined effect of the currents in
all three sets. Due to nonexistence of any zero-sequence current in a 3-
phase winding set, the phase currents iA, iB
, iC
 can be represented as id1
, 
iq1
 in the dq-axis reference frame. Together with the offset component ,
the MMF over set ABC F
1
 can be expressed as a function of
: 
where θ is the rotor angle. Similarly, the total MMFs over sets DEF and
GHI can be expressed as
The variables are similarly defined for the second and third winding sets,
DEF and GHI respectively. It can be shown that under healthy conditionsthe dq-axis currents of each 3-phase set are identical while the offset
components are cancelled according to (4.1). Consequently, all three sets
will produce the same AC component as in a conventional 3-phase machine
with three pole pairs. In case of one set open-circuit condition, the AC
component is zero for the fault set due to zero phase currents but the offset
component still exists due to the currents in the other two 3-phase sets,
whilst both an AC and offset component will exist in the other two sets. If
one set is short circuited, short-circuit currents will be induced in the fault
set, which are governed by the circuit laws. The resultant MMF can be
deduced accordingly as a combination of the AC component and offset
component for each set. In the extreme condition where the currents in each
set are all different, the MMF of each set can still be expressed by (4.2) and
(4.3) with independent dq-axis currents in the three sets. It is important to
point out that the above descriptions of the MMFs associated with each 3-
phase winding set are generic and applicable to any current waveform.
It follows that in any operation conditions the MMF of the whole machine
can be partitioned in three regions. The MMF in each region associated
with a 3-phase set can be expressed as a function f(θ, id
, iq
, Fos) with four
variables, where id
, iq
 are the currents of the winding set in the region while
Fos is the combined offset component due to the currents in all three sets of
windings.
The MMF analysis confirms that different 3-phase sets are not magnetically
isolated and their mutual coupling effect can be represented by the MMF
offset component. And only in healthy conditions, the offset component is
cancelled by each other due to the same current excitation and hence the
machine behaves as a conventional 3-phase machine. This condition is
known as balanced or symmetric operating condition. In contrast, in any
fault conditions the residual MMF offset component is non-zero and it will
lead to unbalanced or asymmetrical operation conditions. Such
understanding provides an important physical insight into the cause of
changes in machine behavior under a fault or unbalanced operation
condition.4.2.2 General Modeling Approach
As discussed earlier, the MMF in one 3-phase set region can be described
by the function of four variables (θ, id
, iq
, Fos). Physically as shown in Fig.
4.4, the flux density in the air gap is determined by the MMF described by
(id
, iq
, Fos) and the permanent magnet (PM) field, whose combined effect
produces flux linkages and torque. Therefore, the flux linkages and torque
of each 3-phase set can be expressed by a 4D function .
This function can be obtained by FE simulations of the full machine model
to establish the flux linkages and torque as functions of the four variables in
the form of 4D lookup tables, as described in Section 4.2.3. As a result, the
performance of each 3-phase set can be predicted by interpolating the 4D
tables via the four variables (θ, id
, iq
, Fos) together with any circuit
equations and physical governing laws for the drive operation.
Thus, a general modeling method is established as shown in Fig. 4.5. First,
the (id
, iq
) currents of each 3-phase set together with θ are fed into the MMF
offset calculation block to derive Fos for each set according to (4.1) and
(4.3). Then, the resultant four variables (θ, id
, iq
, Fos) for each 3-phase set
form the inputs to the 4D tables, which determine the resultant flux linkages
and torque of the 3-phase winding set. It should be noted that the flux
linkages and torque of each set are interpolated separately based on the
same lookup tables since the electrical offset angle between any two
adjacent winding sets is 360o
. The total torque is obtained by adding the
torque contributions of all three sets.
According to the modeling scheme, the flux linkages and torque component
of each 3-phase set can be determined as long as the currents of all three
winding sets are available, no matter the machine is operating in healthy,
open-circuit, short-circuit, or unbalanced current conditions. Thus, the
proposed model can predict the machine behavior under healthy, open￾circuit, short-circuit, and unbalanced current operating conditions without
any modification, and in doing so, significant efforts are saved to predict the
machine performance under different conditions. It should be noted that the
modeling technique can only deal with open-circuit, short-circuit faults and
unbalanced current operations in the 3-phase winding set level at this stage.It will be adapted for modeling with interturn short-circuit fault in Section
4.4.
Figure 4.4 One 3-phase module and its MMF in the air gap.
Figure 4.5 General modeling diagram.
4.2.3 4D Table Construction
Now the key task is to construct the 4D lookup tables to determine the flux
linkages and torque of one 3-phase set as functions of the four variables (θ,
id
, iq
, Fos), which capture the combined effects of the winding MMFs andPM field over that 3-phase set. Since the PMA-SynRM is subject to
magnetic saturation, FE analysis is performed to extract the data for the 4D
tables. It is worth noting that the geometry of the three 3-phase sets is
identical as shown in Fig. 4.4 because the electrical phase shift between
each set is 360°
. Therefore, the 4D tables only need to be constructed for
one 3-phase set and the other two sets can use the same table. Hence, FE
simulations are performed to extract the flux linkages and torque data of set
ABC region in the full machine model, shown in Fig. 4.6, for a given MMF
distribution.
The first step of table construction is to determine the currents in the nine
phases to generate the MMF over set ABC defined by (θ, id
, iq
, Fos). As
discussed previously, the MMF AC component is determined by the
currents of its own set winding. Thus, for given (id
, iq
) and the rotor
electrical angle θ, the phase currents of set ABC can be derived by the dq
transform as(4.4)
Figure 4.6 Full machine model for 4D table generation.
However, the MMF offset component Fos is the combined effect of currents
in all three 3-phase sets. To represent this offset component, specific
currents should be injected to the DEF and GHI sets of windings to generate
the required Fos. For this purpose, the currents in sets DEF and GHI that
differ from those in set ABC are specified as (x, y, z) in (4.5), which are to
be determined to produce the required Fos.(4.5)
(4.6)
(4.7)
(4.8)
(4.9)
As a result, the Fos over set ABC is obtained by substituting (4.4) and (4.5)
into (4.1) as shown in (4.6).
Since zero sequence current cannot circulate in a 3-phase system with no
neutral connection, the 3-phase currents are confined by (4.7).
Based on (4.6) and (4.7), it can be deduced that 
To obtain a unique solution for x, y, their values are chosen as to minimize
the peak currents over one electrical period for phases D, E, F and G, H, I.
This reduces the localized saturation effect in the stator teeth where these
windings are accommodated. Such a condition is closer to the assumption
that the stator and rotor laminations are infinitely permeable for the
derivation of (4.1). Thus, x, y are determined in (4.9).
Therefore, for a given set MMF described by (θ, id
, iq
, Fos), their physical
effect is replicated over set ABC by injecting the currents given in (4.4) and
(4.5) in the full machine FE model as shown in Fig. 4.6. Then, the resultant
flux linkages and torque are calculated for the ABC set region. The flux
linkages are directly obtained by FE tools while the torque is calculated by
Maxwell stress tensor in the air gap under set ABC region. As a result, the(4.10)
4D lookup table data are extracted by scanning the four variables (θ, id
, iq
, 
Fos) over their respective ranges. It is important to point out that in fault or
unbalanced operations, MMF offset components will be present in each 3-
phase set, which leads to a zero-sequence component of the flux linkages.
Hence, the outputs of the 4D table for each set include d-axis, q-axis, and
zero-sequence flux linkages and torque.
It is worth noting that the MMF offset value calculated by (4.1) assumes
infinitely permeable stator and rotor cores. Thus, the reconstructed MMF
offset component may not exactly represent the actual value in the air gap.
However, the saturation effect of the MMF AC component, slotting effect,
and space harmonics are accounted for by the FE model directly. Therefore,
it would only cause a very small error to the prediction. The accuracy of the
model will be examined by FE simulations and experimental tests.
4.2.4 Model Integration with Voltage Equations
As shown in Fig. 4.5, the inputs of the general model are the dq-axis
currents of the three 3-phase winding sets. However, in most simulation
studies and real-time operations, the machine is fed by voltage-source
inverters. Thus, the inputs to the model are typically voltages and the
machine currents as the outputs which are then fed to the general model.
For this purpose, the governing dq-axis voltage equations for each 3-phase
winding set can be utilized to predict the dq-axis currents using (4.10),
where udi, uqi are the dq-axis voltages applied to the ith set of the 3-phase
windings.
Further, any control law, such as proportional and integral (PI) control, can
also be included in the simulation model as shown in Fig. 4.7 for
assessments of the drive system behaviors. As can be seen, each 3-phase
module is controlled by an independent current loop. If the machineoperates in healthy conditions, all three winding sets will exhibit the same
behavior and no MMF offset components will be produced. In case of an
open-circuit fault in one 3-phase set, the currents of the fault set are forced
to zero while the other remaining two sets continue their operation with the
control units. The influence of the open circuit in one 3-phase set on the
other two remaining 3-phase sets will be accounted for by the MMF offset
components evaluated in the model shown in Fig. 4.5. If one 3-phase set is
terminally short circuited, the voltages of the fault set are forced to zero and
the short-circuit currents will be calculated according to (4.10). As a result,
by appropriate configuration of the voltage equation blocks, the model
shown in Fig. 4.17 can be used to simulate the machine drive behaviors in
both healthy and fault conditions as well as for the developments of fault
detection techniques and postfault control algorithms.
Figure 4.7 General model integrated with voltage equations and current
controllers.
4.3 Study on Model Accuracy and
Computational Efficiency
This section evaluates the accuracy and computational efficiency of the
modeling method by comparing its predictions to the results obtained fromdirect FE analysis. The comparisons are made against different scenarios,
including healthy operation, open circuit, and short circuit in one 3-phase
set and unbalanced current conditions. For comparison, the general model
shown in Fig. 4.5 is built in Matlab/Simulink with 4D lookup tables, and
the dq-axis currents and rotor angle as the inputs. The same inputs are fed
into the two-dimensional (2D) FE model of the machine, and the outputs
predicted from the two models are compared for each operation condition
described below. Further, the times taken for the predictions by each model
on the same computing platform are also compared.
4.3.1 Healthy Operation
Under normal (or healthy) operating conditions, the currents in each 3-
phase set are assumed to be balanced with equal magnitude, resulting in a
zero Fos for all three 3-phase sets. As a result, the behavior of the machine
is solely determined by the variables (θ, id
, iq
). Simulations with the 4D
table-based model and by direct FE analysis were conducted at the base
speed 4000 rpm and rated current of 120 A in magnitude. The predicted
torque and flux linkages with the two methods are compared in Figs. 4.8
and 4.9, respectively. The figures reveal that the predictions with the 4D
table model closely match with those obtained from the FE analysis [4].
The relative absolute average differences in the torque and flux linkages
predicted by the two models are 0.06% and 0.88%, respectively, where the
torque is normalized to the FE-predicted average and flux linkages to the
FE-predicted fundamental magnitude. It should be noted that in healthy
operations when the currents in each 3-phase set form balanced sinusoids
with equal magnitude, the FE model can be reduced to one sixth of the full
geometry and the simulation over one electric period takes ∼5 minutes. In
contrast, the prediction with the 4D table-based model over the same period
is much faster and takes ∼0.2 second. However, the computational
efficiency of the 4D table model is far more significant in predictions of
fault and unbalanced current operations as will be discussed in the
subsequent sections.Figure 4.8 Comparison of predicted torque by two models in healthy
condition.
Figure 4.9 Comparison of predicted phases ABC flux linkages by two
models in healthy condition.
4.3.2 Open Circuit
Assuming an open-circuit fault in set ABC, the currents in phases ABC are
zero, while the currents in sets DEF and GHI remain the same as those atthe rated condition in the healthy mode. As depicted in the 4D table-based
model shown in Fig. 4.5, now the currents in set ABC (id1
, iq1
) are zero
while the dq-axis currents in the other two healthy 3-phase sets remain
constant at the rated. The MMF offset components in the three 3-phase sets
should be formed according to (4.1) and (4.3) in the 4D table-based model.
Hence, the four variables (θ, id
, iq
, Fos) for each 3-phase set are derived and
inputted into the 4D lookup tables to predict the flux linkages and torque.
Figures 4.10 and 4.11 compare the flux linkages and torques predicted by
the 4D model and FE analysis. As can be seen, the predicted torque matches
closely with the trend observed in the FE results, albeit slightly higher. The
2nd harmonic in the torque waveform is well captured by the 4D table￾based prediction. Since the electromagnetic behaviors of sets DEF and GHI
are similar under the fault condition, only the flux linkages of set DEF are
illustrated in Fig. 4.11, where it is seen that the 4D table-based predictions
also closely follow the FE results, displaying minor differences. It is evident
that the flux linkages are no longer symmetric under the fault condition
because of the mutual magnetic coupling between the different 3-phase sets
via the non-zero MMF offset component which is plotted in Fig. 4.12. It is a
pulsating component that gives rise to torque ripples but does not contribute
to net electromagnetic energy conversion.Figure 4.10 Comparison of predicted torques by two models in open-circuit
condition.
Figure 4.11 Comparison of predicted flux linkages of healthy DEF set by
two models.Figure 4.12 MMF offset component of set ABC under open-circuit
condition.
It is also evident that, compared with the predictions in the healthy
operation, the differences in the 4D table and FE predictions are slightly
larger. The relative absolute averaging errors for the torque and flux
linkages are 5% and 3.3%, being quite small and acceptable. The increase
in the 4D table-based prediction errors can be attributed to the increase in
the MMF offset magnitudes in the 4D table model, which are derived by
assuming infinitely permeable laminations.
It should be noted that under the open-circuit fault, the FE simulation
requires the full model of the 2D machine geometry and takes ∼30 minutes
to complete for one electrical period. In contrast, the simulation with the 4D
table-based model over the same period still only takes ∼0.2 second,
representing an increase in computational efficiency by about 9000 times.
4.3.3 Short Circuit
In case of a switch or winding short circuit, TSC is applied to the faulted 3-
phase set as a mitigating measure. Since the zero-sequence current is zero in
the 3-phase windings with no neutral connection, the induced short-circuit
currents are determined by the flux linkages of the faulty set according to
(4.11).(4.11)
The derived dq-axis currents, using the model-predicted dq-axis flux
linkages, are fed to the inputs associated with the ABC set in the 4D table￾based model while the dq-axis currents in other two healthy sets are kept to
their values at the rated operation. The MMF offset components are
processed accordingly. The same operation under the short circuit is also
simulated by the full FE models. Figure 4.13 demonstrates the close match
between the 4D model-predicted torque and the FE result. Good agreements
are also observed in the predicted short-circuit currents and flux linkages by
the two models as depicted in Figs. 4.14–4.16. It is evident that the short￾circuit currents in each phase of set ABC are asymmetrical and distorted. It
is also seen that the flux linkages in the faulty 3-phase set are nearly an
order of magnitude lower than those in the two healthy 3-phase sets as they
have effectively been neutralized by the short-circuit currents except for the
residual zero-sequence component due to the absence of zero-sequence
current in the ABC set. Meanwhile, the predicted flux linkages of the
healthy DEF set by the two models are also well matched as shown in Fig.
4.16.Figure 4.13 Comparison of predicted torques by two models in short-circuit
condition.
Figure 4.14 Comparison of predicted short-circuit currents by two models.Figure 4.15 Comparison of predicted flux linkages in the short-circuit set
by the two models.
Like the open-circuit fault, the FE prediction for the short-circuit operation
over one electrical period also requires the full model and takes 30 minutes
to complete. In addition, the short-circuit currents require at least 10
electrical cycles to reach the steady state. Thus, in total, it requires 5 hours
to complete the FE simulation of the short-circuit fault. The prediction by
the 4D table-based model only takes no more than 10 seconds. Further, the
mismatches in the predictions by the 4D table-based and FE models are
lower than those in the open-circuit case. This is indeed because the
resultant MMF offset component of the fault set ABC as shown in Fig. 4.17
is lower compared to that in Fig. 4.12 of the open-circuit operation.Figure 4.16 Comparison of predicted flux linkages in healthy DEF set by
two models.
Figure 4.17 MMF offset component under short-circuit condition.
4.3.4 Unbalanced Current Operation
In practical operation, it is quite normal that the currents of different sets are
slightly unbalanced due to limitations in current control bandwidth and
inaccuracies in current sensors. This will result in an unbalanced currentoperation mode among the three 3-phase sets. Without loss of generality,
the unbalanced current operation is assumed in that sets ABC, DEF, and
GHI are fed by 1, 0.9, and 0.8 pu currents in magnitude, respectively. The
predicted flux linkages and torque are then compared with the FE results as
shown in Figs. 4.18 and 4.19. Since the flux linkages of the three sets
exhibit similar behavior, only the flux linkages of set ABC are plotted and
compared with the FE results. In general, the predicted torque and flux
linkages by the two models agree very well. Furthermore, the 4D table￾based model can capture the torque contributions from different 3-phase
sets as depicted in Fig. 4.19. This provides more insights into the machine’s
behavior and allows for in-depth analysis of unbalanced operations of the
machine drive because of position sensing and/or current control errors. The
good matches between the predictions by the two models can be understood
by the fact that the level of the current unbalance is relatively small and
hence the resultant MMF offset components are quite low. For the FE
predictions of the unbalanced operations, the full geometry model of the
machine is also required. Hence, similar saving in computational time is
gained using the 4D table-based model for predictions. It is worth noting
that unbalanced operations caused by phase control errors in currents or
asymmetries in both current magnitude and phase among the three 3-phase
sets can be similarly simulated with the 4D table-based model in a
computationally efficient manner.Figure 4.18 Comparison of predicted flux linkages of set ABC by two
models.
Figure 4.19 Comparison of predicted torque in unbalanced current
operation by two models.
4.3.5 Influence of Phase Resistances on Model Accuracy
As has been shown in (4.10) and (4.11), the predictions of the dq-axis
currents in healthy and TSC conditions are obtained by the summation of allnonresistive voltages divided by the phase resistance. Since phase
resistance is relatively small and dependent on temperature, it is important
to assess with this modeling technique how changes in phase resistance
influence the prediction of the physical quantities of the machine in healthy
and fault conditions.
For this purpose, simulation studies have been performed first in the healthy
condition when the machine operates at the rated speed and rated torque. By
way of example, Fig. 4.20 compares the dq-axis flux linkages and their
derivatives, and the dq-axis currents and voltages when there is 50%
increase in phase resistance compared to its nominal value. This change
represents a ∼120 °C increase in temperature against the reference
temperature at which the nominal phase resistance value is taken.
It is seen that there are very tiny changes which are invisible in the flux
linkages, their derivatives and the currents when the phase resistance is
increased by 50%. This is because although the predicted dq-axis currents
in the model appear to be inversely proportional to the phase resistance and
any initial change in the resistance will lead to a change in the currents, the
change in the currents will in turn result in changes in the flux linkages and
their derivatives. Consequently, the nonresistive voltage terms in the
numerators of (4.10) will change accordingly, leading to a new equilibrium
governed by the dq-axis voltage equations. The simulation study shows that
the use of (4.10) for predicting dq-axis currents would not compromise the
numerical accuracy and stability of the governing equations of machine
operations. Since at the rated conditions, the resistive voltage drop is very
small compared to the other voltage terms, the change in the phase
resistance does not have much effect on the flux linkages and currents while
a small change in the dq-axis voltages is seen in Fig. 4.20(d) as a result of
the increase in the phase resistance.
Further simulations are performed with the same level of increase in the
phase resistance when the ABC 3-phase set is terminally short circuited
while the other two 3-phase sets are fed with the rated currents at the rated
speed. The results for the ABC set are compared with those of the nominal
phase resistance under the same conditions in Fig. 4.21. As can be seen, the
resultant dq-axis flux linkages and their derivatives are close to zero under
the short-circuit condition. The non-zero components are mainly caused by
the phase leakage inductance. The changes in the flux linkages and theirderivatives when the phase resistance is increased by 50% are noticeable
because now the voltage across the phase resistance contributes a small
portion to the total residual phase voltage. Similar changes in the
nonresistive components of the dq-axis voltages ( ,
) are seen in Fig. 4.21(c). However, the predicted
short-circuit currents are virtually not affected by the change in the phase
resistance as is evident in Fig. 4.21(d). This is because, at the rated speed of
operation, the inductive reactance (ωLd
) is dominant, and hence the short￾circuit current is indeed governed by (ψd
/Ld
), or inductance limited.Figure 4.20 Comparisons of dq-axis quantities of (a) flux linkages and (b)
their derivatives, and (c) currents and (d) voltages when the machine
operates in healthy and the rated condition with 50% increase in phase
resistance against the nominal value.Figure 4.21 Comparisons of dq-axis quantities with 50% increase in phase
resistance against nominal value when the ABC set is terminally short
circuited while the other two 3-phase sets are fed with the rated current at
the rated speed (a) dq-axis flux linkages, (b) their derivatives, (c)
nonresistive components of residual dq-axis voltages, and (d) dq-axis
currents.
The foregoing simulations show that the current predictions based on will
not affect the numerical stability and accuracy of the model in both healthy
and short-circuit conditions when there is a level of uncertainty in the phase
resistance. The influence of the phase resistance on the machine operations
is at a similar level to those seen in the conventional dq-axis-based machine
model in which the currents are predicted from the integrations of the
voltages across the dq-axis inductances.
4.4 General Modeling of Turn Fault
4.4.1 Turn Fault Description
As has been discussed and shown, the general modeling technique has
proven to be flexible and accurate in predicting the flux linkage and torque
of each 3-phase set for open- and short-circuit faults at the set level as well
as for unbalanced current operations. However, it would be desirable to
extend the model to predict the behavior of interturn short-circuit faults,
denoted as turn faults. Therefore, a turn fault model is developed by
adapting the general model, particularly for interturn fault conditions.
For discussion, it is assumed that a turn fault occurs in phase B of set ABC,
specifically in coil B2. The schematic circuit for the turn fault condition is
depicted in Fig. 4.22, where the phase B winding is divided into two parts,
Bh
 to represent the healthy portion, and Bf
 to represent the faulty portion.
The turn fault ratio μ is defined as the number of short-circuited turns Nf
 of
the Bf
 portion divided by the total number of turns of the phase, 2N. Rf
 and
Lf
 are used to represent the external resistance and inductance associated
with the fault current path, while i
f
 represents the current flowing through
the faulty path.4.4.2 Equivalent Input for the General Model Under a
Turn Fault
As previously explained, the inputs for the 4D tables of one 3-phase set can
be expressed as (θ, id
, iq
, Fos). To incorporate the turn fault into the model,
the first step is to deduce the equivalent inputs for the 4D tables while
accounting for the influence of the turn fault current i
f
.
During the turn fault, additional fault current i
f
 flows through the short￾circuited path, thereby impacting the MMF distributions of the machine.
Furthermore, since i
f
 is present in the faulty part of coil B2, the MMF
produced by the current in the Bf
 portion differs from that of phase B. This
disparity can be accommodated by the phase shift between coil B2 and
phase B as described in [5]. Under healthy conditions, the MMF of phase B
is contributed by the two coils, as illustrated in Fig. 4.23. It can be
expressed in phasor form (4.12) when considering only the fundamental
component, where 120° phase shift accounts for the phase shifts between
phase A and phase B windings.Figure 4.22 Schematic circuit for set ABC with turn fault in phase B.
Figure 4.23 MMF phasors of phase B.(4.12)
(4.13)
(4.14)
During a turn fault, the presence of fault current i
f
 will impact the MMF of
phase B. Since the turn fault is assumed to take place in coil B2, the
resultant MMF phasor denoted as MMFBf and given in (4.13) is directly
proportional to the number of fault turns Nf
. The additional phase shift of
15° represents the phase shift in space between the faulty coil B2 and phase
B.
The fault current i
f
 and additional MMFBf caused by the fault current will
influence both the MMF AC component of the ABC set and the MMF offset
components of the other two 3-phase sets. This necessitates modifications
to the dq-axis currents, id1
, iq1
, of the ABC sets as a part of the inputs to the
4D table. Hence, the additional dq-axis components caused by i
f
, denoted as
Δidf
, Δiqf
, can be expressed in (4.14) by the abc-to-dq axis transformation of
the fault current in coil B2. By adding these two components to those
flowing in the healthy parts of phases ABC denoted as id1
, iq1
, the revised
currents idf
 and iqf
 are obtained for the 4D table inputs in the turn fault
mode.
Meanwhile, the MMF offset components will also be affected by the fault
current. The additional offset component, denoted as , in set ABC
region produced by the turn fault current i
f
, can be expressed in equation
(4.15) which is derived from (4.1) based on the turn function [6, 7]
associated with the fault turns.(4.15)
(4.16)
(4.17)
Consequently, the combined MMF offset, , over the set ABC region is
obtained by summing and given in (4.17). Likewise, the offset
components due to the fault current over the regions of the other two 3-
phase sets can similarly be derived and given in equation (4.16).
By adding and to and , respectively, and 
can be calculated accordingly as a result of the turn fault. Subsequently, the
adjusted variables form the inputs for the 4D tables
illustrated in Fig. 4.5 to determine the flux linkages and torque for the faulty
set. Meanwhile, and are the inputs to
the 4D lookup tables for the second and third 3-phase sets, respectively.
4.4.3 Flux Linkage of Fault Turn
By updating the inputs for the 4D tables, the flux linkages in d, q, 0 axes
can be predicted for each 3-phase set under the turn fault condition.
However, the flux linkage of the faulted turns has yet to be established. To
accurately predict the fault current, it is essential to deduce the flux linkage
of the fault turns from the dq0-axis flux linkages, ϕd1
, ϕq1
, ϕ01, of set ABC,
which are the flux linkage outputs of the 4D table depicted in Fig. 4.5.
The flow chart, illustrated in Fig. 4.24, outlines the procedure for deriving
the flux linkage of the fault turns from the flux linkages of the faulty ABC
set. The flux linkages of the faulty ABC set can be split into flux leakage
and airgap flux linkage. However, only the airgap component is linked by
the fault turns [8]. By utilizing equation (4.18), the dq0-axis components of
the ABC set flux linkages can be separated into the flux leakage
components and airgap flux linkage components, where ϕmk (k = d, q, and0) represents the airgap flux linkage in the respective axes, and Ll
 represents
the phase leakage inductance. It is important to note that ϕm0
 is equal to ϕ0
since the lookup table is generated without considering zero-sequence
currents.(4.18)
Figure 4.24 Derivation process of flux linkage of fault turn.(4.19)
(4.20)
The airgap flux linkages originate from the rotor PM flux and the winding
MMFs. When high-order harmonics are neglected, the PM flux linkage
exhibits a sinusoidal distribution in the air gap. As described in Section
4.4.2, the MMF in the air gap encompasses both AC and offset components.
The resultant flux linkages are directly proportional to the MMF.
Consequently, the flux linkages generated by the AC component also
exhibit a sinusoidal distribution in the air gap when the high-order
harmonics are neglected. However, this is not true for the flux linkages
generated by the offset components. Since the fault turns are affected by
both the MMF AC and offset components, the resultant flux linkages will
be treated separately due to their different distributions.
First, the flux linkages generated by the MMF offset component are derived
based on the airgap permeance function, assuming infinitely permeable
laminations. For instance, the flux linkage of phase A attributable to the
offset component is determined using equation (4.19) [6], where ϕosA1
and ϕosA2 represent the flux linkages due to the offset component in coils
A1 and A2, respectively. In addition, nA1, nA2 denote the turn functions for
coils A1 and A2, while r represents the airgap radius and l denotes the axial
length of the stator stack. g
−1(α) represents the inverse airgap function given
in equation (4.20). The integration is performed over phase A winding span.
Similarly, the induced flux linkages in phases B and C, ϕosB and ϕosC, can
be calculated.
Due to the full-pitched coils and space-invariance of across the ABC
set region, it can be inferred that ϕosA1 equals ϕosA2 and both are
independent of the rotor angle. Similarly, it can be inferred that ϕosA equals
ϕosB. Because of the opposite polarity of the turn function for phase C with
respect to phases A and B, the offset flux linkage of the phase C winding(4.21)
ϕosC is equal to that of phase A but in opposite polarity, as given in (4.21)
and shown in Fig. 4.25.
Figure 4.25 Flux linkage distribution induced by the MMF offset
component.
Since the turn fault is situated in coil B2, the flux linked by the fault turn is
directly proportional to ϕosB2. Although the previous analysis provides a
qualitative explanation of the relationships among the offset flux linkage
components, there is a more convenient way to compute them using the 4D
table established previously according to (4.22), where dq−1 denotes the
inverse abc-to-dq axis transformation. Within the brackets on the right side
of (4.22), the first column represents the flux linkages resulting from the
combined MMF AC and offset components as well as the rotor PM field,
while the second column denotes the flux linkages without the MMF offset
component. By subtracting the two components, the flux linkages of the
ABC set produced by the offset component only can be obtained, assuming
the magnetic saturation is negligible. This condition is generally true, in the
event of a turn fault because according to Lenz’s law, the flux due to the
fault current will oppose the original field, resulting in a lower flux density
in the fault turn region. Consequently, the error introduced by equation
(4.22) is relatively small.(4.22)
(4.23)
The flux linkage of the fault turns caused by the MMF offset component is
proportional to the number of fault turns and can be evaluated by (4.23). 2N
in the denominate corresponds to the total number of turns of a phase
winding in the machine under study.
On the other hand, the flux linkages caused by the rotor PM and MMF AC
component exhibit a sinusoidal distribution in the air gap, represented by
AC flux linkages (ϕacA, ϕacB, ϕacC for each phase). The AC flux linkage
phasors for each coil and each phase are illustrated in Fig. 4.26. For each
phase, the flux linkages are also the combined results of the two subcoils.
The AC component of the flux linkage of the fault turns is, therefore,
proportional to the AC flux linkage of coil B2 ϕacB2, where the fault occurs.
As shown in Fig. 4.26, the ϕacB2 phasor differs from the ϕacB phasor. This
difference should be accounted for when evaluating the flux linkage of the
fault turns.Figure 4.26 AC component phasors of flux linkages.
By subtracting the offset flux linkage components in equation (4.22) from
the total airgap flux linkages in equation (4.18) in the dq-axis frame, the
dq0-axis AC flux linkages of the ABC set, denoted as ϕacd
, ϕacq
, ϕac0, can
be evaluated in equation (4.24).(4.24)
(4.25)
These results are projected to the fault turn in coil B2 using the inverse abc￾to-dq transform given in equation (4.25). As can be seen, the coil location
of the fault turn in coil B2 is taken into account by the phase shift between
the B2 coil and phase A winding axes.
Consequently, the airgap flux linkage of the fault turns can be estimated.
Furthermore, the slot leakage fluxes caused by the phase current and fault
turn current need to be taken into account [2, 8]. As depicted in Fig. 4.27,
the slot leakage flux and inductance associated with each turn is dependent
on its location in the slot. The first turn encompasses the largest amount of
the slot leakage flux and hence has the largest leakage inductance while the
4th turn has the smallest leakage inductance. This implies that the leakage
inductance associated with short-circuited turns is dependent on their
relative position in the slot. Nevertheless, once the position of the faulted
turns is known, the associated leakage inductances can be quantified
analytically or by FE analysis [8, 9]. Hence, the leakage flux linkage
associated with the faulted turns can be estimated by using equation (4.26),
where Llf represents the self-leakage inductance of the fault turns and Mlf
denotes the mutual leakage inductance between the healthy turns and the
fault turns within the same slot. As a result, the influence of the slot position
of the fault turns on the machine behavior can be accounted by slot-position
dependent Llf and Mlf. Finally, the total flux linkage of the fault turns can be
obtained in equation (4.27).(4.26)
(4.27)
Figure 4.27 Illustration of the slot position and leakage flux of the fault
turn.
4.4.4 Voltage Equations
By utilizing the obtained flux linkages of the faulted turns and the faulted
ABC set, the voltage equations for both the fault turns and the entire 3-
phase set in the dq-axis reference frame can be expressed by (4.28).(4.28)
It is important to note that the voltage equations of the other two 3-phase
sets remain the same as those in healthy mode since the effect of the fault
current has already been taken into consideration by the changes in the
MMF offset components in equation (4.16). As a result, the general model,
shown in Fig. 4.28, has been adapted to accommodate the turn fault,
accounting for variations in coil location, slot position, and the number of
faulted turns. By evaluating the faulted turn flux linkage, ϕBf, using (4.22)–
(4.27), the fault current i
f
 and its influence on the currents in set ABC can
be predicted by (4.28). The influence of the turn fault current, i
f
, on the
operation of the two healthy 3-phase sets is accounted for by the MMF
offset components given in (4.17). Any change in the fault position in a slot
can be represented by the resultant self- and mutual leakage inductances, Llf
and Mlf, while the fault location in different coils can be accounted for by
appropriate spatial phase shift with respect to phase A axis.Figure 4.28 General model integrated with turn fault model.
4.5 Study on Model Accuracy and
Computational Efficiency Under Turn Fault
The model capable of representing a turn fault, shown in Fig. 4.28, has been
implemented in the Matlab/Simulink with the previously established 4D
tables. To validate the developed turn fault model and access its merits over
the FE-based model, comparisons were made between the two models in
terms of accuracy and computation time under various fault conditions,
including varying faulty coil locations, with and without TSC mitigation
action. For each fault condition, the current control of the three 3-phase sets
is assumed to be perfect, and hence reference currents and relevant
parameters that describe the fault are fed into both models. This assumption
will cause a small deviation in the prediction of fault currents, but
significantly reduces the simulation time since the current control law and
the voltage equations except that which governs the short-circuit current
can be removed in both the FE and developed models.
To compare like-with-like, the same inputs and fault condition are specified
in the FE model and in the developed turn fault model. In the FE model, the
machine is fed by ideal current sources as shown in Fig. 4.29, where theturn fault without and with TSC application to the fault set terminals are
illustrated in Fig. 4.29(a) and (b), respectively. The fault phase winding
where the turn fault occurs is divided into two parts, namely, the healthy
part BH and faulty part BF, and the external circuit condition of each part is
separately defined in the FE model. Similarly, when TSC is not applied, the
same reference currents for the three 3-phase sets used in the FE model are
fed to the developed turn fault model shown in Fig. 4.28 with the PI current
controllers and voltage equations being removed. The fault current is
predicted in the turn fault submodel and its influence on the machine
operation is reflected in the 4D table-based submodel via (idf
, iqf
). Under
TSC application to the faulted 3-phase set, the short-circuit currents in the
healthy part of the ABC phase windings are predicted by (4.28) with (ud1
,
uq1
) being set to zero in the developed turn fault model. The other parts of
the model are the same as those without TSC applications.
Figure 4.29 Illustration of turn fault simulation in FE: (a) set ABC without
TSC, (b) set ABC with TSC, and (c) set DEF and set GHI with normal
excitation.4.5.1 Turn Fault Behaviors Without Terminal Short Circuit
Initially, fault behaviors with a single-turn short circuit without TSC
application are examined and the fault is assumed to take place in coil B2.
All 3-phase sets are excited with balanced sinusoidal reference currents of
120 A in magnitude when the machine operates at 4000 rpm. Under this
condition, the fault current predicted by the developed turn fault model
matches well with the FE results, as depicted in Fig. 4.30. The relative rms
error normalized to the FE prediction is 5.4%. It is seen that the fault
current is nine times the rated value, resulting in significant distortion in the
phase flux linkages, as shown in Fig. 4.31. The phase flux linkages of the
ABC set predicted using the 4D lookup tables with the four equivalent
inputs show very good agreements with the FE results.
Additionally, it is observed that the flux linkage of phase B, where the
faulty turn is located, is noticeably lower than those of phases A and C. This
is understood from Lenz’s law in that the induced short-circuit current tends
to reduce the flux density in the fault region.Figure 4.30 Comparison of predicted turn fault current when it occurs in
coil B2 without TSC.
Figure 4.31 Comparison of predicted phase flux linkages when it occurs in
coil B2 without TSC.
The model also predicts the torque accurately in comparison with FE
analysis as demonstrated in Fig. 4.32. The torque components predicted by
the model reveal that the torque contribution of the healthy sets remains
relatively unchanged; however, a significant second harmonic is evident inthe fault set. This observed second harmonic is primarily attributed to the
distortion in the flux linkages resulting from the turn fault current. This
understanding offers valuable insights for developing turn fault detection
method, which will be explored and discussed in the subsequent chapter.
Furthermore, to account for a turn fault located in a different coil, the fault
behaviors with a single-turn fault taking place in coil A1 are also evaluated
with the same reference currents at the speed stated previously. The
resultant turn fault current predicted by the developed model, as depicted in
Fig. 4.33, agrees closely with the FE result. The relative rms error is about
5.6%. Additionally, the model-predicted phase flux linkages and torque also
agree well with the FE results, further demonstrating the flexibility of the
model in specifying fault location. Their characteristic features are, though,
like those shown in Figs. 4.31 and 4.32, and hence not repeated.
Figure 4.32 Comparison of predicted torques when it occurs in coil B2
without TSC.
It is worth noting that the FE simulation of the machine behaviors under a
turn fault also requires 10 fundamental electrical cycles to reach steady state
in the short-circuit current. Thus, the required FE computation time is also
about 5 hours for one specific fault scenario. In comparison, the developed
model only takes 10 seconds to complete. The savings in time and
computation efforts with the developed model are very significant.Figure 4.33 Comparison of predicted turn fault current when it occurs in
coil A1 without TSC.
4.5.2 Turn Fault Behaviors with Terminal Short Circuit
As has been pointed out previously, the turn fault current is extraordinarily
large if no mitigation measure is taken and may lead to catastrophic
damages. Therefore, it is essential to employ appropriate fault mitigation
actions upon detection of a turn fault. For the triple 3-phase PMA-SynRM
under study, the turn fault can be mitigated by TSC application on the fault
3-phase set through control of inverter switches as has been described in
Chapter 2. The circuit condition of the FE model representing the turn fault
with TSC application has been illustrated in Fig. 4.29 (b), where the
terminals of the fault 3-phase set are directly short circuited. In the
developed turn fault model, the voltages given in (4.28) applied to the fault
set are set to zero for predicting the short-circuit currents in both healthy
and fault parts of the 3-phase windings.
First, the comparisons of the predictions by the turn fault model and the FE
model are made when a single-turn fault is assumed to occur in coil B2 and
TSC is applied to the fault ABC set. Meanwhile, the other two sets are still
excited with the rated current at 4000 rpm. The predicted turn fault current
and phase currents by the developed model are compared in Figs. 4.34 and
4.35 with the FE results. Good agreements between the two predictions areseen. However, a notable discrepancy is observed in the peaks and troughs
of the turn fault current. This is attributed to the omission of high-order
harmonics in PM flux linkage and in the MMF AC component and their
influence on the fault turn flux linkage as described in Section 4.4.3.
Nonetheless, the relative rms error of the turn fault current between the two
predictions is only 4.5%. After the TSC application, the net fundamental
flux linkage in the faulted turn becomes very small and consequently,
neglecting high-order harmonics will lead to an increase in the prediction
error. It is also evident that with the TSC application, the fault current
decreases significantly to approximately 2.4 pu, which becomes thermally
sustainable for the machine since it is confined in the single fault turn while
the currents in the healthy parts of the ABC phases are below the rated. In
addition, the machine remains capable of delivering approximately 2/3 of
its rated torque as illustrated in Fig. 4.36.Figure 4.34 Comparison of predicted turn fault current when it occurs in
coil B2 with TSC.
Figure 4.35 Comparison of predicted phase currents with turn fault in coil
B2 with TSC.
Likewise, the fault behaviors with TSC application are also assessed with
the developed turn fault model and FE model when a single-turn short
circuit is assumed in coil A1. Figures 4.37 and 4.38 compare the predicted
turn fault current and phase currents from the two models. Again, a goodagreement between the two predictions is demonstrated. The relative rms
error of the turn fault current is 3.6%. It is observed that the turn fault
current in coil A1 is notably lower than that in coil B2 under the same
operating conditions. This observation is indeed consistent with those
obtained in the previous fault analysis. In addition, similar computational
efficiency is gained with the developed model over the FE predictions
under the turn fault with TSC application to those without TSC application.
Therefore, the detail is not repeated.Figure 4.36 Comparison of predicted torques with turn fault in coil B2 with
TSC.
Figure 4.37 Comparison of predicted turn fault current when it occurs in
coil A1 with TSC.Figure 4.38 Comparison of predicted phase currents of faulty set with fault
in coil A1 with TSC.
The predictions of turn fault current and the currents in the healthy parts of
the phase windings with or without TSC are based on (4.28). The fault
current and dq-axis currents in the healthy part of the 3-phase windings are
determined from the sum of nonresistive voltage components divided by the
resistance associated with the respective faulted and healthy turns. The
influence of these resistances on prediction accuracy has also been studied
by simulations under turn fault conditions with and without TSC
applications and a similar conclusion to that given in Section 4.3.5 has been
reached. That is, the influence of resistances on the currents and other
physical quantities is governed by the voltage equations and the division by
the resistance for predicting currents based on (4.28) does not affect the
numerical stability and accuracy of the model. The details are omitted for
the sake of conciseness.
4.6 Model Validation by Experimental Tests
This section describes experimental validations of the developed general
model under healthy and different fault conditions, namely, open-circuit,
short-circuit, unbalanced current operation, and interturn short-circuit faults
with and without TSC application. The accuracy and effectiveness of themodel are assessed through comparisons of the experimental measurements
with the model predictions.
During tests, the triple redundant 3-phase machine operates at a given speed
controlled by the dynamometer described previously and its currents in
healthy operations or in healthy phases are controlled by independent PI
current controllers with 200 Hz bandwidth. The sensor-sampled currents,
and control output voltages in the digital signal processor (DSP) which are
also the reference voltages for the inverter operation, have been exported
for comparison purposes. In the predictions, the same current controllers
and the voltage equations have been incorporated in the developed general
models as shown in Figs. 4.7 and 4.28. Further, the same reference current
commands used in the experiments have been fed to the general models for
like-with-like simulation studies.
4.6.1 Healthy Condition
First, the machine undergoes tests in healthy operating conditions at 4000
rpm when each 3-phase set is supplied with dq-axis current commands of
equal magnitude and phase angle for maximum torque per Ampere (MTPA)
operation. Figure 4.39 compares the measured and predicted phase currents
at 80 A in magnitude in phases ABC, where good agreements between the
measurement and prediction are evident. Figure 4.40 shows the model￾predicted and measured dq-axis voltages, where a close resemblance of the
two is seen albeit with noticeable deviations in magnitude and harmonic
contents. This is mainly because the measured dq voltages are obtained
from the DSP as the reference voltages for the inverter modulation. Hence,
a small discrepancy exists compared with the actual voltages applied to the
machine windings due to the voltage drops across and nonlinearity of the
inverters.Figure 4.39 Comparison of measured and predicted currents in healthy
mode.
Figure 4.40 Comparison of measured and predicted voltages in healthy
mode.Figure 4.41 Comparison of measured and predicted torques in healthy
condition.
The predicted average torque variations are compared with the
measurement in Fig. 4.41 when the phase current magnitude is varied from
0 to 120 A. It becomes evident that the measured torques are 4.8% lower
than the predicted values. As previously shown, the flux linkages and torque
predicted by the model match closely with FE calculations. Hence, the
observed torque discrepancy can be primarily attributed to the inaccuracies
within the 2D FE model, which is used to build the 4D tables as described
in Section 4.2.3 and the omission of frictional and windage torque in the
model.
4.6.2 One-Set Open Circuit
Next, one 3-phase set open-circuit operation is tested by intentionally
deactivation of all the IGBTs in the ABC set inverter, while reference
currents of 80 A in magnitude for MTPA operation are fed to the current
controllers of the healthy sets DEF and GHI. In the developed model, the
currents in the ABC phases are set to zero while the same current
commands of 80 A in magnitude are given for the other two healthy sets.
The measured currents and voltages from set DEF match well with the
model predictions as shown in Figs. 4.42 and 4.43. Similar waveforms in
set GHI are observed but not presented. As can be seen, under the open-circuit condition, the phase currents in the DEF set display visible
imbalances and distortions, primarily due to the limited current-control
bandwidth. These changes are reflected quite well in the predicted currents.
Similarly, the measured control voltages also agree well with the model￾predicted results, and the 2nd harmonics are present in both the measured
and predicted dq-axis voltages although a small difference between the
measurements and prediction exists due to the reasons explained earlier.
The measured and model-predicted torque variations with current
magnitude are compared in Fig. 4.44, exhibiting a similar trend to that in
the healthy mode. The difference can be attributed to the inaccuracies in the
FE model and current prediction as well as neglection of friction and
windage losses in the model.
4.6.3 One-Set Short Circuit
Subsequently, the machine drive undergoes tests with TSC in the ABC 3-
phase set while the two remaining healthy sets are fed with the reference
current of 80 A in magnitude under the MTPA condition. The same
conditions are imposed in the prediction in which the dq-axis voltages
applied to the ABC windings are set to zero while sets DEF and GHI are
under current feedback control with the same reference currents. The
measured and predicted short-circuit currents in set ABC are illustrated in
Fig. 4.45. Again, the model can predict the primary characteristics of the
unbalanced phase currents and their harmonic distortion, albeit with
marginally higher peaks than the measurements. Such discrepancy is mainly
caused by extra impedance of the connecting cables and the voltage drops
across the switches which are not accounted for accurately in the model.
Further, the measured currents and command voltages in the healthy sets
are compared with the predictions in Figs. 4.46 and 4.47, demonstrating
good fidelity of the developed model.Figure 4.42 Comparison of measured and predicted currents in open-circuit
mode.
Figure 4.43 Comparison of measured and predicted dq voltages in open￾circuit mode.Figure 4.44 Comparison of measured and predicted torques in open-circuit
condition.
The measured and predicted torque variations with current magnitude in the
healthy sets under this one set short-circuit mode are shown in Fig. 4.48.
The lower measured torque is mainly attributed to the same factors as
discussed previously.Figure 4.45 Comparison of measured and predicted short-circuit currents.
Figure 4.46 Comparison of measured and predicted currents in healthy
DEF set when set ABC in short-circuit mode.Figure 4.47 Comparison of measured and predicted voltages in healthy
DEF set when set ABC in short-circuit mode.
Figure 4.48 Comparison of measured and predicted torques in short-circuit
condition.
4.6.4 Unbalanced Current Operation
Furthermore, the machine drive is tested under unbalanced current
operations. Although unbalanced operations should be avoided in healthyconditions, slight variations in phase currents often exist due to
inconsistencies across current sensors, inverters, and the three sets of phase
windings. Current commands of 100, 80, and 60 A in magnitude under
MTPA conditions are set in both the DSP controller and developed model
for sets ABC, DEF, and GHI, respectively. These current references are
tracked by the three independent current controllers for each 3-phase set.
The measured and predicted currents and voltages of set ABC are plotted in
Figs. 4.49 and 4.50 as examples. It is seen that due to the unbalance in the
three 3-phase sets, the phase currents are slightly distorted, and this
distortion causes noticeable second harmonics on the controller output
voltages. These characteristics are captured by the predictions quite well,
although the differences in the higher-order harmonics between the
measured and predicted voltages are evident. The waveforms of the other
two sets exhibit similar trends and, for conciseness, are not presented.Figure 4.49 Comparison of measured and predicted phase currents in set
ABC under unbalanced currents operation.
Figure 4.50 Comparison of measured and predicted voltages under
unbalanced currents operation.
4.6.5 Turn Fault Without Terminal Short Circuit
As has been explained in Chapter 3, tests with one turn short circuit can be
performed by the control relay connected to the fault emulation taps. Theadditional impedance caused by the relay and connecting leads is estimated
to be 1.5 mΩ and 1 μH. This impedance is included in the developed turn
fault model to replicate the experimental condition as closely as possible.
Prior analysis has demonstrated that turn fault current is considerably high
without the TSC mitigation action. This underlines the necessity for
experimental validation to establish whether the developed fault model is
capable of accurately predicting such fault currents. For safe and repeatable
tests, a single-turn fault within coil B2 is tested at 2000 rpm when each 3-
phase set is loaded with 50 A current in magnitude under the MTPA
condition. The single-turn fault is injected by the relay for a duration of 0.3
second. The measured turn fault current coincides closely with the model
predictions as illustrated in Fig. 4.51. Throughout the fault injection period,
the fault 3-phase set is still driven by the 3-phase inverter with the 50 A
reference current. The acquired phase current and voltage readings are
compared with the model predictions in Figs. 4.52 and 4.53. It is observed
that the turn fault leads to minor distortions in phase currents, which are
effectively captured by the model. Small discrepancies in the predicted
voltages are evident, which are mainly attributed to the causes discussed
previously. Meanwhile, the measured and predicted currents and voltages in
the two healthy sets are depicted in Figs. 4.54 and 4.55, demonstrating a
high level of fidelity in the predictions.Figure 4.51 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault currents
when a turn fault occurs in B2 coil.
Figure 4.52 Comparison of measured and predicted phase currents in fault
set when a turn fault occurs in B2 coil.Figure 4.53 Comparison of measured and predicted dq-axis control
voltages in fault 3-phase set when a turn fault occurs in B2 coil.
Then, the single-turn fault tests are repeated by varying the phase current
magnitude from 10 to 50 A at 2000 rpm with the phase angle kept at the
MTPA condition for each magnitude. The measured variation of the rms
fault current is compared with the prediction in Fig. 4.56. Again, a good
agreement in the measurement and prediction is seen, indicating that the
model can predict the fault currents with good accuracy in different
operation conditions. Tests at higher speeds with larger current are not
performed because high risk of damage to the machine.
In addition, the same tests of the turn fault operation are performed by
rotating the rotor in the opposite direction. In this case, the fault occurs
effectively in coil A1 with the same fault emulation setup. The measured
fault currents and their rms variation are compared with the predicted
values in Figs. 4.57 and 4.58, respectively. Other waveforms, like the phase
currents and voltages, are similar to those shown in Figs. 4.52–4.55 and
therefore not repeated. The close matches of the test results with the
predictions demonstrate that the model is capable of predicting fault
behaviors when a fault occurs in a different coil.Figure 4.54 Comparison of measured and predicted phase currents in
healthy DEF set when a turn fault occurs in B2 coil.
Figure 4.55 Comparison of measured and predicted dq-axis control
voltages in healthy DEF set when a turn fault occurs in B2 coil.Figure 4.56 Measured and predicted turn fault current variations with
healthy phase current magnitude when a turn fault occurs in B2 coil.
Figure 4.57 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault currents at 50
A when a turn fault occurs in A1 coil.
4.6.6 Turn Fault with Terminal Short Circuit
The machine drive under the single-turn short circuit with TSC application
to the fault 3-phase set is also tested. With the TSC application, the resultantturn fault current is significantly reduced. This allows the turn fault test to
be performed at the rated operation conditions (120 A, 4000 rpm). The
measured and predicted fault currents are compared in Fig. 4.59. The
relative rms difference between the measurement and prediction is 1.7%
although the measured peak appears to be much larger. The difference is
mainly caused by the neglection of high-order harmonics in the derivation
of the fault turn flux linkage and the inaccuracy in the model for
quantifying the extra impedance in the fault loop. Nonetheless, the rms
values of both measured and model-predicted fault currents (Fig. 4.60) are
in close agreement, which is a critical factor for thermal analysis. Further,
the accuracy of predicting the currents and voltages of the healthy sets is
demonstrated in Figs. 4.61 and 4.62. A comparison of the variations in rms
turn fault current with the load currents in the healthy sets is presented in
Fig. 4.63. It is shown that the maximum estimation error is under 10%.Figure 4.58 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault current
variations with healthy phase current magnitude when a turn fault occurs in
A1 coil.
Figure 4.59 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault currents with
turn fault in B2 coil and TSC application.Figure 4.60 Comparison of measured and predicted short-circuit phase
currents in ABC phases with turn fault in B2 coil and TSC application.
Figure 4.61 Comparison of measured and predicted phase current in DEF
healthy set with turn fault in B2 coil with TSC application.Figure 4.62 Comparison of measured and predicted control output voltages
in DEF healthy set with turn fault in B2 coil with TSC application.
Figure 4.63 Comparison of measured and predicted rms turn fault current
variations with healthy phase current magnitude when a turn fault occurs in
B2 coil under TSC application.Figure 4.64 Comparison of measured and predicted turn fault currents
when it occurs in A1 coil under TSC application.
Further turn fault tests with TSC application are conducted on coil A1 by
rotating clockwise in motoring mode. Good agreements between the
measured and predicted fault current waveforms and the rms fault current
variation are seen in Fig. 4.64 and 4.65. This provides further confidence in
model predictions under the different fault condition.Figure 4.65 Comparison of measured and predicted rms turn fault current
variations with phase current magnitude in healthy sets when it occurs in
A1 coil under TSC application.
4.7 Summary
In this chapter, a general modeling technique for the triple redundant 3-
phase PMA-SynRM drive has been developed. By decomposition of the
MMFs associated with each 3-phase winding set into AC and offset
components, the flux linkages and torque for each 3-phase set can be
described by four variables, namely, the rotor angle θ, the dq-axis currents
(id
, iq
) of the 3-phase set, and an MMF offset component Fos. These
relationships can then be determined by constructing 4D tables through FE
simulations. The voltage equations and current control laws are
subsequently integrated with the 4D table-based model for convenient time
domain simulations. The key merits of the developed model lie in two
important aspects for the development of a fault-tolerant drive. First, the
model can represent the behaviors of the fault-tolerant machine drive across
a wide range of operational modes, including healthy operations, open￾circuit faults, short-circuit faults, unbalanced current operation, and
postfault operations. Further, the model is computationally very efficient,
being ∼1500 times faster than the FE-based model for simulations of
typical fault behaviors. The general model has been further extended torepresent the behaviors of the machine drive with a turn fault in the phase
windings and subsequent postfault operations after TSC application. The
influential factors of a turn fault, such as the number of faulted turns, their
locations in a slot, and their occurrence in different coils of the phase
windings, can be accounted for in the model. Good accuracy and fidelity of
the models have been demonstrated through a series of simulation studies
and experimental tests. These models provide an effective and enabling tool
for assessments of various fault behaviors and for the developments of fault
detection techniques and postfault control strategies.
It is worth noting that the presented modeling approach is also applicable to
other multiple 3-phase machines with similar segregated winding
arrangements. The models developed with the concepts and techniques
described in this chapter can provide as a useful tool for performance
evaluations under healthy, unbalanced, and fault conditions.
It should be further understood that even for conventional 3-phase machine
drives, the flux-linkage-based modeling techniques are far more
advantageous over the classical dq-axis lumped parameter modeling
approaches [4]. This is because a flux-linkage-based model is able to
account for magnetic saturation, space, and time harmonics, which are often
neglected in a classical dq-axis model, in a computationally effective
manner and hence offers both accuracy and computational efficiency, and
great potential for developing digital twins that provide real-time
information on machine learning and condition monitoring.
References
1 D. C. Patel and M. C. Chandorkar, “Modeling and analysis of stator
interturn fault location effects on induction machines,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4552–4564,
2014.
2 P. Arumugam, T. Hamiti, C. Brunson, and C. Gerada, “Analysis of
vertical strip wound fault-tolerant permanent magnet synchronous
machines,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 61, no. 3,
pp. 1158–1168, 2014.3 J. A. Haylock, B. C. Mecrow, A. G. Jack, and D. J. Atkinson, “Operation
of fault tolerant machines with winding failures,” IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1490–1495, 1999.
4 X. Chen, J. Wang, B. Sen, P. Lazari, and T. Sun, “A high-fidelity and
computationally efficient model for interior permanent-magnet machines
considering the magnetic saturation, spatial harmonics, and iron loss
effect,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 62, no. 7, pp.
4044–4055, 2015.
5 B. Sen, J. Wang, and P. Lazari, “A detailed transient model of interior
permanent magnet motor accounting for saturation under stator turn
fault,” in Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE) 2013
IEEE, 2013, pp. 3548–3555.
6 J. Faiz and I. Tabatabaei, “Extension of winding function theory for
nonuniform air gap in electric machinery,” IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 3654–3657, 2002.
7 J. Faiz, I. T. Ardekanei, and H. A. Toliyat, “An evaluation of inductances
of a squirrel-cage induction motor under mixed eccentric conditions,”
IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 252–258,
2003.
8 Z. Sun, J. Wang, D. Howe, and G. Jewell, “Analytical prediction of the
short-circuit current in fault-tolerant permanent-magnet machines,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 4210–
4217, 2008.
9 B. Sen and J. Wang, “Analytical modelling of stator turn fault in surface
mounted permanent magnet machines,” in Energy Conversion Congress
and Exposition (ECCE) 2013 IEEE, 2013, pp. 4445-4452.5
Fault Detection Techniques for the Multiple
3-Phase Machine Drive
5.1 Introduction
Fast and reliable fault detection is indispensable for any fault-tolerant
system as it enables timely application of suitable fault mitigation actions
[1, 2] and postfault operations. Reliable fault detection is also of paramount
importance for avoiding false alarms and associated unnecessary downtime.
The key to fault detection in a machine drive system is to understand its
fault behaviors and identify an optimal set of fault signatures that have the
highest signal-to-noise ratio. These fault signatures are then monitored
continuously for fault diagnosis. As previously discussed in Chapters 1 and
2, a switch open circuit and a winding interturn short circuit are two of the
most frequent faults in a machine drive [3, 4]. Therefore, this chapter
focuses on the detection methods of these two faults, respectively. The
general model established in Chapter 4 will be utilized for the development
of fault detection techniques. Appropriate simulations and experimental
tests are performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of these fault detection
methods.
First, detection techniques for the open-circuit fault in a machine drive are
investigated. Open-circuit fault in inverter switches and machine windings
is a common failure mode in an electrical machine drive [5, 6]. While it is
relatively easy to detect a winding open-circuit fault with phase current
sensors in a drive system, the detection of an inverter switch open circuit is
more challenging because no direct measurement of currents in the switches
is available. For purpose of discussion, a switch open circuit is defined as
the power transistor in an inverter arm is open circuited such that no current
flows through it, but the diode in the arm can still function. This is typical
in an insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT)-based inverter drive since the
diodes are separately integrated into each inverter arm and are usually more
robust. The transistors are however more vulnerable to an open-circuit
failure due to excessive current, thermal stress, thermal-mechanical cyclicaging, or faulty connection. It should be noted that while a transistor short
circuit is also a common failure mode in an inverter, such a fault would
usually lead to an open-circuit failure in a voltage source inverter because
of the excessive shooting-through current across the DC link. In a silicon
carbide (SiC) metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistor (MOSFET)-
based inverter drive, the diode of an inverter arm is part of the MOSFET
die. An open circuit in a SiC device typically means that both the MOSFET
and diode in an inverter arm are open circuited. This failure mode bears
similarity to the transistor-only open-circuit case although the resultant
distortion in phase currents differs. To facilitate the detection of an open￾circuit fault in inverter switches, the relative β-axis residual voltage signals
associated with each phase during inverter operation will be described and
utilized. The fault behavior of an inverter switch open circuit is analyzed by
comparing the reference voltage and the estimated output voltage under
both healthy and faulty conditions. The reference voltage is predicted by the
real-time switching state of the inverter while the estimated output voltage
is derived from the healthy machine model. It is found that the relative β￾axis residual voltages associated with the fault phase do not change during
an open-circuit fault in the inverter switch, but this is not the case for the
healthy phases. This unique fault behavior is therefore exploited for
detection of open-circuit fault in inverter switches in a machine drive. The
voltage residuals are used to construct fault indicator and their polarities are
employed for identification of the fault location within a 3-phase inverter.
Detection of the second common fault type, an interturn short-circuit fault,
denoted as turn fault, in machine phase windings of a drive system, is far
more challenging. This is because if the number of short-circuited turns is
relatively small, the resultant fault signature is benign while the fault
current can be excessively high, which requires an immediate remedial
action. Reliable detection of the benign fault signature in an electronically
noise environment is, however, technically very difficult. Several
techniques have been developed for detection of such faults. The turn fault
detection was investigated using the model-based approach by monitoring
the current estimation errors [7–11]. This method required an accurate
online model, which was usually achieved by adaptive state observer or
online learning. As a turn fault gives rise to some forms of unbalance and
harmonic distortion, specific harmonics arising from the fault are explored
as a key fault indicator. The harmonic-based method, however, is onlyapplicable in steady state, which takes a longer time to reach and hence may
not be appropriated when immediate remedy action is required. The
unbalance caused by a turn fault can also be monitored at the star-neutral
point of 3-phase windings [12]. This, however, requires an additional
connection to the neutral point, which is not available in most machines. In
Ref. [13], the interturn short-circuit fault was alarmed by tracking estimated
back electromotive force in a permanent magnet (PM) synchronous
machine. Most of these detection techniques are based on monitoring fault
signatures around the fundamental frequency or transients associated with
the operational voltages and currents. However, they are dependent on
operational conditions. Because the fault signatures due to a small number
of short-circuit turns are benign compared with the fundamentals, it is very
difficult to detect such faults with these techniques, particularly at low
speeds of operation. Alternative methods have been developed for more
reliable detection by utilizing high-frequency (HF) signals. Some of these
techniques are discussed in detail in Section 5.8.
An alternative yet effective detection technique for winding interturn fault
in the machine drive under study is proposed and described. Detailed
analysis is performed to identify the behavior of a closed-loop controlled
PM machine drive under interturn fault conditions. It is shown that
significant 2nd harmonic components are generated in the dq voltages,
currents, instantaneous active power (IAP), and instantaneous reactive
power (IRP) during a turn fault condition. Further, the increase in the 2nd
harmonic in IAP and IRP during fault conditions is comparatively higher
than that of voltage and current, making them ideal candidates for turn fault
detections. Thus, the turn fault detection technique based on the 2nd
harmonic in IAP and IRP is implemented and demonstrated.
It should be noted that detection methods for the other faults discussed in
Chapter 2 should also be established and implemented. Furthermore, upon
detection of a fault, appropriate identification or classification of the fault
type is also required to take correct mitigation measures against the fault
[14, 15]. Comprehensive treatment of fault classification techniques is
beyond the scope of this book and will not be elaborated. The detection
methods for the open-circuit fault in inverter switches and winding turn
fault serve as an example for the fault-tolerant triple redundant 3-phasepermanent magnet-assisted synchronous reluctance machine (PMA￾SynRM) drive.
5.2 Analysis of Fault Signal Under Open
Circuit of an Inverter Switch
First, the fault behavior due to an open circuit in an inverter switch is
studied to identify the suitable signal for fault diagnosis. The triple
redundant 3-phase machine drive under study consists of three independent
3-phase modules, each operating as a typical 3-phase drive. Thus, the
following analysis is focused on one 3-phase module, including the inverter
and 3-phase windings for simplicity as shown in Fig. 5.1.
Figure 5.1 One 3-phase module with T1
 open-circuit fault.
5.2.1 Inverter Switching Function Definition
The operation of the 3-phase voltage source inverter is governed by the six
gate drive commands for switches T1
 − T6
, denoted as s1
 − s6
, respectively,
originating from the space vector pulse width modulation (SVPWM) unit
within the digital signal processor (DSP) for drive control. These binary
control signals determine the operating states for each switch, where a “0”
value indicates switch-off state and a “1” indicates a switch-on state. It(5.1)
should be noted that the switching states for the two switches in the same
leg must be complimentary to each other to avoid shooting through. For the
convenience of discussions, the mid-point voltage (MPV) of the DC link is
denoted as the zero-voltage reference. Consequently, the MPVs of the
inverter legs with respect to the ground point as functions of the gating
signals can be formulated as follows: 
where Udc is the DC-link voltage and uAg
, uBg
, uCg
 denote MPVs of the 3-
phase legs A, B, and C, respectively. They are usually referred to as the
inverter output voltages with respect to the negative end of the DC link.
5.2.2 Characteristics of Inverter Arm Mid-Point Voltages
In the event of an open-circuit fault within the inverter switches, a
noticeable distortion in the phase currents is observed. This distortion is
caused by the mismatch between the reference voltage and the actual
voltage applied to the windings by the faulty inverter. Consequently, a
postfault analysis of the actual voltage applied to the stator windings is of
great importance for the fault detection.
Without loss of generality, the operation of the two switches in phase A is
used for the illustration. As depicted in Fig. 5.2, the circulations of current
within phase A in both the healthy and T1
 open-circuit fault scenarios differ.
The current pathways are indicated by solid lines for the healthy state and
dashed lines for the faulty state. In the healthy state, the MPVs of the 3-
phase legs are determined by both the drive signal and the phase current
polarity. When T1
 on, T4
 off and the phase current is positive, the MPV of
phase A is positive DC-link voltage. By contrast, when T1
 off, T4
 on, and
the phase current is positive, the MPV of phase A is zero, as shown in Fig.
5.2(a). Similarly, when the phase current is negative, there are also two
different states of the MPV of phase A, as depicted in Fig. 5.2(b). It is
important to note that the states when T1
 off and T4
 on with a positive phase
current, and when T1
 on and T4
 off with a negative phase current, representfreewheeling conditions. Therefore, the duration of these states is normally
very short.
In the event of an open circuit at T1
 with a positive phase current, the
conduction path through T1
 is interrupted. Now the positive current has to
flow through the diode D4 no matter whether the drive signal is high or low,
as illustrated in Fig. 5.2(c). Consequently, the MPV of phase A is forced to
be zero. It is noteworthy that since T4
 is operating normally during this
condition, the conduction path for a negative phase current remains
unaffected, as shown in Fig. 5.2(d). Thus, the resultant MPV is also not
affected. In the extreme case, if both T1
 and D1
 are simultaneously open
circuited, the freewheeling is impossible which will also cause more
significant fault features.
The inference drawn from this analysis indicates that there is a deviation in
the inverter’s actual output voltage from the reference voltage due to a
switch open-circuit fault. The complexity is further compounded when the
switching operation is in a discontinuous conduction mode, where there is a
short duration in which the phase current is zero and the phase voltage is
indeed dependent on its induced voltage, consisting of the back
electromotive force (back-emf) and the voltages from the mutual inductance
effect. Nonetheless, the zero current interval duration is very brief,
rendering its effect on the overall output voltage negligible.
5.2.3 Output Voltage Vector Analysis Under Fault
Conditions
The inverter output voltages, uAn
, uBn
, and uCn
, referred to as the star
neutral n of the 3-phase windings, as shown in Fig. 5.1, are of more
interests as they are essentially the phase voltages of machine operations.
They can also be expressed in the form of voltage space vectors u within
the a-b-c stationary reference frame as follows:(5.2)
Figure 5.2 Current flow paths under healthy condition and T1 open-circuit
fault. (a) i > 0 under healthy condition. (b) i < 0 under healthy condition. (c)
i > 0 under T1
 open-circuit fault. (d) i < 0 under T1
 open-circuit fault.
According to the above analysis under the open-circuit condition, the phase
voltages are also dependent on the polarities and state of currents. For
notational convenience, the polarity of current is defined as 1 when it is
positive and −1 when negative. Zero current is possible in the circuit;
however, it only lasts for a very short period. Thus, it is disregarded in the
following analysis. Figure 5.3 depicts these space vectors within the a-b-c
frame under both healthy and T1
 open-circuit fault conditions, where the
current polarities and state are indicated within the brackets. In healthy
operational states, a set of eight space vectors, u0
 − u7
, form a hexagon as
shown on the left of Fig. 5.3(a), where u0 and u7
, known as zero vectors, are
located at the center. The six active vectors, u1 and u6
 divide the hexagon
into six sectors, I to VI, as shown in Fig. 5.3(a). In the presence of the open￾circuit fault, the space vectors are changed, which are also illustrated on the
right of Fig. 5.3(b) and (c) for positive and negative currents, respectively.
When the current polarity is positive (denoted as 1), only half of the space
vectors – , , , and – coincide with u0
, u3
, u4
, and
u5
 under the healthy condition. The four remaining space vectors ,
, , and are distorted, with these differences depicted in(5.3)
Fig. 5.3(b). In contrast, with a negative current polarity (denoted as −1), the
eight space vectors during a T1
 open-circuit fault align with those observed
in normal operations as shown in Fig. 5.3(c).
The calculated output voltage vectors, derived from different switch states,
are used to assess the combined voltage vectors for each SVPWM cycle as
(5.2). To demonstrate the differences in voltage space vectors prefault and
postfault conditions, Sector I of the hexagon is utilized as a representative
case. During the healthy operation, the average reference voltage space
vector over a PWM period can be evaluated as follows:
where , represent the α and β-axis reference voltage space vectors,
respectively. t1
 and t2
 denote the active time duration of vectors u1
 and u2
,
respectively. The reference space vector and can be further
expressed in (5.4). Hence, equation (5.3) can be rewritten as (5.5).
Combining equations (5.3) and (5.5), the values for t1
 and t2
 are deduced in
(5.6).(5.4)
(5.5)
(5.6)
Figure 5.3 Space vectors in healthy condition and T1 open circuit: (a)
healthy conditions, (b) T1 open circuit with positive current, and (c) T1 open
circuit with negative current.
where Uref denotes the amplitude of the reference voltage, θ is the electric
angle between the rotating d-axis of the rotor reference frame and phase A
axis, and γ represents the angle of the reference voltage vector with respect
to the d-axis.
When T1
 is open circuited, four non-zero space vectors emerge, ,
, , and . As a result, the combined fault voltage
vector u
′
 may be expressed by (5.7). Hence, the synthetic fault voltage
vector u
′
 can be derived by substituting (5.6) into (5.7) and is given by
(5.8).(5.7)
(5.8)
where tn
 denotes the ratio of negative current time against the switching
period in sector I. The values of t1
 and t2
 are determined by the reference
space vectors and .
Voltage vectors corresponding to the fault condition can be deduced in a
similar way for the five remaining subsectors, and they are listed in Table
5.1. A consistent pattern is noticed in that the β-axis voltage shown in bold
is not affected by the presence of the open-circuit fault. In contrast, the α￾axis voltage experiences variations due to the fault occurrence. This pattern
implies that alterations during the fault are confined to the α-axis voltage,
which can be leveraged for the detection of the open-circuit fault.
The previous analysis assumes that the top switch (T1
) in phase A is in the
open-circuit condition. It can be shown that if the bottom switch (T4
) is
open circuited, the β-axis voltage is also not affected by the fault but the
change in the α-axis voltage differs in polarity with respect to that of the
open-circuit fault on (T1
). Furthermore, the derived formula for the voltage
space vectors and the conclusion is also valid for switch open circuits in
phases B and C if the α-axis is aligned with the axes of phases B and C,
respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 5.4(a). Therefore, relative αβ-axis
voltages for phases B and C can be computed by applying the Clark
transformation with appropriate phase shift against phase A axis. In Fig.
5.4(a), α(A), α(B), and α(C) correspond to the relative α-axis associated
with phases A, B, and C, respectively. Similarly, β(A), β(B), and β(C)
pertain to the relative β-axis for each phase. If the change in the α(A)-axisvoltage due to a switch open-circuit fault in phase A is projected on the β(B)
and β(C) axes as shown in Fig. 5.4(b), the two projected changes will have
equal magnitude but in opposite polarities. Hence, by continuously
monitoring the changes in the voltages projected in β(A), β(B), and β(C)
axes, a switch open-circuit fault can be detected and located.
Table 5.1 Faulty synthesized vector in six sub-sectors.
Sectors u
′
 = uα
 + juβ
; j is the imaginary operator
I
II
III
IV
V
VI(5.9)
Figure 5.4 The relative αβ coordinate systems with respect to the three
phases: (a) relative αβ coordinate systems associated with phases A, B and
C and (b) projection of change in α(A)-axis voltage on the β(B) and β(C)
axes.
5.3 Open-Circuit Fault Detection Design
Based on the prior analysis, notable differences in the relative αβ-axis
voltages under healthy and switch open-circuit conditions have been
identified. Thus, a fault detection scheme for switch open circuit can be
devised by employing the relative β-axis voltages.
Initially, the voltage residual, which is defined as the difference between the
reference voltage and the actual output voltage, is determined. To eliminate
the need for voltage sampling circuit, the duty cycle of the switches is used
to estimate the reference voltage, as described in (5.9).
where DA, DB
, DC
 are the duty cycles of A, B, and C phases. They are
determined by the DSP control unit for a given PWM scheme assuming(5.10)
(5.11)
(5.12)
healthy inverter operations.
Referring to Fig. 5.1, it is straightforward to acquire (5.10) with the neutral￾to-reference ground voltage, ung, as an intermediate variable. However, it
can be eliminated by the fact that uAn
 + uBn
 + uCn
 = 0. Thus, the 3-phase
reference voltages with respect to the star-neutral point n, ,
 for phases A, B, and C, respectively, can be determined in
(5.11).
Next, the actual output voltages are estimated by a simplified permanent
magnet synchronous machine (PMSM) model using Euler approximation
according to (5.12).
where Rs
 represents the stator phase resistance; ud
, uq
, id
, iq
, Ld
, and Lq
denote the voltages, currents, and inductances in the dq-axis reference(5.13)
(5.14)
frame; ψm stands for the PM flux linkage; ωe
 for the rotor electrical angular
speed; and Δt for the sampling interval. With a predetermined set of the
machine parameters, the dq-axis voltages can be estimated from measured
dq-axis currents and rotor speed in (5.12).
To obtain the relative β-axis voltage across all three phases, the estimated
voltages ud
 and uq
 by (5.12) are converted to the abc stationary reference
frame using the inverse Park transformation. Further, the residual voltages
for phases A, B, and C are normalized to the DC-link voltage in (5.13).
Finally, the normalized relative β-axis voltage residuals for phases A, B,
and C are derived and given in (5.14).
where εβ,A, εβ,B, and εβ,C are the normalized relative β-axis residual voltages
for phases A, B, and C, respectively. , , and are the
normalized reference voltages in the relative β-axes associated with phases
A, B, and C, respectively, and uβ,A, uβ,B, and uβ,C are the normalized
estimated actual voltages in the relative β-axes associated with the three
phases.
During healthy operation, the normalized relative β-axis residual voltages
for the three phases should be equal or close to zero. Assuming a switch
open-circuit fault in phase A, the β-axis residual voltage εβ,A remains close
to zero. However, this does not apply to the residuals εβ,B and εβ,C
associated with phases B and C, as indicated by (5.14).(5.15)
As εβ,A maintains zero, it follows that the changes in ΔuB
 and ΔuC
 are
equal, leading to εβ,B and εβ,C displaying one-sided variation and having
opposite polarity to each other. Thus, the three relative β-axis residual
voltages contain the key indicators of the location of the open-circuit fault
and form an integral part of the fault diagnostic approach.
Table 5.2 Diagnostic rule.
Faulty component FA FB FC
No fault 0 0 0
T1 0 −1 1
T2 1 −1 0
T3 1 0 −1
T4 0 1 −1
T5 −1 1 0
T6 −1 0 1
To refine the detection process, the residual outputs from equation (5.14)
are conditioned by a low pass filter (LPF), which helps reduce the impact of
differential operations in (5.12), and switching and sampling noises.
Furthermore, the fault indicator for phase k (k = A, B, C), symbolized as Fk
,
is characterized by 
where εth is a threshold value.
During online monitoring, when the processed residual voltage εβ,k
 exceed
the predefined threshold εth, the corresponding fault indicator Fk
 becomes
active for that phase. A value of either 1 or −1 is assigned for that phase
according to the residual voltage polarity. If an open-circuit fault takes place
in the switch (T1
) of phase A, the residual voltage εβ,A would not be
affected; hence, FA would continue to be zero. In contrast, εβ,B and εβ,Cdeviate from zero, as specified by equation (5.14), FB
 turns to −1 and FC
turns to 1. Therefore, the sign of Fk
 serves as a diagnostic tool to pinpoint
the fault location. Table 5.2 summarizes the correlation between fault
locations and the fault indicators.
5.4 Experimental Validation on Open-Circuit
Fault Detection
The proposed open-circuit detection technique is evaluated experimentally
on the previous triple redundant 3-phase machine drive prototype. Since the
three 3-phase sets are identical and independently controlled, one 3-phase
module can be injected with a switch open-circuit fault for the purpose of
demonstration. Consequently, the subsequent fault diagnosis experiments
will be conducted on one 3-phase set as an example, and the current
waveforms of the other two sets of 3-phase windings are not provided.
5.4.1 Single Switch Fault Diagnosis
The threshold value is a key parameter of the proposed method. Thus, it is
determined before the fault test. The machine drive is commanded to
operate in healthy condition, and the |LPF(εβ,k
)| in (5.15) is recorded. After
operating under the whole torque-speed range, the threshold value is
defined as 0.1 pu. Then, the proposed fault detection method is tested at
2000 rpm with a phase current magnitude of 67 A. The open-circuit fault is
injected in switch T1
 by deactivating T1
 drive signal as depicted in Fig. 5.5.
After the fault occurrence, the positive phase A current reduces to zero since
the voltage applied to the phase becomes zero. With the application of the
proposed detection technique, the relative β-axis residual voltages for the
three phases are determined. A noticeable surge is observed in the relative
β-axis residual voltages, εβ,B and εβ,C, of the healthy phases B and C, which
are higher than the threshold value. In contrast, the value of phase A εβ,A is
only slightly altered, which is consistent with the previous conclusion. As a
result, the fault indicator signals FA, FB
, and FC
 are assigned values of 0,
−1, and 1, respectively.Figure 5.5 Fault detection waveforms when T1
is open circuited: (a) phase
currents, (b) voltage residuals, and (c) fault indicators.Figure 5.6 Fault detection waveforms when T4
is open circuited: (a) phase
currents, (b) voltage residuals, and (c) fault indicators.
The proposed detection method is also examined in different power switch
under the low speed and light load region. Figure 5.6 depicts test
waveforms of switch T4
 open circuited when the machine operates at 500
rpm with 10 A current. The fault indicator, namely, the relative β axis
voltage residuals, promptly responds to the fault. According to the polarity
of FA, FB
, and FC
, an open circuit can be identified in switch T4
. The testresults confirm that the proposed method allows for the detection of open￾circuit fault and accurate fault location identification according to Table 5.2.
5.4.2 Influence of Load Transients on the Detection
Scheme
To eliminate any false-positive alarm in healthy operations, the presented
fault detection algorithm is subjected to a robustness evaluation of step
changes in load current as illustrated in Figs. 5.7 and 5.8. Initially, the
motor operates in healthy condition at 1000 rpm. At 0.2 second, the phase
current experiences a step change in magnitude upwards from 10 to 30 A
and downwards from 30 to 10 A. It is seen that the fault indicators are not
affected by the change as the small deviations in the relative β-axis residual
voltages are all within their thresholds. Such results affirm the introduced
approach is robust to fluctuation in the load current.Figure 5.7 Fault detection waveforms during a step increase in load current:
(a) phase currents, (b) voltage residuals, and (c) fault indicators.Figure 5.8 Fault detection waveforms during a step decrease in load
current: (a) phase currents, (b) voltage residuals, and (c) fault indicators.
5.4.3 Detection with Parameter Variation
The proposed detection technique employs voltage estimators instead of
voltage sensors for evaluating the inverter output voltages. Therefore, it is
necessary to assess the impact of parameter variations on fault detection.
During operation, the machine parameters experience changes due to the
load and speed variation, which typically vary within ±20%. Since voltage
estimation involves four parameters, resistance, dq-axis inductance, and PM
flux linkage, experimental tests are conducted with each of these parameters
varying from 80% to 120%. Fig. 5.9 illustrates the experimental waveforms
of fault detection when the machine operates under low-speed, light loadand high-speed, heavy load conditions, respectively. The waveforms reveal
a negligible impact on the relative β-axis residual voltages, no matter in
healthy or fault mode for the four parameter variations. It can be observed
that the impact of parameter variation on fault detection is minimal and can
be essentially disregarded for both the scenarios. This is because the voltage
residual caused by an open-circuit fault is much greater than the error that
caused by parameter variation. Therefore, the proposed detection method in
this study demonstrates excellent robustness to parameter variations.
5.4.4 Fault Mitigation Test After Open-Circuit Fault
For the triple redundant 3-phase machine drive, an open-circuit fault in an
inverter switch or phase winding can be effectively mitigated by
deactivating the entire 3-phase windings when the fault has been detected.
An integrated test is performed as shown in Fig. 5.10 including detection
and mitigation action. The machine is initially operating at 1000 rpm with
30 A current of magnitude under healthy condition. Subsequently, an open￾circuit fault is injected by deactivating switch T1
. As can be seen, the fault is
rapidly detected after the injection, followed by the swift implementation of
the mitigation strategy through the deactivation of the whole 3-phase set.
This confirms the ability to quick detection of the fault and executing
appropriate control measures to reduce the fault impact on the triple
redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM drive system. Meanwhile, it is evident that
prefault and postfault operations of the other two healthy sets, DEF and
GHI, are almost not affected.Figure 5.9 Influence of machine parameters on the voltage residuals during
detection: (a) 500 rpm with 10 A load current and (b) 2000 rpm with 67 A
load current.Figure 5.10 Integrated test with fault mitigation strategy: (a) phases ABC
currents, (b) fault indicators, and (c) other phase currents.
5.5 Analysis of Turn Fault Signature
Before discussing techniques for detection of a turn fault in a phase
winding, the machine drive behavior under a turn fault is analyzed for
developing a suitable diagnostic method. For the sake of simplicity, the
analysis is also based on a single 3-phase set of the triple-redundant 3-phase
machine drive. As shown in Fig. 5.11, a single-turn fault in coil A1 of the
ABC set is considered for its most benign fault signature. It has been shown
that such a fault leads to a significant fault current i
f
 in the faulty part,
which is roughly nine times the rated value. Consequently, the fault
necessitates immediate detection to initiate a mitigation action, that is,
application of terminal short circuit (TSC) for, or injecting specific current
to, the affected 3-phase set.(5.16)
Figure 5.11 Schematic circuit for set ABC with turn fault in phase A.
Given that a 3-phase drive operates typically with a feedback current
control loop, the fault behavior under closed-loop control will be analyzed
for selecting the most suitable fault indicator that provides optimal signal￾to-noise ratio for detection purposes. As has been shown in Chapter 2, the
distortion in flux linkages due to the fault introduces the 2nd harmonics in
voltages, currents, and hence instantaneous power. These variables under
closed-loop control will be further examined. During healthy operations,
and neglecting higher-order harmonics, the flux linkage associated with a
given number of turns in a phase winding can be described as follows:
where ϕ, ω, and θ0
 are the magnitude, electrical angular speed, and phase
angle, respectively.(5.17)
(5.18)
When a turn fault occurs, the resulting turn fault current is mainly reactive,
generating a flux linkage that counteracts the flux linkage in the healthy
operations. Therefore, the flux linkage generated by the fault current can be
approximated as follows: 
where ϕf
 denotes the magnitude of the flux linkage. This flux linkage can be
expressed in the dq-axis reference frame as
It is seen from (5.18) that the 2nd harmonics will be present in the dq-axis
flux linkages, acting as perturbations to the current control loop. This leads
to the generation of the 2nd harmonics in both dq-axis voltages and
currents. To examine the emerging 2nd harmonic voltages and currents, the
schematics of the dq-axis current control loop, as shown in Fig. 5.12, is
considered. The proportional and integral (PI) current controllers are
simplified as a proportional controller since the integral action has
relatively low bandwidth, thus causing minimal immediate response to the
2nd harmonic components.
The dq-axis voltages of the machine drive can be expressed in (5.19) when
the voltage drops on the winding resistive are neglected.(5.19)
Figure 5.12 Simplified dq-axis current control loops in a 3-phase drive.
where ψd
, ψq
, Ld
 and Lq
 denote the d- and q-axis components of flux
linkages and inductances, respectively. Further, ψd
, ψq
 can be expressed as
in (5.20) by accounting for the flux linkage induced by the turn fault
current, where the DC-offset components in (5.18) associated with cos(θ0
)
are neglected since they do not cause 2nd harmonics in the dq-axis voltages
and currents. ψm represents the PM flux linkage.(5.20)
(5.21)
(5.22)
(5.23)
The decoupling feedforward compensations, and , in the
current controllers of Fig. 5.12 are estimated typically using the dq-axis
machine parameters as in (5.21).
Hence, the voltage equations in (5.19) under the closed loop current control
in Fig. 5.12 can be expressed as
The gains Kpd and Kpq are typically designed as ωcLd
 and ωcLq
,
respectively, based on pole-zero cancellation, where ωc
 is the current
controller bandwidth which is set to 200 Hz. By solving (5.22), the 2nd
harmonic currents and voltages in steady state, denoted as id2
, iq2 ud2
, uq2
,
can be derived as (5.24)
(5.25)
Defining id0
, iq0
 as the DC components of id
 and iq
, the dq-axis currents and
voltages can be further expressed as
It can be seen that the turn fault induces the 2nd harmonics in both the
currents and voltages. The magnitudes of the 2nd harmonics are influenced
by the current control bandwidth. Further, the (IAP and IRP, denoted as iap
and iaq, can be evaluated as [16]
The 2nd harmonics of the IAP and IRP, denoted as p2
 and q2
, are extracted
from (5.25) and given in (5.26).(5.26)
Given that the PM flux linkage ψm is notably small and a negative id
 is
typically employed for maximum torque per Ampere (MTPA) operation in
PMA-SynRM, ψd0
 remains small compared to other elements in (5.26).
Therefore, the magnitude related to the cosine part of p2
 is roughly
equivalent to that of the sine part of q2
. As a result, the magnitude of p2
 is
predominantly determined by its sine part, whereas the magnitude of q2
 is
primarily contributed from its cosine part. When assessing the sine part of
p2
 against the cosine part of q2
, it becomes apparent that the magnitude of
q2
 exceeds that of p2
 with a positive iq0
. Conversely, with a negative iq0
, the
magnitude of q2
 falls below that of p2
. This suggests that in motoring mode
(iq0
 > 0), the 2nd harmonic in the IRP surpasses the IAP, while in generating
mode (iq0
 < 0), it is lower than that of the IAP. Although this analysis is
performed under the simplified condition by ignoring additional sources of
the 2nd harmonics in IAP and IRP, such as natural phase imbalance and
magnetic saturation, they are relatively small compared to those resulting
from a turn fault. The foregoing analysis suggests that the 2nd harmonic of
the IAP or IRP is the suitable fault indicator, depending on the modes of
operation.Figure 5.13 Comparison of 2nd harmonics in IAP and IRP: (a) motoring
mode and (b) generating mode.
To capture the behavior of the 2nd harmonics in the IAP and IRP after the
turn fault across the entire torque-speed operating range of the machine
under study, the general model described in Chapter 4 has been utilized in
simulations. Figure 5.13 illustrates the simulated 2nd harmonics in the fault
3-phase set under both motoring and generating modes of operation. It is
noticed that during motoring, the 2nd harmonic generated in the IRP of the
faulty set surpasses the IAP across the entire operation region, but the trend
is reversed for the generating mode. This observation supports the findings
discussed earlier. Additionally, the relationship between turn faults and the
2nd harmonic of IRP during motoring and IAP during generating displays a
more uniform pattern throughout the operating range. Therefore, in terms of
turn fault detection, the 2nd harmonic in the IRP is a more robust indicator
for motoring mode, while the 2nd harmonic in the IAP becomes more
suitable for generating mode. It is also observed that detection of turn fault
at low speeds is more difficult, as the 2nd harmonics decrease fast with
reduction in speed.
5.6 Turn Fault Detection Design
In this section, the proposed fault detection based on the 2nd harmonics in
IAP and IRP is designed for the triple redundant 3-phase machine drive. It
is important to recognize that inherent asymmetries and imbalances within
the machine are a natural consequence of production variances, the limited
precision of current sensors [17], and disparities in inverter devices. Theseelements all contribute to the presence of small 2nd harmonics even under
healthy operations. To account for these inherent 2nd harmonics, lookup
tables for the 3-phase groups have been created to record the 2nd harmonics
observed under healthy operations. This calibration can be executed
automatically during healthy conditions of the drive, prior to an event of
any fault.
Figure 5.14 Comparison 2nd harmonics of faulty and healthy sets: (a) IRP
in motoring mode and (b) IAP in generating mode.
The fault 3-phase set containing a turn fault obviously will show a
pronounced increase in the 2nd harmonic within the fault indicator
compared with the other two 3-phase sets. The 2nd harmonics between the
healthy and fault-affected sets are compared in Fig. 5.14 across different
modes of operation according to the foregoing analysis and simulations. It
is evident that the 2nd harmonics generated by the faulty set are notably
larger than those in the healthy sets. Consequently, the 2nd harmonic level
of the three 3-phase sets serves as an internal benchmark for detecting the
fault. Harmonics-based detection methods could be prone to variations in
speed and load, potentially leading to false detection. Employing a
comparison among the three 3-phase sets remarkably diminishes the impact
of such transient changes on the accuracy of fault indicators, since these
changes affect all sets equally. However, the increase in the 2nd harmonic in
the fault set will be a clear indicator for detection, significantly lowering the
likelihood of false alarms.
Figure 5.15 presents a schematic diagram of the detailed process for
identifying turn faults in motoring mode. The 2nd harmonics within the IRPare labeled as , k = 1, 2, 3. Initially, IRP values are computed for all 3-
phase sets, utilizing the reference voltages in the DSP control unit and real￾time current measurements as in (5.25). Subsequently, the amplitude of the
2nd harmonic is extracted by the process and low-pass filters shown at the
bottom of Fig. 5.15. Reference data of the 2nd harmonic under healthy
operational conditions are stored in the lookup tables, which are generated
through experimental testing. These tables account for the 2nd harmonics
arising from intrinsic discrepancies in phase windings, such as phase
misalignment, variance in resistance/inductance values, rotor eccentricity,
and nonuniform magnetization of magnets, thereby minimizing the
likelihood of false alarm. Finally, the fault indicators are processed within a
decision block. The fault flag is triggered if(5.27)
Figure 5.15 Fault detection diagram in motoring mode.
where , and represent the 2nd harmonic in IRP of the three 3-
phase sets, and is the reference data of the 2nd harmonic for set ABC
in healthy condition at a given torque-speed combination. The assertion of
the first inequality occurs when the 2nd harmonic surpasses twice the
magnitude of its reference value under the healthy condition, while the
second inequality is validated when this harmonic also exceeds the levels of
the other two sets by a factor of 1.5. Adjustments to the two coefficients
within these inequalities allow for enhanced sensitivity in detection and the
prevention of false detection. Through the utilization of lookup tables and
cross-referencing, the system effectively compensates for machine
imbalances and transient effects, thus ensuring detection is both accurate
and reliable. This detection method has been similarly applied to sets DEFand GHI. In terms of generating mode, the detection approach can be
similarly designed by employing the 2nd harmonic in IAP.
5.7 Experimental Validation on Turn Fault
Detection
The proposed turn fault detection is validated by experimental tests across a
broad torque-speed operating range, including transient load. The fault
current, dq-axis currents and voltages, and fault indicators, namely, 2nd
harmonics in IAP and IRP are presented and discussed. In addition, an
integrated test is conducted to demonstrate the developed fault detection
and mitigation techniques, which enables the transition from healthy
operations to sustainable postfault operations.
5.7.1 Typical Turn Fault Behavior
To mitigate the risk of damage due to excessive fault current, the turn fault
behavior is evaluated at 1000 rpm. This is very representative as low-speed
operation poses the greatest challenge for the fault detection. Initially, the
motor drive operates at the rated current of 100 A in magnitude under
MTPA condition and the turn fault is introduced at 0.06 second by closing
the turn fault emulation relay for a short duration of 0.2 second. The
resultant fault current is shown in Fig. 5.16, where the peak current reaches
480A (4 pu). The measured dq-axis currents and the resulting dq-axis
voltages from the PI controllers are shown in Fig. 5.17 for the three 3-phase
sets, where the subscripts 1, 2, and 3 correspond to the ABC, DEF, and GHI
sets, respectively. The deduced IAP and IRP are depicted in Fig. 5.18(a).
Prior to the fault where t < 0.06 second, the currents, voltages, IAP, and IRP
signals appear consistent across all three 3-phase sets during healthy
operation. Following the turn fault, the drive persists in operation through
the current feedback control, but notable harmonics arise for all three sets,
with the 2nd harmonic being particularly prominent. The amplitudes of the
2nd harmonic in both voltages and currents are observed to be relatively
small, being below 15.4% for the voltage and 2.9% for the current with
respect to their amplitudes. Conversely, the 2nd harmonic in IAP and IRP
are substantially higher, offering a much larger signal-to-noise ratio for the
fault detection. Being consistent with the prior analysis and simulation, the2nd harmonic in IRP extracted from the detector during the motoring
operation surpasses that in IAP remarkably. For illustration, the extracted
2nd harmonics in IRP for the three 3-phase sets are compared in Fig.
5.18(b). It is evident that in the healthy operation, the magnitudes of
 and are small, so are the deviations between them. Following
the turn fault, a significant rise in is observed, while and exhibit
minor changes in opposite directions. This behavior is consistent with the
theoretical study and simulations and has been exploited in the fault
detection criteria outlined in (5.27) for improving reliability of the
detection.Figure 5.16 Turn fault current when the drive operates at 1000 rpm and 100
A.Figure 5.17 Measured currents and voltages before and after turn fault: (a)
dq-axis currents and (b) dq-axis voltages.Figure 5.18 IAP and IRP before and after turn fault: (a) instantaneous
values and (b) extracted 2nd harmonic magnitudes of IRP in three 3-phase
sets.
Additional experiments are performed with 100 A load current in generating
mode. The behaviors of the currents and voltages are similar to those shown
in Figs. 5.16 and 5.17 except for the polarity of the q-axis current being
reversed. Thus, only the graphs for the IAP and IRP before and after the
fault are illustrated in Fig. 5.19(a). Unlike the motoring mode as expected,
now the 2nd harmonic in IAP is evidently much greater than that in IRP.
Consequently, for generating mode, the 2nd harmonic in IAP will be
selected as the fault indicator. The filtered 2nd harmonics of IAP for the
three 3-phase sets are depicted in Fig. 5.19(b). The relative patterns
observed here are very close to those in Fig. 5.18(b), indicating that the turn
fault can be reliably detected in this mode with the defined criterion.
5.7.2 Detectability over the Wide Operating Region
A critical aspect of assessing fault detection capability is the scope of
detectable coverage within the operational torque-speed range for the
machine drive. As depicted in Fig. 5.14, it is observed that the most
challenging zone for the turn fault detection mainly locates at lower speeds
due to the small 2nd harmonics in both IAP and IRP. Consequently, the turn
fault detection algorithm is further examined at a lower speed of 500rpm.
The proportions of the 2nd harmonics in IRP and IAP of the fault condition
against their reference values under the healthy condition, defined as(5.28)
Figure 5.19 Measured IAP and IRP in generating mode: (a) instantaneous
values and (b) extracted 2nd harmonic magnitudes of IAP in the three 3-
phase sets.
have been measured in order to evaluate the detection criterion defined in
(5.27). As depicted in Fig. 5.20, it is seen that the variations of the ratio
with the load current consistently exceed 2 in the motoring mode,
suggesting that the turn fault is detectable under all load current conditions
at 500 rpm. As speed increases, the 2nd harmonic in IRP under a turn fault
condition increases as is evident in Fig. 5.14, leading to a much greater
detectability. Likewise, the ratio remains above 2 for speeds at 1000 rpm in
the generating mode under all load conditions. At 500 rpm, however, the
ratio falls below 2 when the load current surpasses 90 A, indicating that the
turn fault may not be detected reliably with a threshold of 2 for the
 ratio when the speed is below 500 rpm. This phenomenon can be
attributed to several factors, such as small turn fault current, and non￾negligible voltage drop on the phase resistance and inverter switches. In the
motoring mode, the reference voltage magnitude, , is
greater than that of the actual voltage due to the voltage drop on the
inverter, but the opposite is true for the generating mode, resulting in lower
2nd IAP harmonics when evaluated with the voltage reference signals 
and in the DSP controller.It should be noted that the above assessment is based on the experimental
results with one-turn short-circuit fault. If the number of short-circuit turns
is more than 1, the magnitude of the 2nd harmonics in IAP and IRP
increases, leading to much larger fault signatures and even-better
detectability.Figure 5.20 Detection ratio at 500 and 1000 rpm in motoring (M500,
M1000) and generating (G500, G1000) modes.(5.29)
Figure 5.21 Detection zone under (a) motoring mode and (b) generating
mode.
Based on the analysis above, the detection zones under the worst case of
one-turn short circuit can be expressed as and they are illustrated in Fig. 5.21, where the undetectable regions are
shown in gray. Thus, a turn fault can be detected in a very wide operational
range under the motoring mode. While in the generating mode, the fault is
also detectable when the speed is above 500 rpm and the load torque is
lower than −60 Nm.
5.7.3 Effect of Transient Conditions on Detection
Harmonic-based fault detection may lead to unwanted alerts due to
fluctuations in load torque (or current) and speed. For the machine drive
under study, the online monitoring of the three 3-phase sets can provide a
cross reference to avoid false alarms during transient. The robustness of the
analyzed detection method is assessed under such transient conditions and
an example is illustrated in Fig. 5.22(a). Initially, the machine drive is
operating with 40 A current at 1000 rpm, then a step increase in the load
current to 60 A is applied at t = 0.13 second. The resultant 2nd harmonics of
the three 3-phase sets are extracted and displayed in Fig. 5.22(b).
Temporary increases in the harmonics in all 3-phase sets are observed
during the transient, and the peak of the 2nd harmonics is about three times
higher than the reference value. However, the differences in these
harmonics are below 1.5 times. Thus, no false alert will be activated as it
does not satisfy the second inequality in (5.27).Figure 5.22 idq response and 2nd harmonic of IRP in transient (a) idq (b)
2nd harmonic of IRP.
Another test is performed when the same current step change takes place at
1000 rpm and a single-turn fault is injected simultaneously. The dq axis
currents and the 2nd harmonic responses are shown in Fig. 5.23. In thiscase, although the 2nd harmonics of all three sets increase during the
transient, the 2nd harmonic in the fault set is particularly higher. Thus, the
fault can be detected during the transient.Figure 5.23 idq response and 2nd harmonic of IRP in transient with turn
fault (a) idq and (b) 2nd harmonic of IRP.
To avoid the risk of damage in repeated tests with turn fault, simulations
have been performed in various operating conditions with speed and torque
changes. The results show that the fault criterion in (5.27) yields correctdetection in all cases. It follows that by cross-referencing the 2nd harmonics
of the three 3-phase sets the proposed fault detection is also effective during
transient while false alarm can be avoided.
5.7.4 Fault Mitigation Test
Since a turn fault in a phase winding leads to excessive fault current and
rapid increase in temperature in the vicinity of the fault conductors, an
immediate action, that is, application of TSC through the inverter of the
faulty 3-phase set, is necessary upon detection of the fault. Further tests are
also performed to demonstrate the response of the triple redundant drive to
a turn fault through fault detection and mitigation action to postfault
operation. Initially, the machine drive is operating with 60 A load current at
1000 rpm in motoring mode. A single-turn fault is injected into phase B by
triggering the relay across the turn fault emulation taps. It is seen in Fig.
5.24(a) that the fault current, denoted as i
f
, soars to 340 A, which can cause
serious damage to winding insulation if a mitigation action is not taken
timely. With implementation of the fault detection technique described
previously, the turn fault is detected after 15 ms within one fundamental
electrical cycle and TSC is applied on the fault ABC set. With the
mitigation, the rms fault current is reduced to a thermally sustainable level
of 107 A while the rms phase currents in the healthy parts of the ABC
windings are below the rated. Furthermore, the phase currents of the other
two healthy 3-phase sets have not been affected noticeably following the
mitigation action as seen in Fig. 5.24(b). The postfault operation continues
with the two healthy 3-phase sets albeit with reduced torque production
capacity. Thus, it confirms that the worst single-turn fault can be
accommodated by the triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM drive with
proper detection and mitigation actions. It should be noticed that a short
circuit across a single-turn represents the worst-case scenario in terms of
fault current and detection. The integrated test provides further confidence
in the ability of the triple redundant machine drive to operate against other
possible turn faults.Figure 5.24 Current responses during fault detection and mitigation test: (a)
currents in fault set and (b) currents in healthy sets.5.8 High-Frequency Signal-Based Turn Fault
Detection Techniques
As has been briefly discussed in Section 5.1, turn fault detection techniques
based on signals around the fundamental frequency, denoted as low
frequency (LF), are dependent on the machine operation condition. At low
speed and light load conditions, the fault signature is very benign and
reliable detection is of great challenge. The 2nd IRP and IAP-based
detection technique described and tested in Sections 5.6 and 5.7 also falls
into this category, whereby any detection at speed below 500 rpm is
difficult. The direct physical changes due to a turn fault are (1) flux linkage
which in turn affects induced voltage and current and (2) inductance. Since
the first and second changes are proportional to the number of turns and the
square of the number of turns, respectively, the change in inductance is
much greater and even more pronounced at HF. It can be expected that HF
signal-based detection methods will exhibit stronger capabilities and they
have been widely investigated in the literature [2, 18–21].
Currently, there are two main types of detection methods based on HF
signals. One method involves injecting HF voltages into machine windings,
which is similar to the HF-injection based sensorless control of electric
machine drives. The injected voltage is usually around a few kHz with a
small magnitude. The resultant HF current response is then extracted and
processed to detect interturn faults. As the injected signal is at a specific
frequency, independent of machine operations, the detection is more robust
and reliable even at low speed and in no-load operation. The techniques can
be further enhanced by appropriate filtering. The HF signal-based detection
was first analyzed in [22, 23] by measuring the HF negative sequence
current and further investigated in [24] by monitoring the incremental
inductances. In Ref. [25, 26], the HF voltage residual signals are extracted
by comparing the injected HF voltage and estimated HF voltage. It is found
that the fault signals are clearly reflected in the HF range, which are
immune to the operation condition. The enhanced fault detectability of the
HF injection-based technique can be further exploited to detect and classify
turn fault and high-resistance connection fault as reported in [12]. However,
HF injection introduces additional ripple in the current which, in turn,incurs additional HF losses in the machine windings and magnetic materials
and may reduce voltage operating range at high speed.
The other method involves utilizing HF voltages generated by PWM
switching action, which does not require additional HF injection. Therefore,
the disadvantages of the HF injection-based techniques, such as increased
noise and loss, are avoided. The PWM-induced HF voltages are usually
concentrated around two times of the switching frequency, typically 20 kHz
if the switching frequency is 10 kHz. In the presence of turn short-circuit
faults, the asymmetry of the 3-phase windings leads to differences in the
response of HF currents, enabling the detection of interturn short-circuit
faults [27]. Further in Ref. [28], the equivalent HF impedance is employed
to detect the turn fault with higher signal magnitude. However, the HF
voltages and currents generated by PWM require a high sampling rate and
processing power, which may increase the cost of the DSP unit of the drive.
Alternatively, additional hardware processing circuits can be used to filter
the HF voltages and currents.
The above two HF signal-based detection methods can be employed if
accurate detection is required in the low speed and light load region. To
illustrate the effectiveness of HF-signal based detection, the method in [25,
26] is exemplified as shown in Fig. 5.25. HF signals are injected to the
phase voltages similar to the HF-injection based sensorless drive control
[29]. Simulations are performed for a single-turn short circuit in phase B of
the triple redundant machine under two operating conditions, light load at
low speed (10 A current at 500 rpm), which is very challenging for
detection with the technique described in Section 5.6, the other is heavy
load at high speed (60 A current at 4000 rpm). The simulated turn fault
currents and signals are presented in Fig. 5.26. It is seen that at low speed,
the turn fault current is only 150 A while it is 550 A at high speed. As a
result, the turn fault can be easily detected with LF-based techniques at high
speed while the detection is very difficult in low-speed operation. In
contrast, however, the captured HF components in the midpoint-to-ground￾voltages ung_ah, ung_bh, ung_ch [25, 26] in the two operating conditions are
almost the same, as shown in Fig. 5.26. Hence, the turn fault can be reliably
detected for both operations from the HF signals. Thus, the HF-based
method provides an alternative approach to detect the most challenging
fault.Figure 5.25 Scheme of HF voltage injection.
Figure 5.26 Diagnosis process of turn fault under different operating
conditions: (a) 500 rpm with 10 A load and (b) 4000 rpm with 60 A load.
(ia
, ib
, ic
, and i
f are the 3-phase currents and fault current and ung_a
, ung_b
,
ung_c and ung_ah, ung_bh, ung_ch are the midpoint-to-ground-voltages and their
high-frequency components.)
5.9 Summary
This chapter presents fault diagnosis methods for open-circuit faults in
inverter switches and for interturn short-circuit faults in windings of a
motor drive system. For open-circuit faults in power devices, a fault
diagnosis method based on the relative β-axis residual voltages associatedwith each phase has been described, analyzed, and tested. It can not only
detect an open-circuit fault in power devices but also identify the fault
location within the 3-phase inverter. Through analysis of voltage and
current behaviors under a winding turn fault condition, a fault detection
method based on the 2nd harmonics in IAP and IRP has been developed and
demonstrated. It has been shown that the 2nd harmonic in IRP exhibits a
more significant fault signature during motoring mode, while the 2nd
harmonic in IAP is more significant during generation mode. Thus, the two
fault signatures are employed for turn fault detection in the two different
operation modes. The robustness of the fault detection is further enhanced
by cross-references of the fault signatures in three 3-phase sets. Extensive
simulations and experiments have been conducted to validate the
effectiveness and utilities of the two proposed detection methods for
mitigation actions and sustained postfault operations.
In addition, the limitations of LF-based turn fault detection techniques are
discussed and the merits of HF-based detection techniques are outlined. The
latter is conducive not only for fault detection but also for fault
classification.
References
1 S. Afrandideh, M. E. Milasi, F. Haghjoo, and S. M. A. Cruz, “Turn to turn
fault detection, discrimination, and faulty region identification in the
stator and rotor windings of synchronous machines based on the
rotational magnetic field distortion,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
Conversion, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 292–301, 2020.
2 B. Sen and J. Wang, “Stator interturn fault detection in permanent-magnet
machines using PWM ripple current measurement,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 3148–3157, 2016.
3 A. H. Bonnett and G. C. Soukup, “Cause and analysis of stator and rotor
failures in three-phase squirrel-cage induction motors,” Industry
Applications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 921–937, 1992.
4 A. Gandhi, T. Corrigan, and L. Parsa, “Recent advances in modeling and
online detection of stator interturn faults in electrical motors,” IEEETransactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1564–1575,
2011.
5 P. Shi, X. Wang, X. Meng, M. He, Y. Mao, and Z. Wang, “Adaptive fault￾tolerant control for open-circuit faults in dual three-phase PMSM
drives,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 38, no. 3, pp.
3676–3688, 2023.
6 H. Mesai-Ahmed, I. Jlassi, A. J. M. Cardoso, and A. Bentaallah, “Multiple
open-circuit faults diagnosis in six-phase induction motor drives using
stator current analysis,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol.
37, no. 6, pp. 7275–7285, 2022.
7 C. H. D. Angelo, G. R. Bossio, S. J. Giaccone, M. I. Valla, J. A. Solsona,
and G. O. Garcia, “Online model-based stator-fault detection and
identification in induction motors,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 4671–4680, 2009.
8 M. Yi Lu, M. A. Masrur, C. ZhiHang, and Z. Baifang, “Model-based fault
diagnosis in electric drives using machine learning,” IEEE/ASME
Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 290–303, 2006.
9 B. Sen and J. Wang, “A fast detection technique for stator inter-turn fault
in multi-phase permanent magnet machines using model based
approach,” in 7th IET International Conference on Power Electronics,
Machines and Drives (PEMD 2014), 2014, pp. 1–6.
10 S. Nadarajan, S. K. Panda, B. Bhangu, and A. K. Gupta, “Online model￾based condition monitoring for brushless wound-field synchronous
generator to detect and diagnose stator windings turn-to-turn shorts
using extended kalman filter,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 3228–3241, 2016.
11 R. Hu, J. Wang, A. R. Mills, E. Chong, and Z. Sun, “Current-residual￾based stator interturn fault detection in permanent magnet machines,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 59–69,
2021.
12 R. Hu, J. Wang, A. R. Mills, E. Chong, and Z. Sun, “Detection and
classification of turn fault and high resistance connection fault inpermanent magnet machines based on zero sequence voltage,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 1922–1933, 2020.
13 A. Sarikhani and O. A. Mohammed, “Inter-turn fault detection in PM
synchronous machines by physics-based back electromotive force
estimation,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 60, no. 8,
pp. 3472–3484, 2013.
14 M. Drif and A. J. M. Cardoso, “Discriminating the simultaneous
occurrence of three-phase induction motor rotor faults and mechanical
load oscillations by the instantaneous active and reactive power media
signature analyses,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol.
59, no. 3, pp. 1630–1639, 2012.
15 M. Drif and A. J. M. Cardoso, “On-line fault diagnostics in operating
three-phase induction motors by the active and reactive power media,”
in 18th International Conference on Electrical Machines, 2008. ICEM
2008, 2008, pp. 1–6.
16 H. Akagi, Y. Kanazawa, and A. Nabae, “Instantaneous reactive power
compensators comprising switching devices without energy storage
components,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. IA-20,
no. 3, pp. 625–630, 1984.
17 C. Dae-Woong and S. Seung-Ki, “Analysis and compensation of current
measurement error in vector-controlled AC motor drives,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 340–345,
1998.
18 J. Zhang, J. Hang, S. Ding, and M. Cheng, “Online diagnosis and
localization of high-resistance connection in PMSM with improved fault
indicator,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 32, no. 5, pp.
3585–3594, 2017.
19 S. C. Yang, “On-line turn fault detection of interior permanent magnet
machines using the pulsating-type voltage injection,” IEEE Transactions
on Industry Applications, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016.
20 R. Hu, J. Wang, A. R. Mills, E. Chong, and Z. Sun, “PWM ripple
currents based turn fault detection for 3-phase permanent magnetmachines,” 2017 IEEE International Electric Machines and Drives
Conference (IEMDC), 2017, pp. 1–7.
21 R. Hu, J. Wang, A. R. Mills, E. Chong, and Z. Sun, “High-frequency
voltage injection based stator interturn fault detection in permanent
magnet machines,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 36,
no. 1, pp. 785–794, 2021.
22 F. Briz, M. W. Degner, A. Zamarron, and J. M. Guerrero, “Online stator
winding fault diagnosis in inverter-fed AC machines using high￾frequency signal injection,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications,
vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 1109–1117, 2003.
23 F. Briz, M. W. Degner, P. Garcia, and A. B. Diez, “High-frequency
carrier-signal voltage selection for stator winding fault diagnosis in
inverter-fed AC machines,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 4181–4190, 2008.
24 J. Arellano-Padilla, M. Sumner, and C. Gerada, “Winding condition
monitoring scheme for a permanent magnet machine using high￾frequency injection,” Electric Power Applications, IET, vol. 5, no. 1, pp.
89–99, 2011.
25 B. Wang, X. Feng, J. Zeng, and Z. Wang, “A novel turn fault detection
strategy based on high-frequency neutral-to-ground voltages,” IEEE
Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 38, no. 12, pp. 15945–15955,
2023.
26 X. Feng, B. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Hua, M. Cheng, and B. Zhou, “Stator
turn fault detection by relative voltage residual slopes with high
frequency injection,” IEEE Transactions on Transportation
Electrification, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 4809–4820, 2024.
27 B. Wang, L. Luo, W. Fu, W. Hua, G. Wang, and Z. Wang, “Study on the
PWM ripple current based turn fault detection for interior PM machine,”
IEEE Transactions on Transportation Electrification, vol. 7, no. 3, pp.
1537–1547, 2021.
28 B. Wang, J. Hu, G. Wang, and W. Hua, “A novel stator turn fault
detection technique by using equivalent high frequency impedance,”IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 130540–130550, 2020.
29 G. Wang, M. Valla, and J. Solsona, “Position sensorless permanent
magnet synchronous machine drives—a review,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 5830–5842, 2020.6
Postfault Control Strategies for Fault￾Tolerant Machine Drives
6.1 Introduction
Postfault control is an important technique that enables continuous
operation in a fault-tolerant machine drive. After the occurrence of a fault,
the currents in the machine drive are usually distorted with increased
voltage ripples and torque fluctuations. Excessive current will be induced in
case of a short-circuit fault, particularly of an interturn short circuit. Thus, a
suitable postfault control strategy should be in place to suppress the
undesirable effects without further risk of fault propagation.
For multiphase fault-tolerant machines with fractional slot concentrated
windings (FSCWs) in which each phase is independently controlled by an
H-bridge converter as shown in Fig. 6.1 [1, 2], significant torque ripple will
result in case of open or short circuit in one phase. This will deteriorate the
quality of postfault operation and may lead to many undesirable effects,
such as excessive vibration and mechanical instability. This problem can be
addressed by employing an optimal torque control strategy during the
postfault operation [3–5].
For the multiple 3-phase permanent magnet-assisted synchronous
reluctance machine (PMA-SynRM) under consideration, the fault in one
module can be isolated by disabling the whole 3-phase set winding or
applying terminal short circuit (TSC) on the fault set. However, as
described in Chapter 2, in the case of interturn short circuit, the fault current
in the worst-case scenario is about 3.2 pu even after TSC application to the
faulted 3-phase set. This is because of the low impedance in the short￾circuit loop [6, 7]. The localized high fault current may jeopardize the
postfault operation of the machine drives although design measures have
been taken to accommodate this fault as discussed in Chapter 3.
Nevertheless, it would be desirable if the fault current could be further
reduced.TSC application is a common approach for fault-tolerant multiphase
machines and multiple 3-phase machines to mitigate turn fault [1]. The
reactive current produced by the TSC in the fault phase reduces the flux
linkage in the fault turns and hence the resultant fault current. However, the
study in [8] showed that this method was only effective for a small wire
wound machine and was not suitable for a bar wound machine. Therefore,
an optimized current at 90° lagging the back electromotive was injected to
the fault phase of a bar wound machine to limit the fault current. In [9], a
magnet flux nullifying control was developed for a 3-phase interior PM
(IPM) machine following a short-circuit fault either in the inverter or in an
entire phase winding by employing open-end winding drives. It was
demonstrated that the fault current was reduced to zero by injecting proper
current to the healthy phases. In Ref. [10], the fault current was reduced for
a 3-phase PM machine by activating field weakening before the base speed.
The voltage of the fault turns is reduced by increasing the negative d-axis
current. However, the effect of the fault current reduction is quite limited
and this method also reduces the output torque. In addition, it is only
applicable to operations below the base speed. In Ref. [11], 3-phase current
injection was used to reduce the interturn short-circuit current in a PM
aircraft starter/generator but leads to a complete loss of the torque capability
of the machine. This mitigation action is still necessary to prevent excessive
heat in the faulted turns and its propagation since the rotating PM field
cannot be turned off during the engine operation. The conflict between the
suppression of the fault current and the loss of the output torque is mainly
due to the limited degrees of freedom in the conventional 3-phase machine.Figure 6.1 Schematic of 5-phase 10s12p fault-tolerant FSCW PM machine.
This chapter describes the optimal torque control strategy for fault-tolerant
multiphase FSCW PM machines and develops a turn fault mitigation
strategy to minimize the fault current in the multiple 3-phase PMA-SynRM
drive as two examples of postfault control. The optimal current control
strategy is employed to deliver smooth output torque during postfault
operation for both constant torque and constant power operating regions. It
could be adapted for open-circuit, short-circuit, and interturn short-circuit
faults. Current injection technique is employed without compromising
output torque for the multiple 3-phase machine drive under study. The flux
linkage of the faulted phase, where the fault turns are located, is estimated
by accounting for the influence of the rotor PM field and the currents in the
healthy 3-phase sets and the fault set while no precise information on the
number of faulted turns and on the fault location in subcoils and slots is
required. To minimize the flux linkage of the fault turns, specific currents
are injected to the fault 3-phase set while the currents in the healthy sets are
not affected by continuous torque output. The injected currents areestimated by two linear equations, which are independent of the rotor
position. The proposed method is validated by extensive finite element (FE)
simulations and experimental tests. It is demonstrated that the fault current
is effectively reduced compared to the conventional TSC method while the
torque is not compromised.
6.2 Postfault Optimal Torque Control
Strategies for Multiphase FSCW PM
Machines
Multiphase PM machines with single-layer FSCW are one of the classic
forms of PM machine topology that offers fault-tolerant capability [1]. The
number of phases employed is usually greater than 3, being 4 or 5 typically.
Each phase is fed by an independently controlled H-bridge converter.
Hence, the important machine design features to achieve fault tolerance,
namely, electrical, thermal, and magnetic isolations can be easily realized
with this machine topology. Further, by employing surface-mounted rotor
topology, the machine can achieve high torque density at the expense of
more magnetic material usage. Such a machine naturally has large phase
inductance, which is conducive to achieving greater than 1.0 pu phase
inductance for limiting short-circuit current below the rated value. In the
event of an open-circuit or short-circuit fault in one phase, the remaining
healthy phases can continue their operation to produce output torque or
power. For a machine with m number of phases, the output torque capability
under a fault condition is typically reduced to (m−1)/m times the rated. This
provides a degree of freedom in the selection of phase numbers to obtain
the required torque capability in fault conditions.
It is generally assumed that such fault-tolerant machines have a sinusoidal
back electromotive force (back-emf) waveform and the current controller
for each phase is required to track a set of sinusoidal current commands
proportional to a given torque demand. However, this simple control
strategy inevitably results in an undesirable torque ripple during normal
healthy operation, when the back-emf waveform is nonsinusoidal, and a
large torque pulsation under a fault condition, such as an open-circuited or a
short-circuited phase. In this chapter, a 5-phase, 10-slot, 12-pole fault-(6.1)
(6.2)
(6.3)
(6.4)
(6.5)
tolerant FSCW PM machine is considered to develop the optimal torque
control whose schematic is shown in Fig. 6.1.
To reduce the torque ripple in healthy operations and alleviate large torque
pulsation in fault conditions, an optimal current control strategy that aims to
achieve a ripple-free electromagnetic torque under both healthy and faulted
conditions with minimum copper loss can be employed. For a healthy m￾phase machine of this type with a surface-mounted PM rotor, the reluctance
torque is negligible. The electromagnetic torque, Te
, of the healthy machine
can be expressed as 
where i
j
(θ) is the instantaneous current in phase j at a given rotor position of
θ.Kj
(θ) = p(dψmj/dθ), p is the number of pole-pairs of the machine, and
ψmj(θ) is the flux linkage of phase j due to the rotor PM field. If the
machine develops an open-circuit or short-circuit fault in phase k, the
resultant electromagnetic torque will be affected and given by
where Tf
(θ) is the torque produced in the faulted phase and can be
expressed by 
where ik
(θ) is the short-circuit current in the faulted phase and can be
evaluated by 
where R and L are phase resistance and phase inductance of the machine
and ω is the electrical angular frequency. To produce the demand output
torque Te
, the required current waveforms in the healthy phases can be
obtained by minimizing the cost function F: (6.6)
(6.7)
(6.8)
(6.9)
subject to the output torque constraint given in (6.2). Since the cost function
is proportional to the copper loss in the healthy phases, the resultant
currents will minimize the copper loss while satisfying the required torque
demand. The solution to the optimization problem can be derived by
minimizing the augmented objective function F(i1
,…, i
j
,…, im, λ) with a
Lagrange multiplier λ and j ≠ k.
Thus, the optimal currents in the healthy phases to produce the required
output torque Te
 with a minimum copper loss must satisfy
The instantaneous currents in the healthy phases can be derived from (6.6)
and (6.7) and are given by
Once the waveforms of the phase PM flux linkages and phase inductance
are determined by either experimental measurements or FE analysis, the
healthy phase currents at a given rotor position can be obtained from (6.8).
These currents form the demand currents for the healthy phases, which are
tracked by the independent current controllers, one for each phase, via their
H-bridge converters.
In practical implementations, the maximum current in each phase is
typically limited to ±Imax. Depending on the demanded output torque Te
 and
the fault condition, the instantaneous current demands of the phases could
exceed the current limit. In this case, the process of determining the optimal
instantaneous currents may take several iterations. If the instantaneous
current demand of phase l exceeds the current limit, it is clamped to
The torque contribution from this phase becomes(6.10)
(6.11)
(6.12)
(6.13)
where “+” and “−” signs correspond to positive and negative phase
currents, respectively. The demand currents in the remaining healthy phases
can be treated as a separate subset and determined by the same optimization
technique to satisfy the new torque demand (Te
 + Tf
(θ) − Tl
(θ)). The new
current demands are given by
The new current demands should be checked to ensure that none of them
exceeds the current limit. If the current demand for one or more phases
from the new subset exceeds the limit, the above process is repeated until
all the current demands satisfy the current limit. When there are more than
one phase in which the current demands reach the limit, (6.10) should be
the sum of the torque contributions from these phases and the index j in
(6.11) should exclude these phases.
Cogging torque is usually present in a PM machine. In some applications,
such as electric power steering and precision servo control, the presence of
the cogging torque is undesirable. This cogging torque can be compensated
by the electromagnetic torque via the same optimal current control strategy.
In this case, the cogging torque Tcg(θ), predetermined by measurements or
FE analysis, can be added in to the demand torque in (6.12):
The resultant optimal phase currents can be similarly derived and given by
This concept can be further extended to compensate the other types of
torque ripple if their variations with rotor position are known prior.
However, it is important to point out that the effective compensation of the
torque ripple is dependent on the current loop control bandwidth. In most
applications, the torque ripple and torque pulsation due to a fault are more(6.14)
(6.15)
detrimental at low-speed operation. Consequently, the compensation can be
quite effective even with a limited current control bandwidth.
By minimizing the copper loss, the current in each phase tends to be in
phase with the phase back-emf. At high speed, therefore, the converter
output voltage may reach the DC-link voltage of the H-bridge. This implies
the optimal current control strategy is only applicable when the machine
operates in healthy conditions below its base speed, ωb
, which is defined as
the maximum speed at which the drive system can produce rated smooth
torque without flux-weakening. In fault conditions, the current waveforms
produced from the optimal control strategy are more distorted and yield
higher operating voltages. Hence, the effective operation with the optimal
current control in fault conditions will be below the base speed.
To extend the optimal current control operation above the base speed, the
cost function of the optimization can be modified to that given in (6.14)
where w is a weighting factor used to adjust the flux-weakening effect at
high speed. At speeds below the base speed, the weighting factor is set to
zero. Therefore, the cost function becomes , which is equivalent to
minimizing the copper loss . At speeds above the base speed, w is a
non-zero positive number, which controls the degree of the flux-weakening
effect and varies with the speed ω and torque demand Te
 in the following
form: 
where Trated is the rated torque of the machine. The increase in the weight
factor on the PM flux linkage of each phase drives the optimal current
profiles to advance the phase angles with respect to the phase back-emfs,
resulting in lower phase voltages and, hence, flux-weakening effect.
In addition to open- or short-circuit fault in one phase, interturn short circuit
that involves a few turns in a phase may also occur. In this case, a typicalmitigation action is to apply TSC to the faulted phase via the H-bridge
converter. This will reduce the interturn short-circuit current, and the
resulting fault behavior is similar to that of a short-circuit fault in one
phase. Hence, the optimal current control is also applicable after the
mitigation action for the interturn fault.
6.3 Simulation Validation on the Optimal
Torque Control Strategy
For the 5-phase fault-tolerant FSCW PM machine under consideration, the
measured and predicted phase back-emf and cogging torque waveforms are
shown in Fig. 6.2, from which the fundamental back-emf constant is
obtained and given in Table 6.1 together with the phase resistance and
inductance.
Figure 6.2 Measured and predicted waveforms of phase back-emf and
cogging torque.
Each phase is fed by an independently controlled H-bridge converter with a
DC-link voltage at 45 V. The current control bandwidth is set to 800 Hz,
and the converter is assumed to be ideal. Figure 6.3 shows the torque
waveform when a conventional control is employed to track a set of
sinusoidal current demands to produce the rated torque of 23.2 Nm at therotor speed of 100 rad/s under one phase open-circuit or short-circuit
condition.
Table 6.1 Parameters of 5-phase fault-tolerant PM machine.
Parameters Values
Emf constant (V/rad, fundamental) 0.104
Phase resistance (mΩ) 31.61
Phase inductance (mH) 0.155
Figure 6.3 Output torque under open-circuit and short-circuit conditions
with conventional control strategy.
6.3.1 Optimal Torque Control in the Constant Torque
Region
It is seen that due to the emf harmonics and fault conditions, a torque ripple
of 43.3% and 73.8% is present under the open-circuit or the short-circuit
conditions, respectively. To eliminate the excessive torque ripple, the
proposed optimal current control strategy is employed on the 5-phase
prototype drive. By way of example, a test is performed under a short-circuit condition in the constant torque region at a rotor speed of 100 rad/s,
the weighting factor w is set to 0. Figure 6.4 shows the current, voltage,
emf, and torque waveforms, for the same torque demand and rotor speed as
in Fig. 6.3. It is evident that smooth torque is produced at the expense of
increased current harmonics and di/dt, compared with sinewave phase
currents. The required peak phase voltages to realize these current
trajectories also appear to be higher than those for normal healthy
operation.Figure 6.4 Current, voltage, back-emf, and torque waveforms under a
short-circuit condition with the optimal control strategy at 100 rad/s: (a)
phase currents and (b) voltage and back-emf in healthy phase 2 and
resultant torque.
The high-order harmonics in the phase currents that result from the optimal
control strategy will increase eddy current loss in the rotor magnets [4],
particularly at high-speed operations. Axial and circumferential
segmentation of the rotor magnets is typically employed in this type of
machine, not only to reduce the eddy current loss but also to prevent
excessive rotor temperature and irreversible demagnetization.
Since the simulation is performed with ideal converters, pulse width
modulation (PWM) switching effect is not seen in the current and voltage
waveforms. Further under the current feedback control, the phase currents
track very well their demands which results from the optimal current
profiles at the relatively low operating speed. When the weighting factor w
is set to zero, the optimal solution minimizes the copper loss, which leads to
the phase currents being in-phase with their respective emfs. This will be
evident from Fig. 6.4 by examining the current waveform in healthy phase
2 and its corresponding emf. Because of the high peak phase voltage seen in
Fig. 6.4(b) required to track the optimal currents, for a fixed DC-link
voltage, the maximum speed at which the rated ripple-free torque can be
produced under a fault condition will be lower than that under healthy
operating conditions.
6.3.2 Optimal Torque Control in the Constant Power
Region
When the rotor speed increases, the available control voltage to realize the
required current trajectories becomes progressively lower. Therefore, to
achieve a smooth torque output, a degree of flux-weakening proportional to
the speed and torque demand is necessary. Again, by way of example, a test
is performed under a short-circuit condition in the constant power region at
a rotor speed of 600 rad/s. The current, voltage, emf, and torque waveforms
are shown in Fig. 6.5. As can be seen, even under the short-circuit
condition, a ripple-free torque of 11.6 Nm is achieved in the flux￾weakening mode. The flux-weakening effect is produced by increasing theweighting in the cost function given in (6.14). Consequently, the optimal
current trajectories tend to suppress the flux linkage through phase advance,
which is evident from the current and emf waveforms in Fig. 6.5 for healthy
phase 2.
The voltage in phase 2 has reached the DC-link voltage over some periods
in both the positive and negative polarities. Indeed, this illustrates that the
flux-weakening effect is appropriate at the given speed and torque when the
voltage reaches its limit while the currents are still under control.
It is also of interest to see that optimal currents under the flux-weakening
operation are closer to sinewaves. This is because as the currents are more
weighted to reduce the phase flux linkages, the effect of torque pulsation
due to the fault on the currents in the healthy phases is also reduced.
It should be noted that the quality of the optimal current control relies on
high-fidelity tracking of the current demands. In this regard, various
advanced control techniques such as resonant control and repetitive control
may be employed. Some of these techniques are described in [12]. Further,
the flux-weakening effect will also be dependent on fault conditions. With
an open-circuit fault, the tooth and back-iron of the fault phase are
magnetically less saturated, and so are in the two neighboring phase
regions. Hence, more phase advance effect is required to suppress the PM
flux-linkage in these phases. In contrast, under a short-circuit fault, the PM
flux linkage of the fault phase is significantly reduced by the short-circuit
current, which eases the need for flux-weakening control. To achieve good
performance in various operating conditions, the weight factor should
ideally be adaptive, as described in [5].Figure 6.5 Current, voltage, emf, and torque waveforms under a short￾circuit condition with the optimal control strategy at 600 rad/s: (a) phase
current and (b) voltage and back-emf in phase 2 and resultant torque.
6.4 Turn Fault Mitigation by Current Injection
For the fault-tolerant multiple 3-phase drive under study, it has been shown
in Chapter 2 that the turn fault current after application of TSC is still much
higher than the rated. The magnitude of the fault current is also dependent
on fault location – being the highest in motoring mode if the fault occurs in
coil B2, while in generating mode it is the highest in coil A1. To reduce the
fault current further, the flux linkage of the fault turns should be minimized
close to zero if possible. For the multiple 3-phase machine, it has more
degrees of freedom than a conventional 3-phase machine in controlling the
currents, which can be used to influence the flux linkage. Thus, instead of
TSC application, specific currents can be injected to the fault set to
minimize the flux linkage of the fault turns while the remaining healthy sets
continue their postfault operation.
Due to the mutual magnetic coupling between the healthy sets and fault set,
it is not possible to nullify all phase flux linkages of the fault set. However,
only the flux linkage of the fault phase where a turn fault occurs needs to be
minimized. With the fault detection techniques described in [13–15], it is
possible to identify the fault phase but the subcoil in which a turn fault
occurs may still be unknown if a phase winding contains more than one
coil. For a machine with distributed windings, coils of the same phase and
polarity are usually placed within a 60° phase belt. For example, the
machine under consideration has two coils connected in series and they are
displaced by 30° with respect to each other as shown in Fig. 6.6. The phase
axis is displaced by 15° with respect to the two subcoils. Thus, if the total
flux linkage of the fault phase is limited very close to zero, the flux linkage
of the two subcoils will also be very low, leading to a small fault current.
To determine the injected currents, the flux linkage of the fault phase is first
analyzed. According to the analysis in Chapter 4, the flux linkage of the
fault phase is contributed by three sources, namely, the rotor PM field, the
currents in the healthy 3-phase sets, and the currents in the fault set. The
flux linkage of the fault phase due to the three sources will be analyzed(6.16)
separately, assuming that they are independent from each other. While this
condition is generally not true for an IPM machine in saturated condition, it
will be shown that the injected currents render the fault 3-phase region
unsaturated and the principle of superposition is valid.
Figure 6.6 Phasors of the subcoils in phase A.
6.4.1 Flux Linkage by Rotor PM Field
Assuming a turn fault occurs in a phase winding of the ABC set, the flux
linkage in each phase produced by the rotor PM field will not be affected by
the fault and can be evaluated by (6.16) when high-order harmonics are
neglected.
where ψm is the magnitude of the PM flux linkage of each phase, ω denotes
the mechanical speed of the machine, and p is the number of pole pairs.
6.4.2 Flux Linkage by the Currents in Healthy Sets
Unlike the multiphase fault-tolerant PM machines in [7, 16] where mutual
magnetic coupling between phases is negligible, the three 3-phase winding
sets of the PMA-SynRM are mutually coupled via the magneto-motive
force (MMF) offset component as explained in Chapters 2 and 4 [17]. Thus,(6.17)
the MMF distribution produced by the currents in the healthy DEF and GHI
winding sets can be evaluated by multiplying the winding function of their
coils with relevant phase currents, as detailed in Chapter 4. For example,
Fig. 6.7 shows the MMF distribution at a given instant of time over the
three 3-phase sets due to the currents in the two healthy sets. It is seen that
the currents in the two healthy 3-phase winding sets produce an MMF offset
component in the faulted region with varying magnitude and phase angle.
This MMF offset component produces a flux linkage component in the fault
turns.
Figure 6.7 MMF produced by the healthy set currents.
The MMF offset component Fh
 shown in Fig. 6.7 over (0°–120°) region can
be estimated by (6.17). N is the number of turns per coil as stated in Chapter
4.
where iD, iE
, ..., i
I
 are the phase currents which can be expressed in terms of
the dq-axis currents (idh
, iqh
) in (6.18).(6.18)
(6.19)
(6.20)
Substituting (6.18) into (6.17) results in (6.19):
It can be seen from (6.19) that when the dq-axis currents in the healthy 3-
phase sets are kept constant under field-oriented control, the MMF offset
component is time varying but not space varying over the ABC winding
region. Hence, it will give rise to flux linkages of equal magnitude in phases
A, B, and C of the fault set. They are given in (6.20) where the opposite
polarity in phase C is due to the reversed turn function relative to those of
phases A and B as has been explained in Chapter 4. k is a proportional
constant associated with the airgap permeance. It is also of importance to
see that these flux linkages are dependent on the dq-axis currents in the
healthy phases.
Since the coils are full-pitched and Fh
 is space-invariant over the ABC
winding region, the permeance k can be considered independent of rotor
position when high-order permeance components are neglected [18]. Its
value can be obtained via FE computation by injecting a specific MMF
offset component over the fault set region. It is also possible to estimate the
constant k through magnetic circuit analysis. However, for the rotor with
three magnet layers, FE computation is more practical since the model is
already available.(6.21)
(6.22)
6.4.3 Flux Linkage by the Currents in Fault Set
Assuming specific currents (idf
, iqf
) are injected in the fault set to counteract
the flux linkages caused by the PM field and healthy set currents in the fault
phase, their flux linkages in the fault 3-phase set can also be evaluated by
analyzing the MMF distribution.
The MMF caused by the injected currents (idf
, iqf
) in ABC set is plotted in
Fig. 6.8 [17]. As analyzed in Chapter 4, the MMF contains a symmetrical
AC component and an MMF offset component in the ABC winding region
while it contributes to an MMF offset component over the region of the
healthy sets. The MMF in the fault 3-phase set region can be decomposed to
an AC component and an offset component as shown in Fig. 6.9.
The AC component exhibits the same form as that in healthy conditions
when all three sets of windings are excited with (idf
, iqf
). Hence, the flux
linkages induced by the MMF AC component can be calculated by the dq￾axis inductance (Ld
, Lq
) in (6.21), which are further transformed to the
phase quantities in (6.22).
Further, the magnitude of the MMF offset component Ff
 can be estimated
according to the turn functions and phase currents which are given in
(6.23).(6.23)
Figure 6.8 MMF produced by the fault set currents.(6.24)
Figure 6.9 MMF AC and offset components in the fault set.
The flux linkages due to the MMF offset component can be derived
similarly and they are expressed in (6.24).
Hence, the flux linkages in the fault ABC set produced by its own currents
are obtained.
6.4.4 Total Flux Linkage in Fault Phase
From the foregoing analysis, the flux linkages of the fault phase can be
obtained by summing equations (6.16), (6.20), (6.22), and (6.24). Without(6.25)
(6.26)
(6.27)
loss of generality, the fault turns are assumed in coil A1 of phase A. Thus,
the flux linkage of the fault phase A is expressed in (6.25).
To minimize the turn fault current, the flux linkage of the fault phase should
ideally be controlled close to zero. This requires that both the terms
associated with cos pωt and sin pωt equal to zero. The above equation can
be decomposed into two equations given in (6.26), associated with cos pωt
and sin pωt, respectively. Then, the cos pωt and sin pωt components can be
omitted and the equations can be further written as in (6.27).
Hence, the currents (idf
, iqf
) to be injected to the fault set can be determined
as functions of the currents (idh
, iqh
) in the healthy sets based on the two
equations. It is noticed that the injected currents (idf
, iqf
) are independent of
the time and rotor angle, which is very beneficial for current controlimplementation. If the currents (idf
, iqf
) are injected to the fault 3-phase set,
the flux linkages of the fault phase will be close to zero. Consequently, the
flux linkage of the fault turns and the resultant fault current will be reduced
to a very low level. Thus, the impact of the turn fault, namely, excessive
fault current and resultant local hotspot, can be alleviated. It should be
noted that the derivation of the injected currents from (6.26) does not
require specific knowledge of the fault location in which subcoils of the
fault phase and the number of fault turns. If the turn fault takes place in
phases B and C, the flux linkages of phases B and C should be derived
similarly as in (6.25) and they should be forced to be zero to minimize the
fault current. Hence, the technique is applicable to various turn fault
scenarios. The proposed current injection method will be examined by FE
simulations and experimental tests.
6.5 Simulation Validation on the Current
Injection Technique
The effectiveness of the proposed current injection method is evaluated by
FE simulations. The influences of fault location in different phases and
subcoils, slot position of faulted turns, and the number of fault turns on the
turn fault current are assessed with the proposed current injection technique.
In the FE simulations, the machine is fed by ideal current sources. The fault
turns in a coil are separated from the other healthy turns in the ABC phases
as explained in Chapter 4 [19]. The turn fault is emulated by short circuiting
the fault turns directly with zero external impedance. In contrast to the
conventional TSC mitigation action in which the 3-phase terminals of the
fault set are short circuited, the fault set windings are fed by ideal current
sources which are determined from (6.26) under the proposed current
injection mitigation method. The simulations, therefore, assume ideal 3-
phase converters with infinite current control bandwidth.
6.5.1 Effectiveness of Current Injection
The simulation scheme is illustrated in Fig. 6.10. First, the turn fault under
current injection control is examined at the base speed of 4000 rpm when
the healthy sets DEF and GHI are excited with the rated currents (120 A,51°) in motoring mode. A single turn fault occurring in all six different coil
locations of set ABC has been examined. In each case, the injected currents
are calculated by (6.26) for the fault 3-phase set. The injected currents in
the fault set along with the resultant rms turn fault currents are listed in
Table 6.2 and the waveforms of the turn fault currents are shown in Fig.
6.11 for the six scenarios. It is seen that the injected currents are different if
the turn fault occurs in different phases and their magnitudes are lower than
the rated value. This is because the injected currents aim to reduce the flux
linkage of the fault phase only where the fault turns are located. The
maximum rms value of the resultant turn fault current under the injection
technique is 1.72 pu when the fault occurs in coil A2. In contrast, under
TSC application, the maximum rms turn fault current is 3.2 pu when the
fault occurs in coil B2 in motoring mode. Thus, the maximum fault current
has been reduced by 45% with the proposed current injection technique.
The 1.72 pu fault current only flows in one fault turn of coil A2, the
incurred copper loss will not cause localized high temperature as the
thermal loading in the rest A2 coil is much below the rated.
For the purpose of comparison, the total copper loss in the fault 3-phase set
and the copper loss in the fault turn are listed in Table 6.3 under the
conventional TSC mitigation and the proposed current injection method. It
can be found that the turn fault will be safe under both mitigation measures
if it takes place in phases A and C. However, if the turn fault occurs in coil
B2 and is mitigated by TSC, the loss in the fault turn is about 10 times the
thermal load under rated condition. This will cause irreversible damage to
the whole machine drive. In comparison, by employing the proposed
current injection, the loss in the fault turn has been reduced to about 2.3
times the rated thermal load. Though the total copper loss of the fault 3-
phase set is higher than that of TSC, it is still within the rated thermal load
compared with healthy operation. Thus, it will not cause any further
damage to the machine drive.Figure 6.10 Illustration of current injection used in FE simulation of turn
fault: (a) current injection in set ABC and (b) normal excitation in sets DEF
and GHI.
Figure 6.11 Fault current waveforms with current inject technique when a
single turn fault occurs in six coil locations.
Table 6.2 Injected currents and resultant turn fault currents in six different
coils.Turn fault coil location Injected dq-axis currents rms value of
turn fault current
A1 (−47.7 A, 24.8 A)  132 A, 1.58 pu
A2 (−47.7 A, 24.8 A)  144 A, 1.72 pu
B1 (−119 A, 19 A)  98 A, 1.18 pu
B2 (−119 A, 19 A)  127 A, 1.52 pu
C1 (−85 A, 19.7 A)  93 A, 1.11 pu
C2 (−85 A, 19.7 A)  108 A, 1.28 pu
Previously, the saturation effect is not considered in the flux linkage
estimation. This assumption is largely true because the injected current to
the fault set has a large negative id
 and small iq
 as shown in Table 6.2.
Therefore, the fault 3-phase set operates in equivalent deep field
weakening, which implies that the main flux path associated with the fault
winding set is unsaturated.
Table 6.3 Copper loss comparison between current injection, denoted as CJ,
and TSC.
Turn fault
coil location
Total loss in
the fault set
(CJ)
Total loss in
the fault set
(TSC)
Loss in the
fault turn
(CJ)
Loss in the
fault turn
(TSC)
A1 115 W  192 W  28 W  27 W
A2 120 W  183 W  33 W  18.7 W
B1 451 W  175 W  15.4 W  10.3 W
B2 461 W  278 W  25.8 W  113 W
C1 242 W  199 W  14 W  34 W
C2 247 W  175 W  18.7 W  10.3 W
The main objective of the proposed method is to minimize the flux linkage
of the fault turns by injecting specific current to the fault set windings.
However, the fault turn flux linkage cannot be completely nullified mainly
due to two reasons. First, only the fundamental component is considered
while the high-order harmonics of the faulted turn flux linkage will alsoinduce short-circuit current in the fault turns. Second, the phase angle of the
fault turn flux linkage is dependent on in which coil the fault occurs.
However, no practical technique is capable of detecting the fault location to
date. Therefore, in the proposed method, it is assumed that the axis of the
fault turns coincides with that of the faulted phase. This will ensure, on
average, effective reduction of the flux linkage in the faulted turns. The
current is injected to minimize the residual flux along the phase axis.
Hence, if a fault occurs in coil A1, the injected current is 15° leading while
it will be 15° lagging in case the fault is in coil A2. Similar is true for a turn
fault in phases B and C. Thus, fundamental component of the fault turn flux
linkage will not be completely nullified and fault current still circulates in
the fault turns. Nonetheless, it is much lower than that of the conventional
TSC method. Owing to the above two factors, the injected currents affect
the fundamental and high-order harmonic flux linkages of the faulted turn
in a different manner when the fault occurs in different coils, and the
resultant fault current waveforms shown in Fig. 6.11 are different.
6.5.2 Residual Flux Linkage of the Fault Turns
It has been shown that the proposed current injection technique is more
effective than TSC application in the reduction of the turn fault current.
This can be further explained by comparing the residual flux linkages of the
fault turn and fault phase under the two mitigation strategies. A single turn
fault, denoted as B2f, is assumed in coil B2 and the healthy sets of windings
are excited with the rated current at the base speed. The resultant residual
flux linkages following the application of the two mitigation measures have
been compared in Figs. 6.12 and 6.13. After the TSC application, the flux
linkages of phases ABC are reduced simultaneously with their magnitudes
being very close. In contrast, when the current injection is employed, only
the flux linkage of the fault phase B is reduced to a very low level while the
flux linkages of phases A and C are not much affected.
The peak-to-peak residual flux linkages in phase B and fault turn B2f are
compared in Table 6.4. It is evident that under the current injection, both the
flux linkages of phase B and fault turn B2f are much lower than those with
the TSC application, and consequently the fault current with the proposed
method is much smaller.Figure 6.12 Residual flux linkages under TSC application.
Figure 6.13 Residual flux linkages under current injection.
Table 6.4 Peak-to-peak value of residual flux linkage.
Residual flux linkage TSC Current injection
Fault phase B 1.36e-2 Vs 1.0e-3 Vs
Fault turn B2f 1.2e-3 Vs 0.63e-3 Vs6.5.3 Influence of the Slot Position of Fault Turns
It is well known that the slot leakage inductance associated with faulted
turns has a notable impact on the turn fault current. This leakage inductance
is, however, dependent on the relative position of the faulted turns within a
slot as shown in Fig. 6.14. Assuming a single-turn short circuit, the turn
near the slot opening is denoted as “top turn” while that close to the stator
yoke is “bottom turn.” The analysis in [7, 20] shows that the turn fault
current is highest if the fault occurs in the top turn while the fault current is
much lower if the fault occurs in the bottom turn. An important cause of the
difference is the slot leakage inductance. The top turn has a much lower slot
leakage inductance than the bottom turn. Therefore, it is necessary to
examine that if the proposed current injection technique is effective for
arbitrary fault locations in a slot.
According to the proposed method, the injected currents derived from
(6.26) are not dependent on the faulted turn location in a slot. Thus, the
same currents are injected to the fault set windings irrespective of fault turn
location. The effectiveness of the current injection when a single turn fault
occurs in the top turn and in the bottom turn of coil B2 has been studied by
FE simulation. For the two different fault locations, the same currents are
injected to the fault 3-phase set while the healthy sets are fed with the rated
currents at 4000 rpm. Fig. 6.15 compares the resultant turn fault currents
when the fault occurs in the two different slot positions. It is shown that the
fault turn at the top experiences a higher current (1.77 pu) than that at the
bottom (1.21 pu) due to the screening effect of the healthy turns in the B2
coil with the injected current on the bottom turn [8] as well as relatively
lower leakage inductance. Generally, the fault current when the injection
technique is applied will be between the two extreme cases. However, the
fault current in the top turn is still in the safe thermal range. Thus, the
proposed mitigation strategy is effective in the worst-case scenario.Figure 6.14 Illustration of the slot position of the fault turn.
Figure 6.15 Turn fault currents when the fault occurs in two different slot
positions.6.5.4 Influence of the Number of Faulted Turns
The fault current is also affected by the number of faulted turns. Generally,
the turn fault current increases as the number of faulted turns decreases.
This is because the inductance of the faulted turns is proportional to the
square of the number of turns while the flux linkage of the faulted turns and
the induced voltage are proportional to the number of turns. Therefore, the
resultant short-circuit current which can be estimated as the ratio of the flux
linkage to the inductance increases with the decrease in the number of
faulted turns [1, 21].
For mitigation of a turn fault with the current injection, the flux linkage of
the fault turns is reduced along with all turns of the fault phase regardless of
the number of short-circuited turns. As a result, the real effect is expected to
vary with the number of faulted turns. The influence of the number of
faulted turns is examined by FE simulation when the number of faulted
turns is set to 1, 2, 4, and 7 in coil B2 while the two healthy sets are fed by
the rated currents at 4000 rpm. The same currents are injected to the fault
set for the four cases of different numbers of faulted turns. The resultant
turn fault currents are shown in Fig. 6.16. It is seen that the fault current
decreases as the number of faulted turns increases. This result is consistent
with other turn fault mitigation measures in that the fault current decreases
with an increase in the number of faulted turns. Hence, the worst case is
one-turn short circuit. Thus, the proposed method will be effective for
different numbers of faulted turns if the fault current with single-turn short
circuit is reduced to a thermally sustainable level.Figure 6.16 Turn fault currents with four different numbers of faulted turns.
6.5.5 Influence of Output Torque
As discussed in Chapter 2, when a turn fault is mitigated by TSC
application, the torque of the triple redundant fault-tolerant machine will be
reduced by ∼1/3. For the purpose of comparison, the influence of the
proposed current injection on the output torque has also been assessed when
the two healthy sets are fed with the rated current and the machine operated
at the rated speed. The torques under the healthy condition and turn fault
conditions with different numbers of faulted turns when the two mitigation
measures are applied are compared in Fig. 6.17. Note that these faulted
turns are all very close to the slot opening. It is seen that the machine with
different numbers of faulted turns exhibits almost the same torque
waveforms as they coincide with each other and some are not visible.
Compared with TSC application, the output torque under the current
injection method is ∼10% higher. The torque is slightly boosted primarily
because all the injected currents contain not only negative id
 with relatively
large magnitude but also positive iq
 as shown in Table 6.2. They will
produce positive torque in the fault set region. Under the TSC method, only
reactive currents flow in the fault set of windings without control, resulting
in negative id
 and nearly zero iq
. The produced torque is negligible.By employing the general model established in Chapter 4, the torque
boosting mechanism can be explained by separating the torque
contributions of each set region as shown in Fig. 6.18, where the operating
conditions are the same as those in Fig. 6.17 except that one-turn fault is
considered. It is seen that the healthy sets, namely, set 2(DEF) and set
3(GHI) produce similar torque under the two mitigation strategies.
However, the fault set 1(ABC) under current injection contributes higher
torque than that of TSC application. Hence, the current injection method for
turn fault mitigation has an additional benefit of a few percent higher output
torque.Figure 6.17 Output torques under different mitigation strategies
considering different fault turns.
Figure 6.18 Torque contribution of different set regions under two
mitigation strategies with turn fault.
If the machine operates in a generating mode, the healthy sets windings will
be fed with negative id
 and negative iq
. The derived injected currents in the
fault set will also contain negative id
 and negative iq
. Consequently, it will
also produce higher torque (breaking torque) than that of the TSC method.6.5.6 Effectiveness at High Speed
The effectiveness of the current injection method at high-speed operations
is investigated. Generally, when the speed of a machine operation is
sufficiently high, the main limiting factor of a turn fault current will be the
inductance of the short-circuit loop. This condition is known as “inductance
limited.” Thus, when the inductance-limited condition is true, the fault
current will not increase with speed. Hence, when the machine operates
above the base speed, flux-weakening operation will be required and,
consequently, the magnetic circuit of the machine will be less saturated with
an increase in the magnitude of the negative d-axis current. This condition
increases the inductance of the faulted turns and leads to a lower fault
current. To further prove this analysis, one-turn fault in coil A1 has been
simulated in FE at the maximum speed 19,200 rpm. The currents in the
healthy sets of windings are (60 A, 70°) and the injected currents in the fault
set windings are calculated as (idf
 = −54.9 A, iqf
 = 3.8 A). The simulated
turn fault current is shown in Fig. 6.19. It is seen that the fault current is
much lower than that under the rated operating condition given in Table 6.2.
This is because all the three 3-phase sets operate in the deep field
weakening region. As a result, the machine is less saturated and the
inductance of the faulted turn increases. At the same time, the flux linkage
estimation error for derivation of the injected current decreases. Both lead
to a lower fault current. Nevertheless, the simulation confirms that the
proposed method is very effective in reducing fault current at high speed.Figure 6.19 Simulated turn fault current in coil A1 at 19,200 rpm under
current injection.
6.6 Experimental Validation on the Current
Injection Technique
The proposed current injection method has been validated on the triple
redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM prototype drive. The schematic of the
proposed current injection control is shown in Fig. 6.20. The calculation
block provides the current commands based on equation (6.26) which will
be injected into the fault set windings with information on the faulted phase
and current feedback from the healthy sets of windings. The current
commands for the two healthy sets are given according to a specific
operating condition. These current commands are then tracked by the three
dq-axis current controllers independently.
6.6.1 Turn Fault in Coil B2
First, the effectiveness of the two mitigation methods, namely, TSC and the
proposed current injection method is evaluated. The turn fault is injected
into coil B2 during the test when the healthy sets are fed with the rated
currents of 120 A in magnitude at 4000 rpm under maximum torque per
Ampere (MTPA) condition. The resultant turn fault current and phasecurrents under the two mitigation measures are shown in Figs. 6.21 and
6.22. Under the TSC application, the phase currents in the fault set are
reactive and unbalanced due to the mutual coupling with the healthy sets as
seen in Fig. 6.21(a). Consequently, the rms fault current is relatively higher
at 166.6 A albeit the currents in the healthy sets are well below rated as
shown in Fig. 6.22(a). With the current injection technique, the phase
currents of the fault 3-phase set are controlled and exhibit a reasonable level
of symmetry. Since the flux linkages of the fault phase and the fault turn are
minimized by the injected currents, the resultant rms fault current is 68 A,
much lower than that of the TSC scheme. The fundamental component in
the fault current is effectively suppressed, and the third harmonic becomes
the dominant component. Further, the currents in the healthy sets are also
well-controlled with both mitigation measures as is evident in Figs. 6.21(b)
and 6.22(b).Figure 6.20 Schematic of the proposed current injection control diagram.Figure 6.21 Fault current and phase currents in set ABC (a) with TSC and
(b) with current injection.Figure 6.22 Phase currents in sets DEF and GHI (a) with TSC and (b) with
current injection.
The effectiveness of the proposed method is also validated in a wide
operation range by varying the magnitude of the currents in the healthy sets
from 20 to 120 A in six steps. At each current magnitude, the phase angle isdetermined for MTPA condition. Since the fault current of one-turn short
circuit without mitigation is excessive at 4000 rpm, it may cause permanent
damage to the machine. The tests without mitigation action are performed at
a low speed of 1000 rpm. It is seen from Fig. 6.23 that the fault current
without mitigation action increases with the current in the healthy sets and
is about four times the rated value when the current in the healthy sets
reaches the rated. The fault current will be even larger at higher speed
before the inductance-limited condition is met. Thus, the effective
mitigation method is essential to limit the excessive fault current. The
resultant turn fault current under the TSC and current injection at 4000 rpm
are compared in Fig. 6.23. It is seen the turn fault currents are effectively
reduced with both strategies but they are much lower with the current
injection over the current operation range.
Figure 6.23 Rms turn fault current variation with healthy set currents with
turn fault in coil B2 in different operation conditions.
Meanwhile, the torques in healthy condition are compared in Fig. 6.24 with
those under the TSC and current injection methods when the current in the
healthy sets is varied from 20 to 120 A. It is seen that the output torques
under current injection control are always higher than those of TSC when
the fault turn is in coil B2. The torque reduction under the current injection
when the current in the healthy sets reaches 120 A is 20 Nm, which is about
quarter of the rated torque. At low current range, the torque under currentinjection is close to those in the healthy condition since the injected currents
contribute some torque in the fault set region and the total torque is
somehow boosted. Thus, the tests confirm the superior performance of the
proposed method over the conventional TSC strategy.
Figure 6.24 Variations of torques with the load currents at 4000 rpm in
different operation conditions.
6.6.2 Turn Fault in Coil A1
Next, similar tests are performed by rotating the machine in the reversal
direction. This effectively renders the fault in coil A1 with the same fault
injection setup as explained in Chapter 3. This fault scenario is first tested at
4000 rpm while the healthy sets are fed with 120 A currents in magnitude
under MTPA condition. The current waveforms under the current injection
control are shown in Fig. 6.25, where the rms turn fault current is evaluated
to be 58 A. It is seen that the turn fault current is limited effectively, and the
phase currents in both the faulted and healthy 3-phase sets are well
controlled with small distortions.Figure 6.25 Fault current and phase currents: (a) fault current and phase
currents in set ABC and (b) phase currents in healthy sets.
The operations with the turn fault in coil A1 are further tested over the same
current operation range as that stated in the previous section when the two
different mitigation measures are applied. The resultant turn fault currentsunder the two mitigation methods are compared in Fig. 6.26. It is seen the
maximum turn fault current with the current injection control is lower than
that of the TSC. In the light current range, the fault current under the current
injection is slightly higher than that of the TSC. However, the fault current
is much lower than the rated value and will not cause any thermal issue.
The resultant torques with the two mitigation methods are compared in Fig.
6.27. The output torque under current injection control is close to that of the
TSC when the fault turn is in coil A1. The different behaviors in the fault
current and toque from those seen in Figs. 6.23 and 6.24 are mainly caused
by the differences in the injected currents as listed in Table 6.2 when the
fault occurs in coil A1.Figure 6.26 Rms turn fault current variations with healthy set currents with
turn fault in coil A1 at 4000 rpm.
Figure 6.27 Variations of postfault torque with healthy set currents with
turn fault in coil A1 at 4000 rpm.
6.6.3 Integrated Fault Test with Current Injection
In practical operation, the turn fault should be timely detected, and a
mitigation action should be applied immediately to avoid any furtherdamage to the machine drive. Therefore, an integrated test of turn fault
injection, fault detection, and fault mitigation is performed, and the
resultant fault current and phase currents in the ABC set of windings are
shown in Fig. 6.28. Initially, the machine is operating at 1000 rpm with
phase currents of 60 A in magnitude under MTPA condition. Then, one-turn
short-circuit fault is injected in coil B2 at 0.03 second and the fault current
quickly shoots to 200 A. The fault is detected, and the fault phase is
identified by employing the diagnosis technique in [15]. Subsequently, the
proposed current injection method is enabled to reduce the fault current. It
is seen that the fault current is effectively reduced to a safe level.
Meanwhile, the operation of the other two healthy 3-phase sets is not
affected as seen from the current waveforms in Fig. 6.28(b). The test
demonstrates that the triple redundant 3-phase machine drive can
accommodate the turn fault effectively by employing the proposed current
injection technique.
6.7 Summary
This chapter describes postfault control techniques that generally entail
control actions to (1) manage the fault condition and (2) facilitate
continuous operations with the best possible performance. To cope with
potential short-circuit faults in inverter and terminal connections, a fault￾tolerant PM machine must be designed such that its short-circuit current is
below 1.0 pu.
For a multiphase fault-tolerant FSCW PM machine, significant torque
ripple will be present under an open-circuit or short-circuit fault in one
complete phase. Optimal current control strategies described in this chapter
can be used to deliver smooth output torque during postfault operation. The
technique is applicable in both constant torque and constant power
operating regions with some adaption in the flux-weakening weighting
factor. For an interturn short-circuit in a few turns, both TSC of the faulted
phase via its H-bridge converter or appropriate current injection can be
applied to reduce the current in the short-circuited turns to a thermally
sustainable level. The optimal current control can then be employed to
deliver torque-ripple free postfault operation.Figure 6.28 Current waveforms from integrated test of turn fault injection,
fault detection, and mitigation: (a) fault current and phase currents in set
ABC and (b) phase currents in healthy sets.
For the triple redundant 3 × 3-phase PMA-SynRM, a current injection
technique has been developed to reduce excessive interturn short-circuitcurrent as an alternative means of fault mitigation. The flux linkage of the
fault phase is estimated by accounting for three influential sources, namely,
the rotor PM field, the currents in the healthy 3-phase sets, and the currents
in the fault 3-phase sets. The flux linkage and current in the faulted turn can
then be reduced by injecting specific currents to the faulted 3-phase set
while the healthy sets continue their operation to generate torque. The
developed current injection approach is capable of limiting the fault current
for all possible turn fault scenarios, including fault occurrence in different
phases and subcoils, in turns located in different positions in a slot, and with
different numbers of short-circuit turns. The technique has been validated
by extensive FE simulations and experimental tests, demonstrating its
additional benefits in the reduction of the fault current and in boosting
output torque over the conventional TSC mitigation measure.
While the above two postfault control techniques are explored as examples,
other control strategies, such as current harmonic suppression and copper
loss minimization, can be investigated in a similar way to improve the
machine drive performance during postfault operations.
References
1 B. C. Mecrow, A. G. Jack, J. A. Haylock, and J. Coles, “Fault-tolerant
permanent magnet machine drives,” IEE Proceedings – Electric Power
Applications, vol. 143, no. 6, pp. 437–442, 1996.
2 A. G. Jack, B. C. Mecrow, and J. A. Haylock, “A comparative study of
permanent magnet and switched reluctance motors for high-performance
fault-tolerant applications,” IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications,
vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 889–895, 1996.
3 J. Wang, K. Atallah, and D. Howe, “Optimal torque control of fault￾tolerant permanent magnet brushless machines,” IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 2962–2964, 2003.
4 J. D. Ede, K. Atallah, W. Jiabin, and D. Howe, “Effect of optimal torque
control on rotor loss of fault-tolerant permanent-magnet brushless
machines,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 3291–
3293, 2002.5 Z. Sun, J. Wang, G. W. Jewell, and D. Howe, “Enhanced optimal torque
control of fault-tolerant PM machine under flux-weakening operation,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 344–
353, 2010.
6 J. A. Haylock, B. C. Mecrow, A. G. Jack, and D. J. Atkinson, “Operation
of fault tolerant machines with winding failures,” IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1490–1495, 1999.
7 Z. Sun, J. Wang, D. Howe, and G. Jewell, “Analytical prediction of the
short-circuit current in fault-tolerant permanent-magnet machines,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 4210–
4217, 2008.
8 A. J. Mitcham, G. Antonopoulos, and J. J. A. Cullen, “Implications of
shorted turn faults in bar wound PM machines,” IEE Proceedings –
Electric Power Applications, vol. 151, no. 6, pp. 651–657, 2004.
9 B. A. Welchko, J. Wai, T. M. Jahns, and T. A. Lipo, “Magnet-flux-ing
control of interior PM Machine drives for improved steady-state
response to short-circuit faults,” IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 113–120, 2006.
10 J. G. Cintron-Rivera, S. N. Foste, and E. G. Strangas, “Mitigation of
turn-to-turn faults in fault tolerant permanent magnet synchronous
motors,” IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 30, no. 2, pp.
465–475, 2015.
11 Y. Jiang, Z. Zhang, W. Jiang, W. Geng, and J. Huang, “Three-phase
current injection method for mitigating turn-to-turn short-circuit fault in
concentrated-winding permanent magnet aircraft starter generator,” IET
Electric Power Applications, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 566–574, 2018.
12 B. Sen and J. Wang, “Stationary frame fault-tolerant current control of
polyphase permanent-magnet machines under open-circuit and short￾circuit faults,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, vol. 31, no. 7,
pp. 4684–4696, 2016.
13 B. Sen and J. Wang, “A fast detection technique for stator inter-turn fault
in multi-phase permanent magnet machines using model basedapproach,” in 7th IET International Conference on Power Electronics,
Machines and Drives (PEMD 2014), 2014, pp. 1–6.
14 B. Sen and J. Wang, “Stator inter-turn fault detection in SPM machines
using PWM ripple current measurement,” in 7th IET International
Conference on Power Electronics, Machines and Drives (PEMD 2014),
2014, pp. 1–6.
15 B. Sen and J. Wang, “Stator interturn fault detection in permanent￾magnet machines using PWM ripple current measurement,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 3148–3157,
2016.
16 B. C. Mecrow et al., “Design and testing of a four-phase fault-tolerant
permanent-magnet machine for an engine fuel pump,” IEEE
Transactions on Energy Conversion, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 671–678, 2004.
17 B. Wang, J. Wang, A. Griffo, and B. Sen, “A general modeling technique
for a triple redundant 3x3-phase PMA SynRM,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Electronics, vol. 65, no. 11, pp. 9068–9078, 2018.
18 B. Sen, J. Wang, and P. Lazari, “A detailed transient model of interior
permanent magnet motor accounting for saturation under stator turn
fault,” in Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), 2013
IEEE, 2013, pp. 3548–3555.
19 M. Dai, A. Keyhani, and T. Sebastian, “Fault analysis of a PM brushless
DC motor using finite element method,” IEEE Transactions on Energy
Conversion, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 1–6, 2005.
20 B. Sen and J. Wang, “Analytical modelling of stator turn fault in surface
mounted permanent magnet machines,” in Energy Conversion Congress
and Exposition (ECCE), 2013 IEEE, 2013, pp. 4445–4452.
21 K. Kyung-Tae, P. Jun-Kyu, H. Jin, and K. Byeong-Woo, “Comparison of
the fault characteristics of IPM-type and SPM-type BLDC motors under
inter-turn fault conditions using winding function theory,” IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications, vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 986–994,
2014.7
Novel Segregated Windings with Enhanced
Fault Tolerance for Multiple 3-Phase Machine
7.1 Introduction
In Chapter 2, it has been shown that the triple redundant 3-phase permanent
magnet-assisted synchronous reluctance machine (PMA-SynRM) exhibits
good performance while being capable of tolerating various electrical
faults. However, in the worst-fault scenario, namely, single-turn short￾circuit fault in a phase winding, the resultant fault current is about 3.2 pu
after application of terminal short circuit (TSC) on the fault 3-phase set.
While this fault current is thermally sustainable in the machine, it becomes
a bottleneck for the further improvement of fault tolerance and limitation on
the increases in power density of the machine drive. In Chapter 6, the fault
current has been limited by adopting the current injection method from the
perspective of postfault control, and this chapter aims to suppress the
excessive turn fault current by adopting different winding configurations
[1].
It is well known that winding configuration and connection (star or delta)
has a profound impact on the machine’s performance and fault-tolerant
capability [2]. Induction machines and permanent magnet (PM)
synchronous machines employ distributed winding to produce highly
sinusoidal magneto-motive force (MMF) with low harmonics. However,
their overlapped end windings bundled together have bulky size and are
vulnerable to interphase failure due to combined mechanical, thermal,
electrical, and environmental stresses. The nonoverlapped concentrated
winding exhibits short-end winding and good isolation between phases.
Therefore, it has been adopted in fault-tolerant applications in the form of
fractional slot concentric winding (FSCW) PM machines [3], switched
reluctance machines (SRMs) [4], and switched flux PM machines [5].
However, both FSCW and switched flux PM machines contain considerable
low- and high-order MMF harmonics. Although the winding space
harmonics in the FSCW PM machine can be reduced by employing twotooth-span coils, the interturn short-circuit current in such types of PM
machines is too high to be managed safely.
The winding connection of a machine also affects its behavior and level of
fault tolerance. Most PM machines adopt star winding connection to avoid
zero-sequence current and the resultant copper loss. The star connection,
however, makes it impossible to operate with two phases without a neutral
connection. In contrast, machines with delta-connected windings are
capable of two-phase operation in an event of single-phase failure, which
can be utilized to enhance fault tolerance [6, 7]. In [8, 9], it has been shown
that a star-delta-connected machine has superiority in both healthy
performance and fault tolerance. Therefore, winding layouts,
configurations, and connections could be carefully designed to achieve the
best trade-off between performance and level of fault tolerance.
For the triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM under consideration,
although there are good electrical and thermal isolations among the three 3-
phase winding sets, they are magnetically coupled via the MMF offset
component [10, 11], as has been analyzed in Chapter 4. The magnetic
mutual coupling causes a number of undesirable effects in the fault
conditions, such as current distortion and increased torque ripple [12]. It is
also responsible for high fault current in short-circuited turns [13] after TSC
application and deteriorates the postfault control performance of the drive
system [14]. Therefore, the mutual coupling effect should be minimized as
low as possible to suppress the adverse effects.
In addition, as has been shown in Chapter 2, the fault current after TSC
application is much larger if one-turn short-circuit fault occurs in the
leading or trailing coil of a 3-phase winding set, depending on modes of
operation. This can be attributed to the fact that the reduction of flux
linkage by TSC application is less effective in these two subcoils. It shows
that the asymmetry due to the magnetic coupling exists not only in different
phases but also in the different coils within the same phase. Consequently,
the turn fault current exhibits different magnitudes when the fault occurs in
different coils of a 3-phase winding set [15–17]. Similarly, a switch failure
in different legs of a 3-phase inverter will lead to different current patterns
and fault behaviors [18]. For better fault management, clearly it is desirable
to minimize the coil-dependent fault behaviors.This chapter explores alternative winding configurations in order to reduce
turn fault current and hence further improve the fault tolerance level of the
triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM. Thus, four new winding
configurations, namely, delta-connected winding, star-delta-connected
winding, mixed-pitch winding, and concentric winding for the machine
under study are described, and their behaviors in healthy and fault
conditions are analyzed and experimentally tested [19]. The reduction in the
turn fault current is achieved by a change in the winding connection or in
the coil layout, which has a very little impact on the manufacturing process
and cost. The merits of the machines with the alternative winding
configurations in reduction of the turn fault current are assessed in
comparison with the classic star-connected machine. This study provides
some useful insights into selection of appropriate winding configuration for
safety critical applications.
7.2 Multiple 3-Phase Machines with Four
Alternative Segregated Windings
As has been discussed in Chapters 2, 3, and 4, a short circuit fault across a
single turn located on top of a slot results in the largest possible fault
current. An important parameter that influences this current is the number
of series connected turns that have a close magnetic coupling with the
faulted turn. As a rule-of-thumb indication, if the number of series
connected turns is N, the fault current may reach N times the rated current.
It is therefore possible to reduce the worst-case fault current in pu by
selecting a low N during design if there is freedom to do so. For example,
for a given power rating, a combination of low voltage and high current
ratings will lead to low series connected turns in a phase winding, and
hence lower fault current in pu. Likewise, a split of a phase winding into a
few sub-coils that are less magnetically coupled is also conducive to lower
fault current in pu since the number of series connected turns that are
magnetically coupled to a fault turn is reduced. In many cases, however,
such design freedoms may not be available. To further reduce the turn fault
current in the multiple 3-phase machine with star-connected windings when
the above freedoms are not available, four alternative windingconfigurations are examined and the mechanism by which the turn fault
current can be reduced with these winding configurations is discussed.
7.2.1 Zero-Sequence Flux Linkage in Star-Connected
Windings
For the purpose of comparison, the triple redundant fault-tolerant machine
with segregated, star-connected winding configuration is shown on the left
side of Fig. 7.1. This winding configuration is denoted as W1 for short. As
discussed in the previous chapters 2–4, magnetic coupling through the
MMF offset component exists among the three 3-phase winding sets under
fault conditions. This offset component can cause positive, negative, and
zero-sequence flux linkages in the 3-phase winding set where a turn fault
occurs. Following TSC application as the mitigation action on the faulted 3-
phase set, the resultant short-circuit currents contain positive and negative
sequence components but no zero-sequence component as it has no flow
path in a star-connected winding. Hence, while the induced short-circuit
currents have cancellation effects on the positive and negative sequence
flux linkages, they have no cancellation effect on the zero-sequence flux
linkages. As a result, the zero-sequence flux linkages in the coils of the 3-
phase windings remain after the application of TSC.Figure 7.1 Triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM with star-connected
windings and delta-connected windings.
By way of example, the phase flux linkages of the ABC winding set after
TSC application are plotted in Fig. 7.2 with the time-domain waveforms on
the left and sequence components on the right. It is seen that the positive
and negative sequence components of the phase flux linkages are very small
while the major components are the zero-sequence component. The zero￾sequence flux linkage is linked by the fault turns and is the cause of a
relatively large fault current. This can be further understood from the flux
linkages of the six subcoils shown in Fig. 7.3. The turn fault current is
indeed proportional to the residual flux linkage of subcoils. It is also
observed that after the mitigation action, the residual flux linkage of coil B2
is highest, which leads to the largest turn fault current. This analysis agrees
with the findings in Chapter 2.
Thus, there are two possible means to further reduce the turn fault current
for the multiple 3-phase machine: (1) reduce zero-sequence component of
winding flux linkage and (2) reduce the mutual magnetic coupling. The first
approach can be achieved by employing delta or star-delta-connected
windings as they allow the zero-sequence current to flow, which has an
effect on reducing zero-sequence flux linkage. The second approach can be
realized by mixed-pitch windings. Further, by adopting concentric winding
for each phase, the short-circuit currents induced by the mitigation actionwill be more effective in reducing the flux linkage of faulted turns, leading
to lower fault current. The four alternative winding configurations will be
introduced, and their performances in healthy and fault conditions are
analyzed and compared with those of the star-connected winding
configuration in the subsequent sections.
Figure 7.2 Phase flux linkages in phases A, B, and C after TSC application:
(a) time-domain waveform and (b) sequence components.
Figure 7.3 Flux linkages of six subcoils in ABC set after TSC.7.2.2 Delta-Connected Winding Configuration
The segregated, delta-connected winding configuration for the fault-tolerant
machine under study is illustrated on the right side of Fig. 7.1, and it is
named as W2 for short. Compared with the star-connected winding
configuration, the delta connection provides a zero-sequence current flow
path. Consequently, any zero-sequence flux linkage component in the air
gap, such as triplen harmonics, will induce zero-sequence current that flows
through the delta-connected three phases. These currents do not produce
any useful torque but incur additional copper losses. In PM-excited
synchronous machines, it is difficult to eliminate triplen harmonics of the
PM field, and star-connected winding configuration is more preferred to
avoid the extra loss and resultant thermal loading. In the machine under
study, however, the extra copper loss is negligible as the triplen harmonic
PM field in the air gap is relatively weak with the multilayer rotor structure
and in contrast its fault-tolerant capability is enhanced with the delta
connection. In case of an open-circuit fault in one-phase winding, it does
not need to shut down the whole 3-phase set as it does in the star-connected
windings. The two remaining healthy phases can continue their operation to
generate useful torque with modification to the drive control. Hence, the
torque reduction due to the open-circuit fault is minimized and the torque
pulsation is also reduced. In the event of a turn fault, by applying TSC on
the fault 3-phase set, the zero-sequence current can flow in the delta￾connected the phase windings, which leads to lower residual flux linkage in
the faulted turn and lower fault current. Hence, the machine with delta￾connected windings is expected to have improved fault-tolerant
performance than the star-connected machine.
It is worth noting that the above merits are achieved without introducing
any additional cost. Only the number of turns and the winding connections
are changed. For like-with-like comparison, the machines with delta- or
star-connected winding configuration will have the same rated voltage and
current. Hence, the number of turns of each coil in the delta winding
configuration is 1.73 times of that in the star configuration while the cross￾sectional area of each turn is reduced proportionally. As a result, the
machine exhibits the same line voltage and line current at the rated
operation.7.2.3 Star-Delta Winding Configuration
Star-delta winding connection, shown in Fig. 7.4, is commonly used in
high-power machines. With proper design, the machine with such a winding
configuration can achieve an increased fundamental winding factor and
reduced spatial harmonics, leading to increased average torque and reduced
torque ripple and iron loss, etc. In addition, there is also a zero-sequence
current path in the delta-connected winding part, which is conducive to a
reduction of the fault current in an event of turn-to-turn short circuit. Thus,
star-delta winding configuration shown in Fig. 7.4 and denoted as W3 is
adopted for the triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM. As can be seen, the
two coils in each phase are split into the star- and delta-connected sections.
The coils with potentially large turn fault currents, namely, B2, E2, and H2,
are arranged in the delta section, which provides a zero-sequence current
path. Therefore, the residual flux linkages of these coils could be more
effectively reduced by the mitigation action in an event of turn fault. The
turn fault current is expected to be further reduced. Since the circulating
zero-sequence currents only flow in the inner delta-connected winding
section, the extra copper loss introduced is also lower than that with delta￾connected winding configuration.
As is well known, the star-delta-connected winding has a higher
fundamental winding factor and lower spatial harmonics than those of W1
and W2 configurations shown in Table 7.1. The fundamental winding factor
calculated based on the method described in [9] is increased by 3.5%,
which will result in a torque increase by the same amount. Further, the
harmonic factors for the 5th, 7th, 17th, 19th,…, harmonics are zero, and
hence these harmonics are totally cancelled in the flux linkages and back
electromotive force (back-emf), while the 11th and 13th harmonics are
increased by 3.5%. As a result, the total harmonic distortion in the machine
with this winding configuration is reduced, leading to lower torque ripple
and iron loss. Thus, the machine with the star-delta winding configuration is
expected to have improved performance and enhanced fault-tolerant
capability. A full comparison of the winding factors up to 19th harmonics
for the three winding configurations is given in Table 7.1.Figure 7.4 Star-delta winding connection, W3.
Table 7.1 Comparisons of winding factors with star, delta, and star-delta
configurations.
Harmonic order Star or delta Star-delta
1st  0.966  1
5th  0.259  0
7th  0.259  0
11th  0.966  1
13th  0.966  1
17th  0.259  0
19th  0.259  0
It should be noted from Fig. 7.4 that the currents in the delta-connected
coils are (1/ ) times the currents in star-connected coils. To produce the
same MMF by both star- and delta-connected coils, the number of turns in
the delta-connected coils should be increased by a factor of while the
cross-sectional area of each turn is reduced by the same factor. This
complicates the manufacturing process and may cause marginal cost
increases.
7.2.4 Mixed-Pitch Winding
The W2 and W3 winding configurations are employed to facilitate zero￾sequence current in the delta-connected windings or coils following TSC
application. This current will reduce the residual zero-sequence flux linkage
in the faulted turns and hence the fault current. Since the zero-sequence flux
linkage is caused by the MMF offset component of 3-phase windings, it(7.1)
will be logical to explore possible means to reduce the MMF offset
component directly. For this purpose, the MMF offset component, ,
caused by the currents in star-connected ABC windings, which has been
derived in Chapter 2, is rewritten in (7-1) [20] together with the expressions
for the phase currents that generate this component. It is a time-varying
sinusoidal whose magnitude is proportional to where N is the number
of turns per each coil and Im is the phase current amplitude.
In healthy conditions, the sum of the MMF offset components of all three 3-
phase winding sets is zero since the currents in each 3-phase winding set are
identical and balanced [21]. However, it will be nonzero in fault or
unbalanced operation conditions. Therefore, by reducing this offset
component, it is possible to further reduce the fault current in case of a turn￾to-turn short-circuit fault.
A segregated, mixed-pitch winding configuration (named as W4) is devised
as shown in Fig. 7.5 to reduce the magnitude of the MMF offset component.
Similar to the W1 configuration, the three 3-phase distributed windings are
segregated into three nonoverlapped winding sets. Each module forms a
balanced 3-phase set, which can be driven by individual inverters.
Compared with the W1 configuration, only the coil layouts of phases B, E,
and H in the three 3-phase sets are changed while the coils of phases A and
C, phases D and F, and phases G and I remain the same. In the W1
configuration, all the winding coils are full-pitched with a coil span of six
slots over the space of one electrical pole. In the W4 configuration, by
contrast, the coils in phases B, E, and H are short-pitched with a span of
five slots, and the two coils in these phases have an opposite go-return
direction, while the coils of phases A and C, D and F, and G and I are full￾pitched. Therefore, this winding configuration is termed as mixed-pitchsegregated windings. It should be noted that the winding factors of phases
B, E, and H with short-pitched coils are not affected because the
distribution factor becomes 1.0 while the pitch factor is reduced to 0.966. In
contrast, in the full-pitched phases, the distribution factor is 0.966 but the
pitch factor is 1.0. Thus, each of the 3-phase windings in the W4
configuration forms a balanced set for the fundamental electric and
magnetic quantities.Figure 7.5 Triple redundant 3-phase PMA-SynRM with mixed-pitch
windings, W4.
If all three 3-phase sets of the machine with the W4 configuration are
excited with the same 3-phase sinusoidal currents as that of the machine
with the W1 configuration, the current distributions in the slots of the
former are the same as those in the latter. Thus, the resultant MMFs in
healthy operations of the two machines have no difference. It indicates that
the two machines have the same performance in healthy conditions. Thus,
all the merits of the PMA-SynRM, and the measures and processes toachieve the desired fault tolerance are maintained for the machine with the
W4 configuration.
However, the W4 configuration will yield a decreased mutual coupling
effect between the three 3-phase sets than that of the W1 configuration, as
will be shown subsequently.
The reduced mutual coupling effect can be quantified by derivation of the
MMF distribution of one 3-phase set with the W4 configuration, as
described in Chapter 2. The turn functions of the six mixed-pitch coils in set
ABC are plotted in Fig. 7.6. It is seen that the turn function of coil B1 is
negative while it is positive for coil B2 as a result of the modified coil
layouts. The resultant MMF distribution in space at a given instant of time
is shown in Fig. 7.7. It is seen that the MMF has a similar distribution to
that of the W1 configuration. The MMF over the ABC winding region
consists of an AC component and an offset component while only
offset components and exist over the other two regions
occupied by the DEF and GHI sets, respectively. It can be shown that the
MMF AC component of the W4 configuration is exactly the same as that of
the W1, while the offset components over the three 3-phase sets can be
derived and given in (7.2) and further simplified for in (7.3). The
overall MMF offset components in each 3-phase region can be obtained by
summing the offset components produced by all the three 3-phase winding
sets. Thus, under healthy conditions, they are zero when all the three 3-
phase sets are fed with the same 3-phase currents. They will not be zero in
fault or unbalanced operation conditions.(7.2)
Figure 7.6 Turn functions of the six coils in the ABC set of W4.
Figure 7.7 MMF profile produced by ABC set of W4.(7.3)
Comparing equations (7.1) and (7.2), it is seen that the magnitude of the
offset component of is 14% lower than that of . It confirms
that the mutual coupling between the different 3-phase sets is reduced and
so are the undesirable effects associated with the mutual coupling, such as
current distortion and relatively large turn fault current due to the residual
zero-sequence flux linkage in the faulted turn.
It should be noted that the mixed-pitch winding configuration is achieved
simply by rearranging the coils. It will cause very little additional cost. The
proposed winding configuration is applicable to other machines with
segregated, multiple 3-phase distributed windings to obtain fault tolerance
with reduced mutual coupling, such as synchronous reluctance machines,
surface-mounted PM machines, synchronous wound field machines, and
induction machines.
7.2.5 Concentric Winding
As previously explained, the turn fault current in the machine with W1
configuration is unequal when a turn fault occurs in a different coil within a
3-phase winding set. This is because the residual flux linkages are different
when the coil is located in a different position as illustrated in Fig. 7.3. By
employing a concentric winding configuration as illustrated in Fig. 7.8, it is
possible to reduce the fault current in the leading or trailing coil of the W1
configuration. This winding configuration is denoted as W5. As can be
seen, each 3-phase winding set also has no contact with others to guarantee
segregation. It is observed that the current distribution in the slots is also the
same as that of the W1 configuration, which implies that the machines with
the W5 and W1 configurations will have the same performances in healthy
operations.
The key characteristic of the W5 distribution is the fact that the two coils in
a phase are concentric as shown in Fig. 7.9, meaning that the axes of thetwo coils coincide with each other. Hence, the winding distribution factor is
1. However, the coil spans of A1 and A2 are 7 and 5 slots, respectively,
which corresponds to 210 and 150 electrical degrees. Thus, the pitch factor
of the winding is 0.966. The overall winding factor of the W5 configuration
is the same as that of the W1 configuration, although the flux linkage of
each coil is 4% lower, which is beneficial to limit the turn fault current.Figure 7.8 Triple 3-phase PMA-SynRM with concentric windings, W5.Figure 7.9 Space vectors of the six coils in phases ABC (a) W1 and (b) W5.
Further, the no-load flux linkages of the ABC phases are plotted in Fig. 7.10
for the two machines with the W5 and W1 configurations. Obviously, the
phase flux linkages of the two machines coincide with each other. Further,
the flux linkages of the two coils in phase A of the two winding
configurations are illustrated in Fig. 7.11. It is seen that the two coil flux
linkages of the W1 configuration have a phase shift of 30 electric degrees
while those of the W5 overlap with each other. This is the main feature of
the difference of the two machines. As a result, the residual flux linkages of
the two coils in one phase after TSC will be closer and may lead to a lower
fault current. The 4% lower coil flux linkage of the W5 configuration is
caused by its lower pitch factor while its distribution factor is 1.0, higher
than that of the W1 counterpart. Thus, the overall winding factors of the
two configurations are the same. However, the lower coil flux linkage helps
reduce the turn fault current under the fault operating conditions.
It is worth noting that the four alternative winding configurations are known
in literature and have been employed in machines for various industry
applications. However, only their operations in healthy conditions are
analyzed in the existing literature. Their behaviors with multiple 3-phase
segregated windings for fault-tolerant applications are not fully understood.Hence, detailed FE simulations and experimental testing will be performed
to fill this knowledge gap in the subsequent sections.
Figure 7.10 Comparison of no-load phase flux linkages of W1 and W5
configurations.
Figure 7.11 Comparison of no-load coil flux linkages of W1 and W5
configurations.7.3 FE Analysis of Machines with Five
Segregated Winding Configurations
In this section, five PMA-SynRM drives with different segregated winding
configurations are modeled in FE software based on the leading
specification and geometry parameters provided in Table 7.2. Different
from the previous 40 kW machine prototype, it is naturally cooled with 5
kW rated output power at 2000 rpm. It has a shorter axial length but with
similar stator and rotor geometries for high rotor saliency. For like-with-like
comparison of the five winding configurations, the number of turns of each
coil is 8 for the W1, W4, and W5 configurations while it is 14 for the delta￾connected configuration (W2). The number of turns in the W3
configuration is 8 for the star-connected part and 14 for the delta part. The
cross-sectional area of each turn is adjusted accordingly to yield the same
effective slot-fill factor for all five configurations. Consequently, the five
machines share the same electrical, magnetic, and thermal loads and can be
operated with the same inverter and control in both healthy and fault
conditions. The machines are evaluated under healthy and several common
fault conditions, and their performances and characteristic behaviors are
compared. For the simplicity of discussion, the fault is always assumed to
occur in set ABC.
Table 7.2 Machine specification and leading parameters.
Specification Symbol Value
Rated speed nb  2000 rpm
Rated power Pr  5 kW
Rated phase current (magnitude) and
gamma angle
I
ratedY/I
ratedΔ  67 A(49°)/38.7
A(49o
)
Turn number of star-connected coil NY  8
Turn number of delta-connected coil NΔ  14
Axial length LA  86 mm
Stator diameter Rs  180 mm7.3.1 Healthy Performance Evaluation
Although the machines are targeted for fault-tolerant applications, the
performance in healthy operations is also of paramount importance as they
operate in this condition most of the time. Thus, the five machines are
simulated under the rated healthy condition. They are all excited with the
rated line current of 67 A. The presence of the zero-sequence current path in
the W2 and W3 configurations results in zero-sequence currents of triplen
harmonics in the delta-connected part of the windings, as shown in Fig.
7.12. It is seen that the triplen harmonic currents are very small in
magnitude compared with the rate current. The resultant overall copper
losses have been compared in Table 7.3 for the five machines. It can be seen
that the zero-sequence currents have negligible influence on the copper loss
at the rated operation albeit the increase in the copper loss will be more
pronounced at lower load conditions.
The predicted torques for the five machines are compared in Fig. 7.13, and
their average values and absolute torque ripples, denoted as ΔT, are listed in
Table 7.3. As can be seen, the machines with the W1, W4, and W5
configurations exhibit the same torque characteristics due to the same
current distributions in the slots. The machine with the W3 configuration
exhibits the highest torque of 25 N m among the five candidate designs
while its torque ripple is the lowest. The higher torque and low torque ripple
are attributed to the increased fundamental winding factor and reduced
harmonic winding factors because of the star-delta connection. The machine
with the W2 configurations shows slight torque reduction due to the zero￾sequence currents in the delta connection, which induce additional eddy
current loss in the rotor magnets and give rise to drag torque. The torque
ripple is also marginally smaller.Figure 7.12 Line currents and induced zero-sequence currents.
Table 7.3 Performance comparison at rated healthy operation.
Items W1 W2 W3 W4 W5
Torque (N m)  24  23.5  25  24  24
ΔT (Tmax − Tmin)  2.97  2.57  2.37  2.97  2.97
Copper loss (W)  302  307  309.6  302  302
Iron loss (W)  68.3  66.45  66.84  68.3  68.3
Efficiency (%) 93.1  93.0  93.3  93.1  93.1Figure 7.13 Comparison of torque waveforms of the five machines in rated
healthy operation.
In addition, the five machines’ copper loss, iron loss, and electromagnetic
efficiency are quantified and given in Table 7.3. The copper loss of the
machines with the W2 or W3 configuration is marginally higher due to the
induced zero-sequence currents. Thus, their influence on the efficiency at
the rated operation is negligible. As expected, the machine with the W3
configuration exhibits the highest efficiency due to the higher fundamental
winding factor while the efficiencies of the other four machines are more or
less the same.
7.3.2 Open-Circuit Fault
Open-circuit failure in one phase is very common in electrical machine
drives because of a failure in a switching device or connection. For the
machine under study, the whole inverter of the faulted 3-phase set will be
deactivated while the other two 3-phase modules continue their operation to
provide torque at the rated speed with the rated current. This mode is
simulated with the ABC phases open circuited while the other two modules
maintain the same operation without interruption. The resultant torque
waveforms of the five machines are shown in Fig. 7.14. Again, the machine
with the W3 configuration shows the highest torque while the torques of the
remaining four machines are almost the same with an average of about 2/3of the healthy value. The torque waveforms of the machines with the W1
and W5 configurations coincide with each other as the currents in the slots
of the two machines are still the same under this open-circuit mode. Further,
the torque ripples are also provided in Table 7.4. It is seen that they are only
slightly increased compared with those in the rated healthy operation.
It is worth noting that there are zero-sequence currents flowing in the delta￾connected winding sections of the open-circuited ABC phases in the
machines with the W2 or W3 configuration. Their amplitudes are very
small with negligible influence on the postfault operation.
With the delta configuration (W2), it is possible to operate the remaining
two phases in case of an open-circuit fault in one-phase winding [6]. This
will provide additional torque under the open-circuit condition. By way of
example, the schematic of postfault two-phase operation of the delta￾connected ABC winding set, where phase A is open-circuited, is shown in
Fig. 7.15. The phase current vectors of phases A, B, and C in the healthy
condition are shown in Fig. 7.16 in the solid arrow lines. After the open￾circuit fault in phase A, the phase A current is forced to 0, but the currents
in phases B and C can be regulated as the current vectors, and ,
shown as the dashed arrow lines with the inverter to generate positive
sequence MMF and torque. Under this operation mode, extra 4.1 Nm of
torque, or 17% of the rated torque, can be produced with the rated current in
phases B and C of the faulted ABC windings.Figure 7.14 Comparison of torque waveforms of the five machines in open￾circuit condition.
Table 7.4 Torque comparison under fault conditions
Items W1 W2 W3 W4 W5
OC torque (N m)  14.37  14.58  15.34  14.73  14.37
OC ΔT (Tmax − Tmin)  3.22  2.97  3.66  3.41  3.22
SC torque (N m)  15.90  15.62  16.58  15.85  15.90
SC ΔT (Tmax − Tmin) 4.42  4.24  4.62  4.56  4.42Figure 7.15 Open-circuit fault in phase A winding for delta configuration
(W2).
Figure 7.16 Phase current vectors in healthy and phase A open-circuited
conditions for W2.7.3.3 Short-Circuit Fault
As has been discussed in Chapter 2, upon detection of a short-circuit fault
in a phase winding, TSC is applied to the fault 3-phase windings to mitigate
the fault impact. This fault condition is simulated for the machines with the
five different winding configurations by applying TSC on set ABC with sets
DEF and GHI fed with the rated current at the rated speed. The postfault
torque waveforms of the five machines under this mode are compared in
Fig. 7.17, where similar trends are seen. The average toques and torque
ripples of the five machines are given in Table 7.4. It is seen that both the
average torque and torque ripple of a given machine under the short-circuit
condition are slightly larger than those of the machine with the same
winding configuration under the open-circuit condition. Again, it is
observed that the torque of the machine with the W3 configuration is the
highest among the five candidates mainly due to its advantage on the
winding factor.
Figure 7.17 Comparison of torque waveforms of the five machines in short￾circuit condition.
Due to the low PM flux linkages, all the five machines have low short￾circuit (line) currents as shown in Fig. 7.18. For the machine with the W3
configuration, both the line currents and the currents in the delta-connected
windings are shown. Although some differences in waveform shape andphase shift are seen, the RMS currents of all the five machines, including
those in the delta-connected coils are below the rated. Thus, they are all
capable of sustained operation in this failure mode. The asymmetric short￾circuit currents seen are attributed to the mutual coupling effect between the
three 3-phase modules under the fault condition, as has been discussed
previously.
7.3.4 Single-Turn Short-Circuit Fault
The fault current in a single short-circuited turn after TSC application is the
focus of the investigation on the four alternative winding configurations.
Thus, simulations have been performed to assess their relative merits on
this. The residual flux linkage of the faulted turn, which has a key influence
on the fault current, is dependent on fault location and the currents in the
remaining healthy 3-phase sets. Therefore, single-turn fault under TSC
application is simulated for the five machines in motoring mode by varying
fault locations in all possible coils and the currents in the healthy sets. For a
fault located in each coil, it is assumed that the turn closest to the slot
opening is short circuited. The resultant variations of the RMS fault currents
and the normalized values to the rated coil current are shown from Figs.
7.19 to 7.24 with the coil designations given in Figs. 7.1, 7.4, 7.5 and 7.8. It
is shown that in all five machines a single-turn fault in B2 coil yields the
largest fault current when the currents in the healthy 3-phase sets reach the
rated. For this reason, coil B2 is arranged in the inner delta part of the W3
configuration.Figure 7.18 Induced short-circuit currents for the five machines, from top
to bottom, W1, W2, W3, W4, and W5.
Figure 7.19 Variations of turn fault current with load current and fault
location in 6 coils of W1 winding configuration.
Figure 7.20 Variations of turn fault current with load current and fault
location in 6 coils of W2 winding configuration.
Figure 7.21 Variations of turn fault current with load current and fault
location in 6 coils of W3 winding configuration.Figure 7.22 Variations of turn fault current with load current and fault
location in 6 coils of W4 winding configuration.
Figure 7.23 Variations of turn fault current with load current and fault
location in 6 coils of W5 winding configuration.
Figure 7.24 Turn fault current waveforms of the worst cases for the five
winding machines.
The fault current waveforms together with the normalized values in the
worst case of each winding configuration are plotted in Fig. 7.24, and their
RMS values are given in Table 7.5. It should be noted that since the fault
turn occurs in the delta-connected coil in the W2 and W3 configurations,
their fault currents are normalized to I
ratedΔ. It is seen that compared with
the W1 configuration, the fault currents in all four alternative windingconfigurations have been reduced. The reduction in the machines with the
W2 and W3 configurations is more significant since the residual flux
linkage in the faulted turn is reduced by the zero-sequence current in the
delta-connected coils. The reduction in the fault current with the W4 and
W5 configurations is very similar, ∼16%. Further, the copper losses in the
faulted turn and healthy part of the B2 coil for each winding configuration
have been quantified and compared in Table 7.5. The resultant temperature
distributions under the worst case for each machine are predicted in Ansys
Fluent and shown in Fig. 7.25, from which the hot-spot temperature in the
fault turn of each machine is identified and the results are listed in Table
7.5.
It is seen that the hot-spot temperature in the machine with the W3
configuration is the lowest and this is followed by the machine with the W2
configuration. This confirms the effect of the zero-sequence current on the
reduction of the turn fault current and hence the resultant temperature. For
the machine with the W3 configuration, further benefit is derived from the
placement of coil B2 in the delta-connected part. In the machine with the
W4 configuration, the reduction in the fault current is roughly proportional
to the reduction of the MMF offset component, which is the cause of the
mutual coupling effect. In the machine with the W5 configuration, the
residual flux linkage in the faulted turn is more effectively reduced by the
short-circuit currents in the healthy part of the concentric windings. The
overall effect appears to be similar to that of the W4 configuration. The
benefits of the alternative winding configurations are also evident in the
reduced hot-spot temperatures in the worst-case fault condition.Table 7.5 Turn fault current, copper loss, and hotspot temperature.
Items W1 W2 W3 W4 W5
RMS fault current (A)
Its normalized values (pu)
173
(3.65
pu)
86.5
(3.19
pu)
78.7
(2.91
pu)
145.8
(3.07
pu)
144
(3.04
pu)
Copper loss of faulted turn (W) 30.2 13.2 11 21.7 21.2
Copper loss of healthy turns
(W)
10.2 14.8 14.4 8.3 11.4
Maximum temperature in
faulted turn (°)
178 164 157 168 170Figure 7.25 Thermal distribution prediction of the five machines: (a) W1,
(b) W2, (c) W3, (d) W4, and (e) W5.
The extensive simulations demonstrate that the delta connection is effective
in the reduction of the turn fault current. In addition, the winding
configurations with reduced mutual magnetic coupling or concentric coils
are also effective. Therefore, combinations of these concepts, e.g. delta￾connected windings with the mixed-pitch or concentric coils shown in the
W4 and W5 configurations, are expected to achieve further reduction in the
fault current.
7.4 Experimental Assessments of Machines
with Five Segregated Winding
Configurations
The merits of the alternative winding configurations in reduction of the turn
fault current are further assessed by experiments. The machines with the
five winding configurations are designed according to the specifications in
Table 7.2, and prototyped as shown in Fig. 7.26. They are built with the
same stator stack and rotor assembly and hence have the same thermal
dissipation capability. To reduce the number of stators to be built, the
machine with the W2 configuration is obtained by changing the stator
windings of the W1 configuration to the delta connection. Thus, the number
of turns in each phase in these two machines is the same, which implies the
rated line current of the delta-connected machine is 1.732 times of the rated
67 A in the star-connected phase windings, i.e. 117 A.Figure 7.26 Stators and winding ptototypes of the five machines: (a) W1
and W2, (b) W3, (c) W4, and (d) W5. Wang et al. [1]/with permission of
IEEE.Figure 7.27 Established experimental test platform of the five machines: (a)
machine and dynamometer designated as dyno for short and (b) triple 3-
phase inverters. Wang et al. [1]/with permission of IEEE.
An experimental test platform similar to that described in Chapter 3 has
been established as shown in Fig. 7.27. Each prototype machine is fed by
three 3-phase inverters operating at 10 kHz switching frequency and
mechanically coupled, via an inline torque transducer, to the dynamometer,
which acts as a load and controls the speed of the test operations. The
currents in each inverter phase are measured by the integrated inverter
current sensors and recorded in the DSP unit. All other important signals,
such as voltages, speed, torque, and currents in delta-connected windings or
in faulted turns, are measured and recorded during tests.
7.4.1 No-Load Test
First, the five machines are tested with the same rotor assembly under no￾load condition. They are driven by the dynamometer at the rated speed of
2000 rpm, and the back-emfs of each machine are measured. The measured
phase back-emfs are shown in Fig. 7.28 for all machines except for the
machine with the W3 configuration. Since there is no neutral point in the
star-delta-connected windings, direct measurements of the phase back-emfs
are not possible. Instead, its line back-emfs are measured and shown in Fig.
7.28(c).
It is seen that the phase back-emf waveforms of the machines with W1, W4,
and W5 configurations are essentially the same with a peak value around
11.2 V. Small differences in harmonic contents are not visible.Figure 7.28 Measured phase back-emfs of the machines with winding
configurations of (a) W1, (b) W2, (d) W4, and (e) W5. Measured line back￾emfs of the machine with W3 configuration shown in (c).
For the delta-connected machine, the measured phase back-emfs are also
the line quantities, and they differ from those of the star-connected
machines in both waveform shape and magnitude. This is because zero￾sequence currents can flow in the delta-connected windings even under theno-load condition. Consequently, the triplen harmonic voltages are
significantly reduced by the zero-sequence current and the measured back￾emfs exhibit a lower harmonic distortion with a peak voltage of 10.6 V. The
rated line voltage of this machine will be ∼1.73 times lower than those of
the star-connected machines.
A similar effect of the zero-sequence current in the delta-connected coils is
also seen in the measured line back-emfs of the machine with the W3
configurations. The waveforms are less-distorted and highly symmetrical
with a peak value of 17.86 V, close to the line back-emfs of the star￾connected machines. Their rated line voltage will also be similar.
7.4.2 Load Test Under Healthy Condition
Load tests are performed on the five machines to evaluate their torque
capability in healthy operations. First, tests are carried out at 500 rpm by
varying the magnitude and phase angle (denoted as gamma angle) of the
stator currents, and the results are plotted in Fig. 7.29 for the four machines
with the W1, W3, W4, and W5 configurations, from which the optimal
current angles for the maximum torque per Ampere (MTPA) operation of
each machine can be determined. It can be seen that the four machines have
similar MTPA characteristics and their optimal gamma angle at the rated
current of 67 A is about 44°. The machine with the W2 configuration is the
delta-connected version and, hence, has the same MTPA characteristic of
the machine with the W1 configuration. Thus, the separate test is not
performed. However, the inverter-fed currents for this machine should be
adjusted in both magnitude and phase angle based on the governing relation
between the delta and star connections.
The measured output torque variations with the load currents under MTPA
operations are shown in Fig. 7.30, from which it is evident that the machine
with the W3 configuration exhibits the highest torque as expected while that
with the W2 configuration of the lowest torque. This is consistent with the
FE predictions in Fig. 7.13. Further, the torque waveforms are measured at
a very low speed of 10 rpm for the five machines at the rated current and
shown in Fig. 7.31. The characteristic of the torque ripple observed in each
machine are close to the FE results, and any difference is likely caused by
the torque ripple of the dynamometer and mechanical unbalance of the testsetup. As predicted, the torque ripple of the W3 machine is the lowest while
those of the rest are very close.
The measured line currents of the five machines at the rated operation of
2000 rpm are shown in Fig. 7.32. They are well tracked by three
independent inverter controllers and exhibit good symmetry. The currents in
three 3-phase sets of each machine coincide with each other. It is worth
noting that the line current magnitude of the W2 machine is 117 A, which is
1.732 times that of the W1 machine, owing to its delta connection.
The currents in the delta-connected phase windings and coils are also
measured by current probes and they are shown in Fig. 7.33. The currents
are slightly more distorted due to zero-sequence triplen harmonics
circulating in the delta-connected phases or coils, which are not under
inverter control. Switching harmonics, captured by the high bandwidth
probes, are also visible.Figure 7.29 Measured torque variations with current magnitude and gamma
angle of four machines with winding configurations of (a) W1, (b) W3, (c)
W4, and (d) W5.
Figure 7.30 Output torque variations with load current under MTPA
operation in healthy mode.The load tests show that all five machines exhibit similar torque
characteristics in healthy operations as predicated with slightly better
performance from the machine with the W3 configuration.
7.4.3 Load Test with Open Circuit in One 3-Phase Set
Load tests are also performed for each machine at 2000 rpm with the ABC
set open circuited while the other two 3-phase sets are fed with the rated
currents shown in Fig. 7.34. With feedback control in the inverters, the
currents in the healthy sets of the five machines are essentially kept the
same as those in the healthy operation with very small harmonic distortion.
However, circulating current is presented in the delta-connected ABC
phases or coils even in the open-circuit condition. The measured circulating
currents in the delta-connected phases of the W2 configuration and in the
delta-connected coils of the W3 configuration are shown in Fig. 7.35. The
RMS circulating currents are 13.8 and 9.6 A in the machines with the W2
and W3 configurations, respectively. They are below 35% of the rated and
the resultant heating effect is insignificant.
The measured torque variations with current magnitude for the five
machines under the open-circuit mode are compared in Fig. 7.36. Compared
with the healthy operations, the torque capability of all five machines is
reduced by 40%, which is consistent with the trend observed in FE
predictions. The tests confirm that the five machines can cope with the
open-circuit fault with reduced torque capability.Figure 7.31 Measured torque waveforms of five machines at 10 rpm with
rated current, T1, T2, T3, T4, and T5 denote measurements of machines
with W1, W2, W3, W4, and W5 configurations, respectively.7.4.4 Load Test with Short Circuit in One 3-Phase Set
Load tests with one 3-phase set under TSC mode via the inverter are
undertaken with the five machines operating at the rated speed. The tests in
this mode are of particular interest since upon detection of a short circuit in
one phase or a turn fault in any coil, TSC of the 3-phase set where the fault
is located is often adopted as a mitigation measure, which reduces the fault
current to a sustainable level and enables continuous operation of the
remaining healthy 3-phase sets. Figure 7.37 shows the measured currents in
the healthy sets and short-circuit currents in the faulted ABC set of the five
machines under the tests. As observed, the currents in the two healthy 3-
phase sets of each machine are well controlled and overlapped as those seen
in the open-circuit mode while the short-circuit currents are asymmetric and
distorted because of the mutual magnetic coupling. However, the RMS
values of the short-circuit currents are much lower than the rated in all the
five machines, which provides a thermal margin to accommodate a
relatively large turn fault current in case such a fault occurs in any part of a
3-phase winding set. Because of the delta connection, relatively larger
currents by a factor of 1.732 in the machine with the W2 configuration are
seen.Figure 7.32 Measured line currents of the five machines: (a) W1, (b) W2,
(c) W3, (d) W4, and (e) W5.Figure 7.33 Measured currents under rated healthy operation: (a) phase
currents of W2 configuration and (b) currents in delta-connected coils of
W3 configuration.
Figure 7.34 Measured line currents of the five machines with winding
configuration of (a) W1, (b) W2, (c) W3, (d) W4, and (e) W5, when ABC
phases are open circuited.Figure 7.35 Measured currents when phases ABC are open circuited: (a)
currents in delta-connected phases of W2 configuration and (b) currents in
delta-connected coils of W3 configuration.
Figure 7.36 Variations of the output torques with the load currents for the
five machines in open-circuit mode.Figure 7.37 Measured line currents of five machines with winding
configuration of (a) W1, (b) W2, (c) W3, (d) W4, and (e) W5, when ABC
phases are short circuited.Figure 7.38 Measured currents when ABC phases are short circuited: (a)
phase currents in ABC set of W2 configuration and (b) currents of delta￾connected coils in ABC set of W3 configuration.
In addition, the currents in the delta-connected phases or coils of the short￾circuited ABC phases in the machines with the W2 and W3 configurations
are also measured and shown in Fig. 7.38. Similar distortion is seen with
the average RMS value being slightly larger than that of the line quantities
divided by 1.732 because of the circulating zero-sequence components in
the delta-connected loop. Nevertheless, they are all below the rated and
within the safe region of operation under this fault mode.
The torque variations with current magnitude in the healthy 3-phase sets
under this mode are shown in Fig. 7.39 for the five machines, where a
reduction in torque capability by ∼1/3 is observed for all the five machines
compared with their operations in the healthy condition.
7.4.5 Single-Turn Short-Circuit Test
Finally, the merits of the alternative winding configurations in the reduction
of turn fault current following TSC application are experimentally
evaluated. A single turn is split from the B2 coil in each machine and placed
close to the slot opening at which the fault current is the largest. Tests are
performed with this turn being short-circuited externally. Meanwhile, TSC
is applied to the ABC set while the currents in the other two 3-phase sets are
controlled by their inverters. To avoid excessive current in the short￾circuited turn that may cause permanent damage to the windings, the tests
are carried out by gradual increases in the speed and load current until both
the currents in the healthy sets and the speed reach the rated. The measured
short-circuit currents in the ABC set and in the fault turn are shown in Fig.
7.40 for the five machines under the rated operation point. The waveforms
match well with the FE calculation. Their RMS currents in the short￾circuited turn are 151, 113, 72, 122, and 128 A in the machines with the
W1, W2, W3, W4, and W5 configurations, respectively. They are slightly
lower than the FE prediction in all the machines except for that with the W2
configuration, which are caused by the additional resistance and inductance
of the cable and connections to form the external short circuit. The larger
fault current than the prediction given in Table 7.5 in the machine with the
W2 configuration is because the number of turns in a phase winding of theprototype is kept to that of the star-connected machine and not scaled for
the same line current and voltage ratings as in the simulations.
Nevertheless, if the RMS fault currents are normalized to the rated value,
the measurement agrees reasonably well with the prediction. In addition,
the currents in the healthy sets are very similar to those observed in the load
tests under the short-circuit mode, and hence are not repeated. Likewise, the
torque capability of the five machines under this failure mode is very
similar to that under one 3-phase set being short-circuited, shown in Fig.
7.39.
Figure 7.39 Variations of the output torques with the load currents for the
five machines in short-circuit mode.
The turn fault currents and torque capabilities in the rated healthy and
typical fault conditions of the five machines are summarized in Table 7.6.
Compared with the classical star configuration, the normalized turn fault
currents are reduced by 25%, 17%, 19%, and 15% with the W2, W3, W4,
and W5 configurations, respectively. These reductions are obtained without
much affecting their torque capabilities in both healthy and fault conditions.
Compared with the FE prediction for the rms turn fault currents shown in
Table 7.5, the measured fault currents in pu are lower except for that of the
W2 configuration. This is mainly caused by the additional impedance of the
connection cables and relay introduced to generate the short-circuit fault inthe experiments. Since this parasitic impedance is difficult to control during
experiments, its influence on the measured fault currents differs. It is
evident that the relative reduction due to the parasitic impedance in the
measured fault current in the W3 configuration is much less than that in the
other configurations. Consequently, the reduction in the measured fault
current with the W3 configuration appears lower than the other
configurations. Further, since the machine with the W2 configuration in the
experiment uses the same phase windings of the W1 configuration with 8
turns per coil but with a delta connection, the number of series connected
turns across the line voltage is lower, leading to 1.732 times lower voltage
rating than the other configurations. This is conducive to a lower fault
current in pu as discussed at the beginning of section 7.2. For this reason,
the experimentally measured fault current of the W2 configuration is not
directly comparable to the FE prediction, though the largest reduction in the
fault current is obtained with the W2 configuration. While the measured and
predicted fault currents differ to some extent, their trends are still very
close. In conclusion, the reduction in the turn fault current with these
alternative winding configurations will lead to lower hot-spot temperatures
in the faulted turns, and hence enhance fault-tolerant capability of the
machine drive under the worst-case fault condition.Figure 7.40 Measured line currents and turn fault current in five machines
with winding configuration of (a) W1, (b) W2, (c) W3, (d) W4, and (e) W5,
when TSC is applied to fault ABC set.
Table 7.6 Overall performance comparison.
Items W1 W2 W3 W4 W5
Healthy torque (N m)  23.8
23.55
 25.3  24.4
24.0
OC torque (N m)
14.55 14.47 15.38 15.16 14.7
SC torque (N m)
15.87
 14.4
16.72
 16.3
16.0Items W1 W2 W3 W4 W5
RMS turn fault current (A)  151  113  72  122  128
Normalized RMS turn fault
current (pu)
 3.19  2.38  2.65  2.57
2.70
Other faults, like the demagnetization fault and DC-link capacitor fault, can
also be accommodated by the machines with the alternative winding
configurations in a similar manner to the star-connected machine. These
faults can be analyzed with the methods described in Chapter 2 and,
therefore, are not repeated.
7.5 Summary
In this chapter, the cause of the relatively large turn fault current in the
worst-case fault condition of the triple redundant PMA-SynRM with star￾connected 3-phase windings have been identified and four alternative
winding configurations have been presented to address this weakness. The
zero-sequence residual flux linkage in the faulted turn due to mutual
magnetic coupling in the fault condition is the main cause of the turn fault
current. Thus, four alternative winding configurations have been devised to
reduce the residual flux linkage by the zero-sequence currents in the delta￾connected windings or coils or directly reduce the mutual coupling effect.
Both simulations and tests show that, compared with the classic star￾connected machine, the machines with the alternative winding
configurations exhibit similar torque characteristics under both healthy and
fault conditions, while the turn fault current in the worst-case fault
condition is significantly reduced. The machine with the W3 configuration
is most effective in reduction of the turn fault current and it will lead to the
lowest temperature rise in the fault turn. Meanwhile, its torque capability is
also slightly improved. These improvements are obtained with a few
additional steps in the stator winding manufacture process, which may lead
to a slight increase in cost. In contrast, 13% reduction in the normalized
turn fault current with the delta winding configuration is gained at the
expense of a slight reduction in the torque capability, mainly due to the
circulating currents in the delta-connected phases. This disadvantage is
indeed the main reason why the star winding configuration is morecommonly used in PM machines. The other two alternative winding
configurations are also effective in the reduction of the turn fault current,
while there is very little difference in the stator winding manufacturing
process compared to the classical winding configuration. Finally, the
combination of the delta or star-delta winding configurations with the
mixed-pitch or concentric coils in each phase is likely to have further
reduction in the turn fault current under the worst-case fault condition.
References
1 Wang, B., Zha, C., Xu, Y. et al. (2022). Comparative study on fault
tolerant triple 3-phase PM machine drive with five modular windings.
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 70 (10): 1–11.
2 Liu, C. (2018). Emerging electric machines and drives — an overview.
IEEE Transactions on Energy Conversion 33 (4): 2270–2280.
3 Mecrow, B.C. et al. (2004). Design and testing of a four-phase fault￾tolerant permanent-magnet machine for an engine fuel pump. IEEE
Transactions on Energy Conversion 19 (4): 671–678.
4 Radun, A.V., Ferreira, C.A., and Richter, E. (1998). Two-channel
switched reluctance starter/generator results. IEEE Transactions on
Industry Applications 34 (5): 1026–1034.
5 W. Zhao, M. Cheng, W. Hua, and H. Jia, “A redundant flux-switching
permanent magnet motor drive for fault-tolerant applications,” in IEEE
Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conference, 2008. VPPC ’08, 2008, pp.
1-6.
6 Sayed-Ahmed, A. and Demerdash, N.A.O. (2012). Fault-tolerant
operation of delta-connected scalar- and vector-controlled AC motor
drives. IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics 27 (6): 9.
7 Sayed-Ahmed, A., Mirafzal, B., and Demerdash, N.A.O. (2011). Fault￾tolerant technique for Δ-connected AC-motor drives. IEEE Transactions
on Energy Conversion 26 (2): 646–653.8 Ibrahim, M.N.F., Abdel-Khalik, A.S., Rashad, E.M., and Sergeant, P.
(2018). An improved torque density synchronous reluctance machine
with a combined star–delta winding layout. IEEE Transactions on
Energy Conversion 33 (3): 1015–1024.
9 Lei, Y., Zhao, Z., Wang, S. et al. (2011). Design and analysis of star–delta
hybrid windings for high-voltage induction motors. IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics 58 (9): 3758–3767.
10 Alberti, L. and Bianchi, N. (2012). Experimental tests of dual three￾phase induction motor under faulty operating condition. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics 59 (5): 2041–2048.
11 J. Chai, J. Wang, K. Atallah, and D. Howe, “Performance comparison
and winding fault detection of duplex 2-phase and 3-phase fault-tolerant
permanent magnet brushless machines,” in Industry Applications
Conference, 2007. 42nd IAS Annual Meeting. Conference Record of the
2007 IEEE, 2007, pp. 566-572.
12 Fu, J.-R. and Lipo, T.A. (1994). Disturbance-free operation of a
multiphase current-regulated motor drive with an opened phase. IEEE
Transactions on Industry Applications 30 (5): 1267–1274.
13 Wang, B., Wang, J., Griffo, A., and Sen, B. (2018). Stator turn fault
detection by 2nd harmonic in instantaneous power for a triple redundant
fault-tolerant PM drive. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 65
(9): 7279–7289.
14 Bianchi, N., Bolognani, S., and Pre, M.D. (2007). Strategies for the
fault-tolerant current control of a five-phase permanent-magnet motor.
IEEE Transactions on Industry Applications 43 (4): 960–970.
15 Wang, B., Wang, J., Griffo, A., and Sen, B. (2018). Experimental
assessments of a triple redundant 9-phase fault tolerant PMA SynRM
drive. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics 66 (1): 772–783.
16 Dusek, J., Arumugam, P., Brunson, C. et al. (2016). Impact of slot/pole
combination on inter-turn short-circuit current in fault-tolerant
permanent magnet machines. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 52 (4):
1–9.17 Arumugam, P. (2016). Design optimization on conductor placement in
the slot of permanent magnet machines to restrict turn-turn short-circuit
fault current. IEEE Transactions on Magnetics 52 (99): 1–8.
18 S. Dwari, L. Parsa, and T. A. Lipo, “Optimum control of a five-phase
integrated modular permanent magnet motor under normal and open￾circuit fault conditions,” in IEEE Power Electronics Specialists
Conference, 2007. PESC 2007, 2007, pp. 1639-1644.
19 Park, J.K., Babetto, C., Berardi, G. et al. (2021). Comparison of fault
characteristics according to winding configurations for dual three-phase
synchronous reluctance motor. IEEE Transactions on Industry
Applications 57 (3): 2398–2406.
20 Faiz, J. and Tabatabaei, I. (2002). Extension of winding function theory
for nonuniform air gap in electric machinery. IEEE Transactions on
Magnetics 38 (6): 3654–3657.
21 Wang, B., Wang, J., Griffo, A., and Sen, B. (2018). A general modeling
technique for a triple redundant 3 × 3-phase PMA SynRM. IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics 65 (11): 9068–9078.Index
a
airgap flux linkage  142
air gap permeance  13
ambient temperature  78
b
back electromotive force (bemf)  34
c
Clark transformation  18
cogging torque  218
coil location  13
computational efficiency  14
concentric winding  251
constant power region  222
constant torque region  220
control bandwidth  108
cooling design  85
cost function  216
current injection  214
current polarity  175
d
DC-link voltage  4
delta connected winding  252demagnetization fault  58
design optimization  49
design specification  78
design tool  78
digital signal processor (DSP)  155
discontinuous conduction mode  175
distributed overlapping winding  34
dq-axis voltage equations  128
e
efficiency map  39
electrical isolation  35
electrical machine drives  33
experimental validation  155
f
false alarm  14
fault current  14
fault detection  14
fault indicator  16
fault location  77
fault mitigation  5
fault modeling  5
fault propagation  17
fault tolerance  2
fault tolerant machine drives  1
finite element (FE)  12flux density  35
flux leakage  142
flux-linkage-based model  169
flux linkage machine model  82
4D lookup table  124
fractional-slot concentrated winding (FSCW)  10
fundamental flux linkage  152
g
gamma angle  38
general modeling technique  119
generating mode  31
global optimum design  81
ground wall insulation  73
h
high-frequency injection  17
high reliability  1
i
instantaneous active power (IAP)  173
instantaneous reactive power (IRP)  173
insulated gate bipolar transistor (IGBT)   171
insulatum terra (IT)  54
International Standard IEC60364  54
interphase short circuit  3
interturn short circuit  38
intraphase short circuit  3iron loss  86
l
Lenz’s law  71
low pass filter (LPF)  183
lumped parameter thermal model  87
m
magnetic coupling  8
magnetic flux distribution  39
magnetic saturation  13
magneto-motive force (MMF)  6
maximum torque per Ampere (MTPA)  38
maximum winding temperature limit   79
mid-point voltage  174
mixed-pitch winding  252
MMF AC component  64
MMF offset component  61
model-based fault detection  16
motor current signal analysis  16
motoring mode  49
multi-layer rotor  34
multi-phase machine  7
multiple 3-phase machine  34
mutual coupling  8
n
negative sequence current  16neutral point  15
o
online monitoring  4
open circuit  3
open circuit fault detection  14
open circuit torque capability  42
open-end winding  7
optimal torque control  18
optimization tool  80
output torque control  17
output voltage vector  175
overlapping winding  34
p
parameter variation  187
Park transformation  182
partial demagnetization  4
permanent magnet-assisted synchronous reluctance machine (PMA￾SynRM)  77
phase to ground insulation  54
physical isolation  5
PM torque  34
positive sequence  71
postfault control  5
postfault current tracking  17
proportional and integral (PI)  69
protective earth (PE)  54prototype machine  101
PWM current ripple  17
r
relative β-axis residual voltage signal   172
reluctance torque  11
residual current device (RCD)  56
residual flux linkage  44
rotor saliency  39
s
safety critical applications  2
second-order harmonic  67
segregated winding  33
sequential surrogate optimization (SSO)   81
short circuit  3
short-circuit current suppression  17
short-circuit torque capability  45
signal-to-noise ratio  16
single-turn fault  49
slot leakage inductance  13
slot position  13
space harmonics  39
space vector pulse width modulation (SVPWM)  174
spiral cooling jacket  85
star connected winding  253
star-delta connected winding  254switched reluctance machine  8
synchronous reluctance machine  12
t
temperature rise  33
terminal short circuit (TSC)  33
test bench  97
thermal coupler  115
thermal isolation  35
thermal stress  4
torque ripple  4
total harmonic distortion  258
turn fault behavior  149
turn fault current  13
turn fault modeling  13
turn fault signature  189
turn function  13
turn-to-turn short circuit  93
u
unbalanced current operation  120
uncontrolled generation  3
v
voltage equation  12
voltage source inverter  172
w
weighting factor  219winding configurations  2
winding connection  252
winding factor  257
winding function  13
worst-case scenario  14
worst fault scenario  4
z
zero sequence current  127
zero sequence flux linkage  127
zero sequence voltage  15WILEY END USER LICENSE AGREEMENT
Go to www.wiley.com/go/eula to access Wiley’s ebook EULA.
