Basudeb Basu and Bubun Banerjee (Eds.)
Multicomponent Synthesis
Green Bioactive HeterocyclesDe Gruyter Series in Green Bioactive Heterocycles
Volume 
György Keglevich and Bubun Banerjee (Eds.)
Non-Conventional Synthesis, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Volume 
Asit K. Chakraborti, Bubun Banerjee (Eds.)
Aqueous-Mediated Synthesis, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Volume 
Yunfei Du, Bubun Banerjee (Eds.)
Non-Metal Catalyzed Synthesis, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Volume 
Sreekantha B. Jonnalagadda, Bubun Banerjee (Eds.)
Solvent-Free Synthesis, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----
Volume 
Basudeb Basu, Bubun Banerjee (Eds.)
Multicomponent Synthesis, 
ISBN ----, e-ISBN ----Green Bioactive Heterocycles
Series Editor
Bubun Banerjee
Volume 5Multicomponent
Synthesis
Bioactive Heterocycles
Edited by
Basudeb Basu and Bubun BanerjeeEditors
Prof. Basudeb Basu
Department of Chemistry
North Bengal University
P.O. North Bengal University
Darjeeling 734013
West Bengal
India
basudeb.basu@gmail.com
Dr. Bubun Banerjee
Department of Chemistry
Akal University
Talwandi Sabo, Bathinda 151302
Punjab
India
banerjeebubun@gmail.com
ISBN 978-3-11-099733-0
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-3-11-098531-3
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-3-11-098611-2
ISSN 2752-1338
Library of Congress Control Number: 2023949913
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data are available on the internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2024 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover image:
Back Image: IkonStudio/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Front Image: Shaiith/iStock/Getty Images Plus
Typesetting: Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
www.degruyter.comPreface
Heterocyclic compounds are ubiquitous and find numerous significant applications in
biological, agricultural and material sciences. Bio-active heterocycles are often used
as potential drugs, such as antifungal, anti-bacterial, antiviral, antipyretics, anti-aller￾gic, anti-hypertensive, anti-cancer are a few among the myriads. In view of their po￾tential applications as drugs to combat with various diseases, chemists and biologists
are deeply concerned with developing new synthetic procedures that are eco-friendly,
cost-effective as well as new drug molecules bearing more efficient pharmaceutical
activities. Biologists play the important role to evaluate the biological activities, assay
their toxicity and effective doses.
Multi-component reaction (MCR) represents one of the highly efficient and sus￾tainable methods for the synthesis of heterocyclic compounds. In MCR, the target mol￾ecule is synthesized in one-pot convergent approaches using three or more chemical
entities. The expediency of MCR can be recognized with many-fold advantages that
are usually not possible by conventional multi-step sequential assembly. The present
volume is a part of the book series entitled ‘Green Bioactive Heterocycles’ and has
been intended primarily to focus on various multi-component reactions that have
been developed over the last few decades towards the synthesis of various bioactive
heterocyclic molecules. This volume has contained eleven chapters, each having its
unique characteristics on the MCRs leading to heterocycles having one or more N, O
or S atoms as well as focusing the importance and advantages of non-conventional
energy sources, deep eutectic reaction media etc.
The first chapter presents a glimpse on the formation of different N-based hetero￾cyclic small molecules by one-pot domino MCR approach. The domino process in gen￾eral provides several advantages like minimizing the number of steps involved in the
process, avoiding the need of isolation, purification in each step and thus becomes
a speedy process. The domino strategies towards the construction of heterocyclic mol￾ecules would stimulate further development in this direction. Next two chapters de￾lineate three-component MCR strategies leading to the construction of bioactive
scaffolds such as β-lactam, pyrrole, pyridine, pyrimidine, naphthyridines, quinazo￾lines, quinolines, pyran, oxazine, thiazine and spiro-heterocyclic moieties as well as
their biological significance, mechanistic interpretations etc. The chapter 4 describes
various MCR strategies for the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthene-11-one deriv￾atives. Benzoxanthenes, xanthenes, and benzoxanthenones represent an important
class of O-based heterocycles and often find applications in pharmaceuticals, agro￾chemicals, and material sciences. Chapters 5 and 6 include 4/5-component based MCRs
for the synthesis of structurally diverse quinoxaline-annulated spiroheterocycles and
quinazolinone derivatives respectively, whereas chapters 7 and 8 present an update
on triazoles and tetrazoles respectively via multi-component reactions. L-Proline is
the only secondary amine found in the natural amino acids and is often used as a
catalyst in various organic transformations. The chapter 9 gives an account on MCRs
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-202catalyzed by L-proline and its derivatives leading to the synthesis of various bioactive
N- and O-heterocyles along with an outlook and current trends in this area. Micro￾wave-assisted solvent-free multi-component synthesis of bioactive heterocycles has
been summarized in the chapter 10 and the last chapter presents an overview on the
applications of deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-promoted multi-component synthesis of
various heterocyclic scaffolds used in making drug molecules.
Overall, the present book has been attempted to cover the utility and diversity of
MCRs for the synthesis of different bioactive heterocyclic compounds. Recent updates
on several aspects, the mechanistic considerations and future directions could offer
guidance to synthetic chemists for designing new reactions and new heterocyclic
chemical entities involving MCRs. Furthermore, this book is expected to provide huge
interests to the pharmaceutical chemists both in academia and industries in the years
to come.
Prof. Basudeb Basu
&
Dr. Bubun Banerjee
VI PrefaceForeword
Principles of green chemistry are a paramount consideration when designing target￾driven synthetic organic chemistry processes today. Consequently, MCR (multicompo￾nent reaction) options are often the first place investigators look especially when the
target is a complex molecule. MCRs have been defined as convergent multistep reac￾tions which involve three or more components to give a single product in one pot.
Such processes have advantages of high efficiency and atom economy over linear pro￾cesses. The first example of an MCR was synthesis of an aminonitrile reported by
Strecker in 1850. The first involving obtention of a heterocycle was the Hantzsch dihy￾dropyridine synthesis (1881). Much later a four-component example was described by
Ugi (1960). Seminal reviews and publications by Posner, Tietze, Padwa, T.J.J. Mueller
and others not only described published work but emphasized the potential for MCRs
to effect diversity-oriented synthesis, lead to high product yields, minimize waste, and
result in less energy consumption. This has led to the plethora of work reviewed in
Green Bioheterocycles.
The book series ‘Green Bioactive Heterocycles’, edited by Dr. Bubun Banerjee,
presents the current state of the art in diversity-oriented synthesis applied to forma￾tion of complex products of importance in medicinal and bio-organic chemistry and
production of functional molecules. I believe from my experience in academic and
industrial chemistry that this work will provide a powerful tool in the hands of practi￾tioners in both areas. This volume ‘Multicomponent Synthesis: Bioactive Hetero￾cycles’, edited by Prof. Basudeb Basu and Dr. Bubun Banerjee, contains 11 chapters
which comprise a very valuable treatment of the latest work on MCRs for those work￾ing in the field. The first seven chapters are divided by major heterocyclic systems to
bring focus to target oriented synthetic work. The subsequent four chapters are more
concerned with current and new techniques being used for discovery and develop￾ment work. The first chapter looks broadly at options and highlights in particular
domino MCR strategy for aza-heterocyclic synthesis. Chapter 2 covers ways to make
Beta-lactams, pyrroles, and pyridines with a nice treatment of the mechanistic side.
Advances in the synthesis of complex six-membered heterocycles of biological impor￾tance, often featuring the Ugi and Passerini reactions, are reported in Chapter 3. Chap￾ter 4 deals with biologically important benzoxanthenes, xanthenes, and derivatives.
In Chapter 5, recent work on one pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally
diverse bioactive quinoxaline-annulated spiroheterocycles is discussed. Chapter 6 con￾centrates on multicomponent synthesis of bioactive quinazolone derivatives. Recent
approaches to the multicomponent synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles is the topic of Chapter 7.
Chapter 8 considers the contribution of multicomponent click reactions to the synthe￾sis of tetrazoles. The role of L-proline and its derivatives as catalysts is examined in
Chapter 9. Chapter 10 contains a review of the contribution of MW-assisted solvent
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-203free MCRs for formation of bioheterocycles. The potential for Deep Eutectic Mixture
(DEM) assisted MCR synthesis is described in Chapter 11.
Dr. Eric F.V. Scriven
Publishing Editor Arkivoc
President, ARKAT USA, Inc.
Gainesville, Florida, USA
Email: efvs1@aol.com
Formerly
Head of Research & Development
Reilly Industries, Inc., Indianapolis, USA
VIII ForewordA brief professional profile of Prof. Eric F.V. Scriven
Eric Scriven is a native of Wales, UK. After working at BISRA and ESSO, he
attended the University of Salford, graduated in 1965. He received his M.Sc.
University of Guelph, 1967 (M.J. Nye) and PhD, University of East Anglia, 1969 (A.
R. Katritzky). After postdoctoral years at the University of Alabama (R.A.
Abramovitch) and University College London (J.H. Ridd), he was appointed
Lecturer in Organic Chemistry at the University of Salford. At Salford his
research concentrated on the reactivity of azides and nitrenes applied to
heterocyclic synthesis and photoaffinity labeling. He joined Reilly Industries in
1979 and became Head of Research and Development. There he was the leader
of discovery and development programs in pyridine chemistry. Currently, he is
at the University of Florida. He has edited two books, Azides & Nitrenes (1984) and Pyridines: from Lab to
production (2013). He with Professor H. Suschitzky were founding editors of Progress in Heterocyclic
Chemistry which has been published from 1989 to the present. He collaborated with Professors Alan
Katritzky and Charles Rees on Comprehensive Heterocyclic Chemistry II (1996) and CHEC III (2008) with
Professors Katritzky, Ramsden, and Taylor. He has been editor/coeditor (with C.A. Ramsden) of Advances in
Heterocyclic Chemistry since 2014, vol.114 to 145 et seq. Currently, he is the Publishing Editor of Arkivoc, an
online journal of organic chemistry that is free to readers, authors, and their institutions, founded by
Professor Alan Katritzky in 2000.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-204Contents
Preface V
Foreword VII
A brief professional profile of Prof. Eric F.V. Scriven IX
List of contributing authors XIII
Nirjhar Saha, Soumili Biswas, Maulikkumar D. Vaja, Anirban Sarkar, Asit K.
Chakraborti
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent
reaction approach 1
Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nath
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies for the
synthesis of bioactive β-lactam, pyrrole, and pyridine scaffolds 55
Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines and some other
selective six-membered heterocycles with biological importance 117
Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamath
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent
tetrahydrobenzoxanthenone derivatives 157
Bubun Banerjee, Aditi Sharma, Manmeet Kaur, Arvind Singh, Anu Priya
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally diverse bioactive
quinoxaline-annulated spiroheterocycles through the in situ formation
of 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-ones 181
Kantharaju Kamanna, Radhika Mane, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind
Kamath
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone
derivatives 221
Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles using
multicomponent techniques 253Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhi
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent
click reactions 305
Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis
of biologically promising N- and O-heterocycles 337
CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive
heterocycles 373
Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of
heterocycles 399
Index 431
XII ContentsList of contributing authors
Samiran Dhara
Department of Chemistry
University of Calcutta
Kolkata 700009
West Bengal
India
Saiful Islam
Department of Chemistry
University of Calcutta
Kolkata 700009
West Bengal
India
Asish R. Das
Department of Chemistry
University of Calcutta
Kolkata 700009
West Bengal
India
Email: ardchem@caluniv.ac.in
Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar
Retired Chief Scientist
Indian Institute of Chemical Technology – IICT
Tarnaka, Hyderabad
India
Email: dryvdnageswar@gmail.com
Katla Ramesh
Organic Chemistry Laboratory-4
School of Chemistry and Food
Federal University of Rio Grande-FURG
Rio Grande
RS-Brazil
Katla Rakhi
Organic Chemistry Laboratory-4
School of Chemistry and Food
Federal University of Rio Grande-FURG
Rio Grande
RS-Brazil
Bijoy P Mathew
Department of Chemistry
Vimala College (Autonomous)
Thrissur 680 009, Kerala
India
Jagmeet Singh
Department of Chemistry
Faculty of Science
University of Delhi
Delhi 110 007
India
Mahendra Nath
Department of Chemistry
Faculty of Science
University of Delhi
Delhi 110 007
India
Divyang M. Patel
Department of Chemistry
Sankalchand Patel University
Visnagar 384315, Gujarat
India
Hitendra M. Patel
Department of Chemistry
Sardar Patel University
Vallabh Vidyanagar 388120, Gujarat
India
Email: hm_patel@spuvvn.edu
CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar
Associate Professor
Department of Chemistry, School of Applied
Sciences and Humanities
Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology and
Research (VFSTR)
Vignan University
Vadlamudi, Guntur 522 213, Andhra Pradesh
India
Email: pavaniict@gmail.com
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-206Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao
Emeritus Scientist-CSIR & Honorary Professor
AcSIR
Natural Products and Medicinal Chemistry
(NPMC) Department and AcSIR-Ghaziabad
CSIR – Indian Institute of Chemical Technology
Uppal Road Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500007,
Telangana
India
Email: vaidya.opv@gmail.com
Kantharaju Kamanna
School of Basic Sciences
Department of Chemistry
Rani Channamma University
Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156
Karnataka
Email: kk@rcub.ac.in
Yamanappagouda Amaregouda
School of Basic Sciences
Department of Chemistry
Rani Channamma University
Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156
Karnataka
Aravind Kamath
School of Basic Sciences
Department of Chemistry
Rani Channamma University
Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156
Karnataka
Sujit Ghosh
Department of Chemistry
Raiganj Surendranath Mahavidyalaya
Raiganj, West Bengal
India
Basudeb Basu
Formerly Department of Chemistry
North Bengal University
Darjeeling, West Bengal
India
Email: basudeb.basu@gmail.com
Bubun Banerjee
Department of Chemistry
Akal University
Talwandi Sabo, Bathinda, Punjab 151302
India
Email: banerjeebubun@gmail.com
Aditi Sharma
Department of Chemistry
Akal University
Talwandi Sabo, Bathinda, Punjab 151302
India
Manmeet Kaur
Department of Chemistry
Akal University
Talwandi Sabo, Bathinda, Punjab 151302
India
Arvind Singh
Department of Chemistry
Akal University
Talwandi Sabo, Bathinda, Punjab 151302
India
Anu Priya
Department of Chemistry
Akal University
Talwandi Sabo, Bathinda, Punjab 151302
India
Radhika Mane
Department of Chemistry
School of Basic Sciences
Rani Channamma University
Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156
Karnataka
Nirjhar Saha
School of Chemical Sciences
Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science
(IACS)
Jadavpur, Kolkata 700 032, West Bengal
India
XIV List of contributing authorsSoumili Biswas
School of Biological Sciences
Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science
(IACS)
Jadavpur, Kolkata 700 032, West Bengal
India.
Maulikkumar D. Vaja
Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry
Saraswati Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences
Dhanap, Gandhinagar 382355, Gujarat
India
Anirban Sarkar
Department of Chemistry
Vidyasagar College for Women
39 Sankar Ghosh Lane, Kolkata 700006, West
Bengal
India
Asit K. Chakraborti
School of Chemical Sciences
Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science
(IACS)
Jadavpur, Kolkata 700 032, West Bengal
India
E-mail: ocakc@iacs.res.in;
asitkumarchakraborti@gmail.com
List of contributing authors XVNirjhar Saha, Soumili Biswas, Maulikkumar D. Vaja, Anirban Sarkar,
Asit K. Chakraborti✶
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot
domino multicomponent reaction approach
1.1 Introduction
Multicomponent reaction (MCR) is a convergent reaction in which three or more mol￾ecules/reactants combine through a cascade of reactions in one pot to form a product
in which usually the structural features of each and every component (reacting mole￾cule) are incorporated [1]. Sometimes MCRs are referred to as a “multicomponent as￾sembly process” (MCAP). The first MCR, three-component reaction (3-MCR) involving
aldehyde, ammonia, and potassium cyanide, was reported in 1850 known as Strecker
synthesis generating α-amino nitrile/cyanide from which α-amino acid was obtained
by hydrolysis of the nitrile group [2]. The MCR strategy is used in various organic syn￾theses such as total synthesis, synthesis of natural products, complex molecules, func￾tional materials, sequence-controlled polymers, macrocyclic peptides, and easing out
the complexity in asymmetric synthesis [3–10]. For the construction of diverse hetero￾cyclic ring systems the MCR strategy has been recognized as an important tool to syn￾thetic organic/medicinal chemists [11–16]. The MCRs allow simple, spontaneous, and
high-throughput production of small organic molecule. The MCRs have inherent atom
economy with advantages of selectivity and synthetic convergence and are considered
as advanced tools of sustainable organic synthesis [17]. The MCR strategy is increas￾ingly finding attention in drug discovery with immense opportunities in pharmaceuti￾cal industry [18–20].
On the other hand, aza-heterocyclic framework (cyclic system with at least one N￾atom present in the ring) has been recognized as the privileged pharmacophoric fea-
✶
Corresponding author: Asit K. Chakraborti, School of Chemical Sciences, Indian Association for the
Cultivation of Science (IACS), Jadavpur, Kolkata 700 032, West Bengal, India, e-mails: ocakc@iacs.res.in,
asitkumarchakraborti@gmail.com
Nirjhar Saha, School of Chemical Sciences, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS),
Jadavpur, Kolkata 700 032, West Bengal, India
Soumili Biswas, School of Biological Sciences, Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (IACS),
Jadavpur, Kolkata 700 032, West Bengal, India
Maulikkumar D. Vaja, Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Saraswati Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Dhanap, Gandhinagar 382355, Gujarat, India
Anirban Sarkar, Department of Chemistry, Vidyasagar College for Women, 39 Sankar Ghosh Lane,
Kolkata 700006, West Bengal, India
Acknowledgment: AKC and NS thank the Department of Atomic Energy, Mumbai, India, for the award of
Raja Ramanna Fellowship and Research Associateship, respectively.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-001ture (structural component) to medicinal chemists in the perspective of drug discov￾ery due to the prevalence of aza-heterocyclic ring systems in the preparation of drug
candidate molecules, clinical drug candidates, US-FDA-approved drugs and pharma￾ceuticals, and essential medicines [21–27].
A few representative examples of drugs and bioactive molecules containing di￾verse aza-heterocyclic ring systems are provided in Figure 1.1.
Our group had been involved in the development and use of various MCR strate￾gies and one-pot cascade/domino process that find applications in the construction of
various aza-heterocyclic ring systems, for the synthesis of drug molecules, and identi￾fication of novel anti-Leishmanial and anti-TB scaffolds for new lead candidates
[28–45].
This chapter intends to provide the readers a glimpse on the formation of various
aza-heterocyclic ring systems by one-pot domino MCR approach.
1.2 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot
domino MCR
1.2.1 Synthesis of nonfused aza-heterocycles
1.2.1.1 Pyrrole and its analogs
The MCR strategy is the most convenient and explored route for the construction of pyr￾role ring [46]. The one-pot three-component domino reaction approach involving aryl￾glyoxal monohydrates (1), acyclic 1,1-enediamines (2), and coumarins (3) in EtOH under
reflux for the synthesis of 2-amino-4-coumarinyl-5-arylpyrrole (4) derivatives was ex￾plored. The nature of the 1,1-enediamine substrate and the solvent showed influence on
the product formation. The use of cyclic 1,1-enediamines (2) and performing the reac￾tion in 1,4-dioxane under reflux in open air leads to the formation of 2-amino-4-
coumarinyl-5-aryl-6-hydroxylpyrroles (5) (Figure 1.2). The reaction has wide scope with
different substituted reagents except nitro-substituted 1,1-enediamines that did not pro￾duce the desired product. The six-membered 1,1-enediamines gave higher product yield
as compared with five-membered 1,1-enediamines. The mechanism course of the reac￾tion was studied using HPLC-high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) study. It in￾volves the following sequence of reactions: (i) 1,2-addition, (ii) dehydration, (iii) 1,4-
Michael addition, (iv) imine-enamine tautomerism, (v) 1,2-addition, (vi) dehydration,
(vii) keto-enol tautomerism, (viii) abstraction of proton, and (ix) single electron transfer
(SET). The SET mechanism was confirmed by using 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy
as a radical scavenger [47].
Kamalraja and coworkers [48] reported a new approach for the synthesis of poly￾substituted pyrrole and fused chromenopyrrole frameworks (9) by a transition metal-free
2 Nirjhar Saha et al.Figure 1.1: Drug and bioactive molecules with aza-heterocyclic scaffolds.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach
3one-pot domino reaction. The main advantage of this reaction is regioselectivity and broad
application (Figure 1.3). The MCR involving the α-zido ketones (6), 3-formylchromones (7),
and the active methylene compounds (8) in aqueous medium in the presence of 10 mol%
of piperidine afforded chromenoindolylpyrrole/chomenophenylpyrrole, chromenopiper￾ido/morpholinopyrroles, chromenopyridoiminopyrrole, chromenopyrrole, and chromeno￾pyrrolopyrrole derivatives (Figure 1.3). The reaction proceeds via two different paths
generating different products depending upon the nature of active methylene compounds.
The non-cyano-based active methylene substrates formed the fused chromenopyrrole scaf￾folds. On the other hand, the use of cyano-based active methylene compounds afforded
the tetrasubstituted pyrroles in two regioisomers forms based on the mechanistic course
of the reaction, that is, whether the cyano-based active methylene compound undergoes
reaction at the nitrile group or the carbonyl group. The preference for reaction at the ni￾trile has been observed where the carbonyl has aryl moiety. This MCR proceeds through
domino Knoevenagel, Michael addition, cyclization, and rearrangement pathway as the
commonly operative mechanistic pathway.
The formation of phosphorus containing γ-lactam derivatives (13) was accom￾plished [49] by a phosphoric acid and binol-derived Bronsted acid-promoted MCR of
pyruvate derivatives (10), amines (11), and aldehydes (12) (Figure 1.4). The reaction pro￾ceeds by an initial formation of the imine resulting from the condensation between the
aldehyde carbonyl and the amine nitrogen promoted by MgSO4 [50]. This is followed by
aza-aldol-type reaction by nucleophilic attack by the enol form of the active methylene
group of 10 and intramolecular nucleophilic substitution at the ester carbonyl of 10 by
the generated amide anion. Depending on the substitution at the five-membered ring het￾Figure 1.2: Synthesis of pyrrole derivatives by MCR process – influence of active methylene group and
solvent on product formation.
4 Nirjhar Saha et al.erocycle, the products were obtained in the form of 3-hydroxy-1,5-dihydro-2H-pyrrol-2-
one or their enamine derivatives (resulting from the nucleophilic substitution of the OH
group of the enol form of the pyrrolidone by the amine reactant) wherein there is no
substituent at C-5 of the pyrrolidone ring or pyruvate substrate does not contain any sub￾stitution in the phospheneoxide moiety. Employing substituted BINOL-derived phospho￾ric acids as the organocatalyst, certain examples of the enantioselective variant of the
procedure were also reported. Additionally, 3-amino 1,5-dihydro-2H-pyrrol-2-one deriva￾tives have demonstrated effective synthetic intermediates in a number of diastereoselec￾tive transformations, using the chiral carbon present in the γ-lactam scaffold [49].
Under catalyst-free conditions, a new MCR for the synthesis of polysubstituted pyrroli￾dine derivatives (18) was reported. Carbon disulfide (14), secondary amines (15), ali￾phatic/alicyclic isocyanides (16), and gem-dicyano olefins (17) were used in a one-pot,
four-component condensation procedure at room temperature for diastereoselective
synthesis of polysubstituted pyrrolidines in 56–96% yields (Figure 1.5). It has been pro￾posed that the overall process includes an intramolecular cyclization that produces
Figure 1.3: Piperidine-catalyzed 3-MCR for the synthesis of polysubstituted pyrroles.
Figure 1.4: Bronsted acid-catalyzed 3-MCR for the synthesis of pyrrolinones.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 5the basic structure of pyrrolidine after a Mumm-type rearrangement with dithiocar￾bamates. The 4-MCR involving a domino reaction generates five new bonds in the de￾sired product: one carbon–sulfur, two carbon–nitrogen, and two carbon–carbon [51].
Through the effective one-pot condensation of 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds (19), acryl￾ates (20), and ammonium salts (21) with Cu(OAc)2H2O in HFIP as solvent, Huang and
coworkers [52] have generated a series of 2,3,5-trisubstituted pyrroles (22) (Figure 1.6).
The reaction results in the creation of carbon–carbon and carbon–nitrogen bonds
and offers a quick way to obtain highly functionalized pyrroles without the need for
additional raw material processing. The target products are produced using this ap￾proach in moderate-to-good yields and are compatible with a wide range of functional
groups. The reaction proceeds via the sequence: enamine formation, Michael addi￾tion, reductive elimination, and oxidation that has been demonstrated by some con￾trol experiment studies taking preformed enaminone of the β-diketone (that gave the
desired product) versus preformed Michael adduct of the β-diketone and the acrylate
ester that failed to produce the desired product and mass spectrometric identification
of the dihydroproduct [52]. The role of Cu(OAc)2 has been proposed to activate the ac￾rylate ester via π-coordination with the acrylate for the Michael addition with the en￾amine (formed from NH4OAc and the β-diketone) and in the final step to oxidize the
dihydroproduct. The solvent HFIP also plays an important role as no product forma￾tion took place in MeCN or DCM. Though the specific role of HFIP has not been pro￾posed it is likely that HFIP assists in the formation of the enaminone via converting
the β-diketone to its enol form through hydrogen bond (HB)-assisted keto-enol tau￾tomerism and thereafter activating the β-hydroxy enone (the enol form) for aza￾Michael-type addition due to the strong HB donor property of HFIP [53] and the feasi￾bility of promoting hetero (aza/thia)-Michael addition by imidazolium-based ionic
liquids (ILs) as well as water that are capable to activate enone carbonyl group via HB
formation [54–56].
The synthesis of substituted pyrroles tethered to pyrazole scaffold (25) using a
one-pot, four-component sequential process was designed using an effective green so￾nochemical method under bronsted acid catalysis. Under ultrasonic irradiation, this
reaction was conducted utilizing a variety of 5-amino-pyrazoles (23), aldehydes (12),
Figure 1.5: 4-MCR for the synthesis of pyrrolidines.
6 Nirjhar Saha et al.aliphatic/alicyclic isocyanides (16), and dialkyl acetylenedicarboxylates (24) in the pres￾ence of p-TsOH (5 mol%) leading to chemoselective formation of functionalized pyrroles
(25) in good to excellent yields (Figure 1.7). By forming two five-member heterocycles
that are joined in a single step and four new bonds (two carbon–nitrogen and two
carbon–carbon bonds), this waste-free (–H2O) reaction demonstrated a high atom econ￾omy. The synthesized 1-(pyrazol-5-yl)pyrrole derivatives exhibit intriguing fluorescence
characteristics. This four-component domino process mechanism comprised successive
processes including imination, dipolar cyclization, and [1,5]-H shift [57].
By performing the multicomponent tandem [2 + 2 + 1] annulation reaction using an alde￾hyde (12), glycine ester hydrochloride (26), and benzoylacetonitrile (8), functionalized 2-
pyrrolines (27) have been generated (Figure 1.8). The sequential one-pot annulation re￾action offered a highly stereoselective way to create fully substituted 2-pyrrolines with
two contiguous stereocenters from imino esters with benzoylacetonitriles in good yields
under benign conditions in the presence of a catalytic amount of bifunctional chiral
squaramide. The reaction had a moderate overall yield, but given that it produced two
new carbon–nitrogen bonds and one carbon–carbon bond, it was nevertheless surpris￾ingly efficient. Contrarily, chiral 2-pyrrolines were successfully synthesized from alde￾hyde and glycine ester hydrochloride using a Schiff base imino ester through individual
organocatalytic asymmetric domino annulation reactions, followed by a one-pot se￾quential process, yielding essentially only 2-pyrrolines (2S,3S) with er values as high as
94:6 and dr ratios >20:1 [58].
Figure 1.6: Synthesis of trisubstituted pyrroles.
Figure 1.7: Ultrasound-assisted one-pot domino 4-MCR for the synthesis of pyrazole-linked pyrroles.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 71.2.1.2 Pyrazole and its analogs
The bis(pyrazol-5-ol) derivatives (30) were generated through one-pot three-component
domino reaction of various aromatic aldehydes (12), ethyl acetoacetate (EAA) (28), and
hydrazine hydrate/phenyl hydrazine (29) in the presence of guanidine hydrochloride.
The condensation reaction between EAA and hydrazine, followed by the cyclization
process, built up the pyrazole scaffold. In the final step, the aldol-type condensation fur￾nishes the desired bis(pyrazol-5-ol) derivatives (Figure 1.9) [59]. The formation of pyrazole
ring from the reaction of EAA and hydrazine may also occur through simultaneous dou￾ble nucleophilic attack by the hydrazine that acts as bis-nucleophilic agent on two car￾bonyl groups of EAA (acting as bis-electrophile). This usually occurs during the reaction
of 1,2-diamines (e.g., o-phenylenediamine) with 1,2-dicarbonyls (e.g., ethyl glyoxalate) to
form quinoxalin-2(1H)-one ring system [60]. The reaction of pyrazole with the aldehyde
in a 2:1 molar ratio may also proceed analogous to the well-known bis-indolylmethane
formation process [61].
1.2.1.3 Imidazole and its analogs
Our group invented two solid-supported protic acids as heterogeneous catalysts sys￾tems namely HClO4–SiO2 (230–400) and HBF4–SiO2 (230–400) [62–64] that were found
to be versatile in catalytic potential [65–72] and attracted attention of other research￾ers globally for applications in organic synthesis. Using the heterogeneous catalyst
HBF4–SiO2 (230–400), one-pot three-component and four-component reactions were
Figure 1.8: Synthesis of polysubstituted pyrrolines.
8 Nirjhar Saha et al.carried out by our research group for the synthesis of trisubstituted (32) and tetrasub￾stituted imidazoles respectively (34). This heterogeneous catalyst was recycled and
reused up to five times without any loss in its catalytic potential. The MCR of benzil
derivatives (31), aromatic aldehydes (12), and ammonium acetates (21) constructed
the tri-aryl substituted imidazoles (32) while the MCR of 31, 12, benzyl amines (33),
and NH4OAc (21) selectively provided the N-benzylated imidazoles (34) using HBF4–
SiO2 catalyst. This was the first literature report which addressed the selective forma￾tion of the tetrasubstituted imidazoles within the competitive formation of the both
tri- and tetrasubstituted imidazoles based on the effect of the catalyst. Detailed reac￾tion condition optimization study suggested that the LiBF4 was also the efficient
catalyst with higher amount of catalyst loading for the synthesis of trisubstituted imi￾dazoles under homogeneous reaction condition. In case of tetrasubstituted imidazole
synthesis, Zn(BF4)2 with higher amount of catalyst loading was efficient in catalyzing
the 4-MCR. Both of the LiBF4 and Zn(BF4)2 work under homogeneous condition, and
there is no scope of recyclability. In contrast, HBF4–SiO2 catalytic system was recycled
and reused in the MCR (Figure 1.10) [73].
The efficient synthesis of tetrasubstituted imidazoles (39) was carried out through
one-pot, four-component domino reaction of hydroxylamine (35), cyclic-1,3-diketones
(36), benzyl/arylcyanide (37), and arylglyoxals (38) in ethanol under reflux condition
(Figure 1.11). Reaction starts with the nucleophilic addition of hydroxylamine to nitrile de￾rivatives for in situ generation of amidine intermediate. In a simultaneous cascade, the
Claisen–Schmidt-type condensation between the 1,3-dicarbonyl compound and glyoxal
furnishes the corresponding enones. The aza-Michael addition of amidine intermediate to
the β-carbon of enones, followed by cyclocondensation forms the desired imidazole deriv￾atives. The notable advantages of this reported methodology are metal-free reaction con￾dition, easy work-up process, higher yield of the product, and shorter reaction time [74].
The Pd-catalyzed one-pot 3-MCR involving methyl α-isocyanoacetates (40), pri￾mary aromatic amines (11), and sulfonyl azides (41) yielded the tetrasubstituted imi￾dazolone derivatives (42) via formation of the sulfonyl guanidine and Pd-nitrene
intermediates (Figure 1.12). This methodology offers a broad substrate scope, low
amount of catalyst, and ligand loading [75].
Figure 1.9: Guanidine-catalyzed one-pot MCR for the synthesis of bis-pyrazole derivatives.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 9The preformed amidine (43), synthesized by the reaction of amine and nitrile deriva￾tives, was treated with aromatic amine (11) and glyoxal (38) in the presence of catalytic
amount of disodium phosphate (Na2HPO4) to synthesize another set of tetrasubstituted
imidazoles (44) through one-pot, three-component domino reaction (Figure 1.13). Ini￾Figure 1.11: Catalyst-free four-component synthesis of imidazoles.
Figure 1.10: Heterogeneous catalyst HBF4–SiO2 (230–400)-catalyzed one-pot MCR for the synthesis of tri￾and tetrasubstituted imidazoles.
Figure 1.12: Multicomponent synthesis of imidaolones.
10 Nirjhar Saha et al.tially, the condensation reaction between the glyoxal derivatives and aromatic amines
in situ generated the imine intermediate which undergoes nucleophilic addition with
the amidines. Finally, the intramolecular cyclocondensation process accomplishes the
formation of tetrasubstituted imidazoles [76].
1.2.1.4 Tetrazole and its analogs
Tetrazole scaffold is a biorelevant privileged structural feature found in various bioac￾tive molecules [77, 78] and the one-pot multicomponent domino reaction is a popular
strategy for construction of this bioactive scaffold [79]. The Zn(II)-catalyzed Ugi-type
MCR was explored for the synthesis of tetrazole derivatives. The MCR of isocyanides
(16), sulfonamides (45), aldehydes (12), and sodium azide (46) in the presence of Zn(II)
catalysis formed the desired tetrazoles (47) (Figure 1.14). Metal Lewis acid-assisted elec￾trophile activation of aldehydes initiates the imine formation between the aldehydes
and sulfonamides. In the next step, the ZnCl2-promoted imine activation favors the nu￾cleophilic addition of isocyanides to the imine center. The nucleophilic addition of the
azide to the nitrilium moiety and subsequent sigmatropic rearrangement constructs the
desired tetrazoles [80].
Asymmetric synthesis of tetrazole compounds (50) bearing the chiral center was carried
out through one-pot MCR of isocyanides (16), silyl azides (48), and alkylidene malonate de￾rivatives (49) in the presence of chiral Mg(II)-N,Nʹ-dioxide as the catalyst (Figure 1.15) [81].
Figure 1.13: Disodium phosphate-catalyzed synthesis of imidazoles.
Figure 1.14: Metal Lewis acid-catalyzed 4-MCR for the synthesis of tetrazoles.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 111.2.1.5 Isoxazole and its analogs
The cobalt acetylacetonate-catalyzed 4-MCR of perfluoroalkyl reagent/Togni’s reagent
(51/55), styrenes (52), azides (46), and TBHP (53) furnished the one-pot domino synthesis
of isoxazole derivatives (54/56) via radical pathway (Figure 1.16). The reaction proceeds
through the Co(II)-assisted C–I bond cleavage followed by the addition of styrene via
radical mediated C–C bond formation. C–O bond formation was achieved through radi￾cal coupling with TBHP. In the next step, the DABCO-catalyzed Kornblum−DeLaMare
rearrangement followed by dehalogenative aza-Michael addition reaction and intramo￾lecular cyclization via N–O bond formation provided the desired isoxazole derivatives
through one-pot MCR approach. Togni’s reagent was also used as trifluoromethyl source
for the synthesis of isoxazole azides [82].
Figure 1.15: Synthesis of chiral tetrazole derivatives.
Figure 1.16: Co-catalyzed synthesis of isoxazoles via 4-MCR.
12 Nirjhar Saha et al.A synthetic enzyme (synzyme) was explored as the catalyst to promote the one-pot 3-
MCR process for synthesis of isoxazol-5(4H)-one derivatives (57) involving the reaction
of aromatic aldehydes (12), EAA (28), and hydroxylamine (41) (Figure 1.17). The synzyme
acts as the organocatalyst and structurally, it is the hybrid of polyethylene imine (PEI)
and imidazolium IL. This synzyme is entitled as “PEI-IL.” IL is a well-established orga￾nocatalyst in the field of organic synthesis [30, 54, 55, 61, 83–87]. In the course of the
reaction, the IL component activates the electrophilic carbonyl group through the hy￾drogen bonding by its C-2 hydrogen. This activation promotes the oxime formation by
the reaction of β-ketoesters and hydroxylamines. The imine-enamine tautomerism
and subsequent cyclization constructs the isoxazolone scaffold. In the final step, the
PEI-IL-promoted aldol-type condensation between aldehydes and isoxazolone fur￾nished the desired product. The catalytic system could be reused up to 15 times with￾out any notable loss of its activity. The detailed mechanistic course of the reaction
was established by performing the ESI-MS study. The antimicrobial abilities of all syn￾thesized derivatives against Gram-positive and Gram-negative strains were also eval￾uated in this work [88].
1.2.1.6 Thiazolidine derivatives
The synthesis of 2,3-disubstituted thiazolidinones was achieved by our group through a
3-MCR process catalyzed by protic acids adsorbed on solid supports (Figure 1.18) [89].
The scope and limitations of various protic acids was assessed and the relative cata￾lytic efficiency followed the order TfOH > HClO4 > H2SO4 ~ p-TsOH > MsOH ~ HBF4 > TFA ~
AcOH and is in accordance with the relative acid strength. The catalytic power of the
protic acid increased significantly when adsorbed on solid supports for which silica gel
of different mesh sizes (60–120, 100–200, 230–400), different varieties of chromatography
grade alumina (acidic, basic, neutral), montmorrilonite clays (K-10, KSF), zeolites [Y, K/L
(SAR 6.8), ZSM (SAR 6.8), NH4-Y], and amberlite were used. Silica gel (230–400) was the
most effective solid support offering the relative catalytic efficiency of various protic
acids adsorbed on it as HClO4–SiO2 > TfOH–SiO2 ≫ H2SO4–SiO2 > p-TsOH–SiO2 > MsOH–
SiO2 ~ HBF4–SiO2 > TFA–SiO2 ~ HOAc–SiO2. The role of silica gel to enhance the catalytic
power of the protic acid was proposed due to its ability to undergo complex formation
Figure 1.17: Synzyme-catalyzed construction of isoxazoles.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 13with the protic acid through the Si center (Figure 1.19) that accounts for the better cata￾lytic power of HClO4–SiO2 compared to TfOH–SiO2 though TfOH is a stronger protic acid.
Due to strong electron withdrawing ability of the F3C group the S = O groups in TfOH co￾ordinates with Si less effectively. On the other hand, due to the presence of three oxygen
atoms in HClO4 versus only two such oxygen atoms in TfOH, the HClO4 undergoes more
effective coordination with the Si of SiO2 [89].
The catalyst of HClO4–SiO2 could be recycled for five consecutive reactions.
1.2.1.7 Pyridine and its analogs
The MCR strategy has been found to be the popular approach for the construction of
pyridine scaffold [90, 91]. The one-pot three-component domino reaction of aromatic
aldehydes (12), aliphatic/aromatic amines (11), and the EAA (28) was performed by our
research group in aqueous medium for the stereoselective synthesis of tetrahydropyri￾dine derivatives (60) (Figure 1.20) [36]. In view of the necessity of a solubility enhancer to
enable reaction in aqueous medium of the water immiscible reactants and our earlier
results in the beneficial effect of the surfactant SDS during benzothiazepine synthesis in
aqueous medium [92] and of SDOSS for benzothiazole synthesis in aqueous medium at
room temperature [93] rather than under reflux [94], though the specific role of SDOSS
was proved to be dioxygen activator in addition to being the solubility enhancer [93],
Figure 1.18: 3-MCR strategy for construction of thiazolidinone heterocycle catalyzed by solid-supported
protic acid.
Figure 1.19: The role of silica gel in enhancing the catalytic power of the protic acids.
14 Nirjhar Saha et al.various surfactants (anionic, cationic, and neutral) were tried for the 3-MCR process to
synthesize the tetrahydropyridine derivatives (60) in aqueous medium. In this MCR, the
use of SDOSS was the most effective. The systematic study of the reaction in the pres￾ence of other anionic surfactants, nonionic surfactants, cationic surfactants, and non￾aqueous reaction media suggested that the combination of SDOSS in H2O works best for
the synthesis of tetrahydropyridine derivatives. A detailed mechanistic investigation
was made to understand whether the reaction proceeds following the Knoevenagel con￾densation-aza-Diels–Alder reaction (ADR) sequence (Path A) or the tandem inter- and
intramolecular Mannich reaction route (Path B). Based on the experimental results of
the mechanistic investigation the SDOSS-catalyzed reaction has been proposed to
proceed via tandem inter- and intramolecular Mannich-type reactions (Path B) in￾volving the enaminone and imine formation by the reaction of aniline/β-ketoester
and aniline–aldehyde, respectively. The nucleophilic addition of enaminones to the
imine and subsequently condensation/cyclization step stereoselectively formed the
tetrahydropyridines [36].
Persubstituted 1,4-dihydropyridine derivatives (62) were obtained by the microwave￾assisted one-pot four-component reaction of anilines (11), malononitriles (61), aro￾matic aldehydes (12), and dimethylacetylene dicarboxylate (24) in ethanol at room
temperature (Figure 1.21). The reaction pathway is initiated with the Knoevenagel con￾densation between the malononitriles and aromatic aldehydes for in situ formation of
the α,β-unsaturated nitrile derivatives. In the ongoing parallel cascade reaction, the
nucleophilic addition of amines to the electron deficient alkynes furnishes the corre￾sponding enaminones intermediate. The in situ generated α,β-unsaturated nitrile and
the enaminones undergo Michael addition reaction followed by the cyclization proce￾dure to synthesize the desired dihydropyridine derivatives in good to excellent yield.
The distinct benefits of this reaction methodology are the wide substrate scope, non￾toxic substrates and reagents, shorter reaction time, higher yield of the products, no
Figure 1.20: Aqueous SDOSS as catalyst for the stereoselective synthesis of tetrahydropyridines.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 15chromatographic purification, operated at room temperature, and environmental￾friendly reaction conditions [95].
Metal-organic framework (MOF) was applied as heterogeneous catalyst with sulfonic
acid moiety as Bronsted acid functionality to carry out the one-pot three-component
reaction of aromatic aldehydes (12), 1,3-diketo compounds (19), and ammonium ace￾tate (21) as nitrogen source for the synthesis of 1,4-dihydropyridines (63) via Hantzsch
reaction. The MOF termed as MIL-101-SO3H plays the role of heterogeneous Bronsted
acid to activate the electrophilic carbonyl groups. The MOF-catalyzed activation of
carbonyl groups of 1,3-diketo derivatives promotes its participation in both the Knoe￾venagel condensation with the aldehydes and the enaminones synthesis with the am￾monium salts (Figure 1.22). The enaminones undergo Michael addition reaction with
the Knoevenagel product and subsequently the SO3H-promoted cyclocondensation
step provided the desired 1,4-dihydropyridine derivatives. The heterogeneous catalyst
was recovered and recycled upto eight times without any loss in the catalytic poten￾tial. The structural characteristics of the heterogeneous catalyst were confirmed by
the FTIR, PXRD, and SEM analyses [96].
Figure 1.21: Microwave-assisted one-pot 4-MCR for the synthesis of 1,4-dihydropyridine derivatives.
Figure 1.22: MOF catalysis in the construction of 1,4-dihydropyridines.
16 Nirjhar Saha et al.Chemoselective synthesis of two different types of pyridines (64,65) (persubstituted and
tetrasubstituted pyridines) were reported by Du et al. [97] One-pot three-component
reaction of 1,3-diketones (19), α,β-unsaturated nitro derivatives (2), and aromatic al￾dehydes (12) under solvent-free condition or in propylene carbonate provided the
nonfused pyridines in good to excellent yields (Figure 1.23). In the reaction mechanistic
course, both the reactions follow the identical pathway upto the stage of the formation
of 1,4-dihydropyridines. In the final step of the pyridine formation, the chemoselectivity
of the reaction determined the fate of the product formation. The base-promoted
Knoevenagel condensation between 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds and aromatic aldehydes
in situ generates the α,β-unsaturated carbonyl derivatives which further participates in
the Michael addition reaction with α,β-unsaturated nitro derivatives. The intramolecular
cyclization and dehydration process under heating forms the 1,4-dihydropyridines. In
the final stage of the reaction pathway for the aromatization of 1,4-dihydropyridines, the
base-promoted denitration of 1,4-dihydropyridines furnished the tetrasubstituted pyri￾dines while the air-mediated dehydrogenative oxidation of 1,4-dihydropyridines pro￾vided the persubstituted pyridines. This protocol is effective for rapid parallel synthesis
of both persubstituted pyridines and tetrasubstituted pyridines at the same time [97].
Deng and coworkers [98] reported the transition-metal-free one-pot three-component
reaction of aromatic aldehydes (12), aryl methyl ketones (66), and ammonium iodide/
acetate (67/21) (nitrogen source). The MCR gave different products based on the nitro￾gen source and oxidant used. Pyridine (68) ring formation took place with ammonium
iodide as the nitrogen source and DMSO as oxidant. There is change of product selec￾tivity toward pyrimidine (69) ring formation when NaIO4 was used as the oxidant and
ammonium acetate as the nitrogen source (Figure 1.24) [98].
Four different types of pyridin-2-ones (71–74) were synthesized by the one-pot
MCRs of 2-cyanoacetamides (70), aromatic aldehydes/acetone, and acetone in the pres￾ence of piperidine as base (Figure 1.25). Piperidine promoted the aldol condensation
between the 2-cyanoacetamides and acetone followed by dehydration to synthesize
Figure 1.23: Synthesis of trifluoromethylated pyridine derivatives via MCR approach.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 17Figure 1.24: The MCR synthesis of pyridines and pyrimidines.
Figure 1.25: Regioselective synthesis of piperidine derivatives.
18 Nirjhar Saha et al.the α-cyano enone moiety which further participates in the Michael addition reaction
with the enol form of acetone. The intramolecular cyclization of the Michael adduct
completes the piperidine ring construction. Depending upon the regioselectivity of de￾hydration step, two types of pyridinone formation are possible. The vicinal dehydra￾tion process creates the endocyclic olefins, while the geminal dehydration produces
the exocyclic olefins in the structure of pyridinones [99].
The one-pot three-component reaction of the amine 11, ethyl acetylene dicarboxy￾late 24, and diethyl ethoxymethylenemalonate 75 under solvent-free conditions af￾forded two different types of pyridone derivatives such as pyridine-2-one (76) and
pyridine-4-one (77) (Figure 1.26). This base-promoted chemoselective pyridone synthesis
proceeds through the Michael addition/ethanol elimination/intermolecular cyclization
cascade. The substitution pattern at the aniline derivatives controls the chemoselectiv￾ity and type of pyridone formation. Particularly, the presence of halogen group at the
ortho position of the aniline leads to the formation of pyridine-4-one derivatives [100].
The MCR of 2-diphenylphosphoryloxy-1,3-dienes (78), aldehydes, and sulfonylated
amines carried out in the presence of boron trifluoride enabled the construction of
tetrahydropyridine derivatives (79) (Figure 1.27). The reaction proceeds via the ADRs
between the in situ-generated imines and 2-diphenylphosphoryloxy-1,3-dienes. The
chemical stability of the dienes permits this MCR to take place without any special
precautions [101].
Figure 1.26: Chemoselective pyridone synthesis via 3-MCR approach.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 19Wang resin-supported sulfonic acid was utilized as heterogeneous Bronsted acid cata￾lyst for the construction of tetrasubstituted pyridine derivatives (80) through one-pot
four-component reaction of aromatic amines (11), aldehydes (12), acetophenone deriv￾atives (66), and malonitrile derivatives (61) under ultrasound irradiation (Figure 1.28).
Water was opted as the green solvent to carry out the synthesis under aerobic condi￾tion. The reaction process initiates with the ultrasound-assisted Knoevenagel conden￾sation between the malononitriles (61) and aldehydes (12) to in situ form the α,β￾unsaturated nitrile derivatives which undergo Bronsted acid-catalyzed Michael addi￾tion reaction with the enol form of acetophenone derivatives. The nucleophilic addi￾tion of aniline derivatives to the nitrile moiety of the Michael adduct, followed by
Bronsted acid-promoted cyclocondensation reaction furnishes the 1,4-dihydropyridine
derivatives. In the final step, the aerobic oxidation of 1,4-dihydropyridines accom￾plished the aromatization process and resulted desired pyridine derivatives 113. The
Wang resin-bound sulfonic acid catalyst was recycled and reused upto four times
without any significant loss in the catalytic activity. These synthesized pyridine deriv￾atives were subjected to in vitro biological evaluation against SIRT1 suggesting the
bioactive nature of the synthesized compounds [102].
Another one-pot MCR of aromatic aldehydes (12), aniline derivatives (11), and EAA de￾rivatives (28) were carried out in the presence of immobilized lipase enzyme which is
adsorbed on the magnetic halloysite nanotubes (Figure 1.29). This magnetic biocatalyst
included certain advantages such as higher catalytic efficiency, ease of recyclability of
the heterogeneous catalyst through magnetic separation, and use of nontoxic biocata￾Figure 1.27: Synthesis of tetrahydropyridine derivatives through aza-Diels–Alder reaction.
Figure 1.28: Ultrasound-promoted synthesis of pyridines through 4-MCR approach.
20 Nirjhar Saha et al.lyst for the synthesis. The magnetic field susceptible catalyst was recovered through
magnetic separation and reused for six cycles without any significant loss in the prod￾uct yield. This synthetic methodology was also scaled up to gram scale to check the
feasibility of the protocol at industrial scale [103].
The one-pot, 4-MCR of diarylethanones (81), aryl methyl ketones (66), aromatic alde￾hydes (12), and ammonium acetate under solvent-free condition has been reported to
form 2,3,4,6-tetraaryl pyridines (82) (Figure 1.30).
Though broad functional group tolerability, aerial solvent-free reaction condition, and
the feasibility of the synthesis of multiarylsubstituted pyridines from readily available
substrates are some notable features of this protocol, the product yield is poor with
ortho-substituted aryl aldehydes (e.g., the reaction with 2-methyl benzaldehyde gave
17% yield of 82 and no desired product formation took place with 2-methoxy benzalde￾hyde) [104]. It has been demonstrated that the product formation takes place through
Knoevenagel condensation involving the diaryl ethenone 81 and the aldehyde 12 fol￾lowed by Michael addition to this in situ generated 1,3-diarylpropenone with the en￾amine formed by the reaction of the aryl methyl ketone 66 and ammonia (generated
Figure 1.29: One-pot 3-MCR approach for the synthesis of tetrahydropyridine-3-carboxylates.
Figure 1.30: The 4-MCR for synthesis of tetraaryl pyridines.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 21from NH4OAc on heating). The resultant Michael adduct undergoes cyclodehydration
via intramolecular nucleophilic attack by the nitrogen electron lone pair on the ketone
carbonyl to form the corresponding tetraaryl dihydropyridine which on dehydrogena￾tive/oxidative aromatization affords the tetraarylpyridines 82 [104].
The development of a multicomponent domino reaction is an encouraging step
toward the greater goal of sustainable synthesis. The GaI3-catalyzed high-yielding, sol￾vent-free, multicomponent domino synthesis of functionalized pyridines (85) was re￾ported by our research group [37] performing the one-pot three-component reaction
of (E)-3-(dimethylamino)-1-aryl/heteroaryl-prop-2-en-1-ones (83), 1,3-dicarbonyl com￾pounds (84), and ammonium acetate (21) as nitrogen precursor (Figure 1.31). The re￾quired starting material (E)-3-(dimethylamino)-1-aryl/heteroaryl-prop-2-en-1-ones (83)
could be conveniently synthesized by organocatalytic procedures developed by us
[105, 106]. This MCR was explored in the various metal Lewis acid salts such as metal
perchlorates, triflates, halides, and tetrafluoroborates, and this exploration study sug￾gested GaI3 as optimum catalyst to carry out the reaction. The different possible reac￾tion pathways were envisioned and investigated through GC-MS study by identifying
the crucial intermediates of the reaction pathway. The mechanistic course of most
plausible pathway could be outlined as the intermediate formation of imine or imi￾nium salt by the reaction of the 1,3-dicarbonyl compound with ammonia which par￾ticipates in the domino nucleophilic Michael reaction to the (2E)-3-(dimethylamino)
prop-2-en-1-one by its active methylene carbon through its enamine form followed by
intramolecular cyclization and aromatization. The role of different ammonium salts as
a nitrogen source was explored and NH4OAc was found to be the best one. Further, the
effect of acetate anion on the progress of reaction was studied and its role in cyclization
and subsequent aromatization was established. [37].
1.2.1.8 Pyrimidine and its analogs
The Biginelli reaction of aldehydes (12), 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds (84), and urea/thiourea
(86) was performed in the presence of catalytic amount of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium
(bmim) cation containing ILs under solvent-free condition at 100 °C to generate the dihy￾dropyrimidine/thiopyrimidines 87 (Figure 1.32) [30]. The investigation of the reaction in
Figure 1.31: GaI3-catalyzed solvent-free, multicomponent domino synthesis of functionalized pyridines.
22 Nirjhar Saha et al.the presence of various other bmim cation-based ILs with varying associated counter
anion indicated that the [bmim][MeSO4] is the most-efficient organocatalyst for this pur￾pose. The presence of the C-2 hydrogen of the imidazolium moiety in the IL is essential as
it participates in the H-bonding to activate the electrophile and simultaneously the
counter anion part activates the nucleophile. This simultaneous dual activation of the nu￾cleophile and electrophile facilitates the reaction progression. In order to establish the
crucial role of C-2 hydrogen in this Biginelli reaction, various [bmim]-based ILs lacking
the C-2 hydrogen (by having a methyl group at C-2 position of the corresponding imidazo￾lium cation moiety and denoted as bmim cation) was utilized to perform this Biginelli
reaction. The inferior yields of the product indicated the crucial role of C-2 hydrogen in
catalyzing the Biginelli reaction. The reaction proceeds through the imine formation in￾volving the reaction of aldehyde and (thio) urea which might not require any catalytic
assistance by the IL. In the next step, the IL catalyzed the nucleophilic addition of the
imine to the β-carbonyl compounds followed by cyclocondensation resulting in the dihy￾dropyrimidinone formation (87). The IL was recycled and reused for next five Biginelli
reactions. This synthetic methodology was also extended for the synthesis of bioactive
dihydropyrimidinones such as monastrol and enastron [30].
Heterogeneous Bronsted acid catalysis was explored for the multicomponent Biginelli
reaction of aldehydes (12), EAA (28), and urea/thiourea (80) to synthesize the substi￾tuted dihydropyrimidinones (88) in good–to-excellent yield under solvent-free condi￾tion (Figure 1.33). The heterogeneous Cr-based MOF catalyst added the advantage in
terms of catalyst recyclability and enhanced catalytic efficacy. The investigation of
mechanistic pathway of the reaction revealed the engagement of both the Lewis and
Brønsted acid sites of the MOF in the activation of the electrophilic centers during the
course of the reaction [107].
Figure 1.32: Ionic liquid-catalyzed Biginelli synthesis of pyrimidinones.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 231.2.2 Fused aza-heterocycles
1.2.2.1 Indole and its analogs
The organocatalytic MCR of 1,2,3-tricarbonyl compounds (89), aromatic amines (11),
and cyclic-1,3-diketone (36) was performed to synthesize the N-aryl indoles (90). Ini￾tially, cyclic mono enaminones, formed in situ by the reaction of anilines and 1,3-
cyclohexanedione, react with the β-ketoesters through its nucleophilic α-carbon of
enone moiety to generate the carbinol intermediate (Figure 1.34). In the next step, the
intramolecular cyclization and subsequent elimination of water provide the desired
indoles. The unprecedented features of this methodology are application of second￾generation chiral spirocyclic phosphoric acid as organocatalyst, improved enantiose￾lectivity and wide substrate scope [108].
Rh(III)-catalyzed one-pot three-component synthesis of isoindolinone derivatives
(92) were carried out by performing the reaction of aromatic aldehydes (12), 2-
aminopyridines (91), and ethyl acrylate (20). In the presence of copper acetate as oxi￾dant, the Rh(III)-catalyzed dehydrogenative amide formation was occurred by the reac￾tion of 2-aminopyridines and aromatic aldehydes (Figure 1.35). The amine group of
amide functionality acts as the potential directing group for the metal-catalyzed ortho
C–H bond activation. The C–H bond activation favors the alkene insertion step by the
Figure 1.33: MOF-promoted Biginelli synthesis of pyrimidinones.
Figure 1.34: Synthesis of indole derivatives via 3-MCR approach.
24 Nirjhar Saha et al.reaction of rhodacycle and the acrylates. In the final step, the aza-Michael addition com￾pletes the annulation process to build up the isoindolinone scaffold. This mild, operation￾ally multicomponent process transforms a wide variety of commercially available
aldehydes into the corresponding γ-lactams in good yields. Notably, the anxiolytic drugs
pagoclone and pazinaclone can be directly prepared by utilizing this methodology [109].
The 4-oxo-tetrahydroindoles (94) were obtained by the Bronsted acid-catalyzed one￾pot three-component reaction of the cyclic 1,3-diketone dimedone (36), amines (11),
and α-haloketones (93) under ball milling conditions (Figure 1.36). The present protocol
for the preparation of 4-oxotetrahydroindoles offers several advantages such as mild
reaction conditions, improved selectivity, higher yields of the product, solvent-free reac￾tion conditions, catalyst (sulfamic acid) recycling successfully for the next five cycles,
and the use of ball milling as nonconventional energy source [110].
Tetracyclic benzodiazepine-fused isoindolinone scaffold (97) was constructed by the
one-pot three-component MCR of 2-formylbenzoic acid (95), aryl methyl ketones (66),
and o-phenylenediamine (96) in the presence of mesoporous silica nanoparticles
(MSNs) as catalyst (Figure 1.37). The reaction starts with imine formation between o￾pheylenediamine and 2-formylbenzoic acid. The intramolecular cyclization of the imine
intermediate by nucleophilic addition of the carboxylic OH to the imine bond generates
the hemi-aminal which undergoes nucleophilic attack via the enol form of the aryl
methyl ketone to form the lactone and liberates the o-pheylenediamine. The nucleo￾philic addition of one of the NH2 groups of o-pheylenediamine on the side chain car￾bonyl group of the lactone intermediate forming the corresponding imine and that
Figure 1.35: Rh-catalyzed isoindolinone derivatives via 3-MCR.
Figure 1.36: Sulfamic acid-catalyzed 3-MCR for the synthesis of tetrahydroindoles under ball milling.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 25facilitates intramolecular nucleophilic attack on the lactone carbonyl group by the re￾maining NH2 group of the o-phenylenediamine followed by elimination of water mole￾cule forms the desired product. Though wide substrate scope, recyclability of the
catalyst, and applicability in gram-scale synthesis are few attractive features of this pro￾tocol, it requires high reaction temperature and prolonged reaction period [111].
1.2.2.2 Pyrrole fused aza-heterocycles
The synthesis of pyrimidine tethered naphthoquinone-fused pyrroles (101) was accom￾plished by the author using iodine-mediated multicomponent processes. The relating
three-component hybrid molecules with naphthoquinone-fused pyrroles tethered with
a barbituric acid moiety are generated when aryl methyl ketones (66) or terminal aryl
alkynes (98) react with molecular iodine in DMSO, followed by the successive addition
of barbituric acids (99) and 2-amino-1,4-naphthoquinone (100). This three-component
reaction forms three new bonds (two carbon–carbon and one carbon–nitrogen) in one￾pot via metal-free C-H oxidation and multicomponent cyclization (Figure 1.38) [112]. Sim￾ilarly, the similar molecules can be made by reacting arylglyoxals (1), 99 and 100 in re￾fluxing methanol in the presence of catalytic amounts of iodine. These techniques stand
out for their one-pot metal-free approach, high yields, adaptability to a variety of aceto￾phenones, phenylacetylenes, and arylglyoxals, simplicity of product purification, and in￾corporation of naphthoquinone, pyrrole, and pyrimidine moieties.
A pseudo-5-MCR process involving double decarboxylative 1,3-dipolar cycloaddi￾tion of azomethine ylides and olefinic oxyindoles during the reaction of the aldehyde
12, glycine (102), and alkylidene oxyindoles (103) constitute the diastereoselective syn￾thesis of bispiro[oxindole-pyrrolidine]s (104). The primary diastereomers are distinct
compounds having a plane of symmetry and a butterfly shape. To accelerate the reac￾tion, reusable zeolite HY acid was used as the catalyst (Figure 1.39). It is a successive
double [3 + 2] cycloaddition that involves two azomethine ylides that are not stabi￾lized. The bulk of the reactants is contained in the product structure for mass effi￾ciency, intermediate purification is not required to reduce waste, and only 1 equiv. of
Figure 1.37: Mesoporous silica nanoparticle-catalyzed 3-MCR for the synthesis of fused indoles.
26 Nirjhar Saha et al.CO2 and 2 equiv. of H2O are produced as byproducts are the major positive aspects of
this reaction [113].
Yan and co-workers [114] have reported the 3-MCR involving various types of aryl￾glyoxal monohydrates (1), ethyl 2-(pyridin-2-yl)acetates (105), and different heterocyclic
ketene aminals (106) in ethanol to generate 4-(pyridin-2-ylmethyl)-2-aminopyrroles
(107) containing the fused pyrrole ring system (Figure 1.40). In this reaction two new
carbon–carbon and one carbon–nitrogen bonds are formed. Thirty-four compounds
with different substitutions on the ethyl 2-(pyridin-2-yl) acetates (105) and arylglyoxal
(1) were synthesized with good yield. The reaction was also carried out using water or
Figure 1.38: Synthesis of naphthoquinone-fused pyrroles via 3-MCR approach.
Figure 1.39: Spirocyclization of oxyindoles for the construction of fused pyrolidines.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 27mixture of water with ethanol as the solvents but the product was obtained in poor
yield. The detailed reaction mechanism was studied using HRMS.
1.2.2.3 Pyrazole-fused aza-heterocycles
The 3-MCR of aryl aldehyde (12), dimedone (36), and 5-amino-3-methyl-1-phenylpyrazole
(108) produced the new pyrazolo-[3,4-b]-quinoline scaffold (109) (Figure 1.41). The pyra￾zolo-[3,4-b]-quinolines (151) were synthesized using the catalyst-free microwave-assisted
one pot multicomponent reaction performed at room temperature in aqueous ethanol
affording excellent yields (91–98%). The protocol’s distinctive features include opera￾tional simplicity, ease of handling, a one-step simple workup method, mild reaction con￾ditions, short reaction time, good selectivity, and no by-product generation [115].
The chemo- and diastereoselective construction of pyrazole-fused tetrahydropyridines
(113) was achieved through the one-pot 3-MCR of aminopyrazole derivatives (110), sali￾cylaldehyde derivatives (111), and styrenesulfonyl or cinnamoyl chloride (112) in water
that proceeds via intramolecular ADR (Figure 1.42). The aminopyrazoles (110) reacts
with the in situ generated O-sulfonylated intermediate 111a to generate the correspond￾ing imine intermediate (110a). In the final step, the intramolecular ADR accomplished
the tetrahyhydropyridine ring formation in 113 [116].
Figure 1.40: Synthesis of fused pyrroles via multicomponent reaction approach.
Figure 1.41: Synthesis of pyrazole-fused dihydropyridines under microwave irradiation.
28 Nirjhar Saha et al.The synthesis of pyrano[2,3-c]-pyrazoles (114) was achieved via the one pot four￾component domino reaction of substituted aldehydes (12), malononitrile (61), hydra￾zine hydrate (29), and EAA (28) promoted by the MOF catalyst MIL-53(Fe) in ethanol
at room temperature (Figure 1.43). The Lewis acidic character of MIL-53(Fe) promotes
its strong coordination with the carbonyl group of aromatic aldehydes to activate the
electrophilic carbon favoring the Knoevenagel reaction between the aromatic alde￾hydes and malonitrile to furnish the α,β-unsaturated nitrile derivatives. In a parallel
set of reaction in the same pot, the cyclocondensation reaction between EAA and hy￾drazine generates, in situ, the pyrazolone derivative. The MOF assisted Michael addi￾tion reaction between the pyrazolone and the α,β-unsaturated nitrile, followed by
cyclization led to the desired fused pyrazole derivatives. The MOF MIL‐53(Fe) was re￾cycled for six times without any significant loss in its catalytic potential. The notable
features of the present protocol are the short reaction times, simple workup, high
yields, no chromatographic purification, and recoverability of the catalyst [117].
Figure 1.42: Synthesis of pyrazole-fused piperidines through multicomponent reaction.
Figure 1.43: MOF-catalyzed room temperature synthesis of pyrazole fused pyrans via 4-MCR.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 29The similar type of reaction was also explored in the presence of sulfonated carboxy￾methylcellulose (SCMC) as heterogeneous organocatalyst. The one-pot four-component
synthesis of pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazole (114) was carried out by the reaction of substituted
aldehydes (12), malononitrile (61), hydrazine hydrate (29), and EAA (28) in ethanol (Fig￾ure 1.44). The synthesized SCMC catalyst was well characterized using FT-IR spectros￾copy, energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern, scanning
electron microscopy (SEM), and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The sulfonic acid
moiety of SCMC forms hydrogen bonding with the carbonyl groups and nitrile groups
to enhance the electrophilicity of these electrophiles. The key features of this methodol￾ogy are operational simplicity, use of a stable, recoverable, and nontoxic catalyst, easy
purification of the product by nonchromatographic methods, high yields, environment￾friendly reaction, and utilization of green solvent as reaction media [118].
1.2.2.4 Imidazole-fused aza-heterocycles
1.2.2.4.1 Benzimidazoles
The benzimidazole represents the widely used/found imidazole-fused aza-heterocyclic
system. The most convenient way to construct the benzimidazole scaffold is the dehydra￾tive cyclo-condensation of o-phenylenediamines (96) with aldehydes (12) (Figure 1.45).
While the reaction of o-phenylenediamine (96) with an aldehyde (12) to form the
benzimidazole (115) ideally would involve one molecule of each of the reactants and
may not qualify as a MCR process in reality this cyclo-condensation process is inher￾ently multicomponent and may give rise to the formation of the corresponding benz￾Figure 1.44: SCMC-catalyzed 4-MCR for the synthesis of pyrazole-fused pyrans.
Figure 1.45: Construction of benzimidazole ring system.
30 Nirjhar Saha et al.imidazole (115) and 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazole (116) (Figure 1.46). The formation
of 115 is a two-component reaction but the formation of 116 is 3-MCR.
The competitive formation of the 1.2-disubstituted benzimidazole 116 generally occurs
[relative amounts may vary with the reactivity of the substrates (o-phenylenediamine
and the aldehyde) based on electronic and steric factors, and reaction condition used,
for example, nature of catalyst, reaction temperature, solvent, etc.] even when the start￾ing o-phenylenediamine (96) and the aldehyde (12) are taken in 1:1 molar ratio. Thus,
this strategy would be associated with the product selectivity, an issue that remained
unaddressed till our group deliberated on this aspect [119]. In this context, an efficient
catalytic process for 3-MCR involving the reaction of o-phenylenediamines (96) and al￾dehydes (12) used in 1:2 molar ratio was discovered by our group (Figure 1.47).
The selectivity of formation of 2-substituted benzimidazole and 1,2-disubstituted benz￾imidazole was studied in details using various heterogeneous catalysts such as perchloric
acid adsorbed on different solid supports, for example, chromatographic silica gels
(60–120, 100–200, and 340–400 mesh sizes), chromatographic alumina (acidic, basic, neu￾tral), other protic acids, for example, TfOH, TFA, p-TsOH, MsOH, HBr, and H2SO4 adsorbed
on silica gel (340–400), different varieties of zeolites, clays as well as the various grades
of silica gels out of which most effective catalyst system was found to be perchloric acid
adsorbed on silica gel of 340–400 referred as HClO4–SiO2 that was earlier invented by
our group though for other application [62, 64].
Figure 1.46: Two- versus three-component process during benzimidazole formation.
Figure 1.47: Supported protic acid-catalyzed 3-MCR for selective formation of 1,2-disubstituted
benzimidazoles.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 31To understand and resolve the issue on the selectivity of formation of 2-substituted
benzimidazoles versus 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles the mechanistic course of the
reaction was studied in depth by GC-MS and various chemical transformations [119].
The formation of 2-substituted and 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles during the conden￾sation of o-phenylenediamines with aldehydes was visualized by two different path￾ways (Figure 1.48).
The progress of the reaction via “Path I” leads to the formation of the 2-substituted
benzimidazole via initial formation of the mono-imine Ia that may exist as ring chain
tautomer Ib formed by intramolecular nucleophilic attack by the NH2 nitrogen on the
iminic carbon followed by 1,3 (N to N) proton shift. Dehydrogenation/aromatization of
the imidazoline Ib results in the formation of 2-substituted benzimidazole 115. In
“Path II,” that gives rise to the 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazole 116, both of the NH2
groups of the o-phenylenediamine 96 undergo condensation with the aldehyde 12 to
form the bis-imine formation IIb that undergoes rearrangement involving the se￾quence of elementary reactions such as intramolecular nucleophilic attack by the ni￾trogen of one of the iminic group on the C=N group of the other imine moiety to form
the ionic species IIb, rearrangement via 1,3 (C–C) proton shift in IIb to finally generate
the 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazole 116.
The GC-MS and NMR analysis of the reaction mixture during the progress of the
reaction, experimental proof on the bis-imine formation (by isolating the N,N′-
bisbenzylated derivative of the o-phenylenediamines by treating the reaction mixture
of o-phenylenediamine and 2 equiv. of benzaldehyde with NaBH4), and formationof α,α￾bis deuterated N-benzylated 1,2-dibenzylated benzimidazole during the reaction of o￾phenylenediamine with deuterated benzaldehyde established the involvement/opera￾tional feasibility of “Path I” and “Path II.”
The formation of 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazole via the initial formation of the
bis-imine intermediate followed by its rearrangement was demonstrated in carrying
out the reaction of o-phenylenediamine (96) with 2 equiv. of deuterated benzaldehyde
Figure 1.48: Mechanistic pathways of formation of 2-substituted and 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles
during condensation of o-phenylenediamines with aldehydes.
32 Nirjhar Saha et al.(12a-d) in EtOH at rt under the catalytic influence of HClO4–SiO2 that gave 2-phenyl-1-
α-d2-methylphenyl-1H-benzimidazole (115a-d2) (Figure 1.49).
It has been demonstrated that the issue of 2-substituted benzimidazole versus 1,2-
disubstituted benzimidazole formation selectivity depends on the possibility of bis-imine
formation and the product selectivity switch would be dependent on several factors: elec￾tronic and steric effect of the aldehyde carbonyl, electronic effect of the amino groups in
o-phenylenediamine as well as the electrophilic activation ability of the catalyst em￾ployed. Thus, the treatment of 2 equiv. of sterically hindered 2,4,6-trimethylbenzaldehyde
(12b) with o-phenylenediamine (96) afforded only the 2-substituted benzimidazole 116a.
That in this case, the corresponding bis-imine formation does not take place due to steric
crowding was demonstrated by isolation of the mono-N-benzylated product 117 after
treating the reaction mixture with NaBH4 (Figure 1.50) [119].
The influence of electronic factor was also demonstrated in performing the reac￾tion of 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine (96a) with 2 equiv. of the aldehydes (12) with vary￾ing substituents that would reflect variable electrophilicity of the carbonyl carbon. In
all of these cases only 2-substituted benzimidazoles (115) were formed. As the NH2
group para to the NO2 group in 96a is significantly less nucleophilic the bis-imine for￾mation does not take place and is supported by the formation of the mono-N￾benzylated-4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine (118) by subjecting the HClO4–SiO2-catalyzed
reaction mixture of 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine (96a) and benzaldehyde with NaBH4
(Figure 1.51) [119].
A metal and acid-free 3-MCR process was devised by our group for the forma￾tion of 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles (116) by dehydrative cyclo-condensation of
o-phenylenediamines (96) with 2 equiv. of aldehydes (12) promoted by the fluori￾nated alcohols trifluoroethanol (TFE) and hexafluoro-isopropanol (Figure 1.52) [53].
Detailed NMR analysis of aliquot portions of the reaction mixture during the
progress of the reaction, formation of 2-phenyl-1-α-d2-methylphenyl-1H-benzimidazole
(115a-d2) during the reaction of o-phenylenediamines (96) with 2 equiv. of deuterated
benzaldehyde (12-d), and quenching the reaction mixture by treatment of NaBH4 and
identifying the formation of the N,N-bis-benzylated derivative of o-phenylenediamine
confirmed the formation of the 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazole formation to proceed
through the bis-imine intermediate (Figure 1.53).
Figure 1.49: Mechanistic evidence of formation of 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles by rearrangement of the
corresponding bis-imine formed during condensation of o-phenylenediamines with deuterated aldehydes.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 33Figure 1.50: Influence of the steric effect in the formation of 2-substituted and 1,2-disubstituted
benzimidazoles during condensation of o-phenylenediamines with aldehydes.
Figure 1.51: Influence of electronic effect in controlling the formation of 2-substituted and 1,2-
disubstituted benzimidazoles during condensation of o-phenylenediamines with aldehydes.
34 Nirjhar Saha et al.It has been demonstrated that during the TFE/HFIP promoted reaction of equimolar
amounts of o-phenylenediamine and benzaldehyde the 1,2-disubstituted and 2-disubstituted
benzimidazoles are formed in 40:5/40:7 ratio (based on isolated yields) at RT for 60 min
and the ratio becomes 36:27/41:16 (based on isolated yields) at −40 °C for 60 min [53]. As
TFE/HFIP exhibit catalytic effect through HB they are very mild electrophilic activating
agents. Therefore, the formation of the 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazole irrespective of the
molar ratio of the reactants implies that the 2-substituted versus 1,2-disubstituted benzimid￾azole product selectivity is not much dependent on the catalyst/protocol used but on the
reactivity of the substrates.
However, the construction of the 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazole scaffold via the
dehydrative cyclo-condensation route has two distinct limitations: (i) the nature of the
substituents at 1 and 2 are derived from the aldehyde structure and there is no scope of
diversity of the substitution pattern at these two positions and (ii) reactions involving
unsymmetrical o-phenylenediamines would generate regioisomeric 1,2-disubstituted
benzimidazoles (Figure 1.54). It is difficult to distinguish these regioisomers that control
their selectivity of formation.
Figure 1.52: Fluorinated alcohol-catalyzed 3-MCR for selective formation of 1,2-disubstituted
benzimidazoles.
Figure 1.53: Influence of steric effect in controlling the formation of 2-substituted and 1,2-disubstituted
benzimidazoles during TFE-promoted condensation of o-phenylenediamines with aldehydes.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 35For the synthesis of diversely substituted 1,2-disubstituted benzmidazole in regiodefined
fashion avoiding the above mentioned regioselectivity issue our group have developed
novel “all water” chemistries of tandem N-alkylation-nitro reduction-dehydrative cyclo￾condensation strategy for one-pot synthesis of 1-arylmethyl-2-substituted benzimidazoles
from o-nitroanilines (121), benzyl bromides (122), and aldehydes (12) [32] (Figure 1.55).
The intermediacy of the N-benzylated o-nitroanilines (123) and mono-N-benzylated o￾phenylenediamines (124) has been demonstrated by separately carrying out the N￾alkylation of o-nitroanilines (121) with the benzyl bromides (122) in water to isolate 123
which on treatment with In in aq HCl formed 124 [32]. The final dehydrative and dehy￾drogenative cyclo-condensation of 124 with the aldehydes (12) proceeds via initial con￾densation of the NH2 group of 124 with the carbonyl group of the aldehyde (12) forming
the imine 124-a (established by subjecting the reaction mixture to treatment with
NaBH4 and isolating the corresponding N,N-dibenzylated o-phenylenediamine 124-c)
followed by intramolecular nucleophilic attack by the NH nitrogen on the imine group
to form the benzimidazoline intermediate 124-b which on dehydrogenation/aromatiza￾tion produces the final 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles 125 (Figure 1.56).
For further diversity generation at the benzimidazole scaffold our group has de￾veloped novel “all water” chemistries of tandem aromatic nucleophilic substitution
(N-arylation-nitro reduction-dehydrative cyclo-condensation strategy for one-pot syn￾thesis of 1-aryl/alkyl-2-substituted benzimidazoles from o-fluoronitrobenzene (126),
aryl/alkyl amines (11), and aldehydes (12) [33] (Figure 1.57).
The significant aspect of the protocol is base and catalyst-free aromatic nucleophilic
substitution to form the ortho-N-arylated/alkylated nitrobenzenes 127 where water
Figure 1.54: The issue of regioselectivity of 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazole formation by 3-MCR involving
unsymmetrical o-phenylenediamine and aldehyde.
Figure 1.55: Regiospecific synthesis of 1-aryl methyl-2-substituted benzimidazoles by one-pot tandem
reaction involving o-nitroanilines, benzyl bromides, and aldehydes.
36 Nirjhar Saha et al.plays a crucial role for HB-assisted electrophilic activation of the o-fluoronitrobenzene
126 as lesser yields are obtained with ortho-chloro/bromonitrobenzenes (ortho￾iodonitrobenzene being totally ineffective) due to their week HB formation ability
with water molecule. The HB-assistance rendered by water in promoting the nucleo￾philic substitution and the final cyclo-condensation process was demonstrated by
observing deuterium kinetic isotope effect while comparing the reaction rate in
water versus D2O for the steps [33].
1.2.2.4.2 Imidazopyridines
Acetic acid-catalyzed one-pot three-component domino reaction of cinnamaldehydes
(130), ethylenediamines (131), and 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds (19) was performed for
the synthesis of tetrasubstituted hexahydroimidazo[1,2-a]pyridines (132) (Figure 1.58).
The reaction proceeds through the Bronsted acid-catalyzed imine formation in two
successive steps followed by intramolecular cyclization to complete the annulation
process leading to the desired fused pyridine derivatives. X-ray crystallographic study
revealed the trans isomer as the major product [120].
The microwave-promoted one-pot multicomponent domino reactions of arylglyoxal
monohydrates (1), aromatic amines (11), and 2-aminopyridines (91) were carried out in
the presence of catalytic amount of iodine for the synthesis of 3-amino-imidazo[1,2-a]
Figure 1.56: Progress of dehydrative and dehydrogenative cyclo-condensation of mono-N-benzylated o￾phenylenediamines (124) with the aldehydes (12).
Figure 1.57: Regiospecific synthesis of 1-aryl/alkyl-2-substituted benzimidazoles by one-pot tandem
reaction involving o-fluoronitrobenzene, aryl/alkyl amines, and aldehydes.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 37pyridines (133). In the progress of the reaction, iodine promotes imine formation involv￾ing condensation of arylglyoxal monohydrate and the aromatic amine (Figure 1.59). Nu￾cleophilic addition through pyridine ring nitrogen to the imine intermediate followed
by cyclocondensation produced the desired 3-amino-imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine (133). The
exploration of the reaction under both classical (oil bath) heating and microwave heat￾ing suggested that microwave heating is more efficient to carry out the synthesis in
shorter reaction time. Replacement of molecular iodine with Lewis acid catalyst or
Bronsted acid catalyst or organocatalyst didn’t improve the reaction efficiency [121].
The one-pot, three-component synthesis of imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine (135) was achieved
by the reaction of 2-aminopyridines (91), aryl methyl ketones (66), and dimethyl sulf￾oxide (134) as a methylene donor. The potassium persulfate-promoted deoxygenative
nucleophilic addition reaction between the 2-aminopyridines (91) and sulfenium ions
followed by the thiomethyl elimination generates the 2-iminium pyridine cation. The
enolate-mediated nucleophilic coupling of aryl methyl ketones with the iminium ion
generates the β-aminoketones which is further iodinated at the α-position by iodine.
In the final step, the intramolecular nucleophilic substitution through pyridine nitro￾gen and oxidative aromatization process provides the desired imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines
(Figure 1.60) [122].
Figure 1.59: Microwave-assisted synthesis of imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines via MCR approach.
Figure 1.58: Bronsted acid-catalyzed one-pot MCR for synthesis of hexahydroimidazo[1,2-a]pyridines.
38 Nirjhar Saha et al.1.2.2.5 Quinoline and its analogs
Our group developed a new protocol for the synthesis of 2-styrylquinolines for one￾pot tandem Friedländer annulation-Knoevenagel condensation catalyzed by In(OTf)3
[123]. The treatment of ortho-aminobenzophenones (136) with alkyl acetoacetates (28)
at 100 °C under neat condition for 15 min in the presence of In(OTf)3 (10 mol%) fol￾lowed by treatment with aromatic aldehydes (12) at 100 °C for 2–4 h under solvent￾free condition led to the formation of 2-styrylquinolines (137) (Figure 1.61).
The reaction proceeds via the intermediate formation of the 2-methyl quinolines
(137a), as determined by GC-MS studies during the progress of the reaction and based
on earlier report from our group [124]. Various alkali, alkaline, transition, and rare
earth metal halides, acetates, tetrafluoroborate, perchlorates, and triflates were tested
for their catalytic potential to promote the reaction and best efficiency was observed
with In(OTf)3. The In(OTf)3 was recovered and reused for next four cycles.
In a microwave-assisted MCR that involves the use of 2-iodoanilines (138), terminal
alkynes (98), and oxalic acid dihydrate [(CO2H)2·2H2O] (139) under the catalytic influ￾ence of polystyrene-supported palladium (Pd@PS) nanoparticles led to the synthesis of
3-aryl/alkyl-2-quinolones (140). For the carbonylation process (CO2H)2·2H2O served as a
stable and solid carbon monoxide (CO) source. This was the first time that a heteroge￾neous palladium catalyst was investigated for such transformation. A wide range of
functional groups were tolerated, and the reaction showed good regioselectivity and
substrate diversity with respect to 2-iodoanilines and alkynes (Figure 1.62). The notable
benefits of the approach are the use of a recyclable heterogeneous catalyst, bench￾Figure 1.61: In(OTf)3-catalyzed one-pot solvent-free tandem 3-MCR for the construction of 2-styryl
quinoline ring system.
Figure 1.60: Iodine-catalyzed synthesis of imidazopyridines.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 39stable CO surrogate, microwave irradiations, simple reaction handling, and regioselec￾tivity of the products [125].
A series of structurally intriguing new pyrrolo[3,2-c]quinolinone (144) heterocyclic hy￾brids have been synthesized via a one-pot multicomponent domino reaction sequence
that involves a 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition and subsequent intramolecular lactonization
and lactamization steps (Figure 1.63). Baylis–Hillman adducts (141) derived from vari￾ous substituted benzaldehyde and methyl acrylate in the presence of DABCO were
used as dipolarophiles, while the 1,3-dipole components were azomethine ylides,
formed in situ from isatin derivatives (142) and L-phenylalanine (143). The reaction
generated five new bonds, three new rings, and four contiguous stereocenters, which
were created with full diastereomeric control [126]. This regioselecive domino process
generates five bonds and three rings in a single synthetic operation. It also leads to
the fully diastereoselective creation of four adjacent stereocenters, two of which are
quaternary and one is an all-carbon stereocenter.
A library of 2-arylquinolines (146) has been synthesized by the one-pot three-component
domino reaction of aldehydes (12), anilines (11), and nitroalkanes (145) using a catalytic
amount of Fe(III) chloride (Figure 1.64). The reaction most likely occurs via a sequential
aza-Henry reaction/cyclization/denitration. Readily available chemicals as starting mate￾rials, an inexpensive metal catalyst, aerobic reaction conditions, tolerance of a wide
Figure 1.63: Multicomponent synthesis of pyrroloquinolinone derivatives.
Figure 1.62: Microwave-assisted synthesis of quinolones.
40 Nirjhar Saha et al.range of functional groups, and operational simplicity are the notable advantages of this
present approach [127].
The 3-MCR involving anilines (11), alkynes (98), and paraldehyde (147) under micro￾wave irradiation in the presence of (±)-camphor-10-sulfonic acid (CSA) represents a
Povarov-type multicomponent synthesis of 4-aryl quinolines (148). Without the need
of a metal catalyst, this reaction proceeds via the [4 + 2] cycloaddition of alkynes and
imines (generated in situ from aniline and paraldehyde) (Figure 1.65). The role of CSA
has been proposed to activate the imine to prevent the production of Troger’s base
and promote the cycloaddition of imines with alkynes [128].
The [3 + 2 + 1] cycloaddition of enaminones (116), aryl methyl ketones (66), and aryl
amines (11) was used to synthesize 2,3-diaroyl quinolines (149) (Figure 1.66). A scaffold
made of 1,4-dicarbonyl can be produced successfully by this process. Additionally, the 2,3-
diaroyl quinoline produced that has two active electrophilic sites which can be utilized
for further reaction to produce pyridazino[4,5-b]quinolines. The variety of 1,4-dicarbonyl
compounds produced by the Povarov reaction was expanded by this MCR [129].
Figure 1.65: Camphor sulfonic acid-catalyzed MCR for the synthesis of quinoline derivatives.
Figure 1.64: Fe(III)-catalyzed 3-MCR for the synthesis of C-2-arylated quinoline derivatives.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 411.2.2.6 Quinazoline and its analogs
Our group reported a catalyst and solvent-free 3-MCR for the construction of quinazo￾linone ring system [130]. The treatment of isatoic anhydrides (150), anilines (11), and
triethyl orthoacetate (151) either under classical heating at 120 °C for 5 h or micro￾wave irradiation at 140 °C (150 W) for 20–30 min formed the 2,3-disubstituted quinazo￾lin-4(3H)-ones (152) (Figure 1.67).
The use of ammonium acetate in place of the aromatic amine formed the correspond￾ing 2-substituted quinazolines that is devoid of the N-aryl group. On the other hand,
the use of trialkyl orthoformate afforded the quinazolinone that is devoid of the C-2
substitution.
The concept was extended toward the 4-MCR for the construction of 2-styryl qui￾nazolinone ring system [130]. The treatment of isatoic anhydrides (150), anilines (11),
and triethyl orthoacetate (151) either under classical heating at 120 °C for 4 h or micro￾wave irradiation at 140 °C (150 W) for 20 min followed by further treatment under
similar condition with aromatic aldehydes formed the 2-styrylquinazolin-4(3H)-ones
(153) (Figure 1.68).
Using these methodologies various central nervous system drugs such as meth￾aqualone, mebroqualone, mecloqualone, piriquialone, and diproqualone were synthe￾sized [130].
Figure 1.66: Iodine-catalyzed synthesis of 2,3-diketo quinolines via 3-MCR approach.
Figure 1.67: Solvent and catalyst-free 3-MCR for the synthesis of 2,3-disubstituted quinazolin-4(3H)-ones.
42 Nirjhar Saha et al.The inexpensive CuBr-catalyzed one-pot domino MCR of methyl-2‐bromobenzoate (154),
alkyl/arylisothiocyanate derivatives (155), and sodium azide (46) was carried out in the
presence of L-proline as ligand to the metal catalyst (Figure 1.69). The reaction proceeds
through the metal catalyst-assisted carbonyl group activation of methyl-2‐bromoben￾zoate to favor the SNAr reaction with sodium azide. The azidation in the phenyl ring
and subsequent denitrogenation generates the methyl anthranilate intermediate. The
nucleophilic addition reaction of phenyl isothiocyanate with the anthranilates produces
the thiourea intermediate which further cyclizes with the elimination of methanol to
form the desired quinazolinones (156) [131].
Dimethyl sulfoxide (134) acts as one carbon source (substrate) and solvent for the one￾pot domino MCR involving isatoic anhydride (150), arylmethylamines (157) in the pres￾ence of graphene oxide (GO) as catalyst (Figure 1.70). The GO stimulates the formation of
sulfenium ion and the hydrolysis of it in situ generates the formaldehyde intermediate
which actually acts as the C-2 carbon source of quinazolinones. The decarboxylative nu￾cleophilic addition of benzylamines to the isatoic anhydride synthesizes the corre￾sponding amide intermediate which further undergoes condensation reaction with the
formaldehyde intermediate to complete the annulation process. The GO-assisted aerial
oxidation of the dihydroquinazolinone furnished the desired N-benzylated quinazoli￾nones (158). The crucial role of GO in the course of the reaction was established through
performing the reaction under catalyst-free condition which gives no product forma￾tion. However, authors have not performed the reaction in the absence of DMSO or in
the presence of other solvent to ensure the fact that DMSO is acting as C-2 carbon syn￾Figure 1.68: Solvent and catalyst-free 4-MCR for the synthesis of 2-styryl quinazolin-4(3H)-ones.
Figure 1.69: Cu-catalyzed MCR for the synthesis of N-alkyl/arylquinazolones.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 43thon in the course of the reaction. The synthesized GO was totally characterized by
SEM, XRD, EDX, XPS, and TGA [132].
The metal-catalyzed oxidative one-pot MCR of aryl amine (11), alkyl amines (11a), and
formaldehyde (159) was reported for the synthesis of quinazolinones (160) under oxygen.
The quinazolinone ring construction takes place via formation of consecutive C−N and
C−C bonds, followed by oxidative dehydrogenation and oxidation process (Figure 1.71).
After the formation of imine intermediate through the condensation of amine and alde￾hyde, the reaction may proceed through two different reaction pathways such as the
[4 + 2] cycloaddition pathway/isomerization cascade or through the Fridel-crafts alkyl￾ation pathway. Both of these pathways lead to the formation of the common intermedi￾ate tetrahydroquinazoline which is further oxidized to the dihydroquinazolines via
copper-promoted oxidation process under oxygen ballooning. In the final step, the metal￾catalyzed benzylic oxidation synthesized the desired quinazolinone derivative [133].
The I2-catalyzed 4-MCR process involving aryl methyl ketones (66), two molecules of
aryl amine (11), and one molecule of DMSO (134) led to the formation of quinazolinones
161 (Figure 1.72). During the progress of the reaction, the iodination/Kornblum oxidation
sequence in situ generates the aryl glyoxals from the aryl methyl ketones (66) which
subsequently forms the bis imine upon reacting with the amine (11). The intramolecular
cyclization of this bisimine intermediate followed by ring expansion provides the tricy￾clic di-aza-heterocycles. The sulfenium ion produced from the DMSO participates in the
bridge formation between two nitrogen atoms of the di-aza-heterocycles to construct
Figure 1.70: DMSO as C-2 carbon source for the synthesis of quinazolinones via 3-MCR approach.
Figure 1.71: Cu-catalyzed synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives.
44 Nirjhar Saha et al.the bicyclic intermediate. In the final step, the oxidative C–N bond cleavage synthesized
the desired quinazolinone derivatives (161) [134].
The catalyst-free one-pot multicomponent Staudinger/aza-Wittig reaction involving
the dialkyl acetylenedicarboxylates (24), isocyanides (16), and 2-azidobenzoic acid
(162) led to the formation of the quinazolinone derivatives (163) (Figure 1.73). The re￾action proceeds through the nucleophilic addition of isocyanides to the dialkyl acety￾lenedicarboxylates through Michael addition and subsequent hydrolysis generates
the amide intermediate. The coupling between the 2-azidobenzoic acid and the amide
intermediate furnishes the bis amide bond containing intermediate which further
undergoes tandem Staudinger/aza-Wittig reactions to obtain the desired quinazoli￾none derivatives [135].
The catalyst-free one-pot domino MCR of 2-(2-aminophenyl)-2-oxoacetamide deriva￾tives (164), aldehydes (12), and ammonium acetate (21) was reported to form the quan￾zolines (165) (Figure 1.74). The aldehydes and ammonium acetate are the synthetic
equivalent of C-2 carbon and N3 nitrogen, respectively, of the quinazoline ring. The
reaction proceeds through the non-Friedlander pathway of annulation. The condensa￾tion reaction between the ammonium acetate and aldehydes generates the corre￾sponding imine intermediate which further reacts with the 2-(2-aminophenyl)-2-
oxoacetamide under Bronsted acid catalysis to furnish another imine intermediate.
The acetic acid-promoted deammoniative intramolecular cyclization accomplishes the
Figure 1.72: Iodine-catalyzed MCR of methyl ketone, anilines, and DMSO for the formation of
quinazolinones.
Figure 1.73: One-pot multicomponent Staudinger/aza-Wittig reaction for the synthesis of quinazolinones.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 45dihydroquinazoline formation. The aerobic oxidation of dihydroquinazoline synthe￾sized the desired 4-keto quinazolinones (165) [136].
Selectfluor was used as the fluorinating agent in the one-pot multicomponent domino
reaction of 2-aminoacetophenones (166), iso(thio)cyanates (155), selectfluor, and water
for synthesis of 4-difluoromethyl and 4-fluoromethyl quinazolin(thi)ones (167). It has
been proposed that the reaction proceeds through nucleophilic addition/dehydrative
cyclization reaction between the ortho-amino acetophenones and iso(thio)cyanates to
form the 4-methylene quinazolin(thi)ones derivatives (Figure 1.75). In the next step,
selectfluor-mediated electrophilic fluorination generated the iminium intermediate
which further determines the fate of difluorinated or monofluorinated product for￾mation. The direct nucleophilic addition of water molecule at the iminic center di￾rectly gives rise to the monofluorinated quinazolinone. The tautomeric stabilization
of the iminium cation furnishes the 4-methylene quinazolin(thi)ones which further
undergo electrophilic fluorination in the presence of selectfluor to provide the gem￾difluorinated quinazolin(thi)ones [137].
Figure 1.74: Catalyst-free synthesis of quinazolines through 3-MCR approach.
Figure 1.75: Selectfluor as the fluorinating agent in the synthesis of quinazolinones.
46 Nirjhar Saha et al.1.3 Conclusion
The aza-heterocycles are important class of compounds that are finding applications
in diverse fields such as from organic material, metal complex forming ligands, and
more importantly constitute the essential structural components of approved drugs,
clinical drug candidates, and in drug discovery medicinal chemistry. While all these ne￾cessitate the availability of effective methods of synthesis of diverse aza-heterocycles at
the same time it is important to construct the core heterocyclic frame with the shortest
possible pathways for effective and speedy supply of the desired target molecules. In
this context, a domino MCR toward the construction of the aza-heterocyclic ring sys￾tems would minimize the steps involved for their synthesis avoiding the need for isola￾tion and purification at each step, thereby reducing the time, extra cost, and the waste.
The present chapter would provide the readers the literature status on the domino
MCR strategy for aza-heterocycle synthesis and stimulate further research interests on
the development of newer chemistries on this topic.
References
[1] Armstrong RW, Combs AP, Tempest PA, Brown SD, Keating TA. Multiple-component condensation
strategies for combinatorial library synthesis. Acc Chem Res, 1996, 29, 123–131.
[2] Strecker A. Ueber die künstliche Bildung der Milchsäure und einen neuen, dem Glycocoll
homologen Körper. Justus Liebigs Ann Chem, 1850, 75, 27–45.
[3] Tietze LF. Domino reactions in organic synthesis. Chem Rev, 1996, 96, 115–136.
[4] Nicolaou KC, Edmonds DJ, Bulger PG. Cascade reactions in total synthesis. Angew Chem Int Ed,
2006, 45, 7134–7186.
[5] Toure BB, Hall DG. Natural product synthesis using multicomponent reaction strategies. Chem Rev,
2009, 109, 4439–4486.
[6] Zhi S, Ma X, Zhang W. Consecutive multicomponent reactions for the synthesis of complex
molecules. Org Biomol Chem, 2019, 17, 7632–7650.
[7] Müller TJJ, D’Souza DM. Diversity-oriented syntheses of functional π-systems by multicomponent
and domino reactions. Pure Appl Chem, 2008, 80, 609–620.
[8] Zhang Z, You Y, Hong C. Multicomponent reactions and multicomponent cascade reactions for the
synthesis of sequence-controlled polymers. Macromol Rapid Commun, 2018, 39, e1800362.
[9] Reguera L, Rivera DG. Multicomponent reaction toolbox for peptide macrocyclization and stapling.
Chem Rev, 2019, 119, 9836–9860.
[10] Volla CMR, Atodiresei I, Rueping M. Catalytic C−C bond-forming multi-component cascade or
domino reactions: Pushing the boundaries of complexity in asymmetric Organocatalysis. Chem Rev,
2014, 114, 2390–2431.
[11] Padwa A, Bur SK. The domino way to heterocycles. Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 5341–5378.
[12] Jiang B, Rajale T, Wever W, Tu S-J, Li G. Multicomponent reactions for the synthesis of heterocycles.
Chem Asian J, 2010, 5, 2318–2335.
[13] Ibarra IA, Islas-Jácome A. González-zamora e.synthesis of polyheterocycles via multicomponent
reactions. Org Biomol Chem, 2018, 16, 1402–1418.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 47[14] Cherian RM, Harry NA, Saranya S, Rohit KR, Anilkumar G. Copper‐catalysed multicomponent
syntheses of heterocycles. Asian J Org Chem, 2019, 8, 197–233.
[15] Mohammadkhani L, Heravi MM. Synthesis of various N‐heterocycles using the Ugi four‐center
three‐component reaction. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 10187–10196.
[16] Huh DN, Cheng Y, Frye CW, Egger DT, Tonks IA. Multicomponent syntheses of 5-and 6-membered
aromatic heterocycles using group 4–8 transition metal catalysts. Chem Sci, 2021, 12, 9574–9590.
[17] Cioc RC, Ruijter E, Orru RVA. Multicomponent reactions: Advanced tools for sustainable organic
synthesis. Green Chem, 2014, 16, 2958–2975.
[18] Hulme C, Gore V. “Multi-component reactions: Emerging chemistry in drug discovery” ‘from
xylocain to crixivan’. Curr Med Chem, 2003, 10, 51–80.
[19] Dömling A, Wang W, Wang K. Chemistry and biology of multicomponent reactions. Chem Rev, 2012,
112, 3083–3135.
[20] Ruijter E, Orru RVA. Multicomponent reactions – opportunities for the pharmaceutical industry.
Drug Discov Today Technol, 2013, 10, e15–e20.
[21] Roughley SD, Jordan AM. The medicinal chemist’s toolbox: An analysis of reactions used in the
pursuit of drug candidates. J Med Chem, 2011, 54, 3451–3479.
[22] Jahnke W, Erlanson DA, De esch I, Johnson CN, Mortenson PN, Ochi Y, Urushima T. Fragment-to￾lead medicinal chemistry publications in 2019. J Med Chem, 2020, 63, 15494–15507.
[23] Shearer J, Castro JL, Lawson ADG, MacCoss M, Taylor RD. Rings in clinical trials and drugs: Present
and future. J Med Chem, 2022, 65, 8699–8712.
[24] Vitaku E, Smith DT, Njardarson JT. Analysis of the structural diversity, substitution patterns, and
frequency of nitrogen heterocycles among U.S. FDA approved pharmaceuticals. J Med Chem, 2014,
57, 10257–10274.
[25] Brown DG, Wobst HJ. A decade of FDA-approved drugs (2010−2019): Trends and future directions.
J Med Chem, 2021, 64, 2312–2338.
[26] Bhutani P, Joshi G, Raja N, Bachhav N, Rajanna PK, Bhutani H, Paul AT, Kumar R. U.S. FDA approved
drugs from 2015−june 2020: A perspective. J Med Chem, 2021, 64, 2339–2381.
[27] Serafini M, Cargnin S, Massarotti A, Pirali T, Genazzani AA. Essential medicinal chemistry of essential
medicines. J Med Chem, 2020, 63, 10170–10187.
[28] Bhagat S, Chakraborti AK. An extremely efficient three-component reaction of aldehydes/ketone,
amines, and phosphates (Kabachnik-Fields reaction) for the synthesis of α-aminophosphonates
catalysed by magnesium perchlorate. J Org Chem, 2007, 72, 1263–1270.
[29] Bhagat S, Chakraborti AK. Zirconium(IV) compounds as efficient catalysts for synthesis of
α-aminophosphonates. J Org Chem, 2008, 73, 6029–6032.
[30] Raha Roy S, Jadhavar PS, Seth K, Sharma KK, Asit KAK. Organo-catalytic application of room
temperature ionic liquids: [bmim][MeSO4] as a recyclable organo-catalyst for one-pot
multicomponent reaction for preparation of dihydropyrimidinones and -thiones. Synthesis, 2011,
2261–2267.
[31] Kumar D, Kommi DN, Bollineni N, Patel AR, Chakraborti AK. Catalytic procedures for
multicomponent synthesis of imidazoles: Selectivity control during the competitive formation of
tri- and tetra-substituted imidazoles. Green Chem, 2012, 14, 2038–2049.
[32] Kommi DN, Kumar D, Bansal R, Chebolu R, Chakraborti AK. “All-water” chemistry of tandem
N-alkylation-reduction-condensation for synthesis of N-arylmethyl-2-substituted benzimidazoles.
Green Chem, 2012, 14, 3329–3335.
[33] Kommi DN, Jadhavar PS, Kumar D, Chakraborti AK. “All water” one-pot diverse synthesis of
1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles: Hydrogen bond driven ‘synergistic electrophile-nucleophile dual
activation’ by water. Green Chem, 2013, 15, 798–810.
48 Nirjhar Saha et al.[34] Kumar D, Sonawane M, Pujala B, Jain VK, Bhagat S, Chakraborti AK. Supported protic acid-catalyzed
synthesis of 2,3-disubstituted thiazolidin-4-ones: Enhancement of the catalytic potential of protic
acid by adsorption on solid support. Green Chem, 2013, 15, 2872–2884.
[35] Kumar D, Kumar A, Qadri MM, Ansari MI, Gautam A, Chakraborti AK. In(OTf)3-catalyzed synthesis of
2-styryl quinolines: Scope and limitations of metal Lewis acids for tandem Friedländer annulation￾Knoevenagel condensation. RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 2920–2927.
[36] Parikh N, Raha Roy S, Seth K, Kumar A, Chakraborti AK. “On-water” multicomponent reaction for
the diastereoselective synthesis of functionalized tetrahydropyridines and mechanistic insight.
Synthesis, 2016, 48, 547–556.
[37] Kumar D, Sharma H, Saha N, Chakraborti AK. Domino synthesis of functionalized pyridine
carboxylates under gallium catalysis: Unravelling the reaction pathway and the role of the nitrogen
source counter anion. Chem Asian J, 2022, 17, e202200304.
[38] Kommi DN, Kumar D, Chakraborti AK. “All-water chemistry” for a concise total synthesis of the
novel class antianginal drug (RS), (R), (S)-ranozaline. Green Chem, 2013, 15, 756–767.
[39] Kommi DN, Kumar D, Seth K, Chakraborti AK. Protecting group-free concise synthesis of (RS)/(S)-
lubeluzole. Org Lett, 2013, 15, 1158–1161.
[40] Kumar D, Jadhavar PS, Nautiyal M, Sharma H, Meena PK, Adane L, Pancholia S, Chakraborti AK.
Convenient synthesis of 2,3-disubstituted quinazolin-4(H)-ones and 2-styryl-3-substituted
quinazolin-4(3H)-ones: Applications towards the synthesis of drugs. RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 30819–30825.
[41] Bhagat S, Shah P, Garg SK, Mishra S, Kamal P, Singh S, Chakraborti AK. α-Aminophosphonates as
novel antileishmanial chemotypes: Synthesis, biological evaluation, and CoMFA studies. Med Chem
Commun, 2014, 5, 665–670.
[42] Jadhavar PS, Dhameliya TM, Vaja MD, Kumar D, Sridevi JP, Yogeshwari P, Sriram D, Chakraborti AK.
Synthesis, biological evaluation and structure-activity relationship of 2-styrylquinazolones as anti￾tubercular agents. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2016, 26, 2663–2669.
[43] Bhagat S, Supriya M, Pathak S, Sriram D, Chakraborti AK. α-sulfonamidophosphonates as new anti￾mycobacterial chemotypes: Design, development of synthetic methodology, and biological
evaluation. Bioorg Chem, 2019, 82, 246–252.
[44] Dhameliya TM, Patel KI, Tiwari R, Vagolu SK, Panda D, Sriram D, Chakraborti AK. Design, synthesis,
and biological evaluation of benzo[d]imidazole-2-carboxamides as new anti-tb agents. Bioorg
Chem, 2021, 107, 104538.
[45] Dhameliya TM, Tiwari R, Patel KI, Vagolu SK, Panda D, Sriram D, Chakraborti AK. Bacterial ftsz
inhibition by benzo[d]imidazole-2-carboxamide derivative having anti-TB activity. Future Med Chem,
2022, 14, 1361–1373.
[46] Estévez V, Villacampa M, Menéndez JC. Multicomponent reactions for the synthesis of pyrroles.
Chem Soc Rev, 2010, 39, 4402–4421.
[47] Zi QX, Yang CL, Li K, Luo Q, Lin J, Yan SJ. Multicomponent cascade reaction by metal-free aerobic
oxidation for synthesis of highly functionalized 2-amino-4-coumarinyl-5-arylpyrroles. J Org Chem,
2020, 85, 327–338.
[48] Dhanasekar E, Kannan T, Venkatesan R, Perumal PT, Kamalraja J. Metal-free and regioselective
synthesis of substituted and fused chromenopyrrole scaffolds via the divergent reactivity of α-azido
ketones in water. J Org Chem, 2020, 85, 9631–9649.
[49] Del Corte X, Loöpez-Francés A, Maestro A, Martinez de marigorta E, Palacios F, Vicario J. Brönsted
acid catalyzed multicomponent synthesis of phosphorus and fluorine-derived γ-lactam derivatives.
J Org Chem, 2020, 85, 14369–14383.
[50] Chakraborti AK, Bhagat S, Rudrawar S. Magnesium perchlorate as an efficient catalyst for synthesis
of imines and phenylhydrazones. Tetrahedron Lett, 2004, 45, 7641–7644.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 49[51] Matloubiámoghaddam F, Mohammadzadehádezag H. A new Mumm-type rearrangement with
dithiocarbamates via isocyanide-based multicomponent reaction under ultrasound irradiation:
Synthesis of polysubstituted pyrrolidine compounds. New J Chem, 2020, 44, 9699–9702.
[52] He JP, Zhan ZZ, Luo N, Zhang MM, Huang GS. Direct synthesis of 2, 3, 5-trisubstituted pyrroles via
copper-mediated one-pot multicomponent reaction. Org Biomol Chem, 2020, 18, 9831–9835.
[53] Chebolu R, Kommi DN, Kumar D, Bollineni N, Chakraborti AK. Hydrogen-bond driven electrophilic
activation for selectivity control: The scope and limitations of fluorous alcohol promoted selective
formation of 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles and mechanistic insight for rational of selectivity.
J Org Chem, 2012, 77, 10158–10167.
[54] Raha Roy S, Chakraborti AK. Supramolecular assemblies in ionic liquid catalysis for aza-Michael
reaction. Org Lett, 2010, 12, 3866–3869.
[55] Sarkar A, Raha Roy S, Chakraborti AK. Ionic liquid catalysed reaction of thiols with α,β-unsaturated
carbonyl compounds- remarkable influence of the C-2 hydrogen and the anion. Chem Commun,
2011, 47, 4538–4540.
[56] Khatik GL, Kumar R, Chakraborti AK. Catalyst-free conjugated addition of thiols to a,b-unsaturated
carbonyl compounds in water. Org Lett, 2006, 8, 2433–2436.
[57] Nazeri MT, Shaabani A, Notash B. Chemoselective synthesis of fully substituted pyrroles via a one￾pot four-component isocyanide-based reaction. Org Biomol Chem, 2021, 19, 3722–3734.
[58] Zhong Y, Zhao X, Zhao X, Zhang D, Li W, Wei S, Liu F, Yu J, Li G, Wang D. Multi-component syntheses
of 2-pyrrolines and organocatalytic asymmetric syntheses of functionalized chiral 2-pyrrolines. Org
Chem Front, 2021, 8, 664–669.
[59] Noruzian F, Olyaei A, Hajinasiri R, Sadeghpour M. Guanidine hydrochloride catalyzed efficient one￾pot pseudo five-component synthesis of 4, 4′-(arylmethylene) bis (1H-pyrazol-5-ols) in water. Synth
Commun, 2019, 49, 2717–2724.
[60] Dhameliya TM, Chourasiya SS, Mishra E, Jadhavar PS, Bharatam PV, Chakraborti AK. Rationalisation
of benzazole-2-carboxylate vs benzazine-3-one/benzazine-2,3-dione selectivity switch during
cyclocondensation of 2-amino thiophenols/phenols/anilines with 1,2-biselectrophiles in aqueous
medium. J Org Chem, 2017, 82, 10077–10091.
[61] Chakraborti AK, Raha Roy S, Kumar D, Chopra P. Catalytic application of room temperature ionic
liquids: [bmim][MeSO4] as a recyclable catalyst for synthesis of bis(indolyl)methanes. Ion-fishing by
MALDI-TOF-TOF MS and MS/MS studies to probe the proposed mechanistic model of catalysis.
Green Chem, 2008, 10, 1111–1118.
[62] Chakraborti AK, Gulhane R. Perchloric acid adsorbed on silica gel as new, highly efficient, and
versatile catalyst for acetylation of phenols, thiols, alcohols, and amines. Chem Commun, 2003,
1896–1897.
[63] Chakraborti AK, Gulhane R. Fluoroboric acid adsorbed on silica gel as a new and efficient catalyst
for acylation of phenols, thiols, alcohols and amines. Tetrahedron Lett, 2003, 44, 3521–3525.
[64] Chakraborti AK, Gulhane R. A Process for the Acylation of Various Substrates using a Solid Support
Catalyst. Indian Patent Grant No. 248506; Grant Date: 20-07-2011.
[65] Chakraborti AK, Chankeshwara SV. HClO4-SiO2 as a new, highly efficient, inexpensive and reusable
catalyst for N-tert-butoxycarbonylation of amines. Org Biomol Chem, 2006, 4, 2769–2771.
[66] Rudrawar S, Besra RC, Chakraborti AK. Perchloric acid adsorbed on silica gel (HClO4-SiO2) as an
extremely efficient and reusable catalyst for 1,3-dithiolane/dithiane formation. Synthesis, 2006,
2767–2771.
[67] Kumar R, Kumar D, Chakraborti AK. Perchloric acid adsorbed on silica-gel (HClO4-SiO2) as an
inexpensive, extremely efficient, and reusable dual catalyst system for acetal/ketal formation and
their deprotection to aldehydes/ketones. Synthesis, 2007, 299–303.
50 Nirjhar Saha et al.[68] Khatik GL, Sharma G, Kumar R, Chakraborti AK. Scope and limitations of HClO4-SiO2 as an extremely
efficient, inexpensive, and reusable catalyst for chemoselective carbon-sulfur bond formation.
Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 1200–1210.
[69] Kumar D, Kumar R, Chakraborti AK. Tetrafluoroboric acid adsorbed on silica-gel as a reusable
heterogeneous dual-purpose catalyst for conversion of aldehydes/ketones into acetals/ketals and
back again. Synthesis, 2008, 1249–1256.
[70] Sharma G, Kumar R, Chakraborti AK. Fluoroboric acid adsorbed on silica-gel as a new, highly
efficient and reusable heterogeneous catalyst for thia-michael addition to α,β-unsaturated carbonyl
compounds. Tetrahedron Lett, 2008, 49, 4272–7275.
[71] Chakraborti AK, Singh B, Chankeshwara SV, Patel AR. Protic acid immobilised on solid support as an
extremely efficient recyclable catalyst system for a direct and atom economical esterification of
carboxylic acids with alcohols. J Org Chem, 2009, 74, 5967–5974.
[72] Kumar D, Kommi DN, Chebolu R, Garg SK, Kumar R, Chakraborti AK. Selectivity control during the
solid supported protic acid catalysed synthesis of 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles and mechanistic
insight to rationalize selectivity. RSC Adv, 2013, 3, 91–98.
[73] Kumar D, Kommi DN, Bollineni N, Patel AR, Chakraborti AK. Catalytic procedures for
multicomponent synthesis of imidazoles: Selectivity control during the competitive formation of tri￾and tetrasubstituted imidazoles. Green Chem, 2012, 14, 2038–2049.
[74] Alizadeh-Bami F, Salehzadeh M, Mehrabi H, Ranjbar-Karimi R. Efficient synthesis of novel
1-hydroxy-2, 4, 5-trisubstituted imidazole derivatives via a one-pot, four-component reaction
between hydroxylamine, benzonitriles, arylglyoxals and cyclic 1, 3-dicarbonyl compounds. Org
Chem, 2019, 55–63.
[75] Wang F, Xu P, Liu BB, Wang SY, Ji SJ. Pd-Catalyzed multicomponent reaction of sulfonyl azides,
primary amines and methyl α-isocyanoacetates: Highly efficient synthesis of tetrasubstituted
imidazolone derivatives. Org Chem Front, 2019, 6, 3754–3758.
[76] Mehrabi H, Alizadeh-Bami F, Meydani A, Besharat S. An eco-friendly approach for the synthesis of
1, 2, 5-trisubstituted and 4-amino-1, 2, 5-tetrasubstituted imidazoles via a multi-component
condensation. Arkivoc, 2021, 2021, 86–95.
[77] Dhiman N, Kaur K, Jaitak V. Tetrazoles as anticancer agents: A review on synthetic strategies,
mechanism of action and SAR studies. Bioorg Med Chem, 2020, 28, 115599.
[78] Gao F, Xiao J, Huang G. Current scenario of tetrazole hybrids for antibacterial activity. Eur J Med
Chem, 2019, 184, 111744.
[79] Neochoritis CG, Zhao T, Dömling A. Tetrazoles via multicomponent reactions. Chem Rev, 2019, 119,
1970–2042.
[80] Nazeri MT, Nowee AB, Javanbakht S, Farhid H, Shaabani A, Notash B. Highly efficient azido-ugi
multicomponent reactions for the synthesis of bioactive tetrazoles bearing sulfonamide scaffolds.
Tetrahedron, 2021, 91, 132243.
[81] Xiong Q, Dong S, Chen Y, Liu X, Feng X. Asymmetric synthesis of tetrazole and dihydroisoquinoline
derivatives by isocyanide-based multicomponent reactions. Nat Commun, 2019, 10, 2116.
[82] Chen Y, Li L, He X, Li Z. Four-component reactions for the synthesis of perfluoroalkyl isoxazoles.
ACS Catal, 2019, 9, 9098–9102.
[83] Dominguez de maria P. “Nonsolvent” applications of ionic liquids in biotransformations and
organocatalysis. Angew Chem Int Ed, 2008, 47, 6960–6968.
[84] Chakraborti AK, Raha Roy S. On catalysis by ionic liquids. J Am Chem Soc, 2009, 131, 6902–6903.
[85] Sarkar A, Raha Roy S, Parikh N, Chakraborti AK. Non-solvent application of ionic liquids: Organo￾catalysis by 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium cation based room temperature ionic liquids for
chemoselective N-tert-butyloxycarbonylation of amines and the influence of the C-2 hydrogen on
catalytic efficiency. J Org Chem, 2011, 76, 7132–7140.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 51[86] Raha Roy S, Jadhavar PS, Seth K, Sharma KK, Chakraborti AK. Organocatalytic application of ionic
liquids:[bmim][MeSO4] as a recyclable organocatalyst in the multicomponent reaction for the
preparation of dihydropyrimidinones and-thiones. Synthesis, 2011, 2261–2267.
[87] Kelemen Z, Hollóczki O, Nagy J, Nyulászi L. An organocatalytic ionic liquid. Org Biomol Chem, 2011,
9, 5362–5364.
[88] Oliveira GH, Ramos LM, De paiva R, Passos ST, Simões MM, Machado F, Correa JR, Neto BA.
Synthetic enzyme-catalyzed multicomponent reaction for Isoxazol-5 (4 H)-one Syntheses, their
properties and biological application; why should one study mechanisms?. Org Biomol Chem, 2021,
19, 1514–1531.
[89] Kumar D, Sonawane M, Pujala B, Jain VK, Bhagat S, Chakraborti AK. Supported protic acid-catalyzed
synthesis of2,3-disubstituted thiazolidin-4-ones: Enhancement ofthe catalytic potential of protic acid
by adsorption onsolid supports. Green chem, 2013, 15, 2872–2884.
[90] Hill MD. Recent strategies for the synthesis of pyridine derivatives. Chem Eur J, 2010, 16,
12052–12062.
[91] Allais C, Grassot J-M, Rodriguez J, Constantieux T. Metal-free multicomponent syntheses of
pyridines. Chem Rev, 2014, 114, 10829–10868.
[92] Sharma G, Kumar R, Chakraborti AK. “On water” synthesis of 2,4-Diaryl-2,3-dihydro-1,5-
benzothiazepines catalysed by sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS). Tetrahedron Lett, 2008, 49,
4269–4271.
[93] Chakraborti AK, Rudrawar S, Jadhav KB, Kaur G, Chankeshwara SV. “On water” organic synthesis:
A highly efficient and clean synthesis of 2-Aryl/Heteroaryl/Styryl Benzothiazoles and 2-Alkyl/Aryl
Alkyl benzothiazolines. Green Chem, 2007, 9, 1335–1340.
[94] Parikh N, Kumar D, Raha Roy S, Chakraborti AK. Surfactant mediated oxygen reuptake in water for
green aerobic oxidation: Mass-spectrometric determination of discrete intermediates to correlate
oxygen uptake with oxidation efficiency. Chem Commun, 2011, 47, 1797–1799.
[95] Maddila S, Nagaraju K, Chinnam S, Jonnalagadda SB. Microwave‐assisted multicomponent reaction:
A green and catalyst‐free method for the synthesis of poly‐functionalized 1, 4‐dihydropyridines.
ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 9451–9454.
[96] Devarajan N, Suresh P. MIL-101-SO3H metal-organic framework as a brønsted acid catalyst in
hantzsch reaction: An efficient and sustainable methodology for one-pot synthesis of 1,
4-dihydropyridine. New J Chem, 2019, 43, 6806–6814.
[97] Du XX, Zi QX, Wu YM, Jin Y, Lin J, Yan SJ. An environmentally benign multi-component reaction:
regioselective synthesis of fluorinated 2-aminopyridines using diverse properties of the nitro group.
Green Chem, 2019, 21, 1505–1516.
[98] Chen J, Meng H, Zhang F, Xiao F, Deng GJ. Transition-metal-free selective pyrimidines and pyridines
formation from aromatic ketones, aldehydes and ammonium salts. Green Chem, 2019, 21,
5201–5206.
[99] Kong L, Huang R, He H, Fan Y, Lin J, Yan S. Multi-component solvent-free cascade reaction of
2-cyanoacetamides: Regioselective synthesis of pyridin-2-ones bearing quaternary centers. Green
Chem, 2020, 22, 256–264.
[100] Liu S, Li J, Lin J, Liu F, Liu T, Huang C. Substituent-controlled chemoselective synthesis of multi￾substituted pyridones via a one-pot three-component cascade reaction. Org Biomol Chem, 2020, 18,
1130–1134.
[101] He Q, Cao L, Wei Y, Dake GR. Utility of 2‐diphenylphosphoryloxy‐1, 3‐dienes in multicomponent
hetero‐diels-alder reactions to construct functionalized six‐membered nitrogen heterocycles. Chem
Eur J, 2022, 202201328.
[102] Challa CS, Katari NK, Nallanchakravarthula V, Nayakanti D, Kapavarapu R, Pal M. Wang-OSO3H
catalyzed green synthesis of 2-arylamino-3-cyanopyridine derivatives under ultrasound: Their
assessment as potential inhibitors of SIRT1. J Mol Struct, 2022, 1253, 132309.
52 Nirjhar Saha et al.[103] Budhiraja M, Ali A, Tyagi V. First biocatalytic synthesis of piperidine derivatives via an immobilized
lipase-catalyzed multicomponent reaction. New J Chem, 2022, 46, 4837–4849.
[104] Ding Y, Ma R, Xiao X-Q, Wang L, Wang Z, Ma Y. Sustainable four-component annulation for the
synthesis of 2,3,4,6-tetraarylpyridines. J Org Chem, 2021, 86, 3897–3906.
[105] Sarkar A, Raha Roy S, Kumar D, Madaan C, Rudrawar S, Chakraborti AK. Lack of correlation between
catalytic efficiency and basicity of amines during the reaction of aryl methyl ketones with DMF￾DMA: An unprecedented supramolecular domino catalysis. Org Biomol Chem, 2012, 10, 281–286.
[106] Kumar D, Kommi DN, Chopra P, Ansari MI, Chakraborti AK. L-Proline catalysed activation of methyl
ketones/active methylene compounds and DMF-DMA for synthesis of (2E)-3-dimethylamino-2-
propen-1-ones. Eur J Org Chem, 2012, 6407–6413.
[107] Krishna B, Payra S, Roy S. Synthesis of dihydropyrimidinones via multicomponent reaction route over
acid functionalized Metal-Organic framework catalysts. J Colloid Interface Sci, 2022, 607, 729–741.
[108] Wang L, Zhong J, Lin X. Atroposelective phosphoric acid catalyzed three‐component cascade
reaction: Enantioselective synthesis of axially chiral N‐arylindoles. Angew Chem Int Ed, 2019, 58,
15824–15828.
[109] Zhang Y, Zhu H, Huang Y, Hu Q, He Y, Wen Y, Zhu G. Multicomponent synthesis of isoindolinones by
RhIII relay catalysis: Synthesis of pagoclone and pazinaclone from benzaldehyde. Org Lett, 2019, 21,
1273–1277.
[110] Lambat TL, Abdala AA, Mahmood S, Ledade PV, Chaudhary RG, Banerjee S. Sulfamic acid promoted
one-pot multicomponent reaction: A facile synthesis of 4-oxo-tetrahydroindoles under ball milling
conditions. RSC Adv, 2019, 9, 39735–39742.
[111] Yuan S, Yue YL, Zhang DQ, Zhang JY, Yu B, Liu HM. Synthesis of new tetracyclic benzodiazepine￾fused isoindolinones using recyclable mesoporous silica nanoparticles. ChemCommun, 2020, 56,
11461–11464.
[112] Panday AK, Ali D, Choudhury LH. One-pot synthesis of pyrimidine linked naphthoquinone-fused
pyrroles by iodine-mediated multicomponent reactions. Org Biomol Chem, 2020, 18, 4997–5007.
[113] Zhang X, Qiu W, Murray SA, Zhan D, Evans J, Jasinski JP, Wang X, Zhang W. Pseudo-five-component
reaction for diastereoselective synthesis of butterfly shaped bispiro [oxindole-pyrrolidine] s. J Org
Chem, 2021, 86, 17395–17403.
[114] Li K, Chen L, Fan YX, Wei Y, Yan SJ. Multicomponent Tether catalysis synthesis of highly
functionalized 4-(pyridin-2-ylmethyl)-2-aminopyrroles via cascade reaction is accompanied by
decarboxylation. J Org Chem, 2019, 84, 11971–11982.
[115] Khumalo MR, Maddila SN, Maddila S, Jonnalagadda SB. A multicomponent, facile and catalyst-free
microwave-assisted protocol for the synthesis of pyrazolo-[3, 4-b]-quinolines under green
conditions. RSC Adv, 2019, 9, 30768–30772.
[116] Nazeri MT, Javanbakht S, Shaabani A, Khavasi HR. Chemo‐and diastereoselective synthesis of
pyrazolo‐tetrahydropyridines via multicomponent sequential aza‐diels‐alder reactions in water.
ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 14271–14275.
[117] Ghasemzadeh MA, Mirhosseini‐Eshkevari B, Abdollahi‐Basir MH. MIL‐53 (fe) metal-organic
frameworks (MOFs) as an efficient and reusable catalyst for the one‐pot four‐component synthesis
of pyrano [2, 3‐c]‐pyrazoles. Appl Organomet Chem, 2019, 33, 4679.
[118] Ali E, Naimi‐Jamal MR, Ghahramanzadeh R. One‐pot multicomponent synthesis of pyrano [2, 3 c]
pyrazole derivatives using CMCSO3H as a green catalyst. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 9033–9039.
[119] Kumar D, Kommi DN, Chebolu R, Garg SK, Kumar R, Chakraborti AK. Selectivity control during the
solid supported protic acid catalysed synthesis of 1,2-disubstituted benzimidazoles and mechanistic
insight to rationalize selectivity. RSC Adv, 2013, 3, 91–98.
[120] Tan H, Wang Y. Facile synthesis of novel hexahydroimidazo [1, 2-a] pyridine derivatives by one-pot,
multicomponent reaction under ambient conditions. ACS Comb Sci, 2020, 22, 468–474.
1 Synthesis of aza-heterocycles via one-pot domino multicomponent reaction approach 53[121] Shareef S, Khizr M, Sahoo SC, Khan MM. Microwave assisted novel one-pot three-component reaction
for synthesis of 3-aminoimidazopyridines using molecular iodine. Tetrahedron Lett, 2021, 84, 153452.
[122] Zhang Y, Chen R, Wang Z, Wang L, Ma Y. I2-Catalyzed three-component consecutive reaction for the
synthesis of 3-aroylimidazo [1, 2-a]-N-heterocycles. J Org Chem, 2021, 86, 6239–6246.
[123] Kumar D, Kumar A, Qadri MM, Ansari MI, Gautam A, Chakraborti AK. In(OTf)3-catalyzed synthesis of
2-styryl quinolines: Scope and limitations of metal Lewis acids for tandem Friedländer annulation￾Knoevenagel condensation. RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 2920–2927.
[124] Tanwar B, Kumar D, Kumar A, Ansari MI, Qadri MM, Vaja MD, Singh M, Chakraborti AK. Friedländer
annulation: Scope and limitations of metal salt Lewis acid catalysts in selectivity control for the
synthesis of functionalised quinolines. New J Chem, 2015, 39, 9824–9833.
[125] Thakur V, Sharma A, Yamini, Sharma N, Das P. N. Supported palladium nanoparticles‐catalyzed
synthesis of 3‐substituted 2‐quinolones from 2‐iodoanilines and alkynes using oxalic acid as C1
source. Adv Synth Catal, 2019, 361, 426–431.
[126] Arumugam N, Almansour AI, Kumar RS, Altaf M, Mahalingam SM, Periyasami G, Menéndez JC,
Al-Aizari AJ. Multicomponent domino protocol for the stereoselective synthesis of novel pyrrolo
[3, 2-c] quinolinone hybrid heterocycles. Tetrahedron Lett, 2019, 60, 602–605.
[127] Mahato S, Mukherjee A, Santra S, Zyryanov GV, Majee A. Facile synthesis of substituted quinolines
by iron (iii)-catalyzed cascade reaction between anilines, aldehydes and nitroalkanes. Org Biomol
Chem, 2019, 17, 7907–7917.
[128] Chandra D, Dhiman AK, Kumar R, Sharma U. Microwave‐assisted metal‐free rapid synthesis of
C4‐arylated quinolines via povarov type multicomponent reaction. Eur J Org Chem, 2019, 2019,
2753–2758.
[129] Zhao P, Wu X, Zhou Y, Geng X, Wang C, Wu YD, Wu AX. Direct synthesis of 2, 3-diaroyl quinolines
and pyridazino [4, 5-b] quinolines via an I2-promoted one-pot multicomponent reaction. Org Lett,
2019, 21, 2708–2711.
[130] Kumar D, Jadhavar PS, Nautiyal M, Sharma H, Meena PK, Adane L, Pancholia S, Chakraborti AK.
Convenient synthesis of 2,3-disubstituted quinazolin-4(H)-ones and 2-styryl-3-substituted
quinazolin-4(3H)-ones: Applications towards the synthesis of drugs. RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 30819–30825.
[131] Sayahi MH, Saghanezhad SJ, Bahadorikhalili S, Mahdavi M. CuBr‐catalysed one‐pot multicomponent
synthesis of 3‐substituted 2‐thioxo‐2, 3‐dihydroquinazolin‐4 (1H)‐one derivatives. Appl Organomet
Chem, 2019, 33, 4635.
[132] Hada S, Khan Zai MS, Roat P, Verma VP, Shah AK, Yadav DK, Kumari N. Metal‐free graphene oxide
promoted a novel multicomponent reaction for the synthesis of 3‐substituted quinazolinones using
DMSO as one carbon synthon. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 1176–1179.
[133] Liang Y, Tan Z, Jiang H, Zhu Z, Zhang M. Copper-catalyzed oxidative multicomponent annulation
reaction for direct synthesis of quinazolinones via an imine-protection strategy. Org Lett, 2019, 21,
4725–4728.
[134] Zhao P, Yu XX, Zhou Y, Geng X, Wang C, Huang C, Wu YD, Zhu YP, Wu AX. Splitting methyl ketones
into two parts: Synthesis of 4 (3 H)-quinazolinones via consecutive cyclization/ring-opening
reaction. Org Lett, 2020, 22, 7103–7107.
[135] Sun M, Yu YL, Zhao L, Ding MW. One-pot and divergent synthesis of furo [3, 2-c] quinolines and
quinazolin-4 (3H)-ones via sequential isocyanide-based three-component/staudinger/aza-wittig
reaction. Tetrahedron, 2021, 80, 131868.
[136] Shim SH, Park H, Mishra NK, Kim IS, Lee JK, Lee K, Jalani HB, Choi Y. Catalyst‐free one‐pot multi‐
component synthesis of 2‐substituted quinazolin‐4‐carboxamides from 2‐aminophenyl‐2‐
oxoacetamides, aldehydes, and ammonium acetate. ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 5446–5450.
[137] Zhang R, Ma R, Fu Q, Chen R, Wang Z, Wang L, Ma Y. Selective electrophilic di-and
monofluorinations for the synthesis of 4-difluoromethyl and 4-fluoromethyl quinazolin (thi) ones by
a Selectfluor-triggered multi-component reaction. Org Chem Front, 2022, 9, 1567–1573.
54 Nirjhar Saha et al.Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nath✶
2 One-pot three-component selective
annulation strategies for the synthesis
of bioactive β-lactam, pyrrole, and pyridine
scaffolds
2.1 Introduction
Multicomponent reaction (MCR) strategies differ from traditional synthetic procedures
and often involve a combination of three or more smartly functionalized building
blocks to produce a customized product in one-pot using the majority of atoms present
in the substrates/reagents (remarkable atom economy), ultimately producing good-to￾excellent isolated yields, and thereby saving time and energy [1, 2]. MCR protocols have
become efficient and effective synthetic techniques for the synthesis of diverse complex
scaffolds in a single step. Besides, this concept has been proven effective in a number of
areas, including materials science, combinatorial chemistry, drug discovery, and biolog￾ical probes [3, 4]. Moreover, MCRs are distinguished by time effectiveness, high product
yield, production of minimum waste, and less energy consumption. In light of these ad￾vantages, synthetic organic chemists became interested to design efficient environmen￾tally friendly synthetic strategies using MCRs [5].
Heterocycles which make up the majority of all-known organic substances consti￾tutes the magnificent kinds of chemicals having tremendous biological actions [6, 7]. Very
specifically, N- and O-heterocycles represent a privileged structural subunit that is widely
distributed in compounds that occur naturally with incredible biological activities, includ￾ing anticancer, anti-HIV, antimalarial, antiinflammatory, antimicrobial, and antihypergly￾cemic, as well as antineurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer’s, Parkinson disease,
Huntington’s disease, and many more [7, 8]. In spite of the enormity of applications, the
synthesis of these heterocycles often depends on conventional transformations due to its
dependability, robustness, and affordability. It is also true that several of these reactions
produce significant volumes of waste by-products. Nonetheless, organic chemists have
✶
Corresponding author: Mahendra Nath, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of
Delhi, Delhi 110007, India
Bijoy P Mathew, Department of Chemistry, Vimala College (Autonomous), Thrissur 680009, Kerala,
India
Jagmeet Singh, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Delhi, Delhi 110007, India
Acknowledgments: MN is thankful to the IoE, University of Delhi, India, for providing the FRP grant. JS is
grateful to CSIR, New Delhi, India, for the award of senior research fellowship. BPM acknowledges DST￾FIST and DBT-STAR College Scheme for the financial assistance.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-002shown significant interest in developing novel and affordable MCR synthetic strategies
under one-pot operation. In this regard, one-pot three-component reaction is emerging as
a useful technique for creating a wide range of molecular entities. Designing one-pot
MCRs methodologies that are less hazardous and eco-friendly is a continuing effort in
both academia and industry. This chapter emphasizes primarily the formation of three
major N-heterocycles – β-lactams, pyrroles, and pyridines via one-pot three-component
annulation reactions reported since 2011.
2.2 Three-component synthesis of β-lactams
Among the various cyclic amides, β-lactams (2-azetidinones) are unique in terms of
bioactivity profile and wide range of occurrence in natural products. The discovery of
penicillin was regarded as a milestone in medical history, leaving many researchers
inspired to study and utilize β-lactams. Their derivatives developed during the past
decades have shown potent antibacterial and antimicrobial properties. However, β￾lactamase is an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of the lactam ring in the antibi￾otic which not only liberate it from the binding site but also deactivate it [9]. And this
capability advances in bacterial strains leading to antibacterial resistance and hence
demands generation of more number of diverse β-lactam scaffolds. In addition to
their antibacterial properties, β-lactams have also shown anticancer, antiviral, antihy￾perglycemic, and other biological properties [10–16]. Thus, economical and convenient
newer protocols to access β-lactams are highly worthwhile. Several reviews have
come up regarding the synthesis of β-lactams since 2011 [16–21]. In this section, we
have included only the three-component annulation strategies to β-lactams.
2.2.1 Using Ugi reaction
Among the various reported multicomponent reactions, four-center three-component
Ugi (4C-3C-Ugi) reactions are worth mentioning first [22]. After the introduction of
these novel reactions in 1995 by Kehagi and Ugi [23, 24] many reports were published
related to the β-lactam syntheses. In fact, these protocols are the modified version of
the four-component Ugi-type reaction which involves only three components and one
of the components is bifunctional such as amino acids, oxoacids, an isocyanoalde￾hyde, or isocyanoacid. A typical 4C-3C-Ugi for β-lactams involves a reaction between
an β-amino acid, an aldehyde, and an isocyanide (Figure 2.1). The reaction mechanism
involved an initial iminium ion formation (2), which in turn attacked by isonitrile as
nucleophile leading to oxazepinone-type intermediate (4) from intramolecular addi￾tion in intermediate (3), of the carboxylate to the nitrilium ion. This intermediate
56 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathundergoes rearrangement to form β-lactam ring (1). The whole reaction is proposed
to be auto-catalyzed via protonation of imine by carboxylic acid group.
Focusing only on the reports since 2011, Sureshbabu and coworkers [25] synthesized β￾lactam-linked peptidomimetics (8a–e) by utilizing this method. In this reaction, chiral
Nβ
-Fmoc amino alkyl isonitriles (6) were employed with L-aspartic acid α-methylpeptide
ester (comprising di/tripeptides) and commercially available organic aldehydes (7) to
obtain the requisite β-lactams (8). These reactions were carried out in methanol as sol￾vent at room temperature and products were obtained in moderate yields with good
diastereoselectivity (Figure 2.2).
Similarly, Blackie et al. [26] synthesized three series of diversely substituted β￾lactams (Figure 2.3) and evaluated all the compounds for an in vitro assay against the
chloroquine sensitive D10 strain of Plasmodium falciparum. All the compounds showed
low to moderate level of activity with compounds 9a, 9b, and 9c (from series 1); 9d (from
series 2); and 9e (from series 3) showed better 50% inhibitory concentration of 27, 35, and
48; 16; and 15 µM, respectively. The structure-activity relationship wasn’t very clear in the
study though broadly aromatic substitution at para with electron-withdrawing group in
series 1, terminal methylbenzylamine in series 2 as well as benzotriazole compound in
series 3 were cited for improved efficacy.
Recently, Rainoldi et al. [27] developed 4C-3C-Ugi using a rare example where ke￾tone has been used as the carbonyl component. In this protocol, β-amino acid (12) as
usual was reacted with isocyanide (11) and isatin (10, ketonic counterpart) in an acidic
solvent, trifluoroethanol (Figure 2.4). This gave a variety of oxoindole-based β-lactams
(13), having a peptidomimetic backbone. Promisingly, enantiomerically pure β-amino
acids ((S)-3-amino-3-phenylpropanoic acid and (S)-3-amino-4-methoxy-4-oxobutanoic
acid) afforded compounds 13o and 13p, respectively, with moderate diastereoselec￾tively, but both the enantiomers were separable in their pure form. All the compounds
(13a–p) were subjected to physico-chemical analysis and were found to exhibit drug￾Figure 2.1: A typical four-center three-component Ugi (4C-3C-Ugi) reaction.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 57like character according to Lipinski’s rule of five [28]. Further a preliminary in vitro
antibacterial assay demonstrated compound (13e, i.e., R1
= Me) to possess inhibition of
Streptococcus mutan at a concentration of 0.81 mM.
Figure 2.2: Synthesis of β-lactam-linked peptidomimetics (8a–e) using 4C-3C-Ugi strategy.
Figure 2.3: Representative β-lactam derivatives with their antimalarial activity against Plasmodium
falciparum.
58 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nath2.2.2 Using Kinugasa reaction
Kinugasa reaction involving a [3 + 2] cycloaddition between nitrone and a copper ace￾tylide represents another approach to β-lactam synthesis. For quiet sometimes the re￾action suffered from a drawback of no catalytic and highly enantioselective strategy.
Toward this end, Miura et al. [29] reported the first enantioselective reaction between
phenyl acetylene and α,N-diphenylnitrone with catalyst (CuI), ligand (i-Pr BOX) and
base [(–)-sparteine] leading to marginal yield and enantioselectivity. Thereafter sev￾eral chiral ligands [30–33] have been used for giving enantioselective β-lactam prod￾ucts. In 2014, Safaei-Ghomi et al. [34] have developed chiral catalyst using chiral
cyclohexadiamine supported on Fe3O4/ZnO core/MNPs for producing diastereoselective
β-lactams via Kinugasa reaction. The reaction involves a catalytic in situ generation and
reaction between Cu (I)-acetylides and nitrones via one-pot three-component reaction
of aryl aldehyde (14), N-arylhydroxylamine (15), and terminal acetylene (16) using the
chiral MNPs in polyethylene glycol (PEG) as solvent and at room temperature (Fig￾ure 2.5). In this, Cu(II) is used as a catalyst as opposed to Cu(I) in classical Kinugasa reac￾tion. The mechanism involves usual [3 + 2] cycloaddition with arylacetylide attaching
the nitrone from the Si face in the transition state (18), leading to an isooxazoline inter￾mediate (19). This intermediate is thereafter converted to enolate (20) and intercepted
with a proton to yield a major diastereoselective cis-β-lactams (17).
Qi et al. [35] in 2020 developed for the first time a perfect one-pot three-component
Kinugasa reaction between terminal alkynes (21) and nitrones (22) interrupted by a sulfur
electrophile (23 or 24) to form an enantioenriched α-thiofunctional chiral β-lactams (25
Figure 2.4: 4C-3C-Ugi reaction with ketone (isatin, 10) as the third component.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 59Figure 2.5: One-pot three-component enantioselective Kinugasa annulation reaction to β-lactams.
Figure 2.6: Synthesis of α-thiofunctional chiral β-lactams (25 or 26) via interrupted Kinugasa reaction.
60 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathor 26) (Figure 2.6). Mechanistically, a regular four-member enolate Cu(I)-intermediate
(29) in a Kinugasa reaction is intercepted by a sulfur electrophile leading to an unusual
introduction of sulfur moiety on a β-lactam ring system, 25 or 26. This is indirectly proved
by the failed reaction between the Kinugasa products with PhSO2SCH3. Same group devel￾oped a similar interrupted Kinugasa reaction where the regular β-lactam formation is in￾tercepted by allylic alkylation through allylic palladium intermediate (32A) [36]. This
involves a three-component reaction between alkyne (30), nitrones (31), and protected
allyl compound (32) in presence of bimetallic Cu–Pd catalytic system catalyzing Kinugasa
reaction and Tsuji-Trost allylic alkylation, respectively (Figure 2.7). In Figure 2.8, a con￾ceivable catalytic cycle is put forth. The crucial four-membered enolate copper(I) interme￾diate (33A) is provided by the usual cycloaddition between Cu(I)-acetylide (30A) and
nitrones (31). An interim allylic palladium intermediate (32A) is concomitantly generated
by activation of allylic electrophile (32) using palladium catalyst. The reactive intermedi￾ate 33A and 32A created by the simultaneous catalytic cycles undergo stereo-controlled
interrupted Kinugasa allylic alkylation to form the intended α-quaternary chiral β￾lactams via an intermediate, 33B.
Figure 2.7: Synthesis of stereocontrolled α-quatenary β-lactams (33) via interrupted Kinugasa allylic
alkylation.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 612.2.3 Using Staudinger reaction
Of the various methods available for β-lactam synthesis, Staudinger reaction is the most
versatile method, in which ketenes (or its synthetic equivalents) are added to imines in a
formal [2 + 2] cycloaddition reaction [37, 38]. In 2014, Mandler et al. [39] gave the first one￾pot three-component synthesis of β-lactams using phenyldiazoacetate (34), azide (35), and
enonediazoacetate (36) with Rh catalyst at 40 °C to give excellent yield and diastereoselec￾tivity (Figure 2.9). The article describes the optimization of Rh-catalyzed imine formation
(37) from reaction between compounds 34 and 35. It also suggests the possible Wolff rear￾rangement of compound (36) to form ketene intermediate (36A) in the presence of Rh
catalyst. So the discussed one-pot three-component synthesis will plausibly involve [2 + 2]
cycloaddition between intermediate (36A) and imine, 37. In spite of projected versatile
application, there is limited substrate scope reported in this paper. In another report, Mo￾zaffari et al. [40] synthesized β-lactams via a one-pot sequential three-component Stau￾dinger coupling between imine and ketene generated in situ from aldehyde (40) with
primary amines (39) and an acid chloride (generated from reaction between Ar2
OCH2CO￾2H with p-toluene sulfonyl chloride), respectively (Figure 2.10). In addition to being simple
to operate, the protocol has the advantages of short reaction time, convenient workup,
good yields, applicability to a wide range of substrates (19 new β-lactams, 42a–s), and a
low risk of exposure to humans or the environment.
Krasavin and coworkers [41] developed another sequential metal-free three￾component reaction involving in situ-generated imine, 46A (from amine (44) and alde￾hyde (43)) followed by reaction with α-acyl-α-diazoacetate, 45 (Figure 2.11). The β-lactams
(49) obtained showed promising yield and remarkable diastereoselectivity. Except for
Figure 2.8: Plausible bimetallic mechanism for Cu/Pd-catalyzed interrupted Kinugasa allylic alkylation.
62 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathenolizable α-C–H imines (such as N-(cyclohexylmethylene)-1-phenylmethanamine), other
imine did give the requisite β-lactam. This reaction proceeded via a Wolff rearrangement
of diazo compound (45) to form ketene (45A) and subsequent trapping of the ketene
by imine (46A) through Staudinger cyclization. The mechanism involves formation
of stable oxazinone intermediate (47) which on ring-opening (RO; forms betaine in￾termediate, 48) followed by cyclization give the final product, 49. The same group also
reported a similar metal-free sequential three-component strategy using readily avail￾able dialkyl diazomalonates (50) [42]. Though the method used two equivalents of 50,
but gave an extremely rare type of β-lactam, 3-alkoxy-3-alkoxycarbonyl-2-azetidinones,
51 (Figure 2.12).
Chen et al. [43] developed a three-component β-lactam synthesis via reaction be￾tween N-hydroxyanilines (52), enynones (53), and diazo compounds (54) using a metal￾organo relay catalysis giving highly functionalized β-lactams (55) with two quaternary
carbon centers and excellent diastereoselectivities (Figure 2.13). A plausible sequential
three catalytic cycle was proposed involving Rh-catalyzed Wolff rearrangement as well
as imine formation and an Umpolung Staudinger cyclization. The whole reaction is
plausibly initiated by the formation of reactive 2-furyl carbene (53A) from enynones
(53a), which in turn combine with amphiphilic nucleophile N-hydroxyaniline (52a), to
generate two ylides (IA and IB). These ylides on subsequent migration, rearrangement,
and loss of H2O yield imine (IIIA). The synergistic Rh-catalyzed Wolff rearrangement
gave ketene (54B), which on nucleophilic attack by organo-base (L2) generate an enolate
(54C), which acts as a nucleophile and attack the imine (IIIA) forming the required β￾lactam (55a) via umpolung Staudinger cyclization (Figure 2.14). An analogous three￾Figure 2.9: One-pot three-component synthesis of β-lactams via Rh-catalyzed Staudinger reaction.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 63component synthesis involving Staudinger cyclization was developed with more moder￾ate condition (Figure 2.15) by the same group [44]. The reaction involved a one-pot reac￾tion of N-hydroxyaniline (56) and diazo compounds 57 and 58 to synthesize dual
quaternary substituted β-lactams (59) with excellent diastereoselectivity.
Minuto et al. [45] recently developed a new ketene three-component Staudinger
reaction to synthesize β-lactams. This reaction involves visible light induced coupling
of diazoketones (60), primary amines (61) and carbonyl compounds (62) all at once in
a one-pot (Figure 2.16) giving trans-products (63) with moderate substrate scope (nine
examples). This reaction is first of its kind and an imine is formed in situ as opposed
Figure 2.10: Metal-free one-pot sequential three-component Staudinger coupling to diastereoselective
β-lactams.
64 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathto its sequential generation and then, Staudinger cyclization with the ketene. Another
one-pot three-component reaction involves tandem imine formation and Staudinger
cyclization using substrates N-hydroxyanilines (64), diazo compounds (65), and cyclo￾butenones (66) (Figure 2.17) [46]. The possible mechanism comprises Rh-catalyzed
imine generation (65A) from N-hydroxyaniline (64) and diazo compound (65); this is
followed by reaction with ketene (66A), from cyclobutenones (66) at high tempera￾ture, to form zwitterionic intermediates (67A). Then, the intermediates (67A) undergo
possible [2 + 2] cyclization to produce highly functionalized four-membered β-lactams
with excellent diastereoselectivity. The reaction showed good substrate scope and bet￾ter tolerance to functional groups.
Figure 2.11: Synthesis of lactams via sequential metal-free three-component reaction involving
concomitant Wolff rearrangement and Staudinger cyclization.
Figure 2.12: Synthesis of a rare type of β-lactam, 3-alkoxy-3-alkoxycarbonyl-2-azetidinones, 51.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 65Figure 2.13: Diastereoselective synthesis of highly functionalized β-lactams (55).
Figure 2.14: A plausible sequential tricatalytic cycle.
66 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nath2.3 Three-component synthesis of pyrroles
Pyrrole constitutes a well-known and almost ubiquitous five-membered heteroaromatic
compound. They form the key structural motifs in porphyrin-based biomolecules ranging
vitamin B12, chlorophyll pigments, heme as well as enzyme cofactors (cytochrome P450)
[47, 48]. In addition, pyrrole ring commonly exists in marine natural products [49, 50],
lead drugs [51, 52], synthons [53, 54], and optoelectronic materials [48], and has significant
Figure 2.16: Photoinduced three-component Staudinger reaction.
Figure 2.17: Diastereoselective synthesis of highly functionalized β-lactams.
Figure 2.15: Synthesis of β-lactams via Rh-catalyzed C–N bond formation.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 67applications in medicinal chemistry owing to their broad range of bioactivities [52, 55].
Due to these many applications in bioactivity and drug applications, as intermediates in
natural products synthesis and application in materials have caused interest in the devel￾opment of pyrroles synthesis which include traditional routes, such as the Hantzsch
pyrrole synthesis [56], Knorr [57, 58], Paal–Knorr pyrrole [59, 60] synthesis to nonclassi￾cal one [61, 62], and many new synthons have been developed. Again focusing on re￾ports since 2011, we discussed in this section only reactions related to one-pot three￾component synthesis of pyrroles. There are several substrate combinations is reported
in literature [63–66]. We have classified the various reports based on common sub￾strates involved among the three-component synthetic protocol.
2.3.1 From 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds
Korotaev et al. [67] synthesized novel β-(trifluoromethyl)pyrroles (71) via one-pot,
three-component Grob cyclization [68] of 1,1,1-trifluoro-3-nitrobut-2-ene (68) with 1,3-
dicarbonyls (69) and ammonia or primary aliphatic amines (70) in ethanol as a sol￾vent under reflux (Figure 2.18). A plausible pathway involves an initial formation of
intermediate aminoenones (72). This intermediate then undergoes nucleophilic addi￾tion to conjugated nitroalkene to form intermediates A and B, which on cyclization
give the required compound (71) as outlined in Figure 2.18. This new synthesis of β-
(trifluoromethyl)pyrroles proceeds under mild conditions and the starting materials
are readily available. Several reports of pyrroles synthesized using similar nitroole￾fins with primary amines and 1,3-dicarbonyl substrates were reported using catalyst
such as nano-CoFe2O4-supported antimony(III) [69], an acidic ionic liquid (IL) 3-methyl-2-
(1-sulfobutyl)-1H-imidazolium hydrogensulfate, [BSO3HMIm]HSO4 [70], or N-methyl-2-
pyrrolidonium methyl sulfonate ([NMPH]CH3SO3) [71]. In another report, analog sub￾strates nitrostyrenes, amines, and 1,3-dicarbonyls were reacted in refluxing ethanol in
the presence of catalytic amounts of iodobenzene and oxone as oxidant to make pyrroles
with similar mechanism as illustrated in Figure 2.18 [72]. Significant improvement was
reported by Li et al. [73] and they have used gold(I) catalyst and achieved the reaction in
ethanol at room temperature. Very recently Akbaslar et al. [74] have used lactic acid as
recyclable organic catalyst-cum-reaction medium for obtaining the pyrroles in moderate
to excellent yield without using any chromatographic separations. Intermediate β￾aminoenones (A, Figure 2.19) are also formed in a one-pot three-component reaction cata￾lysed by Yb(OTf)3. In this protocol, Reddy et al. [75] reacted amines (73), an acetyl acetone,
and phenacyl bromide (74a) in a single pot in the presence of a reusable Yb(OTf)3 as a
catalyst to form new 1,2,3,4-tetrasubstituted pyrroles (75) (Figure 2.19). In vitro studies
were also conducted on these compounds to determine their ability to inhibit the PDE4B
enzyme. Inhibitors of PDE4 are known to be effective in treating asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. In the present study, compounds 75a and 75b inhibited
PDE4B significantly (57.89% and 66.13% inhibition, respectively), suggesting that the pres￾68 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathent class of pyrroles may be useful in the development of drugs. When tested at concen￾trations of 1, 5, 10, 30, and 100 mM, compound (75b) inhibited PDE4B by 20, 40, 61, 69,
and 75%, respectively. Docking studies were also reported in this paper. A modified ap￾proach with 3-(bromoacetyl)coumarin (74b) as analogous substrate to phenacyl bromide
(74a) was carried using an economic, environmentally benign, and mild catalyst alum in
water–PEG 400 binary solvent system producing 3-(1-aryl-4-acetyl-5-methyl-1H-pyrrol-2-
yl)-2H-chromen-2-ones (76), a new heterocyclic scaffold containing synergistic biological
benefits of coumarin and pyrrole nuclei in a single molecule [76]. The expected mecha￾nism involved the condensation of β-dicarbonyl(acetyl acetone) and amine derivatives
(73) to generate β-enaminone (A) first. It should be noted that the active Al3+ site in alum
increases the electrophilicity of the β-dicarbonyl(acetyl acetone), preventing amine nucle￾ophiles from attacking the activated α-C of (bromoacetyl)coumarin (74b) prematurely.
Following that, the intermediate β-enaminone (A) experienced alum-catalyzed nu￾cleophilic attack at the α-C (Al3+ polarizes the Br atom) of (bromoacetyl)coumarin
(74b) to yield a new intermediate (B), which then undergoes sequential intramolecu￾lar cyclization followed by dehydration to yield the target molecule (76). Magar et al.
[77] developed a mild, efficient, three-component synthesis of diverse N-protected tet￾rasubstituted pyrroles (79) in good-to-excellent yields from nitroallylicacetates (77),
amines (78), and ethyl acetoacetate mediated by ceric ammonium nitrate (CAN) in
MeOH. Possibly β-enaminones (A) formed in situ are thought to engage the nitroallylic
acetates (77) to give the pyrroles (79) by an interesting SN2 reaction to form intermedi￾ate B and C and aromatization process (of cyclic intermediate C) (Figure 2.20).
Figure 2.18: Synthesis of novel β-(trifluoromethyl)pyrroles 71.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 69In another report, benzoin derivatives (80), 1,3-dicarbonyls (81), and ammonium ace￾tate were reacted in the presence of an efficient and reusable solid acid catalyst, mo￾lybdate sulfuric acid (MSA), to form new 2,3,4,5-tetrasubstituted pyrroles (82) via a
novel [2 + 2 + 1] strategy under solvent-free conditions (Figure 2.21) [78]. The plausible
mechanism involves initial chemoselective formation of imine intermediate (81A), fol￾Figure 2.19: Synthesis of differently substituted pyrroles via alum- or Yb(OTf)3-catalyzed reactions.
Figure 2.20: CAN-mediated one-pot synthesis of N-protected tetrasubstituted pyrroles.
70 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathlowed by nucleophilic attack on the MSA-activated benzoin (80A) to form 80B. Then, this
undergoes intramolecular cyclization to form a cyclic intermediate, 82A (via dehydration
of 80C) and elimination of water produces the corresponding tetrasubstituted pyrroles
(82). Using the similar substrates, Niknam et al. [79] have synthesized tetrasubstituted
pyrroles using acidic Al2O3 as an efficient and reusable heterogeneous catalyst in reflux￾ing ethanol in high yields. A solvent-free and catalyst-free approach using similar sub￾strates was also reported by Bhat and Trivedi [80].
Manasa et al. [81] reported a reaction of toluene sulfonyl methyl isocyanide (TosMIC)
with aldehydes (83) and 1,3-dicarbonyls (84) to make 3,4-disubstituted pyrroles (86) in
one-pot under metal-free conditions (Figure 2.22). The plausible mechanism involves the
Knoevenagel condensation between aldehydes (83) and 1,3-dicarbonyls (84) in the pres￾ence of base piperidinium acetate resulting in α,β-unsaturated dicarbonyl intermediate
(85). Thereafter, TosMIC undergoes base (DBU)-assisted Michael addition on to intermedi￾ate (85) giving intermediate (85A), which further undergoes intramolecular cyclisation
(forming 85B) followed by a loss of tosylate anion to give intermediate (86A), which fi￾nally undergoes base-assisted aromatization to form the final product (86).
Huang et al. [82] developed a new [1 + 2 + 2] route for making pharmaceutically sig￾nificant core scaffold, N-(hetero)aryl-4,5-unsubstituted pyrroles (90), using substrates
(hetero)arylamines (87), 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds (88), and α-bromo-acetaldehyde ace￾tal (89) by using aluminum(III) chloride as a Lewis acid catalyst (Figure 2.23). Using the
optimized conditions, three pharmaceutically active N-heterocyclic pyrrole deriva￾tives (90a–c) were synthesized, among which N-pyridylpyrroles 90a and 90b are very im￾portant intermediates in the synthesis of the activator of soluble guanylyl cyclase (sGC).
Plausible mechanism proposed involved the formation of a trivial enamine intermediate
(88A) from 87 and 88. Meanwhile, carbocation intermediate (89A) is formed by the activa￾Figure 2.21: MSA-catalyzed synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyrroles.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 71Figure 2.22: Synthesis of 3,4-disubstituted pyrroles from aldehydes, 1,3-diketones, and TosMIC under
metal-free conditions.
Figure 2.23: Synthesis of N-(hetero)aryl-4,5-unsubstituted pyrroles via [1 + 2 + 2] annulation.
72 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathtion of 89 with AlCl3, which in turn was trapped by the enamine intermediate (88A) to
generate imine intermediate (89B). Subsequently, 89B underwent an intramolecular elec￾trophilic substitution and a spontaneous aromatization to afford the pyrrole product (90).
2.3.2 From alkynes
Alkynes are another important substrate involved in the annulation to pyrrole moiety.
Nagarapu et al. [83] reported the use of alkyne substrate, dialkylacetylene dicarboxylates
(93), when reacted with phenacyl bromides (91) and primary amines (92) in a one-pot
three-component synthesis in an inexpensive, nontoxic, and recyclable PEG gave the tetra￾substituted-pyrroles (94) in good-to-excellent yields. The reaction conditions were moder￾ate and proceeded under catalyst-free conditions at an ambient temperature for 10 h
(Figure 2.24). The same reaction was performed using simple, rapid, efficient, and en￾vironmentally benign procedure under solvent-free conditions using reusable nanorod
ZnO catalyst [84]. In another report, using same substrates, Soltani et al. [85] developed an
efficient and mild protocol for the synthesis of polysubstituted pyrroles using heteropoly
acids, H3PW12O40 as a commercially available, inexpensive, environmentally friendly, non￾corrosive, and reusable catalyst under solvent-free and ambient reaction conditions. Zhao
et al. [86] developed a new simple strategy for constructing pharmaceutically significant
penta-substituted pyrroles (98) from α-nitroepoxides (95) via RO reaction with primary
amines (96) and acetylene dicarboxylates (97). This method needs no additives and is op￾erationally simple. The plausible mechanism (Figure 2.25) involves a nucleophilic RO reac￾tion at the electron-rich center on the α-nitro epoxides (95) to form intermediate (95A).
Then, this forms intermediate (95B) via HNO2 elimination owing to the excellent leaving
ability of nitro group. Thereafter, an intermolecular nucleophilic attack of N-center of 95B
on the acetylene dicarboxylates (97) leads to intermediate 97A and 98A. Finally, an intra￾molecular condensation of 98A leads to final penta-substituted pyrrole (98).
In another study, penta-substituted pyrrole derivatives (102a–h) were produced in excel￾lent yields by a reaction between a primary amine (100), ethyl 2-chloroacetoacetate (99),
and activated acetylenic compounds (101), all of which were reacted in the presence of
magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles (Figure 2.26) [87]. The advantages of the current approach
include a clean reaction, a quick reaction time, a high yield, simple purification, and an
Figure 2.24: Synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyrrole in PEG-400.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 73affordable catalyst. In this protocol unsymmetrically substituted alkynes were used, thus
affording pyrroles with diversified substitution. Qiu et al. [88] used propargyl carbonates
(103) along with isocyanides (104) and alcohols (105) in the presence of a catalytic amount
of Pd(OAc)2 and a stoichiometric amount of tert-butylamine afforded a penta-substituted
aminopyrroles (106) in good yields (Figure 2.27). A possible mechanism involves addition
of in situ produced isocyanide-coordinated Pd(0) species from Pd(OAc)2 to 103 would re￾sult in the production of (σ-allenyl)palladium(II) species A and CO2 at the same time. The
latter would be trapped by t
BuNH2 to afford carbamate anion B. A triple isocyanide inser￾Figure 2.26: Penta-substituted pyrroles from unsymmetrical alkynes.
Figure 2.25: Synthesis of penta-substituted pyrrole via ring-opening reaction of α-nitroepoxides (95).
74 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathtion to the hypothetic (σ-allenyl)palladium(II) intermediate A results in nitrilium D. This
is intercepted by carbamate anion B to afford E. Further, 1,4-addition of an alcohol onto
conjugated imine E, followed by an intramolecular cyclization to form aminopyrrole F,
which on nucleophilic reaction with second molecule of alcohol provided penta-substi￾tuted pyrrole (106).
Singh et al. [89] used β-cyclodextrin as an efficient supramolecular catalyst in the
one-pot three-component reaction involving anilines (107), DEAD/DMAD(diethylacety￾lenedicarboxylate/dimethylacetylenedicarboxylate) (108) and glyoxal (109) in aqueous
media to give polyfunctionalized pyrrole derivatives (110) in high yield (Figure 2.28).
The protocol is environmentally benign and the catalyst used is recycled without
much loss in catalytic activity. This reaction was previously reported using catalyst
DABCO and in organic solvent under ambient temperature [90, 91]. In another green
protocol, imidazolium bronsted acidic ionic liquid (BAIL) was used by Atar et al. [92]
as a catalyst and solvent in a three-component one-pot coupling reaction of amines
(112), dialkylacetylenedicarboxylate (113), and β-nitrostyrene (111) for the production
of tetrasubstituted pyrrole derivatives (114a) (Figure 2.29). This protocol showed a
clean reaction, a method free of transition metals and solvents, readily available reac￾tants, and ecologically friendly reaction conditions. Mechanistically, amine (112) and
alkyne (113) are in situ activated by BAIL, leading to enamine A, which in turn attach
β-nitrostyrene (111) to form an intermediate B. Thereafter, intermediate B cyclizes to
give an intermediate C, which then on further oxidation-cum-aromatization lead to
Figure 2.27: Polysubstituted pyrroles using propargyl carbonates (103) as alkyne substrate.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 75product, 114a. Surineni et al. [93, 94] using similar substrates conducted a one-pot
three-component condensation of 2-nitrovinylcarbazoles (111b) with aryl or alkyl
amines and DMAD to make novel carbazole-tethered pyrrole derivatives (114b) using
FeCl3 as a Lewis acid catalyst. With a MIC of 3.13 µg/ mL, 114b (R = Me & R1 = p-F-Ph)
was found to be the most active of the 24 novel carbazole-tethered pyrrole derivatives
tested for in vitro antimycobacterial activity against Mycobacterium TB H37Rv. It also
showed low cytotoxicity.
Khalilpour et al. [95] developed a unique three-component reaction using dialky￾lacetylenedicarboxylates (116a–b) and alkyl isocyanides (115a–b) with dihydropyrimi￾dones (117a–c) as NH acids to create 10 new dihydropyrimidones substituted pyrrole
Figure 2.28: Tetrasubstituted pyrroles using supramolecular catalysis.
Figure 2.29: BAIL or FeCl3-catalyzed one-pot annulation for the synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyrroles
derivatives (114a or 114b).
76 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathheterocycles (118). Comparing the various produced compounds to doxorubicin (IC50
= 3.42 ± 0.20 μM) after 48 h revealed that compounds 118a and 118b with chlorine sub￾stituents had larger cytotoxic effects (IC50 = 10.36 ± 0.60 μM, 9.90 ± 0.20 μM, respec￾tively) than the other examined compounds. Additionally, antioxidant testing of the
produced products revealed that the presence of substituents (electron-withdrawing
or electron-donating) on the aromatic ring might significantly influence its antioxi￾dant activity. This reaction is rationalized mechanistically in Figure 2.30. The initial
event, according to the well-known chemistry of isocyanides, is the nucleophilic addi￾tion of alkyl isocyanide (115) to the acetylenic ester (116) to produce zwitterion A [96,
97]. Protonation of A by NH-acid (117) results in Aʹ. The positively charged ion Aʹ is
Figure 2.30: Synthesis of novel 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-1(2H)-yl-1H-pyrrole derivatives as anticancer agents.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 77then attacked by conjugated base 117ʹ, resulting in compound B. To create compound
C, an additional alkyl isocyanide performs a Michael addition on molecule B. Then,
compound C proceeds through a cyclization reaction and a subsequent [1,3]-proton
transfer to create compound (118).
Pharmaceutically important trifluoromethyl-substituted pyrrole (123) was synthe￾sized using a sequential one-pot three-component reaction between substituted ω-bro￾moacetophenones (119), anilines (120), and methyl perfluoroalk-2-ynoates (122) by Sun
et al. [98]. The reaction is transition metal-free and uses readily available substrates.
Based on the results of the experiments presented in the paper, it was proposed that the
sequential transformation involved the following steps: (i) a nucleophilic substitution of
119 with aniline (120) to produce compound (121); (ii) a subsequent Michael addition of
121 and 122 to give intermediate A; (iii) an intramolecular cyclization that is sparked by
the electron-rich amino group of A; and (iv) the dehydration of B, followed by deprotona￾tion and aromatization to give 2-trifluoromethyl pyrrole (123) (Figure 2.31).
Shan et al. [99] developed another efficient route for the synthesis of polysubstituted
pyrrole derivatives via a copper-catalyzed three-component reaction between alkynyl
ketones (124), amines (125) and isocyanoacetates (126) (Figure 2.32). Easily available
starting materials, mild conditions, and a wide substrate scope make this approach
potentially useful. This reaction involve [3 + 2] cycloaddition between intermediate A
(formed by insertion of copper species with isocyanoacetate (126), followed by base￾promoted deprotonation) and alkynyl imine B (generated from the condensation of
alkynylketone 124 and amine 125) to form cyclic intermediate C. Thereafter, interme￾diate C undergoes reductive elimination and aromatization to give the final product
(127).
Figure 2.31: Synthesis of 2-(perfluoroalkyl)pyrroles using methyl perfluoroalk-2-ynoates.
78 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra NathUsing benzoin (128) instead of isonitrile, Vanga et al. [100] developed an efficient cata￾lyst-free one-pot three-component synthesis of pentasubstituted pyrroles via reaction
with anilines (129) and DEAD (130) in acetic acid in good to excellent yields (78%–
93%). The plausible reaction mechanism for one-pot synthesis of penta-substituted
pyrroles is shown in Figure 2.33. The initial reaction of benzoin with aniline in the
presence of acetic acid gave the α-aminoketone, A, by dehydration. The resulting α￾aminoketone (A) reacted in situ with DEAD (130), and the nitrogen atom of the α￾aminoketone experienced Michael addition with the latter, which in turn underwent
intramolecular cyclization by combining with the keto carbon. The resulting interme￾diate B underwent aromatization by the removal of a water molecule in order to pro￾duce the penta-substituted pyrrole (131).
Figure 2.33: Synthesis of densely functionalized pyrrole derivatives using benzoin substrates.
Figure 2.32: Synthesis of polysubstituted pyrrole via [3 + 2] cycloaddition.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 79Zhou et al. [101] reported a variety of the synthesis of multiple substituted pyrroles
(135) through zirconocene-mediated coupling of two alkynes (132a and b) and an
azide (134) in the presence of CuCl (Figure 2.34). The study involving the use of sym￾metrically and unsymmetrically substituted monocyclic as well as bicyclic zirconacy￾clopentadienes (133) bearing alkyl and aryl groups resulted in the formation of
pyrroles in high yield in most cases. In terms of the mechanism, the dialkenylcopper
intermediate A is initially created by transmetalation of zirconacyclopentadiene 133
with CuCl. Then, azide (134) coordinates to two copper metals from the dialkenylcop￾per to produce intermediate B, which then experiences a nucleophilic attack from al￾kenylcopper to azide nitrogen to form intermediate C. The coordination of the −N ≡
N group to another copper species may aid in alkenylcopper’s nucleophilic assault on
azide nitrogen and denitrogenation to produce intermediate C. In the end, product
(135) is synthesized along with the elimination of copper metal by a ring-closure cou￾pling process between the N–Cu and C–Cu moieties of intermediate C.
Recently, Zhang et al. [102] developed a new, efficient, and versatile Pd(II)-catalyzed oxi￾dative three-component cascade reaction of diverse amines (136), alkyne esters (137),
and alkenes (138) and disclosed for the direct synthesis of diverse 2,3,4-trisubstituted
pyrroles (139) with broad functional group tolerance and in good to excellent yields
(Figure 2.35). This transformation is supposed to proceed through the cascade formation
of C(sp2
)−C(sp2
) (formation of intermediate C) and C(sp2
)−N bonds (formation of inter￾mediate F) via Pd(II)-catalyzed regioselective alkene migratory insertion (formation of
intermediate C via insertion of Pd-alkene intermediate B into enamine A), intramolecu￾lar radical addition (cyclization of D to E), and oxidation sequential processes (conver￾sion of F to final product 139).
Figure 2.34: Zr-mediated coupling reaction of two alkynes and azide to afford pyrroles in the presence of
CuCl.
80 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nath2.3.3 From carbonyl compounds
Apart from using β-dicarbonyl or alkyne-based substrates, researchers have also used
simple aldehydes/ketones as substrates for pyrrole annulation reactions. Dang et al.
[103] developed an efficient copper-N-heterocyclic carbene complex (Cu-NHC) catalyzed
synthesis of 1,2-, 1,2,3-, 1,2,3,5-, and fully substituted pyrroles (143) via three-component
coupling methods through suitable choice of ketone (141), primary amine (140), and
diol (142). In this reaction, they have used a combination of CuBr and ligand, L to gener￾ate an in situ Cu-NHC as an efficient non-noble metal catalyst (Figure 2.36). Previously,
the same reaction was carried out in the presence of a [Ru(p-cymene)Cl2]2/Xantphos/t￾BuOK catalyst system [104]. Another synthesis involving carbonyl substrates was
developed by Kalmode et al. [105] using a three-component coupled domino reac￾tion of aldehydes (145), ketones (144), and alkyl isocyanoacetates (146) (Figure 2.37).
This transformation proceeds through [3 + 2] cycloaddition reaction of chalcone (A, via
aldol condensation) with α-cuprioisocyanide (B, via reaction of 146 with CuI), leading to
a cyclic organocopper intermediate (C), which on copper–hydrogen exchange followed
by oxidation exclusively offers 2,3,4-trisubstituted-1H-pyrrole (147).
To efficiently access polysubstituted pyrroles (151), Zheng et al. [106] created an
organocatalyzed three-component synthesis using 1,2-diones (148), aldehydes (150),
and arylamines (149). Numerous 1,2-diones, arylamines, and aldehydes smoothly re￾acted with 4-methylbenzenesulfonic acid monohydrate (TsOH.H2O) to produce the
Figure 2.35: Transition-metal-catalyzed C−H oxidative annulations of enamines for the synthesis of
pyrroles.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 81respective polysubstituted pyrroles in acceptable to good yields under relaxed reac￾tion conditions. Based on the research presented in the paper, the multicomponent
domino reaction operates according to the mechanism depicted in Figure 2.38. The
first step is the nucleophilic addition of the enamine intermediate A produced by
the reaction of compounds 148 and 149 to the in situ-generated iminium B from
compounds 149 and 150, followed by the intramolecular nucleophilic assault by the
C amine to produce the aminoalcohol intermediate D with the help of an acid cata￾lyst. After acid-catalyzed tautormerization of the imine form aminoalcohol D to the
equivalent enamine form E, the protonated aminoalcohol E loses a molecule of
water to obtain the comparatively stable conjugate iminium ion (F), and then a pro￾ton is removed to produce the pyrrole nucleus (151).
Su et al. [107] constructed 2,3,4,5-tetrasubstituted pyrroles (155) via one-pot three￾component (3 + 2) annulation reaction from donor–acceptor cyclopropanes (152), sali￾cylaldehydes (153), and ammonium acetate (154) (Figure 2.39). This reaction involves a
Figure 2.37: Synthesis of 2,3,4-trisubstituted-1H-pyrroles via [3 + 2] cycloaddition reaction.
Figure 2.36: Efficient Cu-NHC-catalyzed synthesis of pyrroles.
82 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathdomino sequence involving the RO of donor–acceptor cyclopropanes, [3 + 2] annulation,
and aromatization as the key step (Figure 2.40). This reaction is thought to occur by the
base-promoted elimination of the α-H with respect to the carbonyl in the compound (152)
to form intermediate (A). After, keto/enol tautomerism, intermediate (A) experiences cy￾clopropane RO, which is aided by triethylamine, to produce anion (B). Then, the interme￾diate 2-(iminomethyl)phenol (C) produced from salicylaldehyde (153) and ammonium
acetate (154) is attacked by the intermediate (B) to form the amide intermediate (D),
which then undergoes two intramolecular nucleophilic additions at the respective car￾bonyl groups (Ar2
-C = O and EtO-C = O, respectively) to form the bicyclic intermediate, 3-
cyanotetrahydro-2H-furo[2,3-b]pyrrol-2-olate (E). In the presence of a base, a 1,3-hydrogen
shift produces conjugated styrene intermediate (F). Furan ring opening converts interme￾diate (F) into 3-(cyanomethylene)pyrrolidin-2-yl carbonate (G). When the carbonate is re￾moved, 4-(cyanomethylene)-3,4-dihydro-2H-pyrrol-1-ium (H) is produced. This compound
then undergoes a 1,3-hydrogen shift to become 4-(cyanomethyl)-2H-pyrrol-1-ium (I). Fi￾nally, the deprotonation of 4-(cyanomethyl)-2H-pyrrol-1-ium (I) under basic conditions
enabled for the production of the highly substituted pyrroles (155). This elegant method￾ology readily afforded functionalized pyrroles under mild reaction conditions and with
a wide substrate scope.
Martin-Santos et al. [108] strategized new organo-catalytic method for the synthe￾sis of 3,4-disubstituted pyrroles (159) by reaction of aldehydes 156 with bromonitroal￾kenes (157) to form intermediate A (via enamine catalysis), which upon treatment
with amines (158) trigger the one-pot domino reaction giving good yields of the prod￾uct at room temperature (Figure 2.41). In another report, unactivated carbohydrates
(160), oxoacetonitriles (161), and ammonium acetate were used to produce densely
functionalized pyrroles (162) in yields ranging from 75% to 96% (Figure 2.42) [109].
Novel pyrrolo-glycosides were produced via disaccharides. The exclusive chemo-,
regio-, and stereoselectivity of this metal-free, Et3N-catalyzed cascade reaction was
Figure 2.38: Organocatalyzed three-component reactions for the synthesis of pyrroles.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 83carried out with great atom economy and a broad substrate range. Recently, a three￾component procedure was established by Chang et al. [110] to produce multiaryl￾substituted pyrrole derivatives from arylketones (163), amines (164), and nitrovinylar￾enes (165) without the use of metals. The proposed mechanism involves amine (164)
and arylketone (163) forming imine intermediate A, which is then isomerized into B.
Following that, the nucleophilic addition of B to nitrovinylarenes (165) yields interme￾diate C, which is then tautomerized and cyclized to yield the target product (166)
(Figure 2.43).
Figure 2.40: Plausible mechanism for the formation of pyrroles from cyclopropane derivatives.
Figure 2.39: Synthesis of 2-(2,4,5-trisubstituted-pyrrol-3-yl)acetonitriles.
84 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra NathFigure 2.42: Synthesis of densely functionalized pyrroles via a three-component cascade reaction.
Figure 2.43: A metal-free synthesis of homologous 1,2,4-triaryl-substituted pyrrole.
Figure 2.41: Organocatalytic synthesis of 3,4-disubstituted pyrroles by a one-pot domino reaction.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 852.3.4 From α,β-unsaturated carbonyls (α,β-UC)
Another substrate that is commonly encountered in three-component pyrrole annula￾tion reaction involves α,β-unsaturated carbonyls (α,β-UC). Keiko et al. [111] developed a
reaction of 2-alkyl thio-substituted 3-aryl(hetaryl)propenals (167) (α,β-UC) in a one-pot
three-component reaction with primary amines (168) and nitroethane to form a highly
functionalized pyrroles in 36–80% yields (Figure 2.44). It is observed that the reaction
occurs by the synthesis of the intermediate imine (169) of the starting enal (167), which
then undergoes 1,2-addition by nitroethane to generate the kinetically regulated 2-
alkylthio-3-alkylamino-1-aryl(hetaryl)-4-nitro-pentene (170). This adduct can be con￾verted to the thermodynamically regulated 1,4-adduct (171) under either heating or mi￾crowave irradiation conditions. The later was cyclized intramolecularly to produce
desired tetra-substituted pyrroles (172). The scope of the reaction and the product yields
are strongly influenced by the reaction circumstances as well as the substrate structure.
Shekarrao et al. [112] created a novel multicomponent reaction involving 2-ethynyl pyri￾dine (175), aliphatic amines (174), and β-bromovinyl aldehydes (173) (α,β-UC) that pro￾duced 2-alkylated pyridine substituted pyrroles (176) in excellent yields (Figure 2.45). This
reaction involved cascade imination, Sonogashira coupling, exo-dig cyclization, and hy￾dride transfer. This palladium-catalyzed procedure establishes C–N, C–C, and C–O bonds
all at once, making it simple to generate functionalized pyrroles with a wide range of sub￾stituents. According to the proposed mechanism, imino alkyne intermediate A is pro￾duced first by the Sonogashira coupling reaction between the imine derivative of β￾bromovinyl aldehyde (173) and alkyne (175) in the presence of the Pd(OAc)2 catalyst [113].
The ammonium salt intermediate B is then produced via π-coordination of the carbon￾carbon triple bond of A with the Pd(II) species, followed by exo-dig cyclization. The exo￾dig cyclization in this reaction is most likely caused by the chelation of the pyridine nitro￾Figure 2.44: Synthesis of new tetrasubstituted pyrroles by coupling reaction of 2-functionally substituted
2-alkenals, amines, and nitroethane.
86 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathgen atom to the Pd(II) center. The catalyst is regenerated by the following protonation of
B by internally produced HBr/AcOH, which results in the ammonium salt intermediate C.
The desired product (176) is finally obtained by adding the hydride ion produced by the
reaction of dimethylformamide and K2CO3 in the presence of Pd catalyst [114, 115]. An￾other report, in order to create 3-(1H-pyrrol-3-yl)indolin-2-ones (180) from widely avail￾able starting materials, Vivekanand et al. [116] established an effective, ecologically
friendly, and atom-economical process (Figure 2.46). The products were produced in high
yields through an enamine formation, Michael-addition and an intramolecular cyclization
sequence in this one-pot, three-component reaction between primary amines (178), 1,3-
dicarbonyl compounds (179), and Michael acceptors (177) (α,β-UC) obtained from isatin.
Due to the fact that the methodology forgoes the use of catalysts, solvents, and column
chromatography, the reaction was conducted in ideal green circumstances. Some en￾vironmentally friendly solvents, including water, PEG-200, and glycerol, were also suc￾cessful in providing the products (180) in high yields for a variety of substrates. Two
molecules of water were the only byproduct of this straightforward approach, which en￾abled the production of two C–N bonds and one C–C bond in a single step. The syn￾thesized compounds (180) also demonstrated significant in vitro cytotoxicity against
Ehrlich’s ascites carcinoma tumor cells.
Kumar et al. [117] used (E)-3-(dimethylamino)-1-arylprop-2-en-1-ones (181) as α,β-UC
along with anilines (182), and β-nitrostyrenes (183) in a three-component domino re￾action in acetic acid to successfully synthesize 1,3,4-trisubstituted pyrroles (184) in ex￾cellent yields. One C–C and two C–N bonds form in a single synthetic operation
during this one-pot, three-component transformation, which is thought to proceed via
an addition-elimination/Michael addition/intramolecular annulation/elimination dom￾ino chain of events (Figure 2.47). The authors using this approach have also carried out
Figure 2.45: Synthesis of alkylated pyridine-substituted pyrroles.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 87the formal synthesis of an antifungal agent [118]. Wang et al. [119] devised a three￾component reaction in CH3CN using 2-isocyanoethylindoles (185), gem-diactivated
olefins (186) (α,β-UC), and secondary amines (187) to yield polysubstituted pyrroles
(188, in moderate yields). Contrary to dibenzyl amine, which produced the desired
compounds in subpar yields of 22%, cyclic secondary amines such as morpholine, piper￾idine, and 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline generated the desired products in moderate
yields (34%–46%). A potential reaction mechanism (Figure 2.48) begins with the gem￾diactivated olefin (186) being added by isocyanide (185) via a nucleophilic reaction, re￾sulting in the intermediate A. The intermediate A is next subjected to a nucleophilic at￾tack by the amine (187) to produce the intermediate B. In the subsequent process, the
Figure 2.46: Synthesis of 3-(1H-pyrrol-3-yl)indolin-2-ones.
Figure 2.47: Synthesis of 1,3,4-trisubstituted pyrroles via three-component domino reactions.
88 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathnitrile of intermediate B is nucleophilically attacked by the nitrogen atom, resulting in
polysubstituted pyrroles (188).
Dawande et al. [120] have designed a highly efficient multicomponent reaction of
diazoenals (189) (α,β-UC), amines (190), and aryl aldehydes (191) cooperatively cata￾lyzed by rhodium(II) carboxylate and BINOL-phosphoric acid for the first direct syn￾thesis of valuable α-(3-pyrrolyl)benzylamines (192) with a new stereogenic center
(Figure 2.49). The reaction is proposed to involve formation of a transient protic ammo￾nium ylide (B) from the rhodium enal carbenoid (A), a regioselective Mannich reaction
(between intermediates B and C) leading to Mannich product D and a intramolecular
cyclocondensation cascade in intermediate D leading to final product, 192.
2.3.5 Miscellaneous
Other types of pyrrole annulation reactions involving substrates reported only few
numbers of times have been included in this section.
Peng et al. [121] developed the synthesis of polysubstituted 3-amino pyrroles (196)
via palladium-catalyzed three-component tandem reaction of aryl halides (193), N￾tosylhydrazones (194), and isocyanides (195) (Figure 2.50). The procedure constructs
various polysubstituted 3-amino pyrroles with moderate to excellent yields under
mild reaction conditions, assembly efficiency, readily available starting materials, and
good functional group tolerance. The mechanism involves formation of a Pd carbene
Figure 2.48: Polysubstituted pyrroles via the domino reaction of 2-isocyanoethylindoles.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 89complex A (in turn generated from (i) double isocyanides (195) insertion to palladium
aryl intermediate generated from oxidative addition of Pd(0) to 193; (ii) followed by
trapping of this intermediate by a diazo compound produced from 194). Migratory in￾sertion of imino group in Pd carbene complex gave intermediate B and this under
reductive elimination followed by cyclization leading to the formation of 3-amino￾polysubstituted pyrroles (196).
Ge et al. [122] designed a novel route to make bioactive trifluoromethyl-substituted pyr￾roles (200) via a three-component cascade reaction of 1,3-enynes (197), anilines (198), and
Togni-II reagent (199) with high regioselectivity under mild conditions. Togni-II reagent is
Figure 2.49: Direct synthesis of α‑pyrrolylbenzylamines.
Figure 2.50: Synthesis of polysubstituted 3-amino pyrroles via palladium-catalyzed three-component
tandem reaction.
90 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathutilized as a precursor for the CF3 radical in the presence of Cu(OAc)2 · H2O and a catalytic
amount of [Cp*RhCl2]2. The proposed mechanism (Figure 2.51) begins with the aza￾Michael addition of 1,3-enynes (197) and amine (198), which results in the creation of in￾termediate A, with the help of molecular sieves acting as Lewis acid and Ca(OH)2 acting
as base. Second, a CF3 radical is produced when Togni-II reagent (199) interacts with cop￾per(II), which then reacts with intermediate A to produce intermediate B. Then, interme￾diate B can be trapped by Cu(II) to produce intermediate C, which then undergoes a
transmetallation reaction with Rh(III) to produce rhodacyclic intermediate D. The desired
product (200) is produced after intermediate D is finally subjected to reductive elimina￾tion cum oxidation, along with a Rh(I) species that engages in a redox reaction with Cu
(III) to regenerate the Rh(III) species.
Mohammadi et al. [123] presented a novel and efficient solvent-free synthesis of 3-amino
-4-cyano-5-phenyl-1H-pyrrole-2-carboxamides (204) using a simple three-component reac￾tion involving arylidenmalonononitrile (201), malononononitrile (202), and hydroxyl￾amine hydrochloride (203). The key benefits of this approach include quick reaction
times, good to exceptional product yields, affordable and easily accessible starting materi￾als, and, time and energy savings. A potential reaction mechanism (Figure 2.52) calls for
the Michael addition of hydroxylamine (203) to arylidenmalononitrile (201) in the first
step to create 2-((hydroxyamino)(aryl)methyl)malononitrile A. The intermediate B is pro￾duced in the following step by adding malononitrile (202). The intermediate B is then cy￾clized by adding an oxygen atom to the nitrile group, producing oxazepin-imine, C. In the
intermediate C, a nitrogen atom undergoes an intramolecular SN2-like reaction, and the
CN atom is eliminated, yielding 7-oxa-1-azabicyclo[3.2.0]heptane (D). After the [1,3] H-shift,
D undergoes the electrocyclic RO reaction, followed by the [1,5] H-shift to produce the 3-
amino-4-cyano-5-phenyl-1H-pyrrole-2-carboxamides (204).
Figure 2.51: One-pot synthesis of fully substituted trifluoromethyl pyrroles using Togni-II reagent.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 91Farahi et al. [124] used a one-pot synthesis of α-hydroxyketones (205), malononitrile
(207), and ammonium acetate (206) in the presence of tungstate sulfuric acid (TSA)
under mild reaction conditions to create novel tetrasubstituted pyrroles (208) (Figure 2.53).
The technique worked well with both electron-rich and electron-poor α-hydroxyketones.
This approach is appealing for the synthesis of these valuable heterocycles because of the
high catalyst recyclability, solvent-free conditions, ease of use, appropriate reaction dura￾tions, and decent yields. In another variant approach, Liu et al. [125] have used an impor￾tant building block nitroepoxide (209), which has unique chemical properties with two
adjacent electrophilic centers, as substrates along with amines (210) and malononitrile
(211) under mild conditions (Figure 2.54). This approach is notable for its functional group
tolerance, non-transition metal catalyst, and mild reaction conditions. The ring opening
of nitroepoxide (209) with amine (210) to produce the intermediate A may be the trigger
for the reaction. The produced intermediate A was then converted to aminoketone B by
getting rid of one nitrous acid molecule. Additionally, by removing one molecule of H2O,
the reaction between aminoketone B and malononitrile (211) would result in intermedi￾ate C. Finally, the desired product (212) is obtained by an intramolecular nucleophilic ad￾dition of the cyano group followed by tautomerization.
Li et al. [126] used a three-component bicyclization/RO/oxidative coupling reaction
using β-ketothioamides (KTAs) (213), arylglyoxals (214), and 2-cyanoacetates (215) to rap￾idly produce disulfides tethered pyrroles (216) in DABCO/air (Figure 2.55). In total, nine
chemical bonds and two new pyrrole rings were created through the sequential reactions
of Knoevenagel condensation, Michael addition, N-cyclization, O-cyclization, RO, double
tautomerization, and oxidative coupling. The method created allows for the creation of
disulfides tethered pyrroles with a high atom economy and high formation efficiency. It
also has fascinating features such a quick reaction time, mild reaction conditions, no
need for transition metals, and simple purification. Unquestionably, this synthetic ap￾proach offers a practical method for creating pyrroles with disulfides attached. In con￾trast to the typical imine condensation, the atypical Ag-catalyzed reaction described by
Figure 2.52: Three-component synthesis of 3-amino-4-cyano-5-phenyl-1H-pyrrole-2-carboxamides (204).
92 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra NathLiao et al. [127] begins with a simple aza-Michael addition (Figure 2.56). This interesting
three-component reaction involved 3-formylchromones (217), amines (218), and isocya￾noacetates (219) and was catalyzed by affordable silver salt and triphenylphosphine in a
straightforward manner to produce polysubstituted pyrroles (220). Ding and coworkers
[128] reported on the synthesis of a completely substituted azido pyrrole (224) from 1,3-
enynes (221), amines (222), and TMSN3 (223) utilizing a Cu and Mn co-mediated aerobic
oxidative cyclization and azidation (Figure 2.57). The initial mechanism entails a sequen￾tial aza-Michael addition, intramolecular cyclization mediated by copper, radical azida￾tion with a single electron catalyst mediated by manganese, and oxidative aromatization
in an air atmosphere at ambient temperature. High regioselectivity, a broad substrate
range, and benign reaction conditions are all features of the reaction.
Chaudhary et al. [129] developed a three-component domino reactions of arylglyoxal
monohydrate (226), (E)-N-methyl-1-(methylthio)-2-nitroethenamine (227), and 1,3-dimethyl
barbituric acid/barbituric acid (225) in aqueous media allowed for the chemoselective
synthesis of a series of new 5-(1-methyl-5-(methylthio)-4-nitro-2-aryl-1H-pyrrol-3-yl)pyrimi￾dine-triones (228) (Figure 2.58). The reaction had very high green credentials as analyzed
by green metrics computations done for the newly designed molecules via one-pot syn￾thetic protocol’s green chemistry metrics were assessed. Atom economy (AE, 86–89%),
Figure 2.54: Synthesis of N-substituted 2-amino-3-cyanopyrroles via ring-opening of nitroepoxides.
Figure 2.53: TSA-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyrroles 208.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 93atom efficiency (AEf, 77–81%), carbon efficiency (CE, 87–93%), reaction mass efficiency
(RME, 76–81%), optimum efficiency (OE, 70–93%), and process mass intensity (PMI, 27.96–
34.76 g/g), E-factor (3.93–5.20 g/g), solvent intensity (SI, 3.67–4.64 g/g), and water intensity
(WI, 29.11–23.02 g/g) were found to be almost at their ideal values, thereby demonstrating
a method with excellent green credentials. Liu et al. [130] designed a base-promoted
three-component cascade reaction of α-hydroxy ketones (229), malonodinitrile (230), and
alcohols (231) that offers a quick and straightforward way to a variety of structurally dif￾Figure 2.56: Pyrrole formation initiated by an unexpected aza-Michael addition.
Figure 2.55: Synthesis of disulfide-tethered pyrroles from β-ketothioamides.
Figure 2.57: Regioselective synthesis of fully substituted azido pyrroles from 1,3-enynes.
94 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathferent and valuable 2-alkyloxy-1H-pyrrole-3-carbonitrile derivatives (232 or 233) (Fig￾ure 2.59). The reaction featured the construction of three distinct bonds (C–C, C–O, and
C–N) in a single step, and the structure of the α-hydroxy ketones used determined the
reaction’s regioselectivity. Liu et al. [131] have reported another three-component domino
reaction, promoted by Brønsted acid to polyfunctionalized fully substituted pyrroles (238
and 239) from enaminones (234), arylglyoxal monohydrates (235), and benzenethiol (236)
or indoles (237). Simple mixing of three common reactants in acetic acid with microwave
heating is all that is required to carry out the reaction. The reaction moves along quickly
and can be completed in 26 min (Figure 2.60). The workup is very practical.
Figure 2.58: Synthesis of series of new 5-(1-methyl-5-(methylthio)-4-nitro-2-aryl-1H pyrrol-3-yl)pyrimidine￾triones (228).
Figure 2.59: Construction of pyrroles from α-hydroxy ketones and nitriles.
Figure 2.60: New indolation and thiolation-based three-component domino reactions.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 952.4 Three-component synthesis of pyridine
Pyridine is one of the simplest and important heterocycles having structure like ben￾zene with one methine group replaced with nitrogen atom. Pyridine-containing com￾pounds have shown biological importance by showing antitumor [132], anticancer
[133], antiproliferative [134], anti-arenavirus [135], antituberculosis [136], and antiin￾flammatory activity [137] activities. Further, pyridine scaffold is found to be in many
commercially available drugs [138] such as piroxicam for arthritis, bromazepam for
severe anxiety, phenazopyridine for pain reliever caused by urinary tract infections,
abiraterone for prostate cancer, delavirdine as an antiviral against HIV/AIDS, omepra￾zole for ulcers, and enpiroline for malaria (Figure 2.61). Many of medicinally important
natural products [138, 139] contain the pyridine ring such as collismycin, streptonigrin,
and nikkomycin (Figure 2.62). Due to biological and medicinal significance, newer ap￾proaches are highly worthwhile. So, in this section we have included the three compo￾nent annulation strategies discovered in the last decade.
Figure 2.61: Some commercially available drugs containing the pyridine scaffold.
Figure 2.62: Medicinally important natural products containing pyridine moiety.
96 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra NathDong et al. [140] reported a simple and effective solvent-controlled regioselective syn￾thesis of multisubstituted 4- and 6-amino-2-iminopyridines under extremely mild cir￾cumstances by three-component reaction of sulfonyl azides (241), 2-[(amino)methylene]
malononitriles (240), and alkynes (242). The 6-amino-2-iminopyridines (243) are pre￾dominantly produced in DMF at 50 °C under N2 while the 4-amino-2-iminopyridines
(244) are synthesized in good yield in THF at room temperature (Figure 2.63).
Several research groups have reported the synthesis of highly substituted pyridines
(248) by the one-pot three-component condensation of aldehydes (245), alcohols/thiols
(246), and malononitrile (247) under diverse reaction conditions via carbon–carbon
and carbon–heteroatom bond formation as shown in Table 2.1. The use of nanoparticles
as catalysts increases the selectivity, reactivity, and product yields due to high surface￾to-volume ratio resulting in more active sites per unit area. In this context, Mehrabi
and colleagues [141] have reported the synthesis of pyridines in water–ethanol at re￾fluxing temperature utilizing calcium oxide nanoparticle as a catalyst in 70–90% yields
(Table 2.1, entry 1). This method provides a mild and green access to synthesize the pyri￾dine motif in shorter reaction times. In continuation, nano copper-ferrite catalyst was
also used to synthesize the polyfunctioned pyridine moieties by Douglas and coworkers
[142] (Table 2.1, entry 2). This methodology is ecologically friendly with lower catalyst
loading, shorter reaction times, higher yields, magnetic recoverability, and the catalyst
recyclability. Using nanocrystalline magnesium oxide as a base catalyst, Sheibani and
coworkers [143] has developed an effective and ecologically friendly technique for the
production of polysubstituted pyridine derivatives (Table 2.1, entry 3).
Kidwai and Chauhan [144] have also employed potassium carbonate and PEG
(PEG-400) for the mild and green synthesis of pyridine derivatives (Table 2.1, entry 4).
Figure 2.63: Synthesis of multisubstituted 4 and 6-amino-2-iminopyridines (243–244).
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 97The recovered PEG-400 phase produced reliable results for up to four cycles. Deep eutec￾tic solvent and IL have also been utilized as these provide milder and environmentally
benign methodologies. In this context, Azizi and Haghayegh [145] catalyzed the reaction
in choline chloride (ChCl) and urea while Khandebharad et al. [146] employed choline
hydroxide (ChOH) as IL catalyst with water at refluxing temperature to synthesize the
desired pyridine moieties in good yields. No significant loss in the activity of the catalyst
was observed up to four cycles in both the catalyst. Last, Nazeruddin [147] reported mi￾crowave-assisted synthesis of pyridine by using sodium acetate as a catalyst.
The plausible mechanism for the entries (1–3) in Table 2.1 involves Knoevenagel conden￾sation between malononitrile and aldehydes followed by annulation reactions with alco￾hols/thiols leading dihydropyridines, which in turn result in the formation of pyridines
via an aromatization reaction. A typical example using metal oxide nanoparticles is
given in Figure 2.64. The process commences by the Knoevenagel condensation of alde￾hyde (245) and malononitrile (247) in the presence of metal oxide, producing cinnamoni￾trile (249). Cinnamonitrile then combines with another molecule of malononitrile (247)
which was subsequently reacted with alcohols/thiols (246) to produce a dihydropyridine
intermediate (250). Removal of hydride is facilitated by the oxide ion to convert the di￾hydropyridine into pyridine.
The synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines (253) by using a one-pot three-component
condensation of aromatic aldehydes (245), substituted acetophenones (251), and am￾monium acetate (252) under various conditions is depicted in Table 2.2. Reddy et al.
[148] developed an efficient methodology for synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines by using
tetrabutylammonium hydrogen sulfate (TBAHS) as a phase transfer catalyst at 120 °C
Table 2.1: One-pot synthesis of pyridines by the one-pot three-component condensation of aldehydes,
thiols/alcohols, and malononitrile.
S. no. Conditions Yield (%) Reference
 Nano-CaO, HO/EtOH, reflux,  min – []
 Nano-copper ferrite, EtOH, reflux – []
 Nano-MgO, EtOH,  °C, – h – []
  mol% KCO, PEG-,  °C, – h – []
 Urea-ChCl,  °C, – h – []
 HO/ChOH, reflux – []
 AcONa, MW – []
98 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathtemperature in solvent-free conditions (Table 2.2, entry 1). Also, barium chloride dis￾persed on silica gel nanoparticles (BaCl2-nano-SiO2) were used as a catalyst by Shafiee
and Moloudi [149] for the synthesis of trisubstituted pyridine under solvent-free reac￾tion conditions at 120 °C (Table 2.2, entry 2). Further, Li et al. [150], by using diphenylam￾monium triflate (DPAT) as a catalyst, also reported the synthesis of substituted pyridine
under solvent-free reaction conditions at 120 °C (Table 2.2, entry 3). However, Wang and
group [151] developed an efficient and environment benign methodology for the synthe￾sis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines at 130 °C temperature under solvent-free reaction conditions
without using any catalyst (Table 2.2, entry 4). With nanocrystalline MgAl2O4 as a het￾erogeneous catalyst, Safari et al. [152] also developed an efficient and green synthetic
protocol for the synthesis of trisubstituted pyridine moieties at 120 °C under solvent
free conditions (Table 2.2, entry 5). The catalyst can be used up to five consecutive runs
without any significant loss in activity. In continuation, oxozirconium(IV) chloride
(ZrOCl2) were used by Zare and coworkers [153] as catalyst for the synthesis of trisubsti￾tuted pyridines under solvent-free conditions at 100 °C (Table 2.2, entry 6). The catalyst
works efficiently upto four consecutively runs. Further, Amoozadeh [154] also used the
heterogeneous catalyst in the form of nanotitania-supported sulfonic acid (n-TSA) for
the environmental friendly synthesis of pyridines (Table 2.2, entry 7). The catalyst
shows excellent catalytical activity up to six consecutive cycles. Further, in this regard,
Kamali and Smith [155] also reported the synthesis of trisubstituted pyridine by using
cobalt(II) chloride hexahydrate as a catalyst under solvent-free conditions at 110 °C
(Table 2.2, entry 8). The catalyst promotes the condensation reaction through modified
Chichibabin pyridine synthesis conditions and works well up to four consecutive runs
without any significant loss in the activity. Maleki and Firouzi-Hazi [156] also devel￾oped a green synthesis of pyridine derivatives by using the same starting materials
in the presence of heterogeneous nanocatalyst LPSF (Fe3O4/SiO2/propyltriethoxysilane/L￾proline nanoparticles) at 60 °C (Table 2.2, entry 9). The catalyst is magnetically separable
and works well upto seven cycle without any significant loss in the yield of product.
Ma and coworkers [157] reported a three-component Cu-catalyzed reaction in￾volving N-sulfonyl-1-aza-1,3-butadienes (254), terminal alkynes (255), and sulfonyl
azides (256) in presence of cesium carbonate that provides access to highly functional￾ized 1,4-dihydropyridine molecules (259A), which serve as a precursor for the produc￾Figure 2.64: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of pyridine (248) using metal-oxide nanoparticle.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 99tion of pyridine (257) (Figure 2.65). The [4 + 2] addition reaction is facilitated by the
electron-deficient nature of cesium cation for the formation of 1,4-dihydropyridine
molecule. The tandem reaction between the terminal alkyne (255) and azide (256) in
the presence of stoichiometric quantities of Cs2CO3 was initiated by Cu(I) to produce
the cesium ynamidate (258) which is then cyclized with the 1-azadiene (254) to pro￾duce [4 + 2] cycloadduct intermediate (259) as shown in Figure 2.66. The cesium cation
plays an important role by acting as a Lewis acid to facilitate the formation of inter￾mediate (259). The protonation of intermediate (259) results in the formation of dihy￾dropyridine derivative (259A) which upon aromatization produces the desired pyridine
product (257).
Table 2.2: Synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines by using a one-pot three-component condensation of
aldehydes, acetophenones, and ammonium acetate.
S. no. Conditions Yield (%) Reference
 TBAHS,  °C, – h – []
 BaCl-nano-SiO,  °C, – min – []
 DPAT,  °C, – h✶ – []
  °C, – h – []
 Nano-MgAlO,  °C,  h – []
  mol% ZrOCl,  °C – []
 n-TSA (. g),  °C – []
 CoCl·HO,  °C,  h – []
 LPSF (. g),  °C,  h – []
✶
NH4HCO3 is used as a nitrogen source
Figure 2.65: Synthesis of multisubstituted pyridines (257).
100 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra NathIn the presence of an eco-friendly heterogeneous catalyst K-10, Hanashalshahaby and Un￾aleroglu [158] reported a simple three-component, one-pot water-mediated reaction using
an enolizable ketone (260), Mannich base (261), and ammonium acetate at 80 °C tempera￾ture for the synthesis of trisubstituted pyridine moieties (262) (Figure 2.67).
Initially, ketone reacts with ammonia to produce enamine (263). Further, enone (264)
was also formed in situ from Mannich base (261) as shown in Figure 2.68. The Michael
addition reaction of enone (264) with enamine (263) produces intermediate (265) in
the next step, followed by intramolecular cyclization to produce intermediate (266)
and aromatization to produce 2,3,6-trisubstituted pyridine (262).
Lee and Khanal [159] designed the synthesis of trisubstituted pyridines (271–273)
by conducting three-component L-proline-catalyzed reaction of easily accessible ke￾tones with α,β-unsaturated aldehydes (267) and ammonium acetate (252). This meth￾odology provides an alternative pathway by avoiding the synthesis of necessary
functional groups, such as oximes, imines, or azides through formation of C–C and
C–N bonds in a single operation (Figure 2.69). The synthesized pyridine molecules
show antibacterial activities and can be used for detection of Cu2+ in solutions.
L-Proline enables the enol form (274) to attack the iminium ion (275), which was
generated from α,β-unsaturated aldehydes (267) to produce the intermediate (276) as
shown in Figure 2.70. Another iminium ion intermediate (277) is produced by deproto￾nation of intermediate (276), which then underwent proton migration and intramolec￾Figure 2.66: Plausible mechanism for the copper(I)-catalyzed synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyridines (257).
Figure 2.67: K-10-catalyzed synthesis of trisubstituted pyridines (262).
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 101ular nucleophilic attack to produce intermediate (278). Finally, the aromatization of
intermediate (278) produces the desired pyridine molecule (271–273) and L-proline
was also recovered.
Wan and coworkers [160] reported the synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyridines by
[3 + 2 + 1] cycloaddition reaction of diverse enaminones (279 and 280) and aldehydes
(245) by using a catalytical system consisting of copper iodide and potassium bisulfate
(Figure 2.71). The synthesis is based on highly selective gatherings of NH2 enaminones
(279), N,N-disubstituted enaminones (280), and aryl aldehydes (245).
Figure 2.68: Plausible mechanism for the K-10-catalyzed synthesis of trisubstituted pyridines (262).
Figure 2.69: L-Proline-catalyzed synthesis of substituted pyridines (271–273).
102 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra NathInitially, protonic acid facilitates the formation of imine intermediate (282) through
the condensation of aromatic aldehyde (245) and enaminone (279) (Figure 2.72). Fur￾ther, enaminone (280) reacts with intermediate (282) in nucleophilic addition manner
to produce the intermediate (283). After tautomerism, intermediate (284) underwent
intramolecular 1,4-addition reaction facilitated by the copper(I) results in formation
of intermediate (285). Subsequently, replacement of Cu+ by a proton and eliminating
the dimethyl molecule from intermediate (286) results in the formation of dihydropyr￾idine intermediate (287) which on aromatization by oxidation with copper(II) produ￾ces the desired pyridine moiety (281).
Further, Wang et al. [161] employed nitriles (288) and alkynes (289) to synthesize
the penta-functionalized pyridines (292) via [2 + 2 + 2] cycloaddition reaction using
iron(II) and cobalt(II) co-catalyst (290 and 291). The reaction was carried out in tolu￾ene at 50 °C temperature for 20 h. Also, an efficient and regioselective synthesis of
tetrasubstituted pyridine (294) was carried out by using copper(I)-catalyzed [2 + 2 + 2]
cycloaddition reaction of nitriles (288) and alkynes (289) with vinyl iodonium salts
(293) in DCE at 130 °C by Chen and coworkers [162] (Figure 2.73).
Figure 2.70: Plausible mechanism for the L-proline-catalyzed synthesis of trisubstituted pyridines (271–273).
Figure 2.71: Synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyridines (281).
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 103Figure 2.72: Plausible mechanism for the CuI and KHSO4-catalyzed synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyridines
(281).
Figure 2.73: Synthesis of tetra-/pentasubstituted pyridines (292 and 294).
104 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra NathThe reaction proceeds through an aza-butadienylium intermediate which was subse￾quently formed by the vinylation of nitriles with vinyl-tolyl iodonium salts. First, cop￾per(I) bromide and vinyl iodonium salt (293) reacts to generate electrophilic vinyl-CuIII
intermediate (295) as shown in Figure 2.74. Intermediate (295) is coordinated with
nitriles (288) to afford intermediate (296) which on reductive elimination provide aza￾butadienyl cation intermediate (297). The [4 + 2] cycloaddition reaction of alkyne (289)
with intermediate (297) provides a cyclized cationic intermediate (298) which on aro￾matization via a loss of proton produce the desired pyridines (294).
However, Deng et al. [163] reported an efficient and metal-free synthesis of polyfunc￾tioned pyridines by using ammonium iodide (302). Whereas a stoichiometric amount
of ammonium iodide (302) aided the three-component reaction of oxime acetates
(299), 1,3-dicarbonyls (300) and benzaldehydes (301) operate effectively, the condensa￾tion of oximes (299) and acroleins (304) were facilitated by utilizing a catalytic initia￾tor to produce substituted pyridines. Ammonium iodide (302) served a dual purpose
in the transformation by reducing the oxime N–O bond and subsequently assisted the
condensation reaction (Figure 2.75).
Initially, the N–O bond of oxime acetate (299) is efficiently reduced by ammonium
iodide (302) to produce imine intermediate (306) by losing acetic acid and elemental
iodine (Figure 2.76). Then, the tautomeric form (308) reacts with α,β-unsaturated car￾bonyl (304) in 1,4-addition manner producing the enamine intermediate (309) which
further give dihydropyridine intermediate (310) through intramolecular condensation
reaction. Last, aromatization of dihydropyridine (310) via oxidation by I2 provides the
desired pyridine product (305).
Ma et al. [164] employed Selectflour (312) as an oxidant for the efficient α-methyle￾nation of 1,3-diketones (311) by using DMSO as a carbon source to produce the corre￾sponding methylene-bridged bis-1,3-dicarbonyl compounds (322) which subsequently
condensed with ammonium salt to provide the polysubstituted pyridines (314). Modi￾Figure 2.74: Plausible mechanism for the copper-catalyzed synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyridines (294).
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 105fied conditions were developed by Nurkenov and group [165] via the formation of 1,4-
dihydropyridine (323) by using three-component condensation reaction of acetoacetic
ester (311), ammonium acetate (252) and urotropine (313) in ethanol at refluxing temper￾ature. Subsequently, 1,4-dihydropyridine derivative was converted into pyridine moiety
by using sodium nitrite in acetic acid at room temperature. Another, alternate reagents
involved a three-component cyclo-condensation reaction of 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds
(311), DMSO, and ammonium salt (252) in the presence of trifluoroacetic acid, a highly
convergent one-pot synthesis of Hantzsch-type pyridine [166]. DMSO served as a carbon
source for the α-methylation of dicarbonyl compounds (311), as a solvent, and also as an
oxidant to convert the 1,4-dihydropyridine derivative (323) into pyridine moieties (314)
(Figure 2.77).
The plausible mechanism proposed by Yongmin and co-workers (Figure 2.78) in￾volves five steps. Initially, Selectfluor reacts with DMSO to generate a fluorinated in￾termediate (317) which on a nucleophilic reaction with enolic form of diketone (318)
Figure 2.76: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyridines (305).
Figure 2.75: Synthesis of multisubstituted pyridines from oximes (303 and 305).
106 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathresults in formation of intermediate (319). Further, the intermediate (319) reacts with
another molecule of diketone to generate a key intermediate (322) which on intramo￾lecular cyclization in presence of ammonium acetate affords dihydropyridine (323).
Finally, the intermediate (323) oxidized in the presence of Selectfluor and DMSO to
form desired tetra-substituted pyridines (314). During the course of reaction Select￾fluor plays a dual role by providing F+ ions in the first step and also acts as an oxidant
in final aromatization step to generate desired pyridine molecules.
2.5 Conclusions
The needs for new bioactive heterocycles in health care, combined with the urge to gen￾erate these molecules quickly and in an environmentally friendly manner, provide con￾siderable challenges to the synthetic chemical community. Numerous techniques have
been developed over the years to produce different heterocyclic moieties, but MCRs are
the most desired because of their cost and environmental benefits. Currently, the re￾search concerning the three-component annulation of N-heterocycles (β-lactam, pyrroles,
and pyridine) is limited in terms of readily available substrates and in terms for diversity
of the three components used. As a result, in spite of many reports, there is still lot many
developments needed here for making protocol with better substrate scope. In this chap￾ter, we have elaborated a wide variety of three-component annulation strategies for mak￾ing these N-heterocyclic compounds during the past decade and have also included the
mechanistic pathways in most cases.
Figure 2.77: Synthesis of multisubstituted pyridines from oximes (314–316).
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 107Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest regarding
this chapter.
References
[1] Zhu J, Bienaymé H. Multicomponent Reactions. Wiley, 2006.
[2] Zhu J, Wang Q, Wang M. Multicomponent Reactions in Organic Synthesis. Wiley, 2014.
[3] Herrera RP, Marqués-López E. Multicomponent Reactions: Concepts and Applications for Design
and Synthesis. Wiley, 2015.
[4] Levi L, Muller TJ. Multicomponent syntheses of functional chromophores. Chem Soc Rev, 2016, 45,
2825–2846.
[5] Cioc RC, Ruijter E, Orru RVA. Multicomponent reactions: Advanced tools for sustainable organic
synthesis. Green Chem, 2014, 16, 2958–2975.
[6] Ameta KL, Kant R, Penoni A, Maspero A, Scapinello L. N-Heterocycles: Synthesis and Biological
Evaluation. Springer Nature Singapore, 2022.
[7] Singh PK, Silakari O. The current status of o-heterocycles: A synthetic and medicinal overview.
ChemMedChem, 2018, 13, 1071–1087.
[8] Li MM, Chen X, Deng Y, Lu J. Recent advances of N-heterocyclic carbenes in the applications of
constructing carbo- and heterocyclic frameworks with potential biological activity. RSC Adv, 2021, 11,
38060–38078.
[9] Bush K, Bradford PA. Beta-Lactams and beta-lactamase Inhibitors: An overview. Cold Spring Harb
Perspect Med, 2016, 6, a025247.
[10] Majewski MW, Miller PA, Oliver AG, Miller MJ. Alternate “drug” delivery utilizing beta-lactam cores:
Syntheses and biological evaluation of beta-lactams bearing isocyanate precursors. J Org Chem,
2017, 82, 737–744.
[11] Alves AJS, Alves NG, Laranjo M, Gomes CSB, Cristina Goncalves A, Bela Sarmento-Ribeiro A,
Filomena Botelho M, Pinho EMT. Insights into the anticancer activity of chiral alkylidene-beta￾Figure 2.78: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyridines (314).
108 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nathlactams and alkylidene-gamma-lactams: Synthesis and biological investigation. Bioorg Med Chem,
2022, 63, 116738.
[12] Bartolo I, Santos BS, Fontinha D, Machado M, Francisco D, Sepodes B, Rocha J, Mota-Filipe H,
Pinto R, Figueira ME, Barroso H, Nascimento T, Alves de matos AP, Alves AJS, Alves NG, Simoes CJV,
Prudencio M, Pinho EMT, Taveira N. Spiro-beta-lactam BSS-730A displays potent activity against HIV
and plasmodium. ACS Infect Dis, 2021, 7, 421–434.
[13] Leite THO, Saraiva MF, Pinheiro AC, De souza MVN. Monocyclic beta-Lactam: A review on synthesis
and potential biological activities of a multitarget core. Mini Rev Med Chem, 2020, 20, 1653–1682.
[14] Mehta PD, Sengar NP, Pathak AK. 2-Azetidinone – a new profile of various pharmacological
activities. Eur J Med Chem, 2010, 45, 5541–5560.
[15] Baiula M, Galletti P, Martelli G, Soldati R, Belvisi L, Civera M, Dattoli SD, Spampinato SM, Giacomini
D. New beta-lactam derivatives modulate cell adhesion and signaling mediated by RGD-binding and
leukocyte integrins. J Med Chem, 2016, 59, 9721–9742.
[16] Pitts CR, Lectka T. Chemical synthesis of beta-lactams: Asymmetric catalysis and other recent
advances. Chem Rev, 2014, 114, 7930–7953.
[17] Alves NG, Alves AJS, Soares MIL, Pinho e melo TMVD. Recent advances in the synthesis of spiro‐β‐
lactams and spiro‐δ‐lactams. Adv Synth Catal, 2021, 363, 2464–2501.
[18] Hosseyni S, Jarrahpour A. Recent advances in beta-lactam synthesis. Org Biomol Chem, 2018, 16,
6840–6852.
[19] Mohammadkhani L, Heravi MM. Synthesis of various n‐heterocycles using the Ugi four‐center
three‐component reaction. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 10187–10196.
[20] Zhdankin VV, Singh GS, Sudheesh S. Advances in synthesis of monocyclic beta-lactams. Arkivoc,
2014, 2014, 337–385.
[21] Wang X, Lei J, Li G, Meng J, Li C, Li J, Sun K. Synthetic methods for compounds containing fluoro￾lactam units. Org Biomol Chem, 2020, 18, 9762–9774.
[22] Flores-Reyes JC, Islas-Jácome A, González-Zamora E. The Ugi three-component reaction and its
variants. Org Chem Front, 2021, 8, 5460–5515.
[23] Dömling A, Kehagia K, Ugi I. Employment of a steroidal aldehyde in a new synthesis of β-lactam
derivatives. Tetrahedron, 1995, 51, 9519–9522.
[24] Kehagia K, Ugi IK. The synthesis of 4-acetoxy-azetidin-2-ones as key intermediates for β-lactams.
Tetrahedron, 1995, 51, 9523–9530.
[25] Vishwanatha TM, Narendra N, Sureshbabu VV. Synthesis of β-lactam peptidomimetics through Ugi
MCR: First application of chiral Nβ-Fmoc amino alkyl isonitriles in MCRs. Tetrahedron Lett, 2011, 52,
5620–5624.
[26] Blackie MAL, Feng T-S, Smith PJ, Chibale K. Synthesis of novel β-lactams and in vitro evaluation
against the human malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum. Arkivoc, 2016, 2016, 214–235.
[27] Rainoldi G, Lesma G, Picozzi C, Lo Presti L, Silvani A. One step access to oxindole-based beta-lactams
through Ugi four-center three-component reaction. RSC Adv, 2018, 8, 34903–34910.
[28] Zhang MQ, Wilkinson B. Drug discovery beyond the ‘rule-of-five’. Curr Opin Biotechnol, 2007, 18,
478–488.
[29] Miura M, Enna M, Okuro K, Nomura M. Copper-catalyzed reaction of terminal alkynes with nitrones.
Selective synthesis of 1-aza-1-buten-3-yne and 2-azetidinone derivatives. J Org Chem, 2002, 60,
4999–5004.
[30] Basak A, Ghosh SC, Bhowmich T, Das AK, Bertolasi V. An asymmetric synthesis of β-lactams: On the
use of chiral oxazolidones in the Kinugasa reaction. Tetrahedron Lett, 2002, 43, 5499–5501.
[31] Coyne AG, Müller-Bunz H, Guiry PJ. The asymmetric synthesis of β-lactams: HETPHOX/Cu(I)
mediated synthesis via the Kinugasa reaction. Tetrahedron Asymm, 2007, 18, 199–207.
[32] Lo MM, Fu GC. Cu(I)/bis(azaferrocene)-catalyzed enantioselective synthesis of beta-lactams via
couplings of alkynes with nitrones. J Am Chem Soc, 2002, 124, 4572–4573.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 109[33] Ye MC, Zhou J, Huang ZZ, Tang Y. Chiral tris(oxazoline)/Cu(II) catalyzed coupling of terminal alkynes
and nitrones. Chem Commun (Camb), 2003, 2554–2555.
[34] Safaei‐Ghomi J, Zahedi S. Preparation and characterization of cyclohexandiamine/Fe3O4/ZnO core/
shell nanomagnetic composite as a novel reusable catalyst and its application for the
diastereoselective synthesis of β‐lactams via the asymmetric Kinugasa reaction. Appl Organomet
Chem, 2017, 31, e3763.
[35] Qi J, Wei F, Huang S, Tung CH, Xu Z. Copper(I)-catalyzed asymmetric interrupted kinugasa reaction:
Synthesis of alpha-thiofunctional chiral beta-lactams. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl, 2021, 60, 4561–4565.
[36] Qi J, Wei F, Tung CH, Xu Z. Modular synthesis of alpha-quaternary chiral beta-lactams by a
synergistic copper/palladium-catalyzed multicomponent reaction. Angew Chem Int Ed Engl, 2021,
60, 13814–13818.
[37] Gololobov YG, Kasukhin LF. Recent advances in the Staudinger reaction. Tetrahedron, 1992, 48,
1353–1406.
[38] Palomo C, Aizpurua JM, Ganboa I, Oiarbide M. Asymmetric synthesis of beta-lactams through the
staudinger reaction and their use as building blocks of natural and nonnatural products. Curr Med
Chem, 2004, 11, 1837–1872.
[39] Mandler MD, Truong PM, Zavalij PY, Doyle MP. Catalytic conversion of diazocarbonyl compounds to
imines: Applications to the synthesis of tetrahydropyrimidines and beta-lactams. Org Lett, 2014, 16,
740–743.
[40] Mozaffari A, Jarrahpour A, Alborz M, Turos E. One‐pot multicomponent synthesis of β‐lactams viain
situ generated imines. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 5950–5953.
[41] Synofzik J, Dar’in D, Novikov MS, Kantin G, Bakulina O, Krasavin M. alpha-acyl-alpha-diazoacetates in
transition-metal-free beta-lactam synthesis. J Org Chem, 2019, 84, 12101–12110.
[42] Synofzik J, Bakulina O, Dar’in D, Kantin G, Krasavin M. Dialkyl diazomalonates in transition-metal￾free, thermally promoted, diastereoselective Wolff β-lactam synthesis. Synlett, 2020, 31, 1273–1276.
[43] Chen L, Wang K, Shao Y, Sun J. Stereoselective synthesis of fully substituted beta-lactams via metal￾organo relay catalysis. Org Lett, 2019, 21, 3804–3807.
[44] Chen L, Zhang L, Shao Y, Xu G, Zhang X, Tang S, Sun J. Rhodium-catalyzed c-n bond formation
through a rebound hydrolysis mechanism and application in beta-lactam synthesis. Org Lett, 2019,
21, 4124–4127.
[45] Minuto F, Lambruschini C, Basso A. Ketene 3‐component staudinger reaction (K‐3CSR) to β‐Lactams:
A new entry in the class of photoinduced multicomponent reactions. Eur J Org Chem, 2021, 2021,
3270–3273.
[46] Shao Y, Tian S, Zhu J, Tang S, Sun J. Diastereoselective formation of β-lactams via a three￾component reaction. New J Chem, 2022, 46, 9989–9993.
[47] Finean JB, Michell RH, Bonting SL, de Pont JJHHM, Tamm C, Hawthorne JN, Ansell GB, Pace-Asciak C,
Granström E, Page MI. New Comprehensive Biochemistry: Biosynthesis of Tetrapyrroles. Elsevier, 1981.
[48] Khajuria R, Dham S, Kapoor KK. Active methylenes in the synthesis of a pyrrole motif: An imperative
structural unit of pharmaceuticals, natural products and optoelectronic materials. RSC Adv, 2016, 6,
37039–37066.
[49] O’Malley DP, Li K, Maue M, Zografos AL, Baran PS. Total synthesis of dimeric pyrrole-imidazole
alkaloids: Sceptrin, ageliferin, nagelamide e, oxysceptrin, nakamuric acid, and the axinellamine
carbon skeleton. J Am Chem Soc, 2007, 129, 4762–4775.
[50] Fan H, Peng J, Hamann MT, Hu JF. Lamellarins and related pyrrole-derived alkaloids from marine
organisms. Chem Rev, 2008, 108, 264–287.
[51] Estevez V, Villacampa M, Menendez JC. Multicomponent reactions for the synthesis of pyrroles.
Chem Soc Rev, 2010, 39, 4402–4421.
[52] Bhardwaj V, Gumber D, Abbot V, Dhiman S, Sharma P. Pyrrole: A resourceful small molecule in key
medicinal hetero-aromatics. RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 15233–15266.
110 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nath[53] Jiang C, Frontier AJ. Stereoselective synthesis of pyrrolidine derivatives via reduction of substituted
pyrroles. Org Lett, 2007, 9, 4939–4942.
[54] Lee SJ, Youn SH, Cho CW. Organocatalytic enantioselective formal synthesis of bromopyrrole
alkaloids via aza-Michael addition. Org Biomol Chem, 2011, 9, 7734–7741.
[55] Li Petri G, Spano V, Spatola R, Holl R, Raimondi MV, Barraja P, Montalbano A. Bioactive pyrrole￾based compounds with target selectivity. Eur J Med Chem, 2020, 208, 112783.
[56] Roomi MW, MacDonald SF. The Hantzsch pyrrole synthesis. Can J Chem, 1970, 48, 1689–1697.
[57] Knorr L. Synthese von Pyrrolderivaten. Berichte der Deutschen Chemischen Gesellschaft, 2006, 17,
1635–1642.
[58] Rapoport H, Harbuct JW. Mechanism of a modified Knorr pyrrole condensation. J Org Chem, 2002,
36, 853–855.
[59] Amarnath V, Anthony DC, Amarnath K, Valentine WM, Wetterau LA, Graham DG. Intermediates in
the Paal-Knorr synthesis of pyrroles. J Org Chem, 2002, 56, 6924–6931.
[60] Azizi N, Khajeh-Amiri A, Ghafuri H, Bolourtchian M, Saidi M. Iron-catalyzed inexpensive and practical
synthesis of n-substituted pyrroles in water. Synlett, 2009, 2009, 2245–2248.
[61] Balakrishna A, Aguiar A, Sobral PJM, Wani MY, Almeida e silva J, Sobral AJFN. Paal–Knorr synthesis
of pyrroles: From conventional to green synthesis. Catal Rev, 2018, 61, 84–110.
[62] Portilla Zuniga OM, Sathicq AG, Martinez Zambrano JJ, Romanelli GP. Green synthesis of pyrrole
derivatives. Curr Org Synth, 2017, 14, 865–882.
[63] Azad I, Hassan F, Saquib M, Ahmad N, Rahman Khan A, G.Al-Sehemi A, Nasibullah M. A critical review
on advances in the multicomponent synthesis of pyrroles. Orient J Chem, 2018, 34, 1670–1700.
[64] Zhou NN, Zhu HT, Yang DS, Guan ZH. Recent developments in the group-1B-metal-catalyzed
synthesis of pyrroles. Org Biomol Chem, 2016, 14, 7136–7149.
[65] Javahershenas R, Arlan FM, Prager RH, Khalafy J. Recent advances in the synthesis of pyrroles via
multicomponent reactions using arylglyoxals. Arkivoc, 2020, 2020, 117–152.
[66] Meera G, Rohit KR, Saranya S, Anilkumar G. Microwave assisted synthesis of five membered
nitrogen heterocycles. RSC Adv, 2020, 10, 36031–36041.
[67] Korotaev VY, Barkov AY, Kotovich IV, Sosnovskikh VY. Three-component synthesis of substituted β-
(trifluoromethyl)pyrroles via Grob cyclization of 1,1,1-trifluoro-3-nitrobut-2-ene with 1,3-dicarbonylic
compounds and ammonia or primary amines. J Fluor Chem, 2012, 138, 42–47.
[68] Grob CA, Schad HP. Eine neue pyrrol ring-synthese. II. Teil. Untersuchungen in der Pyrrolreihe. 7.
Mitteilung. Helv Chim Acta, 1955, 38, 1121–1127.
[69] Li B-L, Hu H-C, Mo L-P, Zhang Z-H. Nano CoFe2O4 supported antimony(iii) as an efficient and
recyclable catalyst for one-pot three-component synthesis of multisubstituted pyrroles. RSC Adv,
2014, 4, 12929–12943.
[70] Luo Y, Zhang B-Q, He Y-H, Guan Z. The acidic ionic liquid [BSO3HMIm]HSO4: A novel and efficient
catalyst for one-pot, three-component syntheses of substituted pyrroles. Z Naturforsch B, 2015, 70,
29–38.
[71] Pachechne LA, Pereira VF, Martins GM, Martendal E, Xavier FR, Mendes SR. One-pot multicomponent
synthesis of 1,2,3,4-tetrasubstituted pyrroles catalyzed by [NMPH]CH3SO3. Tetrahedron Lett, 2019, 60,
151043.
[72] Jagadhane PB, Jadhav NC, Herlekar OP, Telvekar VN. Efficient, three-component synthesis of pyrrole
derivatives catalyzed by iodobenzene and oxone. Synth Commun, 2015, 45, 2130–2134.
[73] Li L, Chen Q, Xiong X, Zhang C, Qian J, Shi J, An Q, Zhang M. Synthesis of polysubstituted pyrroles via
a gold(I)-catalyzed tandem three-component reaction at room temperature. Chin Chem Lett, 2018,
29, 1893–1896.
[74] Akbaslar D, Giray ES, Algul O. Revisit to the synthesis of 1,2,3,4-tetrasubstituted pyrrole derivatives
in lactic acid media as a green solvent and catalyst. Mol Divers, 2021, 25, 2321–2338.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 111[75] Reddy GR, Reddy TR, Joseph SC, Reddy KS, Meda CLT, Kandale A, Rambabu D, Krishna GR, Reddy CM,
Parsa KVL, Kumar KS, Pal M. Yb(OTf)3 mediated MCR: A new and regioselective approach towards
polysubstituted pyrroles of pharmacological interest. RSC Adv, 2012, 2, 9142–9150.
[76] Pal G, Paul S, Das AR. Alum-catalyzed synthesis of 3-(1H-Pyrrol-2-yl)-2H-chromen-2-ones: A water￾PEG 400 binary solvent mediated, one-pot, three-component protocol. Synthesis, 2013, 45,
1191–1200.
[77] Magar DR, Ke Y-J, Chen K. Three-component synthesis of functionalized n-protected tetrasubstituted
pyrroles by an addition-elimination-aromatization process. Asian J Org Chem, 2013, 2, 330–335.
[78] Tamaddon F, Farahi M, Karami B. Molybdate sulfuric acid as a reusable solid catalyst in the
synthesis of 2,3,4,5-tetrasubstituted pyrroles via a new one-pot [2+2+1] strategy. J Mol Catal A
Chem, 2012, 356, 85–89.
[79] Niknam K, Sharghi H, Khataminejad M. Synthesis of 2,3,4,5-tetrasubstituted pyrroles and 1,4-
dihydro-tetraarylpyrazines using acidic alumina as a heterogeneous catalyst. J Iran Chem Soc, 2016,
13, 1953–1961.
[80] Bhat SI, Trivedi DR. A catalyst- and solvent-free three-component reaction for the regioselective
one-pot access to polyfunctionalized pyrroles. Tetrahedron Lett, 2013, 54, 5577–5582.
[81] Manasa KL, Sastry KNV, Tangella Y, Babu BN. Tandem synthesis of 3,4-disubstituted pyrroles from
aldehydes, 1,3-diketones and tosmic under metal-free conditions. ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 2730–2733.
[82] Huang W, Wang K, Liu P, Li M, Ke S, Gu Y. Three-component reactions of aromatic amines, 1,3-
dicarbonyl compounds, and alpha-bromoacetaldehyde acetal to access N-(hetero)aryl-4,5-
unsubstituted pyrroles. Beilstein J Org Chem, 2020, 16, 2920–2928.
[83] Nagarapu L, Mallepalli R, Yeramanchi L, Bantu R. Polyethylene glycol (PEG-400) as an efficient and
recyclable reaction medium for one-pot synthesis of polysubstituted pyrroles under catalyst-free
conditions. Tetrahedron Lett, 2011, 52, 3401–3404.
[84] Sabbaghan M, Ghalaei A. Catalyst application of ZnO nanostructures in solvent free synthesis of
polysubstituted pyrroles. J Mol Liq, 2014, 193, 116–122.
[85] Soltani M, Mohammadpoor-Baltork I, Khosropour AR, Moghadam M, Tangestaninejad S, Mirkhani V.
Convenient synthesis of polysubstituted pyrroles and symmetrical and unsymmetrical bis-pyrroles
catalyzed by H3PW12O40. C R Chim, 2016, 19, 381–389.
[86] Zhao D, Zhu Y, Guo S, Chen W, Zhang G, Yu Y. A three-component one-pot synthesis of penta￾substituted pyrroles via ring opening of α-nitroepoxides. Tetrahedron, 2017, 73, 2872–2877.
[87] Babaei SE, Hossaini Z, Besheli RR, Tavakkoli V. Fe3O4 nanoparticles as an efficient and reusable
catalyst for the solvent-free synthesis of 1H-indole and 1H-pyrrole derivatives. Chem Heterocycl
Compd, 2016, 52, 294–298.
[88] Qiu G, Wang Q, Zhu J. Palladium-catalyzed three-component reaction of propargyl carbonates,
isocyanides, and alcohols or water: Switchable synthesis of pyrroles and its bicyclic analogues. Org
Lett, 2017, 19, 270–273.
[89] Singh SB, Verma PK, Tiwari K, Srivastava M, Ankit P, Singh M, Singh J, Tiwari KP. Supramolecular
catalysis in the synthesis of polyfunctionalised pyrroles. Supramol Chem, 2014, 26, 882–889.
[90] Ramesh K, Murthy SN, Karnakar K, Nageswar YVD. DABCO-promoted three-component reaction
between amines, dialkyl acetylenedicarboxylates, and glyoxal. Tetrahedron Lett, 2011, 52, 3937–3941.
[91] Eligeti R, Baireddy K, Saini R. DABCO-promoted facile and convenient synthesis of novel isoxazolyl￾1H-2,3-pyrrole dicarboxylates. Chin Chem Lett, 2013, 24, 134–136.
[92] Balu Atar A, Han E, Sohn DH, Kang J. A solvent and transition metal-free, highly efficient brønsted
acidic ionic liquid promoted one-pot three-component reactions for the synthesis of
tetrasubstituted pyrroles. Synth Commun, 2019, 49, 1181–1192.
[93] Surineni G, Yogeeswari P, Sriram D, Kantevari S. Design and synthesis of novel carbazole tethered
pyrrole derivatives as potent inhibitors of mycobacterium tuberculosis. Bioorg Med Chem Lett,
2015, 25, 485–491.
112 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nath[94] Ghabraie E, Balalaie S, Bararjanian M, Bijanzadeh HR, Rominger F. An efficient one-pot synthesis of
tetra-substituted pyrroles. Tetrahedron, 2011, 67, 5415–5420.
[95] Khalilpour A, Asghari S. Synthesis, characterization and evaluation of cytotoxic and antioxidant
activities of dihydropyrimidone substituted pyrrole derivatives. Med Chem Res, 2017, 27, 15–22.
[96] Domling A. Recent developments in isocyanide based multicomponent reactions in applied
chemistry. Chem Rev, 2006, 106, 17–89.
[97] Shaabani A, Maleki A, Rezayan AH, Sarvary A. Recent progress of isocyanide-based multicomponent
reactions in Iran. Mol Divers, 2011, 15, 41–68.
[98] Sun X, Han J, Chen J, Deng H, Shao M, Zhang H, Cao W. One-pot metal-free cascade synthesis of 2-
(perfluoroalkyl)pyrroles. Eur J Org Chem, 2015, 2015, 7086–7090.
[99] Shan Y, Li J, Zhao Y, Chen D, Li Q, You J. A copper‐catalyzed three‐component reaction for the
preparation of polysubstituted pyrroles from alkynyl ketones, amines and isocyanoacetates.
ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 9497–9500.
[100] Vanga SKR, Bollikolla HB, Peruri VVS. Catalyst‐free facile and efficient one‐pot synthesis of densely
functionalized pyrroles and α‐amino ketones. J Heterocycl Chem, 2021, 58, 892–899.
[101] Zhou Y, Yan X, Chen C, Xi C. Copper-mediated reaction of zirconacyclopentadienes with azides:
A one-pot three-component synthesis of multiply substituted pyrroles from one azide and two
alkynes. Organometallics, 2013, 32, 6182–6185.
[102] Zhang X, Xu X, Chen G, Yi W. Regioselective synthesis of 2,3,4-trisubstituted pyrroles via pd(ii)-
catalyzed three-component cascade reactions of amines, alkyne esters, and alkenes. Org Lett, 2016,
18, 4864–4867.
[103] Dang TT, Seayad AM. Efficient [Cu(NHC)]-catalyzed multicomponent synthesis of pyrroles. Chem
Asian J, 2017, 12, 2383–2387.
[104] Zhang M, Fang X, Neumann H, Beller M. General and regioselective synthesis of pyrroles via
ruthenium-catalyzed multicomponent reactions. J Am Chem Soc, 2013, 135, 11384–11388.
[105] Kalmode HP, Vadagaonkar KS, Murugan K, Chaskar AC. A multicomponent pathway-inspired
regioselective synthesis of 2,3,4-trisubstituted 1H-pyrroles via [3+2] cycloaddition reaction. New J
Chem, 2015, 39, 4631–4639.
[106] Zheng Y, Wang Y, Zhou Z. Organocatalytic multicomponent synthesis of polysubstituted pyrroles
from 1,2-diones, aldehydes and arylamines. Chem Commun (Camb), 2015, 51, 16652–16655.
[107] Su Z, Gu W, Qian S, Xue S, Wang C. One-pot synthesis of highly substituted pyrroles by three￾component reactions of donor-acceptor cyclopropanes, salicylaldehydes, and ammonium acetate.
Eur J Org Chem, 2018, 2018, 1019–1025.
[108] Martín-Santos C, Jarava-Barrera C, Parra A, Esteban F, Navarro-Ranninger C, Alemán J. Modular
three-component organocatalytic synthesis of 3,4-disubstituted pyrroles by a one-pot domino
reaction. ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 976–979.
[109] Xia M, Lambu MR, Tatina MB, Judeh ZMA. A practical synthesis of densely functionalized pyrroles via
a three-component cascade reaction between carbohydrates, oxoacetonitriles, and ammonium
acetate. J Org Chem, 2021, 86, 837–849.
[110] Chang D, Chen J, Liu Y, Huang H, Qin A, Deng GJ. Metal-free synthesis and photophysical properties
of 1,2,4-triarylpyrroles. J Org Chem, 2021, 86, 110–127.
[111] Keiko NA, Vchislo NV, Verochkina EA, Larina LI. One-pot, three-component cascade synthesis of new
tetrasubstituted pyrroles by coupling reaction of 2-functionally substituted 2-alkenals, amines, and
nitroethane. Tetrahedron, 2014, 70, 8959–8970.
[112] Shekarrao K, Kaishap PP, Gogoi S, Boruah RC. Palladium-catalyzed one-pot Sonogashira coupling,
exo-dig cyclization and hydride transfer reaction: Synthesis of pyridine-substituted pyrroles. Adv
Synth Catal, 2015, 357, 1187–1192.
[113] Urgaonkar S, Verkade JG. Ligand-, copper-, and amine-free Sonogashira reaction of aryl iodides and
bromides with terminal alkynes. J Org Chem, 2004, 69, 5752–5755.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 113[114] Zawisza AM, Muzart J. Pd-catalyzed reduction of aryl halides using dimethylformamide as the
hydride source. Tetrahedron Lett, 2007, 48, 6738–6742.
[115] Legros JY, Primault G, Toffano M, Riviere MA, Fiaud JC. Reactivity of quinoline- and isoquinoline￾based heteroaromatic substrates in palladium(0)-catalyzed benzylic nucleophilic substitution. Org
Lett, 2000, 2, 433–436.
[116] Vivekanand T, Vinoth P, Agieshkumar B, Sampath N, Sudalai A, Menéndez JC, Sridharan V. Highly
efficient regioselective synthesis of pyrroles via a tandem enamine formation – Michael addition –
cyclization sequence under catalyst- and solvent-free conditions. Green Chem, 2015, 17, 3415–3423.
[117] Kumar SV, Muthusaravanan S, Muthusubramanian S, Perumal S. An efficient one pot three￾component domino reaction for the synthesis of 1,3,4-trisubstituted pyrroles. ChemistrySelect, 2016,
1, 675–679.
[118] Di Santo R, Tafi A, Costi R, Botta M, Artico M, Corelli F, Forte M, Caporuscio F, Angiolella L,
Palamara AT. Antifungal agents. 11. n-Substituted derivatives of 1-[(aryl)(4-aryl-1h-pyrrol-3-yl)
methyl]-1h-imidazole: Synthesis, anti-candida activity, and qsar studies. J Med Chem, 2005, 48,
5140–5153.
[119] Wang X, Wang SY, Ji SJ. Chemoselective synthesis of polycyclic spiroindolines and polysubstituted
pyrroles via the domino reaction of 2-isocyanoethylindoles. J Org Chem, 2014, 79, 8577–8583.
[120] Dawande SG, Kanchupalli V, Lad BS, Rai J, Katukojvala S. Synergistic rhodium(II) carboxylate and
bronsted acid catalyzed multicomponent reactions of enalcarbenoids: Direct synthesis of alpha￾pyrrolylbenzylamines. Org Lett, 2014, 16, 3700–3703.
[121] Peng J, Gao Y, Zhu C, Liu B, Gao Y, Hu M, Wu W, Jiang H. Synthesis of polysubstituted 3-amino
pyrroles via palladium-catalyzed multicomponent reaction. J Org Chem, 2017, 82, 3581–3588.
[122] Ge J, Ding Q, Wang X, Peng Y. Three-component cascade synthesis of fully substituted
trifluoromethyl pyrroles via a Cu(ii)/Rh(iii)-promoted aza-Michael addition/trifluoromethylation
cyclization/oxidation reaction. J Org Chem, 2020, 85, 7658–7665.
[123] Mohammadi B, Khorrami BR, Ghorbani M, Dusek M. A novel, three-component reaction to the
synthesis of 3-amino-4-cyano-5-aryl-1H-pyrrole-2-carboxamides. Tetrahedron, 2017, 73, 7291–7294.
[124] Farahi M, Davoodi M, Tahmasebi M. A new protocol for one-pot synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyrroles
using tungstate sulfuric acid as a reusable solid catalyst. Tetrahedron Lett, 2016, 57, 1582–1584.
[125] Liu X, Nie Z, Shao J, Chen W, Yu Y. A multi-component synthesis of N-substituted 2-amino-3-cyano
pyrroles via ring-opening of nitroepoxides. New J Chem, 2018, 42, 2368–2371.
[126] Li CX, Liu RJ, Yin K, Wen LR, Li M. Synthesis of disulfides tethered pyrroles from beta-ketothioamides
via a bicyclization/ring-opening/oxidative coupling reaction. Org Biomol Chem, 2017, 15, 5820–5823.
[127] Liao JY, Yap WJ, Wu J, Wong MW, Zhao Y. Three-component reactions of isocyanoacetates, amines
and 3-formylchromones initiated by an unexpected aza-Michael addition. Chem Commun (Camb),
2017, 53, 9067–9070.
[128] Ge J, Ding Q, Yang M, He T, Peng Y. Copper and manganese co-mediated cascade aza-Michael
addition/cyclization and azidation of 1,3-enynes: Regioselective synthesis of fully substituted azido
pyrroles. Org Biomol Chem, 2020, 18, 8908–8915.
[129] Chaudhary A, Khurana JM, Khanna G, Saroha M. A catalyst‐free domino protocol for the
chemoselective synthesis of multifunctionalised pyrroles in aqueous media via nitroketene‐n,s‐
acetal chemistry. ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 6334–6337.
[130] Liu H, Qi C, Wang L, Guo Y, Li D, Jiang H. Base-promoted three-component cascade reaction of
alpha-hydroxy ketones, malonodinitrile, and alcohols: Direct access to tetrasubstituted NH-pyrroles.
J Org Chem, 2021, 86, 9610–9620.
[131] Liu J-Y, Li Q-Y, Jiang B, Tu S-J. Three-component domino reactions providing rapid and efficient
routes to fully substituted pyrroles. RSC Advances, 2013, 3, 5056–5068.
[132] Gomha SM, Abdelrazek FM, Abdelrahman AH, Metz P. Synthesis of some new pyridine-based
heterocyclic compounds with anticipated antitumor activity. J Heterocycl Chem, 2018, 55, 1729–1737.
114 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra Nath[133] Ghobadian R, Mahdavi M, Nadri H, Moradi A, Edraki N, Akbarzadeh T, Sharifzadeh M, Bukhari SNA,
Amini M. Novel tetrahydrocarbazole benzyl pyridine hybrids as potent and selective butryl
cholinesterase inhibitors with neuroprotective and beta-secretase inhibition activities. Eur J Med
Chem, 2018, 155, 49–60.
[134] Tang Q, Duan Y, Wang L, Wang M, Ouyang Y, Wang C, Mei H, Tang S, Xiong Y, Zheng P, Gong P, Zhu
W. Synthesis and antiproliferative activity of pyrrolo[2,3-b]pyridine derivatives bearing the 1,8-
naphthyridin-2-one moiety. Eur J Med Chem, 2018, 143, 266–275.
[135] Miranda PO, Cubitt B, Jacob NT, Janda KD, De la torre JC. Mining a Krohnke pyridine library for anti￾arenavirus activity. ACS Infect Dis, 2018, 4, 815–824.
[136] Sajja Y, Vanguru S, Vulupala HR, Bantu R, Yogeswari P, Sriram D, Nagarapu L. Design, synthesis and
in vitro anti-tuberculosis activity of benzo[6,7]cyclohepta[1,2-b]pyridine-1,2,3-triazole derivatives.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2017, 27, 5119–5121.
[137] Ghattas A-E-BAG, Khodairy A, Moustafa HM, Hussein BRM, Farghaly MM, Aboelez MO. Synthesis,
in vitro antibacterial and in vivo anti-inflammatory activity of some new pyridines. Pharm Chem J,
2017, 51, 652–660.
[138] Ling Y, Hao ZY, Liang D, Zhang CL, Liu YF, Wang Y. The expanding role of pyridine and
dihydropyridine scaffolds in drug design. Drug Des Devel Ther, 2021, 15, 4289–4338.
[139] Lin SX, Curtis MA, Sperry J. Pyridine alkaloids with activity in the central nervous system. Bioorg
Med Chem, 2020, 28, 115820.
[140] Zhou F, Liu X, Zhang N, Liang Y, Zhang R, Xin X, Dong D. Copper-catalyzed three-component
reaction: Solvent-controlled regioselective synthesis of 4-amino- and 6-amino-2-iminopyridines. Org
Lett, 2013, 15, 5786–5789.
[141] Safaei-Ghomi J, Ghasemzadeh MA, Mehrabi M. Calcium oxide nanoparticles catalyzed one-step
multicomponent synthesis of highly substituted pyridines in aqueous ethanol media. Sci Iran, 2013,
20, 549–554.
[142] Douglas SP, Swathi B, Kumar MR, Ramesh Y, Rao KJ, Satyanarayana B, Naidu CP. Nano copper
ferrite catalysed improved procedure for one-pot synthesis of poly substituted pyridine derivatives.
Chem Sci Trans, 2016, 5, 325–334.
[143] Alinaghizadeh F, Zahedifar M, Seifi M, Sheibani H. Cascade synthesis of thieno[2,3-b]pyridines by
using intramolecular cyclization reactions of 3-cyano-2-(organylmethylthio)pyridines. J Braz Chem
Soc, 2016, 27, 663–669.
[144] Kidwai M, Chauhan R. K2CO3 catalyzed green and rapid access to 2-amino-3,5-dicarbonitrile-6-thio￾pyridines. J Iran Chem Soc, 2013, 11, 1005–1013.
[145] Azizi N, Haghayegh MS. Greener and additive-free reactions in deep eutectic solvent: One-pot,
three-component synthesis of highly substituted pyridines. ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 8870–8873.
[146] Khandebharad AU, Sarda SR, Farooqui MN, Arif Khan Pathan M, Agrawal BR. Solvent in solute
system for the synthesis of highly substituted pyridine by using choline hydroxide and water.
Polycycl Aromat Compd, 2018, 40, 832–839.
[147] Pandharpatte MS, Osman HA, Osman A-BM, Nazeruddin GM. Microwave promoted sodium acetate
catalyzed one pot synthesis of highly functionalized pyridine derivatives. Chem Sci Trans, 2017, 6,
1–7.
[148] Reddy KS, Reddy R, Khagga M, Thota G, Srinivasulu G. Synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines using
TBAHS as a catalyst. Rasayan J Chem, 2011, 4, 299–302.
[149] Shafiee MRM, Moloudi R. Barium chloride dispersed on silica gel nanoparticles: An efficient catalyst
for the preparation of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines under solvent-free conditions. J Chem Res, 2011, 35,
294–297.
[150] Li J, He P, Yu C. DPTA-catalyzed one-pot regioselective synthesis of polysubstituted pyridines and
1,4-dihydropyridines. Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 4138–4144.
2 One-pot three-component selective annulation strategies 115[151] Wang M, Yang Z, Song Z, Wang Q. Three-component one-pot synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines
without catalyst and solvent. J Heterocycl Chem, 2015, 52, 907–910.
[152] Safari J, Zarnegar Z, Borujeni M. Mesoporous nanocrystalline MgAl2O4: A new heterogeneous
catalyst for the synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines under solvent-free conditions. Chem Pap, 2013, 67,
688–695.
[153] Zolfigol M, Moosavi-Zare A, Farahmand S, Zare A, Pourali A, Ayazi-Nasrabadi R. synthesis of 2,4,6-
triarylpyridines using ZrOCl2 under solvent-free conditions. Synlett, 2013, 25, 193–196.
[154] Tabrizian E, Amoozadeh A, Rahmani S, Imanifar E, Azhari S, Malmir M. One-pot, solvent-free and
efficient synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines catalyzed by nano-titania-supported sulfonic acid as a
novel heterogeneous nanocatalyst. Chinese Chem Lett, 2015, 26, 1278–1282.
[155] Kamali M, Smith C. One-pot, solvent-free, and efficient synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines using
CoCl2.6H2O as a recyclable catalyst. Cogent Chem, 2016, 2, 1–6.
[156] Maleki A, Firouzi-Haji R. L-Proline functionalized magnetic nanoparticles: A novel magnetically
reusable nanocatalyst for one-pot synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines. Sci Rep, 2018, 8, 17303.
[157] Yan X, Ling F, Zhang Y, Ma C. Three-component functionalized dihydropyridine synthesis via a
formal inverse electron-demand hetero-diels-alder reaction. Org Lett, 2015, 17, 3536–3539.
[158] Hanashalshahaby EH, Unaleroglu C. Mannich bases as enone precursors for water-mediated
efficient synthesis of 2,3,6-trisubstituted pyridines and 5,6,7,8-tetrahydroquinolines. ACS Comb Sci,
2015, 17, 374–380.
[159] Khanal HD, Lee YR. Organocatalyzed oxidative n-annulation for diverse and polyfunctionalized
pyridines. Chem Commun (Camb), 2015, 51, 9467–9470.
[160] Li Y, Wang G, Hao G, Wan J-P. Synthesis of 2,3,5,6-tetrasubstituted pyridines via selective three￾component reactions of aldehyde and two different enaminones. Tetrahedron Lett, 2019, 60,
219–222.
[161] Xie Y, Wu C, Jia C, Tung C-H, Wang W. Iron–cobalt-catalyzed heterotrimerization of alkynes and
nitriles to polyfunctionalized pyridines. Org Chem Front, 2020, 7, 2196–2201.
[162] Sheng J, Wang Y, Su X, He R, Chen C. Copper-catalyzed [2+2+2] modular synthesis of
multisubstituted pyridines: Alkenylation of nitriles with vinyliodonium salts. Angew Chem Int Ed
Engl, 2017, 56, 4824–4828.
[163] Xia Y, Cai J, Huang H, Deng GJ. Synthesis of polysubstituted pyridines from oxime acetates using
NH4I as a dual-function promoter. Org Biomol Chem, 2017, 16, 124–129.
[164] Gao Y, Zhou D, Ma Y. α-Csp3-H methylenation of diketones to synthesize methylene-bridged bis-1,3-
dicarbonyl compounds and polysubstituted pyridines using the dmso/selectfluor system.
ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 9374–9377.
[165] Nurkenov OA, Seilkhanov TM, Fazylov SD, Karipova GZ, Ermek DM, Tishtykbayeva DE. Synthesis and
structure of diethyl-2,6-dimethyl-pyridin-3,5-dicarboxylate. Ser Chem Technol, 2020, 1, 22–28.
[166] Xue L, Cheng G, Zhu R, Cui X. Acid-promoted oxidative methylenation of 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds
with DMSO: Application to the three-component synthesis of Hantzsch-type pyridines. RSC Adv,
2017, 7, 44009–44012.
116 Bijoy P Mathew, Jagmeet Singh, Mahendra NathSamiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das✶
3 One-pot three-component synthesis
of quinolines and some other selective
six-membered heterocycles with biological
importance
3.1 Introduction
Drug development and design significantly affected by the discovery of novel hetero￾cyclic scaffolds which has an enormous effect in human lifestyle. Results from multi￾component reactions (MCR) can be thought of as the synthetic pivot for an enormous
variety of innovative heterocyclic scaffolds. MCRs are typically defined as reactions in
which three or more reactants combine to form novel product in a single operation
[1–6]. This procedure has a number of benefits because it manages to combine some
basic organic reactions that occur under different circumstances, also offering a vivid
solution for a single-step, one-flask procedure that exhibits extraordinary atom econ￾omy and superior selectivity towards the heterocyclic skeleton [7–10]. Generally,
MCRs are composed of simple techniques for the fabrication of various complex mole￾cules in a straightforward manner and have achieved outstanding success in terms of
synthetic efficacy and reaction design [11–14]. Till date, a range of MCR reaction proto￾cols have been developed, for example, the Ugi and Passerini reactions are the pream￾ble examples of MCRs [15]. Due to inherent potency of these techniques significant
applications have been developed for the novel and efficient synthesis of complex het￾erocyclic scaffolds.
The countless convergence of MCR offers a rapid, effective, and affordable un￾common to the present direct synthesis. A low-yielding MCR is less expensive than a
similar multistep process. The majority of MCRs has a wide range of substrates that
they can tolerate in addition to reactive centers with different functionalities. MCR
products may be prepared in the way of subsequent cascade transformations. Fur￾thermore, the high yield, one-pot, single-step procedure, extraordinary bond forming
✶
Corresponding author: Asish R. Das, Department of Chemistry, University of Calcutta, Kolkata
700009, West Bengal, India, e-mail: ardchem@caluniv.ac.in
Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Department of Chemistry, University of Calcutta, Kolkata 700009, India
Acknowledgements: We acknowledge the financial support from the University of Calcutta, India.
S. D. thanks the UGC, New Delhi, India, for his Senior Research Fellowship [UGC Ref. No. 282/(SC) (CSIR￾UGC NET DEC.2016)].
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-003index, high atom economy, and extremely confluent leads to simple upgrade protocols
make the MCR chemistry an almost ideal methodology to construct array of diverse
compounds to benefit manhood (Figure 3.1). These factors combined with the enor￾mous scaffold diversity make the MCR chemistry an extremely efficient method. Con￾sidering this background, we are discussing nearly current advancements in the one￾pot synthesis of heterocyclicsegments that are usually accepted by pharmacology and
academic circles.
3.2 Nitrogen-containing heterocycles
Pyridine, quinolines, pyrimidines, quinazolines, dihydropyridines (DHPs), naphthyri￾dines, and spiro-heterocycles are just a few examples of the heterocyclic moiety that
are commonly used in clinical evaluation. Due to the immense biological importance,
there are plenty of methodologies reported in the literature on how to carry out the
synthesis of these biologically significant compounds.
Figure 3.1: Advantages of one-pot MCR reactions.
118 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das3.2.1 Quinoline derivatives
The pyridine and quinoline nucleus are the essential core piece of a variety of physio￾logically and pharmaceutically active compounds with features including antimalarial,
antibacterial, antiasthmatic, anticancer, antiinflammatory, and antidiabetic [16–30].
They are also helpful for the synthesis of different significant ligands in coordination
chemistry and are utilized as alkali reagents or additives in a variety of organic reac￾tions [31–33]. They serve as a helpful recourse in the synthesis of numerous significant
nitrogen-containing heterocycles [34]. Consequently, superior attention has been given
to constructing pyridine and quinoline molecules in the course of the last few years.
3.2.1.1 Synthesis of 3-arylsulfonylquinolines via cascade oxidative coupling
In 2022, Mal et al. [35] reported a three-component coupling reaction between N￾propargylamine (1), diazonium tetrafluoroborate (2), and DABCO. (SO2)2 (DABSO) (3)
under argon atmosphere in dichloroethane as a solvent. At room temperature, DABSO
used as the sulfone source and an oxidant in this particular radical-medicated cascade
reaction. This methodology offered a wide range of substrate scope, mild reaction
condition and decent to outstanding yields of anticipated products (4) (Figure 3.2).
Figure 3.2: Synthesis of 3-arylsulfonylquinolines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 119Mechanistic study and previous literature suggest that aryl diazonium tetrafluorobo￾rate (2) and DABSO (3) react to each other to generate an aryl sulfonyl radical (B)
in situ. Aryl sulfonyl radical undergoes addition reaction to the 3-propargyal amine
(1) to generate an intermediate (C). The intermediate immediately goes through intra￾molecular cyclization (D), re-aromatization followed by oxidation to produce the de￾sired 3-arylsulfonylquinolines (4) (Figure 3.3).
3.2.1.2 Synthesis of 3-arylquinolines via [3+1+1+1] annulation
In 2022 Li and coworkers [36] synthesized a diverse range of quinolines (8) through
[3+1+1+1] annulation of arylamines (5), arylaldehydes (6), and dimethyl sulfoxide
(DMSO) (7) in the presence of stoichiometric amount base (t-BuOK) and oxidant
(K2S2O8). In this protocol DMSO (7) provides two nonadjacent methines (=CH–) to
the pyridine ring in quinolines core (Figure 3.4). This annulation offers a straight￾forward method for producing 3-arylquinolines (8) from easily accessible sub￾strates with good to outstanding yields.
3.2.1.3 Regioselective synthesis of substituted quinolines
In 2021, Li and coworkers [37] demonstrated a straightforward regiospecific methodol￾ogy for the synthesis of highly substituted quinolines (10 and 10′) from 2-aminobenzyl
alcohols (9), benzaldehyde (6), and DMSO (7) in the presence of KOH. In this annula￾tion reaction, DMSO (7) acts as one carbon source to the quinoline ring (Figure 3.5).
Here, the key step of annulation is the [4 + 2] cycloaddition reaction (Figure 3.6).
Figure 3.3: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of 3-arylsulfonylquinolines.
120 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. DasFigure 3.4: Synthesis of 3-arylquinolines.
Figure 3.5: Synthesis of 3-arylquinolines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 1213.2.1.4 Metal-free synthesis of 4-arylquinolines
In 2018, Tiwari and coworkers [38] developed an effective and transition metal-free
method to synthesize 4-arylquinolines (12) from easily available anilines (5) and al￾kynes (11) in the presence of K2S2O8 and DMSO (7). The one-pot cascade method offers
a broad substrate range, readily accessible raw ingredients, and good to exceptional
yield of the desired quinolies (12). The [4 + 2] oxidative annulation method uses DMSO
as one carbon source (Figure 3.7).
3.2.1.5 An iron(III)-catalyzed synthesis of 2-pyridones
In 2022, Lee and coworkers [39] discovered a highly effective iron(III) catalyzed three￾component heteroannulation reaction between 3-formylchromones (13), phenylpro￾piolamides (14), and water (15) for the synthesis of various multifunctionalized 2-
Figure 3.6: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of 3-arylquinolines.
122 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Daspyridones (16) (Figure 3.8). The key characteristics of this procedure include a cheap
catalytic source, short reaction time, ease of operation, and high yield. Water mole￾cule acts as an oxygen resource.
The key characteristics of this procedure include a cheap catalytic source, short reac￾tion times, ease of operation, and high yield. Water molecule acts as an oxygen resource
(Figure 3.9).
3.2.1.6 Solid-state synthesis of chromenopyridinones
In 2015, Lee et al. [40] synthesized highly functionalized and diverse chromenopyridi￾nones (19) using three-component reactions between different 4-hydroxycoumarins (17)
with ammonium acetate (18) and 3-formylchromones (13) under L-proline-catalyzed sol￾vent-free conditions (Figure 3.10). The benefit of this protocol includes the employment
of low-cost organocatalyst, short reaction time, various functional group tolerance, an￾ticipation of toxic organic solvents, environmental-friendly conditions, solid-state reac￾tion, and excellent yield.
Figure 3.7: Synthesis of 4-arylquinolines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 1233.2.1.7 Ball-milling approach of pyridocoumarin synthesis
In 2017, Das and coworkers [41] developed CuI-Zn(OAc)2 combo-catalyzed solvent-free
protocol for the synthesis of functionalized pyridocoumarin framework (21). In this
particular reaction an aryl aldehyde (6), terminal alkyne (10), and 3-aminocoumarin
(20) couple together to form desired skeleton though a ball-milling process under
mild condition (Figure 3.11).
Reaction mechanism involves uncommon CuI
–CuIII switching combo-catalysis
through the formation of a flexible propargylic amine intermediate (C), which re￾sults in a quick C(sp2
)-H activation for cyclization involving transient CuIII species.
The UV-vis study of the reaction mixture proves the existence of transient CuIII species
(Figure 3.12).
Figure 3.8: Synthesis of 2-pyridones.
124 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. DasFigure 3.9: Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of 2-pyridones.
Figure 3.10: Synthesis of chromenopyridinones.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 125Figure 3.11: Synthesis of functionalized pyridocoumarins.
Figure 3.12: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of functionalized pyridocoumarins.
126 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das3.2.2 Pyrimidines and quinazolines
The importance of pyrimidine and quinazoline derivatives has been skillfully ac￾knowledged. A variety of bioactive compounds with diverse biological properties,
such as antidepressant, antipyretic, analgesic, anticonvulsant, anti-inflammatory,
anti-HIV, antiviral, antitumor, and antibacterial capabilities, all have the pyrimidine
and quinazoline motif as its fundamental core component [42–51]. In addition to these
uses, heterocyclic scaffolds are similarly utilized, antiplatelet aggregation inhibitors,
as serotonin 5-HT6 receptor antagonists, arrhythmic medicines, anti-Parkinsonian
drugs, to treat leukemia, anemia, lower cholesterol levels, etc. [52–55]. Due to such
pharmaceutical importance, the attention in mounting novel synthetic schemes hase
improved for the construction of pyrimidine and quinazoline scaffolds.
3.2.2.1 Microwave-assisted synthesis of quinazolino[4,3-b]quinazolin-8-ones
In 2022, Nanduri and coworkers [56] reported a novel microwave-assisted Cu(I) catalyzed
one-pot multicomponent synthesis of linearly fused quinazolines (25) (Figure 3.13). This
protocol’s synthetic applicability increased by the short reaction time, ligand-free ap￾proach, use of environmentally benign PEG-400 as a solvent, and wide substrate scope.
Here, one of the diheteroatomic quinazoline ring nitrogen was supplied by TMSN3. In the
presence of CuI C–N bond formation takes place at first to give free NH2. Then it reacts
with aldehyde with one molecule of water elimination followed by annulation to the de￾sired product (25).
3.2.2.2 I2/CuCl2 copromoted synthesis of 2-acyl-4-aminoquinazolines
In 2021, Wu and coworkers [57] discovered I2/CuCl2 co-catalyzed [4 + 1 + 1] cyclization
of 2-aminobenzonitraile (26), methyl ketones (27), and ammonium acetates (18) to ac￾cess 2-acyl-4-aminoquinazolines (28) (Figure 3.14). Cheap metal source, use of iodine
as reagent, mild reaction condition, operational simplicity, easily available substrates,
and wide range of functional group tolerance make this protocol more relevant.
A mechanistic assessment reveals that CuCl2 acts as a Lewis acid to assist in the
final cyclization (Figure 3.15).
3.2.2.3 Synthesis of 2,4-substituted quinazolines
In 2020, Wang and coworkers [58] reported a useful and mild synthetic route for the
construction of 2,4-substituted quinazolines (30) from functionalized 2-aminobenzophe￾nones (29) with numerous benzaldehydes (6) by catalyzed TMSOTf and hexamethyldisi￾3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 127lazane (HMDS) under metal and solvent-free and microwave irradiation condition
(Figure 3.16).
According to the previous literature, in this protocol TMSOTf and HMDS interact
with each other to produce gaseous ammonia in situ which acts as a nitrogen source
in quinazoline ring formation. This synthetic protocol provided the desired quinazo￾lines with a broad substrate scope, good to excellent yields, short reaction time.
Figure 3.13: Synthesis of quinazolino[4,3-b]quinazolin-8-ones.
128 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das3.2.2.4 Synthesis of 5H-chromeno[2,3-d]pyrimidin-5-one derivatives
In 2021, Zhai and coworkers [59] proposed a microwave-irradiated multicomponent
reaction between 3-formylchromones (13), amines (5), and paraformaldehyde (31) for
the synthesis of chromenopyrimidine derivatives (32) under solvent free condition
(Figure 3.17).
In this multicomponent annulation reaction paraformaldehyde (31) acts as C1
building block to construct pyrimidine ring. This catalyst-freemicrowave-assisted pro￾tocol provides higher yield under shorter reaction time. Both aromatic and aliphatic
amines (5) react to the process. Possible mechanisms show amine attacks to the β￾position to the 3-formylchromones (13), followed by ring opening providing the key
intermediate (B). Then the intermediate (B) undergoes condensation (C) and annula￾tion, respectively, to generate pyrimidine-fused chroman-4-one (32) (Figure 3.18).
3.2.2.5 Synthesis of 2,4,6-trisubstituted pyrimidines
In 2021, Huang and coworkers [60] reported a base-mediated multicomponent reac￾tion between amidine hydrochlorides (33), aldehydes (6), and acetylacetone (34) to
Figure 3.14: Synthesis of 2-acyl-4-aminoquinazolines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 129Figure 3.15: Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of 2-acyl-4- aminoquinazolines.
Figure 3.16: Synthesis of 2,4-substituted quinazolines.
130 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. DasFigure 3.17: Synthesis of 5H-chromeno[2,3-d]pyrimidin-5-ones.
Figure 3.18: Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of 5H-chromeno[2,3-d]pyrimidin-5-ones.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 131achieve 2,4,6-trisubstituted pyrimidines (34). Readily accessible starting materials, nu￾merous functional group tolerance, and metal-free condition are the core features of
this protocol (Figure 3.19).
3.2.2.6 Synthesis of imidazo[1,2-a]pyrimidines
In 2015, Jeong and coworkers [61] demonstrated a green, highly effective one-pot mul￾ticomponent protocol for the synthesis of imidazo[1,2-a]pyrimidines (37) scaffolds
from 1
H-benzo[d]imidazol-2-amine (36), aldehydes (6), and alkyne (11) via intramolec￾ular C–N bond formation and 6-endo-dig cycloisomerization at 85 °C under solvent￾free conditions (Figure 3.20). Under solvent-free conditions, molybdate sulfuric acid
used as an environment-friendly and reusable catalyst to produce good to exceptional
yields. In this annulation reaction three new bonds are formed. Eco-friendly benign
protocol, use of inexpensive heterogenous catalyst, short reaction time, widely vari￾able function group tolerance, high atom economy, and ease of the reaction are the
remarkable feature of this annulation.
Figure 3.19: Synthesis of 2,4,6-trisubstituted pyrimidines.
132 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das3.2.3 1,4-Dihydropyridines (DHPs)
Many cardiovascular disorders are treated clinically with several DHPs. DHPs effec￾tively inhibit calcium (Ca2+) currents through voltage-dependent L-type channels [62].
The therapy of cardiovascular disorders would greatly benefit from derivatives that
can function as dual cardioselective calcium channel agonists and smooth muscle￾selective calcium channel antagonists [63]. Many DHP-containing natural and synthetic
products exhibit attractive pharmacological profiles, including anti-inflammatory, anti￾tubercular, anticonvulsant, HIV protease inhibitory, analgesic, antithrombotic, radio
and neuroprotectant, and platelet antiaggregatory activities [64–73]. Numerous methods
have been developed to synthesize 1,4-DHPs because of their relevant significance in
the field of pharmacology.
3.2.3.1 Metal-free synthesis of Hantzsch 1,4-dihydropyridines
In 2018, Ranjbar and coworkers [74] reported a novel metal-freeoxidative C–C cou￾pling procedure to synthesize Hantzsch 1,4-dihydropyrimidines (40). Ammonium hy￾droxide (39), 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds (38), and benzylic alcohols (23) react in the
Figure 3.20: Synthesis of imidazo[1,2-a]pyrimidines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 133presence of HBr in DMSO to produce DHP in high yields. This protocol’s primary char￾acteristics are short reaction time and modest temperature requirement (Figure 3.21).
Bromodimethylsulfonium bromide is generated in situ from HBr and DMSO, which inter￾act with benzylic alcohol (23) forms an alkoxysulfonium ion that undergoes nucleophilic
addition with enaminone under the reaction condition. Basically, in this procedure, the
Hantzsch reaction is modified by using benzyl alcohols rather of aldehydes.
3.2.3.2 Divergent synthesis of dual 1,4-dihydropyridines
In 2017, Chaturbhuj and coworkers [75] developed a four-component DHPs (40) syn￾thesis from various aldehydes (6), β-ketoesters (38), and ammonium carbonate (41)
catalyzed by sulfated polyborate under solvent-free condition. High yields, shorter re￾action time, solvent-free conditions, simple workup, reusability of the catalyst, and
the ability to tolerate a variety of functional groups are the main advantages of the
Figure 3.21: Synthesis of 1,4-dihydropyridines.
134 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Dascurrent approach, which has positive effects on both the economy and the environ￾ment (Figure 3.22).
3.2.4 Naphthyridines
Naphthyridine derivatives, [6,6] fused heterocycles, are a significant class of “privi￾leged structure” in drug discovery [76]. Among them, the 1,6-naphthyridine deriva￾tives exhibited unique bioactivities in human disease, such as HIV-1, cancer, and
Alzheimer [77–81]. On this context, designing a decent synthetic pathway for the syn￾thesis of naphthyridines for chemists and biologists is of utmost importance.
Figure 3.22: Synthesis of 1,4-dihydropyridines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 1353.2.4.1 Synthesis of substituted benzo[c]pyrazolo[2,7]naphthyridines
In 2020, Yaqub and coworkers [82] reported a concise, environmentally benign, and
regioselective multicomponent “on-water” protocol of naphthyridine (45) synthesis
from 3-aminopyrazole (43), isatin (42), and malononitrile (44) (Figure 3.23).
Here one-pot base-mediated protocol involves the formation of arylidene as a cause
of Knoevenagel condensation of isatin (42) with malononitrile (44), which afterward
undergoes Michael addition with 3-aminopyrazole (43) trailed hydrolysis, annulation,
decarboxylation, and aromatization to give the desired naphthyridines (45) in excel￾lent yields (Figure 3.24). Water as a green solvent, broad substrate scope, transition
metal-free annulation, and short reaction time are the attractive features of this
protocol.
3.2.4.2 Ultrasonic-promoted synthesis of 1,6-naphthyridine
In 2020, Zhang and coworkers [83] established a straightforward synthesis of poly￾substituted 1,6-naphthyridine (48) derivatives from easily accessible 4-aminopyridinone
(46), aromatic aldehyde (6), and 1,3-cyclohexanedione (47) as substrates. This approach
is very appealing since it uses inexpensive and easily accessible starting ingredients,
environmentally friendly ultrasonic irradiation in water, recyclable heterogeneous
Figure 3.23: Synthesis of benzo[c]pyrazolo[2,7]naphthyridines.
136 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Dassolid acid catalyst, a wide range of substrates, and a straightforward one-pot operation
(Figure 3.25).
3.2.5 Spiro-heterocycles
Numerous biological and pharmacological features of heterocyclic compounds with
the indole nucleus have been described in literature [84, 85]. There are numerous nat￾ural alkaloids, and pharmaceutical drugs are the spirofused indole systems [86–91].
These spiro-heterocycles have a variety of therapeutic and biological activities, includ￾ing anticancer, antimicrobial, and antibiotic [84, 85]. Due to their pharmacological im￾portance, there has been an increase in research work into their synthesis.
Figure 3.24: Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of benzo[c]pyrazolo[2,7]naphthyridines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 1373.2.5.1 Synthesis of indol-fused dispiro-heterocycles
In 2020, Kumar and coworkers [92] discovered a pseudo-four component reaction of 6-
aminouracil/6-amino-2-thiouracil (49), p-toluidine (5), and isatins (42) in an ethanol–water
to access Spiro-heterocyclic scaffolds (50). This domino synthetic protocol using β-CD func￾tionalized nanostructured Fe3O4 as heterogeneous catalyst (Figure 3.26). The nanocataly￾stcharacterized by scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy,
energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and Fourier-transform infrared
spectroscopy. Low catalyst loading, high atom economy, green solvent, use of magneti￾cally separable, and reusable heterogeneous catalysts are key features of this technique.
3.2.5.2 Synthesis of spirooxindoles fused pyrazolo-tetrahydropyridinone
and coumarin-dihydropyridine-pyrazole
In 2018, Choudhury and coworkers [93] reported a microwave-assisted three-compo￾nent reaction involving isatin (42), 4-hydroxycoumarin (17), and aminopyrazole (43) for
the synthesis of fused spirooxindoles (51 and 51′) (Figure 3.27). This methodology’s key
features are solvent-dependent reaction path switching properties, the ability to pro￾duce two different types of products from the same raw materials, metal-free reaction
conditions, a broad substrate range, and good yields.
Spirooxindoles (51′) were produced by the ring opening of the hydroxycoumarin
moiety during the reactions of isatin (42), aminopyrazole (17), and 4-hydroxycoumarins
Figure 3.25: Synthesis of poly-substituted 1,6-naphthyridine.
138 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das(43) under microwave irradiations in an acetonitrile medium. On the other hand, in the
presence of acetic acid, tetracyclic coumarin-DHP-pyrazolemoiety spirofused with oxin￾doles (51) were observed (Figure 3.28).
3.3 Oxygen and sulfur-containing heterocycles
Pyran, oxazine, and thiazine are the important class heterocyclic compounds that fea￾ture in several pharmaceutical drugs and natural products of medicinal interest. A
study of the literature reveals various described processes for producing such bioac￾tive molecules.
3.3.1 Pyran
Pyrans is a significant heterocycle that exhibits a variety of biological activities and con￾tains many natural compounds in its structure [94–96]. Pyran derivatives are frequently
Figure 3.26: Synthesis of fused dispiro-heterocycles.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 139utilized in the chemistry of cosmetics, pigments, and medications [97, 98]. Additionally,
pyran and its derivatives are widely employed as the primary component of photochro￾mic materials and play a significant role in the chemical and biological activities [99].
Due to their biological and therapeutic qualities, such as their antibacterial, antimicrobial,
antiallergic, antirheumatism, and anticancer capabilities, these chemicals have been re￾garded as beneficial [99–104]. Also pyrans are utilized as memory boosters to treat neuro￾logical conditions like Down syndrome, Parkinson’s, Huntington’s, and Alzheimer’s
Figure 3.27: Synthesis of fused spirooxindoles.
140 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. DasFigure 3.28: Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of fused spirooxindoles.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 141[105–107]. Due to their huge biological relevance, there are numerous strategies for syn￾thesizing pyran derivatives that have been documented in the literature.
3.3.1.1 Synthesis of pyrano[3,2-c]quinolone derivatives
In 2022, Guleria and coworkers [108] discovered a green method for the synthesis of
pyrano[3,2-c]quinolone derivatives (54 and 54’). In the presence of taurine as catalyst
in water a three-component MCR takes place between malononitrile (44)/ethylcyanoa￾cetate (53), aldehydes (6), and 4-hydroxy-1-methyl-2(1H)-quinolone (52) to achieve pyr￾anoquinolone derivatives (54 and 54’). Taurine basically 2-aminoethane sulfonic acid
is considered as a water-soluble β-amino acid. Taurine exists in zwitterionic form in
water and literature studies show that due to that reason taurine is able to carry out
the Knoevenagel−Michael cascade reaction effectively (Figure 3.29).
Figure 3.29: Synthesis of pyrano[3,2-c]quinolone.
142 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. DasExcellent product yields, short time span, cost-effectiveness, atom economy, and a
straightforward workup approach without the need for additional purification meth￾ods are all benefits of this methodology.
3.3.1.2 Synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyrans and pyrano[2,3-d]pyrimidinones
In 2022, Kamble and coworkers [109] proposed a novel, gentle, and straightforward
one-pot multicomponent synthesis of tetrahydrobenzopyran (56) and pyranopyrimi￾dine (56′) under microwave-assisted condition. Aldehyde (6), malononitrile (44), and
1,3-dicrbonyl compounds (47 and 55) react in aqueous medium in the presence of chi￾tosan-zinc oxide (CS-ZnO) to achieve the target molecules (Figure 3.30).
Chitosan-zinc oxide (CS-ZnO) is hybrid nanocatalyst where nanoparticle zinc
oxide (ZnO) embedded in polysaccharide is composed by β-linked (1–4) D-glucosamine
(Figure 3.31). This technique addresses the use of modified polymeric substrates in or￾ganic synthesis while also providing ease of operation, simple set-up, and increased
yields (90–95%).
3.3.2 Oxazines
Numerous oxazine derivatives, which constitute a large class of both natural and syn￾thetic compounds, have significant biological features like analgesic, anti-inflammatory,
antimalarial, anticancer, antitubercular, and antibacterial effects [110–115]. There are
many strategies published in the literature for carrying out the synthesis of oxazine mo￾tifs because of enormous biological value.
3.3.2.1 Synthesis of 1,3,5-oxadiazines
Ma and coworkers [116] achieved the first selective and feasible synthesis of diaryl
1,3,5-oxadiazines (58) in 2021 using cheap and easily accessible amidines (57) in wet
DMSO (7 and 15). Control experiments show water molecule acts as the source of oxy￾gen atom which is necessary to form the oxadiazine ring, and DMSO (7) served as the
dual carbon synthon. In this particular transformation, among several copper salts,
Cu(OTf)2 gave the best outcomes (Figure 3.32).
3.3.2.2 Synthesis of coumarin fused bis-oxazines
In 2019, Khurana and coworkers [117] reported a catalyst-free eco-friendly one-pot
protocol for the synthesis of pharmacologically relevant coumarin-fused oxazine (60)
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 143from 5,7-dihydroxy-4-methyl-2H-chromen-2-one (59), substituted aromatic amines (5),
and formaldehyde (31) at room temperature (Figure 3.33).
This approach has the benefits of mild reaction conditions, ease of product sepa￾ration, avoidance of column chromatography, affordable starting reactants, and oper￾ational simplicity (Figure 3.34).
Figure 3.30: Synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyrans and pyrano[2,3-d]pyrimidinones.
144 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. DasFigure 3.31: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyrans or pyrano[2,3-d]
pyrimidinones.
Figure 3.32: Synthesis of 1,3,5-oxadiazines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 1453.3.3 Thiazine
The bioactivesulfur-containing six-membered heterocyclic molecules known as thiazi￾nones have a wide range of pharmacological properties, including anticonvulsant, an￾tifungal, anticancer, antituberculosis, antidiabetic, antiarrhythmic, antimalarial, and
anti-HIV activity [118–125]. Additionally, 1,3-thiazine core moieties are employed as re￾action intermediates in numerous organic syntheses and transformations, and they
also exhibit substantial potential as antiradiation agents and cell growth inhibitors
[126–128]. Because of their tremendous biological relevance, numerous methods for
synthesizing thiazine motifs have been documented in the literature.
3.3.3.1 Synthesis of 1,3-thiazine-4-ones
In 2019, Sharma and coworkers [129] discovered a regioselective catalyst-free multi￾component click reaction between phenylisothiocyanates (61), hydrazine monohy￾Figure 3.33: Synthesis of coumarin-fused bis-oxazines.
146 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Dasdrate (62), and diethyl but-2-ynedioate or dimethyl but-2-ynedioate (63) to achieve 1,3-
thiazine-4-one derivatives (64) at room temperature (Figure 3.35).
This protocol is a prominent replacement for previously reported methods due to
factors like prefunctionalized starting materials, expensive reagents, poor atom econ￾omy, time-consuming workup, complex purification protocols, nonbeneficial solvents,
requirement of inert atmosphere, and nonambient temperature.
3.3.3.2 Synthesis of naphtho[1,2-e]/benzo[e][1,3]thiazine derivatives
In 2018, Khurana and coworkers [130] reported a straightforward and environment
friendly multicomponent reaction involving thionaphthol/thiophenol (65), aromatic
amines (5), and formaldehyde (31) for the synthesis of naphtho[1,2-e]/benzo[e][1,3]thia￾zines derivatives (66). Formaldehyde acts as a two-carbon source to the thiazine ring
Figure 3.34: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of coumarin-fused bis-oxazines.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 147Figure 3.35: Synthesis of 1,3-thiazine-4-ones.
Figure 3.36: Synthesis of naphtho[1,2-e]/benzo[e][1,3]thiazine.
148 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Dasin the presence tetra-n-butyl ammonium bromide as a catalyst under solvent-free con￾dition (Figure 3.36).
Based on previous literature at first condensation of formaldehyde and aniline
with water loss produces imine. The imine is subjected to 2-thionaphthol’s nucleo￾philic attack, followed by aromatization and condensation with formaldehyde to pro￾duce an intermediate, which is then subjected to cyclization to produce the product
(Figure 3.37).
3.4 Conclusion
Due to its high regioselectivity and atom efficiency, one-pot multicomponent reactions
are crucial in the synthesis of organic compounds. The recent advancement of one￾step multicomponent synthesis of several heteroatoms holding six-membered hetero￾cycles, such as pyridines, pyrimidines naphthyridines, DHPs, quinazolines, quinolines
and spiro-heterocyclic compounds, pyran, oxazine, and thiazine is the focus of this
review. Explanation regarding biological significance, mechanistic interpretations,
and the adaptability of numerous scaffolds to form the heterocycles are provided.
This review will be supportive in the future to develop unique strategies for synthesiz￾ing novel bioactive heterocycles.
Figure 3.37: Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of naphtho[1,2-e]/benzo[e][1,3]thiazine.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 149References
[1] Reymond JL, Van Deursen R, Blum LC, Ruddigkeit L. Chemical space as a source for new drugs. Med
Chem Comm, 2010, 1, 30–38.
[2] Dömling A, Wang W, Wang K. Chemistry and biology of multicomponent reactions. Chem Rev, 2012,
112, 3083–3135.
[3] Ugi I, Dömling A, Hörl W. Multicomponent reactions in organic chemistry. Endeavour, 1994, 18,
115–122.
[4] Ugi I. Recent progress in the chemistry of multicomponent reactions. Pure Appl Chem, 2001, 73,
187–191.
[5] Armstrong RW, Combs AP, Tempest PA, Brown SD, Keating TA. Multiple-component condensation
strategies for combinatorial library synthesis. Acc Chem Res, 1996, 29, 123–131.
[6] Hulme C, Gore V. Multi-component reactions: Emerging chemistry in drug discovery from xylocain
to crixivan. Curr Med Chem, 2003, 10, 51–80.
[7] Wan JP, Gan L, Liu Y. Transition metal-catalyzed C–H bond functionalization in multicomponent
reactions: A tool toward molecular diversity. Org Biomol Chem, 2017, 15, 9031–9043.
[8] Wan JP, Liu Y. Recent advances in new multicomponent synthesis of structurally diversified 1,4-
dihydropyridines. RSC Adv, 2012, 2, 9763–9777.
[9] Strecker A. Ueber die künstlicheBildung der Milchsäure und einenneuen,
demGlycocollhomologenKörper. Justus Liebigs Ann Chem, 1850, 75, 27–45.
[10] Innocenti R, Lenci E, Trabocchi A. Recent advances in copper-catalyzed imine-based
multicomponent reactions. Tetrahedron Lett, 2020, 61, 152083.
[11] Liu Y, Wang H, Wan J. Recent advances in diversity oriented synthesis through isatin-based
multicomponent reactions. Asian J Org Chem, 2013, 2, 374–386.
[12] Wan JP, Liu Y. Synthesis of dihydropyrimidinones and thiones by multicomponent reactions:
Strategies beyond the classical Biginelli reaction. Synthesis, 2010, 23, 3943–3953.
[13] Zhu ZP, Bienayme H. Wiley-VC, Weinheim, Germany, 2005.
[14] Dömling A. Recent developments in isocyanide based multicomponent reactions in applied
chemistry. Chem Rev, 2006, 106, 17–89.
[15] Dömling A, Ugi I. Multicomponent reactions with isocyanides. Angew Chem Int Ed, 2000, 39,
3168–3210.
[16] Harborne JB, Mabry TJ, Mabry H. Academic Press, New York, 1975, 19.
[17] Pietta PG. Flavonoids as antioxidants. J Nat Prod, 2000, 63, 1035–1042.
[18] Kaspentakis GC, Tsoleridis CA, Stephanatou JS. Reaction of 3-formylchromone-N-benzoylhydrazone
with ketenes. Synthesis and structural studies of chromone 1,3,4-oxadiazolines. J HeterocyclChem,
2007, 44, 425–430.
[19] Gaspar A, Matos MJ, Garrido J, Uriarte E, Borges F. Chromone: A valid scaffold in medicinal
chemistry. Chem Rev, 2014, 114, 4960–4992.
[20] Augstein J, Cairns H, Hunter D, Lee TB, Suschitzky J, Altounyan RE, Jackson DM, Mann J, Orr TS,
Sheard P. New orally effective chromosome derivatives for the treatment of asthma. Agents
Actions, 1977, 7, 443–445.
[21] Gautam R, Jachak SM, Kumar V, Mohan CG. Synthesis, biological evaluation and molecular docking
studies of stellatin derivatives as cyclooxygenase (COX-1, COX-2) inhibitors and anti-inflammatory
agents. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2011, 21, 1612–1616.
[22] Kand D, Kalle AM, Talukdar P. Chromenoquinoline-based thiol probes: A study on the quencher
position for controlling fluorescent Off–On characteristics. Org Biomol Chem, 2013, 11, 1691–1701.
[23] Joshi AA, Viswanathan CL. Docking studies and development of novel 5-heteroarylamino-2,4-
diamino-8-chloropyrimido-[4,5-b]quinolines as potential antimalarials. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2006,
16, 2613–2617.
150 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das[24] Nagaiah K, Venkatesham A, Rao RS, Saddanapu V, Yadav JS, Basha SJ, Sarma AVS, Sridhar B,
Addlagatta A. Synthesis of new cis-fused tetrahydrochromeno[4,3-b]quinolines and their
antiproliferative activity studies against MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7 breast cancer cell lines. Bioorg
Med Chem Lett, 2010, 20, 3259–3264.
[25] Joshi AA, Narkhede SS, Viswanathan CL. Design synthesis and evaluation of 5-substituted amino-2,4-
diamino-8-chloropyrimido-[4,5-b]quinolines as novel antimalarials. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2005, 15,
73–76.
[26] Selvi ST, Nadaraj V, Mohan S, Sasi R, Hema M. Solvent free microwave synthesis and evaluation of
antimicrobial activity of pyrimido[4,5-b]- and pyrazolo[3,4-b]quinolines. Bioorg Med Chem, 2006, 14,
3896–3903.
[27] Śladowska H, Filipek B, Szkatuła D, Sapa J, Bednarski M, Ciołkowska M. Investigations on the
synthesis and pharmacological properties of N-substituted derivatives of 4-alkoxy-6-methyl-1H￾pyrrolo[3,4-c]pyridine-1,3(2H)-diones. Farmaco, 2005, 60, 53–59.
[28] Hagan DO. Pyrrole, pyrrolidine, pyridine, piperidine and tropane alkaloids. Nat Prod Rep, 2000, 17,
435–446.
[29] Pollak N, Dölle C, Ziegler M. The power to reduce: Pyridine nucleotides–small molecules with a
multitude of functions. Biochem J, 2007, 402, 205–218.
[30] Prachayasittikul S, Pingaew R, Worachartcheewan A, Sinthupoom N, Prachayasittikul V, Ruchirawat
S, Prachayasittikul V. Roles of pyridine and pyrimidine derivatives as privileged scaffolds in
anticancer agents. Mini-Rev Med Chem, 2017, 17, 869–901.
[31] Kaes C, Katz A, Hosseini MW. Bipyridine: The most widely used ligand. A review of molecules
comprising at least two 2,2‘-bipyridine units. Chem Rev, 2000, 100, 3553–3590.
[32] Vitale M, Ford PC. Luminescent mixed ligand copper(I) clusters (CuI)n(L)m (L=pyridine, piperidine):
Thermodynamic control of molecular and supramolecular species. Coord Chem Rev, 2001, 219,
3–16.
[33] Zafar MN, Atif AH, Nazar MF, Sumrra SH, Saba GE, Paracha R. Pyridine and related ligands in
transition metal homogeneous catalysis. Russ J Coord Chem, 2016, 42, 1–18.
[34] Nair V, Menon RS, Sreekanth AR, Abhilash N, Biju AT. Engaging zwitterions in carbon−carbon and
carbon−nitrogen bond-forming reactions: A promising synthetic strategy. AccChem Res, 2006, 39,
520–530.
[35] Mathuri A, Pramanik M, Mal P. 3-Arylsulfonylquinolines from N-propargylamines via cascaded
oxidative sulfonylation using DABSO. J Org Chem, 2022, 87, 6812–6823.
[36] Yang T, Li H, Nie Z, Su MO, Luo WP, Liu Q, Guo CC. [3+1+1+1] Annulation to the pyridine structure in
quinoline molecules based on DMSO as a nonadjacent dual-methine synthon: Simple synthesis of
3-arylquinolines from arylaldehydes, arylamines, and DMSO. J Org Chem, 2022, 87, 2797–2808.
[37] Yang T, Nie ZW, Su MO, Li H, Luo WP, Liu Q, Guo CC. Unexpected annulation between
2-aminobenzyl alcohols and benzaldehydes in the presence of DMSO: Regioselective synthesis of
substituted quinolines. J Org Chem, 2021, 86, 15228–15241.
[38] Phanindrudu M, Wakade SB, Tiwari DK, Likhar PR, Tiwari DK.Transition metal free approach for the
synthesis of 4-arylquinolines from alkynes and anilines. J Org Chem, 2018, 17(83), 9137–9143.
[39] Sim HS, Hanal HD, Lee YR. Fe(III)-catalyzed tandem cyclization of phenylpropiolamides with
3-formylchromones for the construction of 2-pyridones. J Org Chem, 2022, 87, 12890–12899.
[40] Paul S, Lee YR. Eco-friendly construction of highly functionalized chromenopyridinones by an
organocatalyzed solid-state melt reaction and their optical properties. Green Chem, 2016, 18,
1488–1494.
[41] Kausar N, Das AR. CuI-Zn(OAc)2 catalyzed C(sp2)-H activation for the synthesis of pyridocoumarins
through an uncommon CuI
-CuIIIswitching mechanism: A fast, solvent-free, combo-catalytic, ball
milling approach. Tetrahedron Lett, 2017, 58, 2601–2607.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 151[42] Auti PS, George G, Paul AT. Recent advances in the pharmacological diversification of quinazoline/
quinazolinone hybrids. RSC Adv, 2020, 10, 41353–41392.
[43] Radwan AA, Alanazi FK. Biological Activity of Quinazolinones. London, 2020.
[44] Shakhidoyatov KM, Elmuradov BZ. Tricyclic quinazoline alkaloids: Isolation, synthesis, chemical
modification, and biological activity. Chem Nat Compd, 2014, 50, 781–800.
[45] Cagir A, Jones SH, Gao R, Eisenhauer BM, Hecht SM, Luotonin A. A naturally occurring human DNA
topoisomerase I poison. J Am Chem Soc, 2003, 125, 13628–13629.
[46] Tian KM, Li JJ, Xu SW. Rutaecarpine: A promising cardiovascular protective alkaloid from
Evodiarutaecarpa (Wu Zhu Yu). Pharmacol Res, 2019, 141, 541–550.
[47] Joshi BK, Gloer JB, Wicklow DT, Dowd PF. Sclerotigenin: A new antiinsectan benzodiazepine from the
sclerotia of Penicillium sclerotigenum. J Nat Prod, 1999, 62, 650–652.
[48] Martínez VC, Alcaraz AJR, Vera M, Guirado A, Martínezesparza M, Peñarrubia PG. Therapeutic
potential of pteridine derivatives: A comprehensive review. Med Res Rev, 2019, 39, 461–516.
[49] Jacobson KA, Jarvis MF, Williams M. Purine and Pyrimidine (P2) receptors as drug targets. J Med
Chem, 2002, 45, 4057–4093.
[50] Modica M, Santagati M, Santagati A, Cutuli V, Mangano N, Caruso A. Synthesis of new [1,3,4]
thiadiazolo[3,2-a]thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidinone derivatives with antiinflammatory activity. Pharmazie,
2000, 55, 500–502.
[51] Sahu M, Siddiqui N. A review on biological importance of pyrimidines in the new era. Int J Pharm
PharmSci, 2016, 8, 8–21.
[52] Debenham JS, Duggan CM, Clements MJ, Walsh TF, Kuethe JT, Reibarkh M, Salowe SP, Sonatore LM,
Hajdu R, Milligan JA, Visco DM, Zhou D, Lingham RB, Stickens D, DeMartino JA, Tong X, Wolff M,
Pang J, Miller RR, Sherer EC, Hale JJ. Discovery of N-[bis(4-methoxyphenyl)methyl]-4-hydroxy-2-
(pyridazin-3-yl)pyrimidine-5-carboxamide (MK-8617), an Orally Active Pan-Inhibitor of Hypoxia￾inducible factor prolyl hydroxylase 1-3 (HIF PHD1-3) for the treatment of anemia. J Med Chem, 2016,
59, 11039–11049.
[53] Davidson M, Ma P, Stein EA, Gotto AM, Raza A, Chitra R, Hutchinson H. Comparison of effects on
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and high-density lipoprotein cholesterol with rosuvastatin
versus atorvastatin in patients with type IIa or IIb hypercholesterolemia. Am J Card Imag, 2002, 89,
268–275.
[54] Zheng N, Hao Q, Lin K, Pan J, Li Y, Zhou W. Synthesis and biological evaluation of novel 1-substituted
3-(3-phenoxyprop-1-yn-1-yl)-1H-pyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidin-4-amines as potent Bruton’s tyrosine
kinase (BTK) inhibitors. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2019, 29, 225–229.
[55] Sukach VA, Tkachuk VM, Rusanov EB, Roschenthaler GV, Vovk MV. Heterocyclization of N-(1-chloro￾2,2,2-trifluoroethylidene)carbamates with β-enaminoesters – a novel synthetic strategy to
functionalized trifluoromethylated pyrimidines. Tetrahedron, 2012, 68, 8408–8415.
[56] Pawar G, Ghouse SM, Joshi SV, Rana P, Kar S, Sarma PM, Dannarm SR, Sonti R, Nanduri S. Cu(I)-
catalyzed microwave-assisted multicomponent reaction towards synthesis of diverse fluorescent
quinazolino[4,3-b]quinazolin-8-ones and their photophysical study. ChemistrySelect, 2022, 7. DOI:
10.1002/slct.202200500.
[57] Huang C, Zhou Y, Yu XX, Wang LS, Wu YD, Wu AX. I2/CuCl2-copromoted formal [4+1+1] cyclization of
methyl ketones, 2-aminobenzonitriles, and ammonium acetate: Direct access to 2-Acyl-4-
aminoquinazolines. J Org Chem, 2021, 86, 16916–16925.
[58] Chan CK, Lai CY, Wang CC. TMSOTf-catalyzed synthesis of substituted quinazolines using
hexamethyldisilazane as nitrogen source under neat and microwave irradiation. TMSOTf-catalyzed
synthesis of substituted quinazolines using hexamethyldisilazane as a nitrogen source under neat
and microwave irradiation conditions. Org BiomolChem, 2020, 18, 7201–7212.
152 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das[59] Zhang B, Yang H, Wang T, Han X, Sun H, Fang L, Zhai H, Cheng B. Synthesis of 5H-chromeno[2,3-d]
pyrimidin-5-one derivatives via microwave-promoted multicomponent reaction. J Org Chem, 2021,
86, 18304–18311.
[60] Zhang MM, Zhan ZZ, Wang M, Wang HS, Huang GS. Direct synthesis of 2,4,6-trisubstituted
pyrimidines via base-mediated one-pot multicomponent reaction. ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6,
13627–13632.
[61] Shinde VV, Jeong YT. Molybdatesulfuric acid (MSA): An efficient solid acid catalyst for the synthesis
of diversely functionalized fused imidazo[1,2-a]pyrimidines under solvent-free conditions. New J
Chem, 2015, 39, 4977–4986.
[62] Triggle DJ, Langs DA, Janis RA. Ca2+ channel ligands: Structure-function relationships of the 1,4-
dihydropyridines. Med Res Rev, 1989, 9, 123–180.
[63] Vo D, Matowe WC, Ramesh M, Iqbal N, Wolowyk MW, Howlett SE, Knaus EE. Syntheses, calcium
channel agonist-antagonist modulation activities, and voltage-clamp studies of isopropyl 1,4-
dihydro-2,6-dimethyl-3-nitro-4-pyridinylpyridine-5-carboxylate racemates and enantiomers. J Med
Chem, 1995, 38, 2851–2859.
[64] Wachter GA, Davis MC, Martin AR, Franzblau SG. Antimycobacterial activity of substituted isosteres
of pyridine- and pyrazinecarboxylic acids. J Med Chem, 1998, 41, 2436–2438.
[65] Klegeris A, Liutkevicius E, Mikalauskiene G, Duburs G, McGeer PL, Klusa V. Anti-inflammatory effects
of cerebrocrast in a model of rat paw edema and on mononuclear THP-1 cells. Eur J Pharmacol,
2002, 441, 203–208.
[66] Desai B, Sureja D, Naliapara Y, Shah A, Saxena AK. Synthesis and QSAR studies of 4-substituted
phenyl-2,6-dimethyl-3, 5-bis-N-(substituted phenyl)carbamoyl-1,4-dihydropyridines as potential
antitubercular agents. Bioorg Med Chem, 2001, 9, 1993–1998.
[67] Prasanthi G, Prasad K, Bharathi K. Synthesis, anticonvulsant activity and molecular properties
prediction of dialkyl 1-(di(ethoxycarbonyl)methyl)-2,6-dimethyl-4-substituted-1,4-dihydropyridine
-3,5-dicarboxylates. Eur J Med Chem, 2014, 73, 97–104.
[68] Hilgeroth A. Dimeric 4-Aryl-1,4-dihydropyridines: Development of a third class of nonpeptidic HIV-1
protease inhibitors. Mini-Rev Med Chem, 2002, 2, 235–245.
[69] Sadanandam YS, Shetty MM, Reddy KRM, Leelavathi P. Synthesis and pharmacology of new 1,4-
dihydropyridines. 2,6-Dimethyl-4-(substituted phenyl) or (2-furyl)-, (2-thienyl)- or (3-pyridyl)-3,5-di
[(N-methyl) or (N-diethyl)]carbamoyl-1,4-dihydropyridines as potent calcium-channel blockers. Eur J
Med Chem, 1994, 29, 975–979.
[70] Cooper K, Fray MJ, Parry MJ. 1,4-Dihydropyridines as antagonists of platelet activating factor. 1.
Synthesis and structure-activity relationships of 2-(4-heterocyclyl)phenyl derivatives. J Med Chem,
1992, 35, 3115–3129.
[71] Klusa V. Drugs Future, 1995, 20, 135–138.
[72] Donkor IO, Zhou X, Schmidt J, Agrawal KC, Kishore V. Synthesis and radioprotective effects of
adamantyl substituted 1,4-dihydropyridine derivatives. Bioorg Med Chem, 1998, 6, 563–568.
[73] Bretzel RG, Bollen CC, Maeser E, Federlin KF. Nephroprotective effects of nitrendipine in
hypertensive type I and type II diabetic patients. Am J Kidney Dis, 1993, 21, 53–64.
[74] Rezaei N, Ranjbar PR. The efficient synthesis of Hantzsch 1,4-dihydropyridines via metal-free
oxidative C-C coupling by HBr and DMSO. Tetrahedron Lett, 2018, 59, 4102–4106.
[75] Rekunge DS, Khatri CK, Chaturbhuj GU. Sulfatedpolyborate: An efficient and reusable catalyst for
one pot synthesis of Hantzsch 1,4-dihydropyridines derivatives using ammonium carbonate under
solvent free conditions. Tetrahedron Lett, 2017, 58, 1240–1244.
[76] Smith AB, Pitram SM, Boldi AM, Gaunt MJ, Sfouggatakis C, Moser WH. Multicomponent linchpin
couplings. Reaction of dithiane anions with terminal epoxides, epichlorohydrin, and vinyl epoxides:
Efficient, rapid, and stereocontrolled assembly of advanced fragments for complex molecule
synthesis. J Am Chem Soc, 2003, 125, 14435–14445.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 153[77] Rudys S, Luci CR, Pérezroth E, Cikotiene I, Padrón JM. Antiproliferative activity of novel benzo[b][1,6]
naphthyridines in human solid tumor cell lines. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2010, 20, 1504–1506.
[78] Bedard J, May S, L’Heureux L, Stamminger T, Copsey A, Drach J, Huffman J, Chan L, Jin H, Rando RF.
Antiviral properties of a series of 1,6-naphthyridine and 7, 8-dihydroisoquinoline derivatives
exhibiting potent activity against human cytomegalovirus. Antimicrob Agents Chemother, 2000, 44,
929–937.
[79] Ruchelamn AL, Singh SK, Ray A, Wu XH, Yang JM, Li TK, Liu A, Liu LF, LaVoie EJ. 5H-Dibenzo[c,h]1,6-
naphthyridin-6-ones: Novel topoisomerase I-Targeting anticancer agents with potent cytotoxic
activity. Bioorg Med Chem, 2003, 11, 2061–2073.
[80] Lavanya M, Lin C, Mao J, Thirumalai D, Aabaka SR, Yang X, Mao J, Huang Z, Zhao J. Synthesis and
anticancer properties of functionalized 1,6-naphthyridines. Top CurrChem, 2021, 13, 379–543.
[81] Chan L, Jin H, Stefanac T, Lavallée JF, Falardeau G, Wang W, Bédard J, May S, Yuen L. Discovery of
1,6-naphthyridines as a novel class of potent and selective human cytomegalovirus inhibitors. J Med
Chem, 1999, 42, 3023–3025.
[82] Ashraf A, Shafiq Z, Mahmood K, Yaqub M, Rauf W. Regioselective, one-pot, multi-component, green
synthesis of substituted benzo[c]pyrazolo[2,7]naphthyridines. RSC Adv, 2020, 10, 5938.
[83] Li C, Qi C, Zhang F. Ultrasonic promoted synthesis of 1,6naphthyridine derivatives catalyzed by solid
acid in water. Tetrahedron Lett, 2020, 61, 152144.
[84] Sharma V, Kumar P, Pathak D. Biological importance of the indole nucleus in recent years: A
comprehensive review. J HeterocyclChem, 2010, 47, 491–502.
[85] Sayed M, El-Dean AMK, Ahmed M, Hassanien R. Synthesis of some heterocyclic compounds derived
from indole as antimicrobial agents. Synth Commun, 2018, 48, 413–421.
[86] Sundberg RJ. The Chemistry of Indoles. Academic, New York, 1996.
[87] Wan Y, Li Y, Yan C, Yan M, Tang Z. Indole: A privileged scaffold for the design of anti-cancer agents.
Eur J Med Chem, 2019, 183, 111691–111708.
[88] Sebahar PR, Williams RM. The asymmetric total synthesis of (+)- and (−)-spirotryprostatin B. J Am
Chem Soc, 2000, 122, 5666–5667.
[89] Ma J, Hecht SM. Javaniside, a novel DNA cleavage agent from alangiumjavanicum having an
unusual oxindole skeleton. ChemCommun, 2004, 1190–1191.
[90] Kang TH, Matsumoto K, Tohda M, Murakami Y, Takayama H, Kitajima M, Aimi N, Watanabe
H. Pteropodine and isopteropodine positively modulate the function of rat muscarinic M(1) and
5-HT(2) receptors expressed in Xenopus oocyte. Eur J Pharmacol, 2002, 444, 39–45.
[91] Edmondson S, Danishefsky SJ, Sepp-Lorenzino L, Rosen N. Total synthesis of spirotryprostatin a,
leading to the discovery of some biologically promising analogues. J Am Chem Soc, 1999, 121,
2147–2155.
[92] Tailor YK, Khandelwal S, Verma K, Gopal R, Kumar M. Multicomponent synthesis of
dispiroheterocycles using a magnetically separable and reusable heterogeneous catalyst. RSC Adv,
2020, 10, 36713.
[93] Mishra R, Jana A, Panday AK, Choudhury LH. Synthesis of spirooxindoles fused with pyrazolo￾tetrahydropyridinone and coumarin dihydropyridine-pyrazole tetracycles by reaction medium
dependent isatin-based multicomponent reactions. New J Chem, 2019, 43, 2920–2932.
[94] Reis J, Gaspar A, Milhazes N, Borges F. Chromone as a privileged Scaffold in drug discovery: Recent
advances. J Med Chem, 2017, 60, 7941.
[95] Pietta PG. Flavonoids as antioxidants. J Nat Prod, 2000, 63, 1035.
[96] Liu X, Chan CB, Jang SW, Pradoldej S, Huang J, He K, Phun LH, France S, Xiao G, Jia Y, Luo HR, Ye K. A
synthetic 7,8-dihydroxyflavone derivative promotes neurogenesis and exhibits potent
antidepressant effect. J Med Chem, 2010, 53, 8274.
[97] Morinaka Y, Takahashi K. Jpn. KokaiTokkyoKoho, JP52017498, transChem Abstr., 1977, 87, 102299.
[98] Hafez EA, Elnagdi MH, Elagamey AA, ElTaweel FA. Heterocycles, 1987, 26, 903–907.
154 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. Das[99] Guo RY, An ZM, Mo LP, Wang RZ, Liu HX, Wang SX, Zhang ZH. Meglumine: A novel and efficient
catalyst for one-pot, three-component combinatorial synthesis of functionalized 2-amino-4h-pyrans.
ACS Comb Sci, 2013, 15, 557.
[100] Musa MA, Cooperwood JS, Khan MOF. A review of coumarin derivatives in pharmacotherapy of
breast cancer. Curr Med Chem, 2008, 15, 2664–2679.
[101] Page CB, Appleby LF, Day D, Chan Y, Buckley BR, Allin SM, McKenzie MJ. Highly enantioselective
total synthesis of (−)-(3′S)-lomatin and (+)-(3′S,4′R)-trans-khellactone. Org Lett, 2009, 11, 1991–1993.
[102] Venkatesh BC, Muralikrishna A, Padmaja A. ChemInform abstract: Synthesis and antioxidant activity
of a new class of bis and tris heterocycles. ArchPharm Chem Life Sci, 2012, 345, 745–752.
[103] Melliou E, Magiatis P, Mitaku S, Skaltsounis AL, Chinou E, Chinou I. Natural and synthetic 2,2-
Dimethylpyranocoumarins with antibacterial activity. J Nat Prod, 2005, 68, 78–82.
[104] Reis J, Cagide F, Chavarria D, Silva T, Fernandes C, Gaspar A, Uriarte E, Remião F, Alcaro S, Ortuso F,
Borges F. Discovery of new chemical entities for old targets: Insights on the lead optimization of
chromone-based monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) Inhibitors. J Med Chem, 2016, 59, 5879.
[105] Emami S, Ghanbarimasir Z. Recent advances of chroman-4-one derivatives: Synthetic approaches
and bioactivities. Eur J Med Chem, 2015, 93, 539.
[106] Cagide F, Silva T, Reis J, Gaspar A, Borges F, Gomes LR, Low JN. Discovery of two new classes of
potent monoamine oxidase-B inhibitors by tricky chemistry. ChemCommun, 2015, 51, 2832.
[107] Yao N, Chen CY, Wu CY, Motonishi K, Kung HJ, Lam KS. Novel flavonoids with antiproliferative
activities against breast cancer cells. J Med Chem, 2011, 54, 4339.
[108] Saini K, Raigar AK, Manju, Jangid R, Guleria A. Tandem protocol for the synthesis of pyrano[3,2-c]
quinolone derivatives using taurine as a green bio-organic catalyst in aqueous medium. J Org
Chem, 2022, 87, 13734–13743.
[109] Nesaragi AR, Gasti T, Metre TV, Anand A, Kamble RR, Chougale RB, Keri RS. Chitosan-ZnO: An
efficient and recyclable polymer incorporated hybrid nanocatalyst to synthesize tetrahydrobenzo[b]
pyrans and pyrano[2,3-d]pyrimidinones under microwave expedition. 2022, 7. DOI: 10.1002/
slct.202200604.
[110] Thompson AM, Blaser A, Anderson RF, Shinde SS, Franzblau SG, Zhenkun M, Denny WA, Palme BD.
Synthesis, reduction potentials, and antitubercular activity of ring A/B analogues of the bioreductive
drug (6S)-2-nitro-6-{[4-(trifluoromethoxy)benzyl]oxy}-6,7-dihydro-5H-imidazo[2,1-b][1,3]oxazine
(PA-824). J Med Chem, 2009, 52, 637–645.
[111] Ren H, Grady S, Gamenara D, Heinzen H, Moyna P, Croft SL, Kendrick H, Vanessa YV, Moyna
G. Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of a series of simple and novel potential antimalarial
compounds. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2001, 11, 1851.
[112] Benaamane N, Kolli BN, Bentarzi Y, Hammal L, Geronikaki A, Eleftheriou P, Lagunin A. Synthesis and
in silico biological activity evaluation of new N-substituted pyrazolo-oxazin-2-one systems. Bioorg
Med Chem, 2008, 16, 3059.
[113] Ouberai M, Asche C, Carrez D, Croisy A, Dumy P, Demeunynck M. 3,4-Dihydro-1H-[1,3]oxazino[4,5-c]
acridines as a new family of cytotoxic drugs. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2006, 16, 4641–4643.
[114] Mathew BP, Kumar A, Sharma S, Shula PK, Nath M. An eco-friendly synthesis and antimicrobial
activities of dihydro-2H-benzo- and naphtho-1,3-oxazine derivatives. Eur J Med Chem, 2010, 45,
1502–1507.
[115] Cananzi S, Merlin L, Artali R, Beretta GL, Zaffaroni N, Dallavalle S. Synthesis and topoisomerase I
inhibitory activity of a novel diazaindeno[2,1-b]phenanthrene analogue of Lamellarin D. Bioorg Med
Chem, 2011, 19, 4971.
[116] Zhang Y, Kuang J, Xiao X, Wang L, Ma Y. DMSO as a dual carbon synthon and water as oxygen
donor for the construction of 1,3,5-oxadiazines from amidines. Org Lett, 2021, 23, 3960–3964.
[117] Bartwal G, Khurana JM. A catalyst free one-pot synthesis of coumarin functionalized bis-oxazines in
ethanol at room temperature. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 11077–11080.
3 One-pot three-component synthesis of quinolines 155[118] Matysiak J, Juszczak M, Karpinska MM, Langner E, Walczak K, Lemieszek MK, Skrzypek A,
Niewiadomy A, Rzeski W. Synthesis of 2-(2,4-dihydroxyphenyl)thieno-1,3-thiazin-4-ones, their
lipophilicity and anticancer activity in vitro. Mol Divers, 2015, 19, 725–736.
[119] Anand SSA, Loganathan C, Thomas NS, Saravanan K, Alphonsa AT, Kabilan S. Synthesis, structure
prediction, pharmacokinetic properties, molecular docking and antitumor activities of some novel
thiazinone derivatives. New J Chem, 2015, 39, 7120–71299.
[120] Mahato K, Bagdi PR, Khan AT. Yb(OTf)3 catalysed regioselective synthesis of unusual di- and tri￾substituted 3,4-dihydrothiochromeno[3,2-e][1,3]thiazin-5(2H)-one derivatives through a pseudo
four-component hetero-Diels–Alder reaction. RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 48104–48111.
[121] Dandia A, Singh R, Arya K. Phosphorus, microwave induced dry-media synthesis of spiro[indole￾thiazolidinones/thiazinones] as potential antifungal and antitubercular agents and study of their
reactions. Sulfur Silicon Relat Elem, 2004, 179, 551–564.
[122] Gutschow M, Schlenk M, Gab J, Paskaleva M, Alnouri MW, Scolari S, Iqbal J, Muller CE.
Benzothiazinones: A novel class of adenosine receptor antagonists structurally unrelated to
xanthine and adenine derivatives. J Med Chem, 2012, 55, 3331–3341.
[123] Matysiak J, Juszczak M, Karpinska MM, Longner E, Walczak K, Lemieszek M, Skrzypek A, Rzeski W,
Niewiadomy A. Synthesis, characterization, and pharmacological evaluation of novel azolo- and
azinothiazinones containing 2,4-dihydroxyphenyl substituent as anticancer agents. MonatshChem,
2015, 146, 1315–1327.
[124] Salama MA, Almotabacani LA. Synthesis and chemistry of some new 2-mercaptoimidazole
derivatives of possible antimicrobial activity. PhophrusSulfur Silicon Relat Elem, 2004, 179, 305–319.
[125] Bonzsing D, Sohar P, Giggler G, Kovacs G. Synthesis and pharmacological study of new 3,4-dihydro￾2H,6H-pyrimido-[2,1-b][1,3]thiazines. Eur J Med Chem, 1996, 31, 663–668.
[126] Hossaini Z, Nematpour M, Yavari I. Ph3P-mediated one-pot synthesis of functionalized 3,4-dihydro￾2H-1,3-thiazines from N,N′-dialkylthioureas and activated acetylenes in water. Monatsh Chem, 2010,
141, 229.
[127] Rai VK, Yadav BS, Yadav LDS. The first ionic liquid-promoted one-pot diastereoselective synthesis of
2,5-diamino-/2-amino-5-mercapto-1,3-thiazin-4-ones using masked amino/mercapto acids.
Tetrahedron, 2009, 65, 1306–1315.
[128] Fodor L, Szabó J, Bernáth G, Sohár P, Maclean DB, Smith RW, Ninomiya I, Naito T. Synthesis of
6H,8H-isoquino[2,3-c][1,3]benzothiazin-8-ones. J HeterocyclChem, 1989, 26, 333–337.
[129] Hussen AS, Monga A, Sharma A. Regioselective synthesis of functionalized 1,3-Thiazine-4-ones via
multicomponent click reaction approach. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 650–654.
[130] Saroha M, Khanna G, Khurana JM. Green synthesis of novel naphtho[1,2-e]/ benzo[e][1,3] thiazine
derivatives via one-pot three-component reaction using tetra n-butyl ammonium bromide.
ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 12560–12562.
156 Samiran Dhara, Saiful Islam, Asish R. DasKantharaju Kamanna✶
, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda,
Aravind Kamath
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically
prominent tetrahydrobenzoxanthenone
derivatives
4.1 Introduction
Multicomponent reactions (MCRs) have emerged as an extremely powerful tool in
combinatorial chemistry and drug discovery, since they offer significant advantages
over conventional multistep syntheses, in terms of improved organic reactions, pro￾moting new reactions, and developing a straightforward synthetic route for bioactive
heterocycle synthesis [1]. Among various heterocycles, xanthene skeletons are the
most common structural motifs abundant in several natural and synthetic bioactive
compounds. Xanthenes (i), benzoxanthenes (ii) and benzoxanthenones (iii) (Figure 4.1)
form a distinct class of compounds having diverse applications in fluorescent agents
[2], dyes [3], and laser technologies [4], which is the most important class of bioactive
heterocycles in the field of medicinal chemistry owing to their broad spectrum of
pharmacological activities such as antibacterial, analgesic, anti-inflammatory and an￾tiviral (Figure 4.2) [5]. Some of the xanthene-based compounds have found application
in antagonists for paralyzing the action of zolamine and in photodynamic therapy [6].
In addition, their derivatives can be used in dyes, pH-sensitive fluorescent materials
for the visualization of biomolecular assemblies, and in laser technologies [7].
Figure 4.1: Different xanthene skeletons abundant in nature.
✶
Corresponding author: Kantharaju Kamanna, Department of Chemistry, School of Basic Sciences,
Rani Channamma University, Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156, Karnataka, India,
e-mail: kk@rcub.ac.in
Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamath, Department of Chemistry, School of Basic
Sciences, Rani Channamma University, Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156, Karnataka
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-004Among benzoxanthene-based derivatives, tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthene-11-one has
emerged as an important skeleton, due to its distinctive structure pattern and simple
construction route (Figure 4.3) [8].
As it is an interesting skeleton, numerous applications of benzoxanthenone attract chem￾ists in developing a wide range of synthetic methods for the tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthene￾11-one, but the multicomponent one-pot condensation route has emerged a promising
route and the construction is well documented [9]. One of the best acceptable routes that
chemists have explored is the three-component one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]
xanthene-11-one from the reaction of β-naphthol, dimedone, and substituted aromatic al￾dehydes promoted using various catalysts (Figure 4.4 and Table 4.1) [10].
Figure 4.2: Various reported applications of benzoxanthene derivatives.
Figure 4.3: Structure and numbering of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-
one.
Figure 4.4: General one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one.
158 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind KamathTable 4.1: List of various aromatic aldehydes employed for the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene￾11-one.
O H
I
O
OMe
H
V
e
O
OM
H
VI
H O
Cl
VII
O
Cl
H
VIII
O
Cl
H
Cl
IX
O H
OH
X
H
O H
O
XI
H
O H
O
Br
XII
O H
OH
OMe
XIV
O H
OH
OEt
XV
O H
Me
XVI
O
XVII
O
OMe
OH
H
XIX
O
O
H
XX
O
F
H
XXI
O
Br
H
XXII
O
NO
H
II
O
NO
H
III
O
NO
H
IV
O
O H
OH
N
XIII
OHC CH
CH
CH
XVIII
XXIII XXIV XXV
H O
Br
XXVI
O
Cl
H
XXVII
O
Br
H
XXVIII
HN
CHO
XXIX
Me CHO
XXX
H O
CH
XXXI
CHO C
H
H C
XXXII
C CHO
H
H
H C C
XXXIII
O
MeO
OMe
H
XXXIV XXXV
O
O
OME
OH
H
XXXVI
O
NO
Cl
H
XXXVII
O
F
H
XXXVIII
O
O
O
XXXIX
O
H
XL
O H
N
XLI
CHO
XLII
O H
N Me Me
XLIII
O H
CH Me Me
XLIV
O H
OCH
OCH
XLV
O H
OH
Br
XLVI
O H
SCH
XLVII
O
Cl
Cl
H
XLVIII
O
OMe
H
OMe
MeO
XLIX
H O
L
O H
SMe
LI
H C O O
O
LII
O H
Me
Me
LIII
O H
F Cl
LIV
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 1594.2 Homogeneous catalyst reported for
benzoxanthenone derivative synthesis
Homogeneous catalysis contributes about 17–30% of the total organic molecule syn￾thesis in fine chemical industries and pharmaceuticals. In recent years progress in
the homogeneous catalysis has increased significantly, particularly in the polymer
and pharmaceutical industries. Homogeneous catalysis takes place in the same phase
as other reactants, and it may be derived from the simple ions or molecules of base,
metal ions, acid, and complexes of organometallic, macrocyclic, and large enzymes.
Homogeneous catalysis is an excellent approach in synthetic chemistry; due to its in￾teresting mechanism, isolation, and kinetics, it also provides opportunities to know
the molecular causes of the reactivity. In this chapter various homogeneous catalytic
approaches reported for the synthesis of benzoxanthenone derivatives are discussed
[11, 12]. Homogeneous catalyst-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xan￾thene-11-one derivatives (4) achieved by three-component condensation of aryl alde￾hyde (1), β-naphthol (2), and cyclic 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds (3) under solvent-free
conditions isolated high yields of the products (Figure 4.5). In Figure 4.6, a mechanistic
explanation of the likely course of the events is presented. The ortho-quinone me￾thides intermediate, which was created by the homogeneous catalyst-catalyzed nucle￾ophilic addition of 2-naphthol to aldehyde, is used to carry out the reaction. On
Table 4.1 (continued)
O Me
H
LVI
H
O
O
H
LVII
O
OMe
H
LVIII
CHO
OH
OH
LIX
O
OMe
OMe
H
LXIV
O
OMe
OMe
H
LXVII
O
OH
OMe
H
LXX
N
O
H
LXXV
S
O
H C
H
LV
CHO
C H C
LX
CHO
H C C
CH
CH
LXI
CHO
CH H C
LX
CHO
H C C
CH
CH
LXI LXII
H C CH
CHO
LXVIII
CHO
CF
LXXI LXXVI
O
LXXVII
O
LXXVIII
160 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamathdehydration, cyclic hemiketal is produced by following Michael addition with cyclic
1,3-dicarbonyl on the o-QM and adding phenolic hydroxyl moiety to the carbonyl of
the ketone gave the desired product [12, 13].
Numerous researchers across the globe have reported homogeneous catalyzed syn￾thesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one derivatives via three-component conden￾sation of substituted aldehyde, naphthol, and cyclic 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds under
various reaction conditions presented in the Table 4.2.
4.2.1 Reported biological studies
Soliman and Khatab [60] reported (Table 4.2, s. no. 48) the evaluation of antibacterial
activity of the prepared tetrahydrobenzo-[a]xanthen-11-one; the authors also described
Aurora kinase inhibitors, a new class of antimitotic agents and molecular docking stud￾ies, and compared them with pentacyclic AKI-001, a novel class of Aurora inhibitors
Figure 4.5: One-pot synthesis of tetrahydro-benzo[a]xanthen-11-one by homogeneous catalyzed reaction.
Figure 4.6: Tentative mechanism of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one formation.
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 161Table 4.2: Homogeneous catalyzed one-pot reaction of naphthol, aldehyde, and 1,3-dicarbonyl gave
tetrahydrobenzoxanthenone derivatives under various conditions.
S. no. Aldehydes Catalyst Conditions Time (min) Yield (%) Reference
 I, II, III, IV, V,
VI, VII, VIII, IX,
X, XI, XII, XIII,
XIV, XV, XVI,
XVII, XVIII
InCl₃/PO Grinding –/– –/– []
 I, III, X, V, VII,
VIII, XIX, XX
(NH₄)₂[Ce(NO₃)₆] Ultrasonication,
 °C
– – []
 I, II, III, IV, V,
VII, VIII, X, XVI,
XX, XXI, XXII,
XXIII, XXIV, XXV
CH(CH)N(Br)
(CH)
RT – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
VIII, IX, X, XVI,
XXXVIII, XXXIX
I/HOAc MWI – – []
 I, II, III, V, VI,
VII, VIII, X,
XVI, XXII
BNBTS Solvent-free/in
solution
–/– –/– []
 I, II, V, VII, VIII,
X, XVI, XXXVIII,
XXXIX
I/HOAc Reflux – – []
 I, II, V, VII, VIII,
IX, X, XVI,
XXXVI, XXXIX,
XLV
I/HOAc Conventional/
MWI
–/– –/– []
 I, II, III, IV, V,
VII, VIII, IX, XI,
XIV, XVI, XXI,
XXII, XXVIII,
XXXI, XL, XLII,
XLV
CHCH(OH)COOH Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
VIII, IX, X, XIV,
XVI, XVIII, XLV,
XLVII
RuCl·nHO MWI – – []
 I, II, VII, XVI,
XVII, XXI
NHCl Solvent-free – – []
162 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind KamathTable 4.2 (continued)
S. no. Aldehydes Catalyst Conditions Time (min) Yield (%) Reference
 I, III, VI, VII, XX,
XXI, XXVII,
XXVIII, XL, XLI,
XLIV, XLV, LVIII,
LXXIII
Succinimide-N￾sulfonic acid
Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
X, XVI, XXII
I Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
VIII, X, XVI,
XXIV, XXVIII,
XXXIII, XXXVIII,
XL, LVII, LVIII
-Aminophenol Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, IV, V,
VII, X, XVI,
XVIII, XXII, LVI,
LXXVIII
TPPMS/CBr Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, VII, X,
XVI, XXI, XXII,
XLI, XLII, XLIV,
LXXIII
Rice husk Stirred,  °C – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
IX, XI, XXII,
XXVI, XXVII,
XXVIII, XXXI,
XLVIII, LVI
Trityl chloride
(TrCl)
Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VI,
VII, VIII, X, XVI,
XXI, XXII, XXVII,
XXVIII, XLV, LVI,
LXVI
Succinic acid Solvent-free – – []
 I, VIII, XVI,
XXVII, XXVIII,
LVII
Formic acid Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, IV, V,
VII, VIII, X, XI,
XVI, XXII, XXVII,
LXIII
Manganese
perchlorate
Ultrasonication – – []
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 163Table 4.2 (continued)
S. no. Aldehydes Catalyst Conditions Time (min) Yield (%) Reference
 I, II, III, V, VII,
X, XVI, XIX, XXI,
XXII, XXVII,
LXIII, LXIX
Cyanuric chloride Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
VIII, X, XVI, XXI,
XXII, XXVIII,
LVIII
Tartaric acid Solvent-free – – []
 II, III, IV, V, VII,
X, XI, XVI, XX,
XXIV, XXV, LXVI,
LXXV, LXXVI
[Yb(PFO)] Solvent-free – – []
 V, VII, XII, XIV,
XVI, XXII, XVII
Guanidine
hydrochloride
Solvent-free – – []
 I, III, V, VII,
XXIV, XXXII, LX,
LXII
Strontium triflate Reflux – – []
 I, II, V, VII, VIII,
X, XVI, XIX, XXI,
XXII, XXVII,
XXXIII, XXXV, L,
LXIII
-
Tungstophosphoric
acid
Solvent-free – – []
 I, IV, V, VII, X,
XVI, XXI, XXII
Baker’s yeast RT – – []
 II, V, VII, XXI,
XXII, XLIV
Sulfamic acid Solvent-free – – []
 I, V, VII, XXI,
XXIV
Cerium(III)
chloride
MeOH,  °C – – []
 V, VI, X, XXVI,
XXVIII, XLI,
XLIX, LIII, LVII,
LXIV, LXV, LXVI,
LXVII
Glucose sulfonic
acid
Reflux, water,
 °C
– – []
 I, II, III, IV, V,
VI, VII, VIII, X,
XVI, XX, XXI,
XXII, XXIII, XXIV
TBAHS HO,  °C,
stirring
– – []
164 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind KamathTable 4.2 (continued)
S. no. Aldehydes Catalyst Conditions Time (min) Yield (%) Reference
 I, II, III, V, VI,
VII, VIII, IX, X,
XIV, XVI, XXVII,
XXXVI, LXIII
DBSA Ultrasonication – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
XVI, XX, XXXII,
XXXIII, LIV, LV,
LVIII
Zr(HSO) Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, IV, V, VII,
VIII, IX, X, XVI,
XXI, XXII,
XXVIII, LVI,
LVII, LVIII,
LXVIII
Imidazole/
isoquinoline
Solvent-free –/
–
–/– []
 I, V, VII, XVI,
XXI, XXII
KHSO Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, V, VII, VIII,
IX, X, XVI, XIX,
XLV
Pyrrolidine RT – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
VIII, X, XVI,
XXII, XXXII,
XXXIII
Bronsted ionic
liquids
Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, V, VII, XVI,
XL
DSTMG Solvent-free – – []
 I, III, IV, VIII,
IX, XI, XXVII,
XLVIII, XXVI,
XXVIII, LVII, LVI
SAFIS Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
VIII, X, XVI, XXI,
XXII, XXVIII,
XLI, XLIV
DSIMHS Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
XVI, XXI, XXII,
XL, XLIV, XLV
Acidic ionic liquid
[NMP]HPO
Solvent-free – – []
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 165Table 4.2 (continued)
S. no. Aldehydes Catalyst Conditions Time (min) Yield (%) Reference
 I, II, III, V, VIII,
X, XVI, XXI, XXII,
XXX, XXXII, LV,
LXXIV
Ionic liquid MWI – – []
 I, III, V, VII,
XLIV
[DBU][EDSS] Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
VIII, X, XI, XX,
XXII, XXXII, L
[BDMAP][OH] HO,  °C – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
IX, XI, XXII,
XXVII, XXVIII,
XXXI, XVVIII,
LVI
IL, [Pyridine–SOH]
Cl
Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII,
VIII, IX, X, XI,
XVI, XXIV,
XXVII, XL
bmim[HSO] Reflux – – []
 I, II, III, IV, V,
VII, VIII, XXII,
XXVIII, XL, LVIII
[BiPy](HSO)Cl RT – – []
 I, II, III, V, VI,
VII, VIII, X, XXI,
XXII, XXVII,
XXVIII
[TMXH]FeCl Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, V, VII, XVI,
XXII, XXIII,
XXVII, XXXVI,
XXXVII, XXXVIII,
LXIV
SiCl (TCS) RT – – []
 I, II, V, VI, VII,
XVI, XIX, XXIV,
XXVI, XXVII,
XXVIII, XXXVIII,
XLII
[bmim]BF pTSA – – []
 I, III, XXVII,
LVIII, LVI,
XXVIII, XIV,
XLII, XLVIII
NaOAc MWI – –/– []
166 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamathbased on a tetracyclic xanthene scaffold. Khurana et al. [61] reported (Table 4.2,
s. no. 49) synthesized derivatives screened for in vitro antifungal activity against Rhizoc￾tonia bataticola, Sclerotium rolfsii, Fusarium oxysporum, and Alternaria porii, and
showed moderate to good activity against the pathogens tested. The insecticidal activity
of selected derivatives against Spodoptera litura was comparable with the commercial
pyrethroid insecticide, cypermethrin, and urease inhibitory activity was also studied.
Godse et al. [63] investigated (Table 4.2, s. no. 51) the binding mode of tetrahydrobenzo￾xanthene-ones at the active site of enzyme topoisomerase II DNA gyrase. Sethukumar
et al. [64] tested (Table 4.2, s. no. 52) tetrahydrobenzo-xanthene-ones for antibacterial
activity and noticed comparable activities for some of the derivatives .
4.3 Heterogeneous catalyzed reactions
A wide range of organic transformation take place by the use of variety of catalytic ma￾terials developed; when the physical state of the catalysts is different from that of the
product and reactants, it is referred to as heterogeneous catalysis. Metal–organic frame￾works (MOFs) are a class of materials containing metal ions or clusters coordinated to
organic ligands to form one-, two-, or three-dimensional structures. MOFs have been
used to catalyze a variety of organic transformations, including redox and acid–base
reactions [66]. Designing organic molecules for the desired and particular catalytic ap￾plications is now achievable, thanks to the simple tuning of the pore size, shape, and
surface functionality of the organic transformation. Heterogeneous catalysis is a well￾demonstrated application in organic synthesis, and offers several benefits like high effi￾ciency, selectivity, controllability, and moderate reaction condition as well as facile
post-reaction separation, catalyst reusability, and high stability. The ability to synthesize
organic molecules specifically tailored for the catalytic difficulties is demonstrated by
Table 4.2 (continued)
S. no. Aldehydes Catalyst Conditions Time (min) Yield (%) Reference
 I, III, V, VII,
VIII, X, XXXVI
LPCAS Solvent-free – – []
 I, V, VII, VIII,
XVI, XIX, XXI,
XXVIII, LVIII,
LXX
Lawesson’s
reagent
Reflux – – []
 I, III, VII, X, XI,
XVII, XXIV, L,
LVII, LX
Proline triflate Reflux – – []
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 167the potential organization of the active centers such as metallic nodes, organic linkers,
and their chemical synthetic functionalization on the nanoscale.
Heterogeneous catalyzed one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one
derivatives (4) achieved by three-component condensation of aryl aldehyde (1),
β-naphthol (2), and cyclic 1,3-dicarbonyl (3) isolated high yields of the product (Fig￾ure 4.7). Further, the mechanistic plausible route of the formation of product is pre￾sented in Figure 4.8. The o-quinonemethide (o-QM) intermediate created by the
heterogeneous catalyst involved nucleophilic addition of 2-naphthol to aldehyde; on
dehydration, cyclic hemiketal produced by following Michael addition of cyclic 1,3-
dicarbonyl on o-QM gave product 4 [67].
Various researchers across the globe have reported heterogeneous catalysts, which
can be easily prepared from commercially available starting materials, and showed
efficient catalysis for the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one derivatives
via condensation of various substituted aldehydes, β-naphthol, and 1,3-dicarbonyl
compounds under various reaction conditions. The authors noticed that the devel￾Figure 4.7: Heterogeneous catalyzed synthesis of tetrahydro-benzo[a]xanthen-11-one.
Figure 4.8: Plausible mechanism of formation of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one.
168 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamathoped methods have added advantages such as low cost, recyclability, inexpensive cat￾alyst, and applicability for use in the large-scale production (Table 4.3).
4.3.1 Reported biological activities
Akbari and Hosseini-Nia [69] demonstrated (Table 4.3, s. no. 3) one of the simple meth￾ods for syntheses of tetrahydrobenzo-[a]xanthen-11-one derivatives screened for anti￾bacterial activity against Pseudomonas syringae, Xanthomonas citri, and Pectobacterium
carotovorum. Rao et al. [70] reported (Table 4.3, s. no. 4) the synthesis of 12-aryl
-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-one derivatives and evaluated them for Src ki￾nase activity and anticancer activity.
4.4 Conclusions
Benzoxanthenes, xanthenes, and benzoxanthenones belong to one family of bioactive
important heterocyclic scaffolds that showed numerous pharmacological applications
in antiviral, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and antibacterial properties. They were
also found to be potent CCR1 receptor antagonists and nonpeptidic inhibitors of re￾combinant human calpain I. Hence, chemists are more focused on synthetic strategies,
which make target molecules eco-friendly, inexpensive, recyclable, efficient, and
allow for direct isolation of the pure product free from the chromatographic separa￾tion. The best literature reported revealed the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xan￾thene-11-one via MCRs of aryl/heterocyclic aldehyde, 2-naphthol, and 5,5-dimethyl-1,3-
cyclohexanedione (dimedone). Numerous catalysts, both homogeneous and heteroge￾neous catalyzed reaction, for the synthesis of benzoxanthenone are well documented.
In this book chapter, literature compiled so far reported on benzoxanthenone deriva￾tives synthesis via MCRs and biological activity studies performed by numerous re￾search groups across the globe have been discussed. In this chapter more than 100
reported articles have been discussed and related and obviously important skeletons
are cited, which play a promising role in various applications in medicine, agrochem￾icals, pharmaceuticals, and material sciences.
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 169Table 4.3: Heterogeneous catalyst-catalyzed condensation of naphthol, aldehyde, and 1,3-dicarbonyl gave tetrahydrobenzoxanthenone derivatives under various
conditions.
S. no. Aldehydes Catalyst Condition Time (min) Yield (%) Reference
 I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, XVI, XXVII, XXXI, LVI, LVIII NbCl Reflux – – []
 I, II, III, IV, V, VII, VIII, XVI, XXII, XL Silica sulfuric acid Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, X, XXII, XXVIII, XLIV, LIX BF.SiO Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, XVI, XVII, LVIII Sc(OTf) MWI – – []
 I, II, III, V, VI, VII, IX, XVI, XXI, XXII, XLI, XLIV, LI, LVI, LXIX ZnO NPs Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, VIII, XVI, XX, XXI, XXII, XXIV, XXVIII, XXIX Ce(SO)·HO Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, VIII, IX, X, XXII Perlite NPs@IL/ZrCl Solvent-free – – []
 II, III, V, VIII, IX, X, LVII, LVIII, LXIX MWCNTs-SOH reflux – – []
 I, II, III, IV, V, VII, VIII, X, XVI, XXVII, XXVIII, XXIX, XXX HPMoO
¯
(HPMo)
Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, VIII, X, XVI, XXII, XXVIII, XXXI FeO/CS-Ag NPs HO,  °C – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, VIII, XVI, XXI, XXII, XXVIII TiO/AlO/FeO Solvent-free –/–/– –/–/– []
 I, II, III, V, VII, VIII, X, XVI, XXI, XXII, XXVII, XXVIII, XL, XLI Orange peel Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, X, XXII, XXVIII, XLIV Nano-TiCl/SiO Reflux – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, XVI, XXI, XXII, XXVIII ZrSA Solvent-free – – []
170 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamath V, VII, XIV, XVI, XXII, XVVI Zr-MCM- Solvent-free – – []
 I, V, VI, VII, VIII, XVI FeO/SiO/PPA Reflux – – []
 I, II, III, IV, VII, VIII, IX, X, XVI, XXII Starch sulfate Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, IV, VII FeO@SiO–SOH Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, IX, X, XVI, XIX NO−FePc Reflux – – []
 I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, XXI, XXII, XXVII, XXVIII, XXXI,
XL
NSPVPC Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII, IX, XVI, XXI Trichloroacetic acid Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, IV, VII, IX, X, XVII, XIX, XXVI, XXXII, XL, LXXI, LXXII NaHSO·SiO Reflux – – []
 I, II, V, VIII, XVI, XLII, XLV, XLIX, LX [B(HSO)] Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, V, VII FeO@SiO-SnCl Ultrasonic
irradiation
– – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, VIII, X, XVI Cu/SiO Solvent-free – – []
 I, X LaCl/ClCHCOOH Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VI, VII, VIII, X, XVI, XXI, XXII, LVII Co/Mn/nano-ZnO Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, IV, V, VII, VIII, X, XVI, XXII CA-SiO Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, X, XXII, XXVIII Nano-SPA Solvent free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, VIII, X, XVI Cobalt hydrogen
sulfate
Solvent-free – – []
(continued)
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 171Table 4.3 (continued)
S. no. Aldehydes Catalyst Condition Time (min) Yield (%) Reference
 I, II, III, V, VII, IX, XI, XXII, XXVI, XXVII, XXXI, XLVIII, LVI SBISAC Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, XXVII, XLV, LI Ru@SH-MWCNTs Reflux – – []
 I, III, V, VII, X, XVI, XXII, XXXI, XXXVIII, XLI, LXIII CoFeO/OCMC/Cu
(BDC)
Ultrasonic
irradiation
– – []
 I, II, III, V, VII, VIII, X, XVI, XXI, XXII, XXVII, XXVIII, XL, XLI,
XLII, XLIII
Cu(II)/FeO@APTMS￾DFX Solvent-free – – []
 I, II, V, VII, XVI, LX HBF/SiO Solvent-free – – []
172 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind KamathAbbreviations
APTS 3‐Aminopropyltriethoxysilane
[BDMAP][OH] 1-Butyl-(4-dimethylamino)pyridiniumhydroxide
BF3·SiO2 Silica-supported boron trifluoride
[BiPy](HSO3)2Cl2 1,10-disulfo-[2,20-bipyridine]-1,10-diium chloride
BNBTS N,N′-Dibromo-N,N′-1,2-ethanediylbis(p-toluene sulfonamide)
Ce(SO4)2.4H2O Cerium(IV) sulfate tetrahydrate
DBSA p-dodecyl benzene sulfonic acid
[DBU]2[EDS] Bis-2,3,4,6,7,8,9,10-octahydropyrimido[1,2-a]azepinnium-ethyl disulfate
DSIMHS 1,3-disulfonic acid imidazolium hydrogen sulfate
DSTMG N,N-disulfo-1,1,3,3-tetramethyl guanidinium carboxylate ionic liquids
Fe3O4@SiO2–SO3H Nano-Fe3O4 encapsulated-silica particles-bearing sulfonic acid groups
H2PMo12O4¯ (H2PMo) Schiff base (SB)-functionalized graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets containing
phosphomolybdic counter‐anion
LPCAS L-Pyrrolidine-2-carboxylic acid sulfate
MCRs Multicomponent reactions
MWCNTs-SO3H Sulfonated multiwalled carbon nanotubes
MWI Microwave irradiation
NaHSO4·SiO2 Silica-supported sodium hydrogen sulfate
NaOAc Sodium acetate
NbCl5 Niobium pentachloride
NO2−FePc Fe(III) Tetranitrophthalo cyanine immobilized on activated carbon
NSPVPC N-sulfonic acid poly(4-vinylpyridinium) chloride
Perlite NPs@IL/ZrCl4 Perlite nanoparticle modified Lewis acid ionic liquid
[Pyridine–SO3H]Cl Sulfonic acid-functionalized pyridinium chloride
SAFIS Sulfonic acid-functionalized imidazolium salts
Sc(OTf)3 Scandium(III) trifluoromethanesulfonate
TBAHS Tetrabutylammonium hydrogensulfate
TCS Tetrachlorosilane
TCT 2,4,6-Trichloro-1,3,5-triazine
[TMXH]FeCl4 Nano-sized cube-shaped magnetic ionic liquid based on caffeine
TPPMS Triphenylphosphine-m-sulfonate
TrCl Trityl chloride
TTAB Tetradecyltrimethylammonium bromide
Yb(PFO)3 Ytterbium perfluorooctanoate
ZnO NPs Zinc oxide nanoparticles
ZrSA Zirconia sulfuric acid
References
[1] Sharma UK, Ranjan P, Eycken Van Der V et al. Sequential and direct MCRs-based dearomatization
strategies. Chem Soc Rev, 2020, 49, 8721–8748.
[2] Chaudhary A, Khurana JM. Advances in the synthesis of xanthenes: An overview. Curr Organic
Synth, 2018, 15, 341–369.
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 173[3] Insuasty D, Castillo J, Becerra D et al. Synthesis of biologically active molecules through
multicomponent reactions. Molecules, 2020, 25, 505.
[4] Sharma PK, Manhas M. A review: Different approach of bioactive pyrimidobenzothiazoles synthesis.
Drug Invent Today, 2017, 9(3), 18–22.
[5] Shankarling GS, Jarag KJ. Laser dyes. Resonance, 2010, 15, 804–818.
[6] Karami B, Hoseini SJ, Eskandari K et al. Synthesis of xanthene derivatives by employing Fe3O4
nanoparticles as an effective and magnetically recoverable catalyst in water. Catal Sci Technol, 2012,
2, 331–338.
[7] Rouhani H, Sarrafi A, Tahmooresi M. Synthesis of xanthene derivatives over acid activated clay in
Kerman Province and kinetic modeling. Chem Eng Commun, 2016, 203, 289–299.
[8] Fardood ST, Ramazani A, Moradnia F. Green synthesis of zno nanoparticles via sol-gel method and
investigation of its application in solvent-free synthesis of 12-aryl-tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthene-11-
one derivatives under microwave irradiation. Chem Methodol, 2019, 3, 696–706.
[9] Bosica G, De Nittis R, Borg R. Solvent-free, one-pot, multicomponent synthesis of xanthene
derivatives. Catalysts, 2023, 13, 561.
[10] Chaudhary A. Recent development in the synthesis of heterocycles by 2-naphthol-based
multicomponent reactions. Mol Divers, 2021, 25, 1211–1245.
[11] Kantharaju K, Yamanappagouda A. Microwave-assisted organo-catalyzed cc and cx (heteroatom)
bond-forming reactions: An overview. Curr Microw Chem, 2021, 173–203.
[12] Mats L, Moberg C, Hallberg A. Microwave-accelerated homogeneous catalysis in organic chemistry.
Acc Chem Res, 2002, 35(9), 717–727.
[13] Nandi GC, Samai S, Kumar R et al. An efficient one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-
one and diazabenzo[a]anthracene-9,11-dione derivatives under solvent free condition. Tetrahedron,
2009, 65, 7129–7134. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tet.2009.06.024.
[14] Sudha S, Pasha MA. Ultrasound assisted synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[c]xanthene-11-ones using
CAN as catalyst. Ultrason Sonochem, 2012, 19, 994–998. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
ultsonch.2012.02.002.
[15] Shinde PV, Kategaonkar AH, Shingate BB et al. Surfactant catalyzed convenient and greener
synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-ones at ambient temperature. Beilstein J Org Chem,
2011, 7, 53–58.
[16] Sun XJ, Zhou JF, Zhao PS. Molecular iodine‐catalyzed one‐pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo [a]
xanthene‐11‐one and diazabenzo [a] anthracene‐9, 11‐dione derivatives under microwave
irradiation. J Heterocycl Chem, 2011, 48, 1347–1350.
[17] Ghorbani-Vaghei R, Malaekehpoor SM. Facile one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-
one and aryl-14H-dibenzo[a.j]xanthene. Org Prep Proced Int, 2010, 42, 494–498.
[18] Sun XJ, Zhou JF, Zhi SJ. Efficient one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[c]xanthene-1,11-dione
derivatives under microwave irradiation. Synth Commun, 2012, 42, 1987–1994.
[19] Sun XJ, Zhou JF, Zhao PS. Molecular iodine–catalyzed one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo [a]
xanthene-11-one and diazabenzo [a] anthracene-9, 11-dione derivatives. Synth Commun, 2012,
42(10), 1542–1549.
[20] Fatahpour M, Hazeri N, Maghsoodlou MT et al. Lactic acid: A new application as an efficient catalyst
for the green one-pot synthesis of 2-hydroxy-12-aryl-8, 9, 10, 12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one
and 12-aryl-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-one analogs. Iran J Sci Technol, 2018, 42,
533–538.
[21] Tabatabaeian K, Khorshidi A, Mamaghani M et al. One-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen￾11-one derivatives catalyzed by ruthenium chloride hydrate as a homogeneous catalyst. Can J Chem,
2011, 89, 623–627.
174 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamath[22] Foroughifar N, Mobinikhaledi A, Moghanian H et al. Ammonium chloride–catalyzed one-pot
synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo [α] xanthen-11-one derivatives under solvent-free conditions. Synth
Commun, 2011, 41, 2663–2673.
[23] Shirini F, Khaligh NG. Succinimide-N-sulfonic acid: An efficient catalyst for the synthesis of xanthene
derivatives under solvent-free conditions. Dyes Pigm, 2012, 95, 789–794. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
dyepig.2012.06.022.
[24] Wang R-Z, Zhang L-F, Cui Z-S. Iodine-catalyzed synthesis of 12-aryl-8, 9, 10, 12-tetrahydro-benzo
[a] xanthen-11-one derivatives via multicomponent reaction. Synth Commun, 2009, 39, 2101–2107.
[25] Imon MK, Islam R, Karmaker PG et al. A concise metal-free synthesis of xanthene derivatives
mediated by achiral 2-aminophenol under solvent-free conditions. Synth Commun, 2022, 52,
712–723. https://doi.org/10.1080/00397911.2022.2047730.
[26] Huo De C, Bao XZ, Hu DC et al. Triphenylphosphine-m-sulfonate/carbon tetrabromide as an easily
recoverable catalyst system for the efficient synthesis of xanthene and xanthenone derivatives
under solvent-free conditions. Chin Chem Lett, 2014, 25, 699–701. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
cclet.2014.01.023.
[27] Shirini F, Akbari-Dadamahaleh S, Mohammad-Khah A et al. Rice husk: A mild, efficient, green and
recyclable catalyst for the synthesis of 12-Aryl-8, 9, 10, 12-tetrahydro [a] xanthene-11-ones and
quinoxaline derivatives. C R Chim, 2013, 16, 207–216. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
crci.2012.12.004.
[28] Khazaei A, Zolfigol MA, Moosavi-Zare AR et al. Organocatalyst trityl chloride efficiently promoted the
solvent-free synthesis of 12-aryl-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]-xanthen-11-ones by in situ formation
of carbocationic system in neutral media. Catal Commun, 2012, 20, 54–57.
[29] Mohamadpour F. Glycine as a green catalyst for the preparation of xanthenes. Org Prep Proc Int,
2020, 53, 59–67. https://doi.org/10.1080/00304948.2020.1834343.
[30] Olyaei A, Gahramannejad F, Khoeiniha R. One-pot access to new tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-
ones and naphthopyranopyrimidines using 2,3-dihydroxynaphthalene. Synth Commun, 2016, 46,
1699–1707.
[31] Kaur B, Parmar A, Kumar H. Manganese perchlorate-catalyzed greener synthesis of 12-aryl or
12-alkyl-8,9,10,12- tetrahydrobenzo[alpha]xanthen-11-one derivatives under ultrasonication. Synth
Commun, 2012, 42, 447–453.
[32] Zhang Z, Zhang P, Yang S et al. Tetrahydrobenzo[a]-xanthen-11-one derivatives catalysed by
cyanuric chloride. 2010, 122, 427–432.
[33] Mohamadpour F, Maghsoodlou MT, Lashkari M et al. Green synthesis of polysubstituted quinolines
and xanthene derivatives promoted by tartaric acid as a naturally green catalyst under solvent-free
conditions. Chem J Moldova, 2018, 13, 74–86.
[34] Syama Sundar C, Maheswara Rao KU, Bakthavatchala Reddy N et al. Ytterbium perfluorooctanoate
[Yb(PFO)3]: A novel and efficient catalyst for the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-ones
under microwave irradiation. Catal Sci Technol, 2012, 2, 1382–1385.
[35] Sadeghpour M, Olyaei A, Rezaei M. Guanidine hydrochloride: A highly efficient organocatalyst for
the synthesis of 12‐aryl‐8, 9, 10, 12‐tetrahydrobenzo [a] xanthene‐11‐ones under solvent‐free
conditions. J Heterocycl Chem, 2016, 53, 981–988.
[36] Li J, Tang W, Lu L et al. Strontium triflate catalyzed one-pot condensation of β-naphthol, aldehydes
and cyclic 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds. Tetrahedron Lett, 2008, 49, 7117–7120. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.tetlet.2008.09.129.
[37] Wang H, Ren X, Zhang Y et al xanthen-11-one derivatives catalyzed by dodecatungstophosphoric
acid. J Braz Chem Soc, 2009, 20, 1939–1943.
[38] Chavan AS, Kharat AS, Bhosle MR et al. Water mediated and Baker’s yeast accelerated novel
synthetic protocols for tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-ones and pyrazolo[3,4-b]quinolines. Synth
Commun, 2021, 51, 1963–1973. https://doi.org/10.1080/00397911.2021.1913606.
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 175[39] Heravi MM, Alinejhad H, Bakhtiari K et al. Sulfamic acid catalyzed solvent-free synthesis of 10-aryl
-7,7-dimethyl-6,7, 8,10-tetrahydro-9H-[1,3]-dioxolo [4,5-b]xanthen-9-ones and 12-aryl-9,9-dimethyl￾8,9,10,12-tetrahydro-11H-benzo[a]xanthen-11-ones. Mol Div, 2010, 14, 621–626.
[40] Kidwai M, Jahan A, Mishra NK. A novel method for the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]-xanthen-11-
one derivatives using cerium(III) chloride as a highly efficient catalyst. C R Chim, 2012, 15, 324–330.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.crci.2012.01.002.
[41] Wan Y, Zhang XX, Wang C et al. The first example of glucose-containing Brønsted acid synthesis and
catalysis: Efficient synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthens and tetrahydrobenzo[α]acridines in
water. Tetrahedron, 2013, 69, 3947–3950.
[42] Diwan F, Mohsin M, Shaikh M et al. Tetrabutyl ammonium hydrogen sulphate (TBAHS) Catalyzed
Convenient and Greener Synthesis of Tetrahydrobenzo [a] xanthene-11-ones. J Chem Biol, 2019, 9(1),
71–82.
[43] Li JT, Li YW, Song YL. Efficient synthesis of 12-aryl-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-one
derivatives catalyzed by p-dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid in aqueous media under ultrasound
irradiation. Synth Commun, 2012, 42, 2161–2170.
[44] Foroughifar N, Mobinikhaledi A, Moghanian H. A catalytic and green procedure for synthesis of
12-arylor 12-Alkyl-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthen-11-one derivatives under solvent-free
conditions. Int J Green Nanotechnol, 2009, 1, 37–41.
[45] Heydari R, Shahrekipour F. One-pot synthesis of 12-aryl-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-
ones by using of neutral and efficient organocatalysts under solvent-free conditions. Res Chem
Intermed, 2015, 41, 4581–4586.
[46] Reddy NB, Rao KUM, Sundar CS et al. An efficient KHSO4 catalyzed synthesis of xanthenes.
Heterocycl Commun, 2012, 18, 53–56.
[47] Chakrawar AV, Pendalwar SS, Mandode ND, Bhusare SR. A Convenient one-pot synthesis of
tetrahydrobenzo-[c]-xanthene-1,11-dione derivatives in aqueous medium. World J Pharm Res, 2016,
5, 1474–1478.
[48] Zakeri M, Heravi MM, Saeedi M et al. One-pot green procedure for synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]
xanthene-11-one catalyzed by Brønsted ionic liquids under solvent-free conditions. Chin J Chem,
2011, 29, 1441–1445.
[49] Dutta AK, Gogoi P, Saikia S et al. N,N-disulfo-1,1,3,3-tetramethylguanidinium carboxylate ionic
liquids as reusable homogeneous catalysts for multicomponent synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]
xanthene and tetrahydrobenzo[a]acridine derivatives. J Mol Liq, 2017, 225, 585–591. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/j.molliq.2016.11.112.
[50] Zolfigol MA, Khakyzadeh V, Moosavi-Zare AR et al. Preparation of various xanthene derivatives over
sulfonic acid functionalized imidazolium salts (SAFIS) as novel, highly efficient and reusable
catalysts. C R Chim, 2012, 15, 719–736. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.crci.2012.05.003.
[51] Shirini F, Yahyazadeh A, Mohammadi K. One-pot synthesis of various xanthene derivatives using
ionic liquid 1,3-disulfonic acid imidazolium hydrogen sulfate as an efficient and reusable catalyst
under solvent-free conditions. Chin Chem Lett, 2014, 25, 341–347. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cclet.
2013.11.016.
[52] Singh H, Kumari S, Khurana JM. A new green approach for the synthesis of 12-aryl-8,9,10,12-
tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one derivatives using task specific acidic ionic liquid [NMP]H2PO4.
Chin Chem Lett, 2014, 25, 1336–1340. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cclet.2014.05.014.
[53] Kundu D, Majee A, Hajra A. Task-specific ionic liquid catalyzed efficient microwave-assisted
synthesis of 12-alkyl or aryl-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-ones under solvent-free
conditions. Green Chem Lett Rev, 2011, 4, 205–209.
[54] Maleki B, Akbarzadeh E, Babaee S. New basic ionic liquid from ethan-1,2-diyl bis (hydrogen sulfate)
and DBU (1,8-diazobicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene) as an efficient catalyst for one-pot synthesis of
176 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamathxanthene derivatives. Dyes Pigm, 2015, 123, 222–234. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
dyepig.2015.08.009.
[55] Yang J, Yang J, Zhu T et al. Eco-friendly synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[c]xanthenes catalyzed by
functional ionic liquid in water. Monatsh Chem, 2013, 144, 1705–1710.
[56] Moosavi-Zare AR, Zolfigol MA, Zarei M et al. Preparation, characterization and application of ionic
liquid sulfonic acid functionalized pyridinium chloride as an efficient catalyst for the solvent-free
synthesis of 12-aryl-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]-xanthen-11-ones. J Mol Liq, 2013, 186, 63–69.
[57] Khurana JM, Lumb A, Chaudhary A et al. Efficient and green syntheses of 12-aryl-2,3,4,12-
tetrahydrobenzo[b] xanthene 1,6,11-triones in water and task-specific ionic liquid. Synth Commun,
2013, 43, 2147–2154.
[58] Shirini F, Abedini M, Seddighi M et al. Introduction of a new bi-SO3H ionic liquid based on
2,2′-bipyridine as a novel catalyst for the synthesis of various xanthene derivatives. RSC Adv, 2014, 4,
63526–63532. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C4RA12361A.
[59] Salami M, Ezabadi A. Synthesis of the nano-magnetic ionic liquid based on caffeine and its catalytic
application in the synthesis of xanthenes. Res Chem Intermed, 2020, 46, 4611–4626. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11164-020-04224-6.
[60] Soliman HA, Khatab TK. New approach for tetrachlorosilane promoted one-pot, condensation
reaction for tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-ones with docking validation as aurora kinase inhibitor.
Silicon, 2018, 10, 229–233. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12633-016-9421-0.
[61] Khurana JM, Magoo D, Aggarwal K et al. Synthesis of novel 12-aryl-8, 9, 10, 12-tetrahydrobenzo [a]
xanthene-11-thiones and evaluation of their biocidal effects. Eur J Med Chem, 2012, 58, 470–477.
[62] Mane P, Shinde B, Mundada P et al. Sodium acetate/MWI: A green protocol for the synthesis of
tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthen-11-ones with biological screening. Res Chem Intermed, 2020, 46,
231–241. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11164-019-03945-7.
[63] Godse VW, Darandale SN, Zaware BH et al. A green and solvent free protocol for the synthesis of
bioactive tetrahydrobenzo[c]xanthene-8-ones using novel ionic liquid l-pyrrolidine-2-carboxylic acid
sulfate (LPCAS). Modern Org Chem Res, 2017, 2, 1–4.
[64] Sethukumar A, Kumar CU, Prakasam BA. Synthesis, spectroscopic analysis, and in-vitro antimicrobial
evaluation of some tetrahydrobenzo[A]xanthene-11-thiones. Phosphorus Sulf Sil Relat Element,
2013, 188, 1652–1660.
[65] Li J, Lu L, Su W. A new strategy for the synthesis of benzoxanthenes catalyzed by proline triflate in
water. Tetrahedron Lett, 2010, 51, 2434–2437. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.tetlet.2010.02.149.
[66] Hattori H. Heterogeneous basic catalysis. Chem Rev, 1995, 95(3), 537–558.
[67] Nasseri MA, Allahresani A, Esmaeili AA. Niobium pentachloride catalyzed one-pot multicomponent
condensation reaction of β-naphthol, aryl aldehydes and cyclic 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds. Lett Org
Chem, 2014, 11, 91–96.
[68] Nemati F, Arghan M, Amoozadeh A. Efficient, solvent-free method for the one-pot condensation of
β-naphthol, aromatic aldehydes, and cyclic 1, 3-dicarbonyl compounds catalyzed by silica sulfuric
acid. Synth Commun, 2012, 42, 33–39.
[69] Akbari A, Hosseini-Nia A. Biological evaluation and simple method for the synthesis of
tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthenes-11-one derivatives. J Saudi Chem Soci, 2017, 21, S7–S11.
[70] Rao MS, Chhikara BS, Tiwari R et al. Microwave-assisted and scandium triflate catalyzed synthesis of
tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-ones. Monatsh Chem, 2012, 143, 263–268.
[71] Safaei-Ghomi J, Ghasemzadeh MA. A simple and efficient synthesis of 12-Aryl-8,9,10,12-
tetrahydrobenzo[a] xanthen-11-ones by ZnO nanoparticles catalyzed three component coupling
reaction of aldehydes, 2-Naphthol and dimedone. South Afr J Chem, 2014, 67, 27–32.
[72] Taghavi-Khorasani F, Davoodnia A. A fast and green method for synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]
xanthene-11-ones using Ce(SO4)2·4H2O as a novel, reusable, heterogeneous catalyst. Res Chem
Intermed, 2015, 41, 2415–2425.
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 177[73] Moradi L, Mirzaei M. Immobilization of Lewis acidic ionic liquid on perlite nanoparticle surfaces as a
highly efficient solid acid catalyst for the solvent-free synthesis of xanthene derivatives. RSC Adv,
2019, 9, 19940–19948.
[74] Saied SM, Saleh MY, Hamdoon AM. Multicomponent synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene and
tetrahydrobenzo[a]acridine derivatives using sulfonated multi-walled carbon nanotubes as
heterogeneous nanocatalysts. Iran J Catal, 2022, 12, 189–205.
[75 Rohaniyan M, Davoodnia A, Beyramabadi SA et al. Phosphomolybdic acid supported on Schiff base
functionalized graphene oxide nanosheets: Preparation, characterization, and first catalytic
application in the multi-component synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-ones. Appl
Organomet Chem, 2019, 33, 1–11.
[76] Mohammadi R, Eidi E, Ghavami M et al. Chitosan synergistically enhanced by successive Fe3O4 and
silver nanoparticles as a novel green catalyst in one-pot, three-component synthesis of
tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthene-11-ones. J Mol Catal A Chem, 2014, 393, 309–316.
[77] Davoodnia A, Yadegarian S, Nakhaei A et al. A comparative study of TiO2, Al2O3, and Fe3O4
nanoparticles as reusable heterogeneous catalysts in the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene￾11-ones. Russ J Gen Chem, 2016, 86, 2849–2854.
[78] Taghavi F, Gholizadeh M, Saljooghi AS et al. Metal free synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[: A] xanthenes
using orange peel as a natural and low cost efficient heterogeneous catalyst. RSC Adv, 2016, 6,
87082–87087. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C6RA17607K.
[79] Bi Fatemeh Mirjalili B, Bamoniri A, Zamani L. Nano-TiCl4/SiO2: An efficient and reusable catalyst for
the synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthenes-11-ones. Lett Org Chem, 2012, 9, 338–343.
[80] Nakhaei A, Yadegarian S. Synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo [A] xanthene-11-one derivatives using
ZRO2–SO3H as highly efficient recyclable nano-catalyst. J Appl Chem Res, 2017, 11(3), 72–83.
[81] Olyaei A, Alidoust MG. Rapid and efficient one-pot green synthesis of 12-aryl-8,9,10,12-
tetrahydrobenzo[ a]xanthene-11-ones using Zr-MCM-41 Catalyst. Synth Commun, 2015, 45, 94–104.
[82] Amarloo F, Zhiani R, Mehrzad J. Novel Fe3O4/SiO2/PPA magnetic nanoparticles: Preparation,
characterization, and first catalytic application to the solvent- free synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]
xanthene-11-ones. Russ J Org Chem, 2019, 55, 1584–1590.
[83] Shaterian HR, Rigi F. An efficient synthesis of quinazoline and xanthene derivatives using starch
sulfate as a biodegradable solid acid catalyst. Res Chem Intermed, 2015, 41, 721–738.
[84] Nemati F, Sabaqian S. Nano-Fe3O4 encapsulated-silica particles bearing sulfonic acid groups as an
efficient, eco-friendly and magnetically recoverable catalyst for synthesis of various xanthene
derivatives under solvent-free conditions. J Saudi Chem Soci, 2017, 21, S383–S393. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.jscs.2014.04.009.
[85] Huang H, Yao Y, Lin Q et al. One-pot synthesis of xanthene derivatives catalyzed by Fe(III)
tetranitrophthalocyanine immobilized on activated carbon. Russ J Gen Chem, 2016, 86, 934–938.
[86] Shirini F, Abedini M, Pourhasan R. N-sulfonic acid poly(4-vinylpyridinium) chloride: A novel
polymeric and reusable catalyst for the preparation of xanthenes derivatives. Dyes Pigm, 2013, 99,
250–255. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.dyepig.2013.04.036.
[87] Karimi-Jaberi Z, Abbasi SZ, Pooladian B et al. Efficient, one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[a]
xanthen-11-ones and dibenzo[a,j]xanthenes using trichloroacetic acid as a solid heterogeneous
catalyst under solvent-free conditions. E-J Chem, 2011, 8, 1895–1899.
[88] Das B, Laxminarayana K, Krishnaiah M et al. An efficient and convenient protocol for the synthesis
of novel 12-aryl- or 12-alkyl-8,9,10,12-tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-one derivatives. Synlett, 2007,
3107–3112.
[89] Moghanian H, Mobinikhaledi A, Deinavizadeh M. Efficient, one-pot synthesis of xanthene derivatives
using boron sulphonic acid as a solid heterogeneous catalyst under solvent-free conditions. Res
Chem Intermed, 2015, 41, 4387–4394.
178 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamath[90] Bamoniri A, Mirjalili BBF, Fouladgar S. Fe3O4@SiO2-SnCl4: An efficient catalyst for the synthesis of
xanthene derivatives under ultrasonic irradiation. Polycycl Aromat Compd, 2017, 37, 345–361.
[91] Oskooie HA, Heravi MM, Karimi N et al. Cu/SiO2-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of 12-aryl-8,9,10,12-
tetrahydrobenzo[α]xanthen-11-ones under solvent-free conditions. Synth Commun, 2011, 41,
2763–2768.
[92] Pouramiri B, Shirvani M, Kermani ET. Facile and rapid synthesis of diverse xanthene derivatives
using lanthanum(III) chloride/chloroacetic acid as an efficient and reusable catalytic system under
solvent-free conditions. J Serb Chem Soc, 2017, 82, 483–493.
[93] Sadeghi S, Farrokhi A, Hamidi Z et al. Synthesis of Co/Mn/Nano ZnO as an efficient supported
catalyst for preparation of tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one and its derivatives. Synth ReactInorg
Metal-Org Nano-Metal Chem, 2016, 46, 77–82.
[94] Karimi N, Oskooie HA, Heravi MM et al. Caro’s acid-silica gel-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of 12-aryl
-8,9,10,12- tetrahydrobenzo[a] xanthen-11-ones. Synth Commun, 2011, 41, 307–312.
[95] Bamoniri A, Mirjalili BBF, Nazemian S. Microwave-assisted solvent-free synthesis of 14-aryl/alkyl
-14H-dibenzo[a,j]xanthenes and tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthen-11-ones catalyzed by nano silica
phosphoric acid. Curr Chem Lett, 2013, 2, 27–34.
[96] Eshghi H, Eftekhar M, Rahimizadeh M et al. Efficient solvent free synthesis of 12-Aryl-8, 9, 10, 12-
tetrahydrobenzo [a]-xanthen-11-ones and 3H-Spiro [isobenzofuran-1, 9ʹ-xanthen]-3-one derivatives
using cobalt hydrogen sulfate as a green, heterogeneous and reusable catalyst. Org Chem Res,
2016, 2, 20–27.
[97] Moosavi-Zare AR, Zolfigol MA, Zarei M et al. Application of silica-bonded imidazolium-sulfonic acid
chloride (SBISAC) as a heterogeneous nanocatalyst for the domino condensation of aryl aldehydes
with 2-naphthol and dimedone. J Mol Liq, 2015, 211, 373–380.
[98] Tabatabaeian K, Zanjanchi MA, Mamaghani M et al. Ruthenium anchored on multi-walled carbon
nanotubes: An efficient and reusable catalyst for the synthesis of xanthenes. Res Chem Intermed,
2016, 42, 5049–5067.
[99] Ghasemzadeh MA, Ghaffarian F. Preparation of core/shell/shell CoFe2O4/OCMC/Cu (BDC)
nanostructure as a magnetically heterogeneous catalyst for the synthesis of substituted xanthenes,
quinazolines and acridines under ultrasonic irradiation. Appl Organomet Chem, 2020, 34, 1–10.
[100] Sonei S, Gholizadeh M, Taghavi F. Cu(II) anchored on modified magnetic nanoparticles: As a green
and efficient recyclable nano catalyst for one pot synthesis of 12-aryl-8,9,10,12tetrahydrobenzo[a]
xanthene-11-one. Polycycl Aromat Compd, 2020, 40, 1127–1142. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/
10406638.2018.1531431.
[101] Zhang ZH, Wang HJ, Ren XQ et al. A facile and efficient method for synthesis of xanthone derivatives
catalyzed by HBF4/SiO2 under solvent-free conditions. Monatsh Chem, 2009, 140, 1481–1483.
4 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically prominent 179Bubun Banerjee✶
, Aditi Sharma, Manmeet Kaur, Arvind Singh,
Anu Priya
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis
of structurally diverse bioactive
quinoxaline-annulated spiroheterocycles
through the in situ formation of 11H￾indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-ones
5.1 Introduction
Quinoxaline-containing skeletons are very common in naturally occurring bioactive
compounds such as echinomycin (I) and triostin A (II) (Figure 5.1) [1, 2]. Quinoxaline
and its relevant skeletons play an important role in many commercially available drug
molecules [3–7]. Figure 5.2 represents a glimpse of quinoxaline-containing commercially
available drug molecules viz., varenicline (III) (used for the smoking cessation) [3], Bri￾monidine (IV) (used to treat glaucoma) [4], quinacillin (V) (antibiotic) [5], chlorosulfa￾quinoxaline (VI) (antitumor agent) [6], and R-(+)-XK469 (5) (anticancer agent) [7]. Along
with naturally occurring compounds, a huge number of synthetic quinoxaline deriva￾tives also showed significant biological efficacies [8–13]. Among many other quinoxaline
derivatives, in recent times, 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-ones have gained special at￾tention as they can be used as a precursor to many structurally diverse bioactive spiro￾heterocycles having potent biological efficacies including anticancer, antimycobacterial,
antibacterial, anti-Alzheimer, antimicrobial, antioxidant, antifungal, etc. activities (Fig￾ure 5.3) [14–21]. As a result, a large number of atom-efficient reaction protocols have
been developed to construct many structurally diverse bioactive heterocyclic scaffolds
by following one-pot multicomponent strategies involving 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin￾11-one as an important starting component. On many occasions 11H-indeno[1,2-b]qui￾noxalin-11-one was formed in situ in the reaction medium from the reactions between
ninhydrin and o-phenylenediamine, which then took part in the reactions with the
other added components and afforded the desired products.
Multicomponent synthesis approaches are regarded as one of the precious tools
for synthesizing various structurally diverse organic transformations [22–26]. Among
other convincing domains of green chemistry, multicomponent strategy is always a
fascinating tool as it has immense benefits. Multicomponent strategies to synthesize
✶
Corresponding author: Bubun Banerjee, Department of Chemistry, Akal University, Talwandi Sabo,
Bathinda 151302, Punjab, India, e-mail: banerjeebubun@gmail.com
Aditi Sharma, Manmeet Kaur, Arvind Singh, Anu Priya, Department of Chemistry, Akal University,
Talwandi Sabo, Bathinda 151302, Punjab, India
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-005heterocyclic compounds offer a number of advantages such as reduction of purifica￾tion processes, operational simplicity, energy efficiency, atom economy, etc. [27–29].
Figure 5.1: Naturally occurring quinoxaline-bearing bioactive compounds.
Figure 5.2: Commercially available drug molecules with quinoxaline skeleton.
182 Bubun Banerjee et al.5.2 Five-component synthesis of quinoxaline￾annulated spiroheterocycles
5.2.1 Five-component synthesis of spiro-pyrrolidines
In 2011, Ming et al. [30] synthesized a series of spiro-pyrrolidines, viz., (2′S,4′R)-1′-
methyl-4′-arylspiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,2′-pyrrolidine]-3′,3′-dicarbonitriles (7)
and (2′S,3′S,4′R)-ethyl 3′-cyano-1′-methyl-4′-phenylspiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline￾11,2′-pyrrolidine]-3′-carboxylates (8) via one-pot five-component reactions of nin￾hydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), sarcosine (3), aromatic aldehydes (4), and malo￾nonitrile (5) or ethyl cyanoacetate (6), respectively, in ethanol at 100 °C (Figure 5.4).
The desired products (7, 8) were isolated in good yields (62–90%) under conven￾tional stirring at 100 °C for 1–8 h. It was proposed that in this reaction sarcosine (3)
Figure 5.3: 11H-Indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-one can be used as a precursor of many synthetic bioactive
heterocyclic scaffolds.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 183played dual role, i.e., both as catalyst as well as substrate. In the first step, ninhydrin
(1) and o-phenylenediamine (2) reacted to form 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-one
(A) in situ, which further reacted with sarcosine (3), aromatic aldehydes (4), and ma￾lononitrile (5)/ethyl cyanoacetate (6) to afford the desired products.
In 2018, Wen and his group [31] developed an efficient one-pot five-component method
for the synthesis of (2′S)-3′-(indole-3-carbonyl)-1′-methyl-4′-arylspiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxa￾line-11,2′-pyrrolidine]-3′-carbonitrile derivatives (11) in good yields (55–68%) via 1,3-dipolar
cycloaddition reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), 3-cyanoacetyl indole (3),
aryl aldehydes (4), and sarcosine (3) in ethanol under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.5). It
was believed that in the first step, reactions of ninhydrin (1) and o-phenylenediamine
(2) formed 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-one (A) in situ, which further reacts with 3-
cyanoacetyl indole (9), aryl aldehydes (4), and sarcosine (3) to afford the desired prod￾ucts (11). Stereochemistries of the products were confirmed by using detailed spectro￾scopic and X-ray crystallographic studies. The proposed mechanism of this reaction is
shown in Figure 5.6. Under the same reaction conditions they were also able to syn￾thesize (3'S)-2'-(indole-3-carbonyl)-1′-aryl-1′,2′,5′,6′,7′,7a′-hexahydrospiro[indeno[1,2-b]
quinoxaline-11,3′-pyrrolizine]-2′-carbonitriles (12) in excellent yields (69–93%) by
using L-proline (10) instead of sarcosine (3) (Figure 5.5).
In 2015, Velikorodov et al. [32] synthesized 4-{3′,3′-dicyano(or 3′-ethoxycarbonyl
-3′-cyano)-1′-methylspiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,2′-pyrrolidin]-4′-yl}phenyl-N-phenyl￾carbamates (14) in 75–78% yields via one-pot five-component condensation reactions of
Figure 5.4: One-pot five-component synthesis of spiro-pyrrolidine derivatives.
184 Bubun Banerjee et al.ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), sarcosine (3), 4-formylphenyl N-phenylcarbamate
(13), and malononitrile (5) or ethyl cyanoacetate (6) through the formation of 11H-indeno
[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-one (A) in situ in the presence of a catalytic amount of ionic liquid
[bmim]Br in ethanol under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.7).
5.2.2 Five-component synthesis of dispiro-pyrrolidines
In 2014, Liu et al. [33] reported a simple, efficient and one-pot five-component cascade
reaction for the synthesis of highly substituted dispiroindenoquinoxaline pyrrolidine
derivatives (16) from the reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), sarcosine
(3), 1,3-indanedione, (15) and various aromatic aldehydes (4) through the in situ for￾mation of 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-one (A) in ethanol under refluxed conditions
(Figure 5.8). All the reactions were completed within 3 h and afforded excellent yields
(80–92%). All the products were isolated pure just by simple recrystallization with eth￾anol. The authors proposed a mechanism of this transformation, which is shown in
Figure 5.9.
In the same year, Gavaskar et al. [34] designed a one-pot five-component reaction
strategy for the synthesis of a series of pyrazolo-functionalized pyrrolidine-based spiro￾indenoquinoxaline derivatives (19) in good yields (80–88%) from the reactions of ninhy￾drin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), sarcosine (3), hydrate hydrazine (17), and 2,6-bis￾arylmethylidene-cyclohexanone or 2,5-bis-arylmethylidene-cyclopentanone derivatives
Figure 5.5: One-pot five-component synthesis of (2′S)-3′-(indole-3-carbonyl)-1′-methyl-4′-arylspiro[indeno
[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,2′-pyrrolidine]-3′-carbonitriles.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 185(18) in methanol under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.10). It was proposed that the reac￾tions of ninhydrin (1) and o-phenylenediamine (2) formed 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin￾11-one (A) in situ which reacts with sarcosine (3) to form the corresponding azomethine
ylides (20). Now the azomethine ylides (20) underwent [3+2]-cycloaddition with 2,6-
bis-arylmethylidene-cyclohexanone or 2,5-bis-arylmethylidene-cyclopentanones (18)
Figure 5.7: One-pot five-component synthesis of 4-{3′,3′-dicyano(or 3′-ethoxycarbonyl-3′-cyano)-1′-
methylspiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,2′-pyrrolidin]-4′-yl}phenyl N-phenylcarbamates.
Figure 5.6: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of (2′S)-3′-(indole-3-carbonyl)-1′-methyl-4′-arylspiro
[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,2′-pyrrolidine]-3′-carbonitriles.
186 Bubun Banerjee et al.to form the corresponding intermediate (21), which further reacted with hydrate hy￾drazine (17) to form the targeted products (Figure 5.11).
Figure 5.8: One-pot five-component synthesis of (2′R,4′R)-1′-methyl-4′-arylspiro-[2.11′]-indeno[1,2-b]
quinoxaline-spiro-[3.2′]indane-1′,3′-dione-pyrrolidine derivatives.
Figure 5.9: Plausible mechanism for the one-pot five-component synthesis of (2′R,4′R)-1′-methyl-4′-
arylspiro-[2.11′]-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-spiro-[3.2′]indane-1′,3′-dione-pyrrolidines.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 187Figure 5.10: One-pot five-component synthesis of pyrazolo-functionalized pyrrolidine-based spiro￾indenoquinoxaline derivatives.
Figure 5.11: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of pyrazolo-functionalized pyrrolidine-based spiro￾indenoquinoxaline derivatives.
188 Bubun Banerjee et al.5.3 Four-component synthesis of quinoxaline￾annulated spiroheterocycles
5.3.1 Four-component synthesis of spiro-pyrrolidine
In 2020, Arumugam et al. [15] synthesized a series of spiro-pyrrolidine-fused indeno￾quinoxaline derivatives from one-pot four-component reactions of ninhydrin (1),
o-phenylenediamine (2), L-phenylalanine (22), and β-nitrostyrene (23) in ionic liquid
[bmim]Br at 100 °C (Figure 5.12). In the beginning 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-one (A)
was formed in situ from the reactions of ninhydrin (1) and o-phenylenediamine (2). The
plausible mechanism of this transformation along with the role of ionic liquid is shown
in Figure 5.13. Structures and the stereochemistry of the synthesized compounds were
confirmed by using 2D NMR (heteronuclear multiple bond correlation, HMBC) and crys￾tallographic analyses. All the reactions were completed within 1 h and afforded the de￾sired pure products in good yields. Antitubercular activity of the synthesized compounds
was evaluated against Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv. Among all, compound 24a con￾taining nitro group on a phenyl ring showed similar activity to standard drug ethambutol
with MIC (minimum inhibitory concentration) value 1.56 μg/mL.
Figure 5.12: One-pot four-component synthesis of spiro-pyrrolidine-fused indenoquinoxaline derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 189In 2009, Mohammadizadeh and his group [35] developed a catalyst-free stereoselective
method for the synthesis of spiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,3′-pyrrolizidine] deriva￾tives (27) in good yields (75–82%) from the one-pot four-component reactions of ninhy￾drin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), L-proline (10), and various chalcones (26) in ethanol
under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.14). All the reactions were completed within 2 h. It
was proposed that 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-one (A) formed in situ reacts with L￾proline (10) to form the corresponding azomethine ylides (28), which afforded the de￾sired products via the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition with chalcones (26) (Figure 5.15).
In 2017, Akondi et al. [36] designed a simple, efficient and stereoselective approach
for the synthesis of a series of spiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,3′-pyrrolizine] deriva￾tives (29) from one-pot four-component reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine
(2), L-proline (10), and β-nitrostyrene (23) in absence of any catalyst in ethanol under
microwave-irradiated conditions (150 W) at 80 °C (Figure 5.16). All the reactions were
completed within just 7–8 min and afforded good yields (86–96%). The same reaction
required longer times (4–5.5 h) under refluxed conditions in ethanol as solvent. All the
synthesized compounds were evaluated for AChE inhibitory activity. Compound 29a
(IC50 value 0.05 μM) showed 20 times better inhibition activity against acetylcholinester￾Figure 5.13: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of spiro-pyrrolidine-fused indenoquinoxaline
derivatives.
190 Bubun Banerjee et al.ase (AChE) than the potent standard drug galantamine (IC50 value 0.97 μM). The plausi￾ble mechanism of this transformation is shown in Figure 5.17.
In 2020, Arumugam et al. [37] reported a facile protocol for the regio and diastereose￾lective synthesis of spiropyrrolo-fused indenoquinoxaline derivatives (31) in good yields
(79–88%) from one-pot four-component synthesis of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine
(2), L-tryptophan (30), and β-nitrostyrene (23) in ionic liquid [bmim]Br at 100 °C (Fig￾ure 5.18). All the reactions were completed within 45 min. The proposed mechanism of
this reaction and the role of ionic liquids are shown in Figure 5.19. Stereochemistry of the
synthesized compounds was confirmed by HMBC analysis and X-ray crystallographic
studies. All the synthesized compounds were screened for in vitro antitubercular activity
against Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv. Among all, compound 31a showed compara￾ble efficacies to standard drug ethambutol with MIC value 1.56 μg/mL.
Figure 5.15: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of spiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,3′-pyrrolizidine]
derivatives.
Figure 5.14: One-pot four-component synthesis of spiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,3′-pyrrolizidine]
derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 191In 2018, Reddy et al. [38] demonstrated a simple, facile, and catalyst-free diastereoselec￾tive approach for the synthesis of a series of spiro-pyrrolidinyl-fused indenoquinoxaline
derivatives (34) in good yields (70–92%) via one-pot four-component reactions of ninhy￾drin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), isoxazoles (32), and substituted benzyl amines (33) in
methanol under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.20). The reaction proceeded via the
Figure 5.17: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of spiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,3′-pyrrolizine]
derivatives.
Figure 5.16: One-pot four-component synthesis of stereoselective spiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,3′-
pyrrolizine] derivatives.
192 Bubun Banerjee et al.Figure 5.19: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of spiropyrrolo-fused indenoquinoxaline derivatives in
ionic liquids.
Figure 5.18: One-pot four-component synthesis of spiropyrrolo-fused indenoquinoxaline derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 193formation of azomethine ylides in situ, which further underwent 1,3-dipolar [3 + 2]-
cycloaddition reaction to afford the desired products (Figure 5.21).
Shahrestani et al. [39] demonstrated a simple, efficient, and catalyst-free method
for the synthesis of a series of novel spiroindenoquinoxaline-fused pyrrolidines (37)
and spiro-indenoquinoxaline-fused pyrrolizidines (38) via one-pot four-component re￾actions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), cinnamoyl-crotonoyl oxazolidinone
(35), and L-proline derivatives (10, 36) or sarcosine (3), respectively, in ethanol under
refluxed conditions (Figure 5.22).
Figure 5.20: One-pot four-component catalyst-free synthesis of spiropyrrolidinyl-fused indenoquinoxaline
derivatives.
Figure 5.21: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of spiropyrrolidinyl-fused indenoquinoxaline derivatives.
194 Bubun Banerjee et al.Figure 5.22: One-pot four-component synthesis of spiro-indenoquinoxaline-fused pyrrolidine and spiro￾indenoquinoxaline-fused pyrrolizidine derivatives.
Figure 5.23: One-pot four-component synthesis of imidazole-annulated spiro-pyrrolidine derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 195In 2019, Almansoura et al. [17] developed an efficient ionic liquid ([bmim]Br)-mediated
protocol for the synthesis of a new class of imidazole-annulated spiro-pyrrolidine deriv￾atives (40) in good yields (80–87%) via one-pot four component 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition
reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), L-histidine (39), and β-nitrostyrene
(23) at 100 °C (Figure 5.23). All the reactions were accomplished within 1 h. The plausible
mechanism and the role of ionic liquid are shown in Figure 5.24. Screening of anticho￾linesterase activity revealed that compound 40a is active against AChE enzyme with
IC50 value 2.05 μM and interestingly the activity of compound 40b against butyrylcholi￾nesterase (BChE) enzyme (IC50 value 12.40 μM) is almost comparable to the standard
drug galantamine.
In the same year, Gupta and Khurana [40] reported a facile and straightforward
catalyst-free approach for the synthesis of functionalized spiroindeno[1,2-b]quinoxa￾line-11,3′-pyrrolizines (41) via one-pot four-component cascade reactions of ninhydrin
(1), o-phenylenediamine (2), L-proline (10)/L-thioproline (10a), and 3-methyl-4-nitro-5-
styrylisoxazoles (32) in methanol under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.25).
Figure 5.24: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of imidazole-annulated spiro-pyrrolidine derivatives.
196 Bubun Banerjee et al.Mani et al. [14] demonstrated a general method for the synthesis of a series of biologi￾cally active spiro-indenoquinoxaline pyrrolizine derivatives (43) through one-pot four￾component reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), (E)-3-(2-chloroquinolin-3-
yl)-1-phenylprop-2-en-1-ones (42), and L-proline (10) in methanol under refluxed condi￾tions (Figure 5.26). All the reactions were completed within 3 h and afforded the desired
products in good yields (75–92%). All the synthesized compounds were evaluated for
their in vitro antioxidant as well as cytotoxic activities. Among all, the compound 43a
Figure 5.25: One-pot four-component catalyst-free synthesis of functionalized spiroindeno[1,2-b]
quinoxaline-11,3′-pyrrolizines.
Figure 5.26: One-pot four-component synthesis of bioactive spiro-indenoquinoxaline pyrrolizine
derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 197showed better antioxidant efficacies than the standard drug BHT against DPPH, nitric
oxide and superoxide with IC50 values 2.96, 1.34, and 4.01 μg/mL, respectively. Interest￾ingly, as compared to the standard drug doxorubicin, the same compound (43a) also
showed similar anticancer activity against the cancer cell lines MCF-7 and A-549 with
IC50 values 15 μM and 16 μM, respectively. By using different amino acid, i.e., L￾thioproline (10a) under the same reaction conditions, the same group also synthesized
a series of biologically promising spiro-indenoquinoxaline pyrrolothiazoles derivatives
(44) in good yields (70–91%) (Figure 5.26) [41]. As before, all the synthesized compounds
were evaluated for their antioxidant and cytotoxic activities and compound 44a showed
highest antioxidant as well as anticancer efficacies.
5.3.2 Four-component synthesis of ferrocene-embedded
spiropyrrolidine
In 2020, Arumugam et al. [42] reported a simple method for the efficient synthesis of
biologically promising ferrocene-containing hybrid spiro-pyrrolidine derivatives (46)
via one-pot four-component reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), L￾phenylalanine (22), and ferrocenyl chalcone (45) in ionic liquid [bmim]Br at 100 °C
(Figure 5.27). At first indenoquinoxaline (A) was formed in situ from the reactions of
ninhydrin (1) and o-phenylenediamine (2). Then L-phenylalanine (22) reacts with in￾denoquinoxaline (A) to form the corresponding azomethine ylide intermediate, which
further undergoes cycloaddition reaction with various ferrocenyl chalcones (45) to af￾ford the desired products in excellent yields within 1 h (Figure 5.28). The structure
and stereochemistry of the synthesized compounds were determined by HMBC analy￾sis and X-ray crystallographic studies.
Figure 5.27: One-pot four-component regioselective synthesis of ferrocene-containing hybrid spiro￾pyrrolidine derivatives.
198 Bubun Banerjee et al.In 2013, Babu et al. [43] developed a simple, facile, and ultrasound-assisted proto￾col for the synthesis of a series of structurally diverse ferrocene-functionalized spiro￾indenoquinoxaline pyrrolidines (51–55) in good yields (80–90%) via one-pot four-component
reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), sarcosine (3), and various ferro￾cenyl chalcone derivatives (45, 47–50) in methanol (Figure 5.29). All the reactions
were completed within 1.5 h.
The same group also synthesized a series of ferrocene functionalized spiro-inden￾oquinoxaline pyrrolizidine derivatives (58–62) via one-pot four-component from nin￾hydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), L-proline (10), and various ferrocenyl chalcone
derivatives (50, 47, 49, 56, 57) in methanol under conventional refluxed conditions
(Figure 5.30) [44]. The reaction underwent in situ formation of azomethine ylides fol￾lowed by [3 + 2]-cycloaddition with ferrocenyl chalcone derivatives (50, 47, 49, 56, 57).
The proposed mechanism for the synthesis of compounds 58 is shown is Figure 5.31.
Figure 5.28: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of ferrocene-containing hybrid spiro-pyrrolidine
derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 199Gavaskar et al. [45] demonstrated an ionic liquid (N-(1-acroloyl)-N-(4-cyclopentyl)-
piperazinium phosphate)-mediated protocol for the synthesis of a wide range of struc￾turally diverse ferrocene-functionalized spiro-indenoquinoxaline tetrahydro-1H-pyrrolo
[1,2-c][1,3]-thiazoles (63–66) via one-pot four-component reactions of ninhydrin (1), o￾phenylenediamine (2), (R)-thiazolidine-4-carboxylic acid (10a), and various ferrocenyl
chalcone derivatives (50, 47, 45, 56) at 140 °C (Figure 5.32). All the reactions were com￾pleted within 2.4 h and the desired products obtained in excellent yields (87–94%).
Figure 5.29: Ultrasound-assisted one-pot four-component synthesis of structurally diverse ferrocene￾functionalized spiro-indenoquinoxaline pyrrolidine derivatives.
200 Bubun Banerjee et al.Figure 5.30: One-pot four-component synthesis of structurally diverse ferrocene-functionalized spiro￾indenoquinoxaline pyrrolizidine derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 2015.3.3 Four-component synthesis of dispiro-indenoquinoxalines
By using the same ionic liquid (N-(1-acroloyl)-N-(4-cyclopentyl)-piperazinium phosphate),
Gavaskar et al. [46] reported another one-pot four-component method for the synthesis
of steroidal annulated dispiro-pyrrolidine derivatives (68) via the reactions of ninhydrin
(1), o-phenylenediamine (2), (Z)-16-benzylideneestrone (67) and sarcosine (3) at 120 °C
(Figure 5.33). The proposed mechanism of this reaction is depicted in Figure 5.34.
Babu and Ragunathan [47] reported an efficient method for one-pot four-component
synthesis of a wide variety of dispiroindenoquinoxaline pyrrolizidine derivatives
(73–76) from the reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), L-proline (10),
and various aryl eneones such as 2-arylidene-1,3-indanediones (69), (E)-2-arylidene￾tetrahydronaphthalene-1-ones (70), (E)-3-arylidene-4-chromanones (71), and (E)-2-
oxoindolino-3-ylidene acetophenones (72), in the presence of a catalytic amount of
heteropolyacid{H4[Si(W3O10)3]}-silica as a catalyst in acetonitrile under refluxed
conditions (Figure 5.35).
Rajesh et al. [48] synthesized a series of novel 1-methyl-4-arylpyrrolo-(spiro[2.11′]-
11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline)-spiro[3.3″]-1″methyl/benzyl-5″-(arylmethylidene)piperi￾din-4″-one derivatives (78) via one-pot four-component reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phe￾Figure 5.31: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of structurally diverse ferrocene-functionalized spiro￾indenoquinoxaline pyrrolizidine derivatives.
202 Bubun Banerjee et al.Figure 5.32: Ionic liquid-mediated one-pot four-component synthesis of ferrocene-functionalized spiro￾indenoquinoxaline tetrahydro-1H-pyrrolo[1,2-c][1,3]-thiazole derivatives.
Figure 5.33: One-pot four-component synthesis of steroidal embedded dispiro-pyrrolidine derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 203nylenediamine (2), sarcosine (3), and 1-methyl-3,5-bis[(E)-arylmethylidene]-tetrahydro-4
(1H)-pyridinones (77) in ionic liquid [bmim]Br at 100 °C (Figure 5.36). The structure and
the exact stereochemistry of the synthesized compounds were determined by using
HMBC analysis and X-ray crystallography studies. The proposed mechanism of this trans￾formation is shown in Figure 5.37.
Malathi et al. [49] carried out one-pot four-component reactions between ninhydrin
(1), o-phenylenediamine (2), (E)-3-arylidene-1-methylpiperidin-4-ones (79), and 1,3-thiazolane
-4-carboxylic acid (10a) or sarcosine (3) in methanol under refluxed conditions, which af￾forded the corresponding dispiro-piperidone–indenoquinoxaline-pyrrolothiazoles (80) or
dispiro-piperidone–indenoquinoxaline-pyrrolopyrrolidine derivatives (81), respectively
(Figure 5.38). Interestingly, under these conditions L-proline failed to produce the desired
products.
Arumugam et al. [50] synthesized a series of dispiropyrrolidinyl-piperidone-annulated
indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline derivatives (82) via one-pot four-component 1,3-dipolar cycloaddi￾tion reactions between ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), bis-arylidene piperidone
(77), and L-tryptophan (30) in ionic liquid [bmimBr] at 100 °C (Figure 5.39). All the reactions
Figure 5.34: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of steroidal embedded dispiro-pyrrolidine derivatives.
204 Bubun Banerjee et al.were completed within 1 h. All the synthesized compounds were screened for their in vitro
BChE and AChE inhibitory activities. Among all, compound 82a showed better cholinester￾ase inhibitory activity than standard drug galantamine with IC50 values 2.01 and 10.45 μM,
respectively.
A simple, efficient, and catalyst-free one-pot four-component method was reported
by Ren et al. [19] for the synthesis of a series of structurally diverse spiroindole￾indenoquinoxaline derivatives (84–86) from the reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phe￾nylenediamine (2), 3-ylideneoxicndoles (83), and various α-amino acids (3, 10, 10a)
in ethanol under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.40). TrpRS (tryptophanyl-tRNA syn￾thetase) inhibitory activity studies of the synthesized compounds revealed that com￾pound 85a is most active against human mitochondrial TrpRS (hmTrpRS) and Escherichia
Figure 5.35: Silica-mediated heteropolyacid-catalyzed one-pot four-component synthesis of structurally
diverse dispiroindenoquinoxaline pyrrolizidine derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 205Figure 5.36: Ionic liquid-mediated one-pot four-component synthesis of 1-methyl-4-arylpyrrolo-(spiro
[2.11′]-11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline)-spiro[3.3″]-1″-methyl/benzyl-5″-(arylmethylidene) piperidin-4″-ones.
Figure 5.37: Plausible mechanism for the synthesis of 1-methyl-4-arylpyrrolo-(spiro[2.11′]-11H-indeno[1,2-
b]quinoxaline)-spiro[3.3″']-1″-methyl/benzyl-5″-(arylmethylidene)piperidin-4″-ones.
206 Bubun Banerjee et al.Figure 5.38: One-pot four-component synthesis of dispiro-piperidone–indenoquinoxaline-pyrrolothiazole
or pyrrolidine derivatives.
Figure 5.39: One-pot four-component synthesis of dispiropyrrolidinyl-piperidone-annulated indeno[1,2-b]
quinoxalin-11-one derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 207coli TrpRS (ecTrpRS) with IC50 values of 225 and 74 μM, respectively. Interestingly, the
same compound (85a) also showed comparable antibacterial activity with the standard
drug indolmycin against Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC29213) with MIC90 (minimum inhibi￾tory concentration) value 4 μg/mL. Moreover, the same compound (85a) was also
found efficient in suppressing proliferation of cell line DLBCL (diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma) with IC50 value 2.9–4.8 μM.
Almansour et al. [51] synthesized a series of highly substituted novel dispiropyrrolidinyl-N￾styrylpiperidone-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline derivatives (89) in moderate to good yields
(48–64%) from one-pot four-component reactions between 1 equivalent of ninhydrin (1),
1 equivalent of o-phenylenediamine (2), 1 equivalent of 3,5-dibenzylidenepiperidin-4-ones
Figure 5.40: Catalyst-free one-pot four-component synthesis of spiroindole-indenoquinoxaline derivatives.
208 Bubun Banerjee et al.(77), and 2 equivalents of L-phenylalanine (22) in ionic liquid [bmimBr] at 100 °C (Fig￾ure 5.41). It was proposed that the final products were obtained from the reactions of inter￾mediate 90 and phenyl acetaldehyde (88) generated in situ (Figure 5.42). In this reaction
the ionic liquid [bmimBr] behaved as both solvent as well as catalyst. All the synthesized
compounds possess moderate to good antimicrobial and antifungal activities. Combina￾tions of compound 89a with streptomycin and vancomycin showed promising synergistic
activity against E. coli (ATCC 25922).
Babu and Ragunathan [52] reported a facile protocol for the regioselective synthesis of
1N-methyl-spiro[2.11′]indeno-[1,2-b]-quinoxaline-spiro[3.3′′]oxindole-4-benzoyl-pyrroli￾dines (91) in good yields (82–90%) through the formation of azomethine ylide via
one-pot four-component 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reactions of ninhydrin (1), o￾phenylenediamine (2), sarcosine (3), and 2-oxoindolino-3-ylidene acetophenones (72)
in methanol under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.43).
Figure 5.41: One-pot domino four-component synthesis of dispiropyrrolidinyl-N-styrylpiperidone-indeno
[1,2-b]quinoxaline derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 209Figure 5.42: Plausible mechanism for the one-pot domino four-component synthesis of
dispiropyrrolidinyl-N-styrylpiperidone-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline derivatives.
Figure 5.43: One-pot four-component synthesis of 1N-methyl-spiro[2.11′]indeno-[1,2-b]-quinoxaline-spiro
[3.3″]oxindole-4-benzoyl-pyrrolidine derivatives.
210 Bubun Banerjee et al.5.3.4 Four-component synthesis of spiro-indenoquinoxalines
In 2017, Maryamabadi et al. [53] reported a simple, convenient, and catalyst-free ap￾proach for the synthesis a series of novel spiro-indenoquinoxaline derivatives (93) via
one-pot four-component reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), malono￾nitrile (5), and N,N′-substituted-2-nitroethene-1,1-diamines (92) in PEG-400 as solvent
at 130 °C (Figure 5.44). Although, the reactions required longer times (10–14 h), the
desired products were afforded in excellent yields (74–81%). In vitro and in silico
studies revealed that all the synthesized compounds possess moderate level of anti￾AChE and anti-BChE inhibitory activities.
Figure 5.44: One-pot four-component catalyst-free synthesis of novel spiro-indenoquinoxaline derivatives.
Figure 5.45: One-pot four-component catalyst-free synthesis of dihydrothiophenone-fused
dispiroindenoquinoxaline-pyrrolidines or pyrrolothiazole derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 211A simple, efficient, straightforward, and catalyst-free method was developed by Rani
et al. [54] for the synthesis of dihydrothiophenone-fused dispiroindenoquinoxaline￾pyrrolidines (95) or pyrrolothiazole derivatives (96) via one-pot four-component reac￾tions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), (2Z,4Z)-2,4-bis(arylidene)dihydrothio￾phen-3(2H)-ones (94), and sarcosine (3) or L-thioproline (10a), respectively, by using
1,4-dioxane and methanol (1:4 v/v) mixture as solvent under refluxed conditions
(Figure 5.45).
5.3.5 Four-component synthesis of
spiropyrans–indenoquinoxalines
Hasaninejad et al. [55] demonstrated a novel method for the efficient synthesis of a series
of structurally diverse 2′-aminospiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,4′-[4′H]pyran] derivatives
(98) via one-pot four-component reactions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), sev￾eral C–H-activated acids (97), and malononitrile (5) or alkyl malonates (6,6a) in the pres￾ence of a catalytic amount of ammonium acetate (20 mol%) in ethanol under refluxed
conditions (Figure 5.46). The same group [56] also carried out the same batch of reactions
in the presence of a catalytic amount of 15 mol% InCl3 in acetonitrile under refluxed con￾ditions (Figure 5.47). Recently, in 2020, Hojati et al. [57] employed a freshly prepared mag￾netic nanocatalyst [poly(Py-co-Ani)@GOFe3O4] to carry out the same batch of reactions in
ethanol under refluxed conditions (Figure 5.48). They prepared this magnetic nanocata￾lyst by functionalizing Fe3O4 nanoparticles on graphene oxide sheets covered with ani￾line-pyrrole copolymer. The proposed mechanism of this transformation is shown in
Figure 5.46: Ammonium acetate-catalyzed one-pot four-component synthesis of 2′-aminospiro[indeno
[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,4′-[4′H]pyran] derivatives.
212 Bubun Banerjee et al.Figure 5.49. After completion of the reaction the magnetic nanocatalysts were recovered
successively by using a bar magnet and were recycled for several runs without any signif￾icant loss in its catalytic activities.
Figure 5.48: One-pot four-component synthesis of 2′-aminospiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,4′-[4′H]
pyran] derivatives in the presence of a magnetic nanocatalyst.
Figure 5.47: InCl3-catalyzed one-pot four-component synthesis of 2′-aminospiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline￾11,4′-[4′H]pyran] derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 2135.3.6 Four-component synthesis of spirofuran–indenoquinoxalines
In 2015, Sabouri and group [58] reported a simple, catalyst-free, one-pot four-component
method for the synthesis of a series of spirofuran-indenoquoxaline (Z)-dialkyl-5-(alkyli￾mino)-5H-spiro[furan-2,11′-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline]-3,4-dicarboxylates (101) from the re￾actions of ninhydrin (1), o-phenylenediamine (2), dialkyl acetylenedicarboxylates (99),
and isocyanides (100) in dichloromethane as solvent at room temperature (Figure 5.50).
The reactions afforded excellent yields of the desired products after 8 h of stirring. The
plausible mechanism of this transformation is shown in Figure 5.51.
Figure 5.49: Plausible mechanism for the one-pot four-component synthesis of 2′-aminospiro[indeno[1,2-
b]quinoxaline-11,4′-[4′H]pyran] derivatives.
214 Bubun Banerjee et al.Figure 5.51: Plausible mechanism for the catalyst-free synthesis of (Z)-dialkyl-5-(alkylimino)-5H-spiro
[furan-2,11′-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline]-3,4-dicarboxylate derivatives.
Figure 5.50: Catalyst-free synthesis of (Z)-dialkyl-5-(alkylimino)-5H-spiro[furan-2,11′-indeno[1,2-b]
quinoxaline]-3,4-dicarboxylate derivatives.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 2155.4 Conclusions
Quinoxaline skeleton is very common in natural products, commercially available
drugs, and synthetic bioactive compounds. Among many other quinoxaline deriva￾tives, 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-ones have gained special attention as they can be
used as building blocks for many structurally diverse bioactive spiroheterocyclic com￾pounds with potent biological efficacies including anticancer, antimycobacterial, anti￾bacterial, anti-Alzheimer, antimicrobial, antioxidant, antifungal, etc. activities. In this
chapter, we have summarized all the recent advances in one-pot five/four-component
synthesis of structurally diverse bioactive quinoxaline-annulated spiroheterocycles
through the in situ formation of 11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-11-ones.
References
[1] Kim YB, Kim YH, Park JY, Kim SK Synthesis and biological activity of new quinoxaline antibiotics of
echinomycin analogues. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2004, 14, 541–544.
[2] Praseuth AP, Wang CCC, Watanabe K, Hotta K, Oguri H, Oikawa H Complete sequence of
biosynthetic gene cluster responsible for producing triostin a and evaluation of quinomycin-type
antibiotics from streptomyces triostinicus. Biotechnol Prog, 2008, 24, 1226–1231.
[3] Escobar-chavez JJ, Merino V, Lopez-Cervantes M, Rodriguez-Cruz IM, Quintanar-Guerrero D, Ganem￾Quintanar A The use of iontophoresis in the administration of nicotine and new non-nicotine drugs
through the skin for smoking cessation. Curr Drug Discov Technol, 2009, 6, 171–185.
[4] Hugo WB, Stretton RG Action of quinacillin on staphylococcus areus. Nature, 1964, 202, 1217.
[5] Mclaughlin MA, Chiou GCY Review: A synopsis of recent developments in antiglaucoma drugs. J Ocul
Pharmacol, 1985, 1, 101–121.
[6] Gao H, Yamasaki EF, Chan KK, Shen LL, Snapka RM Chloroquinoxaline sulfonamide (NSC 339004) is
a topoisomerase iiα/β poison. Cancer Res, 2000, 60, 5937–5940.
[7] Gao H, Huang KC, Yamasaki EF, Chan KK, Chohan L, Snapka RM XK469, a selective topoisomerase iiβ
poison. Proc Natl Acad Sci, 1999, 96, 12168–12173.
[8] Burguete A, Pontiki E, Hadjipavlou-Litina D, Ancizu S, Villar R, Solano B, Moreno E, Torres E, Perez S,
Aldana I, Monge A Synthesis and biological evaluation of new quinoxaline derivatives as antioxidant
and anti-inflammatory agents. Chem Biol Drug Des, 2011, 77, 255–267.
[9] Geethavani M, Reddy JR, Sathyanarayana SV Synthesis, antimicrobial and wound healing activities of
diphenyl quinoxaline derivatives. Int J Pharm Technol, 2012, 4, 4700–4710.
[10] Morales-Castellanos JJ, Ramírez-Hernández K, Gómez-Flores NS, RodasSuárez OR, Peralta-Cruz J
Microwave-assisted solvent-free synthesis and in vitro antibacterial screening of quinoxalines and
pyrido[2,3-b]pyrazines. Molecules, 2012, 17, 5164–5176.
[11] Tseng C-H, Han C-R, Tang K-W Discovery of 3-arylquinoxaline derivatives as potential anti-dengue
virus agents. Int J Mol Sci, 2019, 20, 4786.
[12] Karki S, Hazare R, Kumar S, Bhadauria V, Balzarini J, Clercq ED Synthesis, anticancer and cytostatic
activity of some 6H-Indolo[2,3-b]quinoxalines. Acta Pharm, 2009, 59, 431–440.
[13] Choudhury P, Basu B. Green synthetic approaches towards benzimidazole and quinoxaline
scaffolds. In Brahmachari G, Ed. Synthetic approaches for biologically relevant heterocycles.
Elsevier, UK, Vol. 2, 2021, 689–768.
216 Bubun Banerjee et al.[14] Mani KS, Kaminsky W, Rajendran SP A Facile atom economic one pot multicomponent synthesis of
bioactive spiro-indenoquinoxaline pyrrolizines as potent antioxidants and anti-cancer agents. New J
Chem, 2018, 42, 301–310.
[15] Arumugam N, Almansoura AI, Kumar RS, Alaqeel SI, Krishna VS, Sriram D Anti-tubercular activity of
novel class of spiropyrrolidine tethered indenoquinoxaline heterocyclic hybrids. Bioorg Chem, 2020,
99, 103799.
[16] Kumar N, Inwati GK, Ahmed EM, Lal C, Makwana B, Yadav VK, Islam S, Ahn H-J, Yadav KK, Jeon B-H
Modified 7-chloro-11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline heterocyclic system for biological activities.
Catalysts, 2022, 12, 213.
[17] Almansoura AI, Arumugama N, Kumar RS, Kotresha D, Manohar TS, Venketesh S Design, synthesis
and cholinesterase inhibitory activity of novel spiropyrrolidine tethered imidazole heterocyclic
hybrids. Bioorg Med Chem lett, 2019, 126789.
[18] Filatov AS, Knyazev NA, Ryazantsev MN, Suslonov VV, Larina AG, Molchanov AP, Kostikov RR, Boitsov
VM, Stepakov AV A highly diastereoselective one-pot three-component 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of
cyclopropenes with azomethine ylides generated from 11H-indeno[1,2-b]-quinoxalin-11-ones. Org
Chem Front, 2018, 5, 595–605.
[19] Ren W, Zhao Q, Yu M, Guo L, Chang H, Jiang X, Luo Y, Huang W, He G Design and synthesis of novel
spirooxindole–indenoquinoxaline derivatives as novel tryptophanyl‑tRNA synthetase inhibitors. Mol
Divers, 2019, 24, 1043–1063.
[20] Kathiravan S, Raghunathan R, Suresh G, Siva GV Synthesis and antimicrobial activities of novel
ferrocenyl dispiropyrrolidines and pyrrolizidines. Med Chem Res, 2012, 21, 3170–3176.
[21] Moosavi-Zare AR, Zolfigol MA, Noroozizadeh E, Zarei M, Karamian R, Asadbegy M Synthesis and
characterization of acetic acid functionalized poly (4- Vinylpyridinium) Salt as new catalyst for the
synthesis of spiropyran derivatives and their biological activity. J Mol Catal A Chem, 2016, 425,
217–228.
[22] Khurana JM, Chaudhary A, Lumb A, Nand B An expedient four-component domino protocol for the
synthesis of novel benzo[a]phenazine annulated heterocycles and their photophysical studies.
Green Chem, 2012, 14, 2321–2327.
[23] Srinivas V, Koketsu M Synthesis of indole-2-, 3-, or 5-substituted propargylamines via gold (III)-
catalyzed three component reaction of aldehyde, alkyne, and amine in aqueous medium.
Tetrahedron, 2013, 69, 8025–8033.
[24] Verma AK, Kotla SKR, Choudhary D, Patel M, Tiwari RK Silver-catalyzed tandem synthesis of
naphthyridines and thienopyridines via three component reaction. J Org Chem, 2013, 78, 4386–4401.
[25] Prasad D, Nath M Three-component domino reaction in PPG: An easy access to 4-thiazolidinone
derivatives. J Heterocycl Chem, 2012, 49, 628–633.
[26] Brahmachari G, Banerjee B Facile and one-pot access to diverse and densely functionalized 2-Amino
-3-cyano-4H-pyrans and pyran-annulated heterocyclic scaffolds via an eco-friendly multicomponent
reaction at room temperature using urea as a novel organo-catalyst. ACS Sustainable Chem Eng,
2014, 2, 411–422.
[27] Banerjee B Recent developments on ultrasound-assisted one-pot multicomponent synthesis of
biologically relevant heterocycles. Ultrason Sonochem, 2017, 35, 15–35.
[28] Banerjee B Recent developments on organo-bicyclo-bases catalyzed multicomponent synthesis of
biologically relevant heterocycles. Curr Org Chem, 2018, 22, 208–233.
[29] Sharma A, Singh A, Priya A, Kaur M, Gupta VK, Banerjee B Trisodium citrate dihydrate catalyzed one￾pot pseudo four-component synthesis of fully functionalized pyridine derivatives. Synth Commun,
2022, 52, 1614–1627.
[30] Ming L, Gong F-M, Wen L-R, Li Z-R Expeditious construction of spiro-pyrrolidines by an autocatalytic
one-pot, five-component, 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of in situ generated azomethine ylides and
olefinic dipolarophiles. Eur J Org Chem, 2011, 3482–3490.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 217[31] Wen R, Cen L, Ma Y, Wang J, Zhu S One-pot five-component 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition: A facile
synthesis of spiropyrrolidine and spiropyrrolizidine derivatives. Tetrahedron Lett, 2018, 59,
1686–1690.
[32] Velikoraodov AV, Stepkina NN, Shustov EA, Ionova VA Synthesis of new spiro compounds
proceeding from 11Н-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxalin-2-one. Russ J Org Chem, 2015, 51, 674–679.
[33] Liu F-H, Song Y-B, Zhai L-J, Ming L Synthesis of spiropyrrolidines via five-component 1,3-dipolar
cycloaddition of azomethine ylides and olefinic dipolarophiles generated in situ simultaneously. J
Heterocycl Chem, 2014, 52, 322–329.
[34] Gavaskar D, Raghunathan R, Babu ARS An expedient one-pot sequential five-component synthesis
of highly substituted spiro-pyrrolidine heterocycles. Tetrahedron Lett, 2014, 55, 2217–2220.
[35] Mohammadizadeh MR, Firoozi N A novel, fast and efficient one-pot four-component procedure for
preparation of some spiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,3'-pyrrolizidine]. Bull Korean Chem Soc, 2009,
30, 1877–1880.
[36] Akondi AM, Mekala S, Kantam ML, Trivedi R, Chwhan LR, Das A An expedient microwave assisted
regio- and stereoselective synthesis of spiroquinoxaline pyrrolizine derivatives and their AChE
inhibitory activity. New J Chem, 2017, 41, 873–878.
[37] Arumugam N, Almansour AI, Kuamr RS, Al-Aizari AJMA, Alaqeel SI, Kansiz S, Krishna VS, Sriram D,
Dege N Regio- and diastereoselective synthesis of spiropyrroloquinoxaline grafted indole
heterocyclic hybrids and evaluation of their anti- mycobacterium tuberculosis activity. RSC Adv,
2020, 10, 23522.
[38] Reddy MS, Chowhan LR, Kumar NS, Ramesh P, Mukkamala SB An expedient regio and
diastereoselective synthesis of novel spiro-pyrrolidinyl indenoquinoxalines via 1,3-dipolar
cycloaddition reaction. Tetrahedron Lett, 2018, 59, 1366–1371.
[39] Shahrestani N, Salahi F, Tavakoli N, Jadidi K, Hamzehloueian M, Notash B Asymmetric synthesis
approach of enantiomerically pure spiro-indenoquinoxaline pyrrolidines and spiro￾indenoquinoxaline pyrrolizidines. Tetrahedron Asymm, 2015, 26, 1117–1129.
[40] Gupta S, Khurana JM Catalyst-free one-pot regioselective synthesis of spiropyrrolizines using 1,3-
dipolar cycloaddition reaction. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 7200–7203.
[41] Mani KS, Murugesapandian B, Kaminsky W, Rajendran SP Enantioselective approach towards the
synthesis of spiro-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline pyrrolothiazoles as antioxidant and antiproliferative.
Tetrahedron Lett, 2018, 59, 2921–2929.
[42] Arumugam N, Almansour AI, Kumar RS, Dege N A Facile Ionic liquid-accelerated, four-component
cascade reaction protocol for the regioselective synthesis of biologically interesting ferrocene
engrafted spiropyrrolidine hybrid heterocycles. J King Saud Univ Sci, 2020, 32, 2500–2504.
[43] Babu ARS, Gavaskar D, Raghunathan R An expedient ultrasonic assisted one-pot four component
synthesis of novel ferrocene grafted pyrrolidine heterocycles via [3+2]-cycloaddition of azomethine
ylides. J Organomet Chem, 2013, 745–746, 409–416.
[44] Babu ARS, Gavaskar D, Raghunathan R A facile synthesis of novel ferrocene grafted spiro￾indenoquinoxaline pyrrolizidines via one-pot multicomponent [3+2] cycloaddition of azomethine
ylides. Tetrahedron Lett, 2012, 53, 6676–6681.
[45] Gavaskar D, Raghunathan R, Babu ARS, Dharani M, Balasubramanian S Ionic liquid accelerated
multicomponent sequential assembly of ferrocene grafted spiro-heterocycles. J Organomet Chem,
2014, 768, 128–135.
[46] Gavaskar D, Raghunathan R, Babu ARS, Dharani M, Balasubramanian S An expedient sequential
one-pot four component synthesis of novel steroidal spiro-pyrrolidine heterocycles in ionic liquid.
Steroids, 2016, 109, 1–6.
[47] Babu ARS, Raghunathan R Heteropolyacid–silica mediated [3+2] cycloaddition of azomethine
ylides – a facile multicomponent one-pot synthesis of novel dispiroheterocycles. Tetrahedron Lett,
2006, 47, 9221–9225.
218 Bubun Banerjee et al.[48] Rajesh SM, Bala BD, Perumal S Multi-component, 1 3,dipolar cycloaddition reactions for the chemo-,
regio- and stereoselective synthesis of novel hybrid spiroheterocycles in ionic liquid. Tetrahedron
Lett, 2012, 53, 5367–5371.
[49] Malathi K, Kanchithalaivan S, Kumar RR, Almansour AI, Kumar RS, Arumugam N Multicomponent [3
+2] cycloaddition strategy: Stereoselective synthesis of novel polycyclic cage-like systems and
dispiro compounds. Tetrahedron Lett, 2015, 56, 6132–6135.
[50] Arumugam N, Almansoura AI, Kumar RS, Kotresha D, Saiswaroop R, Venketesh S Dispiropyrrolidinyl￾piperidone embedded indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline heterocyclic hybrids: Synthesis, cholinesterase
inhibitory activity and their molecular docking simulation. Bioorg Med Chem, 2019, 27, 2621–2628.
[51] Almansour AI, Arumugam N, Kumar RS, Al-thamili DM, Periyasami G, Ponmurugan K, Al-Dhabi NA,
Perumal K, Premnath D Domino multicomponent approach for the synthesis of functionalized spiro￾indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline heterocyclic hybrids and their antimicrobial activity, synergistic effect and
molecular docking simulation. Molecules, 2019, 24, 1962.
[52] Babu ARS, Raghunathan R Regioselective synthesis of novel dispiro-oxindoloindenoquinoxaline
pyrrolidines through 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition methodology. Synth Commun, 2008, 38, 1433–1438.
[53] Maryamabadi A, Hasaninejad A, Nowrouzi N, Mohebbi G Green synthesis of novel spiro￾indenoquinoxaline derivatives and their cholinesterases inhibition activity. Bioorg Med Chem, 2017,
25, 2057–2064.
[54] Rani MA, Kumar SV, Malathi K, Muthu M, Almansour AI, Kumar RS, Kumar RR A one-pot
multicomponent 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition strategy: Combinatorial synthesis of dihydrothiophenone￾engrafted dispiro hybrid heterocycles. ACS Comb Sci, 2017, 19, 308–314.
[55] Hasaninejad A, Golzar N, Shekouhy M, Zare A Diversity-oriented synthesis of novel 2'-aminospiro
[11H-indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-11,4'-[4H]pyran] derivatives via a one-pot four-component reaction.
Helv Chim Acta, 2011, 94, 2289–2294.
[56] Hasaninejad A, Golzar N, Zare A One-pot, four-component synthesis of novel spiro[indeno[2,1-b]
quinoxaline-11,4'-pyran]-2'-amines. J Heterocycl Chem, 2013, 50, 608–614.
[57] Hojati SF, Amiri A, Fardi E The application of copolymer-coated graphene oxide-Fe3O4 in the highly
efficient synthesis of 2'-aminospiro[indeno[1,2-b]quinoxaline-114'-[4>'H]pyran]-3'-carbonitrile and 2'-
aminospiro[indeno-2,4'-[4'H]pyran]-3'-carbonitrile. Appl Organomet Chem, 2020, 5604.
[58] Sabouri N, Mahdavinia GH, Notash B A synthesis of spirofuran-indenoquinoxalines via isocyanid￾based one-pot four-component reaction. Chin Chem Lett, 2016, 27, 1040–1043.
5 One-pot five/four-component synthesis of structurally 219Kantharaju Kamanna✶
, Radhika Mane,
Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamath
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically
active quinazolinone derivatives
6.1 Introduction
Heterocycles are cyclic organic compounds containing at least one heteroatom (N, O, S,
etc.) other than carbon in their ring skeleton [1, 2]. The nitrogen-containing heterocycles
are found to have highest share in pharmaceutical drugs, natural products, synthetic
compounds, veterinary, and agrochemicals [3]. Among them, quinazolinone heterocycle
containing nitrogen atom in the ring, derived from natural and synthetic sources
showed ubiquitous biological activity [4, 5]. Quinazolinone, obtained by the fusion of 2-
pyrimidinone with benzene ring, shows three isomeric forms, based on the presence of
the keto group, and are named quinazolin-4(3H)-one (I), quinazolin-2(1H)-one (II), and
quinazolin-2,4-(1H,3H)-dione (III), and quinazoline (IV). Among the natural and synthetic
sources, quinazolin-4(3H)-one (I) skeleton has emerged as an important scaffold and is
majorly found among other isomers. They are well documented in the pharmacological
and material science applications (Figure 6.1). Quinazolinone skeleton, containing mole￾cules, emerged as a promising heterocyclic scaffold and finds broad applications in the
area of pharmaceuticals, as depicted in Figure 6.2.
Figure 6.1: Different isomeric structures of quinazolinone.
✶
Corresponding author: Kantharaju Kamanna, Department of Chemistry, School of Basic Sciences,
Rani Channamma University, Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156, Karnataka,
e-mail: kk@rcub.ac.in
Radhika Mane, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Aravind Kamath, Department of Chemistry, School
of Basic Sciences, Rani Channamma University, Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156, Karnataka
Acknowledgments: Authors are thankful to UGC for the award of Major Research Project, VGST, Govt. of
Karnataka, for the SMYSR award, and RCUB-IRP-2022-23 for the financial support to KK.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-0066.2 Biological applications
Quinazolinone is regarded as a noteworthy starting material for the synthesis of numer￾ous derivatives with pharmacological importance. About 150 naturally occurring alka￾loids containing quinazolinone skeleton showed a wide spectrum of biological activities
[6], and have attracted great deal of interest owing, to their various important biological
properties [7]. The SAR studies reported in the literature find three sites affecting the
properties of the quinazoline derivatives: (i) pyrimidine ring conjugation, (ii) type of
substituents present, and (iii) existence of a substituent, either on the benzene ring or
on the pyrimidine ring. Due to its wide spectrum of application in pharmacological and
material science research, quinazolinone synthetic protocol has received tremendous
attention from organic chemists. The simple route encountered via MCRs of isatoic an￾hydride, combined with nitrogen nucleophile, gives a wide range of quinazolinone de￾rivatives [8]. Numerous quinazolinone derivatives have exceled as drug candidates for
various diseases treatment, such as doxazosin and prazosin employed in post-traumatic
stress disorder and prostatic hyperplasia treatment, and both gefitinib and erlotinib are
used in pancreatic and lung cancers treatment. Various quinazolinone-based drugs, like
Fenquizone, exhibit a broad spectrum of antitumor, cytotoxic, and antifungal activities.
Lapatinib displays effective anti-breast cancer activity in combination therapy. 2,3-
dihydroquinazolinone has received a lot of biological interest because of its range of
pharmacological properties, such as monoamine oxidase (MAO)-B inhibitor activity and
Figure 6.2: Pharmacological application of quinazolinone derivatives.
222 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.acetylcholinesterase (AChE) inhibitor activity [9], antitumor activity [10–12], antimicro￾bial activity [13–17], anti-inflammatory activity [18], anti-influenza activity [19], antioxi￾dant activity [20], anticonvulsant activity [21], antihypertensive activity [22], anti-obesity
activity [23], antipsychotic activity [24], antidiabetic activity [25], antimalarial activity
[26], antibacterial activity [27, 28], anticancer activity [29, 30], etc.
The first quinazolinone alkaloid (V) discovered was febrifuge, which could be ob￾tained from the Chinese plant asur (Dichroa febrifuga Lour), and showed antimalarial
properties (Figure 6.3) [31].
The quinazoline is structurally related to 2- and 4-quinazolinone isomers, which ex￾hibit chemical behavior similar to their pyrimidine counterpart. However, due to its
electrophilic nature, quinazoline is found to be more basic [32]. According to reports,
3,4-dihydroquinazolin-2(1H)-one derivatives and 3-substituted quinazolin-4(3H)-one
have a broad spectrum of antitumor action toward various cell types (Figure 6.4) [33].
A few quinazolinone Schiff bases (VIII–X) were synthesized, which showed antiviral
activities (Figure 6.4) [34]. Compounds (XI–XIII) are the quinazolinones extracted
from Luotonin a shrub, and are natural poisons, according to traditional Chinese med￾icine (Figure 6.4). Compound XI was initially isolated in 1997. It is currently used in
clinical trials as an anticancer agent and also shows moderate human topoisomerase￾I inhibitor activity (Figure 6.4) [35]. Bouchardatine, a 2-substituted quinazolinone alka￾loid 2-(piperazin-1-yl-methyl) exhibits strong anticancer action (XII, R = acetyl, pro￾pionyl) [36], and 2-substituted quinazolinone Bouchardatine alkaloid, derived from
Bouchardatia neurococca (Rutaceae), shows anticancer properties (XIII) [37].
Quinazolinone derivatives, such as spiro(2H,3H)-quinazoline-2,10-cyclohexan-4(1H)-
one (XIV, XV) shows strong anti-inflammatory and analgesic activities, with better GIT
safety (Figure 6.5) [38]. Hemalatha et al. [39] prepared 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one
(XVI), which is more effective drug than the diclofenac sodium, and prevents the dena￾turation of the bovine serum albumin (BSA) (Figure 6.5). Manivannan and Chatur￾vedi [40] synthesized a new quinazolinone derivative (XVII) and tested it for
cyclooxygenase inhibition using rat paw edema, induced by carrageenan and ovine
COX. The edema inhibition was observed to be 49 ± 1.16%, 45 ± 0.82%, 46 ± 1.36%, and 54
± 1.83%, using indomethacin as reference. The prepared compound demonstrated
strong anti-inflammatory action (Figure 6.5).
Figure 6.3: The natural derivative of quinazolinone found in
febrifugine.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 223El-Azab and Eltahir [41] synthesized a group of 2,3,8-trisubstituted-4(3H)-quinazolinone
derivatives (XVIII) and tested their ability to prevent electrically (MES) and chemically
(PTZ, picrotoxin, and strychnine) produced seizures. The results were compared with
two most commonly used anticonvulsants, methaqualone and sodium valproate (Fig￾ure 6.6). Researcher have described that for maximum electroshock-induced seizure,
Figure 6.4: Bioactive quinazolinone derivatives.
Figure 6.5: Quinazolinone derivatives with anti-inflammatory properties.
224 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.the subcutaneous pentylenetetrazol(6,8-diiodo-2-methyl-3-substituted-quinazolin-4(3H)-
one) analogues (XIX) exhibit good anticonvulsant action (Figure 6.6) [42]. Jatav et al.
[43] have reported novel 3-[5-substituted phenyl-1,3,4-thiadiazole-2-yl] compounds (XX
and XXI), which are variants of the 2-styryl quinazoline-4(3H)-one, show anticonvulsant
action in both MES and scPTZ test models (Figure 6.6).
Vani et al. [44] reported a number of conjugated quinazolin-4(3H)-one and triazole de￾rivatives (XXII–XXIV), and demonstrated their antimicrobial properties (Figure 6.7).
Zhu et al. [45] studied the effect of quinazolinones on malarial parasite Plasmodium
species causing malaria in many parts of the Asia, Africa, and South America. The ma￾jority of the available antimalarial drugs are no longer effective against these para￾sites, due to drug resistance and mutation. Hence, researchers are encouraged to
create new antimalarial-containing quinazolinone skeletons that show high antima￾larial potency and fewer side effects.
Febrifugine (XXV) was extracted from Dichroa febrifuga, a Chinese traditional herb
(Figure 6.8), and in vivo animal studies showed 50–100 times potent antimalarial effects.
In 2015, Birhan et al. [46] reported synthetic Febrifugine analogues WR090212(XXVI) as
potent antimalarial agents (Figure 6.8), and synthesized 3-aryl-2-(substituted styryl)-4
(3H)-quinazolinone derivative (XXVII), which also showed potent antimalarial activity
(Figure 6.8).
Figure 6.6: Anticonvulsant activity of substituted quinazolinone derivatives.
Figure 6.7: Antimicrobial activity of quinazolin-4(3H)-one-triazole hybrids.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 2256.3 Chemical synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives
He et al. [47] reported the first synthesis of quinozolinone by Niementowski, and
named it as Niementowski quinazolinone synthesis. The most popular technique used
for making 4(3H)-quinazolinone (3), based on the Niementowski reaction, involved
fusing anthranilic acid (1) analogues with amides (2) at 130–150 °C before going via an
o-amidobenzamide intermediate (I) (Figure 6.9).
Song et al. [48] described that a one-pot, three-component condensation of isatoic an￾hydride (7), aryl aldehyde (4), and ammonium compounds (6) or primary amine (8)
gave a variety of mono- and di-substituted 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one (3), respec￾tively in the presence of methane sulfonated aluminum in ethanol–water system. The
author claimed that the method allowed isolation of an excellent product; it was a
simple operation and enabled recycling of the catalysts several times (Figure 6.10).
In 2018, Ziarani et al. [49] reported the synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives (3)
catalyzed by sulfonic acid and functionalized by mesoporous silica (SBA-Pr-SO3H) in a
one-pot three-component reaction with aromatic aldehyde (4), isatoic anhydride (7),
and urea (5) (Figure 6.11). The authors noticed that the synthetic route is simple, iso￾lated an excellent yield, and the catalysts could be recycled many times, which are the
benefits of this reported method.
Dabiri et al. [50] in 2010 reported the production of 4(3-substituted)-quinazolinone
using the three-components reaction in a single pot, starting with simple reactants
available in the market in the presence of molecular iodine catalyzed reaction of isatoic
Figure 6.9: Niementowski reaction of quinazolinone synthesis: (a) MW (60 W), 20 min and (b) 130–150 °C,
6 h.
Figure 6.8: Natural extract containing quinazolinone antimalarial agents.
226 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.anhydride (7) with either ammonium acetate (6) or primary amine (8), and aryl alde￾hyde (4), and isolated an excellent yield of C2- and N3-substituted quinazolinone deriva￾tives (Figure 6.12).
Wang et al. [51], in 2011, reported a condensation reaction of isatoic anhydride (7) and
aldehyde (4) with ammonium salts (6) or primary amine (8) in the presence of stron￾tium chloride in aqueous ethanol under reflux condition. A broad variety of mono￾and di-substituted 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one (3) was produced in high yield.
When compared to conventional synthesis, one-pot three-component reaction is an
appealing and atom-efficient technique to build the DHQ framework. A plausible
mechanism for the production of quinazolinone (3) via three-component reaction is
Figure 6.11: Synthesis of 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one.
Figure 6.10: Synthesis of mono/disubstituted 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one.
Figure 6.12: One-pot three-component route to 4(3H)-quinazolinone synthesis.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 227depicted in Figure 6.13. The catalyst first activates isatoic anhydride (7). Then, the amine
group attacks the carbonyl through nucleophile to give the intermediate (I). Next, decar￾boxylation takes place, producing 2-amino-N-substituted benzamide (II). The catalyst sig￾nificantly contributes to increase in the electrophilic nature of the aldehyde (4) by acting
as a Lewis acid. Activated aldehyde then reacts with II to give the intermediate III, which
undergoes an intramolecular cyclization, resulting in product IV, and it undergoes 1,5-
proton transfer to give substituted 2,3-dihydro-4(1H)-quinazolinone derivative (3).
Brown et al. [52] in 2018 reported the synthesis of the corresponding quinazolinone deriv￾atives by the reaction of isatoic anhydride (7), primary amine (8), and aldehyde (4), cata￾lyzed by CSA/DMSO or CSA/ethanol to give 2- and 3-substituted quinazolinone analogues.
The authors demonstrated the mechanistic pathways of quinazolinone involved in the
inhibition of Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoite reproduction in an established infection. Two
of the quinazolinones were found to be potent (IC50 = 6–7 mM) against T. gondii tachy￾zoites of the apicomplexan parasite inhibition (Figure 6.14).
Mehta et al. [53] reported L-proline-catalyzed MCRs to create a new series of quinazo￾lin-4(3H)-one (10) derivative, containing 1,3-diphenyl-1H-pyrazol-4-yl core substituent at
the 2-position, and aromatic or heteroaromatic substituents at the 3-position by a one-pot
reaction of aromatic amine (8), isatoic anhydride (7), and 1-phenyl-3-aryl-1H-pyrazole-4-
carbaldehyde (9). Further, the authors screened the synthesized derivatives for their anti￾bacterial, antifungal, and antitubercular activities. According to the results of the SAR in￾Figure 6.13: Plausible mechanism for the formation of DHQs.
228 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.vestigation, it was noticed that the potency was significantly impacted by the substitution
at the phenyl ring, next to the pyrazole ring (Figure 6.15). Chen et al. [54] published a one￾pot three-component condensation reaction of isatoic anhydride (7), aromatic aldehyde
(4), and amine (8), catalyzed by dodecyl benzenesulfonic acid (DBSA) under ultrasound
irradiation. This process produced 2,3-disubstituted-2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one de￾rivatives (3) in 80–92% yields at 40–42 °C in 1–2 h aqueous medium. The authors claimed
that the method used a gentle reaction condition, avoided organic solvent, isolated a high
yield, and was environmentally friendly (Figure 6.15). Lobo et al. [55] reported acid￾catalyzed MCRs of isatoic anhydride (7), aldehyde (4), and aromatic amines (8) in metha￾nol gave quinazolin-4(1H)-one derivative (3). The authors claimed that the catalyst pro￾duced a better outcome of the product than several other reported catalysts. The authors
claimed that the benefit of the catalysts were a deep eutectic inexpensive mixture of cho￾line chloride and malonic acid, and recyclable, nontoxic, and biodegradable catalysts.
Further, by this method, phenyl and heterocyclic substitution were effectively incorpo￾rated at 2,3-position of the quinazolinone (3). Zhang et al. [56] demonstrated the CeO2
nanoparticle-catalyzed MCRs of quinazolinone derivatives by the reaction of isatoic anhy￾dride (7), benzaldehyde (4), and benzhydrazide (11). Further, the authors studied the
minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) used to investigate antifungal activity by quina￾zolinone derivatives, bearing acylamino motif against four phytopathogenic fungi (12)
and showed dramatic impacts of the substituents on the antifungal activity. The possible
antifungal mechanism of quinazolinone derivative as chitinase inhibitors was confirmed
and the significance of the amide moiety was investigated. As a result, the presence of
OH, 3-OCH3, 4-OH, 4-CH (CH3)2, 4N(CH3)2, styryl, 4-CHO, and iPr group sensitivity against
P. capsici, C. gloeosporioides, and V. mali increased, but the activity against pyrimidine
ring decreased. Notably, the addition of the hydroxy group and the 3-OCH3, 4-OH substit￾uent had significantly increased the efficacy against P. capsici. The addition of 4-OCH3,
4-CHO, 3-pyridyl, and styryl also significantly improved the effectiveness against the R1
ring. Similar incidents involving the insertion of styryl or CH(CH3)3 to the fourth site on
the ring R1 was reported against V. mali, and the authors also established docking studies
(Figure 6.15). In 2021, Tamilselvi et al. [57] reported synthesis of new series of 2-(1H-indol
-3-yl)-3-phenylquinazolin-4(3H)-ones (14) in methanol, catalyzed by p-TSA under reflux
condition via condensation of isatoic anhydride (7), indole-3-carboxaldehyde (13), and
amine (8). The Authors explained that the benefits of the approach include ease of the
reaction set up, good yield, faster reaction rate, inexpensive, and not requiring any chro￾Figure 6.14: MCRs of quinazolin-4(1H)-one derivative synthesis.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 229matographic purification (Figure 6.15). Desai et al. [58] introduced a low transition tem￾perature catalytic mixture (LTTM) made of SnCl2 and L-proline. The direct one-pot
three-component cyclocondensation of isatoic anhydride (7), ammonium acetate (6),
and aldehyde (4) gave 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one (3) product isolation. The au￾thors claimed that the prepared LTTM is inexpensive, green solvent, nontoxic, offered a
high yield, and is recyclable (Figure 6.15). Maleki et al. [59] described an environment
friendly magnetic silica-based nanocomposite (Fe3O4/SBA-15)-catalyzed three-component
reaction of isotoic anhydride (7), amine derivative (8) or ammonium acetate (6),
and aldehyde (4), which gave the title product (3) (Figure 6.15). Kumari et al. [60]
reported in 2012 the L-proline-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4
(1H)-one (3), employing isatoic anhydride (7), ammonium acetate (6), and various
substituted aldehydes (4), to give excellent product (3) isolation under mild reaction
conditions (Figure 6.15). Shaterian et al. [61] described a three-component cyclocon￾densation of isatoic anhydride (7), primary amine (8) or ammonium salts (6), and
aldehyde (4)-catalyzed Al(H2PO4)3. The authors claimed that the method developed
used an efficient, affordable, solvent-free, and heterogeneous reaction to produce
the corresponding quinazolinone derivatives (3) in excellent yields. This solid acidic
catalyst could be easily recycled for at least three cycles without losing any reported
activity (Figure 6.15).
Another well documented and most frequently used synthetic route to make
DHQs is employing anthranilamide (5) and an aldehyde(4) derivative via cycloconden￾sation to give the title product. Selected recent protocols are: Zhang et al. [62] de￾scribed that the reaction of 2-aminobenzamide (5) and 4ʹ-bromoacetophenone (15) in the
presence of molecular iodine in tetrahydrofuran solvent at 323 K for 6 h gave the title
product in excellent yield. The authors also reported that a solid structure of the com￾pound 2-(4-bromophenyl)-2-methyl-2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one (17) in slowly evapo￾rating DMF solution resulted in a crystal appropriate for X-ray diffraction (Figure 6.16).
Watson et al. [63] in 2011 described the successful employment of ruthenium￾catalyzed hydrogen transfer reaction to convert alcohols (18) and anthranilamide (5)
into 2,3-dihydroquinazolinone (3) (Figure 6.16). Narasimhamurthy et al. [64] reported
that the reaction of 2-aminobenzamide (5) with gem-dibromomethylarene (19) in the
presence of t-BuOK and pyridine-DMF reflux condition gave 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4
(1H)-one (3) (Figure 6.16). Obaiah et al. [65] described cyclocondensation of 2-amino ben￾zamide (5) with an aldehyde (4), which yielded 2,3-dihydroquinazoline-4(1H)-one (3) in
basic ionic liquid. Desai et al. [58] reported a one-pot two-component cyclocondensation
of anthranilamide (5) and substituted aldehyde (4) in the presence of low transition
temperature mixture (LTTM, SnCl2, and L-proline) to give 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-
ones (3) in high yield (Figure 6.16). Zhang et al. [66] described microwave-assisted iron￾catalyzed cyclization with or without ligand in water (methods A and B) or DMF offered
a faster, efficient, and environmentally friendly way to make quinazolinone deriva￾tives from substituted 2-halobenzoic acids (21) and amidines (20). The authors claimed
that this was the first report on the iron-catalyzed C–N coupling role in the synthesis of
230 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.N-heterocyclic compounds in aqueous condition, which gave moderate to high yield of
the desired products (Figure 6.16).
Starting with nitro derivatives, Dou et al. [67] reported facile synthesis of a series
of quinazolinone derivatives, such as imidazole[1,2-c]quinazolin-5-amine (25), benz￾imidazole[1,2-c]quinazolin-5-amine (27) and 2-thioxoquinazolinones (29). The reaction
involved a crucial cyclization process catalyzed by TiCl4/Zn via the reaction of 2-(2-
nitrophenyl) benzimidazole (26) and isothiocyanate (22) in anhydrous THF, leading to
moderate to good yields of benzimidazo[1,2-c] quinazolin-5-amine (27). The reaction
of (23) and 2-(2-nitrophenyl)-imidazole (24) under the same optimized reaction condi￾tions gave imidazole[1,2-c]quinazolin-5-amine (25), and the reaction of N-(3-chloro-4-
methylphenyl)-2-nitrobenzamide (28) and (p-methyl)phenyl isothiocyanate (23) gave
2-thioxoquinazolinone (29) in the presence of titanium catalyst at 60 °C (Figure 6.17).
Murthy et al. [68] in 2016 reported a straightforward procedure for the synthesis
of tetracyclic quinazolinone derivatives (31) from isatoic anhydride (7), amine (8),
and ninhydrin (30) in dioxane in the presence of a mineral acid at 90–100 °C
(Figure 6.18).
Figure 6.15: MCRs of quinazolinone derivative synthesis by various catalysts.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 231Puligoundla et al. [69] reported the synthesis of numerous quinazolinone derivatives,
such as 3,3-dimethyl-12-phenyl-3,4,5,12-tetrahydrobenzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b] quinazolin-1
(2H)-ones (34) or 3,3-dimethyl-12-phenyl-3,4,5,12-tetrahydrobenzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b]
quinazolin-1(2H)-ones (36) via the condensation reaction between aromatic aldehydes
(4), dimedone (33), and 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole (32) or 2-aminobenzimidazole (35), re￾spectively under reflux conditions in the presence of 10 mol% molecular iodine in ace￾tonitrile (Figure 6.19).
Gajaganti et al. [70] described a solvent-free method for the synthesis of benzimida￾zolo/benzothiazolo quinazolinone derivatives (39) by the one-pot reaction of 2-aminoben￾zimidazole/2-aminobenzothiazole (37), aromatic aldehyde (4), and 1,3-diketone (38)-
catalyzed scandium triflate under microwave irradiation. The authors claimed the proto￾col offers many advantages, including excellent yield isolation, faster reaction time, and
simple method, and was environmentally friendly (Figure 6.20).
Hakimelahi and Mousazadeh [71] reported the direct application of zinc oxide
nanotube as a recyclable catalyst for the condensation of isatoic anhydride (7), ammo￾nium acetate (6), and aryl aldehyde (4) to give 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one deriv￾Figure 6.16: Synthesis of DHQ using anthranilamide and another substrate.
232 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.atives (3). The authors claimed the advantages of this method to be simple, recycling
of the catalyst, efficient and straightforward procedure to isolate unbeatable yields of
the 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one derivatives (Figure 6.21).
Figure 6.17: Synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives.
Figure 6.18: Fused quinazoline-based tetracyclic compound synthesis.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 233Figure 6.19: One-pot synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives, 34 and 36.
Figure 6.20: Synthesis of benzimidazolo/benzothiazolo quinazolinone.
Figure 6.21: MCRs of ZnO nanotube-catalyzed reaction.
234 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.Mousavi and Maghsoodlou [72] reported the one-pot cyclocondensation of aromatic al￾dehyde (4) and dimedone (33) with 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole (32) or 2-aminobenzimidazole
(34) in the presence of nano-SiO2 in acetonitrile at room temperature to give a high
yield of the product (34 & 36). The authors highlighted that the nano-SiO2 employed in
this process is reusable and environmentally friendly, and the reaction is easy to set up
(Figure 6.22).
Liu et al. [73] reported the reaction of substituted isatin (40) and 2-bromopyridine de￾rivative (37) enabled faster formation of the 1H-pyrido[2,1-b]quinazolin-11-one (41)-
catalyzed Cu(OAc)2·H2O at high temperature. Further, the authors employed the same
condition for the reaction of 2-amino-5-methylbenzoic acid (38) with 2-bromopyridine
derivative (37) to give pyrido-fused quinazolinone derivative (39) and noticed that
one-pot C–N/C–C bond cleavage and two C–N bond construction take place in the con￾struction of the molecule (Figure 6.23).
Elkholy et al. [74] studied the reaction of 2-(6-iodo-4-oxo-4H-benzo[d][1,3]oxazin-2-yl)
benzoic acid (43) with an organic base such as p-aminoacetophenone (44), p-anisidine
(46), glycine (48), and hydrazine hydrate (50) at 65 °C for 15 min to give four quinazoli￾none derivatives (45, 47, 49, and 51). The authors confirmed these derivatives by spectro￾scopic analysis and studied the application to enhance the resistance of lubricating oils to
wear and oil oxidation. Lubricating oils are crucial for preserving the overall perfor￾mance of the automobile industries and ensuring smooth operation of engine compo￾nents. Such oils consist of a base oil made primarily from crude oil and certain boosting
Figure 6.22: NanoSiO2-catalyzed triazoloquinazolinone and benzimidazoquinazolinone derivatives.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 235additives, including antioxidants and wear additives. The authors further elucidated
the tribological and antioxidation performance of the developed compounds by mo￾lecular dynamic simulations to mimic the adsorption orientations of these com￾pounds (Figure 6.24).
Figure 6.24: Synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives for oil antioxidation agents.
Figure 6.23: Pyrido-fused quinazolinone derivative synthesis.
236 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.Angulwar et al. [75] demonstrated an efficient synthesis of thiadiazolo[2,3-b]quinazoli￾none derivatives in a single-pot reaction of 5-aryl-1,3,4-thiadiazolo-2amine (52), dime￾done (33), and substituted aromatic aldehyde (4) in the presence of molecular iodine
(10 mol%). The authors claimed that the protocol is simple to operate and isolated ex￾cellent yield. Further, the authors tested the antibacterial activity of these derivatives
and showed a comparable activity (Figure 6.25).
Lan et al. [76] described the functionalized quinazolinone derivatives (55, 56, and 57)
through tandem hydrolysis, decarboxylation, cyclization, and transesterification reac￾tion with a variety of 2-aminobenzamide (5) and dicarbonyl compounds (54) to achieve
a new biocatalyzed technique. The authors claimed strong catalytic activity, excellent
yields, exceptional chemoselectivity, and wide range of substrate tolerance by this
method. Most importantly, it provides fresh illustration of easy, practical, and sustain￾able synthetic techniques using enzyme catalysis in organic synthesis (Figure 6.26).
Dige et al. [77] in 2019 reported the synthesis of new 4-oxoquinazolin-3(4H)-yl)
furan-2-carboxamide derivatives (59) by the reaction of isatoic anhydride (7), 2-furoic
hydrazide (58), and substituted salicylaldehyde (4) in ethanol–water (5:5 v/v) solvent
system using p-TSA as a catalyst, under ultrasound irradiation at room temperature.
The authors explained that the use of ultrasound enables an easy and straightforward
reaction to be carried out at room temperature, and that it isolated high yield of the
oxoquinazolin-3(4H)-yl) furan-2-carboxamide (59). The authors tested synthesized
compounds against tyrosinase enzyme, and all of them showed powerful inhibitors,
with IC50 being lower than the reference kojic acid (16.832–1.162 M) of 0.028–0.016 to
1.775–0.947 M. Lineweaver-Burk plots were used to study the kinetics of the com￾pound and results showed that the compound inhibited tyrosinase non-competitively
by forming an enzyme-inhibitor complex. Additionally, the capacity of the derivative
(59) to scavenge DPPH-free radicals was examined by both in vitro and in silico analy￾sis, which are consistent with one another, with the ligands posing an acceptable
binding energy (kcal/mol) (Figure 6.27).
Hassankhani [78] in 2018 reported the synthesis of 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one
derivative (3), employing improved MCRs under solvent-free reaction of isatoic anhy￾dride (4), aromatic aldehyde (2), and ammonium acetate (5) in SnCl2 dihydrate at 110 °C.
The authors claimed this method has a number of benefits, including being inexpensive,
Figure 6.25: MCRs of thiadiazolo[2,3-b]quinazoline-6-(7H)-one synthesis.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 237simple, created a mild reaction condition, showed a faster reaction rate, offered excel￾lent yields, and resulted in a wide range of substituted products (Figure 6.28).
Ziarani et al. [79] in 2017 demonstrated a simple sol–gel autocombustion, created
by nanomagnetic SrFe12O19, and examined various techniques for its characterization.
Further, the authors demonstrated catalytic activity, used the modified Niementowski
reaction for the first time, and showed an efficient and environmentally friendly reac￾tion, with an excellent yield of quinazolinone product (60) isolation by the reaction of
isotoic anhydride (7), phenylhydrazine (11) and 2-nitrobenzaldehyde (4). The authors
reported that by using an external magnet, the nanomagnetic catalyst was separated
Figure 6.27: Synthesis of new 4-oxoquinazolin-3(4H)-yl) furan-2-carboxamides.
Figure 6.26: Enzymatic route for producing functionalized quinazolinone derivatives.
238 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.from the reaction mixture and the catalysts were reusable; these are the noticeable
benefits of this method (Figure 6.29).
Tajbakhsh et al. [80] in 2013 reported a one-pot three-component reaction of isatoic
anhydride (7), cyclic ketone (62), and hydrazide (61) in the presence of a catalytic
quantity (20 mol%) of H3PO3 in ethanol, and isolated numerous spiroquinazolinone
derivatives (63). The authors claimed the benefits of the protocol include mild reac￾tion condition, high atom economy, operational simplicity, and isolation in excellent
yield (Figure 6.30).
Chate et al. [81] in 2019 reported a facile and efficient one-pot preparation of spiro oxin￾dole dihydro quinazolinone derivatives, 3ʹ-phenyl-1ʹH-spiro[indoline-3,2ʹ-quinazoline]-
2,4ʹ(3ʹH)-diones (64) and N-(4-oxo-2-phenyl-1,2-dihydroquinazolin-3(4H)-yl)isonicotina￾mide derivatives (66) by the reaction of isatoic anhydride (7), isoniazid (65), and isatine
(40) or substituted aldehyde (4), catalyzed by 2-aminoethanesulfonic acid (taurine). The
authors claimed that the benefits of this organocatalyzed reaction were that it gives ex￾Figure 6.28: Preparation of 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-ones.
Figure 6.29: Nanomagnetic-catalyzed quinazolinone derivative synthesis.
Figure 6.30: Preparation of spiroquinazolines.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 239cellent yield, is easy to operate, and is environmental friendly. Water serves as an en￾vironmentally friendly solvent, nontoxic catalysts can be reused effectively, and the
final product does not require column chromatographic purification – these are the
noteworthy features noticed by the authors (Figure 6.31).
Palaniraja and Roopan [82] in 2015 reported the synthesis of some unknown imida￾zolo-quninazolinone derivatives (69) via MCRs of 2-fluorobenzonitrile (67) and hydra￾zine (50) refluxed for 30 min in ethanol, followed by the addition of benzaldehyde
(4), and diketone (68) in the presence of iodine (20% in acetonitrile), to isolate
7-phenyl-7,9,10,11-tetrahydroindazolo[3,2-b]quinazolin-8(5H)-one (69) (Figure 6.32).
Figure 6.31: Synthesis of spirooxindole dihydroquinazolinone derivatives.
Figure 6.32: Iodine-catalyzed indazolo-quinazolinone synthesis.
240 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.Giri et al. [83] in 2010 described small library of 2-thiazole-5-yl-3H-quinazolin-4-one
derivatives (75) by the reaction of thiourea derivative (71) with an appropriate
2-chloromethyl-3-aryl-3H-quinazolin-4-one (70) in acetonitrile, agitated at 75–80 °C.
The authors created small-molecule multipathway inhibitors that could be used to
treat cancerous condition, factors known to play a crucial role in the onset and de￾velopment of cancer. The synthetic compounds were tested as inhibitors of NF-kB
and AP-1-mediated transcriptional activation and eIF-4E-mediated translational acti￾vation. The study findings point to the 2-thiazole-5-yl-3H-quinazolin-4-one (75) scaf￾fold as a useful building block for the development of new multi-pathway inhibitors
that can be tested as anticancer drugs (Figure 6.33).
Sawant et al. [84] in 2012 produced the crucially important purine quinazolinone scaf￾fold (81 and 82) using a multicomponent microwave-assisted one-pot synthetic method.
At 0 °C, the reaction between 2-chloroacetyl chloride (77) and 6-methyl-2-amino benzoic
acid (76) produced 2-(2-chloroacetamido)-6-methylbenzoic acid as a crystalline product
(78). To this, 2-methyl aniline (79) was added, in the presence of PCl3 as a cyclizing
agent, to create an intermediate product, 2-(chloromethyl)-5-methyl-3-o-tolylquinazolin￾4(3H)-one (80). Finally, this intermediate (80) was condensed with adenine in basic con￾dition under MWI to isolate the target products. The authors compared these deriva￾tives with structural analogues of the PI3K-d inhibitors, IC-87114 and CAL-101, which are
being tested in clinical trials for chronic lymphocytic leukemia (Figure 6.34).
Bakhshali-Dehkordi et al. [85] in 2020 reported one-pot multicomponent reactions
of 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole or 2-aminobenzimidazole (32), dimedone (33), and aromatic
aldehyde (4) in the presence of TiO2@ILs as an effective nanocatalyst, and isolated
Figure 6.33: Synthesis of 2-thiazole-5-yl-3H-quinazolin-4-one derivatives with mechanism.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 2413,3-dimethyl-12-phenyl-3,4,5,12-tetrahydrobenzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b] quinazolin-1(2H)-
ones (34) and 3-dimethyl-12-phenyl-3,4,5,12-tetrahydrobenzo[4,5]imidazo[2,1-b] quina￾zolin-1(2H)-ones (36). Additionally, beetroot juice extract was used to make the TiO2
NPs, and they were functionalized utilizing ILs, based on imidazole. Additionally, this
ionic liquid demonstrated its potential as a reliable nanocatalyst activator and protec￾tor (Figure 6.35).
Figure 6.35: Nano-TiO2@IL-catalyzed synthesis of triazoloquinazolinone and benzimidazoquinazolinone
derivatives.
Figure 6.34: Microwave irradiation synthesis of purine quinazolinone derivatives.
242 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.Kumar et al. [86] in 2023 demonstrated the efficient synthesis of substituted quinazoli￾none and spiroquinazolinone heterocycles via mixed surfactant-mediated organocata￾lyzed (L-proline) method by the reaction of isatin (40) and aldehyde (4) with aniline
(8) and isatoicanhydride (7). The authors claimed that the procedure developed is ex￾tremely efficient and environmentally benign, with water as a medium, room temper￾ature reaction, high yield, and simplicity of purification (Figure 6.36).
Xu et al. [87] in 2022 described Ugi four-component reaction (Ugi-4CR)-based protocols
used to quickly synthesize various substituted polycyclic quinazolinones. The first
protocol involved an ammonia-Ugi-4CR, followed by a palladium-catalyzed annula￾tion. The second method involved a novel use of cyanimide as an amine component
in Ugi-4CR and an AIBN/tributyltin hydride-induced radical reaction in MeOH/H2O
(3:1) at room temperature for 12 h. The reactions of 2-bromobenzoic acid (84) or ben￾zoic acid (88), 2-cyanobenzaldehyde (83) or 2-idobenzaldehyde (89), cyclohexyl iso￾cyanide (86), and NH4Cl (85) gave the product (87) (Figure 6.37).
Figure 6.37: Synthesis of polycyclic quinazolinones.
Figure 6.36: MCRs of quinazolinone (3) and spiroquinazolinone (64) synthesis.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 243Dawoud [88] in 2012 reported the synthesis of 8-(substituted arylidene)-4-(substi￾tuted phenyl) quinazoline-2-(1H)-one (92) using a Biginelli one-pot three-component
reaction of cyclohexanone (90), aromatic/or heterocyclic aldehyde (4), and urea or thio￾urea or guanidine HCl (91) under MWI. The authors claimed that the method developed
has operational simplicity, faster reaction rate, and environmental friendliness as the
benefits (Figure 6.38).
Zeydi and Ghorbani [89] in 2020 reported the solvent-free reaction of 2-aminobenzi￾midazole (35), benzaldehydes (4), and dimedone (33) catalyzed by γ-Fe2O3@KSF
gave tetrahydrobenzimidazo[2,1-b]quinazolin-1(2H)-one (36). The authors prepared
a magnetic catalyst by covering a γ-Fe2O3 layer on a KSF core, and demonstrated appli￾cation in tetrahydrobenzimidazo[2,1-b]quinazolin-1(2H)-one synthesis, and isolated 94%
yield. The authors claimed that the benefits of this method were solvent-free reaction,
faster reaction rate, excellent yield, and reuse of catalysts using an external magnet
four times, without seeing a significant decrease in activity (Figure 6.39).
Beerappa et al. [90] reported via cascade oxidation, Knoevenagel condensation, and
Michael addition, followed by cyclization and dehydration, a highly efficient one-pot
method to create triazolo/benzimidazolo quinazolinone (95) in the presence of tri￾methyl amine N-oxide in ethanol by readily accessible benzyl halide (94), 2-amino
benzimidazole/3-amino-1,2,4-triazole (35), and 1,3-dicarbonyl compound (93). The au￾thor claimed that this is the first instance of the direct synthesis of triazolo/benzimida￾zolo quinazolinone (95) from benzyl halide (94) in a single pot. The appealing aspects
Figure 6.38: Synthesis of quinazolin-2(1H)-one derivative.
Figure 6.39: Tetrahydrobenzimidazo[2,1-b]quinazolin-1(2H)-one synthesis.
244 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.of this approach are its straightforward process, environmental friendliness, mild re￾action condition, and good yield (Figure 6.40).
Rai et al. [91] reported the reaction of 2-(2-halophenyl)benzaimidazole (96), aldehyde
(4), and sodium azide (97) as nitrogen source in the presence of copper-mediated aer￾obic oxidative multicomponent synthesis of benzimidazo[1,2-c]quinazoline (98). The
authors noticed that in this protocol three C–N bonds are formed by first azidating
haloaryl with sodium azide and then converting azide in-situ into arylamine. It was
then condensed with benzaldehyde and subjected to oxidative cyclization to give ben￾zimidazo[1,2-c]quinazoline in excellent yield (Figure 6.41).
Potuganti et al. [92] reported starting with 2-(2-bromophenyl)quinazolin-4(3H)-one
(99), aryl aldehyde (4) and different nitrogen sources (97 or 100) under aerobic con￾ditions in one-pot isolated quinazolino[4,3-b]quinazoline derivatives (101). The au￾thors explained that the mechanistic amination of 2-(2-bromophenyl)quinazolin-4(3H)-
one condensation with the aldehyde and oxidative cyclization, mediated by copper(I)
salt, produced the target product in good yield (Figure 6.42).
Figure 6.40: Synthesis of [1,2,4]triazolo/benzimidazolo quinazolinone.
Figure 6.41: MCRs of benzimidazo-fused quinazoline synthesis.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 2456.4 Conclusion
Quinazolinone is a privileged skeleton extensively found in various pharmacological
applications. The scaffold is capable of binding with high affinity at multiple sites on
the target site, which facilitates more rapid discovery of medicinally active quinazoli￾none derivatives. Hydrochloride salts of prazosin, alfuzosine, and terazosine, and dox￾azosine mesylate-containing quinazolinone are medically approved drugs in the
market. Erlotinib and Gefitinib (Iressa®) are derivatives of quinazolinone available in
the market as anticancer agents. Researcher reported SARs studies of quinazolinone
ring substituents at positions 2 and 3, existence of halogen atom at 6 and 8 positions,
and substituents mainly amine or substituted amines at the fourth position which can
improve antimicrobial activities. Also, the presence of substituted aromatic ring at po￾sition 3 and methyl or thiol group at position 2 are essential for antimicrobial activi￾ties. The examples provided above illustrate how innovative synthetic techniques
such as MCRs and microwave-assisted synthesis are constantly being developed and
are employed to create various quinazolinone analogues. A variety of quinazolinone
derivatives showed promising cytotoxic activity of cell lines such as HT29, and HeLa,
L1210. Across the globe, numerous research groups have proposed anticancer mecha￾nistic pathways by quinazolinone derivatives, which include: (1) inhibition of EGFR,
(2), DNA repair enzyme inhibition system, (3) tubulin polymerase inhibitory effects,
and (4) thymidylate enzyme inhibition. There is strong hope in the future investiga￾tion of quinazolinone-conjugated bioactive molecules and other modifications to yield
some more encouraging results in the field of medicinal chemistry. Researchers have
revealed numerous examples of various substituents at different positions having dif￾ferent activities. The different structural alterations surrounding the fused ring of qui￾nazolinone are then assessed for their applicability in the management of various
disease conditions. Since quinazolinone is the pharmacophore’s main structural com￾ponent, it can accommodate various substituents. It has a wide range of therapeutic
efficacy, based on its different physicochemical properties. Therefore, this skeleton
has promising scope in pharmaceutical, clinical research, and diagnostic treatments,
in the present and in the future. This chapter has focused on the recent MCRs devel￾oped on quinazolinone derivatives. Around 35 schemes reported by researchers
Figure 6.42: Multicomponent synthesis of tetracyclic quinazolino[4,3-b]quinazolines.
246 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.across the globe are discussed and the importance of quinazolinone skeleton towards
pharmacological and other applications is outlined.
Abbreviations
% Percentage
℃ Degree Celsius
δ Delta
)))) Ultrasound
µL Microliter
µg Microgram
DES Deep eutectic solvents.
DHQ 2,3-Dihydroquinazolinone.
Fe3O4 Iron(III) oxide
DMSO Deuterated dimethyl sulfoxide
DPPH Diphenylpicrylhydrazyl
EtOH Ethanol
h Hour
MWI Microwave irradiation
min Minute
MTT (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide)
MCF Michigan Cancer Foundation
MCRs Multicomponent reactions
RT Room temperature
SAR Structure–activity relationship
scPTZ Subcutaneous pentylenetetrazole
TLC Thin-layer chromatography
Ts Tosyl
[Bmim]BF4 Butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate
[bmim]OH Butyl-3-methylimidazolium hydroxide
References
[1] Connolly DJ, Cusack D, O’Sullivan TP, Guiry PJ. Synthesis of quinazolinones and quinazolines.
Tetrahedron, 2005, 61(43), 10153–10202.
[2] Rajput R, Mishra AP. A review on biological activity of quinazolinones. Int J Pharm Sci, 2012, 4(2),
66–70.
[3] Kshirsagar UA. Recent developments in the chemistry of quinazolinone alkaloids. Org Biomol Chem,
13(36), 9336–9352.
[4] Gupta T, Rohilla A, Pathak A, Akhtar MJ, Haider MR, Yar MS. Current perspectives on quinazolines
with potent biological activities: A review. Synth Commun, 2018, 48(10), 1099–1127.
[5] Mphahlele MJ, Maluleka MM. Advances in metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions of halogenated
quinazolinones and their quinazoline derivatives. Molecules, 2014, 19(11), 17435–17463.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 247[6] Mishra S. Quinazolinone and quinazoline derivatives: Synthesis and biological application.
Quinazolinone Quinazoline Deriv, 2020, 10, 75–89.
[7] Karan R, Agarwal P, Sinha M, Mahato N. Recent advances on quinazoline derivatives: A potential
bioactive scaffold in medicinal chemistry. Chem Eng, 2021, 5(4), 73.
[8] Abbas SY, El-Bayouki KA, Basyouni WM. Utilization of isatoic anhydride in the syntheses of various
types of quinazoline and quinazolinone derivatives. Synth Commun, 2016, 46(12), 993–1035.
[9] Rehuman NA, Al‐Sehemi AG, Parambi DGT, Rangarajan TM, Nicolotti O, Kim H, Mathew B. Current
progress in quinazoline derivatives as acetylcholinesterase and monoamine oxidase inhibitors.
ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6(28), 7162–7182.
[10] Chandregowda V, Kush AK, Reddy GC. Synthesis and in vitro antitumor activities of novel
4-anilinoquinazoline derivatives. Euro J Med Chem, 2009, 44(7), 3046–3055.
[11] Al-Rashood ST, Aboldahab IA, Nagi MN, Abouzeid LA, Abdel-Aziz AA, Abdel-Hamide SG, Youssef KM,
Al-Obaid AM, El-Subbagh HI. Synthesis, dihydrofolate reductase inhibition, antitumor testing, and
molecular modeling study of some new 4 (3H)-quinazolinone analogs. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2006,
14(24), 8608–8621.
[12] Bondock S, Alqahtani S, Fouda AM. Convenient synthesis and antitumor evaluation of some new
9-ethyl-3-(hetaryl) carbazoles. Synth Commun, 2019, 49(17), 2188–2202.
[13] Patel PR, Joshi H, Shah U, Bapna M, Patel B. New generation of quinazolinone derivatives as potent
antimicrobial agents. Asia Pac J Health Sci, 2021, 8(2), 61–66.
[14] Rohini R, Reddy PM, Shanker K, Hu A, Ravinder V. Antimicrobial study of newly synthesized
6-substituted indolo [1, 2-c] quinazolines. Eur J Med Chem, 2010, 45(3), 1200–1205.
[15] Antipenko L, Karpenko A, Kovalenko S, Katsev A, Komarovska-Porokhnyavets E, Novikov V, Chekotilo
A. Synthesis of new 2-thio- [1, 2, 4] triazolo [1, 5-c] quinazoline derivatives and its antimicrobial
activity. Chem Pharm Bull, 2009, 57(6), 580–585.
[16] Gupta T, Rohilla A, Pathak A, Akhtar MJ, Haider MR, Yar MS. Current perspectives on quinazolines
with potent biological activities: A review. Synth Commun, 2018, 48(10), 1099–1127.
[17] Aly AA. Synthesis of novel quinazoline derivatives as antimicrobial agents. Chinese J Chem, 2003,
21(3), 339–346.
[18] Alagarsamy V, Solomon VR, Dhanabal K. Synthesis and pharmacological evaluation of some
3-phenyl-2-substituted-3H-quinazolin-4-one as analgesic, anti-inflammatory agents. Bioorg Med
Chem, 2007, 15(1), 235–241.
[19] Wang M, Zhang G, Wang Y, Wang J, Zhu M, Cen S, Wang Y. Design, synthesis and anti-influenza A
virus activity of novel 2, 4-disubstituted quinazoline derivatives. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2020, 30(11),
127143.
[20] Govindaraj S, Alagarsamy V, Prakash CR. Synthesis and evaluation of antioxidant activities of novel
quinazoline derivatives. Int J Pharm Sci, 2010, 2(4), 83–86.
[21] Zayed MF. New fluorinated quinazolinone derivatives as anticonvulsant agents. J Taibah Univ
Medical Sci, 2014, 9(2), 104–109.
[22] Hess HJ, Cronin TH, Scriabine A. Antihypertensive 2-amino-4 (3H)-quinazolinones. J Med Chem, 1968,
11(1), 130–136.
[23] Sasmal S, Balaji G, Reddy HRK, Balasubrahmanyam D, Srinivas G, Kyasa S, Sasmal PK, Khanna I,
Talwar R, Suresh J, Jadhav VP. Design and optimization of quinazoline derivatives as melanin
concentrating hormone receptor 1 (MCHR1) antagonists. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2012, 22(9),
3157–3162.
[24] Alvarado M, Barceló M, Carro L, Masaguer CF, Raviña E. Synthesis and biological evaluation of new
quinazoline and cinnoline derivatives as potential atypical antipsychotics. Chem Biodiv, 2006, 3(1),
106–117.
[25] Malamas MS, Millen J. Quinazolineacetic acids, related analogs as aldose reductase inhibitors. J Med
Chem, 1991, 34(4), 1492–1503.
248 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.[26] Zhu S, Chandrashekar G, Meng L, Robinson K, Chatterji D. Febrifugine analogue compounds:
Synthesis and antimalarial evaluation. Bioorg Med Chem, 2012, 20(2), 927–932.
[27] Van Horn KS, Burda WN, Fleeman R, Shaw LN, Manetsch R. Antibacterial activity of a series of N 2,
N 4-disubstituted quinazoline-2, 4-diamines. J Med Chem, 2014, 57(7), 3075–3093.
[28] Lam T, Hilgers MT, Cunningham ML, Kwan BP, Nelson KJ, Brown-Driver V, Ong V, Trzoss M, Hough
G, Shaw KJ, Finn J. Structure-based design of new dihydrofolate reductase antibacterial agents:
7-(benzimidazol-1-yl)-2, 4-diaminoquinazolines. J Med Chem, 2014, 57(3), 651–668.
[29] Bilbro J, Mart M, Kyprianou N. Therapeutic value of quinazoline-based compounds in prostate
cancer. Anticancer Res, 2013, 33(11), 4695–4700.
[30] Uckun FM, Sudbeck EA, Mao C, Ghosh S, Liu X, Vassilev AO, Navara CS, Narla RK. Structure-based
design of novel anticancer agents. Curr Cancer Drug Targets, 2001, 1(1), 59–71.
[31] He D, Wang M, Zhao S, Shu Y, Zeng H, Xiao C, Lu C, Liu Y. Pharmaceutical prospects of naturally
occurring quinazolinone and its derivatives. Fitoterapia, 2017, 119, 136–149.
[32] Khan AK. Facile synthesis, characterization of new quinazolinones with different azo compounds, 1,
2, 3-triazole moieties and evaluation their anti-bacterial activity. Al-Mustansiriyah J Sci, 2017, 28(3),
122–133.
[33] Gawad NMA, Georgey HH, Youssef RM, El-Sayed NA. Synthesis and antitumor activity of some 2,
3-disubstituted quinazolin-4 (3H)-ones and 4, 6-disubstituted-1, 2, 3, 4-tetrahydroquinazolin-2H￾ones. Eur J Med Chem, 2010, 45(12), 6058–6067.
[34] Kumar KS, Ganguly S, Veerasamy R, De Clercq E. Synthesis, antiviral activity and cytotoxicity
evaluation of Schiff bases of some 2-phenyl quinazoline-4 (3) H-ones. Eur J Med Chem, 2010, 45(11),
5474–5479.
[35] Venkatesh R, Ramaiah MJ, Gaikwad HK, Janardhan S, Bantu R, Nagarapu L, Sastry GN, Ganesh AR,
Bhadra M. Luotonin-A based quinazolinones cause apoptosis and senescence via HDAC inhibition
and activation of tumor suppressor proteins in HeLa cells. Eur J Med Chem, 2015, 94, 87–101.
[36] Murahari MS, Prakash RSJ, Kar SS, Kumar TG, Raj VP, Raju DS. Synthesis, characterization and
in vitro anti-cancer activity of quinazolinone derivatives. J Pharm Res, 2012, 5, 2743–2746.
[37] Rao Y, Liu H, Gao L, Yu H, Tan JH, Ou TM, Huang SL, Gu LQ, Ye JM, Huang ZS. Discovery of natural
alkaloid bouchardatine as a novel inhibitor of adipogenesis/lipogenesis in 3T3-L1 adipocytes. Bioorg
Med Chem, 2015, 23(15), 4719–4727.
[38] Amin KM, Kamel MM, Anwar MM, Khedr M, Syam YM. Synthesis, biological evaluation and
molecular docking of novel series of spiro [(2H, 3H) quinazoline-2, 1′-cyclohexan]-4 (1H)-one
derivatives as anti-inflammatory and analgesic agents. Eur J Med Chem, 2010, 45(6), 2117–2131.
[39] Hemalatha K, Madhumitha G, Vasavi CS, Munusami P. 2, 3-Dihydroquinazolin-4 (1H)-ones: Visible
light mediated synthesis, solvatochromism and biological activity. J Photochem Photobiol B Biol,
2015, 143, 139–147.
[40] Manivannan E, Chaturvedi SC. Analogue-based design, synthesis and molecular docking analysis of
2, 3-diaryl quinazolinones as non-ulcerogenic anti-inflammatory agents. Bioorg Med Chem, 2011,
19(15), 4520–4528.
[41] El-Azab AS, Eltahir KE. Synthesis and anticonvulsant evaluation of some new, 2, 3, 8-trisubstituted-4
(3H)-quinazoline derivatives. Bioorganic Med Chem Lett, 2012, 22(1), 327–333.
[42] Abuelizz HA, El Dib R, Marzouk M, Anouar EH, Maklad YA, Attia HN, Al-Salahi R. Molecular docking
and anticonvulsant activity of newly synthesized quinazoline derivatives. Molecules, 2017, 22(7),
1094.
[43] Jatav V, Mishra P, Kashaw S, Stables JP. CNS depressant and anticonvulsant activities of some novel
3- [5-substituted 1, 3, 4-thiadiazole-2-yl]-2-styryl quinazoline-4 (3H)-ones. Eur J Med Chem, 2008,
43(9), 1945–1954.
[44] Veena Vani K, Ramesh G, Venkata Rao C. Synthesis of new triazole and oxadiazole derivatives of
quinazolin‐4 (3H) ‐one and their antimicrobial activity. J Heterocycl Chem, 2016, 53(3), 719–726.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 249[45] Zhu S, Wang J, Chandrashekar G, Smith E, Liu X, Zhang Y. Synthesis and evaluation of
4-quinazolinone compounds as potential antimalarial agents. Eur J Med Chem, 2010, 45(9),
3864–3869.
[46] Birhan YS, Bekhit AA, Hymete A. In vivo antimalarial evaluation of some 2, 3-disubstituted-4
(3H)-quinazolinone derivatives. BMC Res Notes, 2015, 8(1), 1–6.
[47] He L, Li H, Chen J, Wu XF. Recent advances in 4 (3 H)-quinazolinone syntheses. RSC Adv, 2014, 4(24),
12065–12077.
[48] Song Z, Liu L, Wang Y, Sun X. Efficient synthesis of mono-and disubstituted 2, 3-dihydroquinazolin-4
(1H)-ones using aluminum methanesulfonate as a reusable catalyst. Res Chem Intermed, 2012, 38,
1091–1099.
[49] Mohammadi Ziarani G, Afsar SY, Gholamzadeh P, Badiei A. Synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives
through multicomponent/click reactions. Org Chem Res, 2019, 5(1), 64–72.
[50] Dabiri M, Salehi P, Bahramnejad M, Alizadeh M. A practical and versatile approach toward a one-pot
synthesis of 2, 3-disubstituted 4 (3 H)-quinazolinones. Monatsh Chem, 2010, 141, 877–881.
[51] Wang M, Zhang TT, Liang Y, Gao JJ. Strontium chloride-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of 2, 3-
dihydroquinazolin-4 (1H)-ones in protic media. Chin Chem Lett, 2011, 22(12), 1423–1426.
[52] Brown CE, Kong T, Bordon C, Yolken R, Jones-Brando L, McNulty J. One-pot, multicomponent
synthesis of 2, 3-disubstituted quinazolin-ones with potent and selective activity against Toxoplasma
gondii. Bioorganic Med Chem Lett, 2018, 28(9), 1642–1646.
[53] Mehta HB, Dixit BC, Dixit RB. L-Proline catalyzed one-pot multi-component synthesis of 2-(1,
3-diphenyl-1H-pyrazol-4-yl) quinazolin-4 (3H)-one derivatives and their biological studies. Chin Chem
Lett, 2014, 25(5), 741–744.
[54] Chen BH, Li JT, Chen GF. Efficient synthesis of 2, 3-disubstituted-2, 3-dihydroquinazolin-4 (1H)-ones
catalyzed by dodecylbenzenesulfonic acid in aqueous media under ultrasound irradiation. Ultrason
Sonochem, 2015, 23, 59–65.
[55] Lobo HR, Singh BS, Shankarling GS. Bio-compatible eutectic mixture for multi-component synthesis:
A valuable acidic catalyst for synthesis of novel 2, 3-dihydroquinazolin-4 (1H)-one derivatives. Catal
Commun, 2012, 27, 179–183.
[56] Zhang J, Liu J, Ma Y, Ren D, Cheng P, Zhao J, Zhang F, Yao Y. One-pot synthesis and antifungal
activity against plant pathogens of quinazolinone derivatives containing an amide moiety.
Bioorganic Med Chem Lett, 2016, 26(9), 2273–2277.
[57] Tamilselvi V, Ramesh R, Lalitha A. p-TSA catalyzed one-pot synthesis of 2-(1 H-Indol-3-yl)-3-
phenylquinazolin-4 (3 H)-ones. PolycyclAromat Compd, 2023, 43(1), 434–443.
[58] Desai VM, Birajdar AT, Patil SP, Kupwade RV, Deshmukh MB, Patil SS. An expedient synthesis of
2-Aryl-substituted 2,3-Dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-ones in Low Transition Temperature Mixture (LTTM)
containing SnCl2 and L-Proline. Chem Asian J , 2022, 1886–92.
[59] Maleki A, Rabbani M, Shahrokh S. Preparation characterization of a silica‐based magnetic
nanocomposite and its application as a recoverable catalyst for the one‐pot multicomponent
synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives. Appl Organomet Chem, 2015, 29(12), 809–814.
[60] Kumari K, Raghuvanshi DS, Singh KN. Microwave assisted eco-friendly protocol for one pot
synthesis of 2, 3-dihydroquinazolin-4 (1H)-ones in water, 2012, 860–865.
[61] Shaterian HR, Oveisi AR, Honarmand M. Synthesis of 2, 3-dihydroquinazoline-4 (1 H)-ones. Synth
Commun, 2010, 40(8), 1231–1242.
[62] Zhang MM, Yang K, Wang XS. 2-(4-Bromophenyl)-2-methyl-2, 3-dihydroquinazolin-4 (1H)-one. Acta
Crystallogr, 2010, 66(5), o1069–o1069.
[63] Watson AJ, Maxwell AC, Williams JM. Ruthenium-catalysed oxidative synthesis of heterocycles from
alcohols. Org Biomol Chem, 2012, 10(2), 240–243.
250 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.[64] Narasimhamurthy KH, Chandrappa S, Kumar KSS, Harsha KB, Ananda H, Rangappa KS. Easy access
for the synthesis of 2-aryl 2, 3-dihydroquinazolin-4 (1 H)-ones using gem-dibromomethylarenes as
synthetic aldehyde equivalent. RSC Adv, 2014, 4(65), 34479–34486.
[65] Obaiah O, Kebbahalli NN, Goravanahalli RM, Chottanahalli PS, Kanchugarakoppal RS, Kempegowda.
M. Synthesis of 2-aryl substituted 2, 3-dihydroquinazoline-4 (1H)-ones under solvent free conditions
using ionic liquid as a mild and efficient catalyst. Eur J Chem, 2014, 5(4), 671–675.
[66] Zhang X, Ye D, Sun H, Guo D, Wang J, Huang H, Zhang X, Jiang H, Liu H. Microwave-assisted
synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives by efficient and rapid iron-catalyzed cyclization in water.
Green Chem, 2009, 11(11), 1881–1888.
[67] Dou G, Wang M, Shi D. One-pot synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives from nitro-compounds with
the aid of low-valent titanium. J Comb Chem, 2009, 11(1), 151–154.
[68] Murthy VN, Nikumbh SP, Kumar SP, Chiranjeevi Y, Rao LV, Raghunadh A. A simple approach for the
synthesis of fused quinazoline-based tetracyclic compounds via a multicomponent reaction
strategy. Synlett, 2016, 27(16), 2362–2367.
[69] Puligoundla RG, Karnakanti S, Bantu R, Nagaiah K, Kondra SB, Nagarapu L. A simple, convenient
one-pot synthesis of [1, 2, 4] triazolo/benzimidazolo quinazolinone derivatives by using molecular
iodine. Tetrahedron Lett, 2013, 54(20), 2480–2483.
[70] Gajaganti S, Kumari S, Kumar D, Allam BK, Srivastava V, Singh S. An efficient, green, and solvent‐free
multi‐component synthesis of benzimidazolo/benzothiazolo quinazolinone derivatives using
Sc(OTf)3 catalyst under controlled microwave irradiation. J Heterocycl Chem, 2018, 55(11),
2578–2584.
[71] Hakimelahi R, Mousazadeh MH. The synthesis of 2, 3-dihydroquinazolin-4 (1H)-ones using zinc oxide
nanotubes modified by sio2 as a catalyst with recyclable effect. Orient J Chem, 2018, 34(1), 86.
[72] Mousavi MR, Maghsoodlou MT. Nano-SiO2: A green, efficient, and reusable heterogeneous catalyst
for the synthesis of quinazolinone derivatives. J Iran Chem Soc, 2015, 12.
[73] Liu M, Shu M, Yao C, Yin G, Wang D, Huang J. Synthesis of pyrido-fused quinazolinone derivatives via
copper-catalyzed domino reaction. Org Lett, 2016, 18(4), 824–827.
[74] Elkholy AE, Rizk SA, Rashad AM. Enhancing lubricating oil properties using novel quinazolinone
derivatives: DFT study and molecular dynamics simulation. J Mol Struct, 2019, 1175, 788–796.
[75] Angulwar JA, Khansole GS, Bhosale VN. Molecular iodine mediated one-pot three-component
reaction for synthesis of thiadiazolo [2, 3-b] quinozolin-6 (7H)-ones and their antimicrobial activity.
J Synth, 2022, 1(2), 97–107.
[76] Lan J, Le Z, Li H, Meng J, Gong B, Xie Z. Selective synthesis of functionalized quinazolinone
derivatives via biocatalysis. J Mol Catal B Enzym, 2020, 498, 111261.
[77] Dige NC, Mahajan PG, Raza H, Hassan M, Vanjare BD, Hong H, Lee KH, Seo SY. Ultrasound mediated
efficient synthesis of new 4-oxoquinazolin-3 (4H)-yl) furan-2-carboxamides as potent tyrosinase
inhibitors: Mechanistic approach through chemoinformatics and molecular docking studies. Bioorg
Chem, 2019, 92, 103201.
[78] Hassankhani A. Multicomponent reaction for the synthesis of 2, 3-dihydroquinazolin-4 (1H)-ones
using isatoic anhydride, aldehydes and NH4OAc under Solvent-free conditions Iran. Chem Commun,
2019, 7(24), 248–256.
[79] Mohammadi Ziarani G, Kazemi Asl Z, Gholamzadeh P, Badiei A, Afshar M. The use of SrFe12O19
magnetic nanoparticles as an efficient catalyst in the modified Niementowski reaction. Appl
Organomet Chem, 2017, 12, 3830.
[80] Tajbakhsh M, Ramezanpour S, Balalaie S, Bijanzadeh HR. Novel one‐pot three‐component reaction
for the synthesis of functionalized spiro quinazolinones. J Heterocycl Chem, 2015, 52(5), 1559–1564.
[81] Chate AV, Rudrawar PP, Bondle GM, Sangeshetti JN. 2-Aminoethanesulfonic acid: An efficient
organocatalyst for green synthesis of spiro oxindole dihydro quinazolinones and novel 1,
2-(dihydroquinazolin-3 (4 H) isonicotinamides in water. Synth Commun, 2020, 50(2), 226–242.
6 Multicomponent synthesis of biologically active quinazolinone derivatives 251[82] Palaniraja J, Roopan SM. Iodine-mediated synthesis of indazolo-quinazolinones via a multi￾component reaction. RSC Adv, 2015, 5(12), 8640–8646.
[83] Giri RS, Thaker HM, Giordano T, Chen B, Nuthalapaty S, Vasu KK, Sudarsanam V. Synthesis and
evaluation of quinazolinone derivatives as inhibitors of NF-κB, AP-1-mediated transcription and
eIF-4E mediated translational activation: Inhibitors of multi-pathways involve in cancer. Eur J Med
Chem, 2010, 45(9), 3558–3563.
[84] Sawant SD, Srinivas M, Reddy GL, Rao VV, Singh PP, Vishwakarma RA. One-pot multicomponent
synthesis of medicinally important purine quinazolinone derivatives. Tetrahedron Lett, 2012, 53(46),
6195–6198.
[85] Bakhshali-Dehkordi R, Ghasemzadeh MA, Safaei-Ghomi J. Multicomponent preparation of
quinazolinone derivatives in the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles supported ionic liquids. Polycycl
Aromat Compd, 2022, 42(3), 960–977.
[86] Kumar P, Amber N, Tripathi VD. A catalyst-free surfactant mediated multicomponent synthesis of
quinazolinone derivatives in aqueous media. Chem Eur J, 2023, 4(3), 1–9.
[87] Xu R, Wang Z, Zheng Q, Patil P, Dömling A. A bifurcated multicomponent synthesis approach to
polycyclic quinazolinones. J Org Chem, 2022, 87(19), 13023–13033.
[88] Dawoud NT. An efficient and environmentally friendly procedure for synthesis of quinazolinone
derivatives by use of a Biginelli-type reaction. Chem Sci Trans, 2013, 2(1), 129–134.
[89] Mohammadi Zeydi M, Shiroud Ghorbani S. Green preparation of tetrahydrobenzimidazo [2, 1-b]
quinazolin-1 (2H)-ones using γ-Fe2O3@ KSF as novel and recyclable magnetic catalyst. J Sci Technol,
2019, 5(4), 179–186.
[90] Beerappa M, Shivashankar K. Multicomponent reaction of benzyl halides: Synthesis of [1,2,4]
triazolo/benzimidazolo quinazolinones. Synth Commun, 2016, 46(5), 421–432.
[91] Rai B, Kumar P, Kumar A. Copper-mediated aerobic oxidative synthesis of benzimidazo fused
quinazolines via a multicomponent approach. RSC Adv, 2015, 5(104), 85915–85918.
[92] Potuganti GR, Indukuri DR, Alla M. An efficient one-pot multicomponent synthesis of tetracyclic
quinazolino [4,3-b] quinazolines by sequential C–N bond formation and copper-mediated aerobic
oxidative cyclization. Synlett, 2018, 29(13), 1717–22.
252 Kantharaju Kamanna et al.Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu✶
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis
of 1,2,3-triazoles using multicomponent
techniques
7.1 Introduction
Triazoles are the five-membered heterocyclic compounds with three nitrogen and two
carbon atoms in the ring having molecular formula C2N3H3. The atomic percentage of
nitrogen in 1,2,3-triazole is about 60%, indicating the importance of hetero scaffold in
the field of organic chemistry. Depending upon the position of nitrogen atoms in the
ring they are divided into two isomers: (i) 1,2,3-triazole and (ii) 1,2,4-triaozle [1]. When
three N atoms placed in successive position then it is called 1,2,3-triazole or 1H-1,2,3-
triazole. Again disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles have three isomers (i) 1,4-, (ii) 1,5-, (iii) 4,5-;
and trisubstituted triazoles have only one isomer, that is, 1,4,5 (Figure 7.1). In this chap￾ter, we have discussed the recent literature on the synthetic approaches toward 1,2,3-
triazoles using multicomponent techniques, their mechanistic insights, and outlook.
The 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition [2], between alkyne and azide, is known as azide–alkyne cy￾cloaddition, commonly called AAC reaction [3]. In 1910, the German chemists, Otto Dim￾1,2,3-triazole
Triazole
N
N
NH
1
2
3
4 5
N
N
NH
1
2
3
4 5
1,2,4-triazole
N
N
NH
1
2
3
4 5
N
N
N
1
2
3
4 5
N
N
N
1
2
3
4 5
R
R
R
R R R
(4,5) (1,5) (1,4)
Disubstituted
isomer
Trisubstituted
isomer
N
N
N
1
2
3
4 5
R
R
(1,4,5)
R
(m.f. C2N3H3)
Figure 7.1: Triazole and its various isomers.
✶
Corresponding author: Basudeb Basu, Former Professor, Department of Chemistry, North Bengal
University, Darjeeling, West Bengal, India, e-mail: basudeb.basu@gmail.com
Sujit Ghosh, Department of Chemistry, Raiganj Surendranath Mahavidyalaya, Raiganj, West Bengal,
India
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-007roth and Gustav Fester first synthesized 1H-1,2,3-triazole by heating a mixture of alcoholic
solution of hydrazoic acid (HN3) and acetone solution of acetylene at 100 °C for 70 h [4].
The same compound was synthesized later with NaN3 in acid solution instead of taking
HN3 (Figure 7.2) [5]. Based on this basic reaction route, the terminal alkyne reacts with
alkyl azide resulting in the formation of two possible regioisomers, viz. 1,4-disubstituted
1,2,3-triazole and 1,5-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole (Figure 7.2). Again, when an internal al￾kyne (both symmetrical or unsymmetrical) reacts with alkyl azide, a single isomer of
1,4,5-trisubstituted triazole is obtained. On the other hand, the use of HN3 instead of alkyl
azide affords only 4,5-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole derivative (Figure 7.3).
H
H
H N
N
N
N
H
N
N
+
H
H
N
N
N
+
Na
Hydrazoic acid 1H-1,2-3-triazole Sodium azide
1
2
3
4
5
1,3-dipolar cycloaddition
Figure 7.2: First synthesis of 1H-1,2,3-triazole by cycloaddition reaction with HN3 or NaN3.
Figure 7.3: Synthesis of various disubstituted and trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles.
254 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb BasuThe American chemist K. B. Sharpless has been awarded his second time Nobel prize
in Chemistry in 2022 [5], together with Carolyn Bertozzi and Morten Meldal, for their
achievement in “click chemistry” along with bio-orthogonal chemistry [6]. This click
reaction was a benchmark and unparallel achievement in the field of triazole synthe￾sis. It is unescapable to mention also that he had received first Nobel Prize earlier in
2002 for another breakthrough, that is, chiral oxidation of alcohol [7]. The term “click”
is however not limited to only triazole synthesis, and there are plenty of different
click reactions also well documented in the literature [8]. An access toward the syn￾thesis of various derivatives of 1,2,3-triazole by “click protocol” comprehensively ex￾posed the field of pharmaceutical chemistry in last two decades. The term “click” was
also first coined by K. Barry Sharpless, in 1998. Later it was described by Sharp￾less, Hartmuth C. Kolb, and M.G. Finn of the Scripps Research Institute in 2001 [9–11].
Essentially, it is a set of methods for constructing chemical compounds from small
molecule, the pioneer work was first started in 2002 where both scientists (Sharpless
and Meldal) independently developed copper(I)-catalyzed AAC (CuAAC) reaction.
While the CuAAC produces triazoles of 1,4-regiosomer, the other transition metal
(ruthenium)-based catalysts gives rise to the selective formation of 1,5-regioisomers,
often called as RuAAC reaction procedure [1, 12–16].
Two types of mechanism had already been established for the AAC reaction: (i) via
five-member metal-triazolyl ring intermediate; (ii) via both six- as well as five-membered
ring intermediate. Both of these mechanisms have been highlighted in this chapter.
The 1,2,3-triazoles find their diverse applications not only in pharmaceutical field
but also in numerous other fields. Promisingly bioactive and recently synthesized a
few triazole scaffolds are depicted in Figure 7.4 [17–20]. In every research or review
literatures or in many books or book chapters related to triazole or AAC reaction,
countless applications are already crusted. Still the researchers are trying to design
structurally diverse many triazole conjugates and/or triazole-tethered heterocyclic
molecules with the aim to tuning their bioactivity and applications to new medicinal
fields.
At present, any synthetic attempt without concerning environmental fates or sus￾tainable development [21] will not be tolerable according to the green chemistry point
of view. It is therefore very imperative to design a chemical reaction without using
hazardous or explosive substrates.
Organyl azides are potentially explosive in nature [22] and not safe for handling.
They are better stored at low temperature (−18 °C) and in the dark. Additionally, small
molecules containing the azido functionality tend to decompose violently which may
result in injury if proper safety precautions are not maintained [22]. Therefore, two￾component approach of 1,2,3-triazole synthesis via AAC reaction is not a good choice,
but in situ generation of organic azide from any of its precursor and NaN3 represents
a more viable process. Therefore, multicomponent approach particularly avoiding the
direct use of alkyl azide is considered as a green technique toward the formation of
triazole derivatives.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 255A multicomponent reaction (or MCR) [23], or alternatively called “multicomponent as￾sembly process” (or MCAP), is a chemical reaction where three or more components in
one-pot react to form a single product. MCRs have attained considerable interests
owing to offering greater potentials in synthetic strategies minimizing time, effort,
work-up steps, and waste generation. Because of these factors MCRs are often applied
in drug discovery and drug designing. The exact nature of this type of reaction is often
difficult to assess as there is much less probability for the interaction among three or
more different molecules resulting in a low reaction rate. It is believed that the reac￾tions are more likely to involve consecutive bimolecular reactions where two reactants
combine in a sequential manner to give highly selective products that retain majority
of the atoms of the starting material. It is thus a step-economic process, which does not
require unnecessary separation, isolation, and purification process. Multicomponent re￾actions have been known for more than 100 years. The first MCR was reported by Lau￾rent and Gerhardt in 1838 [24], and the first documented MCR was the Strecker
synthesis of α-amino nitrile in 1850 from which α-amino acids was derived [25]. A few
common and widely used examples of MCRs are Biginelli, Mannich, Hantzsch, A3
-
coupling, isocyanide-based MCRs like three-component Passerini, four-component Ugi
reaction, etc. [26–28] Other MCRs include (i) free-radical-initiated MCRs, (ii) MCRs based
on organoboron compounds, and (iii) metal-catalyzed MCRs [29–32].
Since last two decades adequate number of 1,2,3-triazoles were synthesized by
click or AAC process involving copper and other metal catalyst (Rh, Ru, Ir, Zn, Ag, Au)
both via two-component [33–40] and three-component approaches [41–50].
In this chapter, we have focused on some recent protocols of triazole synthesis by
various multicomponent approaches (mostly covering during the last five years).
N N
N
MeO
Cl
O
NH2 H
N S
N
H
N
N
COOH
O
N
N N
O
HOOC
OH
O
H
N
N
O
anti-TB agent
antibacterial agent anticancer agent
O
N
N
N
N N
Cl
NH2
Me
Me
antiinfluenza activity
Figure 7.4: Some representative examples of bioactive 1,2,3-triazoles.
256 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb BasuMethodologies described herein include both click reaction (with Cu, Ni, Zn Mn, Ru
metal-based homogeneous, and heterogeneous catalyst) and some non-click reactions
(both 3CR and 4CR) under metal, metal-free, and mostly by green shell. In many re￾ports almost similar strategies were taken to synthesize triazole compounds. As the
click reaction is more commonly attempted by the researchers to check the efficiency
of many newly synthesized or as-prepared catalysts, we have searched out some di￾vergent reactions that give the access of many triazole derivatives. Special emphasis
is given on the various types of catalyst preparation and detailed mechanistic inter￾pretation. Some fascinating AAC reactions [51–55] (not shown here) are also found in
the literature, while preparing for this chapter. Some renewable and eco-friendly re￾sources are also used as the catalyst for the triazole synthesis viz., fish bone waste,
graphene oxide, nano-biocatalyst, etc. [56–59].
7.2 The 1,2,3-triazole synthesis by three-component
reaction
The 1,2,3-triazoles are best constructed by click reaction as discussed earlier in the in￾troduction. Though the click reaction involves alkyl azide as the reacting partner, its
explosive nature prefers in situ preparation from the reaction between alkyl halide
and sodium azide. That is why the click reaction by three-component approach is not
only a step economy method but also it circumvents direct use of handling hazardous
alkyl azide. Apart from the click reaction there are some other multicomponent ap￾proaches (both three-component and four-component) in the literature, which have
been reported in last few years [76–95].
7.2.1 Three-component coupling among alkyl halide, terminal
alkyne, and sodium azide
One of the most common approaches for the synthesis of substituted 1,2,3-triazole deriv￾atives is the multicomponent click reaction among alkyl halide or mostly aralkyl halide,
terminal alkyne and sodium azide. There are many review articles and book chapters
that have shown triazole synthesis. A few among them have showed two-component
approach, which is direct AAC reaction between alkyl azide and alkyne. Here, we have
discussed the multicomponent approach mostly disclosed in 2017 onward and noticed
that some metals like nickel, manganese, ruthenium salts, or complexes have been used
as the catalyst in addition to frequently used copper catalyst (Figure 7.5).
Magnetic NiFe2O4-supported glutamate-copper(0) catalyst (Figure 7.6) has been
found to be a very effective heterogeneous catalyst for the synthesis of a wide variety of
1,4-disubstituted-1,2,3-triazoles via one-pot three-component click reactions of substituted
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 257benzyl chloride, terminal alkyne, and sodium azide (Figure 7.7) [60]. 1,4-Disubstituted
1,2,3-triazoles were obtained with good-to-excellent yield. More importantly the coupling
took place under ambient condition in water. Due to magnetic nature the heterogeneous
catalyst it was easily separated simply by using an external magnet and recycled even
up to 10th cycle with a very slight decrease in product yield (run 1: 96% vs run 10: 88%).
Another example of heterogeneous copper catalyst is Cu2O@ARF (Figure 7.8) as prepared
from our laboratory in 2017 and applied for multicomponent click reaction (Figure 7.9) by
green procedure under aqueous and aerobic conditions [61]. We had successfully immo￾bilized stabilized Cu2O nanoparticles (NPs) on amberlite resin formate (ARF) [62] under its
polyionic polar environment. The oxidation state of metal, that is, Cu(I), in the catalyst
Cu catalyst Ru catalyst
Ni catalyst
Mn catalyst
1,2,3-triazole synthesis
(Recent past)
Zn catalyst
Figure 7.5: Involvement of various metal catalysts in the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles under this chapter.
Cl
R + R' + NaN3
N
N N
R R'
R = 4-Me, 4-Br R' = Ph, p-Tol, 4-Br-C6H4
50-90%
H2O, RT, 4-8.5 h
NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu (1 mol%)
(1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1.1 equiv.)
Figure 7.7: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole by three-component coupling among benzyl chloride, terminal
alkyne, and sodium azide catalyzed by NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu(0).
O
O
O
O
NH2
O
OH
Cu
O
O
HO
NH2
Cu
O
NH2
O
HO
Cu
NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu(0)
Figure 7.6: Structure of magnetic NiFe2O4-supported glutamate-copper(0) catalyst.
258 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basucomposite [Cu2O@ARF] was ascertained by FT-IR, XRD, XPS, and HR-TEM and metal con￾tent (10.8 mg copper per gram of the resin composite) in the catalyst matrix was deter￾mined by ICP-AES. The formate counterion (HCOO−
) was responsible to reduce the
precursor Cu(II) ion to Cu(I) and stabilize Cu2O NPs. The significantly high TOF (219 h−1
)
and recyclability (up to fourth run) of the catalyst corroborates for the high catalytic activ￾ity of Cu2O@ARF. The proposed mechanism of the reaction (Figure 7.10) was believed to
pass through the (i) formation of alkynyl copper intermediate from alkyne in presence of
Cu(I)system of Cu2O@ARF, (ii) cycloaddition with alkyl azide (formed in situ from alkyl
halide and sodium azide) to form the intermediate Cu-triazole intermediate, and (iii) fi￾nally protonation of C–Cu bond to afford the triazole product.
n m
NMe3 O
O H
Cu2O@ARF
Cu2O NPs
Figure 7.8: Schematic structure of Cu2O@ARF.
R X + R' H + NaN3
Cu2O@ARF (25 mg),
SDS (0.1 mmol)
H2O, RT, 1-8 h
NN
N
R
R'
R = aryl, styrenyl, vinyl R' = aryl, alkyl
(1 mmol) (1.2 mmol) (1.5 mmol)
X = Cl, Br, I 68-91 %
Figure 7.9: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole by using Cu2O@ARF.
R' H
R' Cu
RCH2N3
RCH2X
+
NaN3
NN
N Cu
R NN
N H
R
R' H
Cu2O@ARF
Cu2O@ARF
H2O
Figure 7.10: Proposed mechanism of the three-component click reaction using Cu2O@ARF.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 259Another example of multicomponent click reaction by Cu2O NPs was reported by Ped￾diahgari and coworkers [63], where the stabilizing agent was hydrogen tritinate nano￾tube (HTNT). The Cu2O-doped HTNTs were synthesized by impregnation method
taking HTNTs and Cu(NO3)2·3H2O. Hydrogen trititanate nanotubes were prepared via
a hydrothermal reaction method taking TiO2 and NaOH solution. This catalyst thus
prepared was abbreviated as Cu2O/HTNT-7 (here 7 indicates that 7 wt% Cu loaded in
the Cu2O/HTNT-7) indicates 7% Cu loaded which worked well under aqueous environ￾ment under ambient reaction condition. They used both alkyl halide as well alkyl sul￾fonate as azide precursor to synthesize 1,2,3-triazole derivatives (Figure 7.11).
Rai et al. [64] in 2019 also synthesized Cu2O NPs from Cu(II) salts by employing rice
(Oryza sativa) as a cheap and ready source of reducing as well as stabilizing agent
(Figure 7.12). Initially acidic hydrolysis of starch results aldohexose sugar (glucose)
which reduces Cu2+ ion to produce Cu2O NPs of approximately 10 nm size. The formed
NPs do not get agglomerated in the presence of rice and thus it become stable to carry
out organic reaction, under aqueous environment. AAC reaction was thus successful
under base free condition via one-pot multicomponent click reaction to yield mono-,
bis-, and tris-1,2,3-triazoles in good-to-excellent yields (Figure 7.13). The substrate vari￾ation has also extended to terminal alkyne compounds, both 1,2- and 1,3-isomers of
diethynylbenzene (Figure 7.14).
Figure 7.11: Multicomponent click reaction catalyzed by Cu2O/HTNT-7.
Starch Monosachharide
(Rice) (Glucose, Mannose)
Cu2O NPs + Sodium gluconate 100 oC
H3O+
CuSO4.5H2O
aq. NaOH
Figure 7.12: Synthesis of Cu2O NPs from starch.
260 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb BasuFigure 7.13: Synthesis of mono-, bis-, and tris-1,2,3-triazole derivatives by multicomponent click reaction
catalyzed by Cu2O NPs.
+ + NaN3
N
N
N
N
N
N
R'
N
N N
R'
+
75-91 % 75-84 %
R'
Condition for monotriazole: Alkyne: Alkyl halide: NaN3 = 1.2 : 1: 1.2;
30 min,Cu2O NPs (5 mg), H2O, 100 oC
Condition for bistriazole: Alkyne: Alkyl halide: NaN3 = 0.5 : 1.2: 1.2;
60 min, Cu2O NPs (5 mg), H2O, 100 oC
(R' = Ph, 2-NO2-C6H4, 4-NO2-C6H4, 3-pyridyl)
(1,2 & 1,3 isomer)
R' X
Figure 7.14: Synthesis of mono- and bis-1,2,3-triazole derivatives from 1,3-diethynylbenzene and 1,2-
diethynylbenzene by Cu2O NPs.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 261Saha et al. [65] prepared a homogeneous copper catalyst from CuI and 1,3-bis(4-
fluorophenylthio)-propane ligand in acetonitrile to prepare the 1D polymeric coordi￾nation complex having formula ([(CuI)2{ArS(CH2)3SAr}2]n, Ar = 4 F-C6H4) and applied
this catalyst in the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole (Figure 7.15). The catalyst was well char￾acterized by 1
H NMR, 13C NMR, and single-crystal X-ray diffraction techniques.
While suggesting the mechanism, it was assumed that the reaction was initiated by
the metalation of phenylacetylene in the presence of the 1D-CuI dithioether polymeric
complexes giving copper acetylide (Figure 7.16). In the subsequent step, alkyl azide
was formed in situ by the corresponding halide and sodium azide. The polymeric cop￾per acetylide moiety reacted with alkyl azide via 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition followed by
elimination of the complex catalyst give rise to the desired 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-
triazoles as the main product.
R1 X + R2 H + NaN3 N
N
N
R1
R2
76-97 %
Cu-catalyst (0.1 mol%)
MeCN: Water (1:1), 50 oC
(1.1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1.2 equiv.)
R1 = Ph, nC7H15, PhCH=CH, CH2=CH
X = Cl, Br, I
R2 =
R
(R = 4-Me, 2-Br, 4-NO2),
CH2CH2CH2Cl, C(Me)(Ph)OH, CH2CO2Me
Figure 7.15: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole derivatives by CuI 1D polymeric coordination complex catalyst.
Cu
I
Cu
S I
S
S
S
H
R2
H+
Cu
I
Cu
S I
S
S
S
R2
R1 X+ NaN3
Cu
I
Cu
S I
S
S
S
N N
N
R2
R1
H+
N N
N
R2
R1
Cu
I
Cu
S I
S
S
S
Cu-catalyst
(in situ formation of RN3)
Figure 7.16: Mechanism of the multicomponent click reaction using 1D-CuI dithioether polymeric complex.
262 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb BasuSynthesis of catalyst involving ball-milling technology is a good green process. By apply￾ing mechanochemical approach, a green tool, Tourani et al. [66] synthesized Cu2(BDC)2
(DABCO) catalyst which was a nanoporous metal-organic framework [Cu(II)MOF]
(Figure 7.17) and found it as suitable catalyst for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole deriv￾atives (Figure 7.18). (BDC: benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid; DABCO: 1,4-diazabicyclo
[2.2.2]octane). Additionally, the Cu content was found to be 23 wt.% by ICP tech￾nique. In the presence of sodium ascorbate as reducing agent the catalyst showed
good conversion rate with desired product yielding 98% while in the absence of
NaASC due to formation of Glaser homocoupled product between terminal alkyne
yields of the desired product became only 68%.
The proposed mechanism given by the author is however slightly different from
other reports (Figure 7.19). Initially, the copper atom coordinated the triple bond and
subsequently, the acetylenic hydrogen was exchanged with the second copper atom
to produce copper acetylide followed by coordination with in situ-generated organic
azide. 1,3-Dipolar cycloaddition then affords the Cu-MOF-containing triazole, which on
protonolysis eventually produced triazole derivatives. Negligible catalyst leaching
was agreed by hot-filtration test during recycling experiment of the catalyst taking
both types of substituted (EDG as well as EWG) phenyl acetylene.
Polyaniline (PANI) could also act as matrix for heterogeneous catalyst, which can
bind both Cu(I) and Cu(II) ion as reported by Sarma and his co-workers [67]. Cu/PANI is
such type of catalyst that could catalyze the multicomponent click reaction (Figure 7.20).
The two types of catalyst mainly differ in the oxidation state of copper ion. During its
Figure 7.17: Synthesis of Cu2(BDC)2 (DABCO).
R + R' X + NaN3
R = Aryl, alkyl R' = vinyl, aryl, phenacyl,
CO2Et
Cu2(BDC)2(DABCO),
NaASC (20 mol%)
EtOH, 60 oC,
0.75-1.5 h
(1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1.2 equiv.) N
N
N
R'
87-98 %
X = Cl, Br
R
Figure 7.18: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole derivatives by multicomponent click reaction using Cu2(BDC)2 (DABCO).
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 263preparation by interfacial polymerization method from aniline solution and CuCl2·2H2O/
Na2S2O8 if NaBH4 was used under N2, Cu(I)/PANI catalyst was formed but when there no
reducing agent was added, then both Cu(I) as well as Cu(II) remained in the catalyst sur￾face. For the latter case ascorbic acid was used as reducing agent. The reaction passed
through the formation of active π-complex followed by the copper acetylide complex as
shown in Figure 7.21.
Solid-supported catalysts offer numerous opportunities to recover and reuse cata￾lysts from the reaction media. These characteristics of heterogeneous catalysts lead to
better process economy and environment compatibility to industrial-scale manufactur￾ing. Silica is one of such cheap stakeholders to prepare such heterogeneous catalyst
owing to their good thermal and chemical stability, high surface area, and exceptional
porosity. Due to the reactive silanol groups (Si–OH group) in silica surface, different li￾gand functionality can be strongly anchored onto it.
An example of such magnetically separable catalyst is the silica-coated heteroge￾neous catalyst, copper nanomagnetite (NHC-benzimi@Cu) [68]. Almost similar ap￾proach was adopted to prepare the catalyst as done by other researchers (Figure 7.22).
This complex used in the multicomponent click reaction via Huisgen 1,3-dipolar cyclo￾addition reaction of alkyl or aryl halide, sodium azide, and terminal alkyne, which
afforded various 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles (Figure 7.23). The catalyst can be eas￾ily separated by external bar magnet and recyclable up to 10th cycle. The mechanism
of reaction is shown in Figure 7.24. The reaction goes through the successive forma￾tion of copper triazolyl, copper triazolyl-acetylide, and six-membered ketenimine ring
intermediate, which is converted to five-membered rings intermediate, and after the
removal of Cu(I) the desired product is obtained.
Very recently benzimidazole-based ionic liquid-tagged Schiff base heterogeneous
copper catalyst Cu@ILSB was applied by Biswas and coworkers (Figure 7.25) [69]. The
Cu(II)MOF
Na-ascorbate (NaASC)
Cu(I)MOF R H
H+
R H
Cu
R' X +
R' N3 NaN3
NN
N Cu
R'
Cu
Cu(I)MOF
N
N
N R'
R CuMOF
H+
N
N
N R'
R
Figure 7.19: Mechanism for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole using Cu(II) MOF.
264 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basucatalyst compatible well under aqueous environment and the triazoles are obtained in
excellent yield by multicomponent click reaction (Figure 7.26) but the reaction time was
longer (12 h). Aldimine that act as Schiff’s base probably binds the copper ion which
may be in + 1 oxidation state as the reaction does not require any additional reducing
agent. According to the report of author synthesized copper complex (Cu@ILSB) did not
yield single crystals after several attempts and hence the exact structure of the complex
R
X + R' + NaN3 H2O:EG (1:1), RT, 2-6 h
(1 equiv.) (1.2 equiv.) (1.5 equiv.)
N
N
N
R' R
R = H, NO2, Br
X = Cl, Br
R' = Ph, CH2SPh, CH2CO2Ph
OMe
50-90 %
HN N N
δ
δ
δ
δ
NH NH
HN N N NH NH
NH
NH
Copper (I)
/PANI
Copper (I) /PANI (1.22 mol%)
or
Copper (I)/(II) (0.82 mol%) &
Ascorbic acid
HN N N NH NH
HN N N NH NH
Cu(II) & Cu(I)
NH
NH
structure
of
catalyst
Copper (II)
/PANI
structure
of
catalyst
Cu(I)
Figure 7.20: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles by Cu/PANI heterogeneous catalyst by multicomponent click
reaction.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 265N
NNH
N
N δ δ NH
Cu
(I) R'
H
R' [Cu]
P
A
N
I
R
X
+ NaN3
RN3
(let assume)
R
N N
N
R' [Cu]
P
A
N
I
N
[Cu]
N
N
R'
R
P
A
N
I
N
N
N R
R' [Cu]
P
A
N
I
N
N
N
R
R' H
Cu(I)/PANI
Figure 7.21: Mechanism of 1,2,3-triazole synthesis by Cu/PANI heterogeneous catalyst.
Nano
magnet O Si N NH
O
O
Nano
magnet
(EtO)4Si (TEOS: Tetraethylorthosilicate)
Nano
magnet
Xylene,
110 oC
(EtO)3Si
Cl
Nano
magnet O Si
O
O
Cl
N
H
N
DMF,
80 oC, 72 h
Nano
magnet N NH
Cu
I
O Si
O
O
CuI, THF
NaOt
Bu
nanomagnetic-NHC-Benzimi@Cu
Figure 7.22: Synthesis of NHC-Benzimi@Cu complex.
266 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basucould not be assigned. But the p-XRD data revealed that Cu2O NPs may be speeded over
the surface network of the catalyst.
Probable mechanism for this multicomponent AAC reaction was proposed by the
author as shown in Figure 7.27. It was assumed that the preliminary step was initiated
by the formation of copper acetylide by metallation of terminal alkynes in the presence
R X + R' + NaN3
(1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1.1 equiv.)
N
N
R N
R'
R = Ph, 2-OMe-C6H4,
4-F-C6H4, C6H13,
4-CN-C6H4, EtOCH2CO
EtOH, 80 oC, 20-40 min
NaASC
81-94 %
R' = 4-OMe-C6H4, 3-pyridyl
p-Tol, 4-F-C6H4,
X = Cl, Br
NHC-Benzimi@Cu (10 mol%)
Figure 7.23: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole derivatives by NHC-Benzimi@Cu complex.
Nano
magnet N NH
Cu
I
O Si
O
O
R X +
NaN3
R N3
Nano
magnet N NH
Cu
N
O Si
O
O
N R
N
R'
Nano
magnet
N NH
Cu
N
O Si
O
O
N N
R'
Nano
magnet N NH
Cu
O Si
O
O
N N
N
R
Nano
magnet N NH
Cu
O Si
O
O
N
NN
R'
N
NN
R'
R
ketenimine
intermediate copper
azido
intermediate
copper
azido-acetylide
intermediate
R'
R
R
Figure 7.24: Mechanism of 1,2,3-triazole formation by NHC-Benzimi@Cu complex.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 267of Cu@ILSB catalyst. In the subsequent step, alkyl azide (which was formed by the sub￾stitution reaction between an alkyl halide and sodium azide) reacted with the active
copper acetylide moiety via cycloaddition reaction to form Cu-triazole intermediate
which is followed by the elimination of the copper catalyst forming 1,4-disubstituted
1,2,3-triazoles as the main product.
Other than homogeneous and heterogeneous copper catalysts, other metals such
as Mn, Ni, and Ru were also found to catalyze the triazole synthesis. Like copper,
nickel metal was also searched and applied for multicomponent click reaction which
is known as NiAAC. A very few reports have been found in literature that can produce
1,2,3-triazole derivatives. Initially Raney Ni was used which produce both the re￾gioisomers (1,4 and 1,5) [70]. While in 2017 Cp2Ni-Xantphos was applied, both terminal
and internal alkyne reacted under this reaction condition [71]. With the terminal al￾kyne, the 1,5-disubstituted triazoles were obtained as the regioselective product. An￾other heterogeneous Ni catalyst is triazole-linked organic polymer (Ni-TLOP), which
acts as a photocatalyst in solar AAC [72]. However, in all these examples alkyl azide
has been directly employed as one of the coupling partners. In 2021, Choudhury et al.
N
N
H
Br
KOH, MeCN,
Reflux, 5 h
N
N
Br NH2. HBr
MeOH, Reflux, 12 h
N N NH2
OH
OH
H O
H2O
N N N OH
OH
Cu(OAc)2, MeOH
20 h, Reflux Cu@ILSB
(exact morphology
not known)
Figure 7.25: Synthesis of Cu@ILSB.
R X + R' H + NaN3
Cu@ILSB (10 mg),
SDS (10 mol%)
H2O, 90 oC, 12 h
NN
N
R
R'
R = Ph, 4-i-Pr-C6H4, 3-Br-C6H4,
3-I-C6H4, 3-NO2-C6H4, 1-Naphthyl,
4-Cl-C6H4-CO, allyl
(1 mmol) (1.2 mmol) (1.2 mmol)
X = Cl, Br, I
79-94 %
Ph
R' = Ph, p-Tol, 4-Br-C6H4,
4-NO2-C6H4, 4-OMe-C6H4
Figure 7.26: Synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles via multicomponent click reaction among alkyl
halide, terminal alkyne, and sodium azide by Cu@ILSB catalyst.
268 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu[73] prepared a ternary composite, Ni-rGO-Zeolite, as an efficient and sustainable cata￾lyst for the AAC reaction. The reaction sequence was essentially an MCR approach
avoiding direct use of alkyl azide (Figure 7.28). The catalyst was synthesized sequen￾tially by the following steps: (i) preparation of GO-Zeolite hybrid material composite
by the reaction between aqueous dispersion of GO with NaY zeolite in water; (ii) reac￾tion of the GO-zeolite hybrid composite with Ni(II) salt under reducing environment.
The resulting ternary nanocomposite Ni-rGO-zeolite is then produced with Ni(0) oxi￾dation state, where highly dispersed Ni-NPs get impregnated over rGO (reduced gra￾phene oxide) surface, as seen from HRTEM images and other analytical data. This
heterogeneous catalyst worked well under aqueous environment at 90 °C for the one￾pot multicomponent click reaction.
Unlike copper, the mechanism did not proceed through Cu-acetylide intermediate as
the initial step of reaction (Figure 7.29). Rather, Ni(0) NPs from rGO-zeolite surface invite
both alkyne and in situ formed alkyl azide via coordination interaction and force them to
interact under close vicinity. Alkyne dipolarophile then undergoes regioselective 1,3-
dipolar cycloaddition with coordinated alkyne and afforded the triazole product.
R' H
Cu@ILSB
R' Cu@ILSB
R X +
NaN3
R N3 R' Cu@ILSB
N N
R
N
N
N
R
BSLI@Cu R'
N
N
N
R
H R'
protonolysis
Figure 7.27: Mechanism of multicomponent click reaction by Cu@ILSB.
R X + R' H + NaN3 Ni-rGO-Zeolite (30 mg) (1.6 mol%)
H2O, 90 oC, 4-6 h
NN
N
R
R'
R = Ph, 4-i-Pr-C6H4, 3-Br-C6H4,
3-I-C6H4, 3-NO2-C6H4, 1-Naphthyl,
4-Cl-C6H4-CO, allyl
(1 mmol) (1.2 mmol) (1.5 mmol)
X = Cl, Br, I
79-94 %
Ph
R' = Ph, p-Tol, 4-Br-C6H4,
4-NO2-C6H4, 4-OMe-C6H4
Figure 7.28: Synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles via multicomponent click reaction among alkyl
halide, terminal alkyne, and sodium azide by Ni-rGO-Zeolite catalyst.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 269Apart from nickel, manganese was found to catalyze 1,2,3-triazole synthesis [74]. In this
method, the metal–organic/inorganic hybrid composite frameworks were applied in
click chemistry under green protocol (Figure 7.30). The author performed the reaction
at 50 °C. The catalyst was synthesized incorporating manganese on the magnetic Co2Fe2O4
in the presence of terephthalic acid or benzene 1,4-dicarboxylic acid by in situ solvother￾mal approach (Figure 7.31). The synthesized catalyst was formulated as CoFe2O4/Mn-BDC.
Due to excellent magnetic properties of the catalyst, it can be efficiently separated after
the reaction using external magnet and was shown to reuse for five consecutive cycles.
Though most of the substrate undergo good conversion rate within 2 h (68–100%), very
poor conversion was also observed in few cases. For example: (i) only 9% (4-methoxy
phenylacetylene, benzyl bromide, NaN3); (ii) 24% (tolylacetylene, benzyl bromide, NaN3);
and (iii) 31% (phenylacetylene, n-butylbromide, NaN3).
Ni Ni Ni
Ni Ni Ni Ni
Ni
Ni
Ni
Ni Ni Ni
Ni
Ni Ni
Ni
Schematic picture of Ni-rGO-Zeolite
Ni-rGO-Zeolite
R H
Ni
Ni Ni
Ni
R H
Ni
Ni Ni
Ni
R' X + NaN3
R' N3
R H
Ni
Ni Ni
Ni
R'
N N N
N N
N
R R' 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition on
Ni-rGO-zeolite surface
Figure 7.29: Mechanism of triazole formation using Ni-rGO-Zeolite catalyst.
R + X + NaN3
R = Ph, 4-Me-C6H4,
4-OMe-C6H4,
4-t-Bu-C6H4
R'
R' = Ph, 4-F-C6H4,
4-NO2-C6H4, nPr
(1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1 equiv.)
X = Cl, Br
H2O, 50 oC, 2-3 h
CoFe2O4/ Mn-BDC
N
N
N
R'
R
9 to 100 conversion rate
Figure 7.30: Synthesis of 1,4-substituted 1,2,3-triazole by CoFe2O4/Mn-BDC hybrid MOF as catalyst.
270 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb BasuA tentative mechanism (Figure 7.32) illustrating the role of the hybrid MOF was almost
similar as seen in case of Ni-catalyzed click reaction. Here no acetylide intermediate
was formed initially and role of Mn-BDC was to activate both alkyne and alkyl azide
from hybrid MOF surface. Initially, a manganese-coordinated acetylene complex was
formed which act as a better dienophile than acetylene itself. After that, in situ￾generated alkyl azide interacted with acetylenic complex to form another complex. In
the penultimate step, the click reaction on the MOF surface produced another com￾plex, which was basically a triazole-metal complex. Finally, regeneration of CoFe2O4/
Mn-BDC catalyst from the triazole-metal complex liberated the desired heterocycle.
Zn also recognized itself as the enlisted metal for click reaction [75]. A novel poly￾mer supported heterogeneous Zn(II) catalyst was prepared by supporting ZnCl2 NPs
onto modified SMA [poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride)] alternating polymer surface.
The SMA surface was then converted to SMI [poly(styrene-co-maleimide)] by reaction
with 3-aminopyridine to obtain the corresponding immobilized heterogeneous active
catalyst as Zn(II)SMI (Figure 7.33). Multicomponent click reaction with this catalyst was
reported by Sarmastib groups (Figure 7.34). Lower reaction time along with good recy￾clable and mild reaction conditions are the notable features of this nanocatalyst. The
mechanism of the reaction is depicted in Figure 7.35 which pass through both six as
well as five membered intermediate.
Another metal that suitably catalyzed the AAC reaction is ruthenium and such re￾action is known as RuAAC. In almost all literature reports, it was found that Ru￾CuAAC produce 1,5-substituted derivative of 1,2,3-triazole but Sharma et al. [76] syn￾thesized another regioisomer (1,4) from triazole-based Ru-catalyst. In their research
work they used click reaction both in catalyst preparation (Figure 7.36) as well as in
the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles (Figure 7.37). The formed catalyst SBA-15-Tz-Ru(II)TPP
CoCl2. 6H2O
+
FeCl3.6H2O
+
NaOAc + PEG-6000
OH
OH
160 oC,
16 h
CoFe2O4 NPs
COOH
COOH
MnCl2.4H2O
DMF, MeOH,
120 oC, 24 h
Mn-BDC = Manganese benzene-1,4-dicarboxylate/
manganese terephthalate
microflakes of CoFe2O4/
Mn-BDC hybrid composite
(Magnetic nanoparticles)
Figure 7.31: Synthesis of CoFe2O4/Mn-BDC hybrid MOF.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 271CH2
H
C
O O O
H2
C
H
C
O O O
SMA
poly(styrene-co-maleic anhydride)
N
NH2
+
stryene-maleic anhydride
alternating co-polymer
DMF (dry), N2, 35 oC,
Ac2O, NaOAc, Et3N, 75 oC
3-amino pyridine
O N O
H2
HC C
Ph n
N
SMI
alternating co-polymer
poly(styrene-co-maleimide)
ZnCl2
Ultrasound
DMF (dry),
N2, Reflux O N O
H2
HC C
Ph n
N
SMI/ZnCl2
alternating co-polymer
ZnCl2
7.61 % Zn (w/w)
= SMI polymeric unit
Zn(II)
Figure 7.33: Preparation of polymer-supported heterogeneous Zn(II)SMI catalyst.
R H
R H
R' + X
NaN3
R' N3
N
N
N
R'
R H
Mn
Mn
R H
Mn
N NN
R'
N
N
N
R'
Mn
R
Figure 7.32: Mechanism of click reaction by CoFe2O4/Mn-BDC.
272 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basuwas recyclable up to five times, and in each step, the catalyst was removed by simple
centrifugation, washed (CH2Cl2 or EtOH, 80 °C), and dried overnight under oven be￾fore applying in next cycle, and thus this heterogeneous catalyst was recycled up to
five times with good efficiency.
X + R + NaN3
R = Ph, p-Tol
R'
(1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1.1 equiv.)
X = Cl, Br, I
H2O, Reflux, 25 to 100 min
N
N
N
R
R'
(phenacyl,
alkyl, benzyl)
Zn(II)-SMI catalyst (0.05 g/mmol)
85-98 %
Figure 7.34: Zn-catalyzed multicomponent click reaction to synthesis 1,2,3-triazole.
R H
Zn(II)
R Zn
R' X+ NaN3
R' N3 R [Zn(II)SMI]
N
N
N
R'
N N N
Zn R
N R'
N
N
R
R'
Zn
N
N
N
R H
R'
ring
contraction
from 6 to 5
Figure 7.35: Mechanism of 1,2,3-triazole synthesis by Zn(II)SMI catalyst.
(MeO)3Si Cl
NaN3, TBAB
CH3CN (MeO)3Si NaN3 OH
OH
OH
SBA-15
O
O
O
SBA-15-N3
Si N3
Toluene
95 oC, N2
H2N
DMF, DIPEA
CuI, 50 oC
O
O
O
SBA-15-Tz
Si N N
N
NH2
[RuCl2(PPh3)3]
DMF, 12 h
O
O
O
SBA-15-Tz
Si N N
N
NH
Ru
ClPPh3
PPh3
Cl
Figure 7.36: Synthesis of Ru-triazole-based heterogeneous catalyst [SBA-15-Tz-Ru(II)TPP].
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 273The formation of 1,4-regiosomer was supported by controlled experiments done by
the research groups. The plausible mechanism for the regioselective formation of
1,4-disubstituted triazole is shown in Figure 7.38.
7.2.2 Three-component coupling among alkyl or aryl boronic acid,
terminal alkyne or alkynyl carboxylic acid, and sodium azide
Apart from alkyl halide, aryl or heteroaryl boronic acid was also exploited for 1,2,3-
triazole synthesis, which undergo coupling with alkyne or its surrogates alkynyl carbox￾ylic acid in presence of sodium azide. The previously discussed NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu(0)
O
O
O
SBA-15-Tz
Si N N
N
NH
Ru
ClPPh3
PPh3 Cl
PPh3 R
Ru Cl
Ph3P
R
N3
Ru Cl
Ph3P
R
HN N N
Ru
HN
N
N
R
H2O
Ph3P
Cl
Ru
HN
N
N
Ph R 3P
Cl
N
N N
R
Ru
Cl H
Ph3P
HN
N N
R
R' Br N
N N
R
R'
Figure 7.38: Synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole catalyzed by SBA-15-Tz-Ru(II)TPP catalyst.
R + Br + NaN3
R = Ph, 4-Me-C6H4, 4-OMe-C6H4, 4-COMe-C6H4, 4-NO2-C6H4,
4-C5H11, 2-OMe-C6H4, 4-O-C5H11, 1-Naphthyl, 2-Pyridyl, nC8H17
R'
(1 equiv.) (1.2 equiv.) (1.2 equiv.) H2O, 90 oC, 12 h
N
N
N
R'
R
R' = Ph, 4-OMe-C6H4, nPr
SBA-15-Tz-Ru(II)TPP (0.445 nol%)
70-92%
Figure 7.37: Synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole by SBA-15-Tz-Ru(II)TPP.
274 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basucatalyst (Figure 7.6), as used in multicomponent click reaction (Figure 7.7), also worked
successfully with aryl boronic acid, terminal alkyne, and NaN3 (Figure 7.39) [60].
Another silica-supported heterogeneous catalyst is the Cu-NHC@SiO2 [77], which was
prepared starting from 3-chloropropyl trimethoxy silane (CPTMS) as reported by Garg
et al. (Figure 7.40). Within the catalyst framework NHC binds the active copper center
which is in +2 oxidation state and it was used for 1,2,3-triazole synthesis. Besides direct
azide–alkyne coupling triazole unit was also prepared by multicomponent method.
The MCR approach involves coupling among arylboronic, alkyne, and NaN3 (Fig￾ure 7.41) to produce synthesis of many triazole derivatives.
Vile et al. [78] synthesized a homogeneous Cu-catalyst as single atom crystal for three￾component regioselective click reaction under base-free conditions. The catalysts
were prepared via tricyanomethane polymerization to create a combine an electronic
structure. The copper ion gets stabilized by the mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride
(C3N4) carrier which acts as a ligand. The catalysts were employed in the synthesis of
1,2,3-triazoles employing azide–alkyne click reaction.
O Si NN
O
O
CPTMS
(3-chloropropyl
trimethoxy silane)
O Si
O
O
Cl
NN
Cu
I
O Si
O
O
CuI, KOt
Bu
SiO2
Si Cl
O O
O
80 oC
Dry
Toluene
SiO2
6h
(under same
condition)
N N
SiO2
,
THF, RT
SiO2
CPTMS@SiO2 Imidazole-CPTMS@SiO2
Cu-NHC@SiO2
Figure 7.40: Synthesis of Cu-NHC@SiO2 catalyst.
Ar B(OH)2 + R' + NaN3
N
N N
R'
Ar
NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu (1 mol%)
H2O, RT, 3-5 h
65-95 %
Ar = Ph, p-Tol R' = Aryl, 2-thienyl, nC3H7
(1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1.1 equiv.)
Figure 7.39: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole by three-component coupling among aryl boronic acid, terminal
alkyne, and sodium azide catalyzed by NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu(0).
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 275Very recently Pharande et al. [79], another heterogeneous catalyst Cell-ThP-Cu(II) (cellu￾lose-supported Schiff base Cu(II) catalyst) was prepared (Figure 7.42) and applied to syn￾thesize 1,2,3-triazoles from aryl boronic acid (Figure 7.43). The reaction proceeded via
Chan-Lam coupling and Huisgen 1,3 cycloaddition reaction (Chan-Lam coupling is the
cross-coupling reaction between alkyl/aryl boronic acids with N- or O-nucleophile). In
the mechanism of the reaction tuning of the catalyst was very interesting; in the first
half of the reaction it played the role of aryl azide formation from precursor aryl bo￾ronic acid via Cu(II)/Cu(0) redox system. Again in the second half of the reaction it
formed product (by click reaction between formed aryl azide with terminal alkyne by
Huisgen cycloaddition) via Cu(II)/Cu(I) redox system (Figure 7.44). While reviewing the
entry list it was found that 4-fluoro phenylacetylene did not form any triazole product
with 4-formyl phenyl boronic acid, 4-bromophenyl boronic acid, and 2-thienyl boronic
acid (reported yield 0, in all these cases). Besides recyclability (up to fifth run) excellent
TON and TOF as well as biodegradable nature of this heterogeneous catalyst made it
prevalent in terms of sustainable development.
Another method for the construction of 1,2,3 triazole is the decarboxylative cou￾pling of propiolic acid, aryl boronic acid, and NaN3. Alkynyl carboxylates are well￾known alkyne surrogates because of activated spC–COOH group that immediately get
triggered prior to cycloaddition with azide ion (Figure 7.45). This has been reported
by Li and group [80].
The mechanistic details are shown in the Figure 7.46 which follow four steps: step
I: formation of the copper(I) acetylide from the decarboxylation of propiolic acid (in
the presence of copper salt and MeOLi); step II: [3 + 2] cycloaddition of copper(I) ace￾tylide with the azide to form triazolyl-copper intermediate; step III: transmetalation
with borate complex (formed by the reaction between phenylboronic acid and MeOLi
under O2); and step IV: reductive elimination to produce the desired product with the
release of the copper(I) species.
Figure 7.41: Synthesis of 1,4-substituted 1,2,3-triazole from aryl boronic acid, terminal alkyne, and sodium
azide by Cu-NHC@SiO2.
276 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu7.2.3 Three-component coupling among α-keto acetal, tosyl
hydrazine, and primary amine
Another set of coupling partners that can provide substituted 1,2,3-triazole are 1°
amine, tosylhydrazine, and acetophenone/α-keto acetal (Figure 7.47) [81]. Zehender
method is little milder process and (a wide variety of functional groups such as ester,
nitriles and carbamates were well tolerated) applicable for alkylamine, heteroaryl￾amine in addition to aryl amine. While acetophenone was used only aryl amine gave
the reaction. Initially the reaction is carried out at room temperature between α-keto
Cellulose O Si
O
O
NH2
Cellulose O Si
O
O
NH2
APTES
Toluene /Reflux, 24 h
Cell-NH2
O S
H
Cellulose O Si
O
O
Cell-ThP (imine functionality)
N
H
S
Thiophene-2-
carbaldehyde
(ThP)
EtOH
Cu(OAc)2, EtOH
Reflux, 24 h
Cellulose O Si
O
O
Cell-ThP-Cu(II)
N
H
S
Cu(II) AcO OAc (3-Aminopropyl)triethoxysilane
(APTES)
O O Si
O
H2N
Figure 7.42: Synthesis of cellulose-ThP-Cu(II) heterogeneous catalyst.
Het/Ar B(OH)2 + R H + NaN3
(1 equiv.) (1.2 equiv.) (1.5 equiv.)
Cell-ThP-Cu(II) (0.072 mol%)
(R = H, Me, F)
H2O, RT, 6h
N
N
N Het/Ar
R
Ar/Het = 3-NO2-C6H4, 4-Br-C6H4, 4-CHO-C6H4, 4-OMe-C6H4, 2-thienyl 85-97 %
Figure 7.43: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles by cellulose-ThP-Cu(II) via MCR approach.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 277acetal and tosylhydrazine followed by 80 °C when amine is added in the same pot.
The work, however, did not discuss about any plausible mechanistic route or incorpo￾rate any evidential studies.
Cell-ThP-Cu(II)
Ar/Het = R'
R = R
Consider:
RB(OH)2
Cell-ThP-Cu(II)
B(OH)2
R
Transmetallation
NaN3 Cell-ThP-Cu(II)
N3
R
Cell-ThP-Cu(0)
1/2H2O
1/2O2 Chan-Lam coupling
R'N3
Reductive
elimination Ligand
substitution
Cell-ThP-Cu(II)
Cell-ThP-Cu(I)
in situ
reduction
R H
H
R Cu(I)-ThP-Cell
R'N3
R' N N N
R Cu(I)-ThP-Cell
N
Cu
N N
R
R'
Cell-PTh
N
N
N R'
Cell-PTh(I)Cu R Huisgen cycloaddtion
N
N
N R'
H R
(Product)
Figure 7.44: Mechanism of 1,2,3-triazole formation by cellulose-ThP-Cu(II) catalyst involving both Chan￾Lam coupling as well as Huisgen cycloaddition.
R COOH R' N3 R'' B(OH) + 2 + N
N
N
R R''
R'
Cu(OAc)2 (15 mol%)
DMBPy (30 mol%)
MeOLi (2.5 equiv.), CH3CN
(1 equiv.) (1.5 equiv.) (2.5 equiv.)
R' = Bn, CH2CO2Me
CH2CH2Ph, nBu,
nHex, C5H9,
CH2CO2Et, CH2CH2OH,
CH2SiMe3
55-73 % R = H, alkyl, aryl R'' = alkyl, aryl
O2, 12h, 60 oC
Figure 7.45: Synthesis of triazole by three- component coupling among propiolic acid, sodium azide,
and alkyl boronic acid.
278 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu7.2.4 Three-component coupling among N-propargyl ortho-bromo
benzamide, alkyl halide, and alkyl azide
The 1,2,3-triazole synthesized from alkyne with other functional group was less com￾mon in the literature. Ether and amide-linked 1,2,3-triazolyl scaffolds act as anti￾proliferative agents and these difunctional compounds were synthesized attempting
click reaction on N-propargyl ortho-bromo benzamide via MCR approach using so￾dium ascorbate and CuSO4 at 150 °C (Figure 7.48) [82]. 2-Bromo-N-(prop-2-yn-1-yl)ben￾zamide (i.e., N-propargyl ortho-bromo benzamide) was separately synthesized from
the reaction of 2-bromobenzoic acid and propargylamine via amidation reaction.
R COOH
Cu(II) catalyst, MeOLi
CO2
R Cu(I)
R' N3
N
N
N
R Cu(I)
R'
Step-I
Step-II
N
N
N
R Cu(III)
R' Step-III
N Step-IV
N
N
R R''
R'
[R''B(OMe)3-n(OH)n]Li
R''B(OH)2
MeOLi
O2
LiB(OMe)4-n(OH)n
+ R''
Cu(I)
[3+2]
cycloaddition
+
transmetalation
reductive
elimination
Figure 7.46: Mechanism of the 1,2,3-triazole formation from propiolic acid, sodium azide, and alkyl
boronic acid.
O
R1
R3
OMe
OMe
+ TsNHNH2 + R2NH2
1. RT, DMSO
N
N
N
R2 R3
R1
45-91 %
R1, R3 = H, Me R2 = alkyl, aryl, heteroaryl
2. 80 oC
(1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1.054 equiv.)
Figure 7.47: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole from α-keto acetal, tosyl hydrazine, and primary amine.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 2797.2.5 Three-component coupling among aldehyde, nitroalkene,
or nitroalkane and sodium azide
A different coupling setup to synthesize 1,2,3-triazoles is the coupling among aldehyde,
nitroalkene/nitroalkane, and NaN3 [83]. An example of such coupling was the synthesis
of triazolochromenes by sequential one-pot three-component reaction. The intermedi￾ate compound 3-nitro-2H-chromenes was (Figure 7.49) produced from salicylaldehyde,
nitroalkene, and sodium azide. In case of solid salicylaldehydes, yields of products are
very low; in that case, the author has developed a two-step mechanochemical approach
which gave higher yield. Though the mechanism of the reaction was not proposed by
the author, perhaps the double bonds of dihydro pyran ring get activated via removal
of NO2 group which undergo cycloaddition with azide ion. Post-functionalization of
these compounds results in the formation of many biologically relevant chemical enti￾ties. These chromenes are ubiquitous in the nature and important structural motifs for
medicinal applications.
A metal-free approach under microwave irradiation technique in PEG-400 solvent
was reported by Garg et al. [77, 84] for the synthesis of 4-aryl-NH-1,2,3-triazoles. They
had chosen aromatic aldehyde, nitromethane, and NaN3 (Figure 7.50) in this three￾component reaction. The reaction proceeds through the formation of α,β-unsaturated
nitrocompound, also called β-nitrostyrene, the Henry reaction product, that is, the aldol
condensation product between aromatic aldehyde and nitromethane (Figure 7.51). The
activated styrene is then attacked by the N3
̶
ion and catalyzed by anthranilic acid,
owing to its H-bonding effect in proximity by both NH2 and COOH group, encouraging
the formation of five-member ring, via HNO2 elimination and protonation to afford the
monosubstituted 4-aryl 1,2,3-triazole.
As previously discussed, the Cu-NHC@SiO2 [77] also acts as a suitable catalyst with
similar kind of reacting partners (Figure 7.52) to afford 4-aryl-NH-1,2,3-triazoles with
diverse benzaldehydes. Under the 1,2,3-triazole family, the NH-1,2,3-triazole represents
Figure 7.48: One-pot synthesis of N-(1-aryl-1H-1,2,3-triazol-4-yl)methyl)-2-(aryloxymethyl)benzamide
derivatives.
280 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basuan important class of compound from which post alkylation or arylation on NH-1,2,3-
triazole may lead to the formation of many desirable N2-substituted 1,2,3-triazoles.
The above reaction almost under similar reaction condition was reported using ZnO
NPs by Phukan et al. [85], except in the proportion of the substrates taken. The ratio
Figure 7.49: Synthesis of triazolochromenes from salicylaldehyde and nitroalkene and sodium azide.
Het/Ar H
O
+ CH3
N O
O
+ NaN3
(1 equiv.) (1.5 equiv.) (2 equiv.)
Reaction condition: constant microwave irradiation 100w (upto 130 °C), 5 min or
conventional heating at 130 oC for 2-3 hr.
N
N
N
Ar/Het
PEG-400
H2N
O
HO
Anthranilic acid (10 mol%)
74-94 %
Ar =
R
(R = H, 2-Cl, 2-NO2, 2-OH, 4-Cl, 4-Br, 4-CN, 4-OMe, 3-NO2, 2,4-di-Cl e.t.c)
Het = 2-furyl
Figure 7.50: Metal-free synthesis of 4-aryl-NH-1,2,3-triazoles by three-component reaction among
nitromethane, aldehyde, and NaN3 catalyzed by anthranilic acid.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 281they had taken for aromatic aldehyde, nitroalkane, and sodium azide was 1:2:3 to get
the optimum yield (98%). The PEG-capped ZnO NPs (15–25 nm) worked efficiently
with the tolerance of a wide range of electronically diverse benzaldehydes leading to
the synthesize 4-aryl-NH-1,2,3-triazoles.
7.2.6 Three-component coupling among o-phenylenediamine,
2-azidobenzaldehyde, and arylchalcogenyl alkynes
Jacob and coworkers [86] synthesized (arylselanyl)- or (arylsulfenyl)-alkyl-1,2,3-triazolo￾1,3,6-triazonines in moderate-to-excellent yields via the reaction of o-phenylenediamine,
2-azidobenzaldehyde, and different arylchalcogenyl alkynes using a copper-catalyzed
MCR approach (Figure 7.53). These reactions tolerate a range of substituents on the aryl￾chalcogenyl alkynes and found to be an efficient methodology for combinatorial synthesis
of new selenium- or sulfur-containing triazonines.
Figure 7.51: Anthranilic acid catalyzed mechanism for the synthesis of 4-aryl-NH-1,2,3-triazoles from
nitromethane, aldehyde, and NaN3.
R CHO + CH3NO2 + NaN3
(1 equiv.) (1.5 equiv.) (2 equiv.)
N
N
N H
R
R = 3-furyl, 3-thienyl, 4-Br-C6H4, 4-OMe-C6H4,
4-OH-C6H4, 4-F-C6H4, 2-Cl-C6H4, 3-NO2-C6H4,
2-NO2-C6H4, 2-Cl & 6-F-C6H3
76-95 %
Cu-NHC@SiO2 (1.5 mol%)
PEG-400, 100 oC, 1.5-3 h
(4-substituted￾N1-H 1,2-3-triazole)
Figure 7.52: Synthesis of 4-substituted 1,2,3-triazole from aldehyde, nitromethane, and sodium azide by
Cu-NHC@SiO2.
282 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb BasuThe mechanism of the reaction has shown in Figure 7.54, which was initiated by the
copper acetylide and imine formation via condensation of o-phenylenediamine with
2-azidobenzaldehyde mechanism followed by azidation on copper ion. In the next
step, the acetylide–copper complex interacted with the azide intermediate to give
Csp2-Cu triazolyl intermediate. In the further step, an intramolecular Ullmann-type
coupling of afforded the 10-membered cyclic intermediate, which by reductive elimi￾nation produced desired (arylchalcogenyl)-alkyl-1,2,3-triazolo-1,3,6-triazonine, regen￾erating the copper(I) catalyst.
NH2
NH2
+
N3
O
H
Z
H
R n
HN N
N
N
N
Z
n R
CuI (10 mol%)
Et3N ( 2equiv.)
1,4-dioxane, 100 oC, 24 h, N2
(1 equiv.)
(1 equiv.)
(1 equiv.)
45-84%
(R = 4-F, 4-Cl, 4-OMe, 4-Me,
3-CF3, 2,4,6-Me3)
(Z = S, Se)
Figure 7.53: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazolo-1,3,6-triazonines from arylchalcogenyl alkynes o-phenylenediamine
and 2-azidobenzaldehyde.
R Z
Cu(I) n
+
N3
O
H
H2N
NH2
N3
H
N
H2O
N
H
N
NH2
NH2
N N
Cu
Z R
n
N
NH2
n
N
N N
Cu
Z
Cu(I)
R Z
n H+ Et3N
N
Cu N
N
N
N
H
Z
R
n
Et3N
HN N
N
N
N
Z R n
+ Et3NH
Et3NH
+
Figure 7.54: Mechanism for the synthesis of arylchalkogenyl-alkyl-1,2,3-triazolo-1,3,6-triazonines.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 2837.2.7 Three-component coupling among epoxide, terminal alkyne,
and sodium azide
Magnetic NiFe2O4-supported glutamate-copper (0) catalyst (Figure 7.6) was further em￾ployed as effective catalyst for the synthesis of a wide variety of 1,4-disubstituted-1,2,3-
triazoles via one-pot three-component coupling among epoxide, alkyne, and NaN3
(Figure 7.55). Hydroxymethylated 1,2,3-triazoles were obtained from epoxide substrate
which may have scope to be further functionalized to build up many other triazole
derivatives. An interesting compound bis(triazoles) was obtained using epichlorohy￾drin which first gives epoxytriazoles followed by repetition of same step affords the
hydroxyl-bis-triazole (Figure 7.56).
7.2.8 Three-component coupling reaction among isatin Schiff
base, sulfonamide, and aromatic aldehyde
The 1,4,5-trisubstituted triazoles were prepared by a completely different coupling set
up. The multicomponent coupling among isatin Schiff bases, benzaldehydes, and tosyl￾hydrazine which afforded many structurally diverse 1,4,5-trisubstituted-1,2,3-triazoles.
More interestingly, the reaction is metal- and azide-free and promoted under sunlight
in the presence of Cs2CO3 as base (Figure 7.57) [87].
O
R H + R' + NaN3 NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu (5 mol%)
H2O, RT, 2-6 h
N N
N
H
OH
R R'
62-95 % (1 equiv.) (1 equiv.) (1.1 equiv.)
R1 = CH2Cl, Me, CH2OCH2CH=CH2,CH2OCnC4H9, CH2OPh, CH2O-p-Tol,
CH2O-o-Tol, 4-Cl-C6H4, 4-Br-C6H4, 4-Me-C6H4, Ph
(including cyclohexene oxide &
cyclopeneteneoxide)
R = 4-R''-C6H4 (R'' = 4-OMe, 3-Me, 3-F, 4-F, 4-Cl, 4-C6H13), 2-pyridyl, nC4H9, nC5H12, nPr
Figure 7.55: Synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole by three-component coupling among epoxide, terminal alkyne,
and sodium azide catalyzed by NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu.
O
+
Ph
Cl + NaN3
N
N
N
Ph
O +
Ph
+ NaN3
N N
N
Ph
OH
N N
N
Ph
hydroxy bis(triazole)
Figure 7.56: Synthesis of the hydroxy bis triazole.
284 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb BasuThe author suggested plausible reaction mechanism (Figure 7.58) and explained with
evidence based on various experimental reaction results. The first step was the forma￾tion of hydrazone derivative by reaction between aldehyde and tosyl hydrazine. The
imine then undergoes deprotonation in the presence of base and the conjugate base
thus formed undergoes resonance to form diazo intermediate followed by radical for￾mation in the presence of sunlight under atmospheric oxygen. Here O2 acts as an oxi￾dant and it oxidizes the anion to the radical. In the next step, the radical attacks to the
imine bond of isatin ring, with the elimination of Ts radical and a spirocyclic interme￾diate is formed. The amide bond gets radically hydrolyzed by H2O to produce NH2 and
COOH group. Finally, decarboxylation and dehydrogenation occur to afford the de￾sired 1,2,4-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazole as the final product.
7.2.9 Three-component coupling reaction of 2H-azirine, terminal
alkyne, and sodium azide
Few researchers emphasize more on the mechanistic investigation rather than the
usual formation of triazole by following most common multicomponent route. Zhao
and co-workers. [88] explained the formation of 1,2,3-triazole ring formation from 2H￾azirines azirine, terminal alkyne, and sodium azide (Figure 7.59) by their theoretical
rationalization. They investigated density functional theory (DFT) and MC-AFIR (mul￾ticomponent artificial force-induced reaction) (MC-AFIR) and established the mecha￾nistic route involving copper(I)-catalyzed synthesis of 5-enamine-trisubstituted-1,2,3-
triazole synthesis via C–N cross-coupling and ring opening of 2H-azirines.
According to their experimental findings the reaction steps involve (i) dicopper￾catalyzed ring opening of 2H-azirines, (ii) alkyne hydrogen atom transfer, (iii) [3 + 2] cycload￾dition, and (iv) C–N bond formation through reductive elimination (Figure 7.60). The possibil￾ity of as usual mononuclear-Cu(III) intermediate was ruled out in terms of its higher energy
N
H
N R1
O G
H
O
Me
S
NHNH2
O O
+ +
Cs2CO3 (1 equiv.),
DMF, Sunlight, 100 oC
6-8 h
(1 equiv.)
(1 equiv.)
(1 equiv.)
N
N
N
NH2
G
R1
75-90 %
G = CH, N
R2
R2
R2 = H, 4-Me, 4-OMe, 4-NO2, 4-CN, 4-F, 4-Cl, 3-OMe, 3-NO2, 3,4-(OMe)2
R1 = H, Me, OMe, CN, F, Cl, Br, NO2
Figure 7.57: 1,4,5-Trisubstituted-1,2,3-triazoles by multicomponent coupling reaction among isatin Schiff
base, sulfonalide, and aromatic aldehyde.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 285barrier, AIM analysis, and trapping experiments. DFT outcomes indicate that the transmeta￾lation process is the slow step of the reaction. Their MC-AFIR survey on the prereactant com￾plexes suggested that both the dicopper-catalyzed 2H-azirine RO and activation of spC–H are
both thermodynamically viable by a singlet/triplet crossing point. This is attributed by the
fact that Et3N play critical for AHT ahead of cycloaddition step. Consequently, this is the
main reason for the absence of CuAAC products in this entire interrupted click process.
Figure 7.58: Radical mechanism for the synthesis of 1,4,5-trisubstituted-1,2,3-triazoles.
R' H + N
R
N N +
CuI (10 mol%),
DIEA
DCM, RT, 12 h
N
N
N
R'
R
N
H
Ph
DIEA = N,N-Diisopropylethylamine
N
(Hünig's base)
N
Ph
upto 97%
Figure 7.59: 1,4,5-Trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazole formation by multicomponent reaction among from
2H-azirines azirine, terminal alkyne, and sodium azide by Cu-NHC@SiO2.
286 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu7.2.10 Three-component coupling reaction of diazomethane
sulfonamides, primary aliphatic amines, and aromatic
aldehydes
Another motivating metal-free three-component synthesis of 1,5-disubstituted 1,2,3-
triazoles from α-acetyl-α-diazomethane sulfonamides, primary aliphatic amines, and ar￾omatic aldehydes was reported by Krasavin and coworkers [89]. The 1,2,3-triazoline-4-
sulfonamides were isolated as reported by their immediate former work [90], which
endured aromatization via the elimination of sulfur(IV) oxide and amine to afford 1,5-
isomer (Figure 7.61). In the other variant, both chemical transformations take place in a
single step conducted at room temperature.
A brilliant modification in the above protocol was done by Malkova et al. [91], tak￾ing 2-azido benzaldehyde and propargylamine considering further a tandem [3 + 2] cy￾loaddition. When these duos were subjected to react with α-acetyl-α-diazomethane
sulfonamide structurally intriguing bistriazolo-diazepine and bistriazolo-diazocine
were obtained at room temperature (Figure 7.62). When but-3-yn-1-amine hydrochloride
reacted, the temperature was increased to 120 °C to get the corresponding bis triazol
product. After the formation of monotriazole unit by previous process the free azido
end then reacts with triple bond of the propargylamine via intramolecular AAC reac￾tion. They also showed the variation in the propargylamine part taking both internal
and terminal alkyne. Few azido compounds such as 2-azidoquinoline-3-carbaldehyde,
2-azido-1-methyl-1H-indole-3-carbaldehyde, and 2-azido-5-nitrobenzaldehyde (Figure 7.63)
N
Ph
Cu Cu
Ring opening
of azirine
N
Ph
hydrogen
atom transfer
(HAT)
R' Cu
Cu
HN
Ph
N
R
N N
N
N
N
R'
R
Cu
Cu
H
N
Ph
N
N
N
R'
Cu R
CuN
H
N
N
N
R'
R Cu
N
H Cu
C-N bond
formation
N
N
N
R'
R
N
H
Ph
Dis-Cu
Figure 7.60: Mechanism of 1,4,5-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazole synthesis involving ring opening of azirine
and HAT (hydrogen atom transfer).
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 287fail to give the desired reaction. The as-synthesized different types of bis(triazole) com￾pounds were found noncytotoxic and tested against lung cancer cell lines A549 and NCI￾H460 and found very low level of cell proliferation.
7.2.11 Three-component coupling reaction of α-CF3 carbonyls
(both ketone and ester), aryl azides, and amines
Another metal-free three-component coupling to afford 1,2,4-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazole
was explored by Gao et al. [92], and the coupling partners were α-CF3 carbonyls (both
O
N2
S N Ph
Boc
O O
R'NH2
O
R H
+ + RT, 18 h
Molecular sieve
MeOH
N
N
N
S O N
O
Boc
Ph
R'
R
Base H
H
N
N
N
R'
R
45-90 %
Figure 7.61: Metal-free synthesis of 1,5 disubstituted 1,2,3-triazol by three-component reaction among
α-acetyl-α-diazomethane sulfonamides, primary amine and aryl aldehyde.
Figure 7.62: Synthesis of bis(1,2,3-triazolo) diazepine and diazocine compounds.
N3
O
H O2N
N N3
CHO
N
Me
N3
CHO
Figure 7.63: Structure of inactivated aromatic azide.
288 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basuketone and ester), aryl azides, and amines. When the enolizable α-CF3 ketones were ap￾plied in aqueous reaction medium various substituted 4-amido 1,2,3-triazoles were ob￾tained (Figure 7.64). Control experiment taking 18O-labeling isotope revealed that the in
situ-generated β-oxo amide was the key compound for the formal oxygen-shift and the
subsequent [3 + 2] cycloaddition reaction, with amine as both the catalyst and reactant. In
the case of nonenolizable α-CF3 esters, the densely functionalized 5-amino-1,2,3-triazoles
were achieved exclusively.
Spirostanic 1,4,5-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles were synthesized by the three-component
reaction of (25R)-6-azidospirostan-3,5-diols with acetophenones and aryl aldehydes. In
this one-pot two-step process, reaction proceeded through the in situ formation of (E)-
chalcones [93], followed by copper-catalyzed click reaction with organic azides in DMF
medium. Products of miscellaneous diversity were achieved by varying the aldehyde
and acetophenone nature as well as by changing the stereochemistry of spirostanic
azide. Synthesized molecules showed antiproliferative activity against MCF-7, glioblas￾toma (SNB-19, T98G, A-172), and neuroblastoma (IMR-32, SH-SYSY) (HCT116) cell lines
(GI50 in the single-digit micromolar range).
7.3 Four-component coupling reaction for triazole
synthesis
Four-component MCRs are relatively less common in the literature as compared to
three-component coupling routes. One possible reason for this may be that the proba￾bility of four body collision is likely to be less than three body collision. But successive
bimolecular reaction can lead to the ultimate product. There are however few reports
in the literature depicting four-component synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles or triazole￾tethered and potentially useful heterocyclic molecules [94–101].
R1
O
CF3 + ArN3 + N
R2
H
R2
when R1 = aryl, alkyl
when R1 = O-alkyl
N
N
N
R1
Ar
O
N
R2
R2
N
N
N
N
Ar
O
R1
R2
R R 2 1 = aryl, alkyl, o-alkyl
Figure 7.64: Synthesis of 1,2,4-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles from three-component coupling of α-CF3
carbonyls (both ketone and ester), aryl azides, and amines.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 2897.3.1 Four-component coupling reaction 2-azidobenzenamines,
aldehydes, propiolic acids, and isocyanides
The one-pot four-component alkyne–azide cycloaddition reaction (4CR/AAC) involving
Ugi reaction is another process for the triazole synthesis. This domino sequence ap￾proach affords [1,2,3]triazolo[1,5-a]quinoxalin-4(5H) under metal-free condition as out￾lined in Figure 7.65. Initially the reaction of 2-azidobenzenamines, aldehydes, propiolic
acids, and isocyanides produced the Ugi adducts, which were transformed to the [1,2,3]
triazolo[1,5-a]quinoxalin-4(5H)-ones in moderate to good yields via alkyne–azide cyclo￾addition reaction. 4-Nitrobenzaldehyde and butanal do not undergo this reaction under
this for component approach [94].
7.3.2 Four-component coupling reaction among terminal alkyne,
urea, α-azido ketone, and aromatic aldehyde
One-pot sequential click-Biginelli reaction afford some important 1,4-disubstituted
1,2,3-triazole-dihydropyrimidinone compounds (1,2,3-trzl-DHPM) [95]. In the sequential
series the first step of the reaction involves AAC and the resulting triazole then under￾goes Biginelli reaction with various substituted aromatic aldehyde in presence of urea
(Figure 7.66). Further bromination on C-6 methyl group of pyrimidine ring followed
by azidation and click reaction afforded another class of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-bis￾triazole dihydropyrimidinone (Figure 7.67). These hybrid compounds are good anti￾R1
NH2
N3
R2 CHO
R3 COOH R4 + N C
+
N
N
N N
R2 CONHR4
R1
R3
O
N3
N
R2 CONHR4
R1
O
R3
Ugi-4CR
MeOH, RT, 12-24 h
DMF, 90 oC
(1 equiv. each compound)
IAAC
50-92 %
R1 = H, 4-Me, 4-Cl,
4-Br, 4,6-Me2
R2 = 4-Cl-C6H4, Ph,
2-Cl-C6H4, nPr,
p-Tol, 2-furyl,
2-thienyl
R3 = Ph, Me
R4 = t-Bu, Cy
IAAC: Intramolecular azide-alkyne cycloaddition
Figure 7.65: One-pot synthesis of [1,2,3]triazolo[1,5-a]quinoxalin-4(5H)-ones by Ugi-4CR/AAC reaction.
290 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basuproliferative agents. Burke and coworkers have found good in vitro antiproliferative
activity [GI50 (growth inhibition of 50%) values are less than 20 μm) in six different
human cancer cell lines: A549 and SW1573 (non-small-cell lung), HBL-100 and T-47D
(breast), HeLa (cervix), and WiDr (colon)].
Ph +
O
N3
O
H2N NH2
R'' O
R
R = H, Cl, OBn
R'' = H, Br, OMe
CuI (5 mol%),
DIPEA (4 mol%),
HOAc (4 mol%)
MW, 24 h, 90 oC
MeCN
+
Aldehyde: Alkyne: Azide: Urea = 1:1:1:1.2
R
R''
N
H
NH
N
N N
Ph
O
39-53 %
Figure 7.66: Synthesis of triazole from terminal alkyne, urea, α-azido ketone, and aromatic aldehyde.
R
R''
N
H
NH N
N N
Ph
O
TBABr3 (1.5 equiv)
R
R''
N
H
NH N
N N
Ph
O
Br (1 equiv.)
DCM, RT, 2 h
NaN3 (1.5 equiv),
DMF
60 °C,
MW, 30 min
R
R''
N
H
NH
N
N N
Ph
O
N3
R''' (1 equiv)
90 °C, MW, DMF R
R''
HN
NH
N N
N
Ph
O
N N
N
R'''
R''' = Ph, cyclopropyl, 4-Br-C6H4,
35-97 %
N
O
O
Figure 7.67: Synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-bis triazole dihydropyrimidinone 1,4-disubstituted
1,2,3-triazole-dihydropyrimidinone by sequential bromination, azidation, and AAC reaction.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 2917.3.3 Four-component coupling reaction among acid chloride,
TIPS-protected 1,3-butadiyne, hydrazine, and alkyl azide
Pyrazolyl-tethered-1,2,3-triazole is an important binuclear heteroscaffold and an essen￾tial bioactive ingredient. The synthetic route behind the generation of such duo-hetero
unit was the four-component coupling among TIPS-protected 1,3-butadiyne, hydrazine,
and alkyl azide (Figure 7.68) [96]. Basically, the reaction follows Pd-Cu-catalyzed alkyny￾lation-cyclocondensation-desilylation-CuAAC process, also referred to as ACDC reaction.
The mechanistic insight pointed out the pentadiynone intermediate as suggested the fol￾lowing sequential approach (Figure 7.69) via retrosynthestic study. The first step was
the Pd-catalyzed Sonogashira coupling which finally ended by CuAAC.
Figure 7.68: Pyrazolyl-tethered-1,2,3-triazoles by four-component coupling among acid chloride,
TIPS-protected 1,3-butadiyne, hydrazine, and alkyl azide.
R1
O
Cl
TIPS TIPS
O
R1 pentadiynone
Step-I + H2N NH
R
N N
TIPS
R1
Sonogashira Cyclo Alkynylation condensation
Desilylatin
N N
H
R1 CuAAC
R2 R2
N N
R1
R2
N N
N
R3
Step-II
Step-IV Step-II
Figure 7.69: Mechanism toward the synthesis of pyrazolyl-tethered-1,2,3-triazoles.
292 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu7.4 Five-component coupling reaction for triazole
synthesis
Five-component approaches toward the synthesis of triazole are rarely found in the
triazole or MCR literature [97–100]. Here we have assembled some examples where
four-component approach initially produce heteroscaffold leaving azido or alkyne
residue to be further triazolized by 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition with corresponding acet￾ylenic dipolarophile or alkyl azide.
7.4.1 Five-component coupling reaction among indole, aromatic
aldehyde, propargyl bromide, alkyl halide, and NaN3
The five-component approach was developed by Saehlim et al. [97] to synthesize the in￾dole-triazole hetero-pair scaffold. They used I2 and H2SO4−SiO2 as catalyst in their sequen￾tial one-pot three-step procedure. The serial route walked over Friedel-Crafts reactions of
indole with aromatic aldehyde followed by N-propargylation and finally CuAAC. The reac￾tion proceeded smoothly yielding a series of bis-indole triazoles hetero duo scaffold at
room temperature in a very short reaction (Figure 7.70). A variety of aldehyde derivatives
N
H
+
O H
R2
+
Step-I: H2SO4 -SiO2, I2 (15 mol%), CH3CN, RT, 15 min
Step-II: KOH (9.5 equiv.), Propargyl bromide(3 equiv), 1h
Step-III: R3X & NaN3 or R3N3 (3 equiv), CuI (30 mol%),
Et3N (1.1 equiv), RT, DMF, 1h
R1
Br
+ R3 X + NaN3
N N
N
N N N N
N R R3 3
R2
R1
R1
One pot synthesis
of indole triazoles
(1equiv) (2.2 equiv.)
R2 R = H, F, Cl, OMe, NO2 1 = H, F, OMe R3 = alkyl, benzyl, glycosyl
10-98 %
Figure 7.70: One-pot synthesis of bis-indole triazole scaffold by five-component approach.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 293bearing both electron-donating groups and electron-withdrawing groups were experi￾enced for the reaction, though 4-nitrobenzaldehyde was extremely uncreative (prod￾uct yield only 17%) under the reaction condition. With the variation in the indole moiety
(5-hydroxyindole) or aldehyde component (terephthalaldehyde) bis-indole tetra-triazoles as
well as tetra-indole tetra-triazole derivatives were also fruitfully synthesized (Figure 7.71).
7.4.2 Five-component coupling reaction via Ugi-4CR approach
Ugi reaction is one of the established multicomponent reactions while scrutinizing
MCR techniques. Combination of Ugi and click reaction affords 1,2,3-triazole with an￾other heterocyclic counterpart. An example of such was the combination of Ugi￾CuAAC reaction, strategically in this one-pot procedure, the first step was the four￾component synthesis of tetrazole hereto unit leaving a reactive terminal alkynyl
chain for to be further cyclized by click protocol. Subsequent steps with organic azide
finally via CuAAC result tetrazolo triazole heterocyclic (Figure 7.72) compound [98].
Figure 7.71: Synthesis of bis-indole tetra-triazole and tetra-indole tetra-triazole.
294 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb BasuThe final product 1,4-disubstituted triazole is also the 1,5-substituted isomer while
numbering with respect to tetrazole ring. Such 1,5-DST (disubstituted tetrazole) linked
with 1,2,3-triazole moiety are the potent medicinal compounds.
Further extension by Knoevenagel condensation of Ugi-CuAAC product produces 3-
triazolyl-quinolin-2-(1H)-ones as shown by Qian et al. [99], These research groups pre￾pared a variety of novel 3-triazolyl-quinolin-2-(1H)-ones by one-pot, five-component con￾densation. The first step proceeded via four-component Ugi approach among o-acyl
NH2
Si N3
R N C 2
O H
R1
N
NN
N R2 R3
N3
Ugi rexn
+
NH
R1
N
NN
N R2
NH
R1
N
N
N
R3
CuAAC
One-pot
Triazole
unit
Tetrazole unit
R1 = H, 2-X (X = F, Cl, Br); 4-Y (Y = F, Br, OMe); 2,4,5-tri Me
R2 = Cy, t-Bu R3 = 4-Z (Z = CN, Cl, NHCOMe)
Condition A
Condition B
Condition A: Solvent-free, RT, t-BuOH:H2O (1:1)
Condition B: t-BuOH:H2O (1:1), CuSO4 (5 mol%), NaASC (10 mol%)
45-80 %
1
1
2
2 3
3
4
5 4
5
Figure 7.72: Synthesis of tetrazole-linked 1,2,3-triazole by five-component Ugi-CuAAC approach.
O
NH2
O
+ NC
HO O
N3
Ugi 4CC
MeOH
20 oC,16 h
O
N
N3
HN
O
CuAAC
Ph
O
N N
O
HN
O
O
20 oC, 16 h
N
HN
O
O
N N
N
Cu(OAc)2.H2O
TEA, NaASC
3-triazolyl-quinolin-2-(1H)-ones
60 oC, 16 h
α ylamino amides -ac
N
N
Ph
Ph
Figure 7.73: Synthesis of 3-triazolyl-quinolin-2-(1H)-ones via five-component Ugi-CuAAC-Knoevenagel approach.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 295aniline, aldehyde, isocyanide, and 2-azido acetic acid to provide α-acylamino amides with
azido functionality. In the second step, the azido end of α-acylamino-amides is converted
to triazole unit by CuAAC. Intramolecular Knoevenagel condensation finally cyclized the
triazole-linked α-acylamino-amides to 3-triazolyl-quinolin-2-(1H)-ones (Figure 7.73).
7.4.3 Five-component coupling reaction of N-propargyl isatins,
malononitrile, 4-hydroxycarbazole, aralkyl halides,
and sodium azide
Spirochromeno carbazole-tethered 1,2,3-triazoles, which are potential anticancer drugs,
were synthesized by MCR approach (Figure 7.74) using CuI NPs [100]. Chavana et al.
[100] employed this five-component approach among N-propargyl isatins, malononi￾trile, 4-hydroxycarbazole, aralkyl halides, and sodium azide using cellulose-supported
CuI NPs (cell-CuI NPs) as the heterogeneous catalyst to prepare triazole-linked impor￾tant scaffolds. These compounds showed selective activity toward specific cancer cells
but nontoxic toward normal cells.
Figure 7.74: Synthesis of spirochromeno carbazole-tethered 1,2,3-triazoles.
296 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu7.5 Conclusion
The synthesis of 1,2,3-trizole moiety via MCR represents an extremely important and
promising tool. Over the last two decades, this technique has been diversely applied
in the field of pharmaceutical chemistry, drug delivery research, etc. The CuAAc has
not only redesigned as a multicomponent approach but also there are several new
coupling partners have been found to be active in this MCR for the final synthesis of
1,2,3-triazoles. As such, apart from the commonly used alkyl halide, terminal acety￾lene, NaN3 in the “click” protocols, several other components like aryl boronic acide,
aldehyde, 2-azido benzaldehyde, diazo compound, α-keto acetal, tosyl hydrazine and
primary amine, N-propargyl ortho-bromo benzamide, N-propargyl isatins, malononi￾trile, 4-hydroxycarbazole, sulfonamide, amine, o-phenylenediamine, arylchalcogenyl
alkynes, urea, α-azido ketone, propiolic acid, isocyanide, o-acyl aniline, and diyne
have been successfully employed. Similarly, in addition to new versions of Cu-based
catalysts, other metal salts/complexes based on Zn, Mn, Ru, Ni, etc., both as homoge￾neous and heterogeneous forms, have been investigated and some successful results
are observed toward triazole synthesis. Attempts have also been made toward devel￾oping and maintaining greener aspects such as use of water as solvent, energy, and
waste minimization procedures. Besides, three- and four-component MCRs, the five￾component approaches for the synthesis of triazoles have also been investigated.
However, it is envisioned that there could be a significant turn of this multicompo￾nent click protocol to synthesize 1,2,3-triazole scaffolds using completely metal cata￾lyst-free conditions.
List of abbreviation
AAC Azide–alkyne cycloaddition
ARF Amberlite resin formate
BDC Benzene-1,4-dicarboxylic acid
BHT Butylated hydroxytolune
CPTMS 3-Chloropropyl trimethoxysilane
DABCO 1,4-Diazabicyclo [2.2.2]octane
DFT Density functional theory
DST Disubstituted tetrazole
EDG Electron-donating group
EWG Electron-withdrawing group
HAT Hydrogen atom transfer
IAAC Intramolecular azide-alkyne cycloaddition
ICP−AES Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy
MC−AFIR Multicomponent artificial force-induced reaction
MCAP Multicomponent assembly process
MCR Multicomponent reaction
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 297MOF Molecular organic framework
NaASC Sodium ascorbate
NPs Nanoparticles
rGO Reduced graphene oxide
TIPS Tris-isopropylsilyl
TLOP Triazole-linked organic polymer
TPP Tris-triphenylphosphine
trzl-DHPM Triazole-dihydropyrimidinone
Ts Tosyl group
References
[1] Dai J, Tian S, Yang X, Liu Z. Synthesis methods of 1,2,3-/1,2 4,triazoles: A review. Front Chem, 2022,
10, 891484. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3389/fchem.2022.891484.
[2] Breugst M, Reissig HU. The Huisgen reaction: Milestones of the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition. Angew
Chem Int Ed, 2020, 59(30), 12293–12307.
[3] Ghosh S, Basudeb B. Microwave-induced triazole synthesis via 1,3-dipolar azide-alkyne
cycloaddition. Recent Adv, 2016, 3, 195–213.
[4] Dimroth O. Ueber eine synthese von derivaten des 1.2.3-triazols. Berichte der deutschen
chemischen Gesellschaft, 1902, 35(1), 1029–1038. DOI: 10.1002/cber.190203501171.
[5] The nobel prize in chemistry 2022. NobelPrize.org. Retrieved, 2022-10-05.
[6] Sletten EM, Bertozzi CR. Bioorthogonal chemistry: Fishing for selectivity in a sea of functionality.
Angew Chem Int Ed, 2009, 48(38), 6974–6998. DOI: 10.1002/anie.200900942.
[7] Adam D. Chemistry nobel. Nature, 2001. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/news011011-17.
[8] Hoyle CE, Bowman CN. Thiol-Ene click chemistry. Angew Chem Int Ed, 2010, 49, 1540–1573.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200903924.
[9] Kolb HC, Finn MG, Sharpless KB Click chemistry: Diverse chemical function from a few good
reactions. Angew Chem Int Ed , 2001, 40(11), 2004–2021.
[10] Evans RA. The rise of azide–alkyne 1,3-dipolar ‘click’ cycloaddition and its application to polymer
science and surface modification. Aust J Chem, 2007, 60(6), 384–395. DOI: 10.1071/CH06457.
[11] Devaraj NK, Finn MG. Introduction: Click chemistry. Chem Rev, 2021, 121(12), 6697–6698.
[12] Guda DR, Ummadi N, Avula B, Zyryanov GV, Reddy CS, Gundala S. New methods for synthesis of
1,2,3-triazoles: A review. Polycycl Aromat Compd, 2022, 42(6), 3874–3892.
[13] Nebra N, Garcia-Alvarez J. Recent progress of cu-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition reactions
(CuAAC) in sustainable solvents: Glycerol, deep eutectic solvents, and aqueous media. Molecules,
2020, 25(9), 2015. DOI: 10.3390/molecules25092015.
[14] Vala DP, Vala RM, Patel HM. Versatile synthetic platform for 1,2,3-triazole chemistry. ACS Omega,
2022, 7(42), 36945–36987. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.2c04883.
[15] Li T, Dief EM, Kalužná Z, MacGregor M, Foroutan-Nejad C, Darwish N. On-Surface azide–alkyne
cycloaddition reaction: Does it click with ruthenium catalysts?. Langmuir, 2022, 38(18), 5532–5541.
[16] Maiuolo L, Costanzo P, Algieri V, Jiritano A, Olivito F, Antonio Tallarida M. Recent progress in
catalytic synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles. Catalysts, 2021, 11(9), 1120. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3390/
catal11091120.
[17] Mahboob Alam M. 1,2,3-triazole hybrids as anticancer agents: A review. Arch Pham, 2022, 355,
2100158. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ardp.202100158.
298 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu[18] Marzi M, Farjam M, Kazeminejad Z, Shiroudi A. A recent overview of 1,2,3-triazole-containing hybrids
as novel antifungal agents: focusing on synthesis, mechanism of action, and structure-activity
relationship (sar). Hindawi J Chem, 2022, 50. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1155/2022/7884316.
[19] Wang FC, Peng B, Ren TT, Liu SP, Du JR, Chen JH, Zhang TT, Gu X, Li M, Cao SL, Xu X. A novel 1,2,3-
triazole derivative of quinazoline exhibits antitumor activity by tethering RNF168 to SQSTM1/P62. J
Med Chem, 2022, 65(22), 15028–15047. DOI: 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c00432.
[20] Staśkiewicz A, Ledwoń P, Rovero P, Papini AM, Latajka R. Triazole-modified peptidomimetics: An
opportunity for drug discovery and development. Front Chem, 2021, 9. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.3389/fchem.2021.674705.
[21] Rogers PP, Jalal KF, Boyd JA. An Introduction to Sustainable Development. Routledge Publishers,
29th October, 2007, ISBN: 978-1844075201.
[22] Treitler DS, Leung S. How dangerous is too dangerous? A perspective on azide chemistry. J Org
Chem, 2022, 87(17), 11293–11295. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.2c01402.
[23] John SE, Gulatia S, Shankaraiah N. Recent advances in multi-component reactions and their
mechanistic insights: A triennium review. Org Chem Front, 2021, 8, 4237–4287. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1039/D0QO01480J.
[24] Auguste Laurent (1807–1853), Oxford Reference.
[25] Strecker A. Ueber die künstliche Bildung der Milchsäure und einen neuen, dem Glycocoll
homologen Körpe. Justus Liebigs Ann Chem, 1850, 75(1), 27–45. DOI: 10.1002/jlac.18500750103.
[26] Torok B, Schäfer C, Kokel A. Multicomponent reactions. In Heterogeneous Catalysis in Sustainable
Synthesis, Elsevier, 2022, 443–489. DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-817825-6.00002.
[27] John SE, Gulatia S, Shankaraiah N. Recent advances in multi-component reactions and their
mechanistic insights: A triennium review. Org Chem Front, 2021, 8, 4237–4287. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1039/D0QO01480J.
[28] Banfi L, Basso A, Lambruschini C, Moni L, Riva R. The 100 facets of the passerini reaction. Chem Sci,
2021, 12, 15445–15472.
[29] Fouad MA, Abdel-Hamida H, Ayoup MS. Two decades of recent advances of Ugi reactions: Synthetic
and pharmaceutical applications. RSC Adv, 2020, 10, 42644–42681. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/
D0RA07501A.
[30] Liautard V, Landais Y. Free-radical multicomponent processes. In Multicomponent Reactions in
Organic Synthesis. 2014, ISBN:9783527678174. DOI: 10.1002/9783527678174.
[31] Marqués-López E, Herrera RP Multicomponent reactions with organoboron compounds. In
Multicomponent Reactions: Concepts and Applications for Design and Synthesis. John Wiley & Sons,
Inc, 2015. DOI: 10.1002/9781118863992.
[32] Peng J, Gao Y, Hu W, Gao Y, Hu M, Wu W, Ren Y, Jiang H. Palladium-catalyzed multicomponent
reaction (MCR) of propargylic carbonates with isocyanides, palladium-catalyzed multicomponent
reaction (MCR) of propargylic carbonates with isocyanides. Org Lett, 2016, 18(22), 5924–5927. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.orglett.6b02999.
[33] Song W, Zhen N. Iridium-catalyzed highly regioselective azide–ynamide cycloaddition to Access
5-amido fully substituted 1,2,3-triazoles under mild, air, aqueous, and bioorthogonal conditions.
Org Lett, 2017, 19(22), 6200–6203.
[34] Rahul P, Thomas J, Dehaen W, John J. Advances in the synthesis of fused 1,2,3-triazoles via a MCR￾intramolecular azide-alkyne cycloaddition Approach. Molecules, 2023, 28, 308. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.3390/molecules28010308.
[35] Turkowicz IM, Markiewicz KH, Michalak M, Wilczewska AZ. NHC-copper complexes immobilized on
magnetic nanoparticles: Synthesis and catalytic activity in the CuAAC reactions. J Catal, 2018, 362, 46–54.
[36] Sultana J, Sarma D. Ag-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition: Copper free approaches for synthesis
of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles. Catal Rev, 2020, 62, 96–117. DOI: 10.1080/01614940.2019.1673443.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 299[37] Panish R, Thieu T, Balsells J. Copper-catalyzed synthesis of 5‑carboxyl-4-perfluoroalkyl triazoles. Org
Lett, 2021, 23, 5937–5941.
[38] Librando IL, Mahmoud AG, Carabineiro SA, Guedes da silva MFC, Maldonado-Hódar F, Geraldes CF,
Pombeiro AJL. Heterogeneous gold nanoparticle-based catalysts for the synthesis of click-derived
triazoles via the azide-alkyne cycloaddition reaction. Catalysts, 2022, 12(1), 45. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.3390/catal12010045.
[39] Song W, Zheng N, Li M, Dong K, Li J, Ullah K, Zheng Y. Regiodivergent rhodium(i)-catalyzed azide−alkyne
cycloaddition (RhAAC) to access either fully substituted sulfonyl-1,2,3-triazoles under mild conditions.
Org Lett, 2018, 20, 6705–6709. DOI: 10.1021/acs.orglett.8b02794.
[40] Ma J, Ding S. Transition metal-catalyzed cycloaddition of azides with internal alkynes. Asian J Org
Chem, 2020, 9, 1872–1888. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/ajoc.202000486.
[41] Trouvé J, Gramage-Doria R. Destabilizing predictive copper-catalyzed click reactions by remote
interactions with a zinc-porphyrin backbone. Helv Chim Acta, 2023, 106, e202200191.
[42] Choudhury P, Basu B Advances in greener processes for triazole synthesis via azide-alkyne
cycloaddition reactions. In Green Synthetic Approaches for Biologically Relevant Heterocycles,
Second edition. Elsevier, 2021, 297–353. ISBN 9780128205860. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-
12-820586-0.00008-X.
[43] Khojastehnezhad A, Bakavoli M, Javid A, Mehdi M, Siuki K. Synthesis, characterization, and
investigation of catalytic activity of copper(II) porphyrin graphene oxide for azide–alkyne
cycloaddition. Res Chem Intermed, 2019, 45, 4473–4485. DOI: 10.1007/s11164-019-03843-y.
[44] Huoa J, Hu H, Zhanga M, Hua X, Chenab M, Chen D, Liua J, Xiaoa G, Wanga Y, Wen Z. A mini review
of the synthesis of poly-1,2,3-triazole-based functional materials. RSC Adv, 2017, 7, 2281–2287.
DOI: 10.1039/C6RA27012C.
[45] Rani A, Singh G, Singh A, Maqbool U, Kaur G, Singh J. CuAAC-ensembled 1,2,3-triazole-linked
isosteres as pharmacophores in drug discovery: Review. RSC Adv, 2020, 10, 5610–5635. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1039/C9RA09510A.
[46] Kummari B, Polkam N, Ramesh P, Anantaraju H, Yogeeswari P, Anireddy JS, Guggilapu SD, Babu BN.
Design and synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole–etodolac hybrids as potent anticancer molecules. RSC Adv,
2017, 7, 23680–23686. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/C6RA28525B.
[47] Varala R, Bollikolla HB, Kurmarayuni CM. Synthesis of pharmacological relevant 1,2,3-triazole and its
analogues-a review. Curr Org Synth, 2021, 18, 101–124. DOI: https://doi.org/10.2174/
1570179417666200914142229.
[48] George N, Singh G, Singh R, Singh G, Devi A, Singh H, Kaur G, Singh J Microwave accelerated green
approach for tailored 1,2,3–triazoles via CuAAC. Sustain Chem Pharm, 22(30), 100824. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.scp.2022.100824.
[49] Sahu A. Advance synthetic approaches to 1,2,3-triazole derived compounds. Curr Organocat, 2021, 8,
271–288.
[50] Saroha B, Kumar G, Kumar S, Kumari M, Rani M, Raghav N, Sahoo PK, Ghosh S, Mahata S, Nasare
VD. Ultrasound assisted a one pot multicomponent and greener synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole
incorporated aurone hybrids: Cathepsin B inhibition, anti-cancer activity against AGS cell line, and
in-silico docking evaluation. Curr Res Green Sustain Chem, 2022, 5, 100295. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.crgsc.2022.100295.
[51] Zeng L, Lai Z, Zhang C, Xie H, Cui S. Directing-group-enabled cycloaddition of azides and alkynes
toward functionalized triazoles. Org Lett, 2020, 22(6), 2220–2224. DOI: 10.1021/acs.orglett.0c00394.
[52] Fujita T, Takeishi M, Ichikawa J. Copper-catalyzed [3 + 2] annulation of azides with a (difluorovinyl)
zinc complex, fluoroacetylene equivalent. Org Lett, 2020, 22(23), 9253–9257. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/
10.1021/acs.orglett.0c03476.
[53] De Novo Ring-Forming Consecutive Four-Component Syntheses of 4-Pyrazolyl-1,2,3-triazoles from
(Triisopropylsilyl)butadiyne as a C4 Building Block.
300 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu[54] Wang YC, Xie YY, Qu HE, Wang HS, Pan YM, Huang FP. Ce(OTf)3-catalyzed [3 + 2] cycloaddition of
azides with nitroolefins: Regioselective synthesis of 1,5-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles. J Org Chem,
2014, 79(10), 4463–4469. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/jo5004339.
[55] Diazo R, Cui X, Zhang X, Wang W, Zhong X, Tan Y, Wang Y, Zhang J, Li Y, Wang X. Transfer reaction
for the synthesis of 1,4,5-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles and subsequent regiospecific construction of
1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles via c–c bond cleavage. J Org Chem, 2021, 86(5), 4071–4080. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.0c02912.
[56] Khojastehnezhad A, Bakavoli M, Javid A, Siuki MMK, Shahidzadeh M. Synthesis, characterization, and
investigation of catalytic activity of copper(II) porphyrin graphene oxide for azide-alkyne
cycloaddition. Res Chem Intermed, 2019, 45, 4473–4485.
[57] Xiong X, Tang Z, Sun Z, Meng X, Song S, Quan Z. Supported copper (I) catalyst from fish bone waste:
An efficient green and reusable catalyst for the click reaction toward N-substituted. Appl
Organometal Chem, 2017, e3946. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/aoc.3946.
[58] Mele G, Mazzetto SE, Lomonaco Diego Teresa MVD, Melo P, Pineiro M. Heterocyclic compounds
from renewable resources. In Heterocycles: Synthesis, Catalysis, Sustainability, and
Characterization. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/9783527832002.ch8.
[59] Cernat A, Györfi SG, Irimes MB, Tertis M, Bodoki A, Pralea IE, Suciu M, Cristea C. Click chemistry on
azide-functionalized graphene oxide. Electrochem Commun, 2019, 98, 23–27.
[60] Jun L, Ma EQ, Liu YH, Li YM, Mo LP, Zhang ZH. One-pot three-component synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles
using magnetic NiFe2O4-glutamate-Cu as an efficient heterogeneous catalyst in water. RSC Adv,
2015, 5, 59167–59185.
[61] Ghosh S, Saha S, Sengupta S, Chattopadhyay S, De G, Basu B. Stabilized Cu2O nanoparticles on
macroporous polystyrene resins [Cu2O@ARF]: Improved and reusable heterogeneous catalyst for
on-water synthesis of triazoles via click reaction. Ind Eng Chem Res, 2017, 56(41), 11726–11733.
[62] Biswas K, Ghosh S, Basu B. Ion-exchange resins and polypeptide supported catalysts: A Critical
Review. Curr Green Chem, 2020, 7, 40–52. DOI: 10.2174/2213346107666200204125435.
[63] Reddy Bhoomireddy RP, Bhavani Narla LG, Reddy Peddiahgari VG. Green synthesis of 1,2,3‐triazoles
via Cu2O NPs on hydrogen trititanate nanotubes promoted 1,3‐dipolar cycloadditions. Appl
Organometal Chem, 2018, 33(3), 4752.
[64] Rai R, Chand DK. Multicomponent click reactions catalysed by copper(I) oxide nanoparticles
(Cu2ONPs) derived using oryza sativa. J Chem Sci, 2020, 132, 83.
[65] Saha S, Biswas K, Basu B. 1-D copper(I) coordination polymer based on bidentate 1,3-dithioether
ligand: Novel catalyst for azide-alkyne-cycloaddition (AAC) reaction. Tetrahedron Lett, 2018, 59,
2541–2545.
[66] Tourani H, Naimi-Jamal MR, Panahi L, Dekamin MG. Nanoporous metal-organic framework
Cu2(BDC)2(DABCO) as an efficient heterogeneous catalyst for one-pot facile synthesis of 1,2,3-
triazolederivatives in ethanol: Evaluating antimicrobial activity of the novel derivatives. Sci Iran C,
2019, 26(3), 1485–1496.
[67] Chetia M, Konwar M, Pegu B, Konwer S, Sarma D. Synthesis of copper containing polyaniline
composites through interfacial polymerisation: An effective catalyst for Click reaction at room
temperature. J Mol Struct, 2021, 1233, 1–13.
[68] Pawar A, Gajare S, Jagdale A, Patil S, Chandane W, Rashinkar G, Patil S. Supported NHC‑Benzimi@Cu
complex as a magnetically separable and reusable catalyst for the multicomponent and click
synthesis of 1,4‑disubstituted 1,2,3‑triazoles via huisgen 1,3‑dipolar cycloaddition. Catal Lett, 2022,
152, 1854–1868. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10562-021-03772-9.
[69] Thakur M, Choudhury P, Kejriwal A, Mukherjee A, Biswas K. A novel benzimidazole based ionic
liquid-tagged Schiff base copper catalyst: Synthesis, characterization, and application toward the
synthesis of 1,4-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles. Inorg Chim Acta, 2023, 549, 121405.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 301[70] Surya Prakash Rao H, Chakibanda G. Raney ni catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition reaction. RSC
Adv, 2014, 4, 46040.
[71] Kim WG, Kang ME, Lee JB, Jeon MH, Lee S, Lee J, Choi B, Cal PM, Kang S, Kee JM. Nickel-catalyzed
azide-alkyne cycloaddition to access 1,5-disubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles in air and water. J Am Chem
Soc, 2017, 139, 12121–12124.
[72] Yadav D, Singh N, Kim TW, Kim JY, Park NJ, Baeg JO. Highly regioselective and sustainable solar click
reaction: A new post-synthetic modified triazole organic polymer as a recyclable photocatalyst for
regioselective azide–alkyne cycloaddition reaction. Green Chem, 2019, 21, 2677–2685.
[73] Choudhury P, Chattopadhyay S, De G, Basu B. Ni–rGO–zeolite nanocomposite: An efficient
heterogeneous catalyst for one-pot synthesis of triazoles in water. Mat Adv, 2021, 2, 3042–3050.
DOI: 10.1039/d1ma00143d.
[74] Yadav S, Sharma S, Dutta S, Sharma A, Adholeya A, Sharma RK. Harnessing the untapped catalytic
potential of a CoFe2O4/Mn-BDC hybrid MOF composite for obtaining a multitude of 1,4-
disubstituted 1,2,3-triazole scaffolds. Inorg Chem, 2020, 59(12), 8334–8344.
[75] Daraiea M, Heravia MM, Sarmastib N. Synthesis of polymer-supported Zn(II) as a novel and green
nanocatalyst for promoting click reactions and using design of experiment for optimization of
reaction conditions. 2020, 57, 488–498. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/10601325.2020.1725389.
[76] Sharma P, Rathod J, Singh AP, Kumar P, Sasson Y Synthesis of heterogeneous ru(II)-1,2,3-triazole
catalyst supported over SBA-15: Application to the transfer hydrogen reaction and unusual highly
selective 1,4-disbustituted triazole formation via multicomponent click reaction. Catal Sci Technol.
DOI: 10.1039/x0xx00000x.
[77] Garg A, Borah N, Sultana J, Kulshrestha A, Kumar A, Sarma D. Silica immobilized copper
N-heterocyclic carbene: An effective route to 1,2,3-triazoles via azide-alkyne cycloaddition and
multicomponent click reaction. Appl Organomet Chem. 2021, 35, 8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1002/
aoc.6298.
[78] Vilé G, Liberto GD, Tosoni S, Sivo A, Ruta V, Nachtegaal M, Clark AH, Agnoli S, Zou Y, Savateev A,
Antonietti M, Pacchioni G. Azide-alkyne click chemistry over a heterogeneous copper-based single￾atom catalyst. ACS Catal, 2022, 12(5), 2947–2958.
[79] Pharande PS, Rashinkar GS, Ghotekar SK, Pore DM. An expedient heterogeneous catalyst for
one‑pot tandem synthesis of 1‑aryl‑1, 2, 3‑triazoles through huisgen 1,3‑cycloaddition. Res Chem
Intermed, 2023. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11164-023-04996-7.
[80] Wang XX, Xin Y, Li Y, Xia WJ, Zhou B, Ye RR, Li YM. Copper-catalyzed decarboxylative cycloaddition of
propiolic acids, azides, and arylboronic acids: Construction of fully substituted 1,2,3-triazoles. J Org
Chem, 2020, 85, 3576–3586. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.9b03285.
[81] Zehndera LR, Hawkinsb JM, Sutton SC. One-pot, metal- and azide-free synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles
from α-ketoacetals and amines. Synlett, 2020, 31, 175–178. DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1691526.
[82] Asgari MS, Bahadorikhalili S, Ghaempanah A, Rashidi, Ranjbar PR, Rahimi R, Abbasi A, Larijani B,
Mahdavi M Copper-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of amide linked 1,2,3-triazoles bearing aryloxy
skeletons. Tetrahedron Lett, 2021, 65, 152765–152770.
[83] Vroemans R, Verhaegen Y, Tran M, Dieu T, Dehaen W. Assembly of fully substituted
triazolochromenes via a novel multicomponent reaction or mechanochemical synthesis. Beilstein J
Org Chem, 2018, 14, 2689–2697. DOI: 10.3762/bjoc.14.246.
[84] Garg A, Sarma D, Ali AA. Microwave assisted metal-free approach to access 1,2,3-triazoles
throughmulticomponent synthesis. Curr Res Green Sustain Chem, 2020, 3, 100013. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.crgsc.2020.100013.
[85] Phukan P, Agarwal S, Deori K, Sarma D Zinc oxide nanoparticles catalysed one‑pot three‑component
reaction: A facile synthesis of 4‑Aryl‑NH‑1,2,3‑Triazoles. Catal Lett, 2020. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10562-020-03143-w.
302 Sujit Ghosh, Basudeb Basu[86] Aquino TB, Edmilson R, Do Nascimento R, Dias ÍFC, De oliveira DH, Barcellos T, Lenardão EJ, Perin G,
Alves D, Jacob RG. Synthesis of (arylselanyl)- and (arylsulfenyl)-alkyl-1,2,3-triazolo-1,3,6-triazonines
via a copper-catalyzed multicomponent reaction. Tetrahedron Lett, 2018, 59, 1080–1083.
DOI: 10.1016/jtetlet.2018.01.072.
[87] Allaka BS, Basavoju S, Rama GK A photoinduced multicomponent regioselective synthesis of 1,4,5-
trisubstituted-1,2 3,triazoles: Transition metal-, azide and oxidant-free protocol. Adv Synth Catal.
DOI: 10.1002/adsc.202100321.
[88] Yu F, Zhou Z, Songa J, Zhao Y. DFT and AFIR study on the copper(I)-catalyzed mechanism of
5-enamine-trisubstituted-1,2,3-triazole synthesis via C–N cross-coupling and the origin of ring￾opening of 2H-azirines. RSC Adv, 2021, 11, 2744–2755. DOI: 10.1039/D0RA07498E.
[89] Bubyrev A, Malkova K, Kantin G, Dar’in D, Krasavin M. Metal-free synthesis of 1,5-disubstituted 1,2,3-
triazoles. J Org Chem, 2021, 86(23), 17516–17522. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.1c02309.
[90] Bubyrev A, Adamchik M, Dar’in D, Kantin G, Krasavin M. Metal-free three-component synthesis of
1,2,3-triazoline-4-sulfonamides. J Org Chem, 2021, 86(19), 13454–13464. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/
acs.joc.1c01552.
[91] Malkova K, Bubyrev A, Vasilisa A, Krivovicheva Dar’in D, Bunev A, Beilstein MK. A novel bis-triazole
scaffold accessed via two tandem [3 + 2] cycloaddition events including an uncatalyzed, room
temperature azide–alkyne click reaction. J Org Chem, 2022, 18, 1636–1641. DOI: https://doi.org/
10.3762/bjoc.18.175.
[92] Gao G, Mao K, Lv L, Li Z. Three-component coupling of α-trifluoromethyl carbonyls, azides and
amines for the regioselective synthesis of 1,4,5-trisubstituted 1,2,3-triazoles. Adv Synth Catal, 2022,
364, 1402–1408.
[93] Mironov ME, Rybalova TV, Pokrovskii MA, Emaminia F, Gandalipov ER, Pokrovskii AG, Shults EE.
Synthesis of fully functionalized spirostanic 1,2,3-triazoles by the three-component reaction of
diosgenin azides with acetophenones and aryl aldehydes and their biological evaluation as
antiproliferative agents. Steroids, 2023, 190, 109133.
[94] Yana YM, Lia HY, Min Z, Zhang RX, Zhoua CG, Ren ZX, Ding MW. One-pot synthesis of
[1,2,3]triazolo[1,5-a]quinoxalin-4(5H)-ones by a metal-free sequential ugi-4CR/alkyne–azide
cycloaddition reaction. Synlett, 2020, 31(01), 73–76. DOI: 10.1055/s-0037-1610737.
[95] Carreiro EP, Senab AM, Puertac A, Padrónc JM, Burke AJ. Synthesis of novel 1,2,3-triazole￾dihydropyrimidinone hybrids using multicomponent 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition (click)–Biginelli
reactions: Anticancer activity. Synlett, 2020, 31, 615–621. DOI: 10.1055/s-0039-1690781.
[96] Niesobski P, Klukas F, Berens H, Makhloufi G, Janiak C, Müller TJJ. De novo ring-forming consecutive
four-component syntheses of 4‑Pyrazolyl-1,2,3-triazoles from (triisopropylsilyl)butadiyne as a C4. J
Org Chem, 2018, 83, 4851–4858. DOI: 10.1021/acs.joc.8b00430.
[97] Saehlim N, Kasemsuk T, Sirion U, Saeeng R. One-pot approach for the synthesis of bis-indole-1,4-
disubstituted-1,2,3-triazoles. J Org Chem, 2018, 83, 13233–13242. DOI: 10.1021/acs.joc.8b02056.
[98] De loera D, Celedon CC, Cortes-Garciaa CJ, Chac-on-garcia L. Synthesis of 1,5-disubstituted tetrazole￾1,2,3 triazoles hybrids via Ugi-azide/CuAAC. Synth Commun, 2019, 49, 2086–2095. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1080/00397911.2019.1616301.
[99] Qian W, Wang D, Wang H, Yu P, Liu S, Chen S. One-pot synthesis of 3-triazolyl-quinolin-2-(1H)-ones
via sequential Ugi-‘‘click”-knoevenagel condensations. Tetrahedron Lett, 2018, 59, 2167–2169.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tetlet.2018.04.050.
[100] Chavana PV, Desaia UV, Wadgaonkarb PP, Tapasec SR, Kodamc KM, Choudharid A, Sarkard D. Click
chemistry based multicomponent approach in the synthesis of spirochromenocarbazole tethered
1,2,3-triazoles as potential anticancer agents. Bioorg Chem, 2019, 85, 475–486. DOI: 10.1016/j.
bioorg.2019.01.070.
[101] Mojtahedi MM, Azhari S, Saeed Abaee M. Four-component one-pot synthesis of novel dicyanoaniline￾anchored triazoles. Can J Chem, 2022, 100. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1139/cjc-2021-0263.
7 Recent approaches toward the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles 303Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar✶
, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhi
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles
via one-pot multicomponent click reactions
8.1 Introduction
Tetrazoles containing a five-membered ring with four nitrogen atoms and one carbon
atom are nitrogen-rich, aromatic, and stable to several oxidizing or reducing agents.
They can be of four types: (a) simple unsubstituted tetrazoles; (b) mono-substituted
tetrazoles like 1-, 2-, or 5-substituted, (c) di-substituted tetrazoles such as 1,5- or 2,5-
disubstituted, and (d) tri-substituted tetrazolium salts such as 1,3,5-, 1,4,5-, or 2,3,5- tri￾substituted. Tetrazole chemistry, particularly 5-substituted 1H-tetrazole derivatives
have been extensively studied. Bladin first reported the preparation of tetrazoles in
1885 [1, 2]. They play a significant role as valuable pharmacophores in the design and
development of drug molecules. Many tetrazole-containing compounds exhibit activi￾ties like antibacterial, antifungal, antiviral, analgesic, anti-inflammatory, anti-ulcer,
anticonvulsant, and anti-allergic activities [3–9]. Moreover, the tetrazole derivatives
have also found applications in the areas like material science [10–14], photography,
agriculture as plant growth regulators, herbicides, and fungicides [15, 16], organocatal￾ysis, and coordination chemistry [16]. Valsartan, irbesartan, losartan, and candesartan
are a few examples of antihypertensive drugs with tetrazole scaffolds. Some of the
important scaffolds with tetrazole skeleton are presented in Figure 8.1.
Hantzsch and Vagt [17] in 1901 reported the synthesis of 5-amino-1H-tetrazole
from cyanamide and hydrazoic acid involving the [3+2] cycloaddition, which has be￾come a classical method for 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles. As this method suffered from
various drawbacks like hazardous reactants, moisture-sensitive reaction conditions,
and the use of strong Lewis acids increased efforts were required towards modifying
the methods for the synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles. In 1958, Finnegan et al.
[18] improved the procedure from nitriles (1) using sodium azide (2) and ammonium
chloride in DMF (Figure 8.2).
✶
Corresponding author: Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Retired Chief Scientist, Indian Institute
of Chemical Technology – IICT, Tarnaka, Hyderabad, India, e-mail: dryvdnageswar@gmail.com
Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhi, Organic Chemistry Laboratory-4, School of Chemistry and Food, Federal
University of Rio Grande-FURG, Rio Grande, RS-Brazil
Acknowledgment: Ramesh Katla (Foreign Visiting Professor: Edital No. 03/2020) thanks the PROPESP/
FURG, Rio Grande-RS, for visiting professorship.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-008[3+2] Cycloadditions between nitriles and an azide constitute an efficient and common
route for the synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles. Apart from sodium azide (NaN3)
(2), other azides, like benzenesulfonylazide, p-toluenesulfonyl azide, trimethylsilylazide
(TMSA), diphenylphosphorylazide (DPPA), tributyltinazide (TBSnA), tetrabutylammoniu￾mazide (TBAA), and organoaluminiumazides have also been employed. Lewis acids,
copper salts, iron salts, zinc salts, amine salts, and heterogeneous catalysts, have been
used to activate the azide–nitrile cycloaddition reaction. These synthetic methods use
Figure 8.1: Biologically active molecules containing tetrazole ring.
Figure 8.2: Synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles from nitriles using sodium azide and ammonium
chloride.
306 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhiexpensive reagents, toxic metals, high boiling solvents, high temperatures, and long re￾action hours.
In 2001, Demko and Sharpless [19] reported a cycloaddition reaction between ni￾triles and sodium azide in water in the presence of ZnBr2 as a catalyst to generate 5-
substituted 1H-tetrazoles. Since then many methods have been described for the prep￾aration of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazole derivatives. Some of these include the use of –
NaN3, CoY, DMF, 120 °C [20]; NaN3,CuFe2O4, DMF, 120 °C [21]; NaN3, K-10-M (M = Fe, Zn,
Cu, Ni), DMF, reflux [22]; NaN3, zeolite and zirconia, DMF and H2O, reflux [23]; NaN3,
InCl3, DMF, microwave heating [24]; NaN3, TMSCl-NMP, microwave irradiation [25];
NaN3, AcOH, NMP-H2O, microwave irradiation [26]; NaN3, montmorillonite K-10, mi￾crowave heating [27]; NaN3, MBA-ZnO, DMSO, 120–130 °C [28]; NaN3, ionic liquids,
AcOH, microwave irradiation [29] and nano-powder, DMF,90 °C [30]. Patil et al. [31]
have reported a method for the synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles by the reaction
of organic oximes with sodium azide in the presence of 25 mol% of copper acetate in
DMF. Direct conversion of arylboronic acids to tetrazoles catalyzed by an ONO pincer￾type Pd(II) complex was reported by Vignesh et al. [32]. Ishihara et al. [33] prepared
tetrazoles from amides and diphenylphosphorazidate or bis(p-nitrophenyl) phosphor￾azidate, which act as both azide source as well as the activator of amide–oxygen for
elimination. Various amides were converted into 1,5-disubstituted and 5-substituted
1H-tetrazole derivatives in good yields without employing any toxic or explosive re￾agents. Ishihara et al. [34, 35] also effectively synthesized 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles
from different aldoximes and diphenylphosphorazidate (DPPA). Patil et al. [36] pre￾pared a library of highly substituted 5-(hydrazinomethyl)-1-methyl-1H-tetrazoles using
N-Boc-protected hydrazine in the Ugi tetrazole reaction. Pathare et al. [37] prepared
aminotetrazoles from aryl azides, isocyanides, and TMSN3 utilizing a Pd-catalyzed
azide–isocyanide denitrogenative coupling to provide an unsymmetric carbodiimide,
which reacts with TMSN3 in the presence of FeCl3 in a single pot. Sridhar et al. [38]
established a simple one-step bismuth(III) triflate-catalyzed approach for the synthe￾sis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles directly from aldehydes by the reaction of acetohy￾droxamic acid and sodium azide. Mohammad Abdollahi-Alibeika and Moaddeli [39]
applied copper-modified molecular sieves with MCM-41 nano structured heteroge￾neous recyclable catalyst in the novel multicomponent one-pot preparation of 5-
substituted 1H-tetrazoles from aldehyde, hydroxylamine, and sodium azide. The het￾erocyclization reaction of primary amines (4), orthoesters (5), and azides (2) leads to
the preparation of tetrazole (6) and its 1-mono- and 1,5-disubstituted derivatives (7)
(Figure 8.3) [40].
The term “click chemistry” was coined by Demko and Sharpless [41] when they re￾ported (3+2) cycloaddition reaction conducted between an azide and nitrile moieties re￾sulting in tetrazole formation. Copper(I) as a catalyst [42–45] facilitates a remarkable
enhancement of reactivity and regioselectivity, in the case of terminal alkynes acting as
the dipolarophile. A metal-free approach was developed by Amantini et al. [46] using tet￾8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 307rabutyl ammonium fluoride (TBAF) as catalyst in the reaction between nitrile compounds
and trimethylsilylazide (TMSN3).
Due to the mild reaction conditions required and high selectivity, click chemistry
has been widely used in material sciences, bioconjugation, and biolabeling. It is also
applied in pharmaceutical and biotech industries. Click reactions can be classified
into three categories:
(1) Cu(I)-catalyzed azide–alkyne click chemistry reaction (CuAAC)
(2) Strain-promoted azide–alkyne click chemistry reaction (SPAAC)
(3) Ligation between tetrazine and alkene (trans-cyclooctene)
The classic copper-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition is a rapid and effective click
reaction for bioconjugation. But it is not suitable for use in live cells due to the toxicity
of Cu(I) ions. Due to the oxidative damage caused by reactive oxygen species produced
by the copper catalysts this is not suitable for use in live cells. Copper complexes also
induce changes in cellular metabolism. Strain-promoted alkyne–azide cycloaddition
(SPAAC) has been promoted as a modification to Cu-free click chemistry as a bioor￾thogonal reaction. Copper-free click chemistry as a bioorthogonal reaction was first
developed by Carolyn Bertozzi as a variant of an azide–alkyne Huisgen cycloaddition,
based on the work by Karl Barry Sharpless et al. The term “bioorthogonal chemistry”
was coined by Carolyn R. Bertozzi in 2003. It refers to any chemical reaction that can
occur inside the living systems without interfering with native biochemical processes.
The Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2022 was awarded to Bertozzi [47] for her contribu￾tion to the development of click chemistry and bioorthogonal chemistry.
This review presents some of the recent research findings in the synthesis of tet￾razoles by click chemistry.
8.2 Recent literature reports
Chermahini et al. [48] successfully utilized montmorillonite K-10 or Kaolin clays as an
efficient eco-friendly and recyclable catalyst in the synthesis of 5-substituted-1H￾tetrazoles (8) by the reaction of a series of aromatic/heterocyclic nitriles (1a) with so￾dium azide (2) in water/DMF. Both conventional heating and ultrasonic irradiation
were used for the protocol. Compared to the conventional method, ultrasound irradia￾Figure 8.3: Synthesis of 1,5-substituted tetrazoles.
308 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhition reduced the reaction times with enhanced catalytic efficiency. The protocol was
examined for a wider spectrum of nitrile derivatives. Nitrile (1a) compounds with
electron-withdrawing groups provided higher yields (Figure 8.4).
During the initial optimization studies, the authors assessed the influence of different
catalytic loadings, nitrile (1)/azide(2) ratios, reaction times, and solvent types. Between
water and DMF, DMF provided better yields due to the higher boiling point and con￾version was also faster for both K-10 and Kaolin. The catalyst was recycled for three
runs consecutively.
Linda I. Nilsson et al. [49] described highly selective CuI-catalyzed alkyne cycloaddi￾tion with electron-deficient azides (9) via tetrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines (10) generating new
41
-substituted-2-(11
,21
,31
-triazol-11
-yl)pyrimidines (11). It was observed that the alkyne (12)
substituent influences the rate of reaction. The influence of the nature of the solvent was
also realized by changing from alcohol to toluene, which brought about rapid reaction in
the copper-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAc) (Figure 8.5).
The scope of the method was established by subjecting 2-azopyrimidines to CuAAc
with a broad range of terminal alkynes to explore both steric and electronic effects.
Herawi et al. [50] reported a practical, one-pot three-component protocol for the
synthesis of 5-substituted-1H-tetrazole (14) derivatives obtained by the reaction of di￾versely substituted aryl aldehydes (15), hydroxylamine (16), and [bmim]N3 (17). Only
traces of the product were obtained when acetaldehyde (15a) was used. In the optimi￾zation studies, the authors examined the suitability of the solvents like H2O, DMF,
MeCN, as well as solvent-free conditions. Cu(OAc)2 (20 mol%) was observed to be ideal
for the reaction. When compared to the electron-withdrawing substituents, electron￾donating substituents provided better yields (Figure 8.6a–b).
Saiprathima and coauthors [51] developed an efficient, on-water, one-pot, eco￾friendly synthesis of quaternary centerd 3-hydroxy-3-(1H-tetrazol-5-yl)indoline-2-ones (18)
and 3-(phenylamino)-3-(1H-tetrazol-5-yl)indolin-2-ones (19) via metal-free azide–nitrile
Figure 8.4: Synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles catalyzed by clay.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 309(2/1b) (3+2) cycloaddition reaction (Figure 8.7a,b). During the initial studies, the au￾thors examined the efficacy of many catalysts.
Patil et al. [52] established an eco-friendly highly efficient β-cyclodextrin-mediated
synthesis of 5-substituted-1H-tetrazoles (21) via [2+3] cycloaddition reaction involving vari￾Figure 8.5: Synthesis of tetrazolopyrimidines.
Figure 8.6: (a) 1-Butyl-3-methyl imidazoliumazide-[bmim]N3. (b) Synthesis of 5-substituted tetrazoles.
310 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhiously substituted structurally divergent nitrile (1a) compounds and NaN3(2) in the pres￾ence of ammonium chloride in DMF at 120 °C. β-cyclodextrin was recovered and reused
three times without significant loss of activity. It was found that β-CD not only improves
the yield but also accelerates the reaction. Initially, Li and Ni salts were also studied for
their azide ion-releasing capability. β-CD is known as an inexpensive, nontoxic, biode￾gradable, easily accessible, and reusable catalyst. Desired products were obtained in a
simple clean work-up without any column purification (Figure 8.8).
A simple, highly effective, regioselective approach for azole-substituted imidazo[1,2-
a]pyridines (22/23) was unveiled by Kaswan et al. [53]. The protocol follows a ligand-free
copper-catalyzed Ullman-type CN cross-coupling of 2-(2-bromophenyl)-imidazo[1,2-a]pyr￾idines (24) with in situ generated 1,2,3-triazoles (25) and variously substituted azoles
(25a). It was observed that 20 mol% of CuI and 2 eq. K2CO3 provided encouraging results.
The scope and generality of the protocol was expanded to include a series of structurally
different azoles such as 1H-benzimidazole, 2-methyl-1H-imidazole, and 4-methyl-1H￾imidazole. The substrate scope was investigated for the synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole based
imidazol[1,2-a]pyridines employing widely substituted phenylacetylenes and aliphatic
Figure 8.7: (a) Synthesis of 3-hydroxy-3-(1H-tetrazol-5yl)indoline-2-one derivatives on water. (b)
Preparation of 3-(phenylamino)-3-(1H-tetrazole-5yl)indolin-2-one compounds.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 311terminal alkynes (12) (Figure 8.9). Furthermore, functionalization of halo-substituted,
azole-substituted imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines was carried out via Suzuki–Miyaura cross￾coupling.
Cardenes-Galindo et al. [54] synthesized a new series of 2-tetrazolyl methyl-2,3,4,9-
tetrahydro-1H-β-carbolines(27) following a microwave-assisted, metal-free, one-pot
Ugi-azide–Pictet-Spengler process. The authors carried out conventional or micro￾wave-assisted methods as well as one-pot process to obtain the corresponding series
of these novel products. In both Ugi-azide and Pictet-Spengler steps methanol was
used as solvent (Figure 8.10).
Iqbal et al. [55] disclosed the synthesis of nontoxic quinolone-based ionic liquids
(30) via N-alkylation (31) followed by anion exchange with fluoride ions (32). The
structures were established with advanced spectroscopic techniques. These new ionic
liquids were later employed as catalysts for click chemistry and the synthesis of 1H￾Figure 8.9: Synthesis of azole-substituted imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine derivatives.
Figure 8.8: β-CD-catalyzed preparation of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles.
312 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhitetrazoles (34); 1,2,5,6-tetrahydronicotinonitrile derivative (35), and pyrazole deriva￾tives (36) (Figure 8.11a–d).
Figure 8.10: Preparation of 2-tetrazolyl methyl-2,3,4,9-tetrahydro-1H-β-carbolines.
Figure 8.11: (a) Synthesis of quinolone-based ionic liquids (QuF). (b) Synthesis of phenyl ring-substituted
1H-tetrazoles by click reaction. (c) Synthesis of 3,5-dimethyl-1-(p-methoxy phenyl)-1H-pyrazole.
(d) Solvent-free one-pot Knoevenagel condensation product.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 313Afraj et al. [56] established an efficient, cost effective, two-step, operationally simple
method for a new series of (5S, 10R)-10-aryl-5,5a,6,7,8,10-hexahydro pyrrolo [1,2-a]tet￾razolo[1,5-d]pyrazines (38/39/40) via a catalyst-free, three-component Strecker reac￾tion followed by an intramolecular [3+2] cycloaddition. The Strecker reaction was
performed between diversely substituted aliphatic/aromatic/heterocyclic aldehydes
(15) and (S)-2-(azidomethyl)pyrrolidine (41) in the presence of KCN/H2O. In the next
step the products underwent intramolecular [3+2] cycloaddition. The products were
obtained with good diastereoselectivities. During the optimization, the authors stud￾ied the influence of different solvents like H2O, DMSO, DMF, MeOH, CH3CN, DCM, di￾oxane, and toluene on the reaction (Figure 8.12a, b).
A new heterogeneous and recyclable polyvinyl alcohol immobilized Cu(II) Schiff
base complex-[PVA@Cu(II)Schiff base complex] was prepared by Milad Kazemnejadi
and Sardarian [57]. They successfully applied this catalyst for an eco-friendly, highly ef￾ficient, aqueous-phase, one-pot, three-component synthesis of 5-substituted-1H-tetrazole
derivatives (42). The method follows click reaction between aliphatic/aromatic alde￾hydes (15), hydroxylaminehydrochloride (16a), and azide (2) at room temperature in
short reaction times. Among the solvents examined – EtOH, MeOH, DMF, CH3CN, Et2O
and H2O – water proved to be the best medium. The catalyst was characterized before
the application. It was recovered and reused in up to four consecutive runs without
significant loss of activity (Figure 8.13).
Figure 8.11 (continued)
314 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla RakhiAn environmentally benign, simple, and cost-effective protocol was revealed by Rad
et al. [58] for generating a new series of 5-substituted-1H-tetrazoles (43) having a
broad substrate scope, through [3+2] cycloaddition reaction between alkyl nitriles
(RCN) (1) and NaN3 (2) promoted by Cu/aminoclay/reduced graphene oxide nano hy￾brid (Cu/Ac/r-GO). The reactions were performed in water/i
PrOH (50:50 v/v). Initially,
the authors tested the suitability of various solvents like H2O; H2O/iprOH; H2O/Me2CO;
H2O/DMF; H2O/DMSO; H2O/THF; H2O/HMPA; H2O/NMP; H2O/toluene; DMSO, DMF, THF,
Figure 8.12: (a) Strecker reaction followed by intramolecular [3+2] cycloaddition. (b) Representative
structures.
Figure 8.13: Synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazole derivatives promoted by PVA @ Cu(II) Schiff base
complex.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 315i
PrOH, EtOH, PEG-200, and PEG-400.The authors also examined other parameters like
various reaction times and temperatures (Figure 8.14).
It was found that H2O/i-prOH at reflux conditions for 4 h provided the best
yields with Cu/Ac/r-GO nanohybrid catalyst on the model reaction. The catalytic effi￾ciency of the present nanohybrid was compared with the earlier literature reports,
involving various other catalysts. The improved performance of the nanohybrid
was observed to be due to the potential π–π✶ interactions of electron enriched r-GO
as poly nuclear aromatic sheet with electron-deficient N-heterocyclic cores tethered
to α- or β-carbon of the nitrile compounds. In this work, different diversely substi￾tuted alkyl nitriles (1) are prepared as substrates by the alkylation of a broad spec￾trum of bioactive N-heterocyclic cores. It was claimed that Cu/Ac/r-GO nanohybrid
was recycled and reused for many consecutive times without significant loss of ac￾tivity. The amount of leached copper from Cu/Ac/r-GO nanohybrid was observed to
be highly negligible (0.008%) even after five runs.
Wright et al. [59] presented the preparation of α-hydroxy-β-azidotetrazoles (45–50)
from α,β-epoxy nitriles (1d) in a single step. These were later used for sequential
CuAAC reactions leading to a large library of triazolomers by the click process. A total
of 11 α-hydroxy-β-triazolotetrazoles and 11 1,1-ethynyl triazoles, and 7 1,1-bitriazoles
were generated following the standardized protocols. The authors successfully dem￾onstrated the usefulness of α-hydroxy-β-azidotetrazole moiety as a carbon stapler for
varied orthogonal CuAAC reactions (Figure 8.15a, b).
Ghumro et al. [60] established the preparation of new N,N-dimethyl pyridin-4-amine
(DMAP) (51) based ionic ligands and applied these successfully as efficient, stable catalysts
in the solvent-free, eco-friendly synthesis of indole (52) ( via Fischer indole approach) and
1H-tetrazole derivatives (via click reaction) with iminium catalyst. The ILs were subjected
to thermal studies (TGA, DSC, and DTG) and molecular dynamic simulations to get the
information about their structural and transport properties (Figure 8.16a–c).
Pharande et al. [61] unveiled an improved ultrasound-assisted eco-friendly prepa￾ration of 1-substituted-1H-1,2,3,4-tetrazoles (55) via a novel isocyanide(28a)-based mul￾ticomponent click reaction under solvent, catalyst, and column-free mild reaction
Figure 8.14: Synthesis of novel 5-substituted 1H-tetrazole compounds catalyzed by Cu/Ac/r-GO nanohybrid.
316 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla RakhiFigure 8.16: (a) Synthesis of DMAP-based ionic fluoride salts. (b) Fischer indole synthesis-model-reaction.
(c) Synthesis of 1H-tetrazoles.
Figure 8.15: (a) Easily accessible α-hydroxy-β-azido-tetrazoles used for sequential CuAAC reactions.
(b) Structures of α-hydroxy-β-azidotetrazoles used for sequential CuAAC reactions.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 317conditions. The present isocyanide-based multicomponent click reaction (IMCCR) pro￾tocol provided products in 71–97% yields (Figure 8.17).
Mehraban et al. [62] developed an efficient, solvent-free, catalyst-free, and eco-friendly
protocol for 5-substituted-1H-tetrazole (57) compounds employing choline azide (2c) as
an azidation agent, involving the reaction of aromatic/heterocyclic nitrile (1a) deriva￾tives with choline azide at 80–120 °C in about 3–6 h. The products are obtained in the
75–95% range (Figure 8.18).
Sardarian et al. [63] reported the synthesis of reusable copper(II) complex supported on
Fe3O4@SiO2 coated by polyvinyl alcohol [Fe3O4@SiO2-TCT-PVA-CuII] and the structural
and other characteristics were established with the help of FT-IR, XRD, FE-SEM, UV-Vis,
DLS, TEM, EDX, TGA, VSM, XPS, NMR, ICP as well as elemental analysis techniques.
Later the catalyst was successfully applied to the one-pot three-component, eco-friendly
synthesis of 5-substituted tetrazoles (58) via click reaction of aliphatic/aromatic alde￾hydes (15) with hydroxyl amine hydrochloride (16a) and azides(2). The catalyst was also
Figure 8.17: Synthesis of 1-STS via IMCCR.
Figure 8.18: Choline azide-supported synthesis of 5-substituted tetrazole derivatives.
318 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhisuccessfully applied to the N-arylation of nitrogen heterocyclic compounds (59) and
alkyl amines (4d) with aryl halides (31b) in the absence of external ligands or additives
as promoters. The catalyst was reused for seven runs without any significant loss of
activity. The authors investigated into various reaction parameters like catalyst load￾ings, solvents, reaction temperatures, as well as the bases. Among various bases tested
t
BuONa, K2CO3, NaOH, CS2CO3, NaOAc, and K3PO4, the best results were obtained with t
BuONa in DMF with 0.6 mol% catalyst concentration. About 23 diversified N-arylated
heterocycles were generated in the range of 83–96% (Figure 8.19a, b).
Ajay Gupta et al. [64] prepared a dual synergistic recyclable catalyst Pd-Cu@rGO and
after characterization employing XRD, FT-IR, Raman, and X-ray photoelectron spec￾troscopy as well as analytical techniques, it was applied to the synthesis of triazole
(60) and tetrazole(61)-containing biaryls(62) and stilbenes(63) via click reaction. The
catalyst was reusable up to seven consecutive runs without significant loss of activity.
The authors accomplished the incorporation of Cu on to GO by literature procedure
involving the addition of NaBH4 into ultrasonicated mixture of CuCl2 and GO. Finally
Pd-Cu@rGO was obtained by the pyrolysis of Pd(OAc)2 in the presence of Cu@rGO in
toluene. The authors also applied the catalyst to the synthesis of biaryls with triazole/
tetrazole scaffolds and also carried out scalability studies (Figure 8.20a–d).
Goud et al. [65] developed a novel route for the synthesis of highly potent 1H￾tetrazole derivatives (66) from (Z)-ethyl-3-(1H-indol-3yl)-(1H-tetrazol-5-yl)acrylates (67)
and various alkylating agents (31). The starting tetrazolyl acrylates (68) are produced
by the Knoevenagel reaction between indole-3-carbaldehydes (15b) and ethyl cyanoa￾cetates (69) catalyzed by L-proline at room temperature and further reaction of the
Figure 8.19: (a) N-Arylation of N-heterocyclic compounds. (b) Synthesis of 5-substituted tetrazoles.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 319Figure 8.20: (a) Pd–Cu @rGO-catalyzed Suzuki reaction. (b) Heck reaction catalyzed by Pd-Cu @ rGO.
(c) Preparation of tetrazoles. (d) Preparation of triazoles.
320 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhiproducts with NaN3 (2) in the presence of CuSO4/DMF. During the initial investigation,
the authors worked on various reaction parameters to standardize the protocol
(Figure 8.21).
Khalili and Rezaee [66] presented the synthesis of an efficient, recyclable, magnetic cata￾lyst-impregnated copper ferrite on mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride-[CuFe2O4/g-C3N4
hybrids]. The structural and morphological characterization of the hybrids were carried
out followed by the application to a ligand-free, facile click synthesis of diverse 1,2,3-
triazoles (70/71/72) and tetrazoles (73), involving aqueous-phase one-pot azide–alkyne
(12a) cycloaddition reaction employing alkyl halides (31) and epoxides (74) as azide(2)
precursors. During initial optimization studies, the authors assessed the efficacy of
Cu(OAc)2·H2O, CuO, Cu, CuFe3O4, and CuF2O4/g-C3N4 and observed the superior capability
of CuFe2O4/g-C3N4. The authors also prepared macrocycles possessing the triazole moiety.
The catalyst was reused up to six runs (Figure 8.22a–c).
Rahini and Ghandi [67] carried out the synthesis of a new series of symmetrical
tetrazol-based carbazole compounds (75) from 3,6-diformyl-N-alkyl carbazoles(15d)
via a one-pot Ugi-azide reaction of 3,6-diformyl-9-alkyl carbazoles (15d), aromatic
amines (4b), trimethylsilylazide (TMSN3) (2a), and isocyanides (28) in methanol me￾dium. In the initial studies, the suitability of several solvents like CH2Cl2, EtOH, H2O,
Figure 8.21: Synthesis of tetrazole compounds.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 321MeOH, and THF for the reaction was examined. The efficacy of NaN3 (2) and TMSN3 (2a)
was explored as azide (2) source (Figure 8.23a,b).
An and Lin [68] produced a panel of sterically shielded tetrazoles (77/78) with
different N-aryl groups and evaluated them` for photo-induced tetrazol-alkene cyclo￾addition reaction. The authors assessed the effect of N-aryl groups on product fluo￾rescence (Figure 8.24a–c).
Hajizadeh et al. [69] immobilized Cu(I) on Fe3O4@HNTS-tetrazole (CFHT) nano
composite and characterized using physiochemical techniques like CHNS analysis, FT￾Figure 8.22: (a) Click synthesis of diverse 1,2,3-triazoles. (b) Multicomponent synthesis of β-OH-1,2,3-
triazoles from epoxides. (c) Synthesis of 5-substituted tetrazole derivatives.
322 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla RakhiFigure 8.23: (a) Preparation of 3,6-diformyl-9-alkyl-carbazoles. (b) Preparation of novel bis-tetrazole-based
carbazoles.
Figure 8.24: (a) Synthesis of the sterically shielded tetrazoles. (b) Cycloadditon of tetrazoles with
spiro[2.3]hex-1-ene. (c) Sterically shielded tetrazoles.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 323IR, SEM, TEM, XRD, VSM, TGA, and EDX. Furthermore, the catalyst was applied suc￾cessfully in the synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazole derivatives (84) via multicompo￾nent reactions involving malononitrile (1e), diversely substituted aromatic aldehydes
(15), and NaN3(2). The catalyst was reused up to five cycles. Catalyst recoverability,
high productivity (90–97%), and short reaction times (30–40 min) are notable features
of this approach. The catalyst also exhibited remarkable antibacterial activity against
E. coli and S. aureus (Figure 8.25).
Yao et al. [70] revealed the preparation of 5-substituted-1H-tetrazole compounds
(85) by a simple, novel, metal-free approach by the (2+3) cycloaddition of boron azides
and nitriles (1a). By shifting NaN3(2) to boron azides (2e) like LiB(N3)4, C2H5N B(N3)3,
(N3)3B.N.C4H4, N.B(N3)3, and C9H7N.B(N3)3 an improvement in the yields was observed
by the authors. When a catalytic amount of heteropolyacids or amine salts like NH4OAc,
NH4Cl, H3PW12O40, and H3PMO12O40 were added to the medium the yields were further
Figure 8.24 (continued)
324 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhiincreased. H2O, THF, DMF, toluene, and DMF/MeOH were screened as solvents. Conduct￾ing the reaction with LiB(N3)4 in DMF/MeOH (9:1) along with 10 mol% NH4OAc proved
to be ideal for the approach. Various substituted nitriles (1b) were examined as sub￾strates in the method (Figure 8.26).
Hameed et al. [71] described a one-pot, solvent-free synthesis of 1H-tetrazole deriva￾tives-linked 1,2,5,6-tetrahydronicotino nitriles (86), by the reaction of acetophenones
(87) and malononitrile (1e) followed by the addition of azide (2) in the presence of
tetra-n-butyl ammonium fluoride trihydrate as solvent and catalyst. The products
were screened for cholinesterase inhibition (Figure 8.27).
Xue et al. [72] designed and developed an eco-friendly sustainable synthesis of
CuNPs decorated on pectin-modified Fe3O4 nanocomposite promoted by Mentha pule￾gium flower extract as a natural stabilizing/ and reducing agent. The authors charac￾terized the nanocomposite by employing a wide range of physiochemical techniques
consisting of FT-IR, elemental mapping, VSM, XRD, IC-OES analysis, FESEM, TEM, and
EDX. The catalytic efficiency was assessed by applying it in the synthesis of broadly
substituted 1H-tetrazoles (88) via a solvent-free three-component reaction. The nano￾composite was also subjected to reusability, leaching studies, hot filtration, and bio￾logical assays (anticancer). From the various studies conducted by the authors, a
Figure 8.25: Preparation of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazole derivatives.
Figure 8.26: Formation of 5-phenyl-tetrazole compounds.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 325promising future was expected for the nanocomposite in cancer management. The
catalyst was efficient up to nine consecutive runs (Figure 8.28).
Krištafor et al. [73] reported a one-pot, multistep, microwave-assisted synthesis of 1,2,3-
triazole (89)-embedded unsaturated Uracil derivatives and the hybrids of 1,5- and 2,5-
disubstituted tetrazoles and pyrimidines (90/91) employing Cu(I)-catalyzed click chemis￾try. The compounds are investigated for antiproliferative activity (Figure 8.29a, b).
Tamoradi et al. [74] successfully synthesized a magnetic CoFe2O4 centered (95) as par￾agine-functionalized noble metal (M = Cu, Ni)-anchored nanocomposite. These heteroge￾neous catalytic materials are characterized by elemental mapping, XRD, SEM, EDX, FT-IR,
and VSM. These reusable materials are effectively applied as catalysts in the preparation
of diarylthioethers (100) by the C–S cross coupling and azide–alkyne cycloaddition by
click reaction affording 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles (102). Simplicity, high output, magnetic
separability, and recyclability of the catalyst are the advantages. Different solvents and
bases are examined for suitability in the initial investigations. The catalyst was success￾fully used for seven runs (Figure 8.30a–c).
A high-order, one-pot six-component protocol for 1,5-disubstituted tetrazol-1,2,3-
triazol hybrid molecules (103) with structural diversity under mild reaction conditions
was described by Ceria M. Aguilar-Morales et al. [75]. The present high atom-economy
Figure 8.27: One-pot synthesis of tetrazole-1,2,5,6-tetrahydronicotino nitriles.
Figure 8.28: Cu/pectin@Fe3O4-promoted synthesis of 1-substituted 1H-tetrazoles.
326 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhicascade approach contains three sequential reactions: Ugi-azide, bimolecular nucleo￾philic substitution (SN2), and copper-catalyzed alkyne–azide reaction (CuAAC) involving
the formation of six new bonds (1C-C and 4C-N and 1N-N). The authors evaluated the
new molecules for antitumor potential by conducting antiproliferative studies against
breast cancer derived cell line MCF-7. These compounds proved to be potential drug
candidates against breast cancer (Figure 8.31).
Khalili et al. [76] established the catalytic efficiency of a series of copper (I) com￾plexes containing dihydrobis(2-mercapto-benzimidazolyl)borate (Bb) (104) and phosphine
co-ligands by applying them in the preparation of nitrogen heterocyclic compounds like
5-substituted tetrazoles (105) and 2H-indazoles (106). The reactions were performed with
low catalyst loadings in short reaction timings with operational simplicity. Solvents like
DMF, DMSO, H2O, EtOH, Toluene, THF, and PEG-200 were examined for best results.
Among 21 compounds, 4 compounds were obtained in trace yields (Figure 8.32a–c).
Figure 8.29: (a) One-pot, three-step reactions generating 1,2,3-triazole-containing uracil derivatives.
(b) Synthesis of 1,5/2,5-disubstituted tetrazol-pyrimidine hybrids.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 327Figure 8.30: (a) CoFe2O4@L-asparagine-Cu/Ni nanocatalyst-promoted synthesis of 5-substituted
1H-tetrazoles. (b) Preparation of aryl thioethers. (c) Preparation of the catalyst.
328 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla RakhiFigure 8.31: One-pot six-component approach for 1,5-disubstituted tetrazole-1,2,3-triazole hybrids.
Figure 8.32: (a) Synthesis of Cu(II) catalyst complexes. (b) One-pot three-component synthesis of
2H-indazoles. (c) Cu (Bb) (PCy3)-catalyzed synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 3298.3 Conclusions
The last few decades have witnessed remarkable growth in click chemistry research
and wider scope can be visualized for the development of new strategies towards build￾ing tetrazole derivatives. This review is an attempt to bring out the recent advances in
tetrazole chemistry. Scholars are advised to go through the original research papers for
proper understanding of the chemistry represented here. All the structures are re￾drawn from these research communications. We acknowledge and appreciate all the
original contributors of the research papers and also their publishers cited herein.
Author contributions: All the authors have accepted responsibility for the entire con￾tent of this submitted manuscript and approved submission.
Figure 8.32 (continued)
330 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla RakhiReferences
[1] Bladin JA. Ueber von Dicyanphenylhydrazin abgeleitete verbindungen. Ber Dtsch Chem Ges, 1885,
18, 1544–1551.
[2] Bamberger E, De Gruyter P. Ueber die constitution der Cyanphenylhydrazine und der
ausdenselbendarstellbarenTriazolkörper. Ber Dtsch Chem Ges, 1893, 26, 2385–2397.
[3] Okabayashi T, Kano H, Makikado N. Action of substituted azaindolizines on microorganisms.
i. action on lactic acid bacteria. Chem Pharm Bull, 1960, 8, 157–162.
[4] Witkowski JK, Robin RK, Sidwell RW, Simon LN. Design, synthesis, and broad spectrum antiviral
activity of 1–D-ribofuranosyl-1,2,4-triazole-3-carboxamide and related nucleosides. J Med Chem,
1972, 15, 1150–1154.
[5] Barry VC, Conalty ML, O’Sullivan JP, Twomey D Antitumour activity of tetrazolopyridazines and
tetrazolophthalazines. In Williams JD, Geddes AM, Eds. Chemotherapy. Volume 8, Plenum Press,
New York, 1976, 103.
[6] Maxwell JR, Wasdahl DA, Wolfson AC, Stenberg VI. Synthesis of 5-aryl-2H-tetrazoles, 5-aryl-2H￾tetrazole-2-acetic acids, and [(4-phenyl-5-aryl-4H-1,2,4-triazol-3-yl)thio]acetic acids as possible
superoxide scavengers and antiinflammatory agents. J Med Chem, 1984, 27, 1565–1570.
[7] Stewart KD, Stefan L, Lisa F, Ellen O, Vered K, Keren IH. Discovery of a new cyclooxygenase-2 lead
compound through 3-D database searching and combinatorial chemistry. Bioorg Med Chem Lett,
1998, 8, 529–534.
[8] Sarro AD, Ammendola D, Zappala M, Grasso S, Sarro GBD. Relationship between structure and
convulsant properties of some beta-lactam antibiotics following intracerebroventricular
microinjection in rats. Agents Chemother, 1995, 39, 232–237.
[9] Mavromoustakos T, Kolocouris A, Zervou M, Roumelioti P, Matsoukas J, Weisemann R. An effort to
understand the molecular basis of hypertension through the study of conformational analysis of
losartan and sarmesin using a combination of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and
theoretical calculations. J Med Chem, 1999, 42, 1714–1722.
[10] Izsák D, Klapötke TM, Lutter FH, Pflüger C. Tailoring the energetic properties of 5-(5-Amino-1,2,3-
triazol-4-yl)tetrazole and its derivatives by salt formation: From sensitive primary to insensitive
secondary explosives. Eur J InorgChem, 2016, 2016, 1720–1729.
[11] Kumar D, He C, Mitchell LA, Parrish DA, Shreeve JM. Connecting energetic nitropyrazole and
aminotetrazole moieties with N,N′-ethylene bridges: A promising approach for fine tuning energetic
properties. J Mater Chem A, 2016, 4, 9220–9228.
[12] Tang Y, He C, Imler GH, Parrish DA, Shreeve JM. Design and synthesis of N-methylene-C linked
tetrazole and nitramino-1,2,4-triazole: An approach to promising energetic materials. J Mater Chem
A, 2016, 4, 13923–13929.
[13] Szimhardt N, Bölter MF, Born M, Klapötke TM, Stierstorfer J. Metal salts and complexes of
1,1′-dinitramino-5,5′-bitetrazole. Dalton Trans, 2017, 46, 5033–5040.
[14] Kumar D, Imler GH, Parrish DA, Shreeve JM. Aminoacetonitrile as precursor for nitrogen rich stable
and insensitive asymmetric N-methylene-C linked tetrazole-based energetic compounds. J Mater
Chem A, 2017, 5, 16767–16775.
[15] Sandmann G, Schneider C, Boger PZ. A new non-radioactive assay of phytoenedesaturase to
evaluate bleaching herbicides. Naturforsch C, 1996, 51, 534–538.
[16] Jursic BS, Le Blanc BW. Preparation of tetrazoles from organic nitriles and sodium azide in micellar
media. J HeterocyclChem, 1998, 35, 405–408.
[17] Hantzsch A, Vagt A. Ueber das sogenannteDiazoguanidin. Justus Liebigs Ann Chem, 1901, 314,
339–369.
[18] Finnegan WG, Henry RA, Lofquist R. An improved synthesis of 5-substituted tetrazoles. J Am Chem
Soc, 1958, 80, 3908–3911.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 331[19] Demko ZP, Sharpless B. Preparation of 5-substituted 1h-tetrazoles from nitriles in water. J Org
Chem, 2001, 66, 7945–7950.
[20] Rama V, Kanagaraj K, Pitchumani K. Syntheses of 5-substituted 1h-tetrazoles catalyzed by reusable
CoY zeolite. J Org Chem, 2011, 76, 9090–9095.
[21] Sreedhar B, Suresh Kumar A, Yada D. CuFe2O4 nanoparticles: A magnetically recoverable and
reusable catalyst for the synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles. Tetrahedron Lett, 2011, 52,
3565–3569.
[22] NajafiChermahini A, Teimouri A, Moaddeli A. Simple and efficient synthesis of 5-substituted
1-H-tetrazoles using metal-modified clay catalysts. HeteroatChem, 2011, 22, 168–173.
[23] Teimouri A, NajafiChermahini A. Zeolite and sulfated zirconia as catalysts for the synthesis of
5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles via [2+3] cycloaddition of nitriles and sodium azide. Polyhedron, 2011, 30,
2606–2610.
[24] Patil VS, Nandre KP, Borse AU, Bhosale SV. InCl3-Catalyzed [2+3] Cycloaddition reaction: A rapid
synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazole under microwave irradiation. E J Chem, 2012, 9, 1145–1152.
[25] Cantillo D, Gutmann B, Kappe CO. Mechanistic insights on azide−nitrile cycloadditions: On the
dialkyltin oxide-trimethylsilylazide route and a new vilsmeier-haack-type organocatalyst. J Am
ChemSoc, 2011, 133, 4465–4475.
[26] Gutmann B, Roduit JP, Roberge D, Kappe CO. Synthesis of 5-substituted 1h-tetrazoles from nitriles
and hydrazoic acid by using a safe and scalable high-temperature microreactor approach.
AngewChemInt Ed, 2010, 49, 7101–7105.
[27] Marvi O, Alizadeh A, Zarrahi SB. Montmorillonite K-10 clay as an efficient reusable heterogeneous
catalyst for the solvent-free microwave mediated synthesis of 5-Substituted 1H-tetrazoles. Korean
ChemSoc, 2011, 32, 4001–4004.
[28] Myznikov LV, Efimova YA, Artamonova TV, Koldobskii GI. Tetrazoles: LVI. Synthesis of 5-substituted
tetrazoles under microwave activation in the presence of heterogeneous catalyst (zinc oxide). Russ J
Org Chem, 2011, 47, 728–730.
[29] Schmidt B, Meid D, Kieser D. Safe and fast tetrazole formation in ionic liquids. Tetrahedron, 2007,
63, 492–496.
[30] Aridoss G, Laali KK. Highly efficient synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles catalyzed by Cu-Zn alloy
nanopowder, conversion into 1,5- and 2,5-disubstituted tetrazoles, and synthesis and NMR studies
of new tetrazolium ionic liquids. Eur J Org Chem, 2011, 6343–6355.
[31] Patil UB, Kumthekar KR, Nagarkar JM. A novel method for the synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazole
from oxime and sodium azide. Tetrahedron Lett, 2012, 53, 3706–3709.
[32] Vignesh A, Bhuvanesh NSP, Dharmaraj N. Conversion of arylboronic acids to tetrazoles catalyzed by
ONO pincer-type palladium complex. J Org Chem, 2017, 82, 887–892.
[33] Ishihara K, Shioiri T, Matusugi M. An expeditious approach to tetrazoles from amides utilizing
phosphorazidates. Org Lett, 2020, 22, 6244–6247.
[34] Ishihara K, Kawashima M, Matsumoto T, Shiori T, Matsugi M. T3P® – A benign desulfurating reagent
in the synthesis of isothiocyanates. Synthesis, 2018, 50, 1141–1151.
[35] Ishihara K, Kawashima M, Shioiri T, Matsugi M. Synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles from
aldoximes using diphenylphosphorazidate. Synlett, 2016, 27, 2225–2228.
[36] Patil P, Zhang J, Kurpiewska K, Kalinowska-Tłuścik J, Dömling A. Hydrazine in the ugitetrazole
reaction. Synthesis, 2016, 48, 1122–1130.
[37] Pathare RS, Ansari AJ, Verma S, Maurya A, Mauryav AK, Agnihotri VK, Sharon A, Pardasani RT,
Sawant DM. Sequential pd(0)/Fe(III) catalyzed azide-isocyanide coupling/cyclization reaction:
One-pot synthesis of aminotetrazoles. J Org Chem, 2018, 83, 9530–9537.
[38] Sridhar M, Mallu KKR, Jillella R, Godala KR, Beeram CR, Chinthala N. One-step synthesis of
5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles from an aldehyde by reaction with acetohydroxamic acid and sodium
azide under Bi(OTf)3 catalysis. Synthesis, 2013, 45, 0507–0510.
332 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhi[39] Mohammad A-A, Moaddeli A. Multi-component one-pot reaction of aldehyde, hydroxylamine and
sodium azide catalyzed by Cu-MCM-41 nanoparticles: A novel method for the synthesis of
5-substituted 1H-tetrazole derivatives. New J Chem, 2015, 39, 2116–2122.
[40] Yurii VG, Sergei VV, Vladimir PK, Oleg AI. Synthesis of tetrazole and its derivatives by
heterocyclization reaction involving primary amines, orthoesters, and azides. Chemheterocycl, 2017,
53, 670–681.
[41] Demko ZP, Sharpless KB. A click chemistry approach to tetrazoles by huisgen 1,3-dipolar
cycloaddition: Synthesis of 5-sulfonyl tetrazoles from azides and sulfonyl cyanides. Angew Chem Int
Ed, 2002, 41, 2110–2113.
[42] Tornöe CW, Christensen C, Meldal M. Peptidotriazoles on solid phase: [1,2,3]-triazoles by
regiospecific copper(I)-catalyzed 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions of terminal alkynes to azides. J Org
Chem, 2002, 67, 3057–3064.
[43] Rostovtsev VV, Green LG, Fokin VV, Sharpless KBA. Stepwise huisgencycloaddition process:
Copper(i)-catalyzed regioselective “ligation” of azides and terminal alkynes. Angew Chem Int Ed,
2002, 41, 2596–2599.
[44] Kolb HC, Sharpless KB. The growing impact of click chemistry on drug discovery. Drug Discov Today,
2003, 8, 1128–1137.
[45] Sharpless KB, Manetsch R. In situ click chemistry: A powerful means for lead discovery. Expert Opin
Drug Discov, 2006, 1, 525–538.
[46] Amantini D, Beleggia R, Fringuelli F, Pizzo F, Vaccaro L. TBAF-catalyzed synthesis of 5-substituted
1H-tetrazoles under solventless conditions. J Org Chem, 2004, 69, 2896–2898.
[47] Hang HC, Yu C, Kato DL, Bertozzi CR. A metabolic labeling approach toward proteomic analysis of
mucin-type O-linked glycosylation. Proc Natl Acad Sci, 2003, 100, 14846–14851.
[48] Alireza NC, Abbas T, Fariborz M, Amin Z, Zeinab D, Aseyeh G, Mostafa R. Clay-catalyzed synthesis of
5-substituent 1-H-tetrazoles. J Heterocycl Chem, 2010, 47, 913–922.
[49] Linda IN, Anne E, Dirk W, Jens MJN. Copper-catalyzed alkyne cycloaddition on electron
deficientazides via tetrazolo[1,5-a]pyrimidines. J Heterocycl Chem, 2010, 47, 887–892.
[50] Heravi MM, Azadeh F, Hossein AO, Yahya SB, Hassan V. Click synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles
from aldehydes, hydroxylamine, and [bmim]N3 via one-pot, three-component reaction. Synlett,
2012, 23, 2927–2930.
[51] Parvathaneni S, Keesara S, Balasubramanian S, Mandapati MR. ‘‘On water’’ one-pot synthesis of
quaternary centered 3-hydroxy-3-(1H-tetrazol-5-yl)indolin-2-ones. RSC Adv, 2013, 3, 7708–7712.
[52] Patil DR, Yogesh BW, Ingole PG, Singh K, Dalal DS. β-Cyclodextrin-mediated highly efficient [2+3]
cycloaddition reactions for the synthesis of5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles. New J Chem, 2013, 37,
3261–3266.
[53] Kaswan P, Pericharla K, Kumar A. Ligand-free, copper-catalyzed ullmann-type C-N coupling:
Regioselective synthesis of azole-substituted imidazo[1,2-a]pyridines. Synlett, 2013, 24, 2751–2757.
[54] Cardenas-Galindo LE, Islas-Jacome A, Alvarez-Rodriguez NV, Kaim L, Gamez-Montano R. Synthesis of
2-tetrazolylmethyl-2,3,4,9-tetrahydro-1H-β-carbolines by a one-pot ugi-azide/Pictet-Spengler
process. Synthesis, 2014, 46, 0049–0056.
[55] Iqbal N, Jamshed H, Syed AA, al-Rashida M, Alharthy RD, Ahmad S, Khan KM, Basha FZ, Moin ST,
Hameed A. Solvent-free 1H-tetrazole, 1,2,5,6-tetrahydronicotinonitrile and
pyrazolesynthesisusingquinoline based ionic fluoride salts (QuFs): Thermal and theoretical studies.
RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 95061–95072.
[56] Afraj SN, Chen C, Lee G-H. Synthesis of decahydropyrrolo[1,2-a]tetrazolo[1,5-d]pyrazines via Strecker
reaction and intramolecular [3+2] cycloaddition. RSC Adv, 2016, 6, 29783–29793.
[57] Milad K, Sardarian AR. Ecofriendly synthesis of a heterogeneous polyvinylalcohol immobilized
copper(II) Schiff base complex as an efficient, reusable catalyst for the one-pot three-component
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 333green preparation of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazoles under mild conditions. RSC Adv, 2016, 6,
91999–92006.
[58] Mohammad NSR, Somayeh B, Vahid SD, Hoseini SJ. Cu/graphene/clay ranohybrid: A highly efficient
heterogeneous nanocatalyst for synthesis of new 5-substituted-1H-tetrazole derivatives tethered to
bioactive N-heterocyclic cores. J Heterocycl Chem, 2017, 54, 355–365.
[59] Wright K, Pierre Q, Bruno D, François C. A one carbon staple for orthogonal coppercatalyzedazide￾alkyne cycloadditions. Chem Commun, 2017, 53, 321–323.
[60] Sarfaraz AG, Sana S, Al-rashida M, Nafees I, Alharthy RD, Ahmed S, Moin ST, Hameed AN.
N-Dimethylpyridin-4-amine (DMAP) based ionic liquids: Evaluation of physical properties
viamolecular dynamics simulations and application as a catalyst for Fisher indole and
1H-tetrazolesynthesis. RSC Adv, 2017, 7, 34197–34207.
[61] Pharande SG, Renteria-go´mez MA, Gamez-Montano R. Isocyanide based multicomponent click
reactions: A green and improved synthesis of 1-substituted1H-1,2,3,4-tetrazoles. New J Chem, 2018,
42, 11294–11298.
[62] Mehraban JR, Azizi K, Jalali MS, Heydari A. Choline azide: New reagent and ionic liquid in
catalyst-free and solvent-free synthesis of 5-substituted-1H-tetrazoles: A triple function reagent.
ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 12175–12180.
[63] Sardarian AR, Eslahi H, Esmaeilpour M. Copper(II) complex supported on fe3o4@sio2 coated by
polyvinyl alcohol as reusable nanocatalyst in N-arylation of amines and N(H)- heterocycles and
green synthesis of1H-tetrazoles. ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 1499–1511.
[64] Gupta A, Jamatia R, Dam B, Pal AK. Development of synergistic, dual Pd-Cu@rGO catalyst for Suzuki,
Heck and click reactions: Facile synthesis of triazole or tetrazole containing biaryls and stilbenes.
ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 8212–8220.
[65] Goud BM, Taduri AK, Bhoomireddy RD. A facile synthesis of novel (Z)-ethyl-3-(5-substituted-1-
alkyl/aryl-1hindol-3-yl)-2-(1H-tetrazol-5-yl)acrylate. J Heterocycl Chem, 2019, 56, 92–98.
[66] Khalili D, Rezaee M. Impregnated copper ferrite on mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride: An
efficient and reusable catalyst for promoting ligand‐free click synthesis of diverse 1,2,3‐triazoles and
tetrazoles. Appl Org Chem, 2019, 33, e5219.
[67] Rahini S, Ghandi M. Preparation of novel symmetrical bistetrazole-carbazole derivatives through a
one-pot Ugi-Azide reaction. J Heterocycl Chem, 2021, 58, 716–723.
[68] An P, Lin Q. Sterically shielded tetrazoles for fluorogenic photo click reaction: Tuning cycloaddition
rate and product fluorescence. Org Biomol Chem, 2018, 16, 5241–5244.
[69] Hajizadeh Z, Fereshte H-A, Diana FJ, Mohammad RA, Maleki A. Cu(II) immobilized on Fe3O4@HNTs￾tetrazole (CFHT) nanocomposite: Synthesis, characterization, investigation of its catalytic role for the
1,3 dipolar cycloaddition reaction, and antibacterial activity. RSC Adv, 2020, 10, 26467–26478.
[70] Yao Y-W, Zhou Y, Lin B-P, Yao C. Click chemistry for the synthesis of 5-substituted 1H-tetrazolesfrom
boron-azides and nitriles. Tetrahedron Lett, 2013, 54, 6779–6781.
[71] Hameed A, Zehra ST, Abbas S, Nisa RU, Mahmood T, Ayub K, Al-rashida M, Bajorath J, Khan KM,
Iqbal J. One-pot synthesis of tetrazole-1,2,5,6-tetrahydronicotinonitriles and cholinesterase
inhibition: Probing the plausible reaction mechanism via computational studies. Bioorg Chem, 2016,
65, 38–47.
[72] Xue W, Yang G, Karmakar B, Gao Y. Sustainable synthesis of Cu NPs decorated on pectin modified
Fe3O4 nanocomposite: Catalytic synthesis of 1-substituted-1H-tetrazoles and in vitro studies on its
cytotoxicity and anti-colorectal adenocarcinoma effects on HT-29 cell lines. Arab J Chem, 2021, 14,
103306–103317.
[73] Krištafor S, Bistrović A, Plavec J, Makuc D, Martinović T, Pavelić SK, Raić-Malić S. One-pot click
synthesis of 1,2,3-triazole-embedded unsaturated uracil derivatives and hybrids of 1,5- and2,5-
disubstituted tetrazoles and pyrimidines. Tetrahedron Lett, 2015, 56, 1222–1228.
334 Yadavalli Venkata Durga Nageswar, Katla Ramesh, Katla Rakhi[74] Tamoradi T, Veisi H, Karmakar B, Gholami J. A competent green methodology for the synthesis of
aryl thioethers and 1Htetrazoleover magnetically retrievable novel CoFe2O4@L-asparagineanchored
Cu, Ni nanocatalyst. Mater Sci Eng C, 2020, 107, 110260–110270.
[75] Aguilar-Morales CM, Araujo-Huitrado JG, López-Hernández Y, Contreras-Celedón C, Islas-Jácome A,
Granados-López AJ, Solorio-Alvarado CR, López JA, Chacón-García L, Cortés-García CJ. A one-pot
six-component reaction for the synthesis of 1,5-Disubstituted Tetrazol-1,2,3-triazole hybrids and their
cytotoxic activity against the MCF-7 cell line. Molecules, 2021, 26, 6104–6117.
[76] Khalili D, Roya E, Abdollah N, Jasem A. Copper(I) complex of dihydrobis(2-mercaptobenzimidazolyl)
borate as an efficient homogeneous catalyst for the synthesis of 2H-indazoles and 5-substituted
1H-tetrazoles. ChemistrySelect, 2021, 6, 746–753.
8 Synthesis of various bioactive tetrazoles via one-pot multicomponent click reactions 335Kantharaju Kamanna✶
, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed
one-pot multicomponent synthesis
of biologically promising N- and
O-heterocycles
9.1 Introduction
Organocatalysis, by definition, uses a simple organic molecule to facilitate organic re￾actions; it is a reasonably novel as well as a most excited area discovered under the
scope of enantioselective (chiral) molecule construction [1]. Although, the idea behind
organocatalysis was documented in the last century, it became popular as a discipline
of organocatalysis in the late 1990s. Since a small number of reference articles have
been reported, it has inspired researchers to explore more in this field. The statistics
of organocatalysis manuscripts reported between 1998 and 2008 showed a little more
than 1,500 published articles in 130 or more discrete reaction types [2]. Recently, orga￾nocatalysis research areas received recognition rewarded due to the significant works
of David MacMillan and Benjamin List in this field, who received 2021 the Nobel Prize
in Chemistry for their outstanding contribution toward the development of organoca￾talysts, more precisely a new tool for molecular construction [3]. Currently, the con￾cept of organocatalysts is widely accepted and is considered as one of the important
principal divisions of chiral molecule preparation, in addition to the existing and ac￾cepted previous organometallic and enzymatic methods. MacMillan explained three
important things were essential for the unexpected birth and faster expansion of or￾ganocatalysis. They are: conceptualization, wide selection and advantages of the ge￾neric mode of activation reactivity, and induction [4]. Yain Shi and coworkers [5],
Scott Denmark et al. [6], and Dan Yang et al. [7] reported the use of the chiral ketone
to catalyze epoxidation of alkene with enantioselectivity. Following this concept re￾ported, Jacobsen et al. [8] demonstrated first example of asymmetric Strecker reaction
via hydrogen-bonding organocatalysts. Corey et al. [9] described chiral bicyclic guani￾dine as an catalyst in the enantioselective synthesis of -amino nitriles. Miller et al. [10]
reported alcohol dervivatives can be resolved kinetically by tripeptide oraganocata￾lysts. Until 2000, the field of organocatalysts did not take off as expected; however, the
field of organocatalysis was effectively relaunched by the simultaneous publication of
✶
Corresponding author: Kantharaju Kamanna, Department of Chemistry, School of Basic Sciences,
Rani Channamma University, Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156, Karnataka,
e-mail: kk@rcub.ac.in
Yamanappagouda Amaregouda, Department of Chemistry, School of Basic Sciences,
Rani Channamma University, Vidyasangama, P-B, NH-4, Belagavi 591156, Karnataka
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-009two articles by Benjamin List and MacMillan and their coworkers [10] on enamine and
iminium catalysis, respectively. The research work of List et al. explained the underly￾ing mechanism of Hajas–Parrish reaction and it extended to a broader transformation,
specifically the intermolecular Aldol reactions [11]. Similar to this work demonstrated
use of a small organic molecule could catalyze reaction on that of bigger enzyme mole￾cules and is comparable catalytic activities. Later researcher explained another imi￾nium catalysis pathways involved three crucial concepts conceived focusing on how
organocatalysts offered economic, scientific as well as environmental outline advan￾tages broadly activated strategies could use with a wide range of reaction types [12, 13].
The community of chemical synthesis recognized that organocatalysis offered inherent
benefits such as simplicity and low cost in completing a reaction. The advantages of
organocatalysts, especially amino acids-derived, brought the prospects of a complemen￾tary mode of catalysts, with the objectives of cost reduction, energy, time, easier experi￾ments set up, and chemical waste reduction [14–18]. Other properties, like unaffected
by atmospheric moisture and oxygen, gave wide scope to select environmentally
friendly and nontoxic compound [19]. For the first time, List et al. [20] described
the use of L-proline amino acid-catalyzed highly enantioselective intermolecular
variants of Hajas-Parrish-Eder-Sauer-Wiechart reaction. Subsequently, this discovery
provided insights to various research groups to explore and design more efficient or￾ganocatalysts, majorly reported in the asymmetric organic synthesis, and employed
more than one functionality in the catalytic mechanism, either through covalent or
noncovalent interactions [21]. Researchers revealed the strongest technique to estab￾lish carbon–carbon (C–C) bonds by an asymmetric aldol reaction in a chiral manner
[22]. The most important improvement mode in organocatalyzed Aldol reaction by de￾veloping catalyst with proline skeleton containing various H-doner and acceptor func￾tionalities derivatives has been well documented and discovered [23].
9.2 Why proline prefers as a good organocatalysts
among other natural amino acids?
The only secondary amine functionality containing natural amino acid that exists is
Proline. It showed better nucleophilicity and it raises the pKa value, compared to
other amino acids. It can act as a Michael acceptor (enamines) or as a nucleophile to
carbonyl groups (iminium intermediate). It can be regarded as a dual functional cata￾lyst. The high stereoselectivity achieved is possibly due to its formation of organized
transition states with many hydrogen bonding frameworks. Proline is not the only
molecule that promotes catalysis, but it still seems to be one of the best molecules in￾volved in diverse organic transformations [24, 25].
Multicomponent reactions (MCRs) emerged as a valuable and efficient methodol￾ogy in the section of synthetic chemistry due to the advantages of one-pot procedure,
338 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregoudaatom economy, time-saving, and chemical waste reduction, and gained much atten￾tion in synthetic organic chemistry. Even though the concept of MCR synthesis for di￾verse organic molecules has been well known for over a century, it has only recently
got more attention and increasing number of publications, emphasizing biologically
relevant organic molecules synthesis via this approach [26]. In the reported literature,
synthesized heterocycles via MCRs are subjected to various biological activity screening.
It was noticed most of such screening focused on anti-inflammatory, antileihsmanial,
ROCK inhibitors, antifibrotic agents, bromodomain inhibitors, neuroprotective agents,
human toll-like receptor 8-active, anti-HIV, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, antioxidant,
antimycobacterial, antimicrobial, and anticancer activities [27]. Numerous MCR proce￾dures applied to the construction of organic molecules clearly showed that MCR-based
approaches are exceptionally promising in drug discovery and screening processes in me￾dicinal chemistry and in drug discovery programs due to their operational simplicity,
high atom-economy, time/cost efficiency, and generation of diverse structural multifunc￾tional substrates [28]. The corresponding nitrogen- and oxygen-containing heterocycles
developed via MCRs approaches catalyzed by L-proline (Figure 9.1) and its derivatives
that are recently reported in literature are discussed in this chapter.
9.3 L-Proline-catalyzed synthesis of N-heterocycles
Chemistry of nitrogen-based heterocyclic is an important and special class among the
applied branches of organic chemistry, with a promising number of research establish￾ments working on the development of novel molecules and composites. These hetero￾cycles received increasing attention over the past two decades, and contributed to the
development of numerous organic synthetic routes, catalyzed by a wide range of homo￾geneous and heterogeneous catalysts. These derivatives showed a vast range of pharma￾cological applications in pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and insecticides [29, 30]. Some
of the recently reported L-proline-catalyzed MCRs are discussed in the following section.
Parvin and coworkers [31] reported the one-pot synthesis of 1,4-dihydrobenzo[b]
[1,8]-naphthyridine (4) by the reaction of 6-aminouracil derivative (R=H, Me, 1) with a
substituted quinoline aldehyde (R1=6-Me, 6-OMe) (2) and dimedone (3) in the presence
of OCP-1 in ethanol under reflux condition (Figure 9.2). The authors demonstrated
aminopyrimidine, regarded as a potential MCR substrates, for the synthesis of various
heterocycles, and tested it for its biological activities in addition to this one, and they
showed strong antimicrobial and biofilm inhibitory capabilities.
Figure 9.1: The structure of L-proline amino acid.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 339Li and Zhao [32] reported the successful isolation of pyrazolo[3,4-b]quinoline deriva￾tives (9) using a 4-CR of phenylhydrazine (7), 3-aminocrotononitrile (6), substituted
benzaldehyde (8), and 2-hydroxynaphthalene-1,4-dione (5) catalyzed by OCP-1 “on
water” (Figure 9.3). The authors explained that the mechanistic pathway of the reac￾tion involved unattached hydroxyl groups of water to be interacted with organic reac￾tants, which led to transition state activation energy lowering, enabling the reaction
rate, and increasing the yields in the water-mediated processes.
Bonne et al. [33] described unsymmetrical 1,4-DHPs (13) in a three-component OCP-1
catalyzed process, which involved the condensation of a chiral aldehyde derivative
(11), 1,3-diketone (12), and a chiral substrate, provided by an enaminoester (10), and
gave a product high yield (Figure 9.4). The authors claimed the developed method was
atom economic, one-pot, and had mild and minimal waste.
Kamalraja et al. described a three-component domino reaction, integrating azido ke￾tone (14), p-tolualdehyde (15), and 3-cyanoacetylindole (16) in the presence of OCP-1. It gave
highly substituted and functionalized indolyl pyrrole derivatives (17). Although the authors
picked piperidine as their favorite catalyst, they later discovered OCP-1 (25 mol%) in water
as an effective catalyst, which gave 75% of the product in 80 °C condition (Figure 9.5) [34].
Figure 9.2: Synthesis of functionalized 1,4-dihydrobenzo[b][1,8]-naphthpyridines.
Figure 9.3: Preparation of pyrazolo[3,4-b]quinoline.
340 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda AmaregoudaQi and coworkers [35] reported tetrahydro-4H-indol-4-one derivative (20) by the reac￾tion of cyclohexane-1,3-dione (3), amine (18), and nitroolefin (19), catalyzed OCP-1 in
aqueous medium. The authors screened various catalysts (acetic acid, Et3N, DMAP,
pyrrolidine, N-methyl morpholine (NMM), K2CO3, and D,L-alanine), and L-proline
emerged superior to all other tested catalysts. Further, the authors also examined suit￾able solvents and found water medium to be better, but protic solvent methanol and
2-propanol also gave high yields. A variety of arylamines and nitroolefins were used
in water at 60 °C, which revealed scope and generality of the reaction, and gave excel￾lent product isolation (Figure 9.6).
Figure 9.4: Unsymmetrical 1,4-DHP synthesis.
Figure 9.5: Synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyrrole via OCP-1 catalysis.
Figure 9.6: Synthesis of tetrahydro-4H-indol-4-one.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 341Zare and Nikpassand [36] reported Hantzsch 1,4-DHPs (23) synthesis by the reaction of
aryl aldehyde (21), dimedone(3), and ammonium acetate (22) in water reflux condition in
the presence of OCP-1. It gave hexahydroacridine derivative (23) (Figure 9.7). The author
also observed that the reaction still took place without proline, albeit in a slow rate, and
gave a low yield. Furthermore, they claimed that N-substituted derivatives of (39) synthe￾sized in aqueous ethanol, utilizing aryl and benzyl amines instead of ammonium acetate
(38), gave excellent yield, compared to camphor sulphonic acid-catalyzed.
Kumar and Maurya [37] reported a four-component unsymmetrical Hantzsch condensa￾tion of aryl aldehyde (21), dimedone (3), acyclicdicarbonyl (24), and ammonium acetate
(22) in water medium under room temperature gave hexahydroquinoline (25). The au￾thors screened a number of catalysts, including L-proline, trans-4-hydroxy-L-proline,
L-thioproline, D/L-phenylglycine, and (–)-cinchonidine during optimization. But, L-Pro￾catalyzed reaction gave product isolation in high yields. Also, the authors observed that
EtOH, H2O, and solvent-free condition for this reaction gave consistent findings, and the
procedure worked well for the aromatic aldehyde, in electron-withdrawing or -releasing
groups (Figure 9.8). The authors also studied comparable transformation, starting from
ethyl acetoacetate, 1,3-indanedione, and ammonium acetate, for the synthesis of unsym￾metrically fused 1,4-DHP-catalyzed L-Pro in water under reflux condition.
Khazaei and Panahi [38] reported that a reaction of arylamine (26), aryl aldehyde
(21), and malononitrile (27) gave 2-amino-4-arylquinoline-3-carbonitrile (28) in water
reflux condition (Figure 9.9). Further, the authors extended the procedure to generate
spiro-pyrimido[4,5b]quinolinedione frameworks by using cyclohexanone as the car￾bonyl-starting material. The authors claimed that minimizing the number of reaction
steps and using straightforward, reasonably priced starting materials enable the cost￾effective synthesis of a variety of complicated chiral molecules.
Tabassum et al. [39] demonstrated that a water reaction involving four components
for the reaction of aryl aldehyde (29), malononitrile (27), acetylene dicarboxylate (31), and
arylamine (30) yielded polysubstituted-1,4-DHPs (32) in another variant of the Hantzsch
DHP synthesis. The best results were obtained by CuI, according to the authors’ testing of
a variety of catalysts, including InCl3, CuO, CuI, CuCN, CuBr, DBU, and piperidine. During
Figure 9.7: Hantzsch dihydropyridine synthesis.
342 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregoudathese optimization investigations, it was shown that L-proline (20 mol%) could accelerate
the reaction to produce the product (32) in 30 min at room temperature – 50% yield was
obtained from benzofurane-2-carbaldehyde (29), aniline (30), dimethylacetylene dicarbox￾ylate (31), and malononitrile (27) (Figure 9.10).
Figure 9.8: Synthesis of hexahydroquinoline via Hantzsch reaction.
Figure 9.9: Synthesis of 2-aminoquinoline.
Figure 9.10: Ultrasound-promoted synthesis of 1,4-dihydropyridines.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 343Sarkar and Mukhopadhyay [40] developed a simple three-component reaction, starting
with cyclic 1,3-diketone (33), primary amine (34), and dialkyl acetylene dicarboxylate (35)
in water using OCP-1. It gave fused N-substituted-2-pyridone derivatives (36) (Figure 9.11).
The authors screened a wide range of catalysts, including SiO2, alumina, MgSO4, p-TsOH,
InCl3, glycine, L-proline, pyrrolidine, TiO2, and nano TiO2, but tests revealed that L-Pro
showed superior performance to other catalysts. Additionally, the authors also examined
the solvent system for the reaction, such as acetonitrile, ethanol, toluene, DMF, DMSO, and
water as solvents, and concluded that 10% OCP-1 with 10% SDS as a surfactant in water at
100 °C produced excellent yields. The authors claimed tolerance of the reaction for various
substituted substrates such as alkynes, primary aryl or alkyl amines, and various cyclic
1,3-diketones.
Kumari et al. [41] reported the synthesis of 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-ones (38) by the
reaction of isatoic anhydride (37), aryl aldehydes (21), primary amines (34), or ammo￾nium acetate (22) in a single step under MW irradiation in water medium catalyzed
OCP-1. The authors screened several amino acids, including glycine, L-alanine, L-proline,
and L-valine, and solvent systems, including water, ethanol, methanol, and acetonitrile,
but finally the authors noticed that L-proline/water system was more effective and gave
the desired products in high yields (Figure 9.12).
Figure 9.11: Substituted 2-pyridone derivative synthesis.
Figure 9.12: Dihydroquinazolinone derivative synthesis.
344 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda AmaregoudaShanthi and Perumal [42] reported that a OCP-1-catalyzed reaction of indole (39), salicy￾laldehyde (40), and malononitrile (27) in water produced indolylchromene derivatives
(41). The authors tested several different substituents present in both salicylaldehyde
(40) and indole (39) and observed that they gave exceptional yields (Figure 9.13). The
authors examined in vitro antioxidant activity of the isolated product. Further, the au￾thors altered the nucleophile to dimedone (3) and synthesized the product 42 under
aqueous micellar conditions (Figure 9.13). The authors screened catalysts, which include
anhydrous FeCl3, CeCl3.7H2O, ZnCl2, glycine, piperidine, and pyruvic acid, but L-proline
emerged as better catalyst; it gave a high yield and product selectivity, and the addition
of 8 mol% SDS, an anionic surfactant, increased the reagent’s solubility, leading to excel￾lent yield in water (77–95%). The authors claimed both indole and salicylaldehyde
substituted high substrate tolerance.
Perumal and coworkers [43] reported that a four-component domino reaction in
water for the reaction of 1,3-dcarbonyl (43), phenyl hydrazine (44), malononitriles
(45), and dialkylacetylene dicarboxylate (35) gave 4H-pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazol-6-amines
(46) (Figure 9.14). The authors claimed the developed method minimized the number
of reaction steps and was straightforward, with accessible starting materials, enabling
the cost-effective synthesis of a variety of complicated chiral molecules.
Prasanna et al. [44] described that the formation of two rings and five new bonds
(two C–C, one C–N, one C–O, and one C=N) in a single step make this reaction incredi￾ble for the alkyl 3,3-bis(5-hydroxy-1H-pyrazol-4-yl) propanoates (48) synthesis. The au￾thors claimed that a one-pot reaction was able to produce excellent yield (up to
97%) – the reaction involved dicarbonyl compounds (43), hydrazine (44), nitrile (45),
and alkyl acetylene dicarboxylate (47) in water under reflux condition (Figure 9.15).
Dabiri et al. [45] reported that 3-CRs of isatins (49), tetronic acid (51), and 1,3-
diaryl-1H-pyrazole-5-amines (50) gave pyrazole-fused spiro compounds (52) (Fig￾Figure 9.13: Indolylchromenes and 9 (1H-indol-3-yl)-xanthen-4-(9H)-one synthesis.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 345ure 9.16). The reaction took place in the presence of 10% L-proline in water under re￾flux condition. The authors observed substrate tolerance and reacted with isatin (49),
acenaphthylene-1,2-dione (51), and 2-hydroxynaphthalene-1,4-dione.
Yu et al. [46] demonstrated that a reaction of hydrazine derivative (54), 1,3-dicarbonyl
compound (55), isatin (53), and malononitrile (27) in the presence of L-proline-catalyzed
Figure 9.16: Synthesis of pyrazole-fused spiro compounds using 3-CRs.
Figure 9.14: Synthesis of highly functionalized pyrano[2,3-c] pyrazoles.
Figure 9.15: Dialkyl acetylene dicarboxylate synthesis.
346 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda4-CRs via in situ formation of a pyrazolone intermediate gave structurally diverse spiro
compounds (56) in high yields (Figure 9.17). The authors investigated different catalysts
(NaOH, Et3N, TBAF, p-TSA, CAN, FeCl3·6H2O, and ZnCl2) and solvents (ethanol, acetoni￾trile, DMF, ethyl acetate, DMSO, and water) at varied temperatures (RT, 40–100 °C) for
the reaction, and determined that the optimized condition of 10 mol% L-proline in
water at 80 °C gave excellent product isolation.
Deka et al. [47] reported that water-mediated MCRs, catalyzed by proline, produced intri￾cate heterocyclic structures with a spirocentre at the barbituric acid’s C-5 position. The
authors revealed a high-yielding, operationally simple method for producing pyrido[2,3-
d]pyrimidin-2-amine-6,5′-pyrimidines (60, 61) in water using 2,6-diaminopyrimidin-4-one
(57), aldehydes (58), and barbituric acids (59). The authors noticed that the reaction fre￾quently resulted in the mixers of the two diastereomers (60) and (61), and preferred a
geometry of 2,4-cis (Figure 9.18).
Dommaraju et al. [48] reported that a pseudo-five component reaction, started
with 3-aminocrotonitrile (62), hydroxylamine hydrochloride (63), aromatic aldehydes
(64) and barbituric acids (65), refluxing water, created spiro(isoxazolo[5,4-b]pyridine￾5,5′-pyrimidine) ring system (66) (Figure 9.19). The C-2 and C-4 stereocenters in this
scenario are positioned relative to one another. The authors explained that the cur￾rent approach gave high yields, mild reaction condition, and isolated a pure product.
Ghosh and Das [49] demonstrated that a green method for the 3-CRs of 4-hydroxycou￾marin (67), aryl aldehyde (68), and cyclic secondary amine (69) gave product 70 in water￾catalyzed L-proline at room temperature (Figure 9.20). The derivatives tested by the au￾thors showed promising antibacterial action.
Srinivas and Bhandari [50] reported that the synthesis of 3-methylisoxazol-5-amine
in the presence of an L-proline-catalyzed reaction of ketone (71) with an unsubstituted
Figure 9.17: Spiro[indoline-3,4ʹ-pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazole] synthesis.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 347azole (72) gave Mannich products (73 & 74) (Figure 9.21). The variety of ketones tested
and used by the authors in this reaction gave excellent product yields.
Javahershenas and Khalafy [51] reported that a reaction of arylglyoxal (75) and 1,3-
dimethyl-6-aminouracil (76), combined with 4-hydroxycoumarin (67), gave pyrrolo[2,3-
d]pyrimidine derivatives (77), when catalyzed by L-proline in acetic acid medium
(Figure 9.22). The authors monitored the reaction using TLC [mobile phase: EtOAc/hex￾Figure 9.18: 3-CRs of spiro[pyrido[2,3-d] synthesis.
Figure 9.19: Synthesis of spiro-indoline-3,4ʹ-pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazole.
Figure 9.20: OCP-1-catalyzed Mannich reaction.
348 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregoudaanes (3:1)]. After the reaction, the precipitate obtained was filtered, cleaned with acetic
acid and cold water, dried, and recrystallized from ethanol, to isolate the pure title
product.
Pons and coworkers [52] reported that a reaction of diazide (79) and cyclohexanone
(78) gave the product triazole (80), which when heated in an oil bath at 80 °C under
stirring condition gave 63% yield. The production of (80) via a different mechanism
corroborated chemoselectivity (Figure 9.23). The authors monitored the reaction using
TLC and flash chromatography on silica gel for the purification reported.
Figure 9.21: Proline-catalyzed cyclic ketone in the Mannich reaction.
Figure 9.22: Preparation of pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine derivatives.
Figure 9.23: Chemoselectivity synthesis of triazole derivatives.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 349He et al. [53] reported that greener one-pot MCRs of indole (81), malononitrile (27), and
aryl aldehyde (34), in the presence of OCP-1, isolated excellent yield of the product,
3-indole derivative (82) (Figure 9.24). The authors claimed that the developed method has
added advantages of eco-friendliness, simple protocol, easy availability of catalysts, and
mild reaction condition. Further, the authors screened a wide range of organic and inor￾ganic catalysts and organic solvent for the reaction, and noticed that a solvent in the
presence of ethanol and the catalyst L-proline (10 mol%) gave excellent product isolation.
Brahmachari and Das [54] described that a one-pot efficient and direct synthesis of a
series of bio active gem-(β-dicarbonyl) arylmethane (83, 84, 85, 90, and 91) prepared via
a three-component reaction of indoles, aryl aldehyde, and C–H-activated acids in a
grinding method under solvent-free catalyzed (10 mol%) L-proline, isolated an excellent
product (Figure 9.25). The authors claimed that the developed method gave high yields,
was eco-friendly, showed high atom economy, and demonstrated mild reaction condi￾tion requirement, which are the visible benefits of this method. The authors reacted
five series of C–H-activated acids. 4-hydroxycoumarin (67), 4–hydroxy-6-methoxy-2H–
pyran-2-one (86), dimedone (3), 1,3-dimethylpyrimidine-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-trione (88), N, N￾dimethyl barbituric acid, and Meldrum’s acid (89) were tested for this protocol, and
they successfully achieved the target heterocycles.
Figure 9.25: Three-component one-pot synthesis of gem-(β-dicarbonyl)arylmethanes.
Figure 9.24: MCRs of 3-alkylated indole synthesis.
350 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda AmaregoudaShi et al. [55] described that the one-pot synthesis of spirooxindole derivative, by the
reaction of isatins (92), 1, 3-dicarbonyl (51), and malononitrile (cyanoacetic ester) (93),
and catalyzed by L-proline under aqueous medium gave excellent product (94) isola￾tion (Figure 9.26). The authors revealed that the advantages of this method are greener,
short reactions times, high yields, inexpensive catalysts, and simple operations.
Muhiebes et al. [56] reported that MCRs of aniline (30), methylacetoacetate (95), and
aryl aldehydes (34), catalyzed by L-proline in ethanol solvent under reflux condition,
gave highly functionalized tetrahydropyridine derivatives (96) in excellent yield (Fig￾ure 9.27). The authors revealed that method used a green solvent, was eco-friendly,
cost less, required a mild reaction condition, and offered high yield isolation, which
are some of the noticeable benefits of this method.
9.3.1 L-proline derivative-catalyzed N-heterocycle synthesis
Belkheira et al. [57] reported the synthesis of 1-(4-methoxyphenyl)-4,5,6,7-tetrahydro-1H￾benzo[d][1,2,3]triazole (98) by the reaction of cyclohexanone (78), and p-methoxyphenyla￾zide (97) in the presence of catalysts in the presence of dichloromethane at 80 °C in a
sealed tube (Figure 9.28). The authors optimized the reaction by increasing the ratio of
ketone to azide from 1:1 to 2:1, and noticed an improved yield, up to 92%. The naturally
occurring proline amino acid emerged as a blockbuster entity in organocatalysts for a
Figure 9.26: Synthesis of spirooxindole derivatives in water medium.
Figure 9.27: Synthesis of functionalized tetrahydropyridine derivatives.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 351wide range of asymmetric organic transformations. Hence, researchers were excited to
explore its derivative for the organic reaction.
The same authors investigated the reaction of cyclohexanone (78) and arylazide (99),
which gave triazole derivative (100). The authors tested the tolerance of the reaction,
and observed that the electron-donating groups gave excellent yield, but electron with￾drawing groups, like the nitro group, resulted in less yield of the arylazide (Figure 9.29).
The intended triazole synthesis gave a high yield and was quantifiable.
Pratap et al. [58] demonstrated that a number of chiral bifunctional organocatalysts
used to study the Michael/hemiketalization of ketoester (101), reacted with 2-hydroxy￾1,4-naphthoquinone (5) and gave 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone (102); it converted in
the presence of ammonium acetate, resulting in oxindoleketoester (103) (Figure 9.30).
This approach provides an elegant synthetic pathway to oxindole derivative at room
temperature in dichloromethane with organocatalysts (5 mol%).
Oliveira da et al. [59] demonstrated several proline-based organocatalysts, devel￾oped to improve the enantio- and diastereo-selectivity of the aldol reaction. The direct
asymmetric aldol reaction between aromatic aldehyde (104) and cyclohexanone (78)
was carried out using a functionalized o-phenylenediamine prolineamide organocata￾lyst (Figure 9.31). Further, prolinamide catalytic activity was enhanced to give an excel￾Figure 9.28: Synthesis of triazole derivatives.
Figure 9.29: Synthesis of triazole derivatives using L-proline as catalyst.
352 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregoudalent yield of (R)-2-((S)-hydroxy(phenyl)methyl)cyclohexanone (105) and (3R,7aS)-2-(2-
(benzylamino)phenyl)-3-phenyl-hexahydropyrrolo[1,2-e]imidazol-1-one (106) in good di￾astereo- and enantioselectivity.
Wang et al. [60] used bifunctional organocatalytic Michael/intramolecular cascade reac￾tion to establish an asymmetric three-component reaction of indole (107), aldehyde (108),
and aniline (109)] to give spirooctahydroacridine-3,3′-oxindoles (110) in an enantiospecific
manner (Figure 9.32). Furthermore, this technique was easily altered to preferentially
pick an alternate major diastereomer of spirocyclic oxindoles, and it could be used to syn￾thesize natural products and potentially important compounds. The authors claimed ex￾ceptional tolerance of this method for a variety of substrates, producing five stereogenic
centers containing products in high yield, and with diastereo and enantioselectivities.
Zhou et al. [61] reported a combination of bifunctional quinine-based thiourea and di￾phenyl prolinol silyl ether (d or e) to effectively catalyze a cascading Michael/Michael/aldol
addition (Figure 9.33) by the reaction of N-substituted oxindole (112), nitrostyrene (113),
and trans-unsaturated aldehyde (114) in a 3-CR-created series of spirooxindole carbocyclic
derivatives (111 and 115) with adaptable molecular complexity and enantioselectivity.
Figure 9.30: Enantioselective synthesis of spirooxindole naphthoquinone.
Figure 9.31: Direct asymmetric aldol reaction.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 353Xie et al. [62] described that the Michael–Henry cascade reaction went smoothly
when the third element of the unsaturated aldehyde (117), substituted with nitroolefin
(116), gave a complex polycyclic oxindole backbone (118) with eight contiguous stereo￾centers and significant stereoselectivity (Figure 9.34). The authors claimed that the
method minimizes the number of reaction steps, was inexpensive, and that these
methods enable the cost-effective synthesis of a variety of optically pure and possibly
bioactive molecules, accomplished through the organocatalytic cascade/tandem route.
Zea et al. [63] reported the reactions of unsaturated aldehyde (120) with unsubsti￾tuted 2-oxoindolin (119), used in the relay Michael–Michael–aldol reaction (Fig￾ure 9.35). The secondary amine Cat. 6 and benzoic acid catalyzed the reaction in the
toluene solvent, and isolated the end product, spirocyclohexene-based oxindole skele￾ton (121), in high yields and in stereo control. Further, the authors demonstrated the
synthesis of more novel heterocycles that are used for bioactivity.
Figure 9.32: Three-component Michael/intermolecular cascade reaction.
Figure 9.33: Michael/aldol cascade reaction.
354 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda AmaregoudaChatterjee and coworkers [64] reported a vinylogous organocatalytic triple cascade re￾action of Michael-1,6-addition-vinylogous aldol (125), employing an aldehyde (123), lin￾ear 2,4-dienals (124), and methylene indolinone derivatives (122) (Figure 9.36). The
authors revealed that the optimized 20 mol% amino catalyst gave high yield and ex￾cellent enantioselectivity and diastereomeric control to achieve the desired spiro￾oxindoliccyclohexanes.
9.3.2 Synthesis of N-heterocycle by using L-proline-supported
catalysts
Arya and coworkers [65] reported L-proline trapped in a faujasite (FAU) zeolite￾enabled pyrimidine-fused spirooxindole (129) synthesis in a single pot. The authors
employed a three-part Mannich type procedure for the reaction of indolin-2-ones
(126) (with 2,3-dihydro-1H-inden-1-one, 1,3-dihydro-2H-inden-2-one, and thiazolidin-4-
Figure 9.34: Preparation of spirocyclic hydroindaneoxindole via the Michael–Henry cascade reaction.
Figure 9.35: Synthesis of cyclohexene-fused spirooxindole compounds.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 355one serving as alternating substrates), formaldehyde (127), and arylamines (128). The
authors studied the FAU zeolite’s catalytic activity in various solvent systems like
DMSO, THF, acetonitrile, water, and methanol. In water, it demonstrated a suitable
reaction condition and gave excellent product isolation, and recycled up to five times
without significantly losing its effectiveness (Figure 9.37).
Sivamurugan et al. [66] developed a novel one-pot three component solvent free synthesis
of 1,5-benzodiazepine (132) in an exceptional yield by the reaction of o-phenylenediamine
(130) and two molecules of ketone (131) under solvent-free conditions, with Zn(L-proline)2
as the catalyst, under microwave heating (Figure 9.38). The authors tested both traditional
and microwave-irradiation methods to evaluate the effectiveness of the catalysts, and
found that the microwave-irradiated product 1,5-benzodiazepine gave moderate to high
Figure 9.36: Synthesis of complex spirooxindoliccyclohexane bearing six stereocenters.
Figure 9.37: Preparation of spiroheterocycle through Mannich reaction.
356 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregoudayield (up to 93%) in a shorter time. Further, the authors tested the recycling of the catalyst
and observed that it can be used for up to five cycles without a significant loss in its
effectiveness.
Esfandiary and Heydari [67] reported a novel magnetic core–shell Fe2O3@[proline]-
CuMgAl-layered double hydroxide, which emerged as an efficient bifunctional cata￾lyst for the reaction of aldehyde (133) and aniline (134); it gave quinolines and 2H￾indazoles (135). The authors explained the catalyst construction as a coupling of Cu(II)
with Mg and Al in LDH structure, and intercalating L-proline between the layers. The
authors claimed that the reaction condition was greener, offered a high yield, was a
faster reaction at low temperatures, which were the advantages of this method; the
catalyst was reused five times, without a significant loss in its activity being reported
(Figure 9.39).
Maleki and Firouzi-Haji [68] demonstrated a simple one-pot synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyri￾dines (138) by the reaction of acetophenones (136), aromatic aldehydes (137), and NH4OAc
(22) in the presence of Fe3O4–SiO2 propyl triethoxysilane L-proline nanoparticle. The au￾thors claimed that the catalyst used was new, efficient, and environmentally friendly in
the chemical synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines (138) (Figure 9.40).
Maleki and Firouzi-Haji [69] reported an efficient synthesis of 3-amino imidazo[1,2-a]
pyridine derivatives (141) by the reaction of aromatic aldehyde (104), 2-aminopyridine
(139), and trimethylsilyl cyanide (TMSCN) (140) in ethanol at room temperature, catalyzed
by L-proline-functionalized magnetic nanocatalysts (Fe3O4@L-proline) (Figure 9.41). The
authors claimed that the solid nanocatalyst is easily recoverable and was reusable for
several cycles, without any loss in its activity.
Figure 9.38: Synthesis of 1, 5-benzodiazepine.
Figure 9.39: One-pot synthesis of quinoline.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 3579.3.3 L-Proline-catalyzed synthesis of O-heterocycles
Oxygen-containing heterocycles emerged as an important class of heterocycles, and is
present in drugs (oxazole and coumarin), fragrances, and flavors (lactones) [70]. The
fusions of benzene ring with oxygen-heterocycle drastically changes the electron den￾sity on the fused ring, thereby altering the chemical/physical/biological properties.
These heterocycles are found to be important class of heterocycles in organic chemis￾try due to their natural abundance and diverse biological functions. Semisynthetic
and natural oxygen heterocycles, such as digoxin (CHF treatment), taxol (anticancer),
lovastatin (hypolipidemic) and cyclosporine-A (immunosuppressant), are well-known
drugs [71].
Rodriguez and coworkers [72] demonstrated an enamine composed of L-Pro and
enone, which functions as dienes (141) in a concerted [4+2] cycloaddition, using inter￾mediates made of 1,3-dicarbonyl-derived arylidenes (89) as a complement to the dien￾ophile nature of Knoevenagel adducts. The authors discovered L-Pro-catalyzed three￾component asymmetric domino-Knoevenagel hetero-Diels Alder reactions of easily ac￾cessible enones (142,89), aryl aldehydes (143,144), and 1,3-indanedione (145), enabling
the production of highly substituted spiro-[cyclohexane-1,2 indane]1, 3, and 4-trione
(146). The process was highly diastereoselective and gave good yields, up to 71% ee
product (Figure 9.42).
Figure 9.40: Synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines.
Figure 9.41: Preparation of 3-aminoimidazo[1,2-a]pyridines.
358 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda AmaregoudaThe same author demonstrated that the one-pot synthesis of spiro(pyrrolidine-3,3′-
indolinones) by the condensation of indolin-2-one (7), Meldrum’s acid (2), and various
N-protected aldehyde (8), catalyzed by OCP-1, is well-known Yonemitsu condensation
that gave functionalized tetrahydro carbazoles. The last step in the synthesis of chiral
2′,3′-pyranone(pyrrolidinone)-fused tryptamine (149) is a diastereoselective trimolecu￾lar condensation of indole (147), Meldrum’s acid (89), and Garner’s aldehyde (148)
(Figure 9.43).
List [73] described the synthesis of alkylidene derivatives and enamines (152) in an
in situ one-pot reaction of ketone (150), aldehyde (151), and Meldrum’s acid (89), cata￾lyzed by OCP-1, by a direct Michael addition of unmodified ketone to unsaturated car￾bonyl. The authors were able to avoid using prefabricated enolate equivalents in this
technique, but reported that the result lacked enantioselectivity (Figure 9.44).
Abdolmohammadi and Balalaie [74] reported 3,4-dihydropyrano[c]chromene de￾rivatives (154) synthesis from 4-hydroxycoumarin (153), aryl aldehydes (21), and malo￾nonitrile (27) in aqueous ethanol, catalyzed by diammonium hydrogen phosphate or
L-proline. The authors tested the tolerance of the method for a wide range of aryl al￾dehydes substitutes such as chloro, methyl, bromo, hydroxyl, cyano, nitro, and di￾chloro (Figure 9.45).
Mofakham et al. [75] demonstrated that two families of fused pyrimidine-2,4-
diones, namely benzo[g]- (159) and dihydro (158), are produced by starting with cyclic
Figure 9.42: Three-component asymmetric domino-Knoevenagel hetero-Diels-Alder reactions.
Figure 9.43: One-pot synthesis of spiro-pyrrolidine-3,3′-indolinones.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 3591,3-dicarbonyl compounds (33), aryl aldehyde (155), 2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone
(156), or 2-hydroxy-1,4-naphthoquinone (157) in the presence of a catalytic quantity of
OCP-1 (Figure 9.46). The authors also tested 3,4-dehydro-L-proline and 4-hydroxy-L￾proline as a catalyst for the reaction, although they noticed a less yield. In order to
access the structurally diverse frameworks, a wide variety of cyclic 1,3-dicarbonyl
compounds, such as Meldrum’s acid and barbituric acid, and aryl aldehydes were em￾ployed in the synthesis.
Zhu et al. [76] reported pyrano[3,2-c]quinolin-2,5-dione (162) synthesis with a modest
(45%) yield, from the reaction of 4-hydroxy-1-methylquinolin-2(1H)-one (160), p-anisalde￾hyde (161), and Meldrum’s acid (89), in refluxing water with 10 mol% L-proline (Fig￾ure 9.47). The authors claimed that the method resulted in high yields, and required mild
reaction conditions and ease setup, which are the benefits of this technique. In addition,
the authors also described that more biomedical screening work is being done in light of
the possible biological actions of these reported compounds.
Shi and coworkers [77] demonstrated the environmentally friendly synthesis of a
library of spiroxindole derivatives (164) via isatin (163), nitrile (93), and cyclic 1,3-
dicarbonyl compounds (33), with L-proline (10 mol%) as a catalyst in a 3-CR in water
at 80 °C (Figure 9.48). A library of (164) derivatives were successfully synthesized, em￾Figure 9.44: Carba-acetalization of p-nitrobenzaldehyde.
Figure 9.45: Synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrano[3,2-c] chromene.
360 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregoudaploying isatin derivatives (163), nitrile derivative (93), and 1,3-dicarbonyl compounds
(33), in excellent yields.
Daloee and Behbahani [78] reported that a simple access to 2-amino-5,10-dioxo-4-
aryl-5,10-dihydro-4H-benzo[g] in an environmentally friendly method by the reaction
of aldehyde (8), 4-naphthoquinone (5), and malononitrile (27), catalyzed by L-proline
under a reflux condition in ethanol gave chromene-3-carbonitrile (165) (Figure 9.49).
The authors claimed that new unidentified 2-amino-5,10-dioxo-4-aryl-5,10-dihydro-4H￾benzo[g]chromene-3-carbonitrile (165) were prepared and demonstrated a chemical
shift of NH2, identified in D2O and without D2O, using the 1
H-NMR technique.
Bodke and coworkers [79] reported that MCRs via Knoevenagel condensation reac￾tions of substituted aldehydes (8), 4-hydroxylcoumarin (67), and 2-mercaptobenzothiazole
(166) catalyzed (10 mol%) by L-proline in ethanol solvent isolated 3-[(1,3-benzothiazol-2-4/
Figure 9.46: Fused pyrimidine-2,4-dione benzo[g]- and dihydropyrano[2,3g] chromene synthesis.
Figure 9.47: Pyrano[3,2-c]quinoline-2,5-dionesynthesis.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 361sulfanyl(phenyl)methyl]-2H-chromen-4-ol derivative (167) in good yield (Figure 9.50). Fur￾ther, the authors tested the prepared derivatives for their antimycobacterial, antioxidant,
anticancer, and molecular docking studies, and these derivatives showed comparable ac￾tivity with standard drugs, as reported.
Figure 9.48: Proline-catalyzed three-component synthesis of spiroxindole.
Figure 9.49: Synthesis of chromene-3-carbonitrile derivatives.
Figure 9.50: Synthesis of 2H-chromene derivatives.
362 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda9.3.4 Proline derivatives catalyzed synthesis of O-heterocycle
Li et al. [80] reported structurally varied benzoxanthenes(169) derivatives, catalyzed
by proline-triflate, in a three-component reaction in aqueous medium under reflux of
β-naphthol (168), aromatic aldehyde (21), and 1,3-dicarbonyl compound (33) (Fig￾ure 9.51). The reaction had strong substituent tolerance and scalability, and it pro￾duced the required products in high yields.
The same authors described that the reaction employing β-naphthol (168), aldehyde
(170), and 1,3-dicarbonyl compound (33) gave regioisomeric-fused oxygen heterocycles
(171) and (172) respectively, in water medium and under reflux condition, gave de￾sired derivatives in good yields (Figure 9.52).
Kuan et al. established the reaction of aldehyde (174) and two molecules of 2-arylide￾neindane-1,3-diones (173), organocatalyzed by the Michael–Michael–aldol reaction. This
process produced an entirely substituted chiral dispirocyclohexane (175) with two inda￾none moieties attached (Figure 9.53) [81]. Three C–C bonds were formed in a single pot
Figure 9.51: Three-component synthesis of benzo[f]xanthene.
Figure 9.52: Synthesis of benzo[c]xanthene and benzo[h]cyclopenta[b]chromene.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 363using this [2+2+2] annulation process, catalyzed by L-diphenylprolinoltrimethylsilyl
ether. Among the tested basic additive i.e., DMAP, DABCO, and imidazole, DABCO gave
high yields. Highest enantioselectivity was obtained by using DMF as solvent and at low
temperature (−20 °C) condition.
Nazari and Keshavarz [82] described the effect of Amberlite supported by L-prolinate
(2–15 mol%) in the reaction of benzaldehyde (176), malononitrile (27), and 3-methyl-1-
phenyl-4,5-dihydro-1H-pyrazol-5-one (177), when examined under various conditions.
The results demonstrated unequivocally that the reaction under reflux in ethanol
with 10 mol% [Amb]-L-prolinate gave a high yield of 6-amino-3-methyl-1,4-diphenyl￾1,4-dihydropyrano[2,3-c]pyrazole-5-carbonitrile (178) (Figure 9.54). The yield grew
gradually with the catalyst load up to 10%, but using more catalyst (15%) did not show
an enhanced yield, and reducing the quantity of the catalyst resulted in a lower yield
isolation.
Figure 9.53: [2+2+2] Annulation reaction for substituted dispirocyclohexane synthesis.
Figure 9.54: Preparation of 6-amino-3-methyl-1,4-diphenyl-1,4-dihydropyrano[2,3-c]pyrazole-5-
carbonitrile.
364 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda9.3.5 Proline-supported catalyzed O-heterocycle synthesis
Kidwai and Jain [83] described that the reaction of aldehyde (179) and dimedone (3),
condensed in water, in the presence of 2 mol% Zn(L-proline) gave xanthenedione
(180) (Figure 9.55). The authors claimed that the method was rapid, showed mild and
increased selectivity, required a simple set up, and was environmentally friendly. By
avoiding the use of volatile organic media and reusing the catalyst, improved the
yields, and offered a cleaner reaction profile, which are the key characteristics of this
protocol.
Siddiqui and Farooq [84] demonstrated a one-pot green synthesis of 3-(aryl/heteroaryla￾minomethylene)-2-hydroxy-chroman-4-ones (183) ithat occurs when 3-formylchromone
(181) and aryl/heteroaryl amine (182) reacts in water under the catalysis of 10% Zn(L￾proline)2 (Figure 9.56). The authors explained the mechanistic pathways involved in the
reaction – three electron-deficient locations on 3-formylchromone, attacked by com￾pounds with nucleophilicity. The three locations are a formyl carbonyl group at position
3, an active electrophilic essential at C-2, and the unsaturated keto function present.
Khalafy [85] described a broad variety of 4-aroyl-4H-benzo[g]chromene derivatives
(186) that were achieved in high yields in a one-pot synthesis of arylglyoxals (184),
2-hydroxy-1,4-naphtoquinone (185), and malononitrile (27) in H2O/EtOH (1:1), catalyzed
by Zn(L-proline)2 at 50 °C (Figure 9.57). The authors claimed that method developed
has benefits of recycled catalyst, faster reaction, high yields, use of a green solvent,
and mild reaction condition.
Safaei-Ghomi and Zahedi [86] discovered an asymmetric Mannich reaction, cata￾lyzed by a magnetic organocatalyst Fe3O4-L-proline NPs. The authors investigated the
Figure 9.55: Synthesis of xanthenediones.
Figure 9.56: Preparation of 3-(aryl/heteroarylaminomethylene)-2-hydroxy-chroman-4-ones.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 365catalytic systems to demonstrate the asymmetric synthesis of isoxazolidine (190)
with good diastereoselectivity from the reaction of N-arylhydroxylamine (187), arylalde￾hydes (188), and unsaturated aldehyde (189) (Figure 9.58). As a magnetic organocatalyst,
L-proline-functionalized Fe3O4 nanoparticles developed isoxazolidine compounds in
high yields as a single isomer with an endo-configuration. Short reaction durations,
good to exceptional yields, and a heterogeneous catalyst that can be recycled several
times without significantly losing were all noteworthy characteristics of this approach.
9.4 Conclusion
L-Proline is a natural abundant and genetically coded amino acid, containing secondary
amine embedded in pyrrolidine ring system. It is nontoxic, of low cost, and it is widely
accessible in both enantiomeric pure D- and L-isomer. Due to its dual functionality, it
behaves both as an acid and a base, is and involved in imine intermediate formation,
led streospecifically by one type of product formation. It was one of the highly exten￾sively studied amino acid in the organocatalysts research field. Researchers studied the
mechanistic pathway involved in proline for enantioselective synthesis that is involved
in iminium or enamine intermediates, which is characteristic of covalent organocataly￾sis. A vast number of organic reactions, both asymmetric and MCRs, catalyzed by
L-proline is well documented in the literature. Further, researchers have explored the
extension of proline and its derivatives of small molecule, which can be the choice for
the selected alternatives for organic transformations and MCRs. Recent trends look for￾Figure 9.57: Synthesis of 4-aryl-4H-benzo[g]chromene.
Figure 9.58: Asymmetric isoxazolidine synthesis.
366 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregoudaward to the use organic synthesis, carried out in aqueous medium. It is of utmost prior￾ity due to the environmental concerns and global warmings, which are crucial, since it
is necessary to reduce the production of waste, and avoid the use of volatile organic
solvents. Hence, MCRs play a pivotal role in efficient synthetic pathways in the section
of synthetic chemistry, due to its advantages of one-pot procedure, atom economy,
time-saving, and chemical waste reduction. Even though the concept of MCR synthesis
for diverse organic molecules has been well known over a century, it has only recently
got more attention and increasing number of publications, emphasizing the biologically
relevant organic molecules synthesis via this approach. In combination with MCRs, or￾ganocatalsyts reaction make the synthetic route eco-friendlier and isolate more product.
Its safety for various biological activity studies is well documented. In this chapter, we
provided a critical overview of proline and its derivatives, employed as an organocata￾lysts for MCRs to produce synthetically and biologically relevant heterocycles, particu￾larly nitrogen and oxygen containing heterocycles, which are playing vital role in
medicinal chemistry and pharmaceuticals, as well in agrochemicals and pesticides
fields. Recent literature reported by researchers across the globe of more than 50 plus
reaction schemes are covered in this chapter for the preparation of heterocycles, influ￾enced by proline and its derivatives.
Abbreviations
BINOL 1,1′-Bis(2-naphthol)
Boc tert-Butyloxycarbonyl
DHP 1,4-Dihydropyridine
DMF Dimethylformamide
DMSO Dimethyl sulfoxide
ee Enantiomeric excess
EDG Electron-donating group
EtOAc Ethyl acetate
EWG Electron-withdrawing group
HClO4 Perchloric acid
HOMO Highest occupied molecular orbital
IPP Isopentenyl pyrophosphate
i-Bu iso-Butyl
i-Pr iso-propyl
NaBH4 Sodium borohydride
OTMS o-Trimethoxysilane
Ph Phenyl
PMP p-Methoxyphenyl
p-Tol p-Tolyl
PMB p-Methoxybenzene
t-Bu tert-Butyl
TBABr Tetrabutylammonium bromide
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 367References
[1] Dalko PI, Moisan L. In the golden age of organocatalysis. Angew Chem Int Ed, 2004, 43, 5138–5175.
[2] Berkessel A, Gröger H. Asymmetric Organocatalysis: From Biomimetic Concepts to Applications in
Asymmetric Synthesis. John Wiley & Sons, 2006.
[3] Burke AJ. Asymmetric organocatalysis in drug discovery and development for active pharmaceutical
ingredients. Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery, 2022.
[4] MacMillan DWC. The advent and development of organocatalysis. Nature, 2008, 455, 304–308.
[5] Tu Y, Wang Z-X, Shi Y. For leading references of recent examples of dioxirane epoxidation.
Tetrahedron Lett, 1993, 261, 9806–9807.
[6] Denmark SE, Wu Z, Crudden CM, et al. Catalytic epoxidation of alkenes with oxone. 2. flupro
ketones. J Org Chem, 1997, 62, 8288–8289.
[7] Yang D, Yip YC, Tang MW, et al. A C2 symmetric chiral ketone for catalytic asymmetric epoxidation of
unfunctionalized olefins. J Am Chem Soc, 1996, 118, 491–492.
[8] Sigman MS, Jacobsen EN. Schiff base catalysts for the asymmetric Strecker reaction identified and
optimized from parallel synthetic libraries. J Am Chem Soc, 1998, 120, 4901–4902.
[9] Corey EJ, Grogan MJ. Enantioselective synthesis of α-amino nitriles from N-benzhydryl imines and
HCN with a chiral bicyclic guanidine as catalyst. Org Lett, 1999, 1, 157–160.
[10] Miller SJ, Copeland GT, Papaioannou N, et al. Kinetic resolution of alcohols catalyzed by tripeptides
containing the N-alkylimidazole substructure. JACS, 1998, 120, 1629–1630.
[11] He L, Tang Z, Cun LF, et al. L-Proline amide-catalyzed direct asymmetric aldol reaction of aldehydes
with chloroacetone. Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 346–351.
[12] Kamanna K, Amaregouda Y. Microwave-assisted organo-catalyzed C-C and C-X (Heteroatom) bond￾forming reactions: An overview. Curr Microw Chem, 2021, 8, 173–203.
[13] Kamanna K, Amaregouda Y. Synthesis of bioactive scaffolds catalyzed by agro-waste-based solvent
medium. Phys Sci Rev, 2022, 141–282.
[14] Amaregouda Y, Kamanna K, Gasti T. Biodegradable polyvinyl alcohol/carboxymethyl cellulose
composite incorporated with l ‑ alanine functionalized MgO nanoplates : physico chemical and food
packaging features. J Inorg Organomet Polym Mater, 2022, 36(2), 2040–2055.
[15] Amaregouda Y, Kamanna K, Gasti T, et al. Enhanced functional properties of biodegradable
polyvinyl alcohol/carboxymethyl cellulose (PVA/CMC) composite films reinforced with l-alanine
surface modified CuO nanorods. J Polym Environ, 2022, 30(6), 2559–2578.
[16] Amaregouda Y, Kamanna K. Physico-chemical, in-vitro cytotoxicity and antimicrobial evaluation of
L-valine functionalised CuO NPs on polyvinyl alcohol and blended carboxymethyl cellulose films.
Indian Chem Eng, 2022, 64(5), 43–552.
[17] Jarvo ER, Miller SJ. Amino acids and peptides as asymmetric organocatalysts. Tetrahedron, 2002, 58,
2481–2495.
[18] Kamanna K. Organocatalysts based on natural and modified amino acids for asymmetric reactions.
Phys Sci Rev, 2022, 120–260.
[19] Jux A, Gleixner G, Boland W. Classification of terpenoids according to the methylerythritolphosphate
or the mevalonate pathway with natural 12C/13C isotope ratios: dynamic allocation of resources in
induced plants. Angew Chem Int Ed, 2001, 40, 2091–2094.
[20] List B, Pojarliev P, Biller WT, et al. The proline-catalyzed direct asymmetric three-component
Mannich reaction: Scope, optimization, and application to the highly enantioselective synthesis of
1,2-amino alcohols. J Am Chem Soc, 2002, 124, 827–833.
[21] Palumbo C. Organocatalysts for enantioselective synthesis of fine chemicals: Definitions, trends and
developments. Sci Open Res, 2015, 1–15.
[22] Trost BM, Brindle CS. The direct catalytic asymmetric aldol reaction. Chem Soc Rev, 2010, 39,
1600–1632.
368 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda[23] Sakthivel K, Notz W, Bui T, et al. Amino acid catalyzed direct asymmetric aldol reactions: A
bioorganic approach to catalytic asymmetric carbon-carbon bond-forming reactions. J Am Chem
Soc, 2001, 123, 5260–5267.
[24] Schneider JF, Ladd CL, Bräse S. Chapter 5: Proline as an asymmetric organocatalyst. In Sustainable
Catalysis: Without Metals or Other Endangered Elements. 2015, 79–119.
[25] Vachan BS, Karuppasamy M, Vinoth P, et al. Proline and its derivatives as organocatalysts for Multi￾component reactions in aqueous media: Synergic pathways to the green synthesis of heterocycles.
Adv Syn Catal, 2020, 362, 87–110.
[26] Weber L. The application of multicomponent reactions in drug discovery. Curr Med Chem, 2002, 9,
2085–2093.
[27] Hulme C, Gore V. Multicomponent reactions: Emerging chemistry in drug discovery from xylocain to
crixivan. Curr Med Chem, 2003, 10, 51–80.
[28] Dömling A, Wang W, Wang K. Chemistry and biology of multicomponent reactions. Chem Rev, 2012,
12, 3083–3135.
[29] Kalaria PN, Karad SC, Raval DK. A review on diverse heterocyclic compounds as the privileged
scaffolds in antimalarial drug discovery. Eur J Med Chem, 2018, 158, 917–936.
[30] Kerru N, Singh P, Koorbanally N, Raj R, Kumar V. Recent advances (2015–2016) in anticancer hybrids.
Eur J Med Chem, 2017, 142, 179–212.
[31] Bharti R, Kumari P, Parvin T, et al. Recent advances of aminopyrimidines in multicomponent
reactions. Curr Org Chem, 2017, 22.
[32] Li M, Zhao BX. Progress of the synthesis of condensed pyrazole derivatives (from 2010 to mid-2013).
Eur J Med Chem, 2014, 85, 311–340.
[33] Bonne D, Constantieux T, Coquerel Y, et al. Use of 1, 3-Dicarbonyl derivatives in stereoselective
domino and multicomponent reactions. Mol Divers, 2020, 59–120.
[34] Kamalraja J, Sowndarya R, Perumal PT. A greener approach for the regioselective synthesis of
multifunctionalized indolylpyrrole and indolyltriazolylpyrrole hybrids via Michael Addition of α-azido
ketones. Synlett, 2014, 25(15), 2208–2212.
[35] Zhang F, Li C, Qi C. An efficient and mild synthesis of tetrahydro-4 h -indol-4-one derivatives via a
domino reaction in water. Synthesis, 2013, 45, 3007–3017.
[36] Zare L, Nikpassand M. Multicomponent synthesis of dihydropyridines catalyzed by l-proline. Chin
Chem Lett, 2011, 22, 531–534.
[37] Kumar A, Maurya RA. Synthesis of polyhydroquinoline derivatives through unsymmetric Hantzsch
reaction using organocatalysts. Tetrahedron, 2007, 63, 1946–1952.
[38] Khazaei A, Panahi F. l-Proline-promoted three-component reaction of anilines, aldehydes and
barbituric acids/malononitrile: regioselective synthesis of 5-arylpyrimido[4,5-b]quinoline-diones and
2-amino-4-arylquinoline-3-carbonitriles in water. Green Chem, 2012, 14, 2876–2884.
[39] Tabassum S, Govindaraju S, Khan RUR, et al. Ultrasound mediated, green innovation for the
synthesis of polysubstituted 1,4-dihydropyridines. RSC Adv, 2016, 6, 29802–29810.
[40] Sarkar R, Mukhopadhyay C. L-Proline catalyzed expeditious multicomponent protocol for the
synthesis of fused N-substituted-2-pyridone derivatives in aqueous medium. Tetrahedron Lett, 2014,
55, 2618–2624.
[41] Kumari K, Raghuvanshi DS, Singh KN. Microwave assisted eco-friendly protocol for one pot
synthesis of 2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-ones in water. Indian J Chem B Org Med Chem, 2012, 51,
860–865.
[42] Shanthi G, Perumal PT. Synthesis and antioxidant activity of indolyl chromenes. 2009, 48, 1319–1323.
[43] Michael Rajesh S, Bala BD, Perumal S, et al. L-Proline-catalysed sequential four-component “on
water” protocol for the synthesis of structurally complex heterocyclic ortho-quinones. Green Chem,
2011, 13, 3248–3254.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 369[44] Prasanna P, Perumal S, Menéndez JC. Chemodivergent, multicomponent domino reactions in
aqueous media: L-proline-catalyzed assembly of densely functionalized 4H-pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazoles
and bispyrazolyl propanoates from simple, acyclic starting materials. Green Chem, 2013, 15,
1292–1299.
[45] Dabiri M, Tisseh ZN, Nobahar M, et al. Organic reaction in water: A highly efficient and
environmentally friendly synthesis of spiro compounds catalyzed by L -proline. Helvetica Chim Acta,
2011, 94, 824–830.
[46] Yu J, Zhou Y, Shen T, et al. Novel and efficient one-pot synthesis of spiro[indoline-3,4ʹ-pyrano [2,3-c]
pyrazole]derivatives catalysed by L-proline in aqueous medium. J Chem Res, 2013, 37, 365–368.
[47] Kalita SJ, Das B, Deka DC. L -proline-catalysed one-pot regio- and diastereoselective synthesis of
spiro[pyrido[2,3- d]pyrimidin-2-amine-6,5′-pyrimidines] in Water. SynOpen, 2017, 1, 45–49.
[48] Dommaraju Y, Borthakur S, Prajapati D. L -proline-catalysed one-pot aza-diels-alder reaction in
water: Regioselective synthesis of spiro(isoxazolo[5,4- b]pyridine-5,5′-pyrimidine) derivatives.
Synlett, 2018, 29, 1195–1198.
[49] Ghosh PP, Das AR. Nano crystalline ZnO: A competent and reusable catalyst for one pot synthesis of
novel benzylamino coumarin derivatives in aqueous media. Tetrahedron Lett, 2012, 53, 3140–3143.
[50] Srinivas N, Bhandari K. Proline-catalyzed facile access to mannich adducts using unsubstituted
azoles. Tetrahedron Lett, 2008, 49, 7070–7073.
[51] Javahershenas R, Khalafy J. A new synthesis of pyrrolo[3,2-d]pyrimidine derivatives by a one-pot,
three-component reaction in the presence of L-proline as an organocatalyst. Heterocycl Commun,
2018, 24, 37–41.
[52] Belkheira M, El Abed D, Pons JM, et al. Organocatalytic synthesis of 1,2,3-triazoles from unactivated
ketones and arylazides. Chem Eur J, 2011, 17, 12917–12921.
[53] Yan-Hong H, Jian-Fei C, Rui L, et al. L-Proline-catalyzed multicomponent synthesis of 3-indole
derivatives. Tetrahedron, 2015, 71, 9299–9306.
[54] Brahmachari G, Das S. L-Proline catalyzed multicomponent one-pot synthesis of gem￾diheteroarylmethane derivatives using facile grinding operation under solvent-free conditions at
room temperature. RSC Adv, 2014, 4, 7380–7388.
[55] Li Y, Chen H, Shi C, Shi D, Ji S. Efficient one-pot synthesis of spirooxindole derivatives catalyzed by
L-proline in aqueous medium. J Comb Chem, 2010, 12(2), 231–237.
[56] Muhiebes RM, Leila F, Sami S. L-proline catalyzed multicomponent reaction for simple and efficient
synthesis of tetrahydropyridines derivatives. Asian. J of Green Chem, 2023, 7, 121–131.
[57] Belkheira M, El Abed D, Pons JM, Bressy C. Organocatalytic Synthesis of 1, 2, 3‐Triazoles from
unactivated ketones and arylazides. Chem Eur J, 2011, 17(46), 12917–12921.
[58] Pratap R, Gajulapalli V, Lokesh K, Vishwanath M, et al. Organocatalytic construction of spirooxindole
naphthoquinones through Michael/hemiketalization using l-proline derived bifunctional thiourea.
RSC Adv, 2016, 6, 12180–12184.
[59] Oliveira VdG, Cardoso MFDC, Forezi da LSM. Organocatalysis: A brief overview on its evolution and
applications. Catalysts, 2018, 8.
[60] Wang Y, Cobo AA, Franz AK. Recent advances in organocatalytic asymmetric multicomponent
cascade reactions for enantioselective synthesis of spirooxindoles. Org Chem Front, 2021, 8,
4315–4348.
[61] Zhou B, Yang Y, Shi J, Luo Z, Li Y. Synthesis of six-membered spirocyclic oxindoles with five
consecutive stereocenters in an asymmetric organocatalytic one-pot michael/michael/aldol addition
sequence. J Org Chem, 2013, 78(7), 2897–2907.
[62] Xie X, Huang W, Peng C, et al. Organocatalytic Asymmetric Synthesis of Six-Membered Carbocycle￾Based Spiro Compounds. Adv Synth Catal, 2018, 360, 194–228.
370 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda Amaregouda[63] Zea A, Alba AR, Mazzanti A, et al. Organocatalytic synthesis of spiro compounds via a cascade
Michael–Michael-aldol reaction. Chem Commun, 2010, 6953–6955.
[64] Cyclohexanes CS, Chatterjee I, Bastida D, et al. Vinylogous organocatalytic triple cascade reaction :
Forging Six stereocenters in complex spiro‐oxindolic cyclohexanes. Adv Synth Catal, 2013,
3124–3130.
[65] Links DA, Arya K, Rajesh UC, et al. Proline confined fau zeolite : Heterogeneous hybrid catalyst for
the synthesis of spiroheterocycles via a mannich type reaction. Green Chem, 2012.
[66] Sivamurugan V, Deepa K, Palanichamy M, et al. An international journal for rapid communication of
synthetic organic chemistry [( L) Proline]2Zn catalysed synthesis of derivatives under solvent – free
condition. Synth Commun, 3833–3846.
[67] Esfandiary N, Heydari A. Fe2O3@[proline]–CuMgAl–LDH: A magnetic bifunctional copper and
organocatalyst system for one-pot synthesis of quinolines and 2H-indazoles in green media. Appl
Org Chem, 2020, 34, 1–16.
[68] Maleki A, Firouzi-Haji R. L-Proline functionalized magnetic nanoparticles: A novel magnetically
reusable nanocatalyst for one-pot synthesis of 2,4,6-triarylpyridines. Sci Rep, 2018, 8, 1–8.
[69] Maleki A, Firouzi Haji R. L-Proline-functionalized magnetic nanocomposite: A green magnetic
nanocatalyst for efficient synthesis of imidazo[1,2-pyridines]. 2017, 4720.
[70] Kaur P, Arora R, Gill NS. Review on oxygen heterocycles. Indo Am J Pharm Sci, 2013, 3(11), 18.
[71] Cossy J. Guérinot A. Natural products containing oxygen heterocycles – Synthetic advances between
1990 and 2015. Adv Heterocycl Chem, 2016, 119, 107–140.
[72] Simon C, Constantieux T, Rodriguez J. Utilisation of 1,3-dicarbonyl derivatives in multicomponent
reactions. Eur J Org Chem, 2004, 4957–4980.
[73] List B. Asymmetric aminocatalysis. Synlett, 2001, 1675–1686.
[74] Abdolmohammadi S, Balalaie S. Novel and efficient catalysts for the one-pot synthesis of 3,4-
dihydropyrano[c]chromene derivatives in aqueous media. Tetrahedron Lett, 2007, 48, 3299–3303.
[75] Mofakham H, Ghadari R, Shaabani A, et al. “on-water” organic synthesis: L-proline catalyzed
synthesis of pyrimidine-2,4-dione-, benzo[g]- and dihydropyrano[2,3-g]chromene derivatives in
aqueous media. J Iran Chem Soc, 2013, 10, 307–317.
[76] Zhu S, Wang J, Xu Z, et al. An efficient one-pot synthesis of pyrano[3,2-c]quinolin-2,5-dione
derivatives catalyzed by l-proline. Molecules, 2012, 17, 13856–13863.
[77] Li Y, Chen H, Shi C, et al. Efficient one-pot synthesis of spirooxindole derivatives catalyzed by
L-proline in aqueous medium. J Combinat Chem, 2010, 12, 231–237.
[78] Daloee TS, Behbahani FK. a green route for the synthesis of 2-amino-5,10-dioxo-4-aryl-5,10-dihydro￾4H-benzo[g]chromene-3-carbonitriles using l-proline as a basic organocatalyst. Polycycl Aromat
Compd, 2022, 42, 681–689.
[79] Kadam PR, Bodke YD, Mamatha D, Naik O, Nagaraja B. Manjunatha, One-pot three-component
synthesis of thioether linked 4-hydroxycoumarin-benzothiazole derivatives under ambient condition
and evaluation of their biological activity. Results in Chem, 2022, 4, 100303–100311.
[80] Li J, Lu L, Su W. A new strategy for the synthesis of benzoxanthenes catalyzed by proline triflate in
water. Tetrahedron Lett, 2010, 51, 2434–2437.
[81] Kuan H, Chien C, Chen K. Synthesis of Fully Substituted Dispirocyclohexanes by Organocatalytic
Annulation Strategy between. 2013, 5366–5369.
[82] Nazari S, Keshavarz M. Amberlite-supported L-prolinate: A novel heterogeneous organocatalyst for
the three-component synthesis of 4H-pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazole derivatives. Russ J Gen Chem, 2017, 87,
539–545.
[83] Kidwai M, Jain A. Zn [( L) Proline] 2 : an eligible candidate for the synthesis of xanthenediones in
water. 2012.
9 L-Proline and its derivatives catalyzed one-pot multicomponent synthesis 371[84] Siddiqui ZN, Farooq F. A practical one pot synthesis of novel 2-hydroxy-4-chromanone derivatives
from 3-formylchromone. J Chem Sci, 2012, 124, 1097–1105.
[85] Khalafy GJA. Organometallic Catalyzed Synthesis of a Series of Novel Functionalized 4-Aroyl-4 H –
benzo [ g] chromenes through One-pot, Three Component Reaction. 2018, 2–7.
[86] Safaei-Ghomi J, Zahedi S. Diastereoselective synthesis of isoxazolidines and spiroisoxazolidines via
catalytic 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reactions in the presence of Fe3O4-L-proline nanoparticles as a
magnetic organocatalyst. Tetrahedron Lett, 2016, 57, 1071–1073.
372 Kantharaju Kamanna, Yamanappagouda AmaregoudaCH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao✶
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free
multicomponent synthesis of bioactive
heterocycles
10.1 Introduction
Microwave (MW) technique is being extensively used for conducting organic chemical
reactions for the past three or four decades [1, 2]. The MW technique is a nonconven￾tional way of exercising organic synthesis. It helps us conduct almost all kinds of or￾ganic chemical reactions. Organic reactions assisted by MWs follow many principles
laid down in green chemistry [3, 4]. MW-assisted chemistry has high relevance in
pharma industry in making active pharma ingredients and drug intermediates [5, 6].
Chemical processes developed involving MW avoid using solvents and reduce waste
generation and these have bearing on pollution creation [7]. Many MW-assisted chem￾ical reactions will be completed in minutes and some are even completed in seconds.
MW-assisted organic reactions are cost-effective because of no solvent requirement,
time of reaction, heat energy supplied (superheating) in the form of MW, higher
yields, and product isolation and purification becomes more effective. Recently, these
MW organic reactions are being conducted using MW-flow reactors [7–12].
Percy Spensor (US electrical engineer) was the first to notice the melting of a
candy bar/chocolate induced by MW in 1946 confirming the role of MWs as heating
aid. This MW-induced heating observation provided entry for present-day MW ovens.
MWs use the frequency/wavelength range of 300 MHz to 300 GHz and most of the
MW ovens operate in the range of ~2.45 GHz (~12.2 cm λ). These MWs have the ability
to pass through/penetrate into fog and clouds and are used for detection leading to
the development of Radiation Detection and Ranging (RADAR). Organic molecules dis￾play molecular rotations and these molecular rotations play an important role in ab￾sorbing the MW radiation [1, 2]. The propagating MW possesses an oscillating electric
and magnetic vector and these vectors interact with rotational levels of organic mole-
✶
Corresponding author: Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao, Emeritus Scientist-CSIR and Honorary Professor
AcSIR, Natural Products and Medicinal Chemistry (NPMC) Department and AcSIR-Ghaziabad,
CSIR – Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, Uppal Road Tarnaka, Hyderabad 500007, Telangana,
India, e-mail: vaidya.opv@gmail.com
CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Department of Chemistry, School of Applied Sciences and Humanities,
Vignan’s Foundation for Science, Technology and Research (VFSTR), Vignan University, Vadlamudi,
Guntur 522 213, Andhra Pradesh, India, e-mail: pavaniict@gmail.com
Acknowledgment: VJR thanks AcSIR-Ghaziabad for Honorary Professorship and CSIR-New Delhi for Emer￾itus Scientist Honor.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-010cules leading to the absorption of MWs [13]. The net interaction is the MW energy ab￾sorption by the molecule leading to heating of the system [14–16].
10.2 Multicomponent reactions
Three or more starting compounds combining to form a product in a one-pot system
is known as a multicomponent reaction (MCR). Generally, these MCRs involve elimina￾tion of water or small molecules and also adopt condensation type chemistry. The
MCRs are known as convergent reactions. Most of the times, the number of atoms
present in the starting materials will be incorporated into the final product, providing
a decent atom economy. Many times these MCRs involve reactive aldehyde or car￾bonyl functionalities and their derivatives. MCRs provide higher yield and purity of a
product compared to the two-component stepwise reaction. The reduction in number
of reaction steps, simplicity in conducting the reaction, diversity, and complexity of
outcomes in the resultant products of these MCRs are noteworthy. The sequence in
the MCRs maybe: two components react to form a product, which reacts with third
component present in the reaction medium leading to a three-component product
and further this three-component product will be ready to react with fourth compo￾nent and so on. The reduction in impurities, less or no side reactions, improved yields,
and reproducibility of the chemistry makes these MCRs more attractive for practical
applications in research and industry.
This chapter provides a compilation of multicomponent organic reactions assisted
by MWs and without using any solvent. The precise and quick information coded in
the figures of this chapter further help the reader to consider them for the possible
development of green chemical processes of importance using continuous flow reac￾tor technology.
10.3 Microwave-assisted synthesis of solvent-free
multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles
10.3.1 Acridone derivatives
Vetrivel Nadaraj et al. [17] reported synthesis of acridine derivatives (4) by adopting mul￾ticomponent single-pot reaction involving benzaldehyde (1), 1-naphthylamine (2), and di￾medone (3), without any solvent and with the help of MWs. The authors reported seven
examples with yields ranging 92–96% (Figure 10.1). MWs with 160 W power were used
for irradiation of the tricomponent mixture (Figure 10.1) to get a yellow-colored solid
within 5 min of time in high yields. 1-Naphthylamine reacts with dimedone to form a
374 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha RaoSchiff base, which reacts with aldehyde to form a C–C bond and then it forms another
C–C bond at 2-position of naphthylamine leading to acridine derivatives. Thus, synthe￾sized acridine derivatives (4) were taken for antimicrobial studies. Several bacteria and
fungi were employed to understand the effect of the prepared acridone derivatives.
Ofloxacin and clotrimazole were the standards used to normalize the antimicrobial activ￾ity. Quite a few compounds exhibited very good IC50 numbers ranging from 3.9–7.8 μg.
Another study by Tu Ju et al. [18] developed a method for making acridone (6) deriva￾tives (Figure 10.2). Aldehyde (1), dimedone (3), and ammonium carbonate (5) were
mixed (without solvent) and microwaved for about 4–7 min to get acridone deriva￾tives (6). The authors provided crystal structure for a compound synthesized. The
thermal method, upon mixing all the three components and refluxing, was found to
be a low-yielding reaction and also adopts higher reaction time.
10.3.2 Pyrimidine derivatives
Dihydro-pyrimidines (DHPMs) synthesis was first reported by Pietro Bigenelli [19] in
1893. Later, during these years many researchers got interested and showed several
publications; in particular, Oliver Kappe [20] came up with a short review [21] on
Figure 10.1: Synthesis of 7,10,11,12-tetrahydrobenzo[c]acridin-8(9H)-one (4) derivatives.
Figure 10.2: Synthesis of 9-aryl-3,3,6,6-tetramethyl-1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10-decahydroacridine-1,8-diones-6.
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 375these DHPMs via Biginelli reaction, because of several biological activities of DHPMs,
like calcium channel modulators [22, 23], adrenergic receptor antagonists [24], mitotic
kinesin inhibitors [25], antiviral [26], antibacterial activity [27], anticancer activity [28],
cardiotonic activity [29], anti-inflammatory activity [30], and fungicidal activity [31, 32].
Other reports are given on the synthesis of DHPMs, which involved mixing of three
components in the presence of acid or catalyst and a suitable solvent [27, 33–35]. Choud￾hury et al. [36] reported a procedure for making pyrimidines involving a three￾component reaction – aldehyde (1), urea (7), and ethyl acetoacetate (8) using a catalyst,
assisted by MW and without any solvent (Figure 10.3). The authors employed several
catalysts to test their activity [36] and the catalysts are supported over montmorillonite
or Si-MCM-41 or no support. There are other reports also, using MW and or catalyst and
without any solvent, to make pyrimidinones via Biginelli reaction [37–40].
Abdulkadir ShubeHussen et al. [41] designed a methodology for making quinazolin￾4(3H)-imines (Figure 10.4). Substituted 2-aminobenzonitrile (10), substituted aniline (11),
and triethylorthoformate (12) were mixed with NH4Cl and MW irradiated to obtain qui￾nazolin-4(3H)-imines (13) (Figure 10.4). Aniline reacts with triethylorthoformate to form
an imine intermediate, which reacts with the amino group of 2-aminobenzonitrile to
form a C–N bond; then it forms another C–N bond with the nitrile group leading to cycli￾zation to form quinazolineimine compounds. Scaled-up preparative reaction is also re￾ported and compared with thermal conditions, where the yields and reaction times are
more favorable for MW-mediated synthesis. Fifteen examples (Figure 10.7) are cited by
changing the substitution on the aniline (11) residue and also on the 2-aminobenzonitrile
(10) compound. Quinazoline derivatives are potential candidates for the various biologi￾cal activities [42].
Virsodia et al. [43] demonstrated synthesis of thiazolopyrimidine and pyrimido￾thiazine (18) compounds (Figure 10.5) in very nice way. Pyrimidine formation fol￾lowed by the final product (18) involves no solvent and no catalyst and the reaction is
assisted by only MW irradiation (Figure 10.5). The first step is a tricomponent Biginelli
Figure 10.3: Synthesis of pyrimidines (7) via MW and catalyst-assisted solvent-free Biginelli reaction.
376 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Raoreaction, involving aldehyde (1), thiourea (8), and aceto-acetanilide (14), which were
MW (400 W) irradiated at 140 °C without any solvent and catalyst. Subsequently, the
pyrimidine derivate (15) was allowed to react with 1,2-dibromopropane (16) or 1,3-
dibromopropane (17) without any solvent and catalyst to afford thiazolo-pyrimidine
or pyrimido-thiazine (18) (Figure 10.10). Interestingly, these pyrimidine-based com￾pounds exhibit various biological activities [44–47].
10.3.3 Imidazole and fused imidazole derivatives
Jiang et al. [48] synthesized various trisubstituted imidazoles (21) (Figure 10.6) via MW
activation of MCR. Arylnitrile (19), aldehyde – 2 mol (1) and ammonium acetate (20)
were mixed (solvent-free) and microwaved for 15–34 min to make various trisubstituted
imidazoles (21) (Figure 10.6). The 25 examples reported indicate the scope of the sub￾strate structure and yields obtained in the MW-mediated multicomponent imidazole syn￾thesis. Interestingly the reaction mechanism suggested informs about the umpolung
Figure 10.4: Synthesis of quinazolin-4(3H)-imines(13).
Figure 10.5: Synthesis of thiazolo-pyrimidine and pyrimido-thiazine (18).
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 377nature (Figure 10.6). Based on the aforementioned findings, potential processes for the pro￾duction of trisubstituted 2-(20-azaaryl)imidazole derivatives and 1,2-diarylethylbenzamides,
respectively, have been postulated. In the first case, ring-closure cascade events such initial
condensation, nucleophilic addition, umpolung (from A to B), intramolecular nucleophilic
addition (from B to C), and dehydration are involved as depicted in Figure 10.6.
Cheldavi and Mohammadi [49] reported synthesis of phenanthro-fused imidazoles (23)
(Figure 10.7). This is a three-component reaction involving 9,10-phenanthrodione (22), al￾dehyde (1), and NH4OAc (20) under MW irradiation conditions. Chemical transformation
involves insertion of two nitrogen atoms coming from NH4OAc (20) (Figure 10.7). Varia￾tion in the substrate aldehyde structure provided 10 examples with very good yields. Im￾idazole derivatives have applications in pharma [50] and in organic materials [51, 52].
10.3.4 Pyrrole and fused pyrrole derivatives
Ranu and Hajra [53] synthesized substituted pyrroles (Figure 10.14) via a three￾component, solid support assisted and mediated by MW irradiation. α,β-unsaturated ke￾Figure 10.6: Synthesis of trisubstituted imidazoles (21).
378 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Raotone (24), amine (11), and nitroalkane (25) were loaded on to the surface of silica gel
and then irradiated with MW to realize the tetrasubstituted pyrrole products (26) (scheme
1 – Figure 10.8). The second scheme involved with α,β-unsaturated nitro compound (27),
amine (11), and aldehyde (28) were loaded on to the surface of alumina, then irradiated
using MWs to make trisubstituted pyrroles (29). The third scheme uses α,β-unsaturated
nitro compound (27), amine (11), and 5/6/7-membered cyclic ketones (30) were loaded on
to the surface of alumina, then irradiated using MWs to make 2,3-fused bicyclic pyrroles
(31). All the three schemes covered enough number of examples to understand the effect
of structural features on the yields and ease of performing the chemistry.
Silica gel is found to serve better in making the tetrasubstituted pyrroles (Fig￾ure 10.8: scheme 1), whereas alumina is favored in conducting schemes 2 and 3 in
making the corresponding pyrroles (Figure 10.8: schemes 2 and 3) in terms of yields
and other advantages. However, the authors provided a few limitations to this proce￾dure: (i) the absence of substituent at α-position of the nitroalkene leads to different
products other than providing pyrroles; (ii) open chain ketones in the place of alde￾hydes also gives different products; and (iii) nitromethane is not effective, whereas
nitroethane and nitropropane are very effective in making substituted pyrroles.
10.3.5 Pyridine derivatives
Pyridones and aminopyridines were synthesized by Kibou et al. [54] using MW irradia￾tion and without catalyst and solvent (Figure 10.9). The intermediate enaminone was
also prepared by adopting MW irradiation, without catalyst and in solvent free condi￾tions (Figure 10.9). Ethyl acetoacetate (7) and 1,1-dimethoxy-N,N-dimethylamethanamine
(DMF-DMA) (33) were mixed and irradiated for 5 min using MWs to obtain corre￾sponding enaminone (34) in 90% yield. The obtained enaminone (34) was mixed with
amine (11) and ethyl cyanoacetate (35) and microwaved for 2 min to make correspond￾ing pyridones (36). In another experiment, the authors replaced the ethyl cyanoace￾tate (35) with malononitrile (37), which afforded tetrasubstituted aminopyridines (38).
Figure 10.7: Synthesis of phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazole (23) derivatives.
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 379These chemical transformations do not use catalyst or solvent. The authors have pro￾vided a possible mechanism of formation for the formation of these (36 and 38) prod￾ucts. Pyridones are known to act as phosphodiesterase (PDE) enzyme [55] inhibitors,
having a role in heart attack problems.
Figure 10.8: Synthesis of substituted pyrroles – 26, 29, and 32 using tricomponent surface-coated silica
gel and alumina with microwave irradiation.
380 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao10.3.6 Nitrogen–sulfur heterocycles
Shubhodam et al. [56] displayed a procedure that aminothiazole (39) reacts with
phenacyl-bromide derivatives (40), along with hydrazine (41) under MW conditions
without any solvent to give 6-(4-substituted-phenyl)-3-methylimidazo[2,1-b]thiazole￾2-carbohydrazide derivatives (42) in good yields (Figure 10.10). The authors inform
that this is a green method that does not involve any catalyst or solvent. Further, the
authors evaluated biological activities of some hydrazides and hydrazones, which
are different from Figure 10.3 and are listed in reference [57]. Preparation of start￾ing compound amino thiazole method is also given (Figure 10.10).
10.3.7 Oxygen heterocycles
Synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyrans and fused tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyrans 43 to 60
were reported by Sougata Santra et al. [58] as a tricomponent, MW-mediated, and sol￾vent-free process. Aldehyde (1), malononitrile (37), and 1,3-cyclohexanedione (3) were
mixed and microwaved for ~7 min at 80 °C to obtain various benzopyran derivatives
(Figure 10.11) in very good yields. Various tetrahydrobezopyran derivatives synthe￾Figure 10.9: Enaminone, pyridone, and aminopyridines (36 and 38) synthesis via MW irradiation.
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 381sized (43–60) are given in Figure 10.11. Interestingly, the pyran derivatives synthesized
(43–60) are multifunctional compounds. Particularly, there are several bond-forming
reactions involved that make the mechanism of formation of these products interesting.
Fardood et al. [59] developed a methodology for the synthesis of amino-chromene
derivatives (62, 64) (Figure 10.12). This is a three-component reaction with α-naphthol (61)
or β-naphthol (63), aldehyde (1), malanonitrile (37), and a catalyst FeTiO3–MNPs, and MW
irradiation under solvent-free conditions afforded 2-amino-4H-chromene derivatives (62
and 64) in very good yields (Figure 10.12). The catalyst, FeTiO3-MNPs were recovered and
reused five times without losing catalytic activity. Chromene products (62 and 64) iso￾lated indicated the regioselectivity observed in these conversions. 2-Aminochromene de￾rivatives are found to possess biological activities such as anticancer, anti-allergic,
antiproliferative, antiviral, antibacterial and apoptosis inducers [60–62].
Torres-Hernández et al. [63] synthesized epoxy-isoindolinones assisted by MWs
and followed by Ugi-4CR/intramolecular-Diels–Alder reaction (Figure 10.13). This is an
example of a four-component reaction accelerated by MW irradiation. Furfural (65),
amine (11), cyclohexylisocyanide (66), and half ester of diacid (67) were mixed and
microwaved for 30 min to get the products (69, 70, 71). The authors predicted the
mechanism by showing an intermediate (68) formed from all the four components of
the reaction, which undergoes final Diels–Alder [4 + 2] cycloaddition leading to the
products (69, 70, 71) mentioned in the Figure 10.13. The main advantages are the reac￾tion time and yields, when compared to the conventional heating method. The chemi￾cal transformations reported are free of catalyst and solvent. It is interesting note that
the complex structures carrying manipulative functional groups for further chemical
transformations can be easily generated through this multicomponent-one pot-MW
technique without using catalyst and solvent.
Figure 10.10: Synthesis of 6-(4-substituted-phenyl)-3-methyl imidazo[2,1-b] thiazole-2-carbohydrazide
derivatives (42).
382 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao10.3.8 Spiroheterocycles
Dandia et al. [64] synthesized spiroheterocycles (75) (Figure 10.14) to evaluate antifun￾gal activity. The methodology involves a tricomponent reaction assisted by MW and
without any organic solvent. Substituted indole-2,3-dione (72), aminoheterocycle (73),
and thioacid (74) were microwaved at 135 °C for about 4–7 min to afford the spirocy￾clic compounds (75) (Figure 14). Substitutions on the isatin (72) ring, heterocyclic
Figure 10.11: Synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyrans and fused tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyrans (43–60).
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 383amine (73), and thioacids (74) were changed to understand the role of the structure
on the antifungal activity. The authors reported crystal structure for one of the com￾pounds synthesized. Fungal strains employed for testing are Rhizoctonia solani, Fusar￾Figure 10.12: Synthesis of 2-amino-4H-chromene (62 and 64) derivatives.
Figure 10.13: Synthesis of epoxy-isoindolinones (69, 70, 71) – Ugi-4CR/intramolecular-Diels–Alder reaction.
384 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Raoium oxysporum, and Collectotrichum capsica, where synthesized compounds exhibited
very good activity compared to the standards like baynate and thiram.
Moghaddam et al. [65] synthesized dispiropyrrolidineoxindole derivatives (79) (Fig￾ure 10.15) via a three-component MW-assisted reaction. Oxindole (76), N-methylglycine
(77), and 6-methoxy-2-(3-substituted-benzylidene)benzofuran-3(2H)-one (78) were
mixed and microwaved for 8–15 min at 100 °C to isolate dispiropyrrolidineoxindole
derivatives (79). The authors reported the advantages with MW conditions, upon
comparing with thermal conditions. Variations in the substituent attached with
the benzylidene–benzofuran derivative (78) introduced 11 examples with excellent
yields (Figure 10.15). The structure of one of the dispiro product (79) was estab￾lished by X-ray diffraction analysis and also by H- and C-NMR data. The synthe￾sized compounds were subjected to docking studies to understand their binding
behavior with respect to cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK5) enzyme. Several dispiro
compounds (79) exhibited acceptable interactions with the enzyme CDK5.
Figure 10.14: Synthesis of substituted spiroheterocycles (75) for antifungal activity.
Figure 10.15: Synthesis of dispiropyrrolidineoxindole derivatives (79).
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 385Debajyothi Bhuyan et al. [66, 67] reported the synthesis of spiro-indeno-tetrahydropyridine
derivatives (81) (Figure 10.16) through an MCR, without catalyst and solvent, using MW
irradiation, following Knoevenagel condensation and aza Diels–Alder reaction. Indane
dione (80), aldehyde (1), and ammonium acetate (20) were mixed together and micro￾waved for 7 min to make spiro-indeno-tetrahydropyridine derivatives (Figure 10.16). Varia￾tions in the substituent attached with aldehyde structure provided 14 examples in
excellent yields (Figure 10.16). Indane dione (80) reacts with aldehyde (1) to form a
Knoevenagel condensation product; then it reacts with ammonium acetate (20) to con￾vert one of the carbonyls of the Knoevenagel condensation product to imine. Then a [4
+ 2] cycloaddition occurs between imine product and Knoevenagel condensation prod￾uct leading to the spiro-indeno-tetrahydropyridine (81) derivative.
10.3.9 Fused bicyclic heterocycles
Yadav and Singh [68] provided a method to make fused thiazolo-pyran moieties (86) with
very high diastereomeric excess (Figure 10.17), adopting an MCR under MW irradiations
and solvent-free conditions. Acetic anhydride (82), glycine (83), and 5-arylidenerhodanine
(84) were mixed without any solvent and microwaved to get annulated pyrano-thiazoles
(86) with very high diastereo selectivity (>96%) (Figure 15). Glycine (83) reacts with acetic
anhydride (82) to form azlactone, which adds to 5-arylidenerhodanine (84) in a Michael
addition fashion to generate an intermediate 85 with high diasteroselectivity (>96%). The
intermediate 85 further undergoes cyclization and ring-opening to form pyrano-thiazole.
Indeed, the authors have isolated the intermediate 85 upon reducing the time of MW ir￾radiation to ~5 min and also microwaved it (85) to observe the product pyarano-thiazole
(86) compound (Figure 10.17). The selectivity observed in these MW-induced transforma￾tions is indeed a very high (>96%) compared to thermal reaction (>57%). High diastero
selectivity (>96%) observed in the formation of compounds, intermediate 85, and prod￾uct-fused thiazolo-pyran 86 go to explain that MW irradiations produce more polar struc￾Figure 10.16: Synthesis of spiro-indeno-tetrahydropyridine (81) derivatives.
386 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Raotures and this may be the reason for the observed selectivity. Pyrano-thiazoles are
known to exhibit anticancer activities [69].
In favor of the cis (syn) isomers, the production of Michael adducts 85 and their
ring modification to 86 were highly diastereoselective. Prior to purification, the dia￾stereomeric ratios of the crude products were verified by 1
HNMR spectroscopy to es￾tablish that real and correct diastereomeric ratios are presented. By using 1
HNMR
spectroscopy, it was discovered that the diastereomeric ratio in the case of MW irradi￾ation was >96:4 and that in the case of oil bath heating was >57:43. If the activated
complex that forms the cis (syn) isomers is more dipolar than the activated complex
that forms the trans (anti) isomers, then the high diastereoselectivity (>96%) in favor
of the cis (syn) isomers under MW radiation may be explained as MW radiation pro￾motes the reactions transpiring via more dipolar activated complex.
Yadav et al. [70] reported a methodology to make fused thiazolo-s-triazine moieties,
adopting solvent-free tricomponent reaction assisted by MW irradiation with notable
diastereomeric excess (de) of > 93% (Figure 10.18). Aryl-substituted thiazolo-2-amine
Schiff base formed using arylaldehyde (87), ammonium acetate (20), and aldehyde (1)
were mixed and microwaved for 6–12 min under solvent-free conditions to afford
thiazolo-s-triazine derivatives (88) (Figure 10.18). The yields, purity, and de of MW￾assisted MCR were compared with thermal reaction and the superiority of MW￾enhanced MCR over thermal reaction was found. The authors suggested two possible
Figure 10.17: Synthesis of fused pyrano-thiazoles (86) using solvent-free tricomponent reaction under
MW irradiation with high de of >96%.
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 387mechanisms (Figure 10.18): one route adopts polar addition mechanism and another
route is about [4+2] cycloaddition (Figure 10.18). Triazines and its derivatives do pos￾sess various biological activities [71–75].
Das and Mukhopadhyay [76] developed a procedure to synthesize 1,6-naphthyridines
(91) via multicomponent MW-assisted reaction under solvent-free and catalyst-free con￾ditions (Figure 10.19). Acetophenone (89), malononitrile (37), and morpholine (90) were
mixed and microwaved at 100 °C for 10 min to make 1,6-naphthyridines (91) (Fig￾ure 10.19). The authors reported several 1,6-naphthyridine compounds (Figure 10.19)
by varying the structure of starting materials. A comparison was made between
thermal conditions and MW reaction conditions to prove the superiority of the MW
method. The chemical transformation is found to be interesting in that this reaction
involves Knoevenagel condensation, Michael addition, ring closure – cyclization
and aromatization cascade, with several C–C and C–N bond-forming processes oc￾curring. The authors provided a reasonably possible complex mechanism of forma￾tion of product 1,6-naphthyridines.
Figure 10.18: Synthesis of fused thiazolo-s-triazinenes(88) using solvent-free tricomponent reaction under
MW irradiation with high de of >93%.
388 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha RaoFigure 10.19: Synthesis of various 1,6-naphthyridines (91–106).
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 38910.3.10 MW-assisted solvent-free MCR synthesis of heterocycles
using catalyst
Devi and Bhuyan [77] developed a method to synthesize fused pyran derivatives
(108) using a three-component, solvent-free, NaBr-catalyzed and MW-assisted cyclo￾condensation process (Figure 10.20). Aldehyde (1), nitrile (107), and dimedone (3)
were mixed with NaBr (catalyst) and microwaved for ~15 min to make highly func￾tionalized, fused pyran derivatives (108) (Figure 10.20). The pyran derivatives have
a wide range of biological activities [78].
Parmar et al. [79] conducted an MCR assisted by MW and in the presence of ionic liquid
to make fused pyrazolo-pyrans (114, 115, 116) (Figure 10.21). 2-Chloro-8-methylquinoline
-3-carbaldehyde (109), pyrazalone (110), and electron-rich olefin (111, 112, 113) were
mixed with triethylammonium acetate (TEAA) ionic liquid and microwaved for about
8–12 min to afford pyrazolo-pyran derivative (114, 115, 116) (Figure 10.21). In another
reaction, 3-chloroindole-2-carbaldehyde (117) was employed with other starting materi￾als being the same, to make corresponding pyrazolo-pyran (118, 119, 120) derivatives
(Figure 10.21). Optimized reaction conditions developed by the authors indicate the
upper hand of MW reaction conditions. The ionic liquid, TEAA reacts with active￾methylene group of pyrazalone (110) to generate carbanion, which reacts with aldehyde
to form corresponding α,β-unsaturated ketone and this enone undergoes [4 + 2] cycload￾dition with the electron-rich olefin to provide pyrazolo-pyran derivatives (114, 115, 116,
118, 119, 120) (Figure 10.21). The ionic liquid TEAA is easily recovered by removing
water from it and can be reused.
Jian-Ming Zhang et al. [80] conducted quinoline derivatives synthesis (Figure 10.22),
adopting a tricomponent reaction with catalyst and assisted by MW irradiation. Penta￾fluorobenzaldehyde (121), substituted aniline (11), and acetylene derivative (122) were
mixed with catalyst CuBr/montmorrilonite and microwaved to get quinolines synthe￾sized (123) (Figure 10.22). Aldehyde (121) reacts with aniline to provide Schiff`s base,
which reacts with Cu-activated acetylene in situ to generate quinolines (Figure 10.22).
The authors report that increasing concentration of acetylene (122) compound fourfold
improves the yields of the quinolines.
Figure 10.20: Synthesis of fused pyran derivatives (108).
390 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha RaoFigure 10.21: Synthesis of pyrano-pyrazoles and fused pyrano-pyrazoles.
Figure 10.22: Synthesis of quinoline derivatives (123).
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 391Banik and coworkers [81] synthesized biologically important 1,4-dihydropyridine (124)
(Figure 10.23) compounds via a three-component, MW-assisted and Bi(NO3)3-catalyzed
reaction without any solvent. Aldehyde (1), 1,3-dione (7), and ammonium acetate (20) or
amine (11) were mixed with catalyst Bi(NO3)3 without solvent, microwaved for about
1–3 min to make 1,4-dihydropyridine (124) derivatives (Figure 10.23). Optimized experi￾mental conditions show the role of catalyst, no solvent, temperature, time of reaction,
and product yields. Variation in the structure of starting materials provided 25 exam￾ples with very good to excellent yields (Figure 10.23). The catalyst Bi(NO3)3 played a role
in decreasing the reaction time and also improved the product yields. These dihydro￾pyridine derivatives are marketed as medicines such as nifedipine, felodipine, nicardi￾pine, and amlodipine, and are used to treat blood pressure and anxiety. Further these
1,4-dihydropyridines are known for their anticancer [82], antimicrobial [83], antidia￾betic [84], neurotropic [85], and other activities [86].
Alireza Samzadeh-Kermani [87] reported an interesting conversion for making 2-
nitroalkylidene-1,3-oxathiolane (128) derivatives (Figure 10.24) via a tri-component reac￾tion catalyzed by triethylamine and assisted by microwaves. Epoxide (125), nitrometh￾ane (126), and carbon disulfide (127) were mixed with (20% mol) of triethylamine as
catalyst and microwaved for 60 min to synthesize 2-nitroalkylidene-1,3-oxathiolane
(128) derivatives (Figure 10.24). Cyclopentene epoxide and cyclooctene epoxide were
found to be inactive and did not yield any product. Interestingly the MCR assisted by
MW exhibited regioselectivity.
Figure 10.23: Synthesis of dihydropyridine derivatives (124).
392 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao10.4 Conclusions
Synthesis of organic molecules via MW irradiation, under MCR and without solvent
provides a route for practical applications for a greener and cleaner organic synthesis
and it is popular among researchers. There are several advantages with the MCR
without solvent when assisted by MWs, such as reaction time, ease of conducting the
chemical reaction, ease of workup, simple isolation and purification, several multiple
bonds formed or cleaved (C–C, C–N, and C–O bonds) in one-go, and making complex
structures in a very simple-way leading to a variety of heterocycles that have poten￾tial bio-activity. The present chapter covered all the above facts dealing with the MW￾assisted solvent-free MCRs and the narration provides confidence to researchers to go
for practical applications.
Conflict of interest: There is no conflict of interest.
References
[1] Kingston HM, Haswell SJ, Eds. Microwave-Enhanced Chemistry. Fundamentals, Sample Preparation
and Applications. American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 1997, ISBN-10: 0841233756.
[2] Loupy A, Ed. Microwaves in Organic Synthesis. 2nd edition. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2006, ISBN 3-527-
31452-0.
[3] Hayes BL. Microwave Synthesis: Chemistry at the Speed of Light. CEM Publishing, Matthews, NC,
2002, ISBN-10: 0972222901.
[4] Tierney JP, Lidstrom P. Eds. Microwave-Assisted Organic Synthesis. Wiley-Blackwell Publishing, 2009,
ISBN: 978-1-405-16844-1.
Figure 10.24: Synthesis of 2-nitroalkylidene-1,3-oxathiolane derivatives.
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 393[5] Oliver Kappe C, Stadler A, Dallinger D, Mannhold R, Kubinyi H, Folkers G, Ed. Microwaves in Organic
and Medicinal Chemistry. 2nd edition, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2012.
[6] Larhed M, Olofsson K. Eds. Microwave Methods in Organic Synthesis. Springer, Berlin, 2006.
[7] Varma RS. Solvent-free organic syntheses using supported reagents and microwave irradiation.
Green Chem, 1999, 1, 43.
[8] Alcazar J, De munoz M. Microwave-Assisted Continuous Flow Organic Synthesis (MACOS). In De la
hoz A, Loupy A, Eds. Microwaves in Organic Synthesis. 3rd edition, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH,
Weinheim, Germany, 2012, 1173–1204.
[9] Egami H, Hamashima Y. Practical and scalable organicreactions with flow microwave apparatus.
Chem Rec, 2019, 19, 157.
[10] Estel L, Poux M, Benamara N, Polaert I. Continuous flow microwave reactor: Where are we? Chem
Eng Process, 2017, 113, 56.
[11] Goyal H, Mehdad A, Lobo RF, Stefanidis GD, Vlachos DG. Scaleup of a single-mode microwave
reactor. Ind Eng Chem Res, 2020, 59, 2516.
[12] Martina K, Cravott G, Varma RS. Impact of microwaves on organic synthesis and strategies
towardflow processes and scaling up. J Org Chem, 2021, 86, 13857–13872. DOI: https://doi.org/10.
1021/acs.joc.1c00865.
[13] Madhvi S, Smita J, Desai KR. A brief review: Microwave assisted organic reactions. Arch Appl Sci Res,
2012, 4, 645–661.
[14] Kappe CO, Dallinger D. The impact of microwave synthesis on drug discovery. Nat Rev Drug Discov,
2006, 5, 51–63.
[15] Lidstrom P, Tierney J, Wathey B, Westman J. Microwave-assisted organic synthesis – A review.
Tetrahedron, 2001, 57, 9225–9283.
[16] Mingos DMP, Baghurst DR. Applications of microwave dielectric heating effect to synthetic
problems in chemistry. Chem Soc Rev, 1991, 20, 1–47.
[17] Nadaraj V, ThamaraiSelvi S, Mohan S. Microwave-induced synthesis and anti-microbial activities of
7,10,11,12-tetrahydrobenzo[c]acridin-8(9H)-one derivatives. Eur J Med Chem, 2009, 44, 976–980.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2008.07.004.
[18] Tu S-J, Lu Z, Shi D, Yao C, Gao Y, Guo C. A convenient synthesis of 9-aryl-3,3,6,6-tetramethyl￾1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10-decahydroacridine-1,8-diones under microwave irradiation without solvent. Synth
Commun, 2002, 23, 2181–2185. DOI: 10.1081/SCC-120005427.
[19] Biginelli P. Gazz Chim Ital, 1893, 23, 360–413.
[20] Oliver Kappe C. Biologically active dihydropyrimidones of the Biginelli-type: A literature survey. Eur J
Med Chem, 2000, 35, 1043–1052.
[21] Spedding M, Paoletti R. Classification of calcium channels and calcium antagonists: Progress report.
Adv Drug Res, 1987, 16, 309–591. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00050915.
[22] Cho H, Ueda M, Shima K, Mizuno A, Hayashimatsu M, Ohnaka Y, Takeuchi Y, Hamaguchi M, Aisaka K,
Hidaka T, Kawai M, Takeda M, Ishihara T, Funahashi K, Satoh F, Morita M, Noguchi
T. Dihydropyrimidines: Novel calcium antagonists with potent and long-lasting vasodilative and
antihypertensive activity. J Med Chem, 1989, 32, 2399–1406. DOI: 10.1021/jm00130a029.
[23] Roehrborn CG, Oesterling JE, Auerbach S, Kaplan SA, Lloyd KL, Milam DE, Padley RJ. The hytrin
community assessment trail study: A one-year study of terazosi versus placebo in the treatment of
men with symptomatic benign prostatic hyperplasia. Urology, 1996, 47, 159–168. DOI: 10.1016/
S0090-4295(99)80409-9.
[24] Mayer TU, Kapoor TM, Haggarty SJ, King RW, Schreiber SL, Mitchison TJ. Small molecule inhibitor of
mitotic spindle bipolarity identified in a phenotype-based screen. Science, 1999, 286, 971–974.
DOI: 10.1126/science.286.5441.
[25] Westox F H, Hul R. Two new synthetic substances active against viruses of the psittacosis￾lymphogranulomatrachoma group. J Med Chem, 1961, 3, 215–229. DOI: 10.1021/jm50015a002.
394 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao[26] Marinescu M. Biginelli reaction mediated synthesis of antimicrobial pyrimidine derivatives and their
therapeutic properties. Molecules, 2021, 26, 6022–6055. DOI: 10.3390/molecules26196022.
[27] Krishnan VBR, Merugu SK, JyothsnaGali S, Kapavarapu R, Hari Babu B. Efficient multicomponent
synthesis of Biginelli-dihydropyrimidines and evaluation of anti-cancer activity. Chemis Select, 2022,
7, e20201630. DOI: 10.1002/slct.202201630.
[28] Bryzgalov AO, Dolgikh MP, Sorokina IV, Tolstikova✶ TG, Sedova VF, Shkurko OP. Antiarrhythmic
activity of 4,6-di(het)aryl-5-nitro-3,4-dihydropyrimidin-(1H)-2-ones and its effects on arterial pressure
in rats. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2006, 16, 1418–1420. DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2005.11.043.
[29] Mokale SN, Shinde SS, Elgire RD, Sangshetti JN, Shinde DB. Synthesis and anti-inflammatory activity
of some 3-(4,6-disubtituted-2 -thioxo-1,2,3,4-tetrahydropyrimidin-5-yl) propanoic acid derivatives.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2010, 20, 4424–4426. DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.06.058.
[30] Gupta R, Jain A, Joshi R, Jain M. Eco-friendly solventless synthesis of 5-Indolylpyrimido[4,5-d]
pyrimidinones and their antimicrobial activity. Bull Korean Chem Soc, 2011, 32(3), 899–904.
DOI: 10.5012/bkcs.2011.32.3.899.
[31] Rajanarendar E, Reddy MN, Murthy KR, Reddy KG, Raju S, Srinivas M, Praveen B, Rao MS. Synthesis,
antimicrobial, and mosquito larvicidal activity of 1-aryl-4-methyl-3,6-bis-(5-methylisoxazol-3-yl)-2-
thioxo-2,3,6,10b-tetrahydro-1H-pyrimido[5,4-c]quinolin-5-ones. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2010, 20,
6052–6055. DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.08.060.
[32] Khasimbi S, Ali F, Manda K, Sharma A, Chauhan G, Wakode S. Dihydropyrimidinones Scaffold as a
promising nucleus for synthetic profile and various therapeutic targets: A review. Curr Org Synth,
2021, 18, 1–24. DOI: 10.2174/1570179417666201207215710.
[33] Chopda LV, Dave PN. Recent advances in homogeneous and heterogeneous catalyst in Biginelli
reaction from 2015–19: A concise review. Chem Select, 2020, 5, 5552–5572. DOI: 10.1002/
slct.202000742.
[34] Hatkehlouei SFT, Mirza B, Soleimani-Amiri S. Solvent-Free one-pot synthesis of
diversedihydropyrimidinones/tetrahydropyrimidinones using Biginelli reaction catalyzed by
Fe3O4@C@OSO3H. Polycycl Aromat Compd, 2022, 42, 1341–1357. DOI: 10.1080/
10406638.2020.1781203.
[35] Arfan A, Paquin L, Bazureau JP. Acidic task-specific ionic liquid as catalyst of microwave-assisted
solvent-free Biginelli reaction. Russ J Org Chem, 2007, 43, 1058–1064. DOI: 10.1134/
S1070428007070202.
[36] Choudhary VR, Tillu VH, Narkhede VS, Borate HB, Wakharkar RD. Microwave assisted solvent-free
synthesis of dihydropyrimidinones by Biginelli reaction over Si-MCM-41 supported FeCl3 catalyst.
Catalysis Communications, 2003, 4(9), 449–453. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1566-7367(03)00111-0.
[37] Renzhong F, Yang Y, Lai W, Ma Y, Chen Z, Zhou J, Chai W, Wang Q, Yuan R. Efficient and green
microwave-assisted multicomponent Biginelli reaction for the synthesis of dihydropyrimidinones
catalyzed by hetero polyanion-based ionic liquids under solvent-free conditions. Synth Commun,
2014, 45, 467–477. DOI: 10.1080/00397911.2014.976346.
[38] Stadler A, Kappe OC. Automated library generation using sequential microwave-assisted chemistry
application toward the Biginelli multicomponent condensation. J Comb Chem, 2001, 3, 624–630.
DOI: 10.1021/cc010044j.
[39] Mirza-Aghayan M, Bolourtchian M, Hosseini M. Microwave-assisted efficient synthesis of
dihydropyrimidines in solvent-free condition. Synth Commun, 2004, 34, 3335–3341. DOI: 10.1081/
SCC-200030577.
[40] Kuraitheerthakumaran A, Pazhamalai S, Gopalakrishnan M. Microwave-assisted multicomponent
reaction for the synthesis of 3,4-dihydropyrimidin-2(1H)-ones and their corresponding 2(1H)-thiones
using lanthanum oxide as a catalyst under solvent-free conditions. Arb J Chem, 2016, 9, S461–S465.
DOI: 10.1016/j.arabjc.2011.06.005.
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 395[41] ShubeHussen A, Bagchi S, Sharma A. Ammonium chloride assisted microwave mediated domino
multicomponent reaction: An efficient and sustainable synthesis of quinazolin-4(3H)-imines under
solvent free condition. Chem Select, 2019, 4, 10169–10173. DOI: 10.1002/slct.201900923.
[42] Asif M. Chemical characteristics, synthetic methods, and biological potential of quinazoline and
quinazolinone derivatives. Intl J Med Chem, 2014, Article ID: 395637. DOI: 10.1155/2014/395637.
[43] Virsodia VR, Vekariya NR, Manvar AT, Khunt RC, Marvania BR, Savalia BS, Shah AK. Catalyst-free,
rapid synthesis of fused bicyclic thiazolo-pyrimidine and pyrimido-thiazine derivatives by a
microwave-assisted method. Phosphorus Sulfur Silicon Relat Elem, 2008, 184, 34–44. DOI: 10.1080/
10426500802077564.
[44] Desai B, Sureja D, Naliapara Y, Shaha A, Saxena AK. Synthesis and QSAR studies of 4-substituted
phenyl-2,6- dimethyl-3, 5-bis-N-(substituted Phenyl)carbamoyl-1,4- dihydropyridines as potential
antitubercular agents. Bioorg Med Chem, 2001, 9, 1993. DOI: 10.1016/S0968-0896(01)00141-9.
[45] Kharkar PS, Desai B, Gaveria H, Varu B, Loriya R, Naliapara Y, Shah A, Kulkarni VM. Three￾dimensional quantitative structure−activity relationship of 1,4-dihydropyridines as antitubercular
agents. J Med Chem, 2002, 45, 4858–4867. DOI: 10.1021/jm020217z.
[46] Engi H, Sakagami H, Kawase M, Parecha A, Manavar D, Kothari H, Adlakha P, Shah A, Motohashi N,
Ocsovszki I, Molnari J. Tumour-specific cytotoxicity and mdr-reversal activity of dihydropyridines.
Vivo, 2006, 20, 637–644.
[47] Virsodia V, Pissurlenkar R, Manvar D, Dholakia C, Adlakha P, Shah A, Coutinho EC. Synthesis,
screening for antitubercular activity and 3D-QSAR studies of substituted N-phenyl-6-methyl-2-oxo-4-
phenyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-pyrimidine-5-carboxamides. Eur J Med Chem, 2008, 43, 2103–2115.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2007.08.004.
[48] Jiang B, Wang X, Shi F, Tu S-J, Ai T, Ballew A, Li G. Microwave enabled umpulong mechanism based
rapid and efficient four- and six-component domino formations of 2-(2-azaaryl)imidazoles and anti￾1,2-diarylethylbenzamides. J Org Chem, 2009, 74, 9486–9489. DOI: 10.1021/jo902204s.
[49] Cheldavi F, Mohammadi MK. Microwave-assisted synthesis of phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazole
derivatives under solvent-free and one pot conditions. J Med Chem Sci, 2020, 3, 41–47.
DOI: 10.26655/JMCHEMSCI.2020.1.5.
[50] Singh I, Luxami V, Paul K. Synthesis of naphthalimide-phenanthro[9,10-d]imidazole derivatives: In
vitro evaluation, binding interaction with DNA and topoisomerase inhibition. Bioorg Chem, 2020, 96,
103631. DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2020.103631.
[51] Umasankar G, Ulla H, Madhu C, RamanjaneyaReddy G, Shanigaram B, Nanubolu JB, Kotamarthi B,
Karunakar GV, Satyanarayan MN, Jayathirtha Rao V. Imidazole-pyrene hybrid luminescent materials
for organic light-emitting diodes: Synthesis, characterization & electrolumines- cent properties.
J Mol Struct, 2021, 1236, 130306. DOI: 10.1016/j.molstruc.2021.130306.
[52] Harshaa KG, Appalanaidua E, Chereddy NR, Baggi TR, Rao VJ. Pyrene tethered imidazole derivative
for the qualitative and quantitative detection of mercury present in various matrices. Sens Actuators
B, 2018, 256, 528–534. DOI: 10.1016/j.snb.2017.10.120.
[53] Ranu BC, Hajra A. Synthesis of alkyl-substituted pyrroles by three-component coupling of carbonyl
compound, amine and nitro-alkane/alkeneon a solid surface of silica gel/alumina under microwave
irradiation. Tetrahedron, 2001, 57, 4767–4773. DOI: 10.1016/S0040-4020(01)00400-8.
[54] Kibou Z, Cheikh N, Villemin D, Choukchou-Braham N. A rapid synthesis of highly functionalized
2-pyridones and 2-aminopyridines via a microwave-assisted multicomponent reaction. J Mater Env
Sci, 2016, 7, 3061–3067.
[55] Ravinder M, Mahendar B, Mattapally S, Hamsini KV, Reddy T, Rohit C, Srinivas K, Banerjee SK, Rao VJ.
Synthesis and evaluation of novel 2-pyridone derivatives as inhibitors of phosphodiesterase3
(PDE3): A target for heart failure and platelet aggregation. Bioorg Med Chem Lett, 2012, 22,
6010–6015. DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2012.05.019.
396 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha Rao[56] Kadam SN, Ambhore AN, Gaikwad MV, Kamble RD, Hese SV, Hebade MJ, Dawane BS. Microwave
assisted multicomponent reaction: An environmentally benign protocol for the synthesis of
substituted imidazo[2,1‐b]thiazole‐2‐carbohydrazide derivatives under solvent free condition. Eur J
Chem, 2016, 7, 431–435. DOI: 10.5155/eurjchem.7.4.431-435.1485.
[57] Mali SN, Thorat BR, Gupta DR, Pandey A. Mini-review of the importance of hydrazides and their
derivatives – synthesis and biological activity. Eng Proc, 2021, 11, 21. DOI: 10.3390/ASEC2021-11157.
[58] Santra S, Rahman M, Roy A, Majee A, Hajra A. Microwave-assisted three-component ‘‘catalyst and
solvent-free’’ green protocol: A highly efficient and clean one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[b]
pyrans. Org Chem Int, 2014, Article ID: 851924, 8. DOI: 10.1155/2014/851924.
[59] TaghaviFardood S, Ramazani A, Asiabi P, BigdeliFard Y, Ebadzadeh B. Microwave-assisted
multicomponent reaction for the synthesis of 2-amino-4H-chromene derivatives using ilmenite
(FeTiO3) as a magnetic catalyst under solvent-free conditions. Asian J Green Chem, 2017, 1, 34–40.
DOI: 10.22631/ajgc.2017.93142.1006.
[60] Laskar S, Brahmachari G. Access to biologically relevant diverse chromene heterocycles via
multicomponent reactions (MCRs): Recent advances. J Org BiomolChem, 2014, 2, 1–50.
Article ID: 010311.
[61] Gorlitzer K, Dehne A, Engler E. 2-( lH-Tetrazol-5-y1)-4,5 -dihydro-4-oxo-indeno [ 1,2- b] pyran. Arch
Pharm, 1983, 316, 264–270. DOI: 10.1002/ardp.19833160315.
[62] Brunavs M, Dell CP, Gallagher PT, Owton WM, Smith CW. Eur Pat Appl EP, 557075 A1 19930825, 1993.
[63] Torres-Hernández F, Gómez AR, Gámez-Montaño R. Synthesis of epoxyisoindolinones via
microwave- assisted Ugi-4cr/intramolecular-Diels-Alder reaction. Chem Proc, 2021, 3, 83–87.
DOI: 10.3390/ecsoc-24-08425.
[64] Dandia A, Singh R, Khaturia S, Morgantc CMG, Loupy A. Efficient microwave enhanced regioselective
synthesis of a series of benzimidazolyl/triazolyl spiro [indole-thiazolidinones] as potent antifungal
agents and crystal structure of spiro [3H-indole-3,2ʹ-thiazolidine]-3ʹ(1,2,4-triazol-3-yl)-2,4ʹ(1H)-dione.
Bioorg Med Chem, 2006, 14, 2409–2417. DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2005.11.025.
[65] Moghaddam FM, Hosseinzadeh N, Fazli H, Sadredini S, Foroumadi A. Regio- and stereoselective
synthesis of dispiropyrrolidineoxindole derivatives by using classical and microwave conditions, and
molecular docking studies of them as potential cyclin dependent kinases (CDK5) inhibitors. Polycycl
Aromat Compd, 2022, DOI: 10.1080/10406638.2022.2127801.
[66] Bhuyan D, Sarmah MM, Dommaraju Y, Prajapati D. Microwave-promoted efficient synthesis of
spiroindenotetrahydropyridine derivatives via a catalyst- and solvent-free pseudo one-pot five￾component tandem Knoevenagel/aza-Diels–Alder reaction. Tetrahedron Lett, 2014, 55, 5133–5136.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tetlet.2014.07.086.
[67] Bhuyan D, Sarma R, Prajapati D. Microwave-assisted efficient synthesis of spiroquinoline derivatives
via a catalyst- and solvent-free aza-Diels–Alder reaction. Tetrahedron Lett, 2012, 53, 6460–6463.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tetlet.2012.09.081.
[68] Yadav LDS, Singh A. Multi-component synthesis of pyran-annulated thiazoles under solvent-free
microwave irradiation. Synthesis, 2003, 2395–2399. DOI: 10.1055/s-2003-42403.
[69] Abdallah AEM, Mohareb RM, Ahmed EA. Novel Pyrano[2,3‐d]thiazole and Thiazolo[4,5‐b]pyridine
Derivatives: One‐pot Three‐component Synthesis and Biological Evaluation as Anticancer Agents,
c‐Met, and Pim‐1 Kinase Inhibitors. J Heterocycl Chem, 2019, 56, 3017–3029. DOI: 10.1002/jhet.3697.
[70] Yadav LDS, Yadav S, Rai VK. Green protocol for annulation of the s-triazine ring on thiazoles using a
three-component coupling strategy. Green Chem, 2006, 8, 455–458. DOI: 10.1039/b602123a.
[71] Srinivas K, Srinivas U, Bhanuprakash K, Harakishore K, Murthy USN, Jayathirtha RV. Synthesis and
antibacterial activity of various substituted s-triazines. Eur J Med Chem, 2006, 41, 1240–1246.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejmech.2006.05.013.
10 Microwave-assisted solvent-free multicomponent synthesis of bioactive heterocycles 397[72] Srinivas K, Srinivas U, Jayathirtha Rao V, Bhanuprakash K, Harakishore K, Murty USN. Synthesis and
antibacterial activity of 2,4,6-tri substituted s-triazines. Bioorganic Med Chem Lett, 2005, 15,
1121–1123. DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2004.12.020.
[73] Jagadeesh Kumar G, SriramkumarBomma HVS, Srihari E, Shrivastava S, Naidu VGM, Srinivas K,
Jayathirtha Rao V. Synthesis and anticancer activity of some new s-triazine derivatives. Med Chem
Res, 2013, 22, 5973–5981. DOI: 10.1007/s00044-013-0584-6.
[74] Guntuku L, Gangasani JK, Thummuri D, Borkar RM, Manavathi B, Ragampeta S, Rao Vaidya J, Sistla
R, Vegi NGM. IITZ-01, a novel potent lysosomotropic autophagy inhibitor, has single-agent
antitumor efficacy in triple-negative breast cancer in vitro and in vivo. Oncogene, 2019, 38, 581–595.
DOI: 10.1038/s41388-018-0446-2.
[75] Jagadeesh Kumar G, Naveen Kumar S, Thummuri D, Bindu Sreeadari L, Naidu VGM, Srinivas K,
Jayathirtha Rao V. Synthesis and characterization of new s-triazine bearing benzimidazole and
benzothiazole derivatives as anticancer agents. Med Chem Res, 2015, 24, 3991–4001. DOI: 10.1007/
s00044-015-1430-9.
[76] Das P, Mukhopadhyay C. Microwave irradiation for catalyst and solvent free Knoevenagel/Michael
addition/cyclization/aromatization cascades. Curr Microw Chem, 2014, 1, 98–109.
[77] Devi I, Bhuyan PJ. Sodium bromide-catalyzed one-pot synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo [b]pyrans via a
three-component cyclocondensation under microwave irradiation and solvent free conditions.
Tetrahedron Lett, 2004, 45, 8625–8627. DOI: 10.1016/j.tetlet.2004.09.158.
[78] Reddy TN, Ravinder M, Bikshapathi R, Sujitha P, Kumar CG, Jayathirtha Rao V. Design, synthesis, and
biological evaluation of 4-H pyran derivatives as antimicrobial and anticancer agents. Med Chem
Res, 2017, 26, 2832–2844. DOI: 10.1007/s00044-017-1982-y.
[79] Parmar NJ, Barad HA, Pansuriya BR, Talpada NP. A highly efficient, rapid one-pot synthesis of some
new heteroaryl pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazoles in ionic liquid under microwave-irradiation. RSC Adv, 2013, 3,
8064–8074. DOI: 10.1039/c3ra00068k.
[80] Zhang J-M, Yang W, Song L-P, Cai X, Zhu S-Z. Microwave promoted solvent-free one-pot three￾component reaction to 2-pentafluorophenylquinoline derivatives. Tetrahedron Lett, 2004, 45,
5771–5773. DOI: 10.1016/j.tetlet.2004.04.179.
[81] Bandyopadhyay D, Maldonado S, Banik BK. A Microwave-Assisted Bismuth Nitrate-Catalyzed Unique
Route Toward 1,4-Dihydropyridines. Molecules, 2012, 17, 2643–2662. DOI: 10.3390/
molecules17032643.
[82] Bijani S, Iqbal D, Mirza S, Jain V, Jahan S, Alsaweed M, Madkhali Y, SA A, Banawas S, Algarni A,
Alrumaihi F, RM R, Alturaiki W, Shah A. Green Synthesis and Anticancer Potential of 1,4-
Dihydropyridines-Based Triazole Derivatives: In Silico and In Vitro Study. Life, 2022, 12, 519–538.
DOI: 10.3390/life12040519.
[83] Malhi DS, Sohal HS, Singh K, Almarhoon ZM, Bacha AB, Al-Zaben MI. Highly Efficient
Electrocarboxylation Method to Synthesize Novel Acid Derivatives of 1,4-Dihydropyridines and to
Study Their Antimicrobial Activity. ACS Omega, 2022, 7, 16055–16062. DOI: 10.1021/
acsomega.2c01316.
[84] Praveenkumar E, Gurrapu N, KumarKolluri P, Yerragunta V, Kunduru BR, Njp S. Synthesis, anti￾diabetic evaluation and molecular docking studies of 4-(1-aryl-1H-1, 2, 3-triazol-4-yl)-1,4-
dihydropyridine derivatives as novel 11-β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-1 (11β-HSD1) inhibitors.
Bioorganic Chem, 2019, 90, 103056. DOI: 10.1016/j.bioorg.2019.103056.
[85] Klusa V, Klimavičiusa L, Duburs G, Kalda A, Zharkovsky A. Neurotrophic activity of non-calcium
antagonistic dihydropyridines. Fundament Clin Pharmacol, 2001, 15, 34.
[86] Parthiban A, Makam P. 1,4-Dihydropyridine: Synthetic advances, medicinal and insecticidal
properties. RSC Adv, 2022, 12, 29253–29290. DOI: 10.1039/d2ra04589c.
[87] Samzadeh-Kermani A. Microwave-assisted one-pot synthesis of 2-nitroalkylidene-1,3-oxathiolane
derivatives. J Sulphur Chem, 2016, 37, 105–113. DOI: 10.1080/17415993.2015.1094806.
398 CH. N. S. Sai Pavan Kumar, Vaidya Jayathirtha RaoDivyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel✶
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted
multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles
11.1 Introduction
The development of structurally diverse small bioactive heterocycles using environ￾mentally sustainable and energy-efficient strategies has become a growing interest in
the field of synthetic organic chemistry [1–5] and drug discovery research [6–9]. Sig￾nificantly, multicomponent reactions (MCRs), obeying the principles of green chemis￾try [10–13], offer exceptional synthetic efficiency, high atom economy, and multiple
bond formation in one-pot operation, without changing the reaction parameters and
without isolating the intermediates [14–19]. Ionic liquids (ILs) have received a lot of
attention in the past as eco-friendly solvents and catalyst systems [20–25]. However,
ILs, based on imidazolium cations and fluorinated anions, do have drawbacks, includ￾ing poor eco-compatibility, toxicity, nonbiodegradability, and lower cost-effectiveness
[26]. Significantly, green and sustainable advances have greatly benefited from the
use of deep eutectic mixtures (DEMs) in organic synthesis [27–30]. Moreover, DEMs
are advantageous due to their low cost, reduced toxicity, and good biodegradability
[31–35]. DEMs function by forming hydrogen bonds between the salt and the hydro￾gen bond donor [36–42]. DEMs are classified into the following four types (Figure 11.1)
[43]. Some examples of the DEMs are shown in Table 11.1.
Type 1: DEMs derived from quaternary ammonium salt derivatives (RN+
4X–
) and
metal chloride (MCln) [44].
Type 2: DEMs derived from quaternary ammonium salt derivatives (RN+
4X–
) and
metal chloride hydrate (MCln·mH2O) [45].
Type 3: DEMs derived from quaternary ammonium salt derivatives (RN+
4X–
) and
hydrogen bond donors (HBDs) [46].
Type 4: DEMs prepared using metal chloride hydrates (MCln·mH2O) and hydrogen
bond donors (HBDs) [47].
✶
Corresponding author: Hitendra M. Patel, Department of Chemistry, Sardar Patel University, Vallabh
Vidyanagar 388120, Gujarat, India, e-mail: hm_patel@spuvvn.edu
Divyang M. Patel, Department of Chemistry, Sankalchand Patel University, Visnagar 384315, Gujarat,
India
Acknowledgment: Dr. Divyang M. Patel is grateful to the Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science,
Sankalchand Patel University, Visnagar, Gujarat, India, for the support in research.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-011DEM has been the subject of extensive study in recent years, and interest in it is contin￾ually expanding [48]. In a variety of sectors, including synthetic organic chemistry, bio￾catalysis, polymerization processes, biomass transformation, and separation techniques,
they have found use as solvent/catalysts [31]. Particularly, DEMs outperform conven￾tional catalysts and solvents in multicomponent processes, in terms of durability and
reusability, without a noticeable deteriorating catalytic activity. Their applications in
multicomponent processes, nonetheless, have not been thoroughly and critically exam￾ined. In this chapter, we have attempted to provide an overview of the use of DEMs as a
solvent and/or catalyst in several MCRs involving Knoevenagel condensation, isocyanide
attack on carbonyl compounds, addition of nucleophilic to enamine or imine deriva￾tives, and associated processes.
Figure 11.1: Classification of deep eutectic mixtures (DEMs).
Table 11.1: Examples of DEMs.
DEM types Constituents of DEM DEM examples
Type I Quaternary ammonium salt/metal chloride ChCl:CoCl
Type II Quaternary ammonium salt/metal chloride hydrate ChCl:CoCl·HO
Type III Quaternary ammonium salt/hydrogen bond donor ChCl:urea
Type IV Metal chloride hydrate/hydrogen bond donor ZnCl:urea
400 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel11.2 Deep eutectic mixtures (DEMs) as reaction
media-cum-catalyst in multicomponent
synthesis of heterocycles
11.2.1 Synthesis of spirooxindole and pyrano [2,3-c] pyrazole
derivatives
DEMs, which were first discovered by Abbott’s team in 2003, have received a great
deal of attention among researchers across the world [49]. This is evident from the
steady stream of new scientific publications that are being published in the literature
[50–81]. DEMs exhibit dual or triple properties, such as solvent, catalyst, and/or reac￾tant in organic synthesis. In 2014, Azizi et al. [50] used a ChCl:urea-based eutectic com￾bination as the solvent and catalyst in a multicomponent synthesis to synthesize the
spirooxindole derivatives (6–8) from isatin (1) and cyanoacetic esters or malononitrile
2(a–c), dimedone (3)/1-naphthol (4)/4-hydroxycoumarin (5). According to experiment
results, a range of spiro oxindole derivatives were synthesized in the reaction, with
different 1,3-diketones, namely methyl acetoacetate and dimedone, in excellent to
moderate yields (Figure 11.2). All reactions proceed smoothly, producing the necessary
products with a decent to moderate yield. This technique stands out for its straightfor￾Figure 11.2: Synthesis of spirooxindoles (6–8).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 401ward purification procedure, friendly reaction procedure, good yield, short reaction
span, simplicity of operation, and no use of column chromatography.
Significantly, the authors proposed a conceivable mechanism, showing the role of
ChCl:urea DEM, for the successful reaction transformation. In this case, the weak
acidic property of DEM promotes the Knoevenagel condensation reaction between
malononitrile and isatin, which leads to the formation of an adduct. Next, nucleo￾philic attack by an enolizable-1,3-dicarbonyl compound gives an adduct, and the sub￾sequent cyclization gives the spiro compound (6) (Figure 11.3).
Figure 11.3: Proposed mechanism for ChCl:urea DEM promoted synthesis of the spiro oxindole derivatives (6).
402 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. PatelRangappa and coworkers [51] used room temperature DEMs to synthesize pyrano[2,3-
c]pyrazole (12)(75–95% yield) and (13) (62–70% yield) by MCR of aldehydes (10), hydra￾zines (11), malononitrile (2a), and 1,3-diones 9(a, b) in 10–30 min. Initially, they sim￾ply heated choline chloride and urea (in 1:2 molar ratio) to create this unique eutectic
combination. It has been observed that this approach worked well with a variety of
aryl aldehydes, including those with electron-donating and -withdrawing groups, as
well as heterocyclic aldehydes, which afforded the required products, 12 or 13, in ac￾ceptable yield (Figure 11.4).
Afterwards, Rajawat et al. [52] developed a range of spirooxindoles (18–21) by treating
indoline-1,3-dione (17), hydrazine hydrate (14), phthalic anhydride (15), and cyclo￾diones (3, 4 and 16, 17) with a DEM of choline chloride: urea (1:2). They utilized cyclic
diketones or diamides and various indoline-2,3-dione derivatives to establish the reac￾tion’s scope and found that these worked well in this process to provide a better yield
(83–93%) in a short period. By evaporating water, DEM was easily extracted from the
filtrate and successfully employed four times (Figure 11.5).
Figure 11.4: Synthesis of 4H-pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazole (12) and (13).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 40311.2.2 Synthesis of chromene, pyrrole, and α-acyloxyamide
derivatives
Next, Azizi et al. [53] reported a reaction of malononitrile (2a), salicylaldehyde 22(a–c),
thiol (23), or amine (25), as well as the use of different nucleophiles (24) to synthesize
chromene derivatives (26–28) from the choline chloride: urea eutectic combination
(Figure 11.6). Using column chromatography or recrystallization, the reaction’s crude
products were purified after completion. The authors used 3-methoxysalicyldehyde 22(a)
and 5-bromosalicyldehyde 22(b) to achieve an excellent yield of 65–98%. In addition to
various aldehydes, several nucleophiles (such as amines, thiols, and cyanides) were
tested to check the reaction’s feasibility. The outcomes demonstrated that cyanide and
Figure 11.5: Synthesis of spiro oxindoles (18–21).
404 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patelamine-based nucleophiles produced lower yields than thiol nucleophiles. Thiols show
quick transformation than other nucleophiles.
Rokade et al. [54] synthesized annulated pyrrole derivative (31) (84–94% yield)
using ChCl/urea as DEMs by MCRs involving different 1,3-dicarbonyl (9), aromatic
amines (30), and sugars (29). To perform the reaction, all reactants were added in
ChCl/urea DEM (10 mL). Then, the reaction mixture was agitated for 30–45 min at
room temperature. After the reaction was complete, the crude product was extracted
using EtOAc. This product was then purified using column chromatography with
n-hexane/EtOAc (3:7) mobile phase. This product was acylated by continuous agitation
in 5 mL of dichloromethane for half-an-hour at ambient temperature. The authors ex￾amined the substrate scope with a number of amines, dicarbonyls, and sugars such as
aldohexose, and achieved good results (Figure 11.7).
Figure 11.6: Synthesis of chromenes (26–28).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 405Using MCR of amines with acyclic 1,3-diones (9), aryl or alkyl aldehyde (10), and nitro￾methane (32), Hu et al. [55] produced functionalized pyrroles (34) (52–91% yield)
using ChCl/malonic acid DEM. No matter what substituents were on them, a range of
aromatic and aliphatic amines responded favorably to the procedure. Alkyl aldehydes
produced a variety of compounds that were challenging to identify, but aromatic alde￾hydes produced good results. Aliphatic aldehydes cannot be employed using this ap￾proach, for this reason. ChCl/malonic acid-based DEMs function both as reaction
media and as catalysts (Figure 11.8).
Using reusable urea:choline chloride-based DES, Shaabani and colleagues [56] pro￾duced α-acyloxyamides (37) (65–94% yield) in a short span, according to the type of
substituents present in substrates. In contrast to aliphatic aldehydes, aromatic alde￾hydes exhibit improved yield. The resulting product was obtained in a pure form by
recrystallization from ethanol or ethyl acetate. Additionally, DEM demonstrated im￾proved potential activity at milder circumstances, avoiding various challenges related
to handling, safety, laborious work-up, and catalyst recovery (Figure 11.9).
Figure 11.7: Synthesis of sugar-fused pyrroles (31).
Figure 11.8: Synthesis of substituted pyrroles (34).
406 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel11.2.3 Synthesis of quinoline, imidazo pyridine, pyrazole,
and Betti base derivatives
Shahabi and Tavakol [57] reported on the synthesis of trisubstituted quinoline deriva￾tives (39) (54–96% yield), utilizing SnCl2/ChCl (DEM). Here, aromatic amines (30) were
combined with aromatic aldehydes (10) and enolizable aldehydes (38) at 60 °C for
2–4 h to get the desired compounds. Following that, the products underwent column
chromatography or recrystallization in ethanol for additional purification. The au￾thors have investigated a variety of aromatic aldehydes, aromatic amines, and enoliz￾able aldehydes to show how flexible reactions can be (Figure 11.10).
Azizi and Dezfooli [58] described urea/chlorofluorocarbon DEM as a catalyst and sol￾vent to produce imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine derivatives (42) from a one-pot reaction of cy￾clohexyl isocyanide (40), aldehydes (10), and 2-amino pyridine (41) at 80 °C for 2–6 h
(Figure 11.11). After completion of the reaction, the resulting product obtained was
pure in form by recrystallization from ethanol or ethyl acetate. Imidazo pyridines
with hydroxyl, methoxy, methyl, and chloro functionality at the aromatic ring were
Figure 11.10: Synthesis of trisubstituted quinolines (39).
Figure 11.9: Synthesis of α-acyloxyamides (37).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 407effectively accessible. Furthermore, when 4-(dimethylamino)-benzaldehyde is used,
no successful reaction transformations have been observed.
Aryan et al. [59] reported a reaction of aldehydes (10), hydrazine (11), and malononi￾trile 2(a) to produce pyrazole-4-carbonitrile (43) (83–92% yield) at room temperature.
Researchers demonstrated that glucose-urea-based DEM can be reused up to four
times, with only a little influence on the reaction’s proficiency. Apart from the recycla￾bility of the DEM, this approach has other advantages, such as a shorter processing
time and the absence of a metal-based catalyst (Figure 11.12).
Azizi and Edrisi [60] further demonstrated the use of a ChCl:urea-based eutectic com￾bination for the synthesis of 1-aminoalkyl-2-naphthol (Betti base) (45) (72–96% yield)
using three-component reaction of secondary amines (25) with aldehydes (10) and 2-
naphthol (44) (Figure 11.13). The authors first prepared the ChCl:urea-based DEM by
simply heating a mixture of choline chloride and urea (1:2) until a clear liquid was
obtained. Then, they dissolved 1 mmol of the reactants in 1 mL of it and stirred it for
1–3 h at 60 °C. After the experiment was completed, the crude mass was filtered and a
pure form was obtained by recrystallization from ethanol. The DEM can be recycled
and reused, without substantial change in its catalytic activity.
Figure 11.12: Synthesis of pyrazole-4-carbonitrile (43).
Figure 11.11: Synthesis of [1,2-a] pyridine derivatives (42).
408 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel11.2.4 Synthesis of chromyl phosphate, dihydropyrimidinone,
pyrazolopyridine, and pyrazolophthalazine
Krishnammagari et al. [61] synthesized 4H-chrome-4-yl phosphates (47) by combining
malononitrile 2(a) with dialkylphosphites (46) and salicylaldehyde derivatives (22) in
ChCl:urea DEM (1:2) (Figure 11.14). The authors also tested non-choline chloride-based
DEMs during reaction condition optimization, though low activity was observed with
non-choline chloride-based DEMs. To test the scope of the reaction, the authors used
different functionalized salicylaldehydes. This approach is industrially helpful for
generating essential phosphorus-containing compounds because of its simple set up,
moderate reaction procedure, and short reaction span.
Momeni and colleagues [62] synthesized dihydropyrimidinone moieties (49 or 50)
(70–95% and 89–92% yield) in a ChCl:chloroacetic acid eutectic mixture by reacting
urea (48) with ethyl acetoacetate (9) and aldehydes (10) (Figure 11.15). Aldehydes,
with electron-withdrawing functionalities, finished the reaction faster than those
with electron-donating functionalities. The authors found that the recycled catalyst
Figure 11.14: Synthesis of 2-amino-4H-chrome-4-yl phosphates (47).
Figure 11.13: Synthesis of 1-aminoalkyl-2-naphthols (Betti bases) (45).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 409could be used up to four subsequent runs, with a significant loss in activity after the
third time. The authors also reported the synthesis of dimedone-fused dihydropyrimi￾dinones (50) under identical reaction parameters.
Vanegas et al. [63] described a multicomponent technique for the synthesis of pyrazo￾lopyridine analogues (52) in a choline chloride and urea-based DEM by the reaction
of ethyl acetoacetate (9), ammonium acetate (51), aldehyde (10), and hydrazine (11).
The reaction mixture was refluxed at 110 °C for 30 min to produce the desired product
in good to excellent (65–96%) yield. This method shows excellent substrate compatibil￾ity with a wide range of aromatic and aliphatic aldehydes (Figure 11.16).
Patil et al. [64] efficiently prepared pyrazolo[1,2-b]phthalazinetriones (54) and (55) by
reacting different aldehydes (10), 4-hydroxylcoumarin (4) dimedone (3) and dihydro
phthalazinedione (53) at refluxing temperature for 30 min using an equimolar pro￾line: oxalic acid dihydrate-based DEM (Figure 11.17). After the reaction was finished,
5 mL of water was added, and the product was filtered to ensure it was pure enough for
characterization. This protocol offers good reaction yields, with aldehydes (10) having
substitutions like hydroxyl, fluoro, chloro, bromo, iodo, methoxy, nitro, and methyl. Fur￾Figure 11.16: Synthesis of pyrazolopyridine analogues (52).
Figure 11.15: Synthesis of dihydropyrimidinone derivatives (49 and 50).
410 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patelthermore, the DEM was recycled up to five runs with no substantial deterioration in cat￾alytic activity.
11.2.5 Synthesis of spirooxindolopyran, spirooxindoloxanthenes,
aminobenzochromene, decahydroacridine,
chromenopyridine, tetrahydrobenzopyran,
and hexahydroxenthene -dione derivatives
Nishtala and Basavoju [65] developed an MCR-based synthesis of xanthenes and spirooxin￾dolopyrans (56–59) in a DEM of ZnCl2:urea (1:3.5) (Figure 11.18). The DEM used in this case
could be recycled and utilized multiple times without deterioration in its activity. Using a
one-flask reaction, the spirooxindolopyrans (56–59) synthesized in 28–50 min at 80 °C in
acceptable yields (82–95%) from isatin (1), barbituric acid (16), 4-hydroxycoumarin (4),
and 1,3-indandione (17). Spirooxindolo xanthenes (59) were synthesized in acceptable
yield using isatin and dimedone in 30–37 min. Fekri et al. [66] described a single-step re￾action of α- or β-naphthol (5 or 44), aldehydes (10), and malononitrile (2a) in choline
chloride/oxalic acid (1:1) DEM at 80 °C in 15 to 25 min to produce chromene derivatives
(60, 61) (Figure 11.19). Here, electron-releasing and -donating functionality-bearing alde￾hydes, like m-hydroxybenzaldehyde, o-methoxybenzaldehyde, p-methoxybenzaldehyde,
p-nitrobenzaldehyde, o-chlorobenzaldehyde, and p-chlorobenzaldehyde were employed
Figure 11.17: Synthesis of pyrazolo[1,2-b]phthalazinetriones (54 and 55).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 411to explore the substrate scope of the reaction and show good reaction transformations
(91–97% yield).
Bhosle et al. [67] developed an efficient approach for synthesizing sulfonyl decahy￾droacridine (63) in 30 min, utilizing a one-flask reaction of dimedone (3), aryl amine
(30), and aryl aldehyde (62) in a ChCl:ZnCl2 (1:2) DEM. Here, DEM serves both as a cata￾lyst and a solvent for the reaction. Here, the title reaction could not show successful
reaction transformation at ambient temperature condition. Nevertheless, when the
temperature increased, the product yield began to increase, but no significant change
in product yield was seen above 80 °C (Figure 11.20).
Using a choline chloride:oxalic acid (1:2) DEM as catalyst cum solvent, Sayahi et al. [68]
demonstrated an effective protocol for the synthesis of chromeno[4,3-b]pyridine-2,5(1H)-
Figure 11.18: Synthesis of spirooxindolopyrans and spirooxindoloxanthenes (56–59).
412 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Pateldione (65) (Figure 11.21), tetrahydrobenzopyran derivatives (66) (Figure 11.22), and hexahy￾dro-1H-xanthene-1,8(2H)-dione (67) (Figure 11.23). The authors used aldehyde (10), dime￾done (3), 4-hydroxycoumarin (4), and ammonia (64) to synthesize product 65, while
aldehyde, malononitrile, and dimedone were used to produce product 66. Moreover, 67
was synthesized by reacting aldehyde and dimedone in a 1:2 molar ratio.
Figure 11.20: Synthesis of sulfonyl decahydroacridine (63).
Figure 11.19: Synthesis of chromenes (60–61).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 41311.2.6 Synthesis of pyranopyrimidinone, dihydropyridopyrimidine,
and alkylidienethiazolone derivatives
Biglari et al. [69] developed a simple one-pot process for producing tetrahydro benzo￾pyran derivatives (66) and pyrano[2,3-d]pyrimidinone derivatives (68) (Figure 11.24).
Here, the authors prepared a DEM using choline chloride, urea, and thiourea in 1:1:1
molar proportion for the reaction of propane dinitrile with enolizable C–H acids and
aldehydes. This method tolerates a wide range of substituents present on aromatic
Figure 11.23: Synthesis of hexahydro-1H-xanthene-1,8(2H)-dione (67).
Figure 11.22: Synthesis of tetrahydrobenzopyran derivatives (66).
Figure 11.21: Synthesis of chromeno[4,3-b]pyridine-2,5(1H)-dione (65).
414 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patelaldehydes, including nitro, chloro, hydroxy, fluoro, and methoxy. Significantly, the
DEM was recycled up to four runs without any substantial loss in its catalytic activity.
A novel microwave-assisted method for synthesizing 2,3-dihydropyrido[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4
(1H)-one scaffolds (70) from the reaction of amines (30), aldehydes (10), and pyrido￾isatoic anhydride (69) with urea:CuCl2 DEM at 100 °C temperature was described by Riadi
[70] (Figure 11.25). In the absence of DEM, a very low yield of product (70) was produced.
Moreover, this process was performed using just urea, and a similar yield, albeit a lower
yield of product, was achieved. These findings demonstrated that both urea and CuCl2 are
required for the formation of product (70). Following the synthesis of several 2,3-
dihydropyrido[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4(1H)-one derivatives (70), their pharmacological activity
was tested against several bacterial strains, and the findings were promising.
Figure 11.25: Synthesis of 2,3-dihydropyrido[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4(1H)-one (70).
Figure 11.24: Synthesis of tetrahydro benzopyran (66) and pyrano[2,3-d]pyrimidinone (68).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 415Azizi et al. [71] reported a three-component reaction of rhodanine (71), aldehyde (10),
and amine (51) using a choline chloride:glycerin-based DEM for the synthesis of 5-
alkylidiene thiazolone(72) at 70 °C with constant stirring (Figure 11.26). After the comple￾tion of the reaction, water was added to the crude product, which was purified using
EtOAc or ethanol to get 5-alkylidiene thiazolone derivatives (72) (53–97% yield). The au￾thors investigated a wide range of substrates by employing various amines and carboxal￾dehyde derivatives with electron-releasing and -withdrawing substituents. The authors
achieved good reaction yields (56–79%) of the desired product (72) in this experiment.
11.3 Deep eutectic mixtures (DEMs) as catalyst with
conventional reaction media in multicomponent
synthesis of heterocycles
11.3.1 Synthesis of spirodioxoloquinolinepyrimidine,
spiropyrazoloquinolinepyrimidine,
and pyrazolopyrimidoquinoline derivatives
Sustainable catalyst design and manufacture are gaining popularity among academic and
industry specialists from several fields. This pursuit is especially beneficial for chemists,
since catalysis is fundamental in solving green chemistry concerns. DEMs have been
used as potential catalysts for numerous transformations in chemistry and related dis￾ciplines. This section displays an overview of the most impressive achievements of
DEMs as unique sustainable catalysts or catalytic medium in organic reactions.
Figure 11.26: Synthesis of 5-alkylidiene thiazolones (72).
416 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. PatelPatel and Patel [72] used a trimethyl glycine betaine-oxalic acid DEM to develop a
diastereoselective and sustainable method for spiro [[1,3] dioxolo[4,5-g] quinoline-7,5′-
pyrimidine] scaffold (74). A pseudo-four-substrate reaction comprising 3,4-methylene￾dioxyaniline (73), aryl/heteroaryl aldehyde (10), and N,N-dimethyl barbituric acid (16) is
used in this method (Figure 11.27). With a molar ratio (1:2:1) of 3,4-methylenedioxyaniline
(73), aldehyde (10), and dimethyl barbituric acid (16), the reaction proceeds smoothly.
The TMGB-oxalic acid DEM outperforms all other DEMs tested, in terms of chemical
transformations. Most spirocyclic derivatives with high diastereoselectivities (dr > 50:1)
were produced here.
Significantly, the authors proposed a conceivable mechanism showing the role of TMGB:
oxalic acid in the promotion of the one-pot reaction of 3,4-methylene-dioxyaniline (73),
aryl/heteroaryl aldehyde (10), and N,N-dimethyl barbituric acid (16). Initially, acidic DEM
supports the formation of the Knoevenagel adduct through the reaction of aldehyde and
dimethyl barbituric acid. This undergoes a reaction with aniline and generates an active
intermediate with a free amino group. Next, this active free amino group reacts with
the second equivalent of aldehyde and generates a Schiff’s base. In the presence of DEM,
this undergoes a subsequent intramolecular cyclization reaction and generates spiro de￾rivatives (74) (Figure 11.28).
Patel et al. [73] then tested the effects of substrates, specifically barbituric acid 16(a)
and N,N-dimethyl barbituric acid 16(b), with 5-aminoindazole (75) and aldehyde (10) in
ethanol, at reflux temperature, using TMGB:oxalic acid DEM. Using N,N-dimethyl barbi￾turic acid in the title multicomponent process results in diastereoselective (dr > 20:1)
Figure 11.27: Synthesis of spiro [[1,3]dioxolo[4,5g]quinoline-7,5′-pyrimidine] (74).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 417spiro[pyrazolo[4,3f]quinoline-8,5ʹ-pyrimidine] scaffolds (75), whereas barbituric acid re￾sults in pyrazolo[4,3f]pyrimido[4,5-b]quinolines (76). This method tolerates electron￾donating and electron-withdrawing functions well and yields spiro derivatives up to 91%
(Figure 11.29).
11.3.2 Synthesis of tetrahydrodipyrazolo pyridine, pyrrole, β￾amino ketones, 2-aminochromene, and pyranocoumarin
derivatives
Tamaddon and Khorram [74] employed a multicomponent protocol for the develop￾ment of tetrahydrodipyrazolo pyridine(52) (78–95% yield) and pyrrole derivatives
(77) using CoCl2:ChCl DEM in water (Figure 11.30). This DEM was developed by heating
the ChCl (20 mmol) and CoCl2·6H2O (5 mmol) mixtures for 60 min at 100 °C. To synthe￾size the product (52), the authors used a DEM-promoted reaction of aldehyde, ethyl
acetoacetate, ammonium acetate, and hydrazine in a (1:2:1:2) ratio, while product (34)
Figure 11.28: Proposed mechanism for TMGB:oxalic acid DEM-promoted synthesis of spiro
[[1,3]dioxolo[4,5g]quinoline-7,5′-pyrimidine] (74).
418 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patelis synthesized using the reactions of aldehyde, ethyl acetoacetate, nitromethane, and
aromatic amine derivatives in (2:2:1:2) molar proportion (Figure 11.31).
Keshavarzipour and Tavakol [75] used the Mannich reaction of aldehydes (10), eno￾lizable ketones (77), and aromatic bases (30) in water at room temperature to produce
ChCl:ZnCl2 DEM-assisted β-amino ketones (78) (52–98% yield) (Figure 11.32). It was ob￾served that aldehydes, with an electron-donating group, offered a larger yield compared
to the others, although ketones had a minimal effect on the reaction. Nevertheless,
amines containing electron-withdrawing substituents lowered the product yield. Further￾Figure 11.30: Synthesis of tetrahydrodipyrazolo pyridines (52).
Figure 11.29: Synthesis of spiro[pyrazolo[4,3f]quinoline-8,5ʹ-pyrimidine] (75) and
pyrazolo-[4,3f]pyrimido[4,5-b]quinolines (76).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 419more, the use of aliphatic aldehyde derivatives shows parallel side reactions, indicating
that the suggested technique is ineffective in the case of aliphatic aldehyde. Afterward, as
the reaction completes, the DEM was easily recovered and reused four times, with no
discernible change in catalytic activity.
Chaskar [76] developed a one-pot reaction of aryl aldehyde (10), malononitrile (2a),
and dimedone (3) in aqueous media, involving ChCl:urea DEM, to synthesize 2-
amino-4H-chromenes(66). The author significantly explored pyranocoumarin (79)
using 4-hydroxycoumarin (4) under identical reaction parameters. The author em￾ployed different CH acids and aryl aldehydes for the generalization of the reaction
and found that procedure works efficiently with various CH acids, like ethyl cyanoa￾cetate (2c), malononitrile (2a), and aryl aldehydes (10), including benzaldehyde,
p-chlorobenzaldehyde, p-bromobenzaldehyde, p-methoxybenzaldehyde, p-methyl￾benzaldehyde, and o,p-dihydroxybenzaldehyde to form the desired products, 66 and
79, in excellent yields (81–96%) and a shorter reaction time (Figure 11.33).
Figure 11.32: Synthesis of β-amino ketones (78).
Figure 11.31: Synthesis of tetrasubstituted pyrrole (34).
420 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel11.4 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-compatible
metallic catalysts in multicomponent synthesis
of heterocycles
11.4.1 Synthesis of 3-aminobenzofuran, β-aminoketones,
and imidazole derivatives
Several organic reactions have profited from the adaptability of DEMs, which provide
an excellent reaction medium, catalyst, or co-catalyst for a wide range of chemical
transformations. A summary of various multicomponent processes in organic synthesis
that involve DEMs and compatible metallic catalysts in the synthesis of heterocycles has
been provided. Abtahi and Hossein [77] reported a MCR of aryl alkyne (80), amine (81),
and salicylaldehyde (22), promoted by ChCl:ethylene glycol (1:2) DEM and copper iodide
(a compatible metallic catalyst), for the synthesis of 3-aminobenzofurans (82) (70–91%
yield). After the completion of the reaction, 10 mL of water and 10 mL of ethyl acetate
were added. The organic layer was separated and evaporated. A pure product was ob￾tained by the chromatography technique. The authors observed the temperature depen￾dence of the product from the reaction screening experiments. Significantly, the desired
products were formed at 80 °C temperature using copper iodide and ChCl:ethylene gly￾col (1:2) DEM (Figure 11.34). Azizi and coworkers [78] developed a SBA-15-supported
HMPCl:ZnCl2 catalyst using N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone hydrochloride (HMPCl) and ZnCl2
Figure 11.33: Synthesis of 2-amino-4H-chromenes (66) and pyranocoumarins (79).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 421(Figure 11.36). The authors investigated the catalytic efficiency of this catalyst by synthe￾sizing β-amino ketones (78) in a one-pot, three-component reaction of aldehydes (10),
ketones (77), and amines (30). Significantly, under optimum reaction parameters, this
protocol offers excellent reaction conversion (68–95% yield) under mild reaction condi￾tions. Here, successful reaction transformation was achieved using functionalized aro￾matic aldehydes; however, no response has been observed with aliphatic aldehydes. In
catalyst recycling experiments, the catalyst can be reused up to four subsequent reac￾tions, with a small deterioration in its catalytic efficiency.
In a plausible mechanism, the formation of an iminium ion from the chemical reac￾tion of salicylaldehyde and secondary amine, with the removal of water molecules, is
the feasible method for the synthesis of functionalized benzo furans employing CuI
along with DES. The organometallic precursor (consisting of a C–Cu bond) is formed
by stimulating the C–H bond, which results from the reaction of acetylene with CuI.
Following that, Cu-acetylide strikes the iminium ion to form an amine as a second in￾termediate. An oxygen atom then targets sp-carbon as a nucleophile and generates a
5-membered ring via an intermolecular interaction. Finally, it is believed that isomeri￾zation would result in the final product (82) (Figure 11.35).
Aziizi et al. [79] developed ChCl:urea DEM-stabilized iron oxide nanoparticles for the
one-pot synthesis of tetrasubstituted imidazole derivative (80) using 1,2-diphenylethane￾1,2-dione (79), ammonium acetate (51), aldehyde (10), and amines (30). The reaction pro￾ceeds smoothly at refluxing temperature (60 °C) using these reactants to form desired im￾idazole derivatives (80) in acceptable yields (60–90%) (Figure 11.37).
11.4.2 Synthesis of thieno indoles, aryl ether, and aryl amine
derivatives
Nguyen and Tran [80] investigated a one-pot multicomponent protocol for the synthe￾sis of thieno[2,3-b]indole derivatives (83) in magnetic nanoparticles, supported by
ChCl:urea DEM media, using acetophenone (77), sulphur (82), and indole (81). By
varying acetophenone and indole derivatives, the authors created functionalized
Figure 11.34: Synthesis of 3-aminobenzofurans (82).
422 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patelthieno[2,3-b]indole derivatives (83) (Figure 11.38). Significantly, in catalyst recycling
experiments, nanoparticle-supported ChCl:DEM was reused for up to five consecutive
runs without a substantial loss in catalytic activity. Zamani et al. [81] investigated a
reusable catalyst composed of a DEM of choline chloride and p-toluene sulfonic acid
(p-TSA), immobilized on magnetic nanoparticles (MNPs) for chemoselective direct
ipso etherification and amination of naphthol derivatives (85) (Figure 11.39).
Figure 11.36: Synthesis of β-aminoketones (78).
Figure 11.35: Proposed mechanism for the synthesis of 3-aminobenzofurans (82) using DEM and CuI.
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 423The functionalized magnetic nanoparticle catalyst exhibited an average yield of 84%
for 16 investigated etherification processes and 77% for 5 tested aminations process.
The yield was greater than 70% for all 23 processes evaluated, and the p-TSA loading
was just 0.45 mol%. Strong DES-support contacts, hydrogen donor species interactions
with naphthol, and nanoparticle dispersion may all have contributed to the catalytic
performance.
Figure 11.38: Synthesis of thieno[2,3-b]indoles (83).
Figure 11.37: Synthesis of tetrasubstituted imidazoles (80).
424 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel11.5 Conclusions
It has been a primary goal for the scientific and manufacturing communities to replace
traditional solvents with those that are less hazardous and have a lesser impact on the
environment because of demands for sustainable technology. As DEMs are typically re￾usable, inexpensive starting ingredients may be used to make them, and many of them
are fully biodegradable; they can be conceived of as beneficial alternatives. DEMs can be
employed in a variety of fields as valuable alternatives for traditional organic solvents to
avoid frequent hassles in the separation or extraction of high-value natural products,
as well as reaction media in a variety of chemical transformations involving green and
sustainable synthesis of bioactive heterocycles. It might be claimed that using DEMs as
solvent-cum-catalyst in multicomponent processes is a step in the right direction, partic￾ularly when those mixes are made of natural materials and renewable resources. The
literature reveals an exponential increase in works that use DEMs, indicating they are
capable of being considered a viable resource in green chemistry. In this chapter, we
provided a review of a couple of key MCRs for the synthesis of heterocycles of biological
importance, where DEMs are now being used, and where they have bright future.
Figure 11.39: Synthesis of aryl ethers/aryl amines (85).
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 425References
[1] Cioc RC, Ruijter E, Orru RVA. Multicomponent reactions: Advanced tools for sustainable organic
synthesis. Green Chem, 2014, 16, 2958–2975.
[2] Rotstein BH, Zaretsky S, Rai V, Yudin AK. Small heterocycles in multicomponent reactions. Chem Rev,
2014, 114, 8323–8359.
[3] Yang J, Tan JN, Gu Y. Lactic acid as an invaluable bio-based solvent for organic reactions. Green
Chem, 2012, 14, 3304–3317.
[4] Banerjee B. Recent developments on ultrasound-assisted one-pot multicomponent synthesis of
biologically relevant heterocycles. UltrasonSonochem, 2017, 35, 15–35.
[5] Singh MS, Chowdhury S. Recent developments in solvent-free multicomponent reactions: A perfect
synergy for eco-compatible organic synthesis. RSC Adv, 2012, 2, 4547–4592.
[6] Dömling A, Wang W, Wang K. Chemistry and biology of multicomponent reactions. Chem Rev, 2012,
112, 3083–3135.
[7] Slobbe P, Ruijter E, Orru RVA. Recent applications of multicomponent reactions in medicinal
chemistry. MedChemComm, 2012, 3, 1189–1218.
[8] Lamberth C, Jeanguenat A, Cederbaum F, De Mesmaeker A, Zeller M, Kempf HJ, Zeun
R. Multicomponent reactions in fungicide research: The discovery of mandipropamid.
BioorgMedChem, 2008, 16, 1531–1545.
[9] Camp JE, Nyamini SB, Scott FJ. Cyrene™ is a green alternative to DMSO as a solvent for antibacterial
drug discovery against ESKAPE pathogens. RSC Med Chem, 2019, 11, 111–117.
[10] Abou-Shehada S, Mampuys P, Maes BUW, Clarkand J, Summerton HL. An evaluation of credentials
of a multicomponent reaction for the synthesis of isothioureas through the use of a holistic CHEM21
green metrics toolkit. Green Chem, 2017, 19, 249–258.
[11] Sheldon RA. Metrics of green chemistry and sustainability: Past, present, and future. ACS Sustain
Chem Eng, 2018, 6, 32–48.
[12] Hudson R, Leaman D, Kawamura KE, Esdale KN, Glaisher S, Bishop A, Katz JL. Exploring green
chemistry metrics with interlocking building block molecular models. J Chem Educ, 2016, 93,
691–694.
[13] Sheldon RA. The E Factor: Fifteen years on. Green Chem, 2007, 9, 1273–1283.
[14] Patel DM, Patel PJ, Patel HM. Catalytic stereoselective multicomponent reactions for the synthesis of
spiro derivatives: Recent progress. Eur J Org Chem, 2022, e202201119.
[15] Patel PJ, Patel DM, Vala RM, Patel SG, Upadhyay DB, Pannerselvam Y, Patel HM. Catalyst-free, room￾temperature accessible regioselective synthesis of spiroquinolines and their antioxidant study. ACS
Omega, 2023, 8, 444–456.
[16] Shi T, Kaneko L, Sandino M, Busse R, Zhang M, Mason D, Machulis J, Ambrose AJ, Zhang DD,
Chapman E. One-step synthesis of thieno[2,3-d]pyrimidin-4(3H)-ones via a catalytic four-component
reaction of ketones, ethyl cyanoacetate, S8, and formamide. ACS Sustain Chem Eng, 2019, 7, 1524.
[17] Sun XX, Li C, He YY, Zhu ZQ, Mei GJ, Shi F. Catalytic asymmetric [3+3] cycloaddition of azomethine
ylides with C3-substituted 2-indolylmethanols. Adv Synth Catal, 2017, 359, 2660.
[18] Patel DM, Vala RM, Sharma MG, Rajani DP, Patel HM. A practical green visit to the functionalized
[1,2,4]triazolo-[5,1-b]quinazolin-8(4H)one scaffolds using the group-assisted purification (GAP)
chemistry and their pharmacological testing. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 1031–1041.
[19] Sun XX, Zhang HH, Li GH, He YY, Shi F. Catalytic enantioselective and regioselective [3+3]
cycloadditions using 2-indolylmethanols as 3C building blocks. Chem Eur J, 2016, 22, 17526.
[20] Tzani A, Douka A, Papadopoulos A, Pavlatou EA, Voutsas E, Detsi E. Synthesis of biscoumarins using
recyclable and biodegradable task-specific ionic liquids. ACS Sustain Chem Eng, 2013, 1, 1180–1185.
426 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel[21] Ganske F, Bornscheuer UT. Lipase-catalyzed glucose fatty acid ester synthesis in ionic liquids. Org
Lett, 2005, 7, 3097–3098.
[22] Patel DM, Sharma MG, Vala RM, Lagunes I, Puerta A, Padrón JM, Rajani DP, Patel HM. Hydroxyl alkyl
ammonium ionic liquid assisted green and one-pot regioselective access to functionalized
pyrazolodihydropyridine core and their pharmacological evaluation. Bioorg Chem, 2019, 86,
137–150.
[23] Lozano P, De Diego T, Carrié D, Vaultier M, Iborra JL. Enzymatic ester synthesis in ionic liquids. J Mol
Catal B Enzym, 2003, 21, 9–13.
[24] Kumar PSV, Suresh L, Bhargavi G, Basavoju S, Chandramouli GVP. Ionic liquid-promoted green
protocol for the synthesis of novel naphthalimide-based acridine-1,8-dione derivatives via a
multicomponent approach. ACS Sustain Chem Eng, 2015, 3, 2944–2950.
[25] Gupta R, Yadav M, Gaur R, Arora G, Sharma RKA. Straightforward one-pot synthesis of bioactive
N-aryl oxazolidin-2-ones via a highly efficient Fe3O4@SiO2-supported acetate-based
butylimidazolium ionic liquid nanocatalyst under metal-and solvent free conditions. Green Chem,
2017, 19, 3801–3812.
[26] Kunz W, Häckl K. The hype with ionic liquids as solvents. ChemPhysLett, 2016, 661, 6–12.
[27] Oakes RS, Clifford AA, Rayner CM. The use of supercritical fluids in synthetic organic chemistry.
J ChemSoc Perkin Trans, 2001, 9, 917–941.
[28] Alonso DA, Baeza A, Chinchilla R, Guillena G, Pastor IM, Ramón DJ. Deep eutectic solvents: The
organic reaction medium of the century. Eur J Org Chem, 2016, 2016, 612–632.
[29] Smith EL, Abbott AP, Ryder KS. Deep eutectic solvents (dess) and their applications. Chem Rev, 2014,
114, 11060–11082.
[30] Alvi S, Ali R. An expeditious and highly efficient synthesis of substituted pyrroles using a low melting
deep eutectic mixture. Org Biomol Chem, 2021, 19, 9732–9745.
[31] Paiva A, Craveiro R, Aroso I, Martins M, Reis RL, Duarte ARC. Natural deep eutectic solvents −
solvents for the 21st century. ACS Sustain Chem Eng, 2014, 2, 1063–1071.
[32] Dai Y, VanSpronsen J, Witkamp GJ, Verpoorte R, Choi YH. Natural deep eutectic solvents as new
potential media for green technology. Anal Chim Acta, 2013, 766, 61–68.
[33] Liu Y, Friesen JB, McAlpine JB, Lankin DC, Chen SN, Pauli GF. Natural deep eutectic solvents:
Properties, applications, and perspectives. J Nat Prod, 2018, 81, 679–690.
[34] Kotha S, Chakkapalli C. Application of Fischer indolization under green conditions using deep
eutectic solvents. ChemRec, 2017, 17, 1039–1058.
[35] Ruß C, König B. Low melting mixtures in organic synthesis-an alternative to ionic liquids?. Green
Chem, 2012, 14, 2969–2982.
[36] Marcus Y. Deep Eutectic Solvents. Springer International Publishing, 2019, 45–110. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-030-00608-2.
[37] Perna FM, Vitale P, Capriati V. Deep eutectic solvents and their applications as green solvents.
CurrOpinGreenSustainChem, 2020, 21, 27–33.
[38] Liu YT, Chen YA, Xing YJ. Synthesis and characterization of novel ternary deep eutectic solvents. Chin
Chem Lett, 2014, 25, 104–106.
[39] Jablonsky M, Majova V, Ondrigova K, Sima J. Preparation and characterization of physicochemical
properties and application of novel ternary deep eutectic solvents. Cellulose, 2019, 26, 3031–3045.
[40] Migliorati V, Sessa F, D’Angelo P. Deep eutectic solvents and multicomponent reactions: Two
convergent items to green chemistry strategies. Chem Phys Lett, 2019, 2, 100001–100009.
[41] Abbott AP, Harris RC, Ryder KS, D’Agostino C, Gladden LF, Mantle MD. Glycerol eutectics as
sustainable solvent systems. Green Chem, 2011, 13, 82–90.
[42] Mainberger S, Kindlein M, Bezold F, Elts E, Minceva M, Briesen H. Deep eutectic solvent formation: A
structural view using molecular dynamics simulations with classical force fields. Mol Phys, 2017, 115,
1309–1321.
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 427[43] Smith EL, Abbott AP, Ryder KS. Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) and their applications. ChemRev, 2014,
114, 11060–11082.
[44] Wilkes JS, Levisky JA, Wilson RA, Hussey CL. Dialkylimidazolium chloroaluminate melts: A new class
of room-temperature ionic liquids for electrochemistry, spectroscopy and synthesis. InorgChem,
1982, 21, 1263–1264.
[45] Abbott AP, Capper G, Davies DL, Rasheed RK. Ionic liquid analogues formed from hydrated metal
salts. Chem Eur J, 2004, 10, 3769–3774.
[46] Zhekenov T, Toksanbayev N, Kazakbayeva Z, Shah D, Mjalli FS. Formation of type III Deep Eutectic
Solvents and effect of water on their intermolecular interactions. Fluid Phase Equilib, 2017, 441,
43–48.
[47] Abbott AP, Al-Barzinjy AA, Abbott PD, Frisch G, Harris RC, Hartley J, Ryder KS. Speciation, physical
and electrolytic properties of eutectic mixtures based on CrCl3· 6H2O and urea. Phys
ChemChemPhys, 2014, 16, 9047–9055.
[48] Gawande MB, Shelke SN, Zboril R, Varma RS. Microwave-assisted chemistry: Synthetic applications
for rapid assembly of nanomaterials and organics. Acc Chem Res, 2014, 47, 1338–1348.
[49] Abbott AP, Capper G, Davies DL, Rasheed RK, Tambyrajah V. Novel solvent properties of choline
chloride/urea mixtures. ChemCommun, 2003, 1, 70–71.
[50] Azizi N, Dezfooli S, Hashemi MM. Greener synthesis of spirooxindole in deep eutectic solvent.
JMolLiq, 2014, 194, 62–67.
[51] Swaroop TR, Sharath Kumar KS, Palanivelu M, Chaitanya S, Rangappa KS. A catalyst-free green
protocol for the synthesis of pyranopyrazoles using room temperature ionic liquid choline chloride￾urea. J Heterocycl Chem, 2014, 51, 1866–1870.
[52] Rajawat A, Khandelwal S, Kumar M. Deep eutectic solvent promoted efficient and environmentally
benign four-component domino protocol for synthesis of spirooxindoles. RSC Adv, 2014, 4,
5105–5112.
[53] Azizi N, Mariami M, Edrisi M. Greener construction of 4H-chromenes based dyes in deep eutectic
solvent. Dyes Pigm, 2014, 100, 215–221.
[54] Rokade SM, Garande AM, Ahmad NAA, Bhate PM. Acid- and metal-free synthesis of annulated
pyrroles in a deep eutectic solvent. RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 2281–2284.
[55] Hu HC, Liu YH, Li BL, Cui ZS, Zhang ZH. Deep eutectic solvent based on choline chloride and malonic
acid as an efficient and reusable catalytic system for one-pot synthesis of functionalized pyrroles.
RSC Adv, 2015, 5, 7720–7728.
[56] Shaabani A, Afshari R, Hooshmand SE. Passerini three-component cascade reactions in deep
eutectic solvent: An environmentally benign and rapid system for the synthesis of α-acyloxyamides.
Res Chem Intermed, 2016, 42, 5607–5616.
[57] Shahabi D, Tavakol H. One-pot synthesis of quinoline derivatives using choline chloride/tin (II)
chloride deep eutectic solvent as a green catalyst. J Mol Liq, 2016, 220, 324–328.
[58] Azizi N, Dezfooli S. Catalyst-free synthesis of imidazo [1,2-a] pyridines via Groebke multicomponent
reaction. Environ Chem Lett, 2016, 14, 201–206.
[59] Aryan R, Beyzaei H, Nojavan M, Rezaei M. Novel biocompatible glucose-based deep eutectic solvent
as recyclable medium and promoter for expedient multicomponent green synthesis of diverse three
and four substituted pyrazole-4-carbonitrile derivatives. ResChemIntermed, 2017, 43, 4731–4744.
[60] Azizi N, Edrisi M. Multicomponent reaction in deep eutectic solvent for synthesis of substituted
1-aminoalkyl-2-naphthols. Res Chem Intermed, 2017, 43, 379–385.
[61] Krishnammagari SK, Cho BG, Jeong YT. Choline chloride-based eutectic solvent for the efficient
synthesis of 2-amino-4H-chromen-4-yl phosphonate derivatives via multicomponent reaction under
mild conditions. Phosphorus Sulfur Silicon Relat Elem, 2018, 193, 306–316.
428 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. Patel[62] Momeni AR, Samimi HA, Vaezzadeh H. Eutectic mixture choline chloride–Chloroacetic acid: A new
and efficient catalyst for synthesis of 3,4-Dihydropyrimidin-2-ones. Chem Methodol, 2018, 2,
260–269.
[63] Vanegas S, Rodríguez D, Puentes C. An efficient and eco‐friendly one‐pot synthesis of
pyrazolopyridines mediated by Choline Chloride/Urea eutectic mixture. ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4,
3131–3134.
[64] Patil A, Lohar T, Mane A, Kamat S, Salunkhe R. Deep eutectic solvent an efficient reaction medium
for the synthesis of chromeno pyrazolo and indazolo phthalazine derivatives. J Heterocycl Chem,
2019, 56, 3145–3151.
[65] Nishtala VB, Basavoju S. ZnCl2-Urea, the deep eutectic solvent promoted synthesis of the
spirooxindolopyrans and xanthenes through a pseudo-three-component approach. Synth Commun,
2019, 49, 2342–2349.
[66] Fekri LZ, Nikpassand M, Mostaghim S, Marvi O. Green catalyst-free multi-component synthesis of
aminobenzochromenes in deep eutectic solvents. Org Prep Proced Int, 2020, 52, 81–90.
[67] Bhosle MR, Shaikh MA, Nipate D, Khillare LD, Bondle GM, Sangshetti JN. ChCl: 2ZnCl2catalyzed
efficient synthesis of new sulfonyl decahydroacridine-1, 8-Diones via one-pot multicomponent
reactions to discover potent antimicrobial agents. PolycyclAromatCompd, 2019, 1–12.
[68] Sayahi M, Gorjizadeh M, Meheiseni M, Sayyahi S. One-pot multicomponent process for the synthesis
of 4-azaphenanthrene-3,10-dione, 1,8-dioxo-octahydroxanthene and tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyran
derivatives catalyzed by the deep eutectic solvent choline chloride-oxalic acid. Z Naturforsch B, 2020,
75, 269–279.
[69] Biglari M, Shirini F, Mahmoodi NO, Zabihzadeh M, Mashhadinezhad M. A choline chloride-based
deep eutectic solvent promoted three-component synthesis of tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyran and
pyrano[2,3-d] pyrimidinone (thione) derivatives. J Mol Struct, 2020, 1205, 127652.
[70] Riadi Y. Green, rapid and efficient synthesis of new antibacterial pyridopyrimidinone mediated by
eutectic mixture of Urea/CuCl2. Sustain Chem Pharm, 2020, 15, 100233.
[71] Azizi N, Qomi M, Asghari M, Farhadi E. Deep eutectic solvent mediated rapid and selective one-pot
synthesis of 5-alkylidene-Thiazolones. SustainChem Pharm, 2021, 22, 100457.
[72] Patel DM, Patel HM. Trimethylglycine-betaine-based-catalyst-promoted novel and ecocompatible
pseudo-four-component reaction for regioselective synthesis of functionalized 6, 8-dihydro-1′ H, 5
H-spiro [[1, 3] dioxolo [4, 5-g] quinoline-7, 5′-pyrimidine]-2′, 4′, 6′(3′ H)-trione derivatives. ACS
Sustain Chem Eng, 2019, 7, 18667–18676.
[73] Patel DM, Patel HJ, Padrón JM, Patel HM. A novel substrate directed multicomponent reaction for
the syntheses of tetrahydro-spiro [pyrazolo [4, 3-f] quinoline]-8, 5′-pyrimidines and tetrahydro￾pyrazolo [4, 3-f] pyrimido [4, 5-b] quinolines via selective multiple C–C bond formation under metal￾free conditions. RSC Adv, 2020, 10, 19600–19609.
[74] Tamaddon F, Khorram A. New magnetic-responsive deep eutectic catalyst based on Co2+
/choline
chloride for the synthesis of tetrahydropyrazolopyridines and pyrroles in water. J Mol Liq, 2020, 304,
112722.
[75] Keshavarzipour F, Tavakol H. Deep eutectic solvent as a recyclable catalyst for three-component
synthesis of β-Amino Carbonyls. CatalLett, 2015, 145, 1062–1066.
[76] Chaskar A. Catalyst free one-pot three-component synthesis of 2-Amino-4H-chromene derivatives in
aqueous deep eutectic mixture at room temperature. LettOrgChem, 2014, 11, 480–486.
[77] Abtahi B, Tavakol H. CuI‐catalyzed, one‐pot synthesis of 3‐aminobenzofurans in deep eutectic
solvents. Appl Organomet Chem, 2021, e6433.
[78] Azizi N, Edrisi M. Deep eutectic solvent immobilized on SBA-15 as a novel separable catalyst for
one-pot three-component Mannich reaction. Microporous Mesoporous Mater, 2017, 240, 130–136.
11 Deep eutectic mixture (DEM)-assisted multicomponent synthesis of heterocycles 429[79] Aziizi N, Manochehri Z, Nahayi A, Torkashvand S. A facile one-pot synthesis of tetrasubstituted
imidazoles catalyzed by eutectic mixture stabilized ferro fluid. J Mol Liq, 2014, 196, 153–158.
[80] Tran PH. One-pot multicomponent synthesis of thieno [2, 3-b] indoles catalyzed by a magnetic
nanoparticle-supported [Urea]4 [ZnCl2] deep eutectic solvent. RSC adv, 10, 9663–9671.
[81] Zamani P, Ozdemir J, Ha Y, Benamara M, Kuchuk AV, Wang T, Chen J, Khosropour AR, Beyzavi MH.
Magnetic nanoparticle anchored deep eutectic solvents as a catalyst for the etherification and
amination of naphthols. Adv Synth Catal, 2018, 360, 4372–4380.
430 Divyang M. Patel, Hitendra M. PatelIndex
(±)-camphor-10-sulfonic acid 41
(arylchalcogenyl)-alkyl-1,2,3-triazolo-1,3,6-
triazonine 283
. β-cyclodextrin 311
[3 + 2] cycloaddition 26
[Fe3O4@SiO2-TCT-PVA-CuII] 318
1H-1,2,3-triazole 254
2,3-dihydropyrido[3,2-d]pyrimidin-4(1H)-one 415
2,3-dihydroquinazolin-4(1H)-one 230
2-amino-4-coumarinyl-5-arylpyrrole 2
2-amino-4H-chromenes 420
2H-indazoles 329
2-thiazole-5-yl-3H-quinazolin-4-one 241
3,4-dihydroquinazolin-2(1H)-one derivatives 223
3-aminobenzofurans 421
3-substituted quinazolin-4(3H)-one 223
4H-chrome-4-yl phosphates 409
5-alkylidiene thiazolone 416
alkyne dipolarophile 269
amidation reaction 279
amlodipine 392
annulation 120, 122, 127, 129, 132, 136
anthranilamide 230
atom economy 117–118, 132, 138, 143, 147
aza-Diels–Alder reaction 15
aza-Diels–Alder reactions 19
azide 257–258, 263, 268, 275–277, 279–280,
282–283, 285–286, 289, 293, 295–296
azide–alkyne click reaction 275
azide–alkyne cycloaddition 267
Baylis–Hillman adducts 40
benzoxanthenes 157
benzoxanthenone 158
benzoxanthenones 157
Betti base 408
Biginelli 256
Biginelli reaction 23, 376
bioactive 127, 139, 146, 149
bioactivities 135
bioconjugation 308
biolabeling 308
bioorthogonal chemistry 308
bismuth(III) triflate 307
bis(pyrazol-5-ol) derivatives 8
bis-tetrazole 323
catalyst free 143
catalyst-free 129, 146
choline azide 318
chromene 411
chromene derivatives 404
chromeno[4,3-b]pyridine-2,5(1H)-dione 413
Claisen–Schmidt-type condensation 9
click chemistry 308
click-Biginelli reaction 290
CoFe2O4@L-asparagine-Cu/Ni nanocatalyst 328
Cu/Ac/r-GO nanohybrid 316
Cu/pectin@Fe3O4 326
CuFe2O4/g-C3N4 321
Cu-free click chemistry 308
cycloaddition 59, 61–62, 78–79, 81–82, 102–103
C–H sulfonylation process 127
de nitrogenative coupling 307
decahydroacridine 412
dihydropyrimidinone 409
dispiropyrrolidineoxindole 385
DMAP-based ionic fluoride 317
domino Knoevenagel 4
domino-Knoevenagel hetero-Diels Alder
reactions 358
enaminone 69, 103
environmental-friendly 123
examples of the DEMs 399
Fe3O4@HNTS-tetrazole 322
Febrifugine analogues WR090212 225
felodipine 392
Fenquizone 222
Friedländer annulation-Knoevenagel
condensation 39
functionalized pyrroles 406
graphene oxide 43
green chemical 374
green chemistry 373
green method 381
green solvent 136, 138
greener 393
Hajas-Parrish-Eder-Sauer-Wiechart reaction 338
Hajas–Parrish reaction 338
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110985313-012Hantzsch 256
Hantzsch reaction 16
Heck reaction 320
heterocycles 383, 386, 390, 393
heterocyclic 117–118, 137, 139, 146, 149
heteropolyacids 324
high yield 117, 123
Huisgen 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition reaction 264
IMCCR. 318
imidazo[1,2-a]pyridine 407
imidazole 422
imine 57, 62–64, 70, 73, 75, 78, 82, 84, 86, 91–92,
103, 105
indomethacin 223
inexpensive 132, 136
inexpensive catalyst 169
intermolecular Aldol reactions 338
intra-molecular Mannich reaction 15
intramolecular-Diels–Alder reaction 382
isatoic anhydride 228, 232
Knoevenagel condensation 17, 295, 313, 386, 388
Knoevenagel condensations reactions 361
Knoevenagel reaction 29
Kornblum−DeLaMare rearrangement 12
L-phenylalanine 189
L-proline 319, 347, 351
L-thioproline 198
Mannich 89, 101, 256
Mannich products 348
Mannich reaction 365, 419
MCR 117, 142
MCRs 55–56, 107, 117, 157, 169, 173
mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride-[CuFe2O4/
g-C3N4 hybrids] 321
metal-free 132–133, 136
metal-organic framework 16
Michael addition 4, 15, 71, 78–79, 87, 91–92, 94, 101
Michael adduct 20
Michael–Henry cascade reaction 354
Michael–Michael–aldol reaction 354, 363
microwave technique 373
mild synthetic route 127
monoamine oxidase 222
montmorillonite K-10 308
multicomponent assembly process 1
multicomponent reaction 86, 89, 256, 374,
377, 386
multicomponent reactions 55, 149, 374
multicomponent reactions (MCRs) 55
multicomponent synthesis 399
nano 68, 97, 99–100
nanocatalyst 138, 143
naphthol derivative 423
N-Arylation 319
nicardipine 392
Niementowski quinazolinone synthesis 226
nifedipine 392
ninhydrin 181, 183–185, 189–192, 194, 196–200,
202, 204–205, 208–209, 211–212, 214
one-pot 117, 127, 132, 136–137, 143, 149
one-step 149
Passerini 256
Pd–Cu @rGO 320
pharmaceutical 127, 137, 139
pharmacological 133, 137, 146
PVA @ Cu(II) Schiff base complex. 315
pyrano[2,3-c]pyrazole 403
pyrano[2,3-d]pyrimidinone 414
pyranocoumarin 420
pyrano-thiazoles 387
pyrazole-4-carbonitrile 408
pyrazolo-[3,4-b]-quinolines 28
pyrazolo[4,3f]pyrimido[4,5-b]quinoline 418
pyrazolopyridine 410
pyrrole 418
pyrrole derivative 405
quinazolinone 221
quinoline 407
quinoline-based ionic liquids 313
quinoxaline 181
recyclability 169
regioselectivity 90, 93, 95
regiospecific 120
ruthenium-catalyzed 230
sarcosine 183–185, 194, 199, 202, 204, 209, 212
short reaction time 123, 127–128, 132, 134, 136
single-step 117
small bioactive heterocycles 399
432 Indexsolvent free 379, 387, 390, 393
solvent-free 381–382, 386
Sonogashira coupling 292
spiro [[1,3] dioxolo[4,5-g]
quinoline-7,5′-pyrimidine] 417
spiro-indenoquinoxaline derivatives 211
spiro-indeno-tetrahydropyridine 386
spirooxindole derivatives 401
spirooxindole dihydroquinazolinone 239–240
spirooxindoles 403
spiro-oxindoliccyclohexanes 355
spirooxindolopyrans 411
spiro[pyrazolo[4,3f]quinoline-8,5ʹ-pyrimidine] 418
spiro-pyrrolidines 183
sterically shielded tetrazoles 322
Strecker reaction 314
Suzuki reaction 320
Suzuki–Miyaura cross coupling 312
tetrahydro benzopyran 414
tetrahydro-1H-β-carbolines 312
tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one 158
tetrahydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one
derivatives 160
tetrahydrobenzo[b]pyrans 381
tetrahydrobenzopyran 413
tetrahydrodipyrazolopyridine 418
tetrahydronicotinonitriles 326
tetrazole-1,2,3-triazole hybrids. 329
tetrazolopyrimidines 310
tetrazol-pyrimidine hybrids 327
tetrhydrobenzo[a]xanthene-11-one 168
thiazolo-s-triazine 387
thieno[2,3-b]indole 422
Ugi reaction 256, 294
Ugi tetrazole reaction 307
Ugi-azide–Pictet-Spengler process 312
Ullman-type CN cross-coupling 311
uracil derivatives 327
Wolff rearrangement 62–63, 65
Xanthenes 157, 411
Yonemitsu condensation 359
Zn(L-proline)2 365
zolamine 157
α-acyloxyamides 406
α-hydroxy-β-azidotetrazoles 316
β-amino ketone 419
β-amino ketones 422
γ-lactam 4
Index 433
