CRC Press
Taylor &Francis Croup
ANDRIA MERRISON AND STEFEN BRADY
MUSCLE DISEASES
A GUIDE TO DIFFERENTIAL
DIAGNOSIS, INVESTIGATION
AND MANAGEMENTMuscle Diseases
This volume is a how-to guide on the clinical assessment and investigation of 
patients presenting with muscle-related symptoms. Featuring a case-based 
approach, this accessible text is suitable for a wide range of clinical specialists 
who see patients presenting with both common and rare muscle diseases.
Muscle diseases are often initially missed or misdiagnosed, as they are uncom￾mon disorders and can present in a variety of ways, often mimicking other more 
common disorders. Careful assessment of the history, physical examination and 
appropriate choice of investigations is therefore essential to reaching a diagnosis 
and providing short- and long-term effective management plans. Key features of 
this resource include:
• A case-based approach using real cases seen in clinical practice and 
highlighting different clinical presentations
• Case vignettes that cover patient history, examination, investigations, 
diagnosis and discussion points to assist the reader in developing a 
mental framework for thinking about muscle disease and approaching 
diagnosis
• The relevant investigations (including muscle biopsy, neurophysiology 
and muscle imaging) required for each clinical scenario, aiding the cli￾nician in clinicopathological correlation
• Being concise, practical and complemented by a wide range of figures to 
enhance understanding
Patients with muscle diseases may be referred to one of several medical or surgical 
specialties, including neurology, rheumatology, neuropathology, neurophysiol￾ogy, cardiology, respiratory medicine, intensive care medicine, gastroenterology, 
ophthalmology, orthopaedic and spinal surgery, before the correct diagnosis is 
considered. This accessible text is an ideal resource for clinicians.Muscle Diseases
A Guide to Differential Diagnosis, 
Investigation and Management
Andria Merrison and Stefen Brady
Image Editor Kathryn UrankarDesigned cover image: Kathryn Urankar
First edition published 2025
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2025 Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. While all reasonable efforts 
have been made to publish reliable data and information, neither the author[s] nor the publisher can accept any legal 
responsibility or liability for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publishers wish to make clear that any 
views or opinions expressed in this book by individual editors, authors or contributors are personal to them and do 
not necessarily reflect the views/opinions of the publishers. The information or guidance contained in this book is 
intended for use by medical, scientific or health-care professionals and is provided strictly as a supplement to the 
medical or other professional’s own judgement, their knowledge of the patient’s medical history, relevant manufac￾turer’s instructions and the appropriate best practice guidelines. Because of the rapid advances in medical science, 
any information or advice on dosages, procedures or diagnoses should be independently verified. The reader is 
strongly urged to consult the relevant national drug formulary and the drug companies’ and device or material 
manufacturers’ printed instructions, and their websites, before administering or utilizing any of the drugs, devices 
or materials mentioned in this book. This book does not indicate whether a particular treatment is appropriate or 
suitable for a particular individual. Ultimately it is the sole responsibility of the medical professional to make his 
or her own professional judgements, so as to advise and treat patients appropriately. The authors and publishers 
have also attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to 
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been 
acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, 
or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, includ￾ing photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without writ￾ten permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact 
the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works 
that are not available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging‑in‑Publication Data
Names: Merrison, Andria, editor. | Brady, Stefen, editor. 
Title: Muscle diseases : a guide to differential diagnosis, investigation 
and management / [edited by] Andria Merrison and Stefen Brady ; image 
editor, Kathryn Urankar. 
Other titles: Muscle diseases (Merrison) 
Description: First edition. | Boca Raton, FL : CRC Press, 2025. | Includes 
bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2024017755 (print) | LCCN 2024017756 (ebook) | ISBN 
9781138368330 (hardback) | ISBN 9781138368026 (paperback) | ISBN 
9780429429323 (ebook) 
Subjects: MESH: Neuromuscular Diseases--diagnosis | Neuromuscular 
Diseases--therapy | Diagnosis, Differential | Case Reports 
Classification: LCC RC925.55 (print) | LCC RC925.55 (ebook) | NLM WE 550 
| DDC 616.7/44--dc23/eng/20241112 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024017755
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2024017756
ISBN: 9781138368330 (hbk)
ISBN: 9781138368026 (pbk)
ISBN: 9780429429323 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323
Typeset in Minion
by Deanta Global Publishing Services, Chennai, IndiaMy thanks go to my inspirational parents, gorgeous husband, 
wonderful daughters (Alice, Grace & Olivia); as well to our patient 
publishers (Georgia & Miranda) and all the patients and families 
that we have served.
—Andria Merrison
There are many people to thank for putting up with and supporting 
me while I was writing this book and they know who they are. 
However, I have one specific dedication, come apology, to a friend 
and colleague. She suggested, many times, that we write a book like 
this when we were trainees together in London. However, back then 
I had neither the time nor probably the necessary experience and 
ultimately our paths diverged. Hopefully this dedication will make 
up for my reticence.
—Stefen Bradyvii
CONTENTS
Preface x
About the editors xi
List of contributors xii
Introduction xiii
Abbreviations xvi
Chapter 1 History 1
Andria Merrison
Chapter 2 Muscle examination 5
Stefen Brady
Chapter 3 Serological tests 11
Stefen Brady
Chapter 4 Muscle antibodies 13
Maria Mirza and Joel David
Chapter 5 Neurophysiology 18
Andria Merrison and Agyepong Oware
Chapter 6 Muscle biopsy 26
Andria Merrison and Kathryn Urankar
Chapter 7 Muscle imaging 42
Rajat Chowdhury
Chapter 8 Genetic investigations in neuromuscular diseases 46
Kate Sergeant and Carl Fratter
Chapter 9 Management, treatment and therapy for 
neuromuscular conditions 51
Andria Merrison
Chapter 10 Closing comments 60
Stefen Brady
Section Cases
Case 1 63
Stefen Brady
Case 2 66
Sithara Ramdas
Case 3 70
Stefen Brady
Case 4 74
Andria Merrison
Case 5 78
Andria Merrison
Contents Contentsviii
Contents
Case 6 82
Andria Merrison
Case 7 86
Stefen Brady
Case 8 90
Andria Merrison
Case 9 95
Andria Merrison
Case 10 99
Andria Merrison
Case 11 102
Sithara Ramdas
Case 12 106
Andria Merrison
Case 13 110
Louisa Kent and Stefen Brady
Case 14 116
Andria Merrison
Case 15 119
Stefen Brady
Case 16 123
Andria Merrison
Case 17 126
Andria Merrison
Case 18 130
Andria Merrison
Case 19 133
Stefen Brady
Case 20 138
Kezia Austin and Harsha Gunawardena
Case 21 142
Charlotte David and Joel David
Case 22 147
Matthew Wells and Harsha Gunawardena
Case 23 150
Stefen Brady
Case 24 155
Andria Merrison
Case 25 159
Louisa Kent and Stefen Bradyix
Contents
Case 26 162
Stefen Brady
Case 27 166
Stefen Brady
Case 28 170
Stefen Brady
Case 29 174
Andria Merrison
Case 30 178
Stefen Brady
Case 31 182
Stefen Brady
Case 32 185
Stefen Brady
Case 33 189
Stefen Brady
Case 34 193
Stefen Brady
Case 35 197
Andria Merrison
Case 36 201
Andria Merrison
Index 205x
PREFACE
This book serves as a window into the world of diagnosis, treatment and care for 
people living with neuromuscular conditions. It introduces neuromuscular con￾ditions and the diagnostic armamentarium available, as well as possible manage￾ment approaches and treatment options.
Presented as a series of clinical cases – each set out in terms of history, examina￾tion and investigation findings – the reader is led through the clinical journey 
in each case. It can be approached as a number of tests – probing one’s knowl￾edge of the neuromuscular clinical arena (should the reader wish to take on 
this challenge) – before delving into the diagnosis and discussion that follows. 
Alternatively, it is a gentle walk through the key areas of neuromuscular clinical 
practice – each case providing a means of structuring and remembering clinical 
knowledge.
We have been privileged to have shared some of the experiences of many people 
living with neuromuscular conditions in very different ways. We hope to be 
able to share some of the passion, inspiration and understanding that we have 
been given in a way that is both accessible and useful to clinicians seeking to 
know more about this area of medicine and in turn help others living with these 
conditions.
Preface Prefacexi
ABOUT THE EDITORS
Andria Merrison, MA, MBChB, MD, FRCP
Andria Merrison is a Consultant Neurologist based in North Bristol NHS Trust 
and is the Director of the South West Neuromuscular Operational Delivery 
Network and the Bristol Motor Neurone Disease Centre. She trained at Gonville 
and Caius College, Cambridge University and the University of Bristol. In her 
role as a board member of the NHS England Neurosciences Clinical Reference 
Group, she led on a service specification for Neurology for NHS England. She is 
also an MRCP Part 2 Examination Board member, and Regional Advisor and 
Regional Specialty Advisor for the Royal College of Physicians.
Stefen Brady, BA, MB, BCh, BAO, MSc, DPhil, FRCP
Stefen Brady is a Consultant Neurologist and Clinical Lead of the Oxford 
Adult Muscle and Spinal Muscular Atrophy (SMA) Services, Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford. He studied medicine 
at Trinity College Medical School, University of Dublin; and trained in neurol￾ogy in Yorkshire. He completed a DPhil in clinical neurology at Keble College, 
University of Oxford. He is a committee member of the British Myology Society 
and has the honour of being Treasurer for the Oxford Muscle Symposium.
Image Editor:
Kathryn Urankar, BSc MBBS, FRCPA (Anat. Path; For Path); FRCPath 
(Neuropath)
Kathryn Urankar is a Consultant Neuropathologist based at North Bristol 
NHS Trust and is the muscle biopsy lead in the department of Neuropathology, 
both performing and interpreting muscle biopsies for the South-West region. 
She studied medicine at the University of Queensland in Brisbane, Australia 
and undertook her initial pathology training in Queensland with Pathology 
Queensland. She has subsequently worked in the fields of Forensic Pathology and 
Neuropathology in Australia, Canada and the United Kingdom as well as a brief 
stint at USCF learning from some of the best neuropathologists in the world. 
She currently holds the position of Chair of Examiners in Neuropathology for 
the Royal College of Pathologists of the United Kingdom and Head of School of 
Pathology for the Severn & Pennisula Deaneries.
About the editors About the editorsxii
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Kezia Austin
North Bristol NHS Trust
Bristol, UK
Rajat Chowdhury
Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Trust
Oxford, UK
Charlotte David
Barts Health NHS Trust
London, UK
Joel David
Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Trust
Oxford, UK
Carl Fratter
Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Trust
Oxford, UK
Harsha Gunawardena
North Bristol NHS Trust
Bristol, UK
Louisa Kent
Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust
Oxford, UK
Maria Mirza
Royal Berkshire NHS Hospitals Trust
Berkshire, UK
Agyepong Oware
North Bristol NHS Trust
Bristol, UK
Sithara Ramdas
Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Trust
Oxford, UK
Kate Sergeant
Oxford University Hospitals NHS 
Trust
Oxford, UK
Matthew Wells
North Bristol NHS Trust
Bristol, UK
Kathryn Urankar
North Bristol NHS Trust
Bristol, UKxiii
INTRODUCTION
Muscle conditions form a fascinating area of medicine that lies in an ever￾changing landscape. They encompass a wide range of diseases (over 60 named 
in the UK NHS specialised definition set) which present in a myriad of different 
ways. Over 50,000 people in the UK have one of this diverse group of genetic 
and acquired conditions that make up primary muscle disease and many more 
have muscle symptoms due to drugs or systemic disease. The important acquired 
muscle diseases include the inflammatory myopathies, which are treatable and so 
diagnosis must not be missed (or overdiagnosed and some other disorder treated 
inappropriately), as well as the drug-induced myopathies. Clinicians are often 
asked to assess patients with secondary muscle dysfunction due to ageing, immo￾bility, critical illness or cancer.
Many neuromuscular conditions have a genetic basis, and advances in genetics 
has obviated the need for more invasive tests in many cases. There is an increas￾ing ability to make a diagnosis by identifying causative genes; through linkage 
studies, whole genome or exome sequencing in cohorts of patients with specific 
features. However, there are likely to be many more genetic abnormalities that 
will in time be confirmed to be associated with disease (many more than the few 
we routinely analyse now), and there may be involvement of more than one gene 
or a variety of genetic mechanisms at play to cause disease. Patients may also 
present with very different phenotypes, even with the same genotype in the same 
family. Careful assessment of the history, physical examination and appropriate 
choice of investigations are therefore essential to reaching a diagnosis and pro￾viding short- and long-term effective management plans.
Muscle conditions impair mobility and frequently cause cardiorespiratory com￾plications. The range of their age of onset is very wide; patients may die dur￾ing early life, face lifelong disability or present with late-onset muscle weakness. 
Distinguishing myopathies from peripheral neuropathy, anterior horn cell dys￾function and neuromuscular junction disorders can be challenging.
Providing excellent care requires a multidisciplinary team dedicated to helping 
people living with neuromuscular conditions. Careful co-ordination of a variety 
of different medical and surgical specialisms is often essential for successful long￾term management.
INTRODUCTIONxiv
INTRODUCTION
CLASSIFICATION OF MYOPATHIES IN 
ADULTS
Acquired
Primary Polymyositis
Dermatomyositis
Inclusion body myositis
Secondary Drugs and toxins
Connective tissue disease and other autoimmune 
disorders
Endocrine
Metabolic
Infections
Inherited
Muscular dystrophy Myotonic dystrophy type 1 and 2
Dystrophinopathies: Duchenne and Becker 
muscular dystrophy
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy
Limb girdle muscular dystrophies
Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy
Congenital myopathies Nemaline
Core myopathies
Myofibrillar myopathies
Distal myopathies
Metabolic myopathies Glycogen metabolism: McArdle’s
Fatty acid metabolism: CPT2 deficiency, acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency
Channelopathies Non-dystrophic myotonias
Periodic paralysis
Mitochondrial disease Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegiaxv
Diagnostic features of muscle conditions
DIAGNOSTIC FEATURES OF MUSCLE 
CONDITIONS
Facial weakness FSHD
Myotonic dystrophy
Inclusion body myositis
Polymyositis
Myasthenia gravis
Ophthalmoplegia/ptosis Mitochondrial cytopathy (often without 
double vision)
Thyroid myopathy
Myasthenia gravis
Dysphagia Inclusion body myositis
Polymyositis
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy
Motor neurone disease 
Myasthenia gravis/Lambert Eaton 
myasthenic syndrome, congenital 
myasthenia
Neck weakness Myasthenia gravis
Motor neurone disease
Polymyositis
Myotonia Myotonic dystrophy type 1 and 2
Non-dystrophic myotonias (myotonia 
congenita, paramyotonia congenita)
Contractures Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2A 
(calpainopathy)
Bethlem myopathyxvi
ABBREVIATIONS
AD autosomal dominant
ALT alanine aminotransferase
AR autosomal recessive
AST aspartate aminotransferase
BiPAP bilevel positive airway pressure
BMD Becker muscular dystrophy
CK creatine kinase
COX cytochrome c oxidase
CPAP continuous positive airway pressure
DM myotonic dystrophy
DMD Duchenne muscular dystrophy
ECG electrocardiogram
EDMD Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy
EM electron microscopy
EMG electromyography
FKRP fukutin-related protein
FSHD facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy
GSD glycogen storage disorder
IBM inclusion body myositis
IHC immunohistochemical
IIM idiopathic inflammatory myopathy
IMNM immune-mediated necrotising myopathy
LGMD limb girdle muscular dystrophy
MAC membrane attack complex
MELAS mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like 
 episodes
MHC major histocompatibility complex
MLPA multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification
MRC Medical Research Council
MRI magnetic resonance imaging
NADH nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NCS nerve conduction study
NGS next-generation sequencing
PAS periodic acid-Schiff
SDH succinate dehydrogenase
SMA spinal muscular atrophy
SR sarcoplasmic reticulum
STIR short-tau inversion recovery
TAM tubular aggregate myopathy
TAs tubular aggregates1
Chapter 1
HISTORY
Andria Merrison
Clinicians encounter people living with muscle conditions presenting in isola￾tion or as part of a multisystem disorder. More than 50,000 people in the UK 
have one of a diverse group of genetic and acquired conditions that make up the 
primary muscle disorders. These include muscular dystrophies, and congenital, 
metabolic, mitochondrial and inflammatory myopathies. An even greater num￾ber of people are affected by secondary muscle problems due to drugs, ageing, 
immobility, critical illness, systemic metabolic disorders and cancer.
Over 85% of neuromuscular conditions, including genetic muscle problems, 
present in adult life. Advances in genetics have led to greatly improved diag￾nostics and new therapies for muscle conditions (including dystrophinopathies, 
spinal muscular atrophy and others). Respiratory and cardiac complications of 
muscle disorders are common and early recognition and effective management 
can save lives, reduce morbidity and improve quality of life.
Distinguishing myopathies from peripheral neuropathies (hereditary or inflam￾matory neuropathy), anterior horn cell diseases (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
spinal muscular atrophy or Kennedy’s disease) and neuromuscular junction dis￾orders (myasthenic syndromes) requires careful clinical evaluation. This includes 
diligent history taking, thorough examination and implementation of appropri￾ate investigations.
Muscle diseases History
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-1
10.1201/9780429429323-12
Muscle diseases
HISTORY
A number of diagnostic clues may be derived from the history on the basis of the 
age of onset, family history, rate of progression/temporal pattern of weakness and 
pattern of muscle involvement. The following may be reported by the patient (or 
subsequently become evident): weakness, myalgia, wasting, hypertrophy, muscle 
stiffness, cramps, myoglobinuria and/or respiratory or cardiac involvement.
Age of onset
• Duchenne muscular dystrophy presents at <5 years, inclusion body 
myositis generally in midlife and mitochondrial disease at any age.
• Dermatomyositis is much more common than polymyositis in 
childhood.
• Many muscular dystrophies, such as facioscapulohumeral, myotonic 
and limb girdle muscular dystrophy tend to present in adolescence or 
early adult life, but both late and young onset are recognised.
• Childhood features: Reduced fetal movements in pregnancy, “floppy 
baby”, feeding or breathing problems, delayed motor milestones and 
limited sporting achievements can all point to a congenital or child￾hood-onset disorder. These features alone may not distinguish a muscle 
problem from a neuromuscular junction or peripheral nerve disorder.
Family history
• The family history may reveal an autosomal recessive/dominant, 
X-linked or mitochondrial pattern of inheritance.
• Some conditions show genetic anticipation (e.g., myotonic dystrophy), 
manifesting with increasing severity in subsequent generations.
• Systemic features in other family members (e.g., early cataracts in myo￾tonic dystrophy) may be the only manifestation of a condition in pre￾ceding generations.
Pattern of muscle involvement
The distribution of muscle weakness can be an important clue to the diagnosis.
• Facial involvement: Consider facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, 
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy and sometimes inflammatory 
myositis or mitochondrial myopathy.
• Ophthalmoplegia: Check for fatiguability to exclude myasthenia gravis. 
If there is no fatiguability the common causes are mitochondrial dis￾ease (often without double vision despite significant dysconjugate gaze), 
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy and myotubular myopathy. Ptosis 
may be associated with ophthalmoplegia and be evident in isolation in 
these conditions and congenital myopathies.
• Proximal (limb girdle) muscle weakness is the commonest presentation 
and has many causes: muscular dystrophy, metabolic or mitochondrial 
myopathy, polymyositis and dermatomyositis.3
History
• Inclusion body myositis usually affects the quadriceps muscles (causing 
proximal lower limb weakness) and the long finger and wrist flexors 
(causing distal weakness in the upper limbs).
• Isolated distal weakness is usually neurogenic in origin (peripheral 
neuropathy, anterior horn cell disease, radiculopathy) but can occur in 
myotonic dystrophy, myofibrillar myopathy and some other congenital 
myopathies.
• Bulbar weakness (dysphagia/dysarthria): Consider myotonic dystrophy, 
inclusion body myositis, inflammatory, mitochondrial and endocrine 
myopathies, and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy.
Weakness
Weakness will lead to a range of functional difficulties, which may be progres￾sive. Progression is usually gradual and linear, but the experience of losing the 
ability to do something that one could previously do is often stepwise. This may 
include difficulty with activities above shoulder height (reaching into overhead 
cupboards or brushing/washing hair) or problems with grip strength (opening 
jars, doing up buttons or using a screwdriver). Negotiating stairs, rising from a 
seated/squat or supine position, standing on tiptoes or on heels can all be diffi￾cult, and foot drop and falls can occur.
Facial weakness is usually bilateral and symmetrical and can often go unnoticed 
or unreported. It can lead to difficulty whistling, blowing up balloons, using a 
straw or dysarthria. Difficulty with eye closure during sleep may indicate more 
severe facial weakness and protection of the cornea (with eye gels/lubricants) is 
essential to preserving vision.
Myalgia
Myalgia is a common complaint and often not due to muscle disease but instead 
due to other systemic problems, including infection, arthritis and polymyalgia 
rheumatica. Myalgia without weakness, myoglobinuria or a rise in plasma cre￾atine kinase and normal electromyography is unlikely to be due to muscle disease. 
Muscle conditions where myalgia is commonly a feature include inflammatory 
myopathies, myotonic dystrophy (and non-dystrophic myotonia), hypothyroid￾ism, vitamin D deficiency and drug-induced myopathy. Myalgia precipitated by 
exercise occurs in metabolic and mitochondrial myopathies, dystrophinopa￾thies, myotonic dystrophy (particularly type 2) and sometimes in inflammatory 
myopathies.
Muscle stiffness
Although some degree of muscle stiffness is common in muscle disorders, very 
marked stiffness and difficulty with muscle relaxation may be caused by myoto￾nia. Some drugs, e.g., beta blockers, can exacerbate myotonia. In myotonia con￾genita, there is a worsening with rest and reduced myotonia with exercise, known 
as the “warm-up phenomenon”. In paramyotonia congenita, there is exacerba￾tion with exercise and with cold, known as “paradoxical myotonia”.4
Muscle diseases
Cramps
Cramps are more commonly seen in neurogenic disorders. If they are very prom￾inent, one should consider drug-induced myopathy, metabolic muscle disease, 
mitochondrial myopathy or hypothyroidism.
Myoglobinuria
Myoglobin released from damaged muscle can colour the urine dark brown/
black. This can occur in glycogenoses, fatty acid disorders, mitochondrial respi￾ratory chain dysfunction, malignant hyperthermia, dystrophinopathies, inflam￾matory myopathy, infection, ischaemia, trauma, alcohol and drug-induced 
myopathy.
Respiratory and cardiac muscle involvement
Respiratory and cardiac muscle may be affected to differing degrees and at dif￾ferent stages in a variety of neuromuscular conditions. This can lead to reduced 
exercise tolerance, which may be difficult to establish in patients who are already 
immobile.
• Respiratory symptoms arise due to diaphragmatic, intercostal muscle 
and upper airway weakness (and in a minority of cases centrally driven 
problems, e.g., some people living with myotonic dystrophy). The hyper￾capnia that results leads to many of these symptoms. They include dys￾pnoea, orthopnoea, early morning headache and excessive daytime 
somnolence.
• Cardiac symptoms are due to dysrhythmia and/or cardiac failure: syn￾cope, palpitations, dyspnoea and peripheral neuropathy.
General anaesthesia
Some myopathies are associated with malignant hyperthermia (e.g., central 
core or RyR1-associated myopathy) or similar reactions (e.g., periodic paraly￾sis). Anaesthesia may also unmask previously unrecognised cardiorespiratory 
insufficiency.5
Chapter 2
MUSCLE EXAMINATION
Stefen Brady
Taking an accurate history and performing a detailed physical examination are 
the most helpful “tests” a clinician has in the diagnosis of myopathies. With 
experience, pattern recognition resulting from detailed history, observational 
skills and thorough physical examination often enables one to confidently make 
a clinical diagnosis, which guides the selection of appropriate supportive tests 
and genetic analysis. The physical examination of a patient with a suspected 
myopathy differs slightly from the standard neurological examination. As usual, 
it involves a combination of inspection, functional assessment, tone, manual 
muscle testing, sensory examination, coordination and reflex testing. In addi￾tion, it is worth spending a bit of time examining the skin (see later), joints for 
hyperlaxity and contractures, and cardiorespiratory systems.
Muscle diseases Muscle examination
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-2
10.1201/9780429429323-26
Muscle diseases
INSPECTION
Inspection begins with observing the patient sitting in the waiting room for 
characteristic facial features associated with myopathies such as myotonic dys￾trophy type 1 (DM1; ptosis, frontal balding, and wasting of masseter and tempo￾ralis) and facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD; Bell’s phenomenon 
and lower facial atrophy with prominence of the lips and cheeks). The presence 
of pelvic girdle weakness is suggested by the patient using their hands and arms 
to help them rise. Those with very severe pelvic girdle weakness may perform a 
modified Gower manoeuvre, which can look very dramatic to the unknowing 
observer. Here the patient places their hands on the floor in front of their chair 
and lifts themselves from the chair by weighting their arms whilst locking their 
legs straight. Once in this position (a forward fold), they rotate to face the chair 
which they then use, in addition to their legs, to climb up to achieve a standing 
position.
Next, take note of the patient’s posture and gait. Those with marked ptosis will 
tip their head back to see under lowered eyelids. The normal position of the hand 
when walking is with the thumb pointing in the direction of travel. However, 
those with periscapular muscle weakness, e.g., FSHD, walk with the dorsum of 
the hand pointing in the direction of travel and the thumb pointing in towards 
the thigh of the same side.
A variety of different gaits may be observed in neurology clinics. It is slightly 
simpler in the adult muscle clinic with four main patterns of gait to be aware of:
i. Waddling and hyperlordotic gait because of pelvic girdle weakness
ii. Toe-walking due to the presence of ankle contractures
iii. Steppage due to weakness of ankle dorsiflexion
iv. Stiff-legged due to hyperextension (retroflexion) of the knee to compen￾sate for weakness of knee extension
These patterns are not mutually exclusive and more than one can be observed in 
a single patient.
Myopathies can produce many signs in the head and neck (Table 2.1), partic￾ularly involving the extraocular and periocular muscles. Those to take note of 
include miosis (tubular aggregate myopathy [TAM]), ptosis (DM1, oculopharyn￾geal muscular dystrophy [OPMD], congenital myopathies, and mitochondrial 
myopathy), ophthalmoparesis without diplopia (OPMD, mitochondrial myop￾athy, and congenital myopathies), and cataracts (DM1 and 2, mitochondrial 
disease, and myofibrillar myopathy). Periocular weakness may be suggested by 
Bell’s phenomenon. Muscle atrophy is seen in DM1 (temporalis, masseter, and 
sternocleidomastoid) and FSHD (perioral muscle atrophy resulting in promi￾nence of the lips and cheeks). Orobulbar signs are an uncommon feature of adult 
myopathies, but dysphonia can accompany congenital myopathy and dysarthria 
in DM1. Perioral fasciculation suggests spinobulbar muscular atrophy (SBMA; 
Kennedy’s disease), tongue atrophy and fasciculation spinal muscular atrophy 
(SMA) and SBMA (after ruling out the motor neurone disease), and tongue 7
Muscle examination
hypertrophy is observed in muscular dystrophy and the glycogen storage disor￾der Pompe disease.
With the patient undressed, there is a further opportunity to observe their gait, 
inspect for fasciculation, and to look for generalised or focal muscle atrophy or 
hypertrophy. Pectoral muscle wasting in FSHD is evidenced by the presence of a 
horizontal axillary crease, while atrophy of the volar forearms is commonly seen 
in inclusion body myositis (IBM). Calf hypertrophy is most commonly associated 
with Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies (DMD and BMD) but can be 
present in several other hereditary myopathies. Generalised muscle hypertrophy 
may be observed in myotonia congenita, RYR1-related myopathy and very rarely 
DM1. Skeletal changes (kyphoscoliosis, increased lumbar lordosis) and dermato￾logical signs are useful in directing the clinician to particular diagnoses. Minor 
degrees of scoliosis and spinal rigidity are demonstrated by asking the patient to 
touch their toes while standing. Prior to examining the patient on the couch, the 
examiner should inspect the patient’s back for scapular winging (aka scapula alata).
Table 2.1 Clinical signs of myopathy in the head and neck
Signs in the head and neck Possible diagnoses
Miosis Tubular aggregate myopathy (TAM)
Cataracts Myotonic dystrophies type 1 and 2 
(DM1 and 2)
Myofibrillar myopathy
Pigmentary retinopathy Mitochondrial disease
Optic atrophy Mitochondrial disease
Ophthalmoparesis Congenital myopathy (CM)
Mitochondrial disease
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy 
(OPMD)
Ptosis Mitochondrial disease
DM1 and 2
CM
OPMD
Facial weakness CM
Congenital DM1
Facioscapulohumeral muscular 
dystrophy (FSHD)
Temporalis, masseter and 
sternocleidomastoid wasting
DM1
Tongue atrophy and fasciculation Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA)
Spinobulbar muscular atrophy 
(SBMA; Kennedy’s disease)
Tongue hypertrophy Duchenne and Becker muscular 
dystrophy
Pompe disease
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 
9 (LGMD R9, FKRP)8
Muscle diseases
Manual muscle assessment
Searching for muscle weakness is best done in a systematic head-to-toe fashion. 
How best to record the severity of weakness is down to the individual. Each sys￾tem has its pros and cons. Over time, I have become more enamoured with a 
simple system that I acquired from a mentor: mild weakness (Medical Research 
Council [MRC] –5 to 4/5), moderate weakness (MRC 3/5), and severe weak￾ness (MRC <3/5). Mild bilateral facial weakness can be very difficult to identify 
unless specifically sought. Subtle periocular weakness may only be identified by a 
patient’s inability to fully bury their eyelashes, while perioral muscle atrophy and 
weakness may be evidenced by detection of a transverse smile and/or prominent 
lips and cheeks. The same can be said for mild degrees of bilateral ptosis. A clue 
to its presence is frontalis overactivity.
Several patterns of weakness of are often described in myopathies:
i. Duchenne and Becker type: neck flexion weakness accompanied by hip 
girdle weakness greater than shoulder girdle sometimes accompanied 
by weakness of ankle dorsiflexion.
ii. Limb girdle weakness: hip girdle weakness greater than shoulder girdle.
iii. FSHD type (aka scapuloperoneal): periocular and perioral weakness 
with scapular winging and weakness of ankle dorsiflexion.
iv. Distal weakness: predominant involvement of the extensor or flexor 
muscle groups of the distal upper limb (e.g., Welander myopathy or 
myasthenic syndromes) or, more commonly, the distal lower limb (most 
commonly weakness of ankle dorsiflexion, which is found in many 
hereditary myopathies, and much less frequently weakness of ankle 
plantarflexion, which is observed in dysferlinopathy).
v. OPMD type: (ptosis with or without ophthalmoparesis), dysphagia, and 
proximal weakness.
vi. Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD): scapuloperoneal weak￾ness with prominent joint contractures.
vii. Distal and proximal weakness: observed in inclusion body myositis 
where early weakness of finger flexion is identified in conjunction with 
weakness of knee extension.
viii. Generalised asthenia: slim muscles associated with a mild generalised 
weakness, as observed in congenital myopathy.
Mild asymmetry of strength is not unusual, but marked asymmetry is suggestive 
of FSHD and IBM. Clinically, it can be difficult to differentiate a length-depen￾dent motor neuropathy and a distal myopathy. A useful sign of the underlying 
pathology is the presence or absence of extensor digitorum brevis on the dorsum 
of the foot, which is typically atrophied in neuropathy but preserved in distal 
myopathy.
It is easy to overlook the abdomen, but don’t! There are clues to the diagnosis 
to be found here too. Abdominal muscle weakness may result in asymptomatic 
asymmetric bulges of the abdominal wall when seated or standing. Beevor sign 
describes the cranial movement of the umbilicus when the recumbent patient 
lifts their head from the examination couch. Movement of the umbilicus is due to 9
Muscle examination
weakness of the lower abdominal muscles. It was originally described in patients 
with thoracic spinal cord injury. However, it is often observed in FSHD. Although 
neither 100 per cent sensitive nor specific, its presence is highly supportive of this 
diagnosis. Sometimes the umbilicus moves caudally, indicative of upper abdomi￾nal muscle weakness.
Sensation and coordination
Impaired coordination is a commonly reported symptom in individuals with a 
myopathy. For the most part, it is usually the result of muscle weakness rather 
than attesting to the presence of a concomitant neuropathy or cerebellar involve￾ment. For most patients, a detailed sensory examination is unnecessary. A usu￾ally more than adequate screen is to test the vibration and joint position senses. If 
these are abnormal, further more detailed examination may be required. Sensory 
signs are found in mitochondrial disease, myofibrillar myopathy and very rarely 
in disorders of fatty acid oxidation (i.e., metabolic myopathy). There are many 
more detailed texts on performing an examination for cerebellar disease. I will 
limit myself to saying that cerebellar signs in combination with weakness are 
highly suggestive of mitochondrial disease.
Reflexes
Tendon reflexes may be normal, reduced or absent in myopathies. With mild 
myopathic weakness, tendon reflexes should be present. As the severity of weak￾ness increases, tendon reflexes can reduce and may sometimes disappear alto￾gether. Upper motor neuron (UMN) signs are never observed in a myopathy 
(bar hyperreflexia in hyperthyroidism and mitochondrial disease with central 
nervous system involvement). If present, UMN signs are indicative of an alterna￾tive diagnosis, such as motor neurone disease, or much less likely (if no reason is 
evident on history such as previous stroke) a second diagnosis.
Myotonia plus
Excluding cramps, which are a neurogenic phenomenon, there are three abnor￾mal muscle contractions to be aware of: myotonia and paramyotonia, myoedema, 
and rippling muscle. Myotonia, delayed muscle relaxation, is the most frequently 
encountered. It is observed by asking the patient to forcibly close their eyes or 
make a fist before opening it quickly. The affected patient will struggle to open 
their eyes or fist quickly on initial command. However, with repeated action, 
the myotonia lessens and performing the requested movement becomes easier. 
With paramyotonia, the movement does not get easier and can worsen with rep￾etition. Myotonia can be elicited by striking the origin of the finger extensors 
in the forearm or thenar eminence with a tendon hammer. Although clinical 
myotonia (myotonia on examination rather than with electromyography [EMG]) 
can be demonstrated in a few different myopathies, because of its prevalence, 
DM1 should be the presumed diagnosis whilst awaiting genetic confirmation. 
Myoedema is indicative of hypothyroidism. It is the production of a lump in the 
muscle (mounding of muscle) when a muscle is struck with a tendon hammer. 
The lump resolves over a few seconds. Rippling muscle is a wave of contraction 
spreading across a muscle in response to percussion or stretching. It is observed 10
Muscle diseases
with pathogenic variants in CAV3 and can be autoimmune in origin. Both myo￾edema and rippling muscle are electrically silent on EMG.
Dermatological features of muscle disease
Skin diseases are relatively frequent in muscle diseases and are often highly 
specific to particular diagnoses. The most well-known are those associated 
with idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs). Findings in dermatomyositis 
include but aren’t limited to periocular heliotrope rash and oedema, erythema￾tous photosensitive rashes over the anterior chest (V-sign), shoulders and upper 
back (shawl sign), and lateral thigh (holster sign), Gottron’s papules and sign, 
ragged hypertrophied cuticles, dilated nailfold capillaries, and subcutaneous 
limb oedema. Patients with antisynthetase syndrome may report and demon￾strate Raynaud’s phenomenon and mechanic’s hands (fissuring of the skin, par￾ticularly the ulnar edge of the little finger). Sclerodactyly may be seen in overlap 
myositis. Lesser-known cutaneous changes associated with myopathies include 
(i) radiation changes associated with radiotherapy-induced myopathy; (ii) hyper￾trophic and keloid scarring, and hyperkeratosis pilaris with collagen VI-related 
myopathies; (iii) ichthyosis in neutral lipid storage disease (aka Chanarin–
Dorfman syndrome); (iv) epidermolysis bullosa in PLEC-related muscle disease; 
(v) pilomatrixomata in DM1; (vi) lipomatosis in mitochondrial disease associated 
with the pathogenic point variant m.8344A>G; and (vii) lipoatrophy in LMNA￾related myopathy.
Final comment
The physical examination of a patient with a presumed myopathy can seem 
daunting, but it becomes easier and quicker with practice. If one piece of advice 
can be offered, it is to always examine the patient’s back for scapular winging, 
an incredibly helpful and often missed diagnostic sign.11
Chapter 3
SEROLOGICAL TESTS
Stefen Brady
Creatine kinase (CK; aka creatine phosphokinase) is the most widely serologi￾cal test employed in the investigation of a myopathy. It is vital in the transfor￾mation of adenosine diphosphate (ADP) to adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the 
energy currency of cells. There are several isoforms of CK: CK-MM, CK-MB, 
CK-BB and CK-MiMi. The predominant isoform in serum is the skeletal muscle 
form, CK-MM. CK-MiMi, the mitochondrial isoform, is not normally present in 
serum. The routine measurement of CK does not distinguish between different 
CK isoforms. Infrequently, it is necessary to determine the subtype of CK con￾tributing to hyperCKaemia. To do this, CK electrophoresis is required.
Although measurement of the serum CK is an easily performed and helpful inves￾tigation, it has limitations. Although the largest pool of CK in the body is skeletal 
muscle, there are non-myopathic, sometimes physiological causes for a raised 
CK, including a patient’s race, sex, and age, or pathological, such as impaired 
clearance of CK in chronic renal disease, trauma, and neuropathy or following an 
acute myocardial infarction. The CK level is normal in many primary myopathies 
and the level of CK elevation is not indicative of disease severity. Monitoring CK 
levels has limited use except in the management of rhabdomyolysis and monitor￾ing response to treatment of idiopathic inflammatory myopathies (IIMs). A ris￾ing CK indicates an impending relapse of a previously treated IIM and, usefully, 
this normally precedes clinical symptoms or signs.
A number of other serological markers are elevated in myopathies, including ala￾nine and aspartate transaminase (ALT and AST), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 
aldolase and troponin. There is no reason to prefer any of these over CK. It is 
important to remember that ALT and AST are present in skeletal muscle and 
thus their elevation is not always indicative of liver disease. Troponins T and I are 
commonly measured with presumed cardiac disease. However, troponin T is not 
cardiac-specific and can also be elevated in myopathies.
Excluding testing for serum antibodies, there are a few other serological tests 
that have been used in the diagnosis of myopathies. These are mentioned here for 
completeness, though many have been or are being relegated to historical texts 
because of widespread access to whole-exome and/or whole-genome sequencing. 
Such tests include the non-ischaemic forearm exercise test for McArdle disease, 
white cell alpha-glucosidase in Pompe disease, carnitine and acylcarnitine pro￾files, plasma amino acids and urinary organic acids for metabolic myopathies, 
Jordans’ phenomenon (the presence of lipid-containing vacuoles in leucocytes) 
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-3
10.1201/9780429429323-312
Muscle diseases
Serological tests
in neutral lipid storage disorders, and the detection of acanthocytes in McLeod’s 
disease. However, these tests retain real-world utility in helping to clarify the 
pathogenicity of variants of uncertain significance, which are often identified 
through genomic testing.
Finally, in the investigation of mitochondrial disease, the following serological 
tests may sometimes be requested: serum and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) lactate, 
serum fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21) and growth differentiation factor 15 
(GDF15). Although elevated levels of such markers are suggestive of a primary 
mitochondrial disease, none individually, or in conjunction, are highly sensitive 
or specific for the diagnosis. Instead, mitochondrial genetic testing and respira￾tory chain enzyme analysis are the preferred means for diagnosis.13
Chapter 4
MUSCLE ANTIBODIES
Maria Mirza and Joel David
INTRODUCTION
The diagnosis of inflammatory myopathy is usually made based on clinical 
symptoms combined with detection of raised creatine kinase (CK) levels, ele￾vated acute phase proteins like C-reactive protein and an increased erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate on serological testing. Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) may or 
may not be positive. Electromyography, characteristic findings on muscle biopsy, 
and the detection of autoantibodies may further help support the diagnosis of an 
inflammatory myositis.
Autoantibodies play a fundamental role in the diagnosis and classification of 
idiopathic inflammatory myopathy (IIM). Around 80% of patients with IIM 
will have a relevant muscle-associated autoantibody. The autoantibodies sum￾marised in Table 4.1 target both nuclear and cytoplasmic components of the 
muscle fibre leading to muscle damage. There are two main categories of autoan￾tibodies: myositis-specific antibodies (MSAs) and myositis-associated antibodies 
Muscle diseases
Table 4.1 Myositis antibodies and the associated clinical conditions
Myositis-specific antibodies (MSAs) Antibody-associated condition
Anti-ARS; anti-Jo-1, anti-PL7, 
anti-PL12, anti-EJ, anti-OJ, anti-Ha, 
anti-Ks and anti-Zo 
Antisynthetase syndrome 
Anti-SRP and anti-HMGCR 
antibodies
Immune-mediated necrotising myopathy 
Anti-Mi2, anti-TIF1 and anti-NXP2 DM
Anti-MDA5 and anti-SAE Clinically amyopathic DM 
Myositis-associated antibodies 
(MAAs)
Antibody-associated condition
Anti-Ro/SSA PM overlap with Sjogren’s syndrome, 
systemic sclerosis; overlap with anti￾synthetase syndrome
Anti-PmScl PM and SSc
Anti-Ku PM and SSc
Anti-U1RNP PM and SLE 
Abbreviations: Anti-ARS, antisynthetase syndrome; PM, polymyositis; DM, dermatomyositis; 
SSc, systemic sclerosis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-4
10.1201/9780429429323-414
Muscle diseases
Muscle antibodies
(MAAs). MSAs are highly specific for IIM with a 90% specificity compared to 
MAAs, which only occur in 50% of affected patients. MAAs are often found in 
overlap syndromes which occur when a medical condition shares features of 
two rheumatological disorders, for example, polymyositis and systemic sclerosis 
(PM/SSc). There is limited documentation on the utility of autoantibodies in the 
classification criteria of IIM. This could be due to a scarcity of data prior to the 
introduction of such criteria. Autoantibodies serve as biomarkers of disease, and 
as diagnostic testing increases in capacity and efficiency, they will play a more 
integral role in the classification criteria of IIM (1).
Myositis-specific antibodies
Anti-aminoacyl tRNA synthetase (anti-ARS) antibodies
After inclusion body myositis (IBM), antisynthetase syndrome (ASS) is the most 
common IIM in adults. It is typified by the presence of anti-ARS antibodies. ARS 
are cytoplasmic enzymes that catalyse the binding of tRNA to amino acids dur￾ing protein synthesis. Anti-Jo1 is present in 11% of patients with IIM with the 
remaining anti-ARS antibodies like anti-PL7, anti-PL12, anti-EJ, anti-OJ, anti￾Ha, anti-Ks and anti-Zo found in only 3.5% of patients (2). Anti-Jo1 is found in 
20–30% of patients with polymyositis (PM) and 60–70% of myositis associated 
with interstitial lung disease (ILD). In 2010, Connors et al. introduced formal cri￾teria for ASS, proposing that there must be evidence for tRNA synthetase auto￾antibody in addition to one or more of the following clinical features: mechanic’s 
hands, Raynaud’s phenomenon, myositis, ILD, arthritis and/or unexplained 
fever (3).
Anti-SRP and anti-HMGCR antibodies
Immune-mediated necrotising myopathy (IMNM) is characterised by the pres￾ence of antibodies to signal recognition particle (anti-SRP) or to 3-hydroxy￾3-methylglutaryl CoA reductase (anti-HMGCR). Histopathology often reveals 
marked muscle fibre necrosis with minimal inflammatory infiltrate. CK levels 
can be markedly elevated (maybe in excess of 10,000 IU/L). Clinically, there is 
profound proximal weakness with a slow response to conventional therapy (4).
SRP is a cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein made of six polypeptides complexed with 
a single 7sl RNA, and involved in secretory protein recognition and DNA trans￾location across the rough endoplasmic reticulum. Anti-SRP antibodies are found 
in around 4% of polymyositis (PM) patients. These cases typically demonstrate 
rapidly progressive muscle weakness.
Anti-HMGCR antibodies occur in 3–8% of adults with IIM. 3-hydroxy-3-methyl￾glutaryl-coenzyme A is a key part of cholesterol biosynthesis, which is inhibited by 
statin therapy. There is a previous history of statin exposure in 40–92% of patients 
with detectable levels of anti-HMGCR autoantibodies. Most cases show a female￾predominance, adult-onset disease typified by subacute progressive proximal 
weakness. Fatigue and myalgia are reported in 20–60% of patients. Anti-HMGCR 
myopathy classically affects the skeletal muscle, and non-specific symptoms such 
as rash, arthritis and Raynaud’s phenomenon are uncommon (5,6).15
Muscle antibodies
Anti-Mi2, anti-TIF-1 and anti-NXP2 antibodies
Anti-Mi2 antibody
Dermatomyositis (DM) is an idiopathic autoimmune inflammatory disorder 
typified by a weakness, elevated CK and characteristic cutaneous manifesta￾tions. The skin features are often a defining feature, and hallmarks of the disease 
include periorbital dusky violaceous erythema, violaceous erythema over the 
face (malar/butterfly facial rash), chest (V sign), or shoulders and back (shawl 
sign). Gottron’s papules, i.e., red scaly bumps over the knuckles, elbows or 
knees, are a further diagnostic cutaneous manifestation of DM. In some cases, 
patients present with cutaneous disease with subclinical or even absent muscle 
disease (7).
Anti-Mi2 autoantibodies can be detected in 11–59% of cases of adult DM and 
4–10% of cases of juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM). Anti-Mi2-related DM shows 
a favourable prognosis with mild muscle involvement, low associations with ILD 
and cancer, and a good response to immunosuppressive therapy. Anti-Mi2 targets 
nucleosome remodelling and deacetylase. The Rituximab in Myositis (RIM) trial 
was the first prospective, double-blind randomised trial in myositis and the larg￾est clinical trial performed in the setting of inflammatory myositis. Rituximab 
was found to provide a significant steroid-sparing effect between the start and 
conclusion of the trial. Furthermore, the presence of anti-Mi2 was linked to a 
shorter time to improvement in response to rituximab (8).
Anti-TIF1-gamma antibody
Anti-TIF1-gamma autoantibodies were discovered by Targoff et al., who, in 
2006, identified an antibody targeting a 155 KDa nuclear protein later identified 
as transcription intermediary factor 1-gamma (9). TIF1 is a tripartite motif-con￾taining protein essential in cellular pathways central to cell proliferation, apop￾tosis, and the innate immune system. Cutaneous involvement is a key finding in 
13% of cases of adult DM and in 22–29% of cases of JDM which show positivity 
for anti-TIF1-gamma antibodies. A link between anti-TIF1 antibody-positive 
DM and cancer was identified in a meta-analysis undertaken by Trallero￾Araguas et al. in 2006. This study revealed 78% sensitivity and 89% specific￾ity in the diagnosis of an underlying myositis-associated cancer (10). Patients 
with anti-TIF1-gamma antibody-positive DM are less frequently afflicted by 
Raynaud’s phenomenon, arthritis, calcinosis and ILD. However, pruritus, severe 
cutaneous disease and lower CK levels are more commonly seen in this group of 
myositis patients (11).
Anti-NXP2 antibody
Originally termed anti-MJ, anti-NXP2 antibodies target a 140-KDa nuclear 
protein called nuclear matrix protein 2 which plays a key role in P53-induced 
apoptosis following oncogenic stimulus. Anti-NXP2 antibodies occur in about 
15% of patients with JDM. In anti-NXP2 antibody-positive JDM, severe cutane￾ous lesions are often observed along with calcinosis and muscle contractures. In 
adult men with DM, this antibody is associated with cancer (1).16
Muscle diseases
Anti-MDA5 and anti-SAE antibodies
Anti-MDA5 antibodies were first described in a cohort of East Asian patients with 
clinically amyopathic myositis (81%) and rapidly progressive ILD (74%). These 
antibodies target IFN-induced melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5 
(MDA5). In patients with this antibody, CK levels tend to be low and the disease 
is associated with a poor prognosis due to its association with respiratory failure. 
In addition, Sato et al. (2013) noted a link between anti-MDA5 antibodies and 
cutaneous ulceration in the nail folds and over the joint extensor surfaces (12).
Anti-SAE targets the small ubiquitin-like modifier-activating enzyme identified 
by Betteridge et al. (11). This autoantibody was observed in 6–8% of Caucasian 
patients with DM and even less frequently in Asian patients (2%). It is associated 
with HLA-DQB1*03 haplotype, which may explain the reduced frequency of the 
autoantibody among non-Caucasian patients. Dysphagia is seen in 78% of anti￾SAE positive patients compared with 43% in anti-SAE negative group (11).
Myositis-associated autoantibodies (MAAs)
Anti-Ro/SSA
Anti-Ro autoantibodies are typically identified when PM or DM is associated 
with another connective tissue disease, for example, systemic sclerosis (SS). 
Anti-Ro/SSA antibody against the Ro52 subunit is the most conspicuous MAA, 
occurring in more than 30% of patients with IIM. Frequently, its presence over￾laps with the presence of anti-ARS antibodies. The combination of anti-Ro/SSA 
antibodies with anti-Jo1 antibodies in ASS is associated with an increased risk of 
severe ILD, myositis, joint involvement and cancer. Myositis is reported to occur 
in 1–14% of primary Sjogren’s syndrome cases. Anti-Ro and or anti-La antibod￾ies occur frequently in PM/Sjogren’s overlap syndrome, which comprises 5.3% of 
patients with PM (1).
Anti-PmScl
Anti-PmScl antibodies are one of the most common MAAs and are most com￾monly associated with PM and SS overlap. The presence of these autoantibodies 
suggests an increased risk of the development of ILD, inflammatory joint disease, 
mechanic’s hands and Raynaud’s phenomenon.
Anti-Ku
Anti-Ku antibodies are a relatively recently recognised autoantibody involved in 
IIM, particularly in cases previously thought to be autoantibody negative. Their 
presence is indicative of PM and SSc, having been reported in 28% of anti-Ku￾positive patients. These patients tend to have a mild, glucocorticoid-responsive 
myopathy (11).
Anti-U1RNP
Anti-U1RNP antibodies are common in PM and SLE overlap syndrome and are 
also associated with anti-Jo1 antibodies in overlap myositis. Apart from myositis, 
these patients tend to have erosive arthritis, alopecia, ILD, oral ulcers and rarely 
glomerulonephritis (1).17
Muscle antibodies
Conclusion
Autoantibodies identified in cases of myositis are an expanding heterogeneous 
group. Detection of these autoantibodies is of great clinical utility, both diag￾nostic and prognostic, through the identification of those patients at increased 
risk of cancer and ILD. It is likely that the identification of specific autoantibod￾ies in myositis will feature prominently in future classification or diagnostic 
criteria of IIM.
Further reading
1. Ghirardello A, Borella E, Beggio M, et al. Myositis autoantibodies and clini￾cal phenotypes. Auto Immun Highlights. 2014;5(3):69–75.
2. McHugh N, Tansley S. Autoantibodies in myositis. Nat Rev Rheumatol. 
2018;14:290–302.
3. Connors GR, Cristopher-Stine L, Oddis CV, et al. Interstitial lung disease 
associated with idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: What progress has 
been made in the past 35 years? Chest. 2010;138:1464–1474.
4. Lundberg IE, De Visser M, Werth VP. Classification of myositis. Nat Rev 
Rheumatol. 2018;14(5):269–278.
5. Mohassel P, Mammen AL. Anti-HMGCR Myopathy. J Neuromuscular Dis. 
2018;5(1):11–20.
6. Selva-O’Callaghan A, Alvarado-Cardenas M, Marin A, et al. Statins and 
myositis: The role of anti-HMGCR antibodies. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 
2015;11(12):1277–1279.
7. Bohan A, Peter JB. Polymyositis and dermatomyositis (second of two parts). 
N Engl J Med. 1975;292(8):403–407.
8. Oddis CV, Reed AM, Aggarwal R, et al. RIM Study Group. Rituximab 
in the treatment of refractory adult and juvenile dermatomyositis and 
adult polymyositis: A randomised, placebo-phase trial. Arthritis Rheum. 
2013;65(2):314–324.
9. Targoff IN, Mamyrova G, Trieu EP, et al. Childhood Myositis Heterogeneity 
Study Group; International Myositis Collaborative Study Group. A novel 
autoantibody to a 155-kd protein is associated with dermatomyositis. 
Arthritis Rheum. 2006;54(11):3682–3689.
10. Trallero-Araguas E, Rodrigo-Pendas JA, Selva-O’Callaghan A, et al. 
Usefulness of anti-p155 autoantibody for diagnosing cancer-associated 
dermatomyositis: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Arthritis Rheum. 
2016;64:523–532.
11. Betteridge Z, McHugh N. Myositis-specific autoantibodies: An important 
tool to support diagnosis of myositis. J Intern Med. 2016;280(1):8–23.
12. Sato S, Kuwana M, Fujita T, Suzuki Y. Anti-CADM-140/MDA5 autoanti￾body titer correlates with disease activity and predicts disease outcome in 
patients with dermatomyositis and rapidly progressive interstitial lung dis￾ease. Mod Rheumatol. 2013;23:496–502.18
Chapter 5
NEUROPHYSIOLOGY
Andria Merrison and Agyepong Oware
Nerve conduction studies (NCS) and electromyography (EMG) are used to aid 
the distinction between nerve, muscle and neuromuscular junction disorders. 
They are important diagnostic tests that must be considered within the context of 
the clinical picture and the results of other investigations. For some conditions, 
advances in genetics, imaging and serological tests have meant that neurophysi￾ological tests may not be required.
Muscle diseases Neurophysiology
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-5
10.1201/9780429429323-519
Neurophysiology
Neurophysiology
NERVE CONDUCTION STUDIES (NCS)
Nerve conduction studies can be used to assess the functional and anatomical 
integrity of motor and sensory nerves. In routine clinical practice, the motor and 
sensory nerves in the distal lower and upper limbs are tested. These nerves are 
relatively superficial, and the stimulus intensity required is tolerable.
Motor nerve conduction studies involve supramaximal electrical stimulation at 
two or more sites along the length of the nerve. The evoked response is recorded 
from a muscle innervated by the nerve with a pair of surface electrodes, the 
active at the endplate region (the belly of the muscle) and the reference on the 
tendon. Supramaximal stimulation ensures the activation of all excitable axons. 
The stimulus is delivered at increasing distances from the muscle. The waveform 
produced, the compound muscle action potential (CMAP), is a sum of the muscle 
electrical activity at the vicinity of the active electrode. The latency, amplitude, 
duration and morphology of the CMAP at the different sites are analysed. The 
distances between the sites of stimulation and the latency differences are used to 
calculate conduction velocity.
Sensory conduction study involves supramaximal stimulation of sensory or 
mixed nerves with the recording electrodes being placed over the same nerve. 
The evoked response, (compound) sensory nerve action potential (SNAP), is a 
sum of the electrical activity from activated fibres. The attributes analysed are the 
latency, amplitude and conduction velocity. There are two methods for perform￾ing a sensory conduction study. Stimulation can be proximal (antidromic) or dis￾tal (orthodromic) to the recording electrode. The sensory conduction velocities 
are similar but antidromic stimulation produces higher amplitude SNAP than 
orthodromic stimulation. Sensory conduction studies assess the large myelin￾ated axons only.
Routine NCS assesses the motor and sensory conduction velocities along the dis￾tal segments of the nerves, but the amplitudes of the action potentials reflect the 
integrity of the entire nerve. The latencies of the late responses, the H-reflex and 
F-wave, provide information about the conduction velocity along the proximal 
segments. The F-wave study is an extension of the motor conduction study and 
results from antidromic activation of motor neurons following stimulation of 
the nerve distally. The H-reflex is elicited by stimulating the tibial nerve in the 
popliteal fossa and recording at the soleus and median nerve at the elbow and 
recording at the flexor carpi radialis. The afferent limb of the reflex is sensory 
(spindle afferent) and the efferent is motor. The latencies of the late responses are 
height-dependent.
Nerve conduction studies can be used to:
• Localise weakness or sensory symptoms to the peripheral nervous sys￾tem/lower motor neuron or the neuromuscular junction.20
Muscle diseases
• Differentiate between axonal degeneration and demyelination as the 
underlying pathology. (The pattern of abnormalities helps differentiate 
between genetic/inherited and acquired demyelinating neuropathies.)
• Characterise the distribution of abnormalities – single nerve (mono￾neuropathy, e.g., entrapment neuropathy), several nerves multi-focal or 
diffuse polyneuropathy, one or more nerve roots (radiculopathy), and 
plexus (plexopathy).
• Determine the type of fibres involved. Mixed sensory and motor, pure 
sensory/dorsal root ganglion or pure motor anterior horn cells (e.g., 
motor neurone disease, spinal muscular atrophy) are involved. Mixed 
sensory and motor involvement is the most common form of neuropathy.
• Identify subclinical neuropathies.
• Monitor peripheral nerve disorders.
Axonal degeneration (axonal neuropathy)
NCS
Low-amplitude SNAPs
Normal or reduced CMAPs
Normal conduction velocities
EMG
Spontaneous activity including fasciculations
Reduced number of motor units
Polyphasic, long-duration and high-amplitude motor unit action potentials
Demyelination (demyelinating neuropathy)
NCS
Slowing of conduction velocity
Conduction block
Dispersion of compound action potentials
Low-amplitude/absent SNAPs
EMG
Reduced recruitment
Spontaneous activity due to secondary axonal degeneration
Motor neuron disease (anterior horn cell dysfunction)
NCS
Normal sensory studies
Low-amplitude motor responses
EMG
Widespread denervation
Spontaneous activity
Fasciculations
Polyphasic, long-duration high-amplitude motor units
Reduced recruitment21
Neurophysiology
Myopathy
NCS
Normal sensory and motor responses
EMG
Spontaneous activity (with or without)
Low-amplitude, polyphasic and short-duration motor unit action potentials
Early recruitment and full interference pattern
Limitations of NCS
Nerve conduction studies have a number of limitations:
• Electrical stimulation is painful. Some patients are unable to tolerate 
high enough stimulus intensity for supramaximal stimulation.
• Routine NCS does not assess small fibre function – thinly myelinated 
(Aδ) and unmyelinated fibres (C fibres).
• The sensory nerves in the proximal lower and upper limbs and the trunk 
are technically difficult to examine.
• The abnormalities are not disease-specific. This is mainly due to the 
limited repertoire of reactions to injury or disease in peripheral nerves. 
Most disease processes lead to axonal degeneration or demyelination.
Electromyography (EMG)
EMG is particularly helpful in identifying muscle disorders. It involves the inser￾tion of a specialised needle containing a recording electrode into a muscle or 
range of muscles. EMG can be divided into four areas of analysis: insertional 
activity, spontaneous activity, motor unit potentials and interference pattern.
Insertion (or movement) of the EMG needle induces a burst of high-frequency 
potentials lasting a few hundred milliseconds. This is caused by mechanical 
stimulation or injury to muscle fibres. Decreased insertional activity occurs in 
fibrotic or severely atrophied muscle and periodic paralysis. Increased inser￾tional activity is typically seen in denervation but may also be seen in other dis￾orders, including inflammatory myopathies, myotonic disorders, acid maltase 
deficiency and hypothyroidism. Following the insertional activity, the normal 
muscle is “quiet” except when the needle is at the end plate.
In muscle or nerve disorders, the resting muscle shows abnormal spontaneous 
activity, which may take several forms:
Fibrillation potentials are spontaneous discharges (duration 1–5 milliseconds) 
arising from single muscle fibres (Figure 5.1). Positive sharp waves (comprising 
an initial positive spike followed by a slower negative potential) have a similar 
significance and often occur with fibrillation potentials. Both usually occur in 
denervation but are also seen in inflammatory myopathies, inclusion body myo￾sitis, muscle membrane instability, and endocrine and metabolic myopathies.
Fasciculation potentials are produced by the spontaneous discharge of muscle 
fibres of a whole motor unit. They are usually associated with motor neurone 22
Muscle diseases
disease, other peripheral nerve or root disorders, and may also be seen in thyro￾toxic myopathy.
Complex repetitive discharges are prolonged bursts of high frequency (sounding 
like a machine gun) that are caused by near-synchronous repetitive firing of a 
group of muscle fibres. They are seen in neurogenic disorders (e.g., hereditary 
motor sensory neuropathy, spinal muscular atrophy) and myopathic disorders 
(inflammatory myopathy, muscular dystrophy, hypothyroidism and acid maltase 
deficiency).
Myotonic discharges are trains of electrical discharge that wax and wane in fre￾quency and amplitude producing a characteristic “dive bomber” sound. They are 
seen in myotonic disorders (dystrophic and non-dystrophic, even in the absence 
of clinical myotonia), acid maltase deficiency, myopathy associated with choles￾terol-lowering agents, periodic paralysis and hypothyroidism.
Myokymia
Repetitively firing single or multiple (grouped) motor units may be seen in demy￾elinating conditions (CIDP, AIDP), radiation plexopathy and peripheral nerve 
hyperexcitability.
Motor unit potentials
A motor unit potential (MUP) is the summation of single-fibre potentials aris￾ing within the same motor unit. It is recorded with an EMG electrode at both 
minimal and maximal activation of the muscle. The amplitude, duration, shape 
and recruitment pattern of MUPs are characteristics that are assessed and may 
provide further information about the nature of the disease (Figure 5.2).
The MUP amplitude depends on the number of fibres discharging close to the 
EMG needle. Therefore, MUP amplitude tends to be reduced in myopathic disor￾ders due to the loss of functional muscle fibres.
In neurogenic disorders, MUP amplitudes are increased as collateral re-innerva￾tion increases the number of fibres within a motor unit. The size of the electrical 
field of an individual muscle fibre is proportional to its diameter, so large MUPs 
may also be seen in conditions in which there is muscle hypertrophy (e.g., some 
muscular dystrophies).
MUP duration is a measure of the degree of synchrony of firing of fibres within 
a motor unit and is determined by the anatomical spread of the fibres within 
the unit, the length of muscle fibres, the speed of electrical propagation along 
the muscle fibres and membrane excitability. The duration is measured from the 
100
uv 100 ms
Figure 5.1 Positive sharp waves and fibrillation potentials.23
Neurophysiology
initial take-off to the return to baseline. It is prolonged in neurogenic disorders 
(with re-innervation and sprouting of axons) and reduced in myopathies due to 
loss of muscle fibres.
MUPs are usually bi- or tri-phasic. Phases are determined by the number of base￾line crossings plus one. Polyphasic potentials arise when there is increased tem￾poral dispersion of the firing of fibres within a motor unit. This may be seen in 
both neurogenic (e.g., motor neuropathies) and myogenic disorders (e.g., inflam￾matory myopathies).
Generally, MUPs have a fairly uniform shape and amplitude. Variability from 
moment to moment is referred to as instability and is usually seen in the con￾text of jitter (see later). Instability occurs in neuromuscular junction disorders, in 
rapid denervation, in early re-innervation and in some inflammatory myopathies 
and inclusion body myositis.
Interference pattern
During increasing voluntary muscle contraction, the rate of individual motor 
unit firing increases and additional units become active (recruitment). A full 
interference pattern is seen when it is no longer possible to identify individual 
MUPs in the summated response.
In neurogenic disorders, the remaining motor neurons must fire faster than nor￾mal to achieve the same force. Even at maximum effort, individual MUPs can 
still be identified and the interference pattern is said to be reduced.
In myopathic disorders, the loss of muscle fibres means that a greater number 
of units need to be active to generate a given force. Therefore, a more complex 
interference pattern develops at a lower force of contraction (early recruitment). 
Neuromuscular junction disorders can also lead to early recruitment.
Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS)
Repetitive supramaximal nerve stimulation at slow rates is usually at 3 Hz and 
measurement of the resulting muscle action potential is used to identify neu￾romuscular junction disorders. In myasthenia gravis, RNS demonstrates decre￾ment: progressive reduction (>10%) of the CMAP amplitude/area from the first 
to fourth or fifth stimuli, followed by partial recovery. Decrement is also seen in 
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome at slow rates of stimulation (Figure 5.3). 
However, at higher rates (20 Hz) or following brief sustained contraction, the 
CMAP amplitude increases by over 100% (facilitation). Decrement may be seen 
in neurogenic disorders such as motor neuron disease.
100
uv 100 ms
Figure 5.2 Myopathy low-amplitude, short-duration MUPs.24
Muscle diseases
Single-fibre EMG and jitter
Single-fibre EMG can be used to detect activity from just a few muscle fibres 
within a motor unit. In this technique, the needle is positioned to record poten￾tials from two muscle fibres, each innervated by a terminal branch of the same 
axon. In response to muscle contraction (or nerve stimulation), the two fibres 
will fire nearly simultaneously. The small time difference between the poten￾tials is termed the interpotential interval and is a few tens of milliseconds. This 
interval reflects the neuromuscular transmission time between the two muscle 
fibres. The mean consecutive difference of successive interpotential intervals is 
called jitter.
The main source of jitter in normal nerve and muscle is the neuromuscular 
junction. Jitter is increased in neuromuscular junction disorders. Increased 
jitter may be seen in neuropathies with denervation and re-innervation and 
in myopathies associated with damage to the neuromuscular region. Jitter is 
reduced in muscular dystrophies and other myopathies that are associated with 
split muscle fibres.
Nerve conduction studies and EMG can be essential to establishing a diagno￾sis, including in situations where the clinical presentation is unclear or complex. 
Whilst relatively non-invasive, these tests are uncomfortable and may not be tol￾erated by all patients. Sedation may be required for these tests in young children. 
The tests may be technically difficult and inconclusive when there is significant 
oedema or excessive adipose tissue. There are no absolute contraindications, 
but a cautious approach is required with EMG in patients who are anticoagu￾lated or have thrombocytopenia, and with NCS in patients with pacemakers and 
implanted cardiac defibrillators. Correct positioning of the electrodes and limb 
temperature are important. Ideally, the limb skin should be >32 C. The intensive 
care unit is a particularly challenging environment in which to undertake these 
tests due to the surrounding electrical noise.
Neurophysiology is a highly skilled area of medicine requiring close commu￾nication between the neurophysiologist and referring clinician. NCS and EMG 
abnormalities are not disease-specific. Therefore, careful consideration of the 
findings within the context of the patient’s presentation is critical.
5mv
5 ms 2 mV
0
0
1
2
3 4 5
1
2
3 4 5
0 1
2
3
4
5
Figure 5.3 Decrement at 3Hz. Low-amplitude resting CMAP and 200% facilita￾tion after brief exercise in Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS).25
Neurophysiology
Further reading
Chichkova RI & Katzin L. (2010). EMG and nerve conduction studies in clinical 
practice. Practical Neurology 9(1):32–38.
Iwanami T et al. (2011). Decremental responses to RNS in motor neuron disease. 
Clinical Neurophysiology 122:2530–2536.
Kimura J. (2013). Electrodiagnosis in Diseases of Nerve and Muscles: Principles 
and Practice, 4th Edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Mills K. (2016). Oxford Textbook of Clinical Neurophysiology, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford.
Rubin DI. (2021). Clinical Neurophysiology, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Tim RW & Sanders DB. (1994). Repetitive nerve stimulation studies in the 
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic syndrome. Muscle Nerve 17:995–1001.
Whittaker RG. (2012). The fundamentals of electromyography. Practical 
Neurology 12(3):187–194.26
Chapter 6
MUSCLE BIOPSY
Andria Merrison and Kathryn Urankar
Muscle biopsy has enabled the definition and diagnosis of muscle disease for 
decades and remains an invaluable diagnostic tool in assessing primary muscle 
disorders. Diagnosis depends on the skills of an expert pathologist working in 
collaboration with a specialist clinician. In this way, a multidisciplinary review of 
biopsies allows the setting of clinical context and careful analysis of biopsy find￾ings, directing subsequent investigations and management strategies.
Muscle biopsies are not without inherent problems. Targeting the affected muscle 
is important in ensuring diagnostic material is sampled, although changes in 
severely affected muscle may mask the subtle changes required for diagnosis. 
Changes within muscle can also be very focal, both within and between muscles. 
For example, patchy changes in inflammatory muscle disease may be missed and 
require more than one biopsy for diagnosis. Interpretation of the changes seen in 
muscle may be difficult.
In some cases, myopathic changes may be secondary to another pathology. For 
example, inclusion body myositis may cause secondary mitochondrial changes 
and neurogenic disorders may show a range of secondary myopathic features. 
Necrosis can be seen in a wide range of different muscle disorders. Inflammatory 
changes in muscle may be primary (i.e. related to an underlying myositis) or an 
associated feature of a number of dystrophic conditions (e.g. Duchenne muscu￾lar dystrophy or some forms of limb girdle muscular dystrophy such as calpain￾opathy). Furthermore, certain pathological findings may be observed in different 
conditions and a variety of histological appearances may be seen in conditions 
associated with the same genetic variant. For example, ryanodine receptor 1 
(RyR1) disorders can give rise to rods and/or cores, minicores, acute necrosis or 
fibre-type disproportion. Conversely, cores and rods are observed in association 
with variants in a host of other genes.
The genetic revolution has had an impact on the utility of muscle biopsy in the 
diagnosis of muscle disease. The rapidly developing application of next-genera￾tion sequencing has led to the analysis of panels of genes which enables a faster 
and more cost-effective diagnostic approach. Therefore, there are circumstances 
where advances in genetic testing have made muscle biopsy unnecessary. This is 
true for patients presenting with classical features of some muscular dystrophies, 
e.g. facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, myotonic dystrophy and many of 
the limb girdle muscular dystrophies.
Muscle diseases Muscle biopsy
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-6
10.1201/9780429429323-627
Muscle biopsy
Muscle biopsy
However, given the complex nature of some of the variants responsible for neu￾romuscular conditions, pathogenic variants may not be identified by routine 
genetic testing and may require the application of more specific techniques. 
Additionally, many new variants of uncertain significance are being uncovered 
through expansion in genetic testing and may require correlation with muscle 
biopsy to establish the pathogenicity of these novel variants. In some mitochon￾drial diseases, the responsible mitochondrial DNA mutation may only be found 
in muscle and therefore a muscle biopsy will be required for confirmatory genetic 
testing.
Despite all of these issues, muscle biopsy can be extremely useful. The context of 
the clinical picture remains essential in determining the diagnostic potential of 
muscle biopsy.28
Muscle diseases
SAMPLING TECHNIQUE: OPEN AND NEEDLE 
BIOPSIES
Open muscle biopsies, usually carried out under local anaesthetic, allow direct 
visualisation of the muscle sampled and enable a larger, well-orientated and often 
less damaged sample to be submitted for analysis. This is the preferred method 
of sampling in adults. Needle biopsies (also performed with local anaesthetic) 
may allow for a more rapid acquisition of muscle and provide the opportunity to 
biopsy a range of muscles. This technique is often utilised in paediatric patients.
Open muscle biopsies are commonly carried out on vastus lateralis (quadriceps), 
gastrocnemius or deltoid muscles. Most is known about these muscles, and biop￾sies taken from other areas (e.g. distal or paraspinal muscles) may be more dif￾ficult to interpret.
Ideally, a muscle biopsy should be taken from an affected muscle that is mildly 
or moderately weak. In severely weak muscles, the microscopic appearances are 
often those of “end-stage muscle”: muscle fibres are extensively atrophied and 
replaced by fat and connective tissue resulting in loss of specific diagnostic path￾ological features. Imaging, particularly magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), can 
be used in order to select an appropriate (affected) area of muscle for biopsy and 
may be particularly helpful in investigating patchy inflammatory muscle disease.
Once the sample has been taken, it is submitted fresh to the pathology laboratory 
in order to undergo a large range of histochemical, immunohistochemical and 
other testing. An initial sample is usually prepared for light microscopy where 
a panel of routine histological, histochemical and immunocytochemical stains 
can be applied. The specific tests performed depend on the diagnostic question 
and the initial pathology identified. Another sample of tissue is preserved in glu￾taraldehyde and can be submitted for electron microscopy. A third sample of 
tissue (if available) is frozen in liquid nitrogen for future biochemical and DNA 
analysis. Fresh tissue is required for testing in all cases, as fixation in formalde￾hyde destroys the activity of enzymes and affects analysis. Delays in transit to the 
laboratory can have similar effects. Immersion in water or saline may also distort 
some of the features observed.
Muscle histochemistry
Muscle is comprised of a combination of muscle fibres, nerves and blood vessels 
encased in a connective tissue sheath which protects the muscle from the effects 
of repeated contraction and relaxation. Muscle fibres are comprised of multiple 
myofibrils which themselves are composed of a series of sarcomeres, made up 
of interconnecting thin (actin) and thick (myosin) filaments. Contractions of 
muscle occur as a result of ATP-dependent movement of actin along the myosin 
filaments.
Enzyme histochemistry identifies two main fibre types: type 1 or slow-twitch 
fibres, and type 2 or fast-twitch fibres. Type 1 fibres have high oxidative and low 29
Muscle biopsy
glycolytic activity and are capable of generating force over a protracted period of 
time. In contrast, type 2 fibres have low oxidative and high glycolytic activity and 
are able to generate a large force rapidly. Type 2 fibres can be further subdivided 
into type 2A, 2B and 2C fibres, with the latter showing moderate rather than 
low oxidative activity. The different myofibre subtypes can be identified by stain￾ing with adenosine triphosphatase (ATPase) at different pHs. However, with the 
advent of immunohistochemistry, the use of antibodies against the myosin heavy 
chain isoforms is now more commonly utilised.
Motor nerve cell bodies originate in the anterior horn of the spinal cord. The 
neurone from the cell body branches to supply a variable number of muscle fibres 
(usually several hundred). The anterior horn cell, axon and the muscle fibres 
supplied constitute the motor unit. Muscle fibres from one motor unit are of a 
uniform type, and distributed in a limited area but randomly scattered and not 
clustered.
Most muscles in humans are of mixed fibre type, arranged in a checkerboard pat￾tern. However, the proportion of each fibre type varies between muscles. Many 
factors can influence fibre type, including denervation, neuromuscular dysfunc￾tion, hormones, exercise, disuse, drugs and age (Table 6.1). 
Histological stains
Haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) staining is the most important histological stain 
used in the interpretation of muscle biopsies. H&E stains highlight the overall 
structure of muscle tissue with muscle fibres appearing pink or eosinophilic, 
while nuclei appear blue. H&E stains enable the identification of a number of 
features, including myofibre size and variation, location of nuclei, the presence or 
absence of connective tissue (fibrosis and/or fat), necrotic fibres and/or basophilic 
degenerative/regenerative fibres, vacuoles, and inflammation. In addition, they 
allow for the assessment of blood vessels and nerves within the muscle. Rather 
than the presence of a single diagnostic feature, it is the combination of features 
within the context of the clinical setting that helps establish the diagnosis (Figure 
6.1 and Figure 6.2).
Table 6.1 Muscle fibre types and histochemistry
Type 1, Slow-twitch fibres Type 2, fast-twitch fibres
ATPase Dark at pH 4.5 Dark at pH 9.5
MATPase Bright blue 2B violet, 2C light blue
PAS Low glycogen content 
(pale)
High glycogen content 
(dark)
Oil Red O High lipid content (red) Low lipid content (pale)
NADH/SDH High oxidative activity 
(dark)
Low oxidative activity 
(pale)
COX High oxidative activity 
(dark)
Low oxidative activity 
(pale)
Phosphorylase Low activity (paler) High activity (darker)30
Muscle diseases
There are a number of patterns identifiable on routine H&E stains that can indi￾cate a potential diagnosis and direct further studies. The classic features of a dys￾trophy include muscle fibre size variation, atrophy of myofibres, the presence of 
scattered necrotic fibres and/or basophilic degenerative/regenerative fibres, com￾bined with an increase interstitial connective tissue. Split fibres are an additional 
feature identified in many limb girdle muscular dystrophies. A patchy inflam￾matory infiltrate may be seen in a number of dystrophies including Duchenne/
Becker muscular dystrophy, dysferlinopathies, calpainopathies and fasciohum￾eral muscular dystrophy (Figure 6.3).
Figure 6.1 Normal muscle H&E 20×. (A) Adult muscle. (B) Infant muscle. These 
sections demonstrate the difference in myofibre diameters between the imma￾ture muscle of infants and children and the fully developed muscle of an adult.
Figure 6.2 Myopathic muscle. H, hypertrophic myofibres; A, atrophic fibres. 
Green arrows highlight internal nuclei.31
Muscle biopsy
The term “myopathy” is often used to describe more non-specific findings of 
muscle fibre size variation, type 1 fibre predominance and increased internal 
nuclei. Necrotic fibres and other various features may be seen but an increase in 
interstitial connective tissue is not characteristic.
The presence of group fibre atrophy, pyknotic nuclear clusters and fibre type 
grouping, alongside targets or targetoid fibres, point towards a neurogenic 
pathology (e.g. motor neurone disease, peripheral motor neuropathy). However, 
the changes seen may be subtle and non-specific and can depend on the duration 
and severity of denervation. Small angular fibres may form early in denervation, 
while in more chronic disorders, fibre type grouping may be seen (better demon￾strated on MATPase, NADH or myosin staining). Fibre type grouping arises due 
to re-innervation by compensatory collaterals sprouting from the terminal axons 
of surviving neurons (Figure 6.4).
The presence of necrotic fibres and their distribution can be helpful in identify￾ing the underlying aetiology, with groups of necrotic fibres seen in muscular dys￾trophies, perifascicular necrosis in antisynthetase disease, and isolated necrotic 
fibres in toxic or autoimmune aetiologies (i.e IMNM and in metabolic disorders. 
Vacuoles or “holes” within the muscle fibre vary in appearance and location 
within the muscle fibre, a feature which can also be used to point towards an 
underlying cause. However, correlation with material present within the vacuoles 
is typically required.
A panel of other histochemical stains is available to refine the diagnosis sus￾pected based on the initial H&E findings (see Table 6.2). The modified Gömöri 
trichrome (GTC) stain is a very useful stain, enabling the identification of nuclei 
Figure 6.3 Dystrophic muscle. (A) Increased variation in myofibre dimeters, with 
frequent hypertrophic and atrophic fibres, combined with increased internal 
nuclei, increased endomysial connective tissue and occasional necrotic fibres 
(pale pink fibres). (B) More extensive changes with the replacement of muscle 
fibres by fat and connective tissue combined with further increased endomysial 
connective tissue.32
Muscle diseases
including those of inflammatory cells (which stain bright red), muscle fibres 
(which stain a blue-green colour), connective tissue (which stains a paler green), 
myelin (which stains bright red) and mitochondria (which also stain bright red). 
The accumulation of mitochondria within type 1 fibres and around the periph￾ery of “ragged fibres” can be one of the characteristic features of mitochondrial 
disorders. GTC staining can also identify other pathological features in muscle, 
including nemaline rods, tubular aggregates, rimmed vacuoles and cytoplasmic 
vacuoles, all of which stain red (Figure 6.5 and Figure 6.6).
Histochemical analysis of muscle also includes assessment of the storage of 
energy sources within muscle. Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS staining) is utilised to 
demonstrate both normal and abnormal storage of glycogen within myofibres; 
the latter is normally observed in vacuoles in myofibres. Excess glycogen may 
also be seen lying freely between myofibrils. It is most abundant in disorders 
of the proximal end of the glycogenolytic/glycolytic pathway (e.g. debrancher 
enzyme deficiency) but is usually absent in disorders of the distal end of the path￾way. In acid maltase deficiency (Pompe disease), excess glycogen may be seen 
within lysosomes (Figure 6.7).
Oil Red O or Sudan Black staining are utilised to demonstrate the lipid content 
of muscle fibres. Type 1 fibres normally contain greater amounts of lipid com￾pared to type 2 fibres, while this amount is increased in association with under￾lying lipid storage disorders. However, an increase in lipid storage may not be 
identified in all cases. For example, in carnitine palmitoyltransferase deficiency 
(CPT2 deficiency; the commonest cause of recurrent rhabdomyolysis in adults) 
one may only see excess lipid in the muscle fibres immediately after an acute 
episode (Figure 6.8).
Figure 6.4 H&E muscle demonstrating group fibre atrophy on low power 10×
(A) and higher power (B) comprising clusters of small atrophic fibres.33
Muscle biopsy
Figure 6.6 Modified Gömöri trichrome staining. (A) Rimmed vacuoles within 
myofibres. (B) The presence of numerous nemaline rods within myofibres.
Figure 6.5 Ragged red fibres in mitochondrial myopathies. (A) H&E 40× granu￾lar fibres with peripheral enhancement of staining. (B and C) Modified Gömöri 
trichrome 40× highlighting the peripheral accumulation of mitochondria giving 
the fibres a “ragged red” appearance.34
Muscle diseases
Figure 6.7 (A) H&E of muscle showing variation in myofibre diameters, increased 
connective tissue and invasion of intact fibres by inflammatory cells. (B) H&E 
showing subsarcolemmal vacuolation typical of glycogen storage disorders. (C) 
H&E showing increased internal nuclei characteristic of centronuclear myopathy. 
(D) Electron microscopy highlighting an internal nucleus.
Figure 6.8 (A) PAS staining showing normal glycogen content in myofibres, with 
variation in content between type 1 and 2 fibres. (B) Normal Oil Red O staining 
showing normal lipid content in myofibres with variation in content between type 
1 and 2 fibres. (C) PAS staining demonstrating accumulation of glycogen in a 
subsarcolemmal vacuole typical of a glycogen storage disorder. (D) Oil Red O 
staining showing increased lipid content in myofibres indicative of a lipid storage 
myopathy,35
Muscle biopsy
Histochemical techniques
Histochemical stains are used to demonstrate the biochemical properties of 
specific fibre types (and their selective involvement in disease). ATPase stain￾ing at different pHs can differentiate between type 1 (slow-twitch) and type 2 
(fast-twitch) muscle fibres. However, immunostaining for myosin heavy chain 
fibre types is now more commonly performed. In normal muscle, there should 
be a chequerboard distribution of fibre types. This pattern may be lost in certain 
muscles, where a predominance of a particular fibre type may be normal (i.e. type 
1 fibres in axial muscles and type 2 fibres in biceps and hamstrings). However, 
the pattern may also be lost in certain myopathies and in neurogenic disorders, 
where groupings of fibre types can be seen. Selective type 2 fibre atrophy is a 
non-specific finding reported in association with a variety of muscle problems, 
including disuse, ageing, paraneoplastic disorders and myasthenia gravis (Figure 
6.9 and Figure 6.10).
Histochemical stains can also be useful in demonstrating the reduction or 
absence of an enzyme (e.g. phosphorylase in McArdle disease) or excess of a par￾ticular substrate (e.g. glycogen in glycogen storage disorders). They can also show 
structural changes in muscle that would not be evident with routine histological 
stains (e.g. cores in core myopathies or distribution of mitochondria).
Reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-tetrazolium reductase (NADH-TR), 
succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and cytochrome c oxidase (COX) are the most 
useful oxidative enzymes studied in muscle. NADH-TR stains type 1 fibres a 
Figure 6.9 (A) MATPase histochemical staining showing relatively normal che￾querboard distribution of myofibre types. Slow/type 1, dark blue; fast/type 2, 
light blue. (B) ATPase pH 4.5 showing grouping of myofibre types (dark, type 1; 
light, type 2) suggesting an underlying neurogenic disorder. (C) MATPase stain￾ing highlighting myopathic type grouping of type 1 fibres (dark blue) without 
associated grouping of type 1 fibres.36
Muscle diseases
darker blue than type 2 fibres (in contrast to myosin ATPase staining). It does not 
tend to stain the myofibrils but does stain the intermyofibrillar network (mito￾chondria and sarcoplasmic reticulum) and is therefore helpful in assessing the 
myofibrillar structure of myofibres. Cores, minicores and targets are best rec￾ognised on NADH staining. In addition, NADH staining can demonstrate the 
presence of lobulated fibres, moth-eaten fibres or ragged blue fibres (i.e. fibres 
with increased peripheral accumulation of mitochondria). Each of these findings 
can point towards specific underlying aetiologies.
SDH (blue) and COX (brown) are both mitochondrial stains and therefore also 
help distinguish fibre types (similar to NADHR), with type 1 fibres staining 
darker. COX staining in isolation helps identify COX-negative fibres which result 
from the impaired COX activity often seen in association with many types of 
mitochondrial disorders. However, combined staining for SDH and COX is most 
useful in the identification of COX-negative fibres, which appear blue rather than 
pale or negative.
There are a number of other histochemical stains which are useful in the diag￾nosis of muscle disorders. Congo red or crystal violet staining can help iden￾tify the deposition of amyloid in inclusion body myositis, while increased acid 
phosphatase staining can help confirm a diagnosis of Pompe disease. Alkaline 
phosphatase staining can highlight necrotic fibres and/or regenerating/immune 
myofibres, while positive staining for non-specific esterase can highlight dener￾vated myofibres (see Table 6.2 and Table 6.3).
Figure 6.10 NADH histochemical staining. (A) A relatively normal chequerboard 
distribution of myofibre types. (B) Grouping of fibre types in a neurogenic disorder 
(dark fibres, type 1; light, type 2). (C) Targets within myofibres, showing a pale centre 
and a darkened rim. (D) Central cores showing pallor/loss of staining in myofibres.37
Muscle biopsy
Table 6.2 Histological and histochemical stains
Stain Use
H&E Muscle fibre size and structure, nuclei, fibrosis, 
inflammation, nerves, blood vessels
NADH-TR Muscle fibre type (type 1 fibres dark blue, type 2 
light blue), mitochondrial distribution and 
abnormality; myofibrillar disruption including 
cores, targets, moth-eaten and lobulated fibres
SDH Muscle fibre type (type 1 fibres dark brown, type 
2 light brown), mitochondrial distribution and 
abnormality; myofibrillar disruption including 
cores, targets, moth-eaten and lobulated fibres
Myosin ATPase Muscle fibre type (type 1 fibres light brown, type 
2 dark brown) distribution
COX Muscle fibre type, mitochondrial distribution 
and mitochondrial activity
Combined COX–SDH Fibres with reduced/absent COX activity (some 
mitochondrial disorders) appear blue
PAS Identifies excess glycogen (and other 
polysaccharides)
Oil Red O/Sudan Black Lipid content (excess seen in lipid storage 
disorders, mitochondrial disorders) appears red 
on Oil Red O and black on Sudan Black
Congo red Amyloid (present in sporadic and hereditary 
inclusion body myositis)
MHC class I (β2 
microglobulin)
Upregulated expression in inflammatory muscle 
disease/primary myositis
Phosphorylase Absent in McArdle disease (type V glycogenosis) 
and with other defects in glycogen synthesis; 
also identifies fibre type and cores (glycogen 
absence)
Phosphofructokinase Absent in type VII glycogenosis; can be difficult 
to assess
Myoadenylate deaminase Myoadenylate deaminase deficiency, tubular 
aggregates (dark); can be difficult to assess
Acid phosphatase Raised in lysosomal storage disorders, type II 
glycogenosis, vacuolar myopathy and 
degenerating/necrotic fibres; very little is seen 
in normal muscle
Alkaline phosphatase Raised in blood vessels (and other cell 
membranes where active transport occurs), 
some inflammatory myopathies and focal 
necrosis
(Continued)38
Muscle diseases
Immunohistochemistry
Antibodies directed against specific muscle proteins associated with the sar￾colemmal contractile apparatus are routinely used as part of the assessment of 
muscle when an underlying dystrophic process is suspected. In general, when a 
pathogenic or disease-causing variant is present, there will be a loss of staining 
for the affected protein. For example, in Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), 
there will be an absence of staining for dystrophin. In Becker muscular dystrophy 
(BMD), dystrophin staining may be reduced, patchy or focally lost but may also 
be normal. Secondary loss of sarcoglycan expression and increased dystrophin 
expression may also be observed in both DMD and BMD. However, advances in 
genetic testing have meant that in many suspected cases of muscular dystrophy, 
a muscle biopsy is not performed. There remains a utility for muscle biopsy in 
cases when a variant of unknown significance (VUS) is identified or a suspected 
Table 6.2 (Continued) Histological and histochemical stains
Stain Use
Menadione-linked 
α-glycerophosphate 
dehydrogenase
Acid maltase deficiency (Pompe disease); 
reduction of bodies and granular inclusions; 
accumulation of myofibrillar material in 
myofibrillar myopathies
Acetylcholinesterase High acetylcholinesterase activity at 
neuromuscular junctions and some vacuoles
Abbreviations: H&E, haematoxylin and eosin; NADH-TR, reduced nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide-tetrazolium reductase; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; COX, 
cytochrome c oxidase; PAS, periodic acid-Schiff; MHC, major histocompati￾bility complex.
Table 6.3 Histological stains
Stain Use
H&E Muscle fibre size and structure, nuclei, fibrosis, inflammation, 
nerves, blood vessels
NADH-TR Muscle fibre type (type 1 fibres dark blue, type 2 light blue), 
mitochondrial distribution and abnormality, myofibrillar 
disruption, cores
SDH Muscle fibre type (type 1 fibres dark brown, type 2 light 
brown), mitochondrial distribution and abnormality, cores
Myosin ATPase Muscle fibre type (type 1 fibres light brown, type 2 dark brown) 
distribution
COX Fibre type pattern, fibres with abnormal mitochondria or 
reduced mitochondrial activity, cores
Oil Red O Lipid (intracellular): red
Sudan Black Lipid and phospholipid: black
Abbreviations: H&E, haematoxylin and eosin; NADH-TR, reduced nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide-tetrazolium reductase; SDH, succinate dehydrogenase; COX, 
cytochrome c oxidase.39
Muscle biopsy
variant is not detected. Demonstration of pathological changes in the muscle will 
help confirm the pathogenesis of the VUS and/or confirm the loss of the func￾tional protein (Figure 6.11).
Immunohistochemical stains are of further utility in the diagnosis and classi￾fication of forms of myositis. Immunostaining is used to determine the types 
of inflammatory cells present, including lymphocytes (T and B cells) and mac￾rophages. Upregulation of other inflammatory markers is usually seen, in par￾ticular upregulation of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class II (i.e. β-2 
microglobulin).
The characteristic feature of inflammatory myopathies is the presence of inflam￾matory infiltrates, mainly lymphocytes and some macrophages. Upregulation of 
MHC class I molecules may also be seen. More recently, the pattern of upregula￾tion of MHC class II, expression of MXA (human myxovirus resistance protein 
A) and expression of type 1 interferon has been used to subclassify types of pri￾mary myositis.
In dermatomyositis, the inflammatory infiltrates tend to be perivascular and are 
mainly comprised of helper T-cells (T4+, CD4). Isolated necrotic fibres or groups 
of fibres (due to infarction) and perifascicular atrophy may also be seen. These 
fibres often express membrane attack complex (MAC or C5b9), which can also 
be expressed in capillaries. While MHC class I expression is seen, often with a 
peripheral gradient of staining, there is an absence of expression of MHC class II. 
Sarcoplasmic MXA expression is observed.
Figure 6.11 Immunohistochemical staining of muscles for the dystrophic-asso￾ciated protein. (A) Retained “normal” sarcolemmal staining for DAPs, although 
variation in myofibre diameters is noted combined with occasional split (invagi￾nated) fibres. (B) Retained normal staining for dystrophin compared to (C) com￾plete loss of staining for dystrophin in Duchenne muscular dystrophy. (D) Normal 
staining for merosin in unaffected muscle compared to (E) complete loss of sar￾colemmal staining for merosin in merosin-deficient LGMD.40
Muscle diseases
Antisynthetase syndrome is characterised by perifascicular necrosis rather than 
atrophy and CD138-positive plasma cells may be present as part of the inflamma￾tory infiltrate. Upregulation of both MHC class I and class II is characteristic and 
there is the absence of the type 1 interferon signature.
In contrast, inclusion body myositis inflammatory infiltrates tend to be scattered 
within the endomysium of fascicles, with cytotoxic T-cells (T8+, CD8) making 
up the majority of infiltrating cells. Partial invasion of muscle fibres is common 
(i.e. clusters of inflammatory cells apparently compressing or indenting non￾necrotic muscle fibres) and necrotic fibres can be seen scattered throughout the 
fascicles. In inclusion body myositis, there will be a generalised upregulation of 
MHC class I without expression of MHC class II. MAC expression may be seen 
on some necrotic fibres but is not observed on capillaries. The classic diagnostic 
feature is the identification of p62 positive granular subsarcolemmal inclusions 
within rimmed vacuoles. These can also stain with TDP-43, LC3 and ubiquitin. 
Concomitant mitochondrial abnormalities are characteristic.
Immune-mediated necrotising myopathies tend to show a paucity of inflamma￾tion within the muscle and instead demonstrate the presence of scattered necrotic 
fibres. The necrotic fibres tend to show sarcoplasmic expression of MAC (C5b9) 
and a characteristic pattern of diffuse sarcoplasmic staining for p62. MHC class I 
may be upregulated, but MHC class II expression is never observed.
Electron microscopy
Although considered to be an outdated modality in other fields, electron micros￾copy (EM) remains extremely helpful in the diagnosis of muscle disorders. EM 
allows for visualisation of the ultrastructure of muscle, can identify distortions in 
muscle structure and the presence of characteristic inclusions, and can confirm 
the nature of a range of structural abnormalities which characterise many of the 
common congenital myopathies. EM is particularly useful in identifying abnor￾mal mitochondria and characteristic paracrystalline inclusions in mitochondria, 
confirming an underlying mitochondrial myopathy prior to enzymatic or genetic 
testing. It can also demonstrate the presence of other characteristic inclusions 
such as rods in nemaline myopathy, glycogen within vacuoles in the various gly￾cogen storage disorders, and the tubulofilamentous inclusions often present in 
inclusion body myositis or oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy.
Congenital myopathies
Congenital myopathies are a diverse group of disorders that may demonstrate a 
variety of features on muscle biopsy, including ultrastructural abnormalities. In 
some forms, the muscle fibre architecture is disrupted (e.g. central core disease, 
multicore or centronuclear myopathy) and nuclei may be displaced from the 
periphery to the centre of muscle fibres (e.g. centronuclear myopathy). In other 
types of congenital myopathy, particular proteins form abnormal structures or 
accumulations (e.g. nemaline myopathy, myofibrillar myopathy) or demonstrate 
abnormality within organelles (e.g. tubular aggregate myopathy). Depending on 
the subtype, these changes can be identified on routine H&E stains or on particu￾lar histochemical and/or immunohistochemical stains. 41
Muscle biopsy
Further reading
Dubowitz V, Sewry CA & Oldfors A. (2021). Muscle biopsy: A Practical Approach. 
5th edn. London: Saunders Elsevier.
Merve A, Schneider U, Kara E, Papadopoulou C & Stenzel W. (2022). Muscle 
biopsy in myositis: What the rheumatologist needs to know. Best Practice 
Research Clinical Rheumatology 36(2):101763.42
Chapter 7
MUSCLE IMAGING
Rajat Chowdhury
Muscle imaging studies can provide an increased understanding of neuromus￾cular disease patterns, as well as their activity, severity and distribution, to help 
provide answers to diagnostic challenges. In addition, imaging studies are often 
used to support clinical and laboratory findings. Magnetic resonance imag￾ing (MRI) is helpful in evaluating specific areas of muscle oedema and areas of 
replacement of muscle tissue by fat, muscle volume loss or increase; as well as 
identifying which muscles are involved and which geographical territory within 
the affected muscles the changes are affecting. MRI is both sensitive and specific 
in the diagnosis of many neuromuscular diseases, particularly in the diagnosis of 
inherited myopathies, which have certain typical and/or characteristic patterns 
of muscle involvement or sparing which can be visualised on MRI. For example, 
in most cases of ryanodine receptor 1 (RYR1) myopathy, the vastus muscles are 
affected more than the rectus femoris muscle in the thigh, and the soleus muscle 
is more affected than the medial and lateral gastrocnemius muscles in the poste￾rior calf. MRI can also help identify appropriate targets for muscle biopsy.
Muscle MRI is also helpful in evaluating inflammatory myopathies not only 
for diagnosis with certain characteristic patterns relating to specific inflamma￾tory myopathies but also for monitoring progress and response to treatment. 
Most inflammatory myopathies demonstrate diffuse inflammatory fluid in the 
affected muscles, as evidenced by T2 signal hyperintensity, with the exception of 
inclusion body myositis (IBM), where there is an overriding asymmetric pattern 
of fatty infiltration within the affected muscles.
Computed tomography (CT) is sensitive in detecting the replacement of mus￾cle tissue with fat and reduction in muscle volume, particularly in advanced or 
chronic neuromuscular disease. It may also be used if MRI is contraindicated, 
although early disease is usually difficult to identify on CT (Figure 7.1).
Ultrasound examination can be helpful in detecting fluid and oedema in the soft 
tissues as well as in the identification of the replacement of muscle tissue with fat. 
Ultrasound is often used to guide radiological muscle biopsies.
Dystrophinopathies, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, are seen to preferen￾tially affect the gluteal and adductor magnus muscle in the thigh and the gastrocne￾mius and peroneus longus muscle in the calf on MRI scans. Limb girdle muscular 
dystrophies, in contrast, are seen to preferentially affect the posterior thigh muscles 
in addition to the gluteal and adductor muscles. The muscles least affected include 
the gracilis, sartorius and tibialis posterior muscles (Figure 7.2 and Figure 7.3).
Muscle diseases Muscle imaging
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-7
10.1201/9780429429323-743
Muscle imaging
Muscle imaging
Figure 7.1 The distinctive and characteristic CT pattern of replacement of mus￾cle tissue with fat in the medial gastrocnemius muscles bilaterally in the case of 
IBM. MG, medial gastrocnemius. 
Figure 7.2 The distinctive and characteristic MRI pattern of muscle involvement 
in collagen VI-related myopathies, which target the periphery of the vastus mus￾cles and gastrocnemius muscles. VL, vastus lateralis; RF, rectus femoris.
Figure 7.3 The distinctive and characteristic MRI pattern of muscle involvement 
in collagen VI-related myopathies, which target the periphery of the vastus mus￾cles and gastrocnemius muscles. MG, medial gastrocnemius.44
Muscle diseases
Muscle MRI protocols for neuromuscular disease should include both fat-sen￾sitive (T1-weighted) and fluid-sensitive sequences (T2-weighted). The fluid￾sensitive sequences should be performed with fat saturation (FS), usually STIR 
(short-tau inversion recovery), T2 or proton density (PD), to allow accurate eval￾uation of fat and fluid distribution within muscle. These sequences should be per￾formed in multiple planes (usually coronal and axial). In general, muscle oedema 
is identified by signal hyperintensity on STIR, T2FS and PDFS sequences, and 
fatty tissue replacement is identified by signal hyperintensity on T1-weighted 
sequences (Figure 7.4 and Figure 7.5). The key diagnostic patterns are assessed 
from the axial series of the lower limbs which is usually of high diagnostic yield 
but whole-body MRI can often give a more specific analysis with regard to which 
muscles are preferentially affected and which are preferentially spared. This can 
be particularly useful in diagnosing hereditary myopathies. In more advanced 
Figure 7.4 An inflammatory myopathy with diffuse T2 signal hyperintensity in 
the thigh muscles, especially in vastus lateralis (VL), vastus intermedius (VI), graci￾lis (G) and semitendinosus (ST), along with inflammatory fluid tracking along the 
anterior and intermuscular fasciae, more so on the right.
Figure 7.5 Complete resolution of Figure 7.4 with glucocorticoid treatment.45
Muscle imaging
diseases, however, muscle involvement can be far more widespread and thus 
diagnostically less helpful.
The differential diagnosis of inflammatory muscle signals on MRI is wide and 
includes polymyositis, dermatomyositis, drug toxicity, infection and rhabdomy￾olysis. The differential diagnosis of fat infiltration in muscle on MRI includes 
denervation and neuropathy, disuse and previous trauma. Interpretation of mus￾cle MRI is therefore dependent on the clinical context, which will then predeter￾mine its value in guiding related diagnostic and management pathways.46
Chapter 8
GENETIC INVESTIGATIONS IN 
NEUROMUSCULAR DISEASES
Kate Sergeant and Carl Fratter
INTRODUCTION
Genetic investigations play an important role in the diagnosis of suspected 
neuromuscular disease. Establishing a genetic diagnosis provides information 
regarding prognosis and risks to other family members and allows advice to be 
given in relation to reproductive options. Moreover, genetic testing increasingly 
allows for the possibility of targeted treatments and the potential for inclusion in 
clinical trials. The “genomic revolution” has led to genetic investigations increas￾ingly becoming a first-line investigation in the diagnosis of neuromuscular dis￾ease. Historically, a muscle biopsy was often performed early in the diagnostic 
pathway, and results of muscle histology and biochemical analyses would then 
guide genetic testing, which was typically limited to testing for common patho￾genic variants or sequencing of individual genes known to be involved in the sus￾pected conditions. The development of next-generation sequencing (NGS) and 
other technological advances has enabled timely and cost-effective genetic test￾ing of blood DNA with a high diagnostic yield (Herman et al., 2021). Therefore, 
muscle biopsy may now only be necessary in more limited circumstances, such 
as when genetic testing has not led to a diagnosis or when genetic testing has 
detected variants of uncertain clinical significance.
Currently, a number of genetic testing strategies and approaches may be employed 
depending on the suspected neuromuscular disorder and the resources available 
to genetic testing laboratories. These include simple low-cost targeted tests (e.g., 
copy number variant detection for dystrophinopathies or testing for the repeat 
expansions associated with myotonic dystrophy) as well as more comprehensive 
NGS approaches such as whole-exome sequencing (WES) and whole-genome 
sequencing (WGS).
For consideration of appropriate genetic testing methods, neuromuscular dis￾orders can be grouped by their genetic characteristics. The subsequent sections 
summarise these characteristics and outline appropriate testing strategies, based 
on current approaches in the United Kingdom and in many other centres/coun￾tries worldwide. This is followed by a discussion of the limitations of genetic 
testing.
Muscle diseases Genetic investigations in neuromuscular diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-8
10.1201/9780429429323-847
Genetic investigations in neuromuscular diseases
Genetic investigations in neuromuscular diseases
Dystrophinopathies
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) 
are caused by pathogenic variants in the X-linked DMD gene. This gene encodes 
dystrophin, the largest gene in the human genome. The majority of causative 
variants are large deletions or duplications of one or more exons. Therefore, ini￾tial genetic analysis is often limited to testing for exon-level copy number vari￾ants (CNVs) using targeted methods such as multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification (MLPA) analysis. If a causative deletion or duplication is not iden￾tified, then sequence analysis of the coding regions of the DMD gene can be car￾ried out to detect small nucleotide variants (SNVs), such as missense or nonsense 
changes. More detailed information regarding genetic analysis for DMD and 
BMD can be found in “EMQN Best Practice Guidelines for Genetic Testing in 
Dystrophinopathies” (Fratter et al., 2020).
Short tandem repeat expansion disorders
Some neuromuscular diseases are caused by expansion of short tandem repeats 
(STRs) and these often require more specialised testing techniques. Expansions 
are typically categorised into ranges for normal, intermediate and pathogenic 
numbers of repeats. Due to the large size of some pathogenic expansions and the 
nature of the repetitive sequence, they can be refractory to standard polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) amplification and may be missed by short-read NGS and 
bioinformatic analysis pipelines, which are usually optimised for calling smaller 
sequence variants.
Myotonic dystrophy type I (DM1) and type II (DM2) are caused by monoallelic 
expansion of repeats in the non-coding regions of the DMPK (CTG) and CNBP
(CCTG) genes, respectively. Each disorder can be excluded by the presence of 
two alleles within the normal repeat size range at the particular locus. This can 
be detected by conventional PCR across the repeat region followed by sizing of 
the amplification products, typically by fluorescent capillary electrophoresis. If 
only one allele in the normal range is detected, then further investigation using 
repeat-primed PCR and/or Southern blotting analysis is necessary to differen￾tiate between homozygosity for a normal-sized allele and an expansion in the 
affected range. WGS technologies may be used to detect repeat expansions if 
there is no PCR step in the initial library preparation, which avoids preferential 
amplification of the shorter fragments. Specialised bioinformatic data analysis 
tools can then be employed to interrogate the WGS data to identify repeat expan￾sions. Using WGS to detect repeat expansions allows for alternative diagnoses to 
be interrogated at the same time (see later).
Similarly, oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is almost exclusively 
caused by expansion of a GCN (where N can be any nucleotide) repeat, encoding 
the amino acid alanine, in exon 1 of the PABPN1 gene. However, in OPMD, the 
largest expansions consist of only 17 GCN repeats and so are readily detected by 
a simple PCR and sizing assay, as well as being detectable by WGS and most other 
NGS methods.48
Muscle diseases
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is caused by very unusual 
genetic mechanisms; these differ between FSHD type 1 (FSHD1) and FSHD type 
2 (FSHD2) but ultimately lead to the relaxation of chromatin in the subtelomeric 
region of the q arm of chromosome 4 (4q) and hence expression of the DUX4
gene.
FSHD1 is caused by contraction (partial deletion) of the 3.3kb D4Z4 subtelomeric 
repeats on chromosome 4q. The contraction also has to be on a “permissive” hap￾lotype in order to be associated with disease. A very similar repeat region is pres￾ent on chromosome 10, but this is not associated with disease. Testing is typically 
carried out by Southern blotting to size the D4Z4 repeat region using restriction 
enzymes to distinguish between repeats on chromosomes 4 and 10. Haplotype 
analysis can also be carried out to determine if contracted D4Z4 repeats are pres￾ent on a permissive background.
FSHD2 is caused by hypomethylation of the D4Z4 repeats and most cases of 
hypomethylation result from a pathogenic sequence variant in the SMCHD1 gene. 
If there are clinical features typical of FSHD but initial analysis has not identi￾fied a contracted D4Z4 repeat on chromosome 4 (but has identified at least one 
permissive haplotype), then methylation studies for FSHD2 should be consid￾ered, typically undertaken by bisulphite conversion of genomic DNA (to convert 
unmethylated cytosine to uracil) and subsequent sequencing. Finally, sequence 
analysis of SMCHD1 can be carried out in order to identity a pathogenic variant 
if hypomethylation is detected.
Genetically heterogeneous neuromuscular disorders
For groups of disorders with considerable genetic heterogeneity, such as limb gir￾dle muscular dystrophies (LGMD) or congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS), 
a wider approach to genetic analysis is generally more effective. Panels of genes 
(for example, those curated in PanelApp, https://panelapp.genomicsengland.co
.uk/) can be sequenced simultaneously using targeted NGS technologies or a 
virtual panel can be applied to exome or genome data. Gene agnostic exome or 
genome analysis may be more useful where there is a much wider differential 
diagnosis, but it usually requires sequencing of multiple family members, such as 
a parent–child trio for paediatric patients without a family history.
Analysis of sequencing data for SNVs is typically restricted to coding regions 
plus splice sites. To maximise sensitivity, analysis should also aim to detect CNVs 
for relevant genes. This can be achieved by additional techniques such as MLPA 
or microarray or ideally by including bioinformatics CNV tools in the NGS data 
analysis pipeline.
In contrast to the targeted techniques described earlier, more extensive analysis 
comes with the task of interpreting the many sequence variants that will be iden￾tified. Variants of uncertain significance (VUSs) are often identified and deter￾mining their likelihood of clinical significance is challenging (see “Limitations” 
section). Laboratories may choose not to report VUSs in order to minimise 49
Genetic investigations in neuromuscular diseases
misinterpretation of such findings. Furthermore, the chance of incidental find￾ings is increased with wider analyses, such as detecting carrier status for an unre￾lated recessive disorder or identifying a pathogenic variant in a gene associated 
with cancer susceptibility. Disclosing such incidental findings may be subject to 
local policy and guidelines (e.g., Green et al., 2013, and subsequent updates).
Mitochondrial disorders
Mitochondrial disorders have significant genetic heterogeneity and so are ame￾nable to the NGS approaches outlined thus far. However, mitochondrial disor￾ders can be caused by pathogenic variants in either nuclear or mitochondrial 
DNA (mtDNA)-encoded genes and are further complicated by heteroplasmy of 
the multicopy mtDNA. Therefore, a single NGS assay for comprehensive mito￾chondrial genetic testing is not routinely available in most centres, although 
WGS is increasingly being developed for this purpose.
The mitochondrial genome is a small (16.6kb) circular molecule which is strictly 
maternally inherited and is present in multiple (100–1000s) copies per cell. 
Pathogenic mtDNA variants are typically heteroplasmic (i.e., a mixture of wild￾type molecules and molecules containing the variant are present). Levels of het￾eroplasmy can vary between tissues and over time; importantly, variants may be at 
very low levels (<5%) or absent in blood from adults and older children. Therefore, 
muscle is often preferred for mtDNA analysis, especially in adults. When muscle 
is not available, urine can be a useful alternative. Laboratory methods that are 
able to detect low levels of variant (down to ~5%) and that can accurately quantify 
heteroplasmy are preferred. Targeted analysis for common pathogenic mtDNA 
variants, such as m.3243A>G and large-scale mtDNA deletions, may be adopted 
as a first-line test, particularly if the phenotype is suggestive of a specific variant. 
NGS of the whole mitochondrial genome requires high read depth to achieve a 
sufficiently low limit of heteroplasmy detection, and can be used as a first-line 
test or following targeted testing if necessary. “Genetic Testing for Mitochondrial 
Disease: The United Kingdom Best Practice Guidelines” (Mavraki et al., 2023) 
can be referred to for further details.
Limitations and further analysis
Despite the genomic revolution, significant limitations of genetic (or genomic) 
testing remain.
Laboratory turnaround times are highly variable and typically it can take weeks 
or months for a result, particularly due to the complexity of both laboratory wet 
work and analysis. Even when testing is requested urgently, turnaround times are 
likely to be several days for more simple tests or several weeks for NGS-based tests.
Although genetic tests for a few disorders, such as DM1 and DM2, approach 
100% sensitivity, in general failure to identify a genetic cause does not exclude 
a genetic diagnosis. This is due to technical and analytical limitations as well 
as the possibility of other, as yet unknown, genes associated with the specific 
neuromuscular phenotype. Moreover, when a genetic diagnosis is made, this is 
typically definitive, but there may be uncertainty regarding prognosis.50
Muscle diseases
The limitations in test sensitivity are most pronounced for neuromuscular disor￾ders with high genetic heterogeneity. The sensitivity of NGS approaches, includ￾ing WES and WGS, is affected by incomplete sequence coverage, restricting 
analysis to specific regions (such as coding exons plus splice sites) and the inabil￾ity to interpret the pathogenicity and clinical significance of all variants detected.
Although the development of guidelines for variant classification (Richards et 
al., 2015; ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation, https://clinicalgenome.org
/working-groups/sequence-variant-interpretation/) has helped standardise 
approaches, variant interpretation remains challenging.
Multidisciplinary teams (MDTs) can be helpful in evaluating the clinical signifi￾cance of VUSs, but in many cases this remains uncertain and further studies are 
required to try to confirm or exclude the putative genetic diagnosis.
If patients remain undiagnosed, because either no candidate causative variants 
were identified or VUSs were identified, then there may be options for additional 
analysis. In some cases, other “routine” diagnostic investigations, such as muscle 
biopsy or muscle imaging, may be sufficient to reclassify a VUS as (likely) patho￾genic. More often, functional studies, other “omics” (such as transcriptomics and 
proteomics) and/or emerging genomics (such as long-read NGS and optical genome 
mapping) would be required to further pursue a possible genetic diagnosis. These 
are not available in most diagnostic settings, although collaboration with research 
groups may be possible. For further discussion, see Wortmann et al. (2022).
Conclusion
In summary, there are many different genetic tests available to investigate sus￾pected neuromuscular disease and these have become more comprehensive with 
recent developments in sequencing technologies enabling genome-wide data to 
be interrogated in a single test. However, it is important to consider that even 
if exome or genome sequencing has been performed, more specialised testing 
may be required to diagnose certain disorders such as FSHD or mtDNA disease. 
Furthermore, if patients remain undiagnosed after the aforementioned testing 
strategies, this does not exclude a genetic diagnosis and there may be options for 
follow-up studies.
Further reading
Fratter et al., 2020, Eur J Hum Genet. 28(9):1141–1159. PMID: 32424326
Green et al., 2013, Genet Med. 15(7):565–574. PMID: 23788249
Herman et al., 2021, Muscle Nerve. 63(3):304–310. PMID: 33146414
Mavraki et al., 2023, Eur J Hum Genet. 31(2):148–163. PMID: 36513735
Richards et al., 2015, Genet Med. 17(5):405–424. PMID: 25741868
Wortmann et al., 2022, J Inherit Metab Dis. 45(4):663–681. PMID: 3550643051
Chapter 9
MANAGEMENT, TREATMENT AND 
THERAPY FOR NEUROMUSCULAR 
CONDITIONS
Andria Merrison
Managing people living with neuromuscular conditions requires a holistic, dedi￾cated and collaborative multidisciplinary team. We are entering a new era where 
specific disease-modifying or curative treatments are increasingly available for 
conditions previously considered unremittingly progressive. The number of 
such treatments is growing, particularly with the expansion in understanding 
of genetics and gene-modifying agents, such that there are several options for 
people living with Duchenne muscular dystrophy or spinal muscular atrophy. 
However, for many patients, the approach is one of managing symptoms, mini￾mising comorbidity and providing supportive therapies (Table 9.1).
Successful management is likely to require medical input across a range of disci￾plines (neurologists, respiratory physicians, cardiologists, geneticists, rehabilita￾tion physicians, palliative medicine physicians, psychologists, endocrinologists, 
rheumatologists, anaesthetists, spinal surgeons, pathologists and neurophysi￾ologists). The multidisciplinary team will also include physiotherapists, occupa￾tional therapists, speech and language therapists, orthotists, and social workers. 
This is likely to require working across a range of organisations in health, social 
care and community settings.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-9
10.1201/9780429429323-952
Muscle diseases
Management, treatment and therapy for neuromuscular conditions
Table 9.1 Specific treatments for muscle diseases
Condition Treatment
Duchenne muscular dystrophy Steroids (glucocorticoids) in childhood, 
gene therapy: ataluren (nonsense 
mutations), eteplirsen (exon 51 
skippable mutations), viltolarsen and 
golodirsen (exon 53 skippable 
mutations), casimersen (exon 45 
skippable mutations)
Myotonic dystrophy Modafinil for sleepiness, mexiletine for 
myotonia
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis Steroids, azathioprine, methotrexate, 
mycophenolate, cyclophosphamide, 
IVIg, plasma exchange
Spinal muscular atrophy Gene modifying therapy: nusinersen 
(intrathecal injection) and risdiplam 
(oral medication)
Paramyotonia congenita Mexiletine, acetazolamide
Myotonia congenita Mexiletine
Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis Acute: salbutamol
Prevention: acetazolamide, thiazide 
diuretics
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis Acute: K+ supplements
Prevention: low Na+-high K+ diet, 
acetazolamide, spironolactone
Anderson–Tawil syndrome K+ management, acetazolamide, 
implantable defibrillator
Malignant hyperthermia Dantrolene, treat hyperkalaemia and 
arrhythmias, sodium bicarbonate for 
acidosis
Mitochondrial disease Co-enzyme Q10
β-oxidation defects Avoid fasting, diet: low fat, sufficient 
carbohydrates
Primary carnitine deficiency Carnitine supplements
Long chain acyl dehydrogenase 
deficiency
Diet: carbohydrate, medium chain 
triglycerides and reduced long-chain 
fatty acids
Multiple acyl-coA dehydrogenase 
deficiency/riboflavin deficiency
Riboflavin supplements
Acid maltase deficiency (Pompe 
disease)
Enzyme replacement therapy: 
α-glucosidase, avalglucosidase alfa53
Management, treatment and therapy for neuromuscular conditions
INFLAMMATORY MUSCLE DISEASE
Corticosteroids are the first-line agents used in inflammatory muscle disorders 
(including polymyositis and dermatomyositis). If longer-term treatment is required, 
steroid-sparing agents, including methotrexate, azathioprine or mycophenolate, 
may be used. In patients with connective tissue disorders, cyclophosphamide or 
rituximab may be considered. Intravenous immunoglobulin (or plasma exchange) 
may be used in the acute setting, particularly in severe dermatomyositis.
Myotonic dystrophy
Modafinil may be helpful in treating excessive daytime sleepiness and mexiletine 
may alleviate myotonia. Treatment may also be required for the multisystem 
complications of myotonic dystrophy (DM). Gene therapy, including the devel￾opment of antisense molecules that will reduce mutant DPMK (the myotonic 
dystrophy protein kinase gene that causes this condition), offers potential hope 
for disease-modifying therapies in DM1.
Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Corticosteroids form the mainstay of treatment in childhood. There is evidence 
that they delay the onset of loss of ambulation, preserve respiratory function and 
reduce the need for scoliosis surgery. There is less evidence for ongoing benefit 
in adulthood. Gene therapy is developed rapidly in treating people living with 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and a number of mutation-specific treat￾ments have regulatory approval. These include ataluren (nonsense mutations), 
eteplirsen (exon 51 skippable mutations), viltolarsen and golodirsen (exon 53 
skippable mutations), and casimersen (exon 45 skippable mutations) but they are 
not universally available.
Spinal muscular atrophy
There are two licensed gene-modifying therapies for spinal muscular atrophy 
(SMA): nusinersen (intrathecal injections) and risdiplam (an oral medication). 
These treatments have had excellent early outcomes; with respect to improved 
muscle strength in the limbs, trunk and respiratory muscle function for babies 
and children presenting with SMA. Their efficacy longer term and for patients 
presenting in adult life are being assessed. Further gene replacement therapy tri￾als are underway, including onasemnogene abeparvovec. In addition, oral salbu￾tamol has been used and reported to improve muscle strength in some patients.
Glycogen storage disease (Pompe disease)
Enzyme replacement therapy (glucosidase α) is licensed for Pompe disease and 
has been used very effectively since 2006. Avalglucosidase alfa-ngpt is a syn￾thetic oligosaccharide, available since 2021, which may have increased efficacy 
in reducing the accumulation of glycogen. The first patients treated with enzyme 
replacement therapy in infancy are now surviving into adulthood.
Gene-modifying therapy provides an attractive future way of treating patients 
with Pompe disease, tackling the problems of multisystem disease and the 54
Muscle diseases
central nervous system. A number of approaches, including recombinant adeno￾virus and lentivirus vectors, are being explored.
Channelopathies
Periodic paralysis can be alleviated with potassium normalisation and acet￾azolamide. Mexiletine is used for myotonia in myotonia congenita and in some 
patients with myotonic dystrophy too.
Mitochondrial disease
Some patients report improvement in functional strength and reduced fatigue 
when taking regular coenzyme Q10.
Respiratory complications
A number of muscle conditions are associated with respiratory complications (see 
Table 9.2), usually respiratory muscle (diaphragmatic and intercostals) weakness. 
Respiratory surveillance (lung function tests, overnight oximetry and carbon 
dioxide monitoring) is required for these patients. Early respiratory weakness is 
often detected at night, causing sleep disruption, early morning headaches, day￾time somnolence/fatigue, loss of appetite and cognitive difficulties.
Non-invasive ventilation, bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP), is usually the 
treatment of choice. In some circumstances, including later in disease progres￾sion, tracheostomy ventilation may be an option that is considered. A growing 
number of people living with Duchenne muscular dystrophy and other muscle 
conditions use tracheostomies and portable ventilation units.
In some conditions, such as myotonic dystrophy, early upper airway weakness 
may lead to obstructive sleep apnoea. Some of these patients will benefit from 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) ventilation. A relatively small num￾ber of patients (including some patients with myotonic dystrophy) will also have 
centrally driven breathing problems, including central apnoea, which will require 
ventilation set to trigger supportive ventilation when such problems arise.
Many patients, particularly those with significant bulbar involvement, will need 
support with cough management. This can include respiratory physiotherapy 
techniques such as breath stacking and for some patients (particularly those with 
very low peak cough flows) cough assist machines can improve lung clearance 
and reduce hospital admissions due to lower respiratory tract infections.
Availability of early intervention with antibiotics may be critical for some patients 
with respiratory failure and many will have a supply of antibiotics at home for 
this purpose. Vaccination against influenza, COVID and pneumococcal infec￾tions is also important. Saliva management (using glycopyrronium bromide, 
amitriptyline, hyoscine or botulinum toxin injections) may also be essential for 
those with swallowing problems.
Cardiac complications
Cardiac complications occur with a number of muscle conditions (see Table 9.3). 
These complications are broadly divided into rhythm disturbances and 55
Management, treatment and therapy for neuromuscular conditions
Table 9.2 Neuromuscular conditions associated with respiratory failure
Respiratory failure Rarely respiratory 
failure
Dystrophies Duchenne muscular dystrophy
Becker muscular dystrophy
Myotonic dystrophy*
Facioscapulohumeral muscular 
dystrophy
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy* 
R1(2A), R9 (2I), SGCG, SGCA, 
SGCB, SGCD(2C-F)
Emery–Dreifuss muscular 
dystrophy
Congenital Nemaline myopathy*
Myofibrillar myopathy* (e.g., 
desminopathy)
Metabolic Acid maltase deficiency* 
(Pompe disease)
Primary carnitine deficiency*
Debrancher enzyme 
deficiency*
Mitochondrial Generalised myopathy Chronic progressive 
external 
ophthalmoplegia
Leigh’s disease
Endocrine/electrolyte 
disturbance
Hypo-/hyperkalaemia*
Hypo-/hypermagnesemia*
Hypophosphataemia*
Hyperthyroidism*
Barium intoxication*
Inflammatory Acute neuropathy: acute 
inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (Guillain–
Barré syndrome) 
Polymyositis
Dermatomyositis
Critical illness Critical illness neuropathy/
myopathy*
Neuromuscular junction Myasthenia gravis*
Lambert–Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome*
Congenital myasthenic 
syndromes*
Botulism*
* Respiratory failure may be the first presenting feature.56
Muscle diseases
Table 9.3 Neuromuscular disease associated with cardiac complications
Muscle condition Cardiac complications
Dystrophies Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 
(early), dilated 
cardiomyopathy (late), 
arrythmias (atrial and 
ventricular tachycardia), 
sudden death
Becker muscular dystrophy Arrhythmias, 30% 
cardiomyopathy, sudden 
death
Myotonic dystrophy Arrhythmias (brady and 
tachyarrhythmias), 
progressive heart block, 
cardiomyopathy uncommon, 
sudden death
Emery–Dreifuss muscular 
dystrophy
Arrhythmias: sinus 
bradycardia (early), atrial 
tachycardia, AV conduction 
block (late), cardiomyopathy, 
sudden death 50%
Limb girdle muscular 
dystrophy D1 (1A)
Myofibrillar myopathy
Myotilin
Cardiomyopathy, arrhythmias
Limb girdle muscular 
dystrophy D2 (1B), laminin 
AC
Arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy
Limb girdle muscular 
dystrophy SGCG, SGCA, 
SGCB, SGCD(2C-F), 
sarcoglycanopathies
Cardiomyopathy
Limb girdle muscular 
dystrophy R9 (2I), 
fukutin-related protein 
(FKRP)
Cardiomyopathy
X-linked scapuloperoneal 
muscular dystrophy
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Inflammatory Primary inflammatory 
myopathies
Arrhythmias, cardiomyopathy 
(uncommon), myocarditis
Metabolic Carnitine deficiency Cardiomyopathy
Acid maltase deficiency Cardiomyopathy
Debrancher enzyme 
deficiency
Cardiomyopathy
(Continued)57
Management, treatment and therapy for neuromuscular conditions
cardiomyopathy. Rhythm disturbances may be treated by anti-arrhythmic drugs, 
ablation procedures, pacemakers and implantable defibrillators. Cardiomyopathy 
is usually treated with β-blockers and ACE inhibitors, but a heart transplant may 
also be an option.
Routine electrocardiograms and echocardiograms are required in those with 
conditions associated with these complications. For some patients, for example, 
those with Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, the risk of sudden cardiac death 
is high and these patients require closer monitoring. In some conditions, such as 
Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and Duchenne muscular dystrophy, there 
is an increased risk of cardiac complications in both manifesting and non-man￾ifesting carriers, so family members who are gene carriers should also receive 
cardiac screening.
Other management
Exercise and rehabilitation programmes may make considerable improvements 
in function and delay disability. Surgery may be required for kyphoscoliosis, con￾tractures and deformity (e.g., of the feet).
Good nutritional surveillance and intervention, pain management and excellent 
psychological support are also important determinants of health, quality of life 
and the ability to live independently at home.
Whilst the frontiers of medical science move forward in developing new treat￾ments, much of the impact that healthcare can make on the quality of life lies 
in careful consideration of the needs of individual patients. A multidisciplinary 
team that can accompany a patient on their journey, responding swiftly and flex￾ibly to their needs over time and providing support with compassion and kind￾ness is essential for providing the best care for people living with neuromuscular 
conditions.
Table 9.3 (Continued) Neuromuscular disease associated with cardiac 
complications
Muscle condition Cardiac complications
Mitochondrial Kearns–Sayre syndrome Arrhythmias (bradycardia), 
dilated cardiomyopathy 
(late), sudden death
Channelopathy Andersen–Tawil syndrome Arrhythmias: prolonged QT 
(early), bidirectional 
ventricular tachycardia, 
bigeminy, conduction block 
(late); valvular abnormalities, 
sudden death
Neuromuscular 
junction
Myasthenia gravis Myocarditis58
Muscle diseases
Further reading
Ashizawa T et al. 2019. Consensus-based care recommendations for adults with 
myotonic dystrophy type 1. Neurology Clinical Practice 8(6): 507–520.
Bibekananda K, Santiago CR, Sabharwal A, Clark KJ & Ekker SC. 2023. 
Mitochondrial base editing: recent advances towards therapeutic opportu￾nities. Int J Mol Sci 24(6): 5798.
Birnkrant D et al. 2018. Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dys￾trophy, part 1: diagnosis and neuromuscular rehabilitation, endocrine, gas￾trointestinal and nutritional management. Lancet Neurol 17(3): 251–267.
Birnkrant D et al. 2018. Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dys￾trophy, part 2: respiratory, cardiac, bone health and orthopaedic manage￾ment. Lancet Neurol 17(4): 347–361.
Birnkrant D et al. 2018. Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dys￾trophy, part 3: primary care, emergency management, psychosocial care 
and transitions of care across the lifespan. Lancet Neurol 17(5): 445–455.
Cheng PC, Panitch HB & Hansen-Flaschen JH. 2020. Transition of patients with 
neuromuscular disease and chronic ventilator-dependent respiratory fail￾ure from pediatric to adult pulmonary care. Paediatr Respir Rev 33: 3–8.
Dalakas MC. 2023. Autoimmune inflammatory myopathies. Handbook Clinical 
Neurology 195: 425–460.
Hansen-Flaschen J & Ackrivo J. 2023. Practical guide to management of long￾term non-invasive ventilation for adults with chronic neuromuscular dis￾ease. Respirat Care 68(8): 1123–1157.
Magot A, Wahbi K, Leturcq F, Jaffre S, Pereon Y & Sole G. French BMD working 
group. 2023. Diagnosis and management of Becker muscular dystrophy: the 
French guidelines. J Neurol Jul 9. doi:19.1007/s00415-023-11837-5.
Mercuri E, Finkel RS, Muntoni F, Wirth B, Montes, J, Main M, Mazzone ES, Vitale 
M, Snyder B, Quijano-Roy S, Bertini E, Hurst Davis R, Meyer OH, Simonds 
AK, Schroth MK, Graham RJ, Kirschner J, Iannaccone ST, Crawford TO, 
Woods S, Qian Y & Sejersen T. 2018. Diagnosis and management of spinal 
muscular atrophy: Part 1: Recommendations for diagnosis, rehabilitation, 
orthopaedic and nutritional care. Neuromuscul Disord 28(2): 103–115.
Mercuri E, Finkel RS, Muntoni F, Wirth B, Montes, J, Main M, Mazzone ES, Vitale 
M, Snyder B, Quijano-Roy S, Bertini E, Hurst Davis R, Meyer OH, Simonds 
AK, Schroth MK, Graham RJ, Kirschner J, Iannaccone ST, Crawford TO, 
Woods S, Qian Y & Sejersen T. 2018. Diagnosis and management of spinal 
muscular atrophy: Part 2: Pulmonary and acute care; medications, supple￾ments and immunizations; other organ systems and ethics. Neuromuscul 
Disord 28(3): 197–207.
Monda E, Bakalakos A, Rubino M, Verrillo F, Diana G, de Michele G, Altobelli 
I, Lioncino AP, Falco L, Palmiero G, Elliott PM & Limongelli G. 2023. 
Targeted therapies in pediatric and adult patients with hypertrophic heart 
disease: from molecular pathophysiology to personalized medicine. Circ 
Heart Failure Jul 21. 123.010687.59
Management, treatment and therapy for neuromuscular conditions
Nishio H, Niba ETE, Saito T, Okamoto K, Takeshima Y & Awano H. 2023. Spinal 
muscular atrophy: the past, present and future of diagnosis and treatment. 
Int J Mol Sci 24(15): 11939.
Patterson G, Conner H, Groneman M, Blavo C & Parmar MS. 2023. Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy: current treatment and emerging exon skipping and 
gene therapy approach. J Pharmacol 15(947): 175675.
Roberts TC, Wood MJA & Davies KE. 2023 Therapeutic approaches for 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Nat Rev Drug Discov Aug 31. doi:10.1038/
s41573-023-00775-6.
Shah MNA & Yokota T. 2023. Cardiac therapies for Duchenne muscular dystro￾phy. Ther Adv Neurol Disord Jul 3 16: 17562864231182934.
Simonds AK. 2016. Home mechanical ventilation: an overview. Ann Am Thorac 
Soc 13(11): 2035–2044.
Stoodley J, Vallejo-Bedia F, Seone-Miraz D, Debasa-Mouce, Wood MJA & Varela 
MA. 2023. Application of antisense conjugates for the treatment of myo￾tonic dystrophy type 1. Int J Mol Sci 24(3): 2697.
Straub V & Guglieri M. 2023. An update on Becker muscular dystrophy. Curr 
Opin Neurol 36(5): 450–454.
Taran S, McCredie VA & Goligher EC. 2022. Non-invasive and invasive mechan￾ical ventilation for neurologic disorders. Handb Clinical Neurology 189: 
361–386.
Timchenko L. 2022. Development of therapeutic approaches for myotonic dys￾trophies type 1 and type 2. Int J Mol Sci 23(18): 10491.
Toussaint M, Wijkstra PJ, McKim D, Benditt J, Winck JC, Nasilowski J & Borel 
JC. 2022. Building a home ventilation programme: population, equipment, 
delivery and cost. Thorax 77(11): 1140–1148.
Viscomi C & Zeviani M. 2023. Experimental therapy for mitochondrial diseases. 
Handb Clin Neurol 194: 259–277.
Vivekanandam V, Jayaseelan D & Hanna MG. 2023. Handb Clin Neurol 195: 
521–532. doi:10.1016/B978-0-323-98818-6.00006-660
Chapter 10
CLOSING COMMENTS
Stefen Brady
Most primary myopathies, hereditary and inflammatory, are rare. Despite 
this, doctors or allied healthcare professionals in medical and surgical speciali￾ties, primary care, emergency medicine, psychiatry and anaesthetics will meet 
patients with an undiagnosed or diagnosed myopathy. As myopathies are often 
multisystem disorders, a patient’s presenting complaint can be something other 
than limb weakness obscuring the underlying diagnosis. A few of many exam￾ples include presenile cataracts in myotonic dystrophy type 1, cardiomyopathy 
in manifesting carriers of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, respiratory failure and 
pulmonary fibrosis in antisynthetase syndromes, dysphagia in inclusion body 
myositis, contractures in collagen VI-related myopathies, and malignant hyper￾thermia in RYR1- and CACNA1S-related disease. Our aim in writing this book 
was to produce an approachable and informative, but not overwhelming, intro￾duction to a fascinating group of patients and diseases that are often overlooked 
and underserved by medical services. We very much hope that you find this book 
a useful (and interesting) introduction to the varied world of myopathies.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-10
10.1201/9780429429323-1061
CASESQ�Taylor & Francis 
Taylor & Francis Group 
http://taylorandfrancis.com 63
Case 1
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 22-year-old man was admitted to hospital in extremis with shortness of breath 
at rest and low oxygen saturations (SaO2 86% on room air). He recounted being 
unable to climb stairs for several months due to shortness of breath and being 
unable to lie flat in bed. Initial clinical examination and investigations were con￾sistent with cardiac failure and treatment for this was commenced.
Although his clinical status improved with this treatment, it was subsequently 
noted once he was better that he could not rise from a seated position without 
using his arms. Further history revealed lifelong exercise intolerance and poor 
academic performance out of keeping with that of his sisters. He had no family 
history of note.
Examination
There was marked wasting of his quadriceps muscles and bilateral Achilles ten￾don contractures were observed along with bilateral mild–moderate weakness of 
shoulder abduction (MRC grade 4/5) and hip flexion (3/5) with marked weakness 
of knee extension (2/5).
Investigations
Serum creatine kinase (CK) level was raised (2538 U/L; normal 40–320 U/L). An 
echocardiogram revealed dilated cardiomyopathy.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-12
10.1201/9780429429323-1264
Muscle diseases
Case 1
DIAGNOSIS
Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) due to an in-frame deletion affecting DMD.
Discussion
Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD) and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) 
are X-linked recessive muscle disorders arising from pathogenic variants in the 
DMD gene encoding the protein dystrophin, which forms an important part of 
the cytoskeleton of muscle fibres. DMD is the clinically more severe form affect￾ing males in early childhood. In contrast, BMD is less severe sometimes arising 
later in life. The incidence of DMD is 1:3500–1:6000 live male births. Estimates 
for BMD vary, but it is approximately one-third as common as DMD. Between 
10% and 20% of women carrying a pathogenic variant in DMD will develop clini￾cal features. The severity varies widely due to mosaicism. Affected women are 
called manifesting carriers.
Typical BMD includes calf hypertrophy, combined with limb girdle weakness, 
and CK levels 5–20 times greater than normal in childhood. However, BMD is 
phenotypically heterogeneous and other presentations include exercise-induced 
myalgia and myoglobinuria, prominent quadriceps wasting and X-linked car￾diomyopathy. Although onset in childhood is usual, BMD can present at any age 
including late adulthood (1). Extramuscular features include cognitive impair￾ment (although usually less severe than observed in DMD), psychiatric disorders 
and cardiomyopathy.
Cardiac disease (cardiomyopathy, conduction block and arrhythmia) is the pri￾mary cause of death among patients with BMD. Most affected individuals will 
develop cardiomyopathy by the third decade of life emphasising the importance 
of regular cardiac assessment. There is no correlation between the severity of 
skeletal muscle weakness and the degree of cardiac involvement in patients with 
BMD and DMD. The optimal management of BMD-related cardiac disease is 
uncertain. Treatment includes pharmacological therapy such as angiotensin￾converting enzyme inhibitors and β-blockers, but when to start such treatment 
is unknown. Defibrillators and/or pacemaker devices are inserted if clinically 
warranted. A cardiac transplant may be considered in some cases.
Molecular genetic testing for deletions and duplications in the DMD gene is the 
appropriate initial investigation in boys and men with typical clinical presenta￾tions of DMD or BMD. DMD is a large gene comprising 79 exons. Eighty per 
cent of cases of BMD are due to an intragenic deletion. The milder phenotype in 
BMD relates to the preservation of the genetic reading frame, which results in 
the production of some dystrophin compared to none in DMD. Although genetic 
testing has reduced the need for muscle biopsy in cases of DMD and BMD, in 
atypical presentations or with uncertain genetic results, muscle biopsy can be 
helpful. Typical findings are dystrophic changes (increased connective tissue, 
muscle fibre splitting and atrophy, internal nuclei, and muscle fibre necrosis and 
regeneration) combined with a complete or partial loss of immunohistochemical 65
Case 1
staining of sarcolemmal dystrophin (see Figure C1.1). Rarely, advanced labora￾tory techniques such as immunoblotting and mRNA studies are performed.
Learning points
• BMD is associated with several phenotypes including limb girdle weak￾ness, prominent quadriceps wasting and weakness, exercise-induced 
myalgia and myoglobinuria, and X-linked cardiomyopathy.
• BMD shows a milder clinical phenotype compared to DMD due to the 
production of some dystrophin protein.
• If the clinical phenotype is indicative of BMD (or DMD), the appropri￾ate initial test is molecular genetic testing for deletions and duplications 
in the DMD gene.
• Despite the presence of two X-chromosomes, 10–20% of female carri￾ers of pathogenic variants in DMD will develop symptoms, so-called 
manifesting carriers. All female carriers should undergo periodic car￾diac review.
Further reading
1. Tselikas L, et al. Dystrophie musculaire de Becker à révélation tardive. À
propos d’un nouveau patient et de 12 observations de la littérature [Late 
onset Becker muscular dystrophy. A case report and literature review]. Rev 
Med Interne. 2011;32:181–6.
Figure C1.1 Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD). (A) Normal control demonstrat￾ing strong positive diffuse sarcolemmal dystrophin immunostaining. Panels B 
to D show dystrophin immunostaining in BMD. (B) Dystrophin 1 (rod domain) 
showing relative preservation of sarcolemmal staining. (C) Dystrophin 2 (C ter￾minus) showing reduced but variable sarcolemmal staining in dystrophic muscle. 
(D) Dystrophin 3 (N terminus) showing patchy loss of sarcolemmal staining.66
Case 2
Sithara Ramdas
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 4-year-old boy was referred because of a history of frequent falls and difficulty 
in keeping up physically with his peers. He was mildly delayed in his gross motor 
milestones, cruising at 14 months and walking independently at 18 months. 
There were no concerns regarding fine motor skills, language or cognition. There 
was no family history of note.
Examination
On examination, bilateral calf hypertrophy was observed. He used Gower’s 
manoeuvre when rising to stand. He had weakness of neck flexion (3/5) and hip 
flexion weakness (2/5) with sub-gravity hip extension. He had no weakness in the 
knees, ankles and upper limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were elicitable in both the 
upper and lower limbs.
Investigations
His creatine kinase (CK) level was found to be markedly elevated at 15,000 U/L 
(normal 40–320 U/L). Genetic testing led to a diagnosis.
Muscle diseases Case 2
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-13
10.1201/9780429429323-1367
Case 2
Case 2
DIAGNOSIS
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) due to an out-of-frame deletions of exons 
46–49.
Discussion
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is an X-linked recessive disorder arising 
because of pathogenic variants in DMD encoding the large cytoplasmic protein 
dystrophin, which plays a vital part in muscle contraction. The incidence of DMD 
is 1:3500–1:6000 live male births.
The typical clinical presentations include boys with gross motor delay or motor 
difficulties (including frequent falls or difficulty with running and/or climbing 
stairs), global developmental delay and/or isolated speech delay, as muscle weak￾ness may not be obvious in young infants. In some cases, the only evidence may 
be an isolated elevated CK level of 20–100× normal. Isolated raised transami￾nases (aspartate aminotransferase and alanine aminotransferase) in combina￾tion with otherwise normal liver function tests should also raise the suspicion of 
DMD in a boy.
Common comorbidities associated with DMD include learning difficulties 
(30%), autism spectrum disorder (15%), attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder 
(32%) and anxiety (27%).
Molecular genetic testing for DMD is the appropriate initial investigation in 
boys if the diagnosis is suspected. Seventy per cent of boys with DMD have 
a single-exon or multi-exon deletion, or duplication detected by multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) or microarray. The remain￾ing 25–30% require next-generation sequencing to detect point mutations 
(nonsense or missense), small deletions, small duplications or insertions in 
DMD. When performed, muscle biopsy usually reveals dystrophic changes and 
absent staining for all isoforms of the dystrophin gene (rod, N-terminus and 
C-terminus), although reduced or patchy dystrophin staining may be observed 
(Figure C2.1).
Glucocorticoids are the mainstay of current treatment. Benefits include delayed 
age at loss of ambulation, better preservation of respiratory function and reduc￾tion in the requirement for scoliosis surgery. The side effects of long-term glu￾cocorticoid use are not negligible, and active monitoring for reduced growth 
velocity, pubertal delay, bone demineralisation, weight gain, adrenal suppression, 
adverse behaviour issues, hypertension, glucose intolerance, cataracts and gastri￾tis, is necessary and important.
Several mutation-specific treatments have regulatory approval including ataluren 
(nonsense mutations – EMA), eteplirsen (exon 51 skippable mutations – FDA), 
viltolarsen and golodirsen (exon 53 skippable mutations – FDA), casimersen 
(exon 45 skippable mutations – FDA). However, these medications are not uni￾versally available.68
Muscle diseases
Respiratory involvement is universal in DMD and usually progresses following 
loss of ambulation. An anticipatory approach with regular spirometry, timely 
initiation of lung volume recruitment, assisted coughing, nocturnally assisted 
ventilation and subsequent daytime ventilation can improve quality of life and 
increase survival. Cardiovascular complications are currently the main cause of 
disease-related morbidity and mortality in those with DMD. Prophylactic use of 
ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) inhibitors by the age of 10 years in asymp￾tomatic boys (without evidence of abnormality on echocardiogram or cardiac 
MRI) is the current recommended practice.
Two-thirds of mothers of an affected child will carry the DMD pathogenic vari￾ant. In those, an echocardiogram is recommended every 3–5 years to monitor 
for the development of a cardiomyopathy. Twenty per cent of female carriers will 
develop progressive muscle weakness, but usually to a lesser severity than the 
males. These individuals are termed “manifesting carriers”.
Learning points
• DMD is most often associated with progressive limb girdle weakness 
but may also present with developmental delay in young boys in whom 
muscle weakness may not be obvious.
• Current treatments delay the progression of the disease but DMD 
remains a significantly life-limiting condition due to its associated car￾diac and respiratory morbidity.
Figure C2.1 Duchenne muscular dystrophy. A. Haematoxylin and eosin (20x) 
demonstrating dystrophic muscle with moderate variation, scattered necrotic 
fibres and increased endomysial connective tissue replacing normal muscle. B. 
Dystrophin control staining demonstrating strong positive diffuse sarcolemmal 
staining in normal muscle. C. Dystrophin 1 (rod domain) showing complete loss 
of sarcolemmal staining. D. Dystrophin 2 (C terminus) showing complete loss of 
sarcolemmal staining. E. Dystrophin 3 (N terminus) showing complete loss of sar￾colemmal staining.69
Case 2
• Genetic testing for DMD should be performed in all boys who present 
with motor difficulties and raised CK or with a significantly raised CK 
level in isolation. However, the diagnosis may also be considered in girls 
with a limb girdle pattern of weakness and accompanying elevated CK 
levels.
• Two thirds of mothers with an affected child carry the DMD pathogenic 
variant and will require lifelong cardiac screening.
• Long-term management requires multidisciplinary team input.
Further reading
Birnkrant D et al. Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystro￾phy, part 1: diagnosis, and neuromuscular, rehabilitation, endocrine, 
and gastrointestinal and nutritional management. Lancet Neurol. 2018 
Mar;17(3):251–267.
Birnkrant D et al. Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 
part 2: respiratory, cardiac, bone health, and orthopaedic management. 
Lancet Neurol. 2018 Apr;17(4):347–361.
Birnkrant D et al. Diagnosis and management of Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 
part 3: primary care, emergency management, psychosocial care, and tran￾sitions of care across the lifespan. Lancet Neurol. 2018 May;17(5):445–455.70
Case 3
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 58-year-old man was referred to the muscle clinic with a diagnosis of a geneti￾cally undetermined distal myopathy. He presented with a 10-year history of pro￾gressive bilateral foot drop. Investigations prior to referral included a creatine 
kinase (CK) level of 556 IU/L (40–320 IU/L), electromyography (EMG) revealing 
myopathic changes in several lower limb muscles, a muscle biopsy (Figure C3.1) 
from the tibialis anterior muscle showed variation in fibre size and split fibres, 
and electron microscopy revealed areas of myofibrillar disorganisation.
Further history elicited from the patient and his partner uncovered that he had 
never been able to whistle and slept with his eyes partially open. Since his 20s, 
he had struggled with shoulder pain and had difficulty performing tasks such as 
changing bed sheets and hanging up washing. More recently, climbing upstairs 
had become difficult for him. There was no family history of note.
Examination
He had prominent cheekbones and lips consistent with atrophy of the lower facial 
muscles. Periocular (Bell’s phenomenon) and perioral (inability to purse lips and 
transverse smile) weakness were evident.
Further examination findings were transverse axillary creases and pectoral 
muscle wasting, asymmetric scapular winding (scapula alata), upper arm wast￾ing with preservation of the deltoid muscles (Figure C3.2), moderate asymmetric 
weakness of elbow extension (MRC grading 3/5), moderate weakness of hip flex￾ion (3/5) and knee extension (3/5), and marked weakness of ankle dorsiflexion 
(0/5).
Additional signs were a protuberant abdomen out-of-keeping with his body 
habitus, positive Beevor’s sign (indicative of lower abdominal weakness) and 
increased lumbar lordosis.
Muscle diseases Case 3
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-14
10.1201/9780429429323-1471
Case 3
Case 3
Figure C3.1 (A) Haematoxylin and eosin stain highlights dystrophic muscle 
with variation in fibre diameters, including numerous hypertrophied fibres, 
focal necrosis, patchy inflammation (arrow), and increased endomysial connec￾tive tissue and interstitial fat. (B) Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) 
histochemical stain demonstrating abnormal myofibrillar architecture including 
lobulated and moth-eaten fibres. (C) Immunohistochemical inflammatory marker 
beta-2 macroglobulin (also known as major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
class I) revealing diffuse upregulation of sarcolemmal expression on all muscle 
fibres.
Figure C3.2 Clinical photographs showing (A) transverse axillary creases (blue 
arrows) indicating atrophy of the pectoral muscles with wasting of the upper 
arm muscles with preservation deltoid and forearm muscles (red arrows), and 
(B) marked asymmetric scapular winging (blue arrow).72
Muscle diseases
DIAGNOSIS
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) due to truncation of D4Z4 
repeat sequence on chromosome 4qA.
Discussion
Facioscapulohumeral dystrophy (FSHD) is one of the commonest muscular dys￾trophies in the United Kingdom (UK). It is an autosomal dominant disorder. 
However, a positive family history is frequently absent, as one-third of cases are 
due to de novo mutations. Ninety-five per cent of cases of FSHD, so-called FSHD1, 
are due to deletion of polymorphic repeats on chromosome 4qA. Most individu￾als with FSHD have signs of the disease by the end of their second decade. The 
distribution of weakness is pathognomonic. Disease progression is in a cranio￾caudal direction.
Facial weakness affects both the periocular and perioral muscles. Symptoms of 
the former include dry eyes or family members reporting that the patient sleeps 
with their eyes open. The latter is identifiable by an inability to drink through a 
straw or whistle. Facial weakness in FSHD is typically bilateral and as a result, 
often overlooked. Infrequently, there may be no facial weakness. In such cases, 
a clue to the diagnosis can be prominent cheekbones and lips due to atrophy 
of the lower facial muscles. Scapular winging often brings individuals to medi￾cal attention, but it is also easily and frequently missed if the patient’s clothing 
is not removed and their back is not thoroughly examined. The deltoid mus￾cles are relatively preserved and, therefore, shoulder abduction strength below 
shoulder height is often normal or only mildly reduced. Individuals with FSHD 
were described to have “Popeye” arms because, like the fictional 1920s cartoon 
character Popeye the Sailor Man, of the preservation of forearm muscles in com￾parison to the wasting and weakness of the humeral muscles. Ankle dorsiflex￾ion weakness is frequent and may precede pelvic girdle and proximal lower limb 
weakness. Asymmetric weakness is the norm in FSHD. Examination of the torso 
reveals several characteristic signs including pectoral muscle wasting evidenced 
by the presence of transverse axillary creases, a prominent abdomen in contrast 
to the individual’s body habitus with a positive Beevor’s sign due to lower abdom￾inal muscle weakness, and increased or marked lumbar lordosis.
Despite the early onset of symptoms and signs, late presentations of FSHD are 
not uncommon. Atypical presentations include absent facial weakness (10–15%) 
and camptocormia (bent spine). As observed in this case, foot drop can be a 
prominent feature and may mislead the unwary clinician if other signs are not 
sought. Other myopathies that may be initially mistaken for a distal myopathy 
because of the presence of a marked foot drop include myotonic dystrophy type 
1 (DM1), inclusion body myositis (IBM) and Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD).
Extramuscular features reported in FSHD include retinal vasculopathy, hearing 
loss and supraventricular arrhythmia. However, in typical FSHD these are rarely 
of clinical relevance and routine surveillance is unnecessary. An important 73
Case 3
feature of significant clinical consequence in FSHD, but one that is difficult 
to manage adequately, is pain. It usually affects the shoulders and lower back. 
Although it is indubitably due in part to muscle weakness leading to abnormal 
movement and joint instability, it is much more prominent in FSHD than in 
other myopathies and often present in the absence of significant weakness.
In a clinically typical case, the initial diagnostic test for FSHD is molecular 
genetic testing, looking for a deletion affecting the D4Z4 repeat sequence on 
chromosome 4qA. Testing for FSHD is complicated and usually performed 
in specialist laboratories. A deletion is present in 95% of cases of FSHD, more 
accurately called FSHD1. Of the remaining 5% of cases, most are due to patho￾genic variants in SMCHD1 and are referred to as FSHD2. The genetic basis of 
FSHD1 and 2 is fascinating and discussed in Chapter 8. For the interested reader, 
more detailed publications on the topic are included in the “Further reading” 
list. Muscle biopsy is rarely performed in FSHD due to the highly sensitive and 
specific clinical presentation. Histopathological features observed in FSHD are 
varied and rarely helpful. In rare cases, when the clinical features are missed and 
a muscle biopsy is performed, the presence of inflammatory changes, one of the 
protean histopathological features reported in FSHD, can lead the clinician to 
the incorrect diagnosis of an inflammatory myopathy.
Management of individuals with FSHD is primarily supportive and aims to 
maximise function through exercise and aids. A small number of individuals 
may benefit from scapular fixation surgery, which should only be performed by 
an experienced surgeon in collaboration with a specialist neuromuscular clinic.
Learning points
• FSHD is one of the three commonest muscular dystrophies in the UK. 
The others are myotonic dystrophy type 1 and the dystrophinopathies, 
Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophies.
• Signs of FSHD are usually evident before 20 years of age.
• Clinical examination is characteristic and typically includes facial and 
scapuloperoneal weakness that progress in a craniocaudal direction.
• The initial investigation is molecular genetic testing for FSHD1.
Further reading
Best practice guidelines on genetic diagnostics of facioscapulohumeral muscular 
dystrophy: Workshop 9th June 2010, LUMC, Leiden, The Netherlands.
Richard J.L.F. Lemmers et al., Digenic inheritance of an SMCHD1 mutation and 
an FSHD-permissive D4Z4 allele causes facioscapulohumeral muscular 
dystrophy type 2. Nature Genetics 44(12):1370–4.74
Case 4
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 48-year-old man first began to notice lower limb weakness following a series 
of falls whilst playing squash in his early 20s. Over the course of the next decade, 
he experienced progressive weakness in the lower limbs (in both proximal and 
distal muscles) with development of contractures. He had been born normally, 
achieved normal motor milestones as a child and enjoyed sport throughout 
childhood and early adult life.
At the age of 37, he began to use a wheelchair. Over several years, he had a num￾ber of falls that led to lower limb fractures. From the age of 40, he developed pro￾gressive proximal weakness in the upper limbs. By the age of 50, he was unable 
to weight bear and was using an electric wheelchair. Three years later he required 
non-invasive ventilation at night.
He had a younger brother who was similarly affected.
Examination
All cranial nerves were intact. There was marked symmetrical wasting of the 
deltoids, subscapularis, biceps, triceps, glutei, quadriceps and distal lower limb 
muscles without fasciculation. Reflexes were normal; the plantar flexors and all 
sensory modalities were intact.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) ranged from 4,000 to 8,000 over a period of years. EMG 
demonstrated widespread myopathic changes. MRI of the lower limbs demon￾strated wasting of the glutei, quadriceps, soleus and gastrocnemius, with marked 
sparing of hip abductors.
Genetic testing revealed a pathogenic variant in the calpain gene.
Muscle diseases Case 4
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-15
10.1201/9780429429323-1575
Case 4
Case 4
DIAGNOSIS
Recessive limb girdle muscular dystrophy R1 (calpainopathy, previously known 
as LGMD 2A).
Discussion
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) was described by Walton and Natrass 
in 1954 as a separate group of conditions, characterised by limb girdle weak￾ness with or without the involvement of other muscle groups. From the 1990s 
onwards, the identification of disease-causing genes and their protein products 
has led to an understanding of the forms of LGMD and their wide genetic and 
phenotypic variability. They have been classified on the basis of their mode of 
inheritance: type 1 autosomal dominant (8 forms) being less common, and type 2 
autosomal recessive (28 forms to date) and most frequently occurring. This group 
now includes conditions with mainly proximal involvement (LGMD2I), those 
with mainly distal involvement (LGMD2B) and others with both.
In 2017 the second meeting of the European Neuromuscular Centre (ENMC) 
was held and led to a consensus for updating LGMD nomenclature and clas￾sification. The autosomal dominant forms were named D (from 1 to 5) and the 
recessive forms R (from 1 to 23).
LGMDs have an estimated prevalence of 2/100,000. There are significant differ￾ences in presentation in a number of ethnic groups, in part due to founder muta￾tions. LGMD can present at any age, but some forms tend to arise in childhood 
(1B, 2C–G, 2J).
Other features of LGMD include muscle wasting or hypertrophy, limb contrac￾tures or scapular winging. Extraocular, facial and bulbar muscles are usually 
spared. Respiratory involvement is common in some forms (1B, 2C–F, 2I) and 
uncommon in others. Similarly, cardiac involvement is more prominent in some 
forms (1A, 1B, 2I).
LGMD2A (calpainopathy) is the commonest recessive form of LGMD and is due 
to mutations in the gene (often in one of seven exomes) for the calcium-dependent 
cytoplasmic protease enzyme calpain-3. It frequently leads to scapular winging, 
and wasting of the gluteal and both proximal and distal posterior compartment 
muscles and contractures. Respiratory involvement is less common and is usu￾ally mild and slowly progressive.
Creatine kinase is usually raised (>1500). Whilst calpain staining may be abnor￾mal on muscle biopsy (as well as having dystrophic changes), both immunohis￾tochemistry and immunoblot may appear normal. Lobulated fibres may be seen 
within the muscle (Figure C4.1). Particular patterns of muscle involvement can 
be identified with magnetic resonance imaging. Genetic testing confirms the 
diagnosis.76
Muscle diseases
Learning points
• Limb girdle muscular dystrophy is an uncommon but important cause 
of proximal, proximal and distal and rarely distal weakness in both 
adults and children.
• These conditions are usually recessively inherited, but there is wide 
genetic and phenotypic variability, even within the same family.
• Diagnosis relies on genetic testing, but clinical examination, CK analy￾sis, muscle MRI and, in some cases, muscle biopsy may be helpful.
• Other causes of proximal weakness should be excluded:
• With contractures (Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, Bethlem 
myopathy, glycolytic metabolic myopathies).
• With scapular winging (facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, 
McArdle’s disease).
• With muscle hypertrophy (myotonia congenital, Duchenne/Becker 
muscular dystrophy).
• A number of forms are associated with respiratory and/or cardiac 
involvement, and this may be the presenting feature. Lifelong respira￾tory and cardiac surveillance is required.
References
Bockhorst J & Wicklund M (2020) Limb girdle muscular dystrophies. Neurologic 
Clinics 38(3): 493–504.
Bushby K (2009) Diagnosis and management of the limb girdle muscular dystro￾phies. Practical Neurology 9(6): 314–332.
Lasa-Elgarresta J, Mosqueira-Martin L, Naldaiz-Gastesi N, Saenz A, Lopez de 
Munain A & Vallejo-Illarramendi A (2019) Calcium mechanisms in limb 
girdle muscular dystrophy with CAPN3 mutations. International Journal of 
Molecular Science 20(18): 4548.
Figure C4.1 Calpainopathy. In addition to non-specific myopathic/dystrophic 
findings, the presence of lobulated fibres is a common finding in Calpainopathy. 
These are best observed on the oxidative enzyme stains. A. SDH. B. NADH and 
C. COX.77
Case 4
Norwood FLM, Harling C, Chinnery PF, Eagle M, Bushby K & Straub V (1999) 
Prevalence of genetic muscle disease in Northern England: in-depth analy￾sis of a muscle clinic population. Brain 132: 3175–3186.
Straub V, Murphy A, Udd B & The LGMD Workshop Study Group. (2018) 
229th ENMC international workshop: Limb girdle muscular dystrophies 
– Nomenclature and reformed classification, the Netherlands 17-19 March 
2017. Neuromuscular Disorders 28(8): 702–710.78
Case 5
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 43-year-old woman presented with a 10-year history of slowly progressive 
proximal weakness in all four limbs. It was increasingly difficult for her to rise 
from a seated position, to get out of bed and to carry bags of shopping. She had 
no previous neuromuscular (or other medical problems) and had represented her 
school in a number of team sports. She was the youngest of five siblings and had 
one brother who had been identified to have a raised creatine kinase (CK) follow￾ing some problems with muscle pain. She had five children who were well.
When this lady first presented to a neurology clinic some years ago, it was thought 
that she had an inflammatory myopathy – inflammatory indices were initially 
mildly raised. She was treated with a combination of steroids and other immu￾nosuppressants (including azathioprine, methotrexate and intravenous immu￾noglobulin). Despite a possible initial improvement in symptoms on initiation of 
steroids, these treatments had made no difference.
Examination
On examination, there was proximal muscle weakness in all four limbs grade 
4–4+/5. There was symmetrical wasting evident proximally in both anterior and 
proximal compartments in the lower limbs and particular wasting of the supra￾spinatus and subscapularis in the upper limbs. Other muscle groups were well 
preserved. There was no facial weakness and the rest of the neurological and 
medical examination was normal.
Investigations
Her creatine kinase was significantly raised: 14,949 (along with AST 244 and 
ALP 59) initially and fluctuated over the years from 2,800 to 8,000. A range of 
other blood tests, including inflammatory indices and dry bloodspot testing for 
Pompe disease, were subsequently normal. Electromyography showed chronic 
myopathic changes. An MRI of the muscles showed wasting of the glutei, vas￾tus lateralis, hamstrings, supraspinatus and subscapularis muscles bilaterally. 
Genetic testing for calpainopathy, dysferlinopathy and fukutin-related protein 
(FKRP) mutations were negative. Further genetic testing identified the diagnosis.
All immunosuppressants were stopped and she felt better off steroids. She 
received physiotherapy and made a number of lifestyle changes. She has subse￾quently been found to have mild respiratory muscle weakness.
Muscle diseases Case 5
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-16
10.1201/9780429429323-1679
Case 5
Case 5
DIAGNOSIS
Recessive limb girdle muscular dystrophy R12 (ANO5 mutation, previously 
known as LGMD2L).
Discussion
It is important to distinguish between primary inflammatory muscle disease and 
disorders of muscle with an associated inflammatory component, but this can 
be very challenging. Systemic manifestations of inflammatory disease, including 
inflammatory indices, should be looked for. Evidence of inflammation within 
muscle fibres (particularly non-necrotic fibres), including upregulation of MHC 
class I proteins (e.g., β-microglobulin) and invasion by inflammatory cells, on the 
muscle biopsy may be helpful but can be present in both primary and secondary 
inflammation (Figure C5.1). Failure to respond to immunosuppressants should 
always make one reconsider a diagnosis of myositis.
Forms of muscular dystrophy which are commonly associated with inflammation 
and a significantly raised CK include calpainopathy (LGMD2A), dysferlinopathy 
(LGMD2B) and FKRP-related (LGMD2I) muscular dystrophy. However, this can 
occur in a number of other more common dystrophies, including dystrophinop￾athies (DMD, BMD) and sarcoglycanopathies.
Figure C5.1 ANO5 myopathy. A (centre image) H&E showing non-specific dys￾trophic findings with fibre size variation, the presence of scattered necrotic fibres, 
and focal mononuclear inflammation. B. CD68 highlighting myophagia within 
necrotic fibres. C. Acid Phosphatase highlighting necrotic fibres with myophagia. 
D. Beta-2-macroglobulin (MHC class II) highlighting upregulation of sarcolemmal 
expression and occasional necrotic fibres. E. C5b9 (membrane attack complex) 
showing sarcoplasmic expression in necrotic fibres. 80
Muscle diseases
A mutation in the ANO5 gene was first reported to cause a recessive form of limb 
girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD2L) in 2010 (Bolduc 2010). This gene encodes 
for a calcium-channel-activated chloride channel belonging to the anoctamin 
family of proteins. This channel has been demonstrated to facilitate muscle 
precursor cell fusion, which is important for muscle repair (Whitlock 2018). A 
founder mutation was identified in the North and Central Europe population 
(Hicks 2011) and LGMD2L is now recognised to be the third commonest form of 
recessive LGMD in this population (Magri 2012, Witting 2013).
Whilst the phenotype is variable, most patients have a relatively mild, slowly pro￾gressive form with onset from 20 to 50 years (Hicks 2011, Magri 2012). Cardiac 
involvement has been reported in some cases (Liewluck 2013). MRI studies 
(Mahjneh 2012) have shown specific involvement of the gastrocnemius medialis, 
soleus, hip adductors, hamstrings, gastrocnemius lateralis, quadriceps (and later 
gluteus minimus and biceps brachialis) muscles. These patients require lifelong 
cardiac and respiratory surveillance.
Learning points
• Distinguishing primary inflammatory myopathy from secondary 
inflammation should be considered when symptoms are resistant to 
immunosuppressants.
• Forms of muscular dystrophy which are commonly associated with 
inflammation and raised CK are calpainopathy (LGMD2A), dysfer￾linopathy (LGMD2B), FKRP-related (LGMD2I), dystrophinopathies 
and sarcoglycanopathies.
• LGMD2L, due to a mutation in ANO5, is the third commonest muta￾tion in North and Central European populations and can also be associ￾ated with inflammation.
Further reading
Bolduc V, Marlow G, Boycott KM, Saleki K, Inoue H, Kroon J, Itakura M, 
Robitaille Y, Parent L, Baas F, Mizuta K, Kamata N, Richard I, Linssen WH, 
Mahijneh I, de Visser M, Bashir R, Brais B. (2012) Recessive mutations in 
the putative calcium-activated chloride channel Anoctamin 5 cause proxi￾mal LGMD2L and distal MMD3 muscular dystrophies. American Journal 
of Human Genetics 86(2):213–21.
Christiansen J, Guttsches AK, Schara-Schmidt U, Vorgerd M, Heute C, Preusse 
C, Stenzel W, Roos A. (2022) ANO5-related muscle diseases: from clinics 
and genetics to pathology and research strategies. Genes Dis 9(6):1506–20.
Hicks D, Sarkozy A, Muelas N, Köehler K, Huebner A, Hudson G, Chinnery PF, 
Barresi R, Eagle M, Polvikoski T, Bailey G, Miller J, Radunovic A, Hughes 
PJ, Roberts R, Krause S, Walter MC, Laval SH, Straub V, Lochmüller H, 
Bushby K. (2011) A founder mutation in Anoctamin 5 is a major cause of 
limb-girdle muscular dystrophy. Brain 134(Pt 1):171–82.
Liewluck T, Winder TL, Dimberg EL, Crum BA, Heppelmann CJ, Wang Y, Bergen 
HR 3rd, Milone M (2013) ANO5-muscular dystrophy: clinical, pathological 
and molecular findings. European Journal of Neurology 10:1383–9.81
Case 5
Magri F, Del Bo R, D’Angelo MG, Sciacco M, Gandossini S, Govoni A, Napoli L, 
Ciscato P, Fortunato F, Brighina E, Bonato S, Bordoni A, Lucchini V, Corti 
S, Moggio M, Bresolin N, Comi GP. (2012) Frequency and characterisation 
of anoctamin 5 mutations in a cohort of Italian limb-girdle muscular dys￾trophy patients. Neuromuscular Disorders 22(11):934–43.
Mahjneh I, Bashir R, Kiuru-Enari S, Linssen W, Lamminen A, Visser MD (2012) 
Selective pattern of muscle involvement seen in distal muscular dystrophy 
associated with anoctamin 5 mutations: a follow-up muscle MRI study. 
Neuromuscular Disorders 22 Suppl 2:S130–6.
Soontrapa P & Liewluck T. (2022) Anoctamin 5 (ANO5) muscle disorders: a nar￾rative review. Genes (Basel) 13(10):1736.
Whitlock JM, Yu K, Cui YY, Hartzell HC. (2018) Anoctamin 5/TMEM16E 
facilitates muscle precursor cell fusion. Journal of General Physiology
150(11):1498–509.
Witting N, Duno M, Petri H, Krag T, Bundgaard H, Kober L, Vissing J. (2013) 
Anoctamin 5 muscular dystrophy in Denmark: prevalence, genotypes, 
phenotypes, cardiac findings, and muscle protein expression. Journal of 
Neurology 260(8):2084–93.82
Case 6
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 38-year-old woman presented with progressive weakness in all four limbs. She 
had begun to find it difficult to stand from a seated position, going up and down 
stairs was more difficult and walking was generally slower. She found it more 
effortful to wash her hair and to reach up into overhead cupboards in the kitchen.
She had a long-standing history of lipodystrophy dating back to childhood and 
had always been very self-conscious of her appearance: prominent muscles in 
her arms and skin changes, including acanthosis nigricans. She reported feeling 
stiffness in her back since her early teenage years and had not enjoyed sport at 
school. She developed diabetes mellitus in her 20s.
At the age of 32, she had a series of collapses with associated brief loss of con￾sciousness. A cardiac monitor identified periods of complete heart block and 
ventricular tachycardia. An implantable defibrillator was used to treat cardiac 
rhythm problems. She was also receiving treatment for diabetes mellitus.
Examination
Examination of the cranial nerves was normal. There was weakness of shoulder 
abduction grade 4–/5 despite relatively well-preserved muscle bulk in the shoul￾der girdle. Similarly, there was symmetrical hip flexion weakness grade 4–/5 
without focal wasting or fasciculation. Reflexes were reduced a little and plan￾tars flexor. There were mild contractures of the Achilles tendon bilaterally. Other 
than a mild reduction in perception of vibration and temperature distally in the 
lower limbs, sensory function was otherwise normal.
Her skin exhibited multiple skin tags and acanthosis nigricans. She had a wide 
neck with limited lateral neck flexion.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was raised at 4884 U/l. Electromyography showed myo￾pathic changes and nerve conduction studies demonstrated a mild axonal neu￾ropathy (attributed to diabetes).
An echocardiogram revealed mildly dilated cardiomyopathy and she was started 
on lisinopril.
Genetic testing identified a mutation in the laminin A (LMNA) gene. Genetic 
counselling was provided for family members.
Muscle diseases Case 6
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-17
10.1201/9780429429323-1783
Case 6
Case 6
DIAGNOSIS
Dominant limb girdle muscular dystrophy (laminopathy, Emery–Dreifuss mus￾cular dystrophy 2 EDMD2, previously known as limb girdle muscular dystrophy 
type 1B).
Discussion
Laminopathy is a rare but increasingly recognised condition with a range of mul￾tisystem (skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, peripheral nerves, fat, bone and skin) 
phenotypes that usually present in neurological or cardiological practice. The 
most frequently seen conditions associated with laminin mutations are an auto￾somal dominant form of Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD2, previ￾ously known as limb girdle muscular dystrophy type 1B), autosomal recessive 
Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy and LMNA-related congenital muscular 
dystrophy.
Laminopathy arises due to mutations in the LMNA gene which encodes for the 
nuclear envelope proteins laminin A and laminin C. The mechanism of action 
in determining disease is not fully understood, but disruption of these proteins 
does appear to disrupt muscle growth (in turn leading to some features such as 
contractures and a rigid spine). In addition to dystrophic changes (increased fibre 
size variation, necrotic and regenerating fibres and fibrosis with collagen deposi￾tion, and replacement of muscle by fat), fibre type 2 predominance, small type 
1 fibres and mild inflammatory changes may be seen on muscle biopsy (Figure 
C6.1). Specific immunostaining for the laminin A/C proteins is not routinely 
performed.
Patients present with widely varying degrees of severity of disease. Cardiac 
involvement shows high penetrance and manifests as conduction defects and 
dilated (and occasionally restrictive) cardiomyopathy. Most cardiac conduction 
defects occur before the age of 30 years. Cardiac dysrhythmia and respiratory 
failure (secondary to respiratory muscle/diaphragmatic weakness) are common 
causes of death in this group but not all patients have cardiac and/or respiratory 
muscle involvement.
Most patients with laminopathy have a raised CK. Muscle MRI may identify par￾ticular patterns of muscle involvement. Fatty infiltration of the adductor mag￾nus, semimembranosus, long and short heads of biceps femoris and vasti muscles 
with relative sparing of rectus femoris has been reported.
Identification of a laminopathy does provide an opportunity for genetic testing 
in other family members. In turn, this can guide cardiac (ECG, cardiac moni￾toring and echocardiogram) and respiratory screening (lung function tests and 
overnight oximetry). There is phenotypic overlap with X-linked EDMD, there￾fore, where appropriate, genetic testing for mutations in emerin may be needed in 
those who do not have mutations in LMNA. Managing these conditions requires 
a multidisciplinary approach with good collaboration between neurologists, car￾diologists, geneticists and respiratory physicians.84
Muscle diseases
Learning points
• Laminopathy can lead to multisystem disease and a range of pheno￾types, including an autosomal dominant form of muscular dystrophy: 
Emery–Dreifuss 2 (EDMD2), previously known as limb girdle muscular 
dystrophy 1B.
• Patients may present in cardiac practice first, and both cardiac (dys￾rhythmia and cardiomyopathy) and respiratory complications may be 
life-threatening and require long-term multidisciplinary surveillance.
• There is phenotypic overlap with Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy, 
so where appropriate genetic testing for mutations in emerin should be 
conducted in those who do not have mutations in LMNA.
Further reading
D’Ambrosio P, Petillo R, Torella A, Papa A, Palladino A, Orsini C, Ergoli M, 
Passamano L, Novelli A, Nigro V & Politano L (2019) Cardiac diseases as a 
predictor warning of hereditary muscle diseases. The case of laminopathies. 
Acta Myologica 38(2): 33–36.
Fan Y, Tan D, Song D, Zhang X, Chang X, Wang Z, Zhang C, Chan S, Wu Q, Wu 
L, Wang S, Yan H, Ge L, Yang H, Mao B, Bonneman C, Liu J, Wang S, Yuan 
Y, Wu X, Zhang H & Xiong H (2021) Clinical spectrum and genetic varia￾tions of LMNA-related muscular dystrophies in a large cohort of Chinese 
patients. Journal of Medical Genetics 58(5): 326–333.
Figure C6.1 Laminopathy (LMNA). A. H&E 10× (central image) demonstrating 
myopathic changes with clusters of atrophic fibres and hypertrophic fibres with 
focal inflammation. B. Fast myosin 10× highlighting type 2 fibre predominance 
and atrophic type 2 fibres. C. Slow myosin 10× highlighting both hypertrophic 
and a trophic type 1 fibres. Focal inflammation present. D. Laminin alpha 2 immu￾nostains 10× showing preserved sarcolemmal staining and highlights group atro￾phy. E. Utrophin 10× showing patchy upregulation of sarcolemmal expression.85
Case 6
Lin H, Liu X, Zhang W, Liu J, Zuo Y, Xiao J, Zhu Y, Yuan Y & Wang ZX (2018) 
Muscle magnetic resonance imaging in patients with various clinical 
subtypes of LMNA-related muscular dystrophy. Chinese Medical Journal
131(12): 1472–1479.
Muchir A, Bonne G, van der Kooi AJ, et al. (2000) Identification of mutations in 
the gene encoding laminin A/C in autosomal dominant limb girdle mus￾cular dystrophy with atrioventricular conduction disturbances. Human 
Molecular Genetics 9: 1453–1459.
Owens D, Messeant J, Moog S, Viggars M, Ferry A, Mamchaoui K, Lacene 
E, Romero N, Brull A, Bonne G, Butler-Browne G & Coirault C. (2020) 
Lamin-related congenital muscular dystrophy alters mechanical signal￾ling and skeletal muscle growth. International Journal of Molecular Science
22(1): 306.86
Case 7
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 33-year-old woman presented with a 30-year history of progressive limb weak￾ness and joint contractures. She was first seen at 4 years of age and diagnosed 
with Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy because of delayed motor milestones 
and joint contractures. She underwent surgery for kyphoscoliosis and Achilles 
tendon contractures in childhood. Her joint contractures had rendered her 
wheelchair-bound for many years. She had no cardiorespiratory symptoms and 
had recently undergone a cardiac workup due to a family history of valvular 
heart disease. She was one of three female siblings. There was no family history 
of neuromuscular disease or consanguinity.
Examination
Multiple non-pruritic, small red papules, consistent with keratosis pilaris, were 
observed over her body, most marked over the extensor surfaces of her limbs. 
Keloid scars were identified at the sites of previous surgical incisions. She had 
laxity of the distal interphalangeal joints and elbows, and finger flexion contrac￾tures, as well as knee and ankle contractures, and prominent calcaneum. She had 
mild symmetrical weakness (MRC grading 4/5) of shoulder abduction, elbow 
flexion, finger flexion and moderate weakness of hip flexion (3/5).
Investigations
Her creatine kinase (CK) level was normal: 125 IU/L (20–200 IU/L). Spirometry 
showed mild restrictive lung disease. A muscle biopsy performed at 4 years of age 
revealed marked variation in fibre size and increased endomysial connective tis￾sue and fat. Additional immunohistochemical (IHC) staining did not contribute 
further to her diagnosis but did demonstrate normal IHC staining for emerin.
Muscle diseases Case 7
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-18
10.1201/9780429429323-1887
Case 7
Case 7
DIAGNOSIS
Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy (UCMD) due to heterozygous mutations 
in COL6A1.
Discussion
Contractures are not infrequently observed in many chronic neuromuscular and 
neurological diseases. However, prominent early onset contractures are indica￾tive of either collagen VI-related myopathies including Ullrich congenital mus￾cular dystrophy (UCMD) and its milder form, Bethlem myopathy (BM), both 
of which arise secondary to pathogenic variants in three genes that encode the 
alpha-chain of collagen VI (COL6A, COL6B and COL6C) or the genetically heter￾ogenous condition Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD). The presence 
of skin abnormalities, joint laxity and cardiac involvement help to differentiate 
between these two groups.
Clinical features of UCMD are present at birth or soon thereafter and include 
hypotonia and weakness, proximal joint contractures, and distal joint laxity. 
Joint contractures may resolve in the first few years of life only to reappear in 
later years. Other characteristic features include skin and skeletal abnormalities 
such as keratosis pilaris, hypertrophic or “keloid” scarring, prominent posterior 
calcaneum, and the presence of kyphoscoliosis. The level of ambulation achieved 
is variable and some individuals with this condition may never walk. Respiratory 
failure requiring ventilatory support is a frequent complication of UCMD.
BM can be thought of as a later onset and milder form of UCMD like Becker 
muscular dystrophy compared to Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Those affected 
present within the first two decades of life with proximal weakness, distal rather 
than proximal joint contractures and distal joint laxity. As in UCMD, joint con￾tractures may resolve only to reappear later in life. Similar skin changes are seen 
in BM and UCMD. Respiratory failure may also occur in BM. In contrast to 
UCMD, individuals with BM usually remain ambulant.
In both UCMD and BM, the CK level is often normal or only mildly elevated. 
Muscle biopsy findings are non-specific and can range from mild to markedly 
myopathic. Immunostaining of muscle tissue for collagen VI can be performed 
but is inconsistent, and more reliable testing is achieved through culture and 
staining of skin fibroblasts for collagen VI. Muscle imaging can aid diagnosis as 
it may reveal peripheral involvement of the vastus muscles with central sparing 
in both UCMD and BM and an abnormal central signal in the rectus femoris in 
BM (Figure C7.1). However, in UCMD, the changes can be overshadowed by the 
presence of significant widespread fatty atrophy of the muscles.
A clinical diagnosis of UCMD and BM is confirmed by molecular genetic test￾ing. As stated, both UCMD and BM result from pathogenic variants in three 
genes that encode the alpha-chain of collagen VI: COL6A, COL6B and COL6C. 
Typically, UCMD is inherited in an autosomal recessive (AR) fashion, while BM 88
Muscle diseases
follows an autosomal dominant (AD) pattern of inheritance. However, cases of 
AD UCMD and AR BM are described.
The main differential diagnosis for UCMD and BM is EDMD, which is genotypi￾cally heterogeneous. Like UCMD and BM, it is characterised by early joint con￾tractures and weakness. However, unlike UCMD and BM, EDMD is associated 
Figure C7.1 MRI proximal lower limbs in Bethlem myopathy. (A and B) T1 axial 
images through the thigh revealing typical imaging findings in a patient with 
Bethlem myopathy, peripheral fatty atrophy of vastus lateralis with central spar￾ing (arrows). (C) Earlier in the disease, prior to circumferential fatty atrophy, the 
same pattern of muscle involvement may be observed on the short-tau inversion 
recovery (STIR) sequences (arrows).89
Case 7
with cardiac disease including cardiomyopathy, conduction defects and arrhyth￾mias. Further clues to the correct diagnosis are skin abnormalities and joint laxity 
which are not observed in EDMD. Additionally, muscle biopsy in the commoner 
X-linked EDMD associated with pathogenic variants in EMD demonstrate loss 
of myonuclear IHC staining for emerin.
Learning points
• Prominent early contractures are observed in collagen VI-related myop￾athies (UCMD and BM) and EDMD. However, the presence of joint lax￾ity and skin changes in conjunction with the absence of cardiac disease 
supports a diagnosis of UCMD or BM.
• The clinically more severe UCMD is usually autosomal recessive, while 
the milder and later onset BM is usually autosomal dominant, though 
there are rare exceptions to this rule and de novo pathogenic variants 
can occur.
• Muscle imaging and immunohistochemical staining of muscle or cul￾tured skin fibroblasts may aid diagnosis but molecular genetic testing is 
required to confirm the diagnosis.
• Close monitoring for respiratory failure is necessary.90
Case 8
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 17-year-old woman presented to a neuromuscular clinic with a clinical diag￾nosis of congenital myopathy. Her birth and early childhood had been uncompli￾cated. She had started walking at the age of 2 but was a little unsteady on her feet, 
and by the age of 5, it was clear that there were problems with mobility. She was 
found to have significant proximal muscle weakness, initially only in the lower 
limbs, but this progressed to involve the upper limbs too. By the age of 8 years, 
she was using a wheelchair and in her teenage life became wheelchair-bound. She 
had successful surgery for scoliosis at the age of 9.
At the age of 12, her sleep pattern was disrupted and she felt very tired during the 
day. She was found to have early respiratory failure and non-invasive ventilation 
was started at night, leading to markedly improved sleep quality and feeling much 
better during the day. She had had mild swallowing difficulties for 2–3 years.
Examination
On examination, there was bilateral facial weakness, and her tongue movements 
were slow and speech mildly dysarthric. Neck flexion and extension were weak. 
There was global muscle wasting, most marked proximally without fasciculation. 
The tone was normal throughout and there was no evidence of myotonia. There 
was symmetrical weakness grade 2–3/5 proximally and 4–/5 distally in all four 
limbs. Reflexes were preserved, and plantar flexors and all sensory modalities 
were intact.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) and routine blood tests were normal, apart from a low vita￾min D level. EMG demonstrated myopathic changes. Muscle biopsy revealed 
variation in muscle fibre size and multiple rod-shaped structures within myo￾fibres on a number of different histochemical stains (Figure C8.1A–C) but par￾ticularly on modified Gömöri trichrome staining (Figure C8.1C). The presence of 
rods was confirmed with electron microscopy (Figure C8.1D).
Genetic testing subsequently revealed two pathogenic mutations in the NEB 
gene.
Forced vital capacity was 40% of predicted. Overnight oximetry (without ventila￾tion) showed significant dips in oxygenation overnight.
Muscle diseases Case 8
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-19
10.1201/9780429429323-1991
Case 8
Case 8
Figure C8.1 Nemaline myopathy. A. H&E 10× demonstrating the presence of 
many rod-like inclusions within myofibres. B. Metachromatic ATPase 10× show￾ing type 1 predominance (‘myopathic’ muscle) with absence of staining in areas 
of rods. C. Modified Gomori Trichrome staining highlighting the presence of 
numerous ‘red’ rods in muscle fibres. There are variable numbers present in indi￾vidual fibres. D. Electron Microscopy confirming the presence of electron dense 
Z-disk-like material 1–7um in length. 92
Muscle diseases
DIAGNOSIS
Nemaline myopathy.
Discussion
Nemaline myopathy is one of the most common forms of congenital myopathy. 
It is a genetically and phenotypically heterogeneous group of conditions with a 
wide range of disease severity. Some forms are lethal perinatally or in infancy, 
others are milder and present in childhood with about 4% presenting in adult life. 
It usually presents with a slowly progressive form of proximal weakness in child￾hood, leading to delayed motor milestones. However, patients can present with a 
late-onset distal myopathy. The more severe intrauterine or perinatal forms may 
lead to contractures, fractures, absence of movement and/or early respiratory 
failure.
Mutations in a number of different genes are associated with nemaline myopathy 
in an autosomal dominant, recessive or sporadic inheritance pattern. These genes 
all encode proteins associated with the structure or regulation of the thin fila￾ment of the skeletal muscle sarcomere. The most commonly causative are muta￾tions in the nebulin (NEB) gene, causing 50% of cases and are mainly recessive. 
Nebulin is one of the largest known proteins, making the nebulin gene challeng￾ing to sequence, and there may be more causative mutations in this gene and it is 
likely that there are others yet to be identified.
Nebulin mutations are closely followed by mutations in the ACTA1 gene. Less 
common mutations are found in TPM3 and TPM2, encoding tropomyosin alpha 
and beta, or myopalladin, all integral structural proteins of the thin filament. 
TNNT1 and TNNT3 encode proteins of the troponin complex, which is needed 
for the structure and function of the thin filament during contraction. Other 
genes reported to cause this condition include KLHL40, KLHL41, CFL2 and 
LMOD3.
Muscle weakness and wasting are seen in the proximal, facial, neck flexor, tongue 
and pharyngeal muscles. NEB mutations can cause a distal onset myopathy. 
Respiratory failure, with diaphragmatic and intercostal muscle weakness, is 
common and may be the presenting feature. Respiratory surveillance – regular 
clinical assessment, lung function tests, overnight oximetry and in some cases 
carbon dioxide levels – is essential for all patients. Scoliosis is a quite common 
feature. There is rarely cardiac involvement. Ophthalmoplegia is uncommon but 
has been observed in patients with mutations in KLHL40 or LMOD3, or excep￾tional cases in NEB.
CK is usually normal or mildly raised. Electromyography often demonstrates 
myopathic features. Diffuse thigh, soleus and tibialis anterior muscles are com￾monly seen on MRI in nemaline myopathy. Small case series indicate that 
ACTA1 demonstrates vasti, sartorius and biceps femoris involvement with rela￾tive adductor and gracilis sparing. TPM3 shows involvement in biceps femoris 
and adductor magnus with relative rectus femoris, adductor longus and gracilis 93
Case 8
sparing. NEB and ACTA1 both show relative gastrocnemii and tibialis poste￾rior sparing. Increased tiabilis anterior and extensor hallucis longus involvement 
may correlate with worse mobility.
Nemaline myopathy is characterised by rod-shaped structures (or nemaline bod￾ies) in muscle fibres. These are comprised of thin filamentous material arising 
from the sarcomere. The subsequent sarcomeric disruption leads to problems 
with muscle contraction, muscle weakness and wasting. Rod-like structures can 
also be found in normal myotendinous junctions, normal ocular muscles, ageing 
muscles and occasionally in other inherited and acquired neuromuscular disor￾ders (including mutations in the ryanodine receptor gene RyR1).
There are currently no curative treatments for nemaline myopathy. Treatments 
are supportive and aimed at addressing the complications of the condition and 
improving function and quality of life. Future treatment trials, including gene￾modifying therapies, may provide a means of treating people living with nema￾line myopathy.
Learning points
• Nemaline myopathy is caused by a range of genes (recessive, domi￾nant and sporadic), most commonly the large nebulin gene, with wide 
phenotypic variation. These genes all encode proteins associated with 
the structure or regulation of the thin filament of the skeletal muscle 
sarcomere.
• Respiratory failure, in particular diaphragmatic weakness, is common 
in patients with nemaline myopathy and may be the presenting feature.
• The majority of cases are recessive (NEB gene) forms presenting in 
infancy or childhood, but late-onset (often sporadic) forms do occur 
and can lead to a rare distal myopathy.
Further reading
Gineste C & Laporte J. 2023. Therapeutic approaches in different congenital 
myopathies. Journal Current Opinion Pharmacology 68: 102328.
Laitila J & Wallgren-Pettersson C. 2021. Recent advances in nemaline myopathy. 
Neuromuscular Disorders 31(10): 955–967.
Naddaf E, Milone NE, Kansagra A, Buadi F, Kourelis R, Naddaf E. 2019. Sporadic 
late-onset nemaline myopathy: Clinical spectrum, survival and treatment 
outcomes. Neurology 93(3): e298–e305.
Ogasawara M & Nishino IJ. 2023. A review of major causative genes in congenital 
myopathies. Human Genetics 68(3): 215–225.
Perry L, Stimpson G, Singh L, Morrow JM, Shah S, Baranello G, Muntoni F & 
Sarkozy A. 2023. Muscle magnetic resonance imaging involvement patterns 
in nemaline myopathies. Annals of Clinical and Translational Neurology
10(7): 1219–1229.
Schnitzler LJ, Schreckenbach T, Nadaj-Pakleza A, Stenzel W, Rushing EJ, Van 
Damme P, Ferbert A, Petri S, Hartmann C, Bornemann A, Meisel A, 
Petersen JA, Tousseyn T, Thal DR, Reimann J, De Jonghe P, Martin JJ, 94
Muscle diseases
Van den Bergh PY, Schulz JB, Weis J & Claeys K. 2017. Sporadic late-onset 
nemaline myopathy: clinico-pathological characteristics and review of 76 
cases. Orphanet Journal Rare Disease 12(1): 86.
Younger DS. 2023. Congenital myopathies. Handbook Clinical Neurology 195: 
533–561.
Yuen M & Ottenheijm CAC. 2020. Nebulin: big protein with big responsibilities. 
Journal of Muscle Research Cell Motility 41(1): 103–124.95
Case 9
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 19-year-old man presented with progressive proximal weakness in all four 
limbs. He reported that he had not enjoyed sport at school, had been described 
as a clumsy child and found running very difficult. Getting upstairs had become 
slow and laboured. He had noticed increasing thinning of his muscles. He 
described episodes of palpitations.
His maternal grandfather had died suddenly in early adult life, having collapsed 
due to cardiac complications whilst playing football.
Examination
He had mild facial weakness. There was symmetrical proximal weakness and 
wasting in all four limbs, most marked in the lower limbs. He had mild contrac￾tures in the Achilles and elbow tendons. His heart rate was irregular.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was 598. ECG showed first-degree heart block and atrial 
ectopics. The echocardiogram, lung function tests and overnight oximetry were 
normal. Genetic testing revealed a genetic abnormality in FHL1. A muscle biopsy 
was not required for diagnosis.
An urgent referral to the cardiology team was made prior to genetic testing.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-20
10.1201/9780429429323-2096
Muscle diseases
Case 9
DIAGNOSIS
Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
Discussion
Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy (EDMD) is a rare muscle disease charac￾terised by the clinical triad of progressive muscle weakness, early-onset joint 
contractures and cardiac involvement. It was first described by British geneticist 
Alan Emery and German neurologist Fritz Dreifuss in 1966.
EDMD is most commonly an X-linked recessive disorder caused by the gene 
Xq28, a small gene that codes for emerin. This is a protein localised to the inner 
nuclear membrane of skeletal and cardiac muscle and present in the cytoplasm 
of other cells. Some patients have an X-linked dominant form, EDMD1. A variety 
of mutations have been identified in this gene, causing the absence or reduced 
expression of emerin. Other pathogenic variants in other responsible genes 
include LMNA (EDMD2, EDMD3), SYNE1 (EDMD4), SYNE2 (EDMD5) and 
FHL1 (EDMD6). Congenital forms (EDMD2 and EDMD3) are caused by muta￾tions in laminin A (LMNA), which encodes for A-type laminins, an intermediate 
filament which has an important role in the cytoskeleton of cardiac and skeletal 
muscle.
Most patients present with proximal weakness and wasting around 5 years of age, 
but milder, later onset forms are reported. Patients with FHL1 gene abnormalities 
can present much later in adult life. Humeroperoneal muscles (often with deltoid 
sparing) and then later proximal limb girdle muscles are involved. Contractures 
are seen at the elbows, Achilles and posterior neck tendons. They can become 
severe with time but need to be actively looked for in early disease. As weakness 
progresses there is increased lumbar lordosis and a waddling gait. Toe walking, 
calf hypertrophy and a rigid spine may be present. Scapular winging and mild 
facial weakness may be seen.
CK may be raised but usually <10× normal. Muscle biopsy, if performed, typi￾cally demonstrates dystrophic changes (variation in fibre size, increased inter￾stitial connective tissue, necrotic and regenerating fibres), although the key 
diagnostic finding is reduced or absent expression of emerin within myonuclei 
on immunohistochemical staining (Figure C9.1). Skin biopsies are an alternative 
to muscle biopsy and will show emerin-negative nuclei in both EDMD patients 
and carriers. More commonly, the diagnosis is confirmed by genetic testing.
EDMD carries a high risk of cardiac complication, including sudden cardiac 
death (in over 40% of unrecognised cases). Cardiac involvement usually occurs 
in the second to fifth decade and often leads to atrioventricular conduction block 
(sinus bradycardia, heart block, atrial flutter and fibrillation). Later in the dis￾ease, generalised cardiomyopathy may develop. EDMD is also associated with an 
increased risk of malignant hyperthermia.97
Case 9
Cardiac monitoring is essential for patients with EDMD and female carriers 
(who themselves have a 20% risk of cardiac problems). Cardiac pacing and/or 
implantable defibrillators and medication for cardiac dysrhythmia and/or heart 
failure may be life-saving. Some patients with progressive cardiomyopathy may 
be considered for cardiac transplantation.
Learning points
• EDMD carries a high risk of cardiac complications (atrioventricular 
block and cardiomyopathy) for patients with EDMD and for female car￾riers, requiring cardiac screening and possible treatment with pacemak￾ers, implantable defibrillators, medication for heart failure and cardiac 
transplant.
• EDMD is typically associated with significant early contractures 
(elbows, Achilles, posterior neck).
• Other differential diagnoses for contractures include Bethlem myopa￾thy and calpainopathy (limb girdle muscular dystrophy 2A).
• EDMD is usually X-linked recessive but there are dominant forms 
(including congenital forms EDMD2).
Further reading
Cannie DE, Syrris P, Protonotarios A, Bakalakos A, Pruny JF, Diaranto R, 
Martinez-Veira C, Larranaga-Moreira JM, Medo K, Bermudez-Jimenez FJ, 
Ben Yaou R, Leturq F, Mezcua AR, Marini-Bettolo C, Cabrera E, Reuter 
C, Limeres Freire J, Rodriguez-Palomares JF, Mestroni L, Taylor MRG, 
Figure C9.1 Emery Driefuss Muscular Dystrophy. A. H&E 10× showing mild 
bimodal variation in myofibre diameters. B. Metachromatic ATPase 10× high￾lighting type 1 smallness. C. Spectrin 10× highlighting the variation in myofi￾bre diameters. D. Emerin IHC 20× `Control’ demonstrating retention of nuclear 
staining in normal muscle. E. Emerin IHC 20× demonstrating widespread loss of 
nuclear staining confirming the diagnosis of EDMD.98
Muscle diseases
Parikh VN, Ashley EA, Barriales-Villa R, Jimenez-Jaimez J, Garcia-Pavia 
P, Charron P, Biagini E, Garcia Pinilla JM, Bourke J, Savvatis K, Wahbi K & 
Elliott PM. 2023. Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy 1 is associated with 
high risk of malignant ventricular arryhthmias and end-stage heart failure. 
European Heart Journal 44(48): 5064–5073.
Cesar S, Coll M, Fiol V, Fernandez-Falgueras A, Cruzalegui J, Iglesias A, Moll I, 
Perez-Serra A, Martinez-Barrios E, Ferrer-Costa C, Del Olmo B, Puigmule 
M, Alcalde M, Lopez L, Pico F, Berrueco R, Brugada J, Zschaeck I, Natera-de 
Benito D, Carrera-Garcia L, Expositio-Escudero J, Ortez C, Nascimento A, 
Brugada R, Sarquella-Brugada G & Campuzano O. 2023. LMNA-related 
muscular dystrophy: identification of variants in alternative genes and per￾sonalized clinical translation. Frontiers Genetics 14: 1135438.
De Las Heras JL, Todorow v, Krecinic-Balic L, Hintze S, Czapiewski R, Webb S, 
Schoser B, Meinke P & Schirmer EC. 2023. Metabolic, fibrotic and splicing 
pathways are all altered in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy spectrum 
patients to differing degrees. Human Molecular Genetics 32(6): 1010–1031
Heller S, Shih R, Kalra R & Kang PB. 2020. Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy. 
Muscle and Nerve 61(4): 436–448.
Maggi L, Mavroidis M, Psarras S, Capetanaki Y & Lattanzi G. 2021. Skeletal and 
cardiac muscle disorders caused by mutations in genes encoding intermedi￾ate filament proteins. International Journal of Molecular Science 22(8): 4256.
Yunisova G, Ceylaner S, Oflazer P, Deymeer F, Parman YG & Durmus H. 2022. 
Clinical and genetic characteristics of Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy 
patients from Turkey: 30 years longitudinal follow-up study. Neuromuscular 
Disorders 32(9): 718–727.
Wang S & Peng D. 2019. Cardiac involvement in Emery-Dreifuss muscular dys￾trophy and related management strategies. International Heart Journal
60(1): 12–18.99
Case 10
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 48-year-old woman presented with a longstanding history of progressive distal 
and proximal muscle weakness affecting all four limbs. At the time of presenta￾tion, she was wheelchair-bound.
She recollected developing symmetrical bilateral foot drop during pregnancy at 
the age of 23 years. She had initially been thought to have a motor neuronopathy. 
This was followed by progressive proximal muscle weakness in the lower limbs 
and by the age of 35 years she experienced progressive proximal weakness fol￾lowed by distal weakness in the upper limbs. She did not report pain, sensory 
symptoms or sphincter disturbance.
She reported that until recently she had been able to extend her legs (using some 
remaining quadriceps strength) a little when dangling her legs from a seated 
position. This had been the last effective movement that she had in her legs.
Examination
On examination, she had no movement in the lower limbs and a flicker of move￾ment in the hands only. She was overweight and muscle definition was difficult to 
assess. Reflexes were present and symmetrical. All cranial nerves were intact but 
there was some weakness of neck flexion. Sensory function was normal.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was 253. Nerve conduction studies were normal but EMG 
showed widespread severe myopathic changes. A muscle biopsy was attempted 
but proved technically difficult. Genetic testing for limb girdle muscular dys￾trophy and myofibrillar myopathies was negative. Further genetic testing estab￾lished a diagnosis.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-21
10.1201/9780429429323-21100
Muscle diseases
Case 10
DIAGNOSIS
GNE myopathy (hereditary inclusion body myopathy, distal myopathy with 
rimmed vacuoles, Nonaka distal myopathy).
Discussion
GNE myopathy (previously known as hereditary inclusion body myopathy, 
Nonaka myopathy, distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles or quadriceps-spar￾ing myopathy) is a rare autosomal muscle disease characterised by widespread 
muscle atrophy, which was originally identified in a Japanese population in the 
early 1980s but is now recognised worldwide. The estimated prevalence is one 
to nine per million. The gene responsible, on chromosome 9, codes for GNE. 
Diagnosis depends on identifying pathogenic (homozygous or compound het￾erozygous, mainly missense) mutations in the GNE gene.
GNE (UDP-N-acetylglucosamine 2-epimerase/N-acetylmannosamine kinase) 
is an enzyme which catalyses the first two steps in N-acetylneuraminic acid or 
sialic acid biosynthesis. Modification of glycoproteins and glycolipids (expressed 
at the cell surface) by sialic acid is crucial for their function in many cell pro￾cesses, including cell adhesion and signal transduction, and this failure may lead 
to myopathy. The precise pathological mechanisms for GNE myopathy are not 
fully elucidated but impaired autophagy may be part of this process.
Symptoms usually begin in the late second or third decade but later onset cases 
(up to the seventh decade) have been reported and similarly a few cases in chil￾dren as young as 10 years. Bilateral foot drop, caused by weakness in the tibialis 
anterior, is the commonest first presentation. Weakness progresses mainly sym￾metrically in all four limbs, with relative sparing of the quadriceps muscles until 
later in the course of the disease. Loss of ambulation usually occurs within 10–15 
years of onset. The deep finger flexors and intrinsic muscles of the hands are often 
affected early too.
Cranial nerves are not affected but neck flexion weakness is common. 
Cardiomyopathy is not associated with GNE myopathy but cardiac dysrhythmia 
and respiratory muscle weakness are reported infrequently. Thrombocytopenia 
has been identified in some East Asian families with GNE myopathy.
Serum CK may be moderately raised and EMG is usually myopathic with small 
motor unit potentials and fibrillation potentials. Muscle MRI may identify early 
involvement of the biceps femoris short head in some cases.
Muscle biopsy may reveal similar features to inclusion body myositis (hence 
the previous name) including myopathic changes (type 1 fibre predominance, 
fibre size variation and variable atrophy) combined with the presence of rimmed 
vacuoles containing ubiquitinated material. There is increased acid phosphatase 
activity and lysosomal markers within the vacuoles, suggesting a role for autoph￾agy. In contrast to inclusion body myositis, there is paucity of inflammation and 
an absence of expression of MHC1 (major histocompatibility complex 1).101
Case 10
Electron microscopy may show filamentous inclusions in the nucleus and cyto￾plasm, as well as the autophagic vacuoles. Mitochondrial dysfunction, increased 
amyloid β peptide and reduced sialic acid (important for platelet function) levels 
have also been found in GNE myopathy.
Although there are no current disease-modifying therapies available, research 
is underway to develop treatments. Substrate replacement (including increas￾ing sialic acid levels), immunotherapy and gene therapy strategies are being 
evaluated.
Learning points
• GNE myopathy (hereditary inclusion body myopathy) is a rare condi￾tion but should be considered in the differential diagnosis in patients 
presenting with progressive muscle atrophy, particularly in early adult￾hood with early bilateral footdrop and late quadriceps sparing (some 
preservation of hip flexion).
• Other conditions which may feature in the differential for GNE myopa￾thy include the much more common sporadic inclusion body myositis 
and adult-onset dominant distal and myofibrillar myopathies.
• Cardiac dysrhythmia and respiratory muscle weakness (requiring ven￾tilatory support) may be complications of this condition.
• Diagnosis depends on genetic confirmation and future treatment 
options may include substrate replacement (sialic acid) and/or genetic 
modifying therapy.
Further reading
Carrillo N, Malicdan MC & Huizing M. 2018. GNE myopathy: etiology, diagno￾sis and therapeutic challenges. Neurotherapeutics 15(4): 900–914.
Mullen J, Alrasheed K & Mozaffar T. 2022. GNE myopathy: history, etiology and 
treatment trials. Frontiers Neurology 13: 1002310.
Nishino I, Carillo-Carrasco N & Argov Z. 2015. GNE myopathy: current update 
and future therapy. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry
86(4): 385–392.
Nonaka I, Noguchi S & Nishino I. 2005. Distal myopathy with rimmed vacuoles 
and hereditary inclusion body myopathy. Current Neurological Neuroscience 
Reports 5(1): 61–65.
Pogoryelova O, Gonzalez Coraspe JA, Nikolenko N, Lochmuller H & Roos A. 
2018. GNE myopathy: from clinics and genetics to pathology and research 
strategies. Orphanet Journal of Rare Diseases 13(1): 70.
Yoshioka W, Nishino I & Noguchi S. 2022. Recent advances in establishing a cure 
for GNE myopathy. Current Opinion Neurology 35(5): 629–636.
Zhang T, Shang R & Miao J. 2022. The role of amyloid βin the pathological mech￾anism of GNE myopathy. Journal Neurological Science 43(11): 6309–6321.102
Case 11
Sithara Ramdas
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 6-year-old girl was referred with a history of gross motor delay and ongoing 
difficulties with gait. She was born at term without any antenatal concerns. She 
was noted to be floppy and was on nasogastric feeds for 2 weeks. She had recur￾rent chest infections until 2 years of age. Her gross motor development was sig￾nificantly delayed. She sat independently at the age of 18 months, stood unaided 
at 28 months and walked independently at 36 months. But at the age of 6 years, 
she is unable to run, jump or hop. She required speech and language therapy 
input for phonation difficulties related to poor lip closure. There are no concerns 
about her fine motor and cognitive abilities.
Examination
Rise to stand with Gower’s manoeuvre. Neck flexion MRC grade 3. Hip girdle 
weakness was noted with sub-gravity hip extension. Knee extension 4, ankle 
dorsi flexion 5. Shoulder abduction 4, elbow extension 5, wrist extension 5. Deep 
tendon reflexes were elicitable in the upper and lower limbs. Mild bilateral facial 
weakness but the rest of the cranial nerve and cerebellar examination were nor￾mal. No spinal rigidity or scoliosis.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) 130 U/L (40–320 U/L).
Muscle biopsy revealed myopathy with cores. Genetic testing established the 
diagnosis.
Muscle diseases Case 11
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-22
10.1201/9780429429323-22103
Case 11
Case 11
DIAGNOSIS
Congenital myopathy due to compound heterozygous pathogenic variants in 
RYR1.
Discussion
Congenital myopathies are a group of genetic muscle disorders typically charac￾terised by childhood onset of slowly or non-progressive skeletal muscle weakness. 
Mutations in the skeletal muscle ryanodine receptor (RYR1) gene are known to 
cause both autosomal dominant and recessive muscle disorders. RYR1 encodes 
for the sarcoplasmic reticulum calcium release channel (RyR1) which plays a cru￾cial role in excitation/contraction coupling.
RYR1-related myopathy subtypes as based on histopathological features include 
central core disease (CCD), multiminicore disease (MmD), centronuclear myop￾athy (CNM), congenital fibre-type disproportion (CFTD) and core-rod myopathy 
(CRM) (Table C11.1). Other RYR1-related clinical phenotypes now recognised 
include King–Denborough syndrome, RYR1 rhabdomyolysis-myalgia syndrome, 
atypical periodic paralysis, congenital neuromuscular disease with uniform type 
1 fibres and late-onset axial myopathy.
RYR1-related myopathy presents with a variable spectrum of clinical features 
which include early-onset hypotonia, proximal/distal or generalised muscle 
weakness, facial weakness, ptosis, ophthalmoplegia, bulbar weakness, respira￾tory involvement (recurrent chest infection, respiratory failure) and orthopaedic 
conditions (joint contractures, hip dislocation, scoliosis).
All RYR1-related myopathy cases should be considered potentially malignant 
hyperthemia susceptible; the higher risk is in dominant phenotypes.
Serum CK is normal or mildly raised. Muscle MRI demonstrates relative sparing 
of rectus femoris and gracilis in CCD-dominant patients with more generalised 
involvement in other cases.
There are no approved therapies for RYR1-related myopathy. Small studies and 
case reports have reported benefits with salbutamol and CNM-associated RYR1 
myopathy benefits from pyridostigmine. Clinical care due to the multisystem 
involvement should be via a multidisciplinary team.
Learning points
• RYR1-related congenital myopathy presents with variable age of onset, 
clinical features, and both dominant and recessive modes of inheritance.
• The main diagnostic investigations in these cases include muscle biopsy 
and genetic testing. Muscle MRI can aid in diagnosis.
• In most patients, the muscle weakness is stable and non-progressive.
• The risk of malignant hyperthermia should be considered in all patients 
with pathogenic variants in RYR1.
• There are no approved treatments and long-term management requires 
a multidisciplinary approach.104
Muscle diseasesTable C11.1 RYR1 subtypes and common clinical features
Hypotonia Gross motor delay Weakness Orthopaedic EOM weakness Respiratory Bulbar
CCD
(dominant)
+ + P, A + – – –
CCD
(recessive)
+ + G + +/– + +
MmD + + P, A, D + + + +
CNM + + P, A
D
+ + +/– +/–
CFTD + + P, A + + + +
CRM + + G, A + – + –
Abbreviations: P, proximal; A, axial; G, generalised; D, distal.105
Case 11
Further reading
Lawal TA, Todd JJ, Meilleur KG. Ryanodine receptor 1-related myopathies: 
Diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Neurotherapeutics. 2018 Oct; 
15(4):885–899.
Wang CH, et al. Consensus Statement on Standard of Care for Congenital 
Myopathies. Journal of Child Neurology. 2012 Mar; 27(3):363–382.
Zhou H, Jungbluth H, Sewry CA, et al. Molecular mechanisms and phenotypic 
variation in RYR1-related congenital myopathies. Brain: A Journal of 
Neurology. 2007; 130(8):2024–2036.106
Case 12
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 53-year-old man presented with shortness of breath on minimal exercise and 
an overall reduction in exercise tolerance soon after a viral illness. He was inves￾tigated by the medical team and found to have dilated cardiomyopathy. He was 
treated for cardiac failure and subsequent problems with cardiac dysrhythmia 
led to the insertion of a pacemaker and subsequently an implantable defibrillator.
Within a year of his original presentation with cardiac problems, this man began 
to find it difficult to rise from a seated position and had further problems with 
being able to sustain exercise. He also reported sleep disruption, unrefreshing 
sleep and fatigue.
There was a long-standing history of diabetes and mild hypertension. He was 
also an ex-smoker.
There was a family history of cardiac disease with four family members experi￾encing premature death (presumed myocardial infarction): his mother at the age 
of 60, one brother at the age of 60 and one brother at the age of 47, and a maternal 
aunt at the age of 50 years.
Examination
All cranial nerves were intact. There was weakness of hip flexion grade 3/5 bilat￾erally and of knee flexion and extension grade 4+/5 bilaterally. Tone was normal 
throughout and reflexes were present and symmetrical with flexor plantars. There 
was some wasting of the quadriceps muscles bilaterally without fasciculation. 
Mild Achilles tendon contractures were evident. Sensory function was normal.
Investigations
Creatine kinase was 8923. Nerve conduction studies were normal, and EMG 
showed myopathic changes. Echocardiogram revealed dilated cardiomyopathy, 
lung function tests identified respiratory muscle weakness and overnight oxime￾try showed nocturnal hypoventilation. A cardiomyopathy gene panel was under￾taken, which confirmed the diagnosis.
Treatment
This man received medical treatment for heart failure and was established on 
nocturnal non-invasive ventilation to improve symptoms of hypoventilation.
Muscle diseases Case 12
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-23
10.1201/9780429429323-23107
Case 12
Case 12
DIAGNOSIS
Myofibrillar myopathy secondary to a BAG3 mutation.
Discussion
BAG3 myopathy is one of the myofibrillar myopathies, a heterogeneous group 
of neuromuscular disorders characterised by disintegration of the Z-disk, caus￾ing disintegration of myofibrils. The BAG3 gene (Bcl-2–associated athanogene 3) 
encodes a multidomain protein that plays an important role in a number of cel￾lular processes. BAG3 mutations have been reported in a relatively small number 
of patients. In children, this largely autosomal dominant myofibrillar myopathy 
leads to rapidly progressive weakness and a poor prognosis with respect to car￾diac and respiratory involvement. (De novo mutations have been reported too.) 
However, in adults, progression may be much slower. Proximal weakness, rigid 
spine and Achilles tendon contractures are often present.
Muscle biopsy may identify a range of myopathic features including fibre size 
variability, fibre splitting, excess internal nuclei, increased connective/adipose 
tissue and/or vacuoles (Figure C12.1). Desmin or myotilin protein accumulation 
is often observed within affected myofibres. Electron microscopy will highlight 
myofibrillar disintegration and protein aggregation (Figure C12.2). In addition, 
Figure C12.1 Myofibrillar Myopathy. A H&E 10× demonstrating moderate 
variation in myofibre diameters with split fibres, isolated necrotic fibres and an 
occasional fibre showing granular eosinophilic material within the cytoplasm. B. 
Modified Gomori Trichrome 10× highlighting darkly staining material within myo￾fibres. C. NADH 10× confirming many fibres with abnormal/distorted myofibrillar 
architecture. D. Myotilin immunostains 20× highlighting the presence of abnor￾mal myotilin-positive myofibrillar material within myofibres. A similar pattern of 
staining was observed for desmin.108
Muscle diseases
neuropathic changes may be seen in some BAG3-related cases due to associated 
polyneuropathy.
BAG is a co-chaperone for heat shock protein HSP70, together contributing to 
targeting aggregation-prone proteins to macro-autophagic degradation and con￾tributing more widely to anti-apoptosis in a range of degenerative diseases. There 
is already evidence from in vivo models that transcriptional adaptation of gene 
expression can prevent myopathy and heart failure, providing encouraging first 
steps in developing gene-modifying therapy in this condition.
Learning points
• BAG3-related myofibrillar myopathy is rare. Although previously 
thought of as an autosomal dominant, rapidly progressive condition in 
children, a wider range of phenotypes, including milder forms present￾ing in adulthood, are increasingly recognised.
• Proximal muscle weakness, rigid spine and Achilles tendon contrac￾tures are common features.
• A number of muscle conditions, including myofibrillar myopathy, may 
present with cardiac dysfunction as the primary symptom. BAG3 usu￾ally leads to cardiomyopathy.
• Gene panels for cardiomyopathy may identify conditions with an asso￾ciated skeletal myopathy, which may or may not have been evident for 
the patient prior to testing.
• Respiratory muscle weakness can also be associated with BAG3 
mutations.
Figure C12.2 Myofibrillar Myopathy. Electron Microscopy images. A. EM of 
muscle demonstrating disruption of Z-lines. B EM demonstrating accumulation 
of myofibrillar material.109
Case 12
Further reading
Akaba Y, Takeguchi R, Tanaka R, Makita Y, Kimura T, Yanagi K, Kaname T, 
Nishino I & Takahashi S. (2022) Wide spectrum of cardiac phenotype in 
myofibrillar myopathy associated with Bcl-2-associated athanogene 3 muta￾tion: a case report and literature review. Journal Clinical Neuromuscular 
Disease 24(1): 49–54.
Batonnet-Pichon S, Behin A, Cabet E, Dalort F, Vicart P & Lilienbaum A (2017) 
Myofibrillar myopathies: New perspectives from animal models to thera￾peutic approaches. Journal of Neuromuscular Disorders 4(1): 1–15.
Behin A, Salort-Campana E, Wahbi K, Richard P, Carlier RY, Laforet P, Stojkovic 
T, Masisonobe T, Verschueren A, Franques J, Attarian S, Maues de Paula A, 
Figarell-Branger D, Becane HM, Nelson I, Duboc D, Bonne G, Vicart P, Udd 
B, Romero N, Pouget J, Eymared B & Behin A (2015) Myofibrillar myopa￾thies: State of the art, present and future challenges. Reviews Neurology
(Paris) 171(10): 715–729.
Diofano F, Weinmann K, Schneider I, Thiessen KD, Rottbauer W & Just S (2020) 
Genetic compensation prevents myopathy and heart failure in an in vivo 
model of BAG3 deficiency. PLoS Genetics 16(11): e1009088.
Selcen D, Muntoni F, Burton BK, Pegoraro E, Sewry C, Bite AV & Engel AG 
(2009) Mutation in BAG3 causes severe dominant childhood muscular dys￾trophy. Annals of Neurology 65: 83–89.
Liu L, Sun K, Zhang X, Tang Y & Danyan X (2021) Advances in the role and 
mechanism of BAG3 in dilated cardiomyopathy. Heart Failure Reviews
26(1): 183–194.
Sturner E & Behl C (2017) The role of the multi-functional BAG3 protein in cellular 
protein control and in disease. Frontiers in Molecular Neuroscience 10: 177.110
Case 13
Louisa Kent and Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 28-year-old man was seen in the muscle clinic with a 3-year history of progres￾sive difficulty walking. He frequently tripped over his feet and reported falling 
on several occasions. He found it difficult to grip heavy objects, for example, he 
experienced difficulty carrying shopping bags. He had no known family history 
and was otherwise well.
Examination
Examination revealed marked distal lower limb wasting and inability to stand 
on his heels. Extensor digitorum brevis (EDB) was preserved and he did not have 
a hanging hallux. There was mild proximal lower limb weakness, with notable 
sparing of quadriceps. In the upper limbs, there was atrophy of the thenar mus￾cles and weakness of finger flexors. Reflexes and sensation were normal.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was 1021 IU/L.
Nerve conduction studies were normal. EMG revealed myopathic changes in the 
distal muscles of the upper and lower limbs.
MRI scan of the legs revealed fatty infiltration in the anterior lower leg muscles 
bilaterally (particularly anterior tibial and toe extensors) and medial gastrocne￾mius. In the thighs, there was fatty infiltration of the hamstring muscles but with 
sparing of the quadriceps.
Muscle biopsy of the left deltoid showed variability in fibre size with many slightly 
atrophic and angular fibres and some hypertrophic fibres. There was fibre type 
disproportion with type 1 fibres smaller and more numerous than type 2.
Genetic testing established the diagnosis.
Muscle diseases Case 13
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-24
10.1201/9780429429323-24111
Case 13
Case 13
DIAGNOSIS
GNE myopathy (Nonaka distal myopathy) due to compound heterozygous 
pathogenic variants detected in GNE.
Discussion
The term “distal myopathy” describes a heterogeneous group of slowly progres￾sive inherited myopathies which predominantly affect the distal muscles of 
either the lower limbs (more commonly) and/or the upper limbs. The classifica￾tion of distal myopathies is complicated because of the use of eponymous names 
and varied classification systems that have developed over the years. Previous 
schemes involving histopathological classification, phenotypic classification and 
genetic variants have been used. Some distal myopathies are also included in the 
limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD) classification. In the era of genetics, 
distal myopathies should preferably be classified (or referred to) by the causative 
gene. This is not only clearer but provides information on disease course and 
likelihood of other organ involvement, and can aid in genetic counselling and 
subsequent family planning.
When presented with a patient with a distal myopathy, careful clinical assessment 
(history and examination) and investigations (CK, neurophysiology, MRI and 
muscle biopsy findings) help to narrow the possible causative genes (Table C13.1). 
The main differential diagnosis for a distal myopathy is distal motor neuropathy. 
Clinical pointers to the diagnosis of a distal myopathy include distal lower limb 
weakness with preservation of quadricep strength, retained reflexes and preserva￾tion of muscle bulk (particularly of the extensor digitorum brevis). Investigations 
can further help to distinguish between a myopathy and neuropathy. More often 
than not the CK will be normal or mildly raised in both distal neuropathy and 
myopathy. However, CK levels >2000 U/L are almost never neurogenic and point 
to pathogenic variants of ANO5 or DYSF. Many would consider neurophysiol￾ogy to be the gold standard for distinguishing a distal myopathy from a motor 
neuropathy, but it can on occasion be unhelpful especially early in the disease 
course. Subclinical selective muscle involvement on muscle MRI is sometimes 
also useful, e.g., in TTN-related myopathy there is selective involvement of the 
anterior compartment in the distal lower limbs, but often it may not add much 
beyond that which is elicited by thorough clinical examination. A role for muscle 
biopsy remains, particularly if the phenotype is unusual or a variant(s) of uncer￾tain significance is identified on genetic testing. While no general histopathologi￾cal features of a distal myopathy exist, some features, such as rimmed vacuoles or 
myofibrillar aggregates, may point towards certain subsets of distal myopathies.
GNE myopathy is an autosomal recessive distal myopathy which typically pres￾ents in early adulthood. It is more prevalent in those of Iranian Jewish descent 
due to the presence of the founder mutation c.2228T>C (p.M743T) in the pop￾ulation. There is no association with cardiomyopathy, and respiratory muscle 
weakness is unusual. The most commonly affected muscles initially are the ankle 
dorsiflexors and toe extensors, often with weakness of finger flexors. This can 112
Muscle diseases
Table C13.1 Clinical and muscle biopsy features of rare distal myopathies
Gene Name(s) Inheritance Histopathology Age at onset 
Typical initial 
distribution of 
weakness Other features 
TTN Udd myopathy AD >AR Dystrophic with 
RV
Adult Anterior lower 
leg
CM, RF
TIA1 Welander myopathy AD Dystrophic with 
RV
Adult Hands, finger 
extensors
MATRN3 Vocal cord and pharyngeal 
distal myopathy
AD Dystrophic with 
RV
Adult Distal limb, 
vocal cord 
RF
ACTN2 Distal actinopathy AD Myopathic with 
RV 
Adult Anterior lower 
leg 
CM
NOTCH2NLC, 
LRP12 and
GIPC1
Oculopharyngodistal 
myopathy
AD/AR RV Adult Distal limb, 
facial, ptosis, 
bulbar
RF
VCP VCP-mutated distal 
myopathy 
AD RV Adult Anterior lower 
leg 
Frontotemporal 
dementia, Paget’s 
disease, ALS 
FLNC Distal ABD-filaminopathy/
C-terminal nonsense 
mutated distal 
filaminopathy 
AD Myofibrillar Early 
adulthood
Distal lower/
upper limb 
CM
DNAJB6 DNAJB6 distal myopathy AD Dystrophic with 
RV
Early 
adulthood
Distal lower 
limb 
No
MYH7 Laing distal myopathy AD > AR Myopathic Childhood Anterior lower 
leg
Hanging toe, CM
(Continued)113
Case 13
Table C13.1 (Continued) Clinical and muscle biopsy features of rare distal myopathies
Gene Name(s) Inheritance Histopathology Age at onset 
Typical initial 
distribution of 
weakness Other features 
MYOT Distal myopathy with 
myotilin defect
AD MFM Adult Distal lower 
limb 
CM
ZASP Markesbery–Griggs 
myopathy
Zaspopathy
AD MFM Adult Distal lower 
limb
CM
DES Desminopathy AD >AR MFM Adult Distal lower 
limb 
CM, RF
αB-crystallin αB-crystallinopathy AD MFM Adult Anterior lower 
leg
CM, RF, cataracts
BAG3 BAG3 myofibrillar 
myopathy 
AD MFM Childhood Limb and axial Neuropathy, CM, RF, 
rigid spine
PLIN4 PLIN4-associated 
myopathy 
AD Ubiquitin/p62 
positive 
deposits, RV
Early 
adulthood
Anterior lower 
leg
RF
HSPB8 Rimmed vacuolar 
neuromyopathy 
AD RV Early 
adulthood
Anterior lower 
leg 
Neuropathy, RF
KLHL9 Early onset distal 
myopathy with KLHL9 
mutations
AD Myopathic Childhood Anterior lower 
leg 
CAV3 Distal myopathy with 
caveolin defect
AD Myopathic, 
reduced 
caveolin3 staining 
Early 
adulthood 
Small muscles 
of hands and 
feet 
Wide phenotype, 
including LGMD, high 
CK, rippling muscles 
(Continued)114
Muscle diseases
Table C13.1 (Continued) Clinical and muscle biopsy features of rare distal myopathies
Gene Name(s) Inheritance Histopathology Age at onset 
Typical initial 
distribution of 
weakness Other features 
DMN2 DNM2-related distal 
myopathy
AD Centronuclear 
myopathy 
Childhood/
early 
adulthood 
Distal limbs Ptosis, 
ophthalmoplegia, 
facial weakness, RF
RYR1 RYR1 mutated calf 
predominant distal 
myopathy
AD/AR May see core-like 
structures
Adulthood Lower/upper 
limb 
Wide phenotype, 
including rigid spine, 
malignant 
hyperthermia
GNE Nonaka myopathy
Distal myopathy with 
rimmed vacuoles 
AR Myopathic, RV Early 
adulthood
Anterior lower 
leg, hands, 
sparing 
quadriceps 
DYSF Miyoshi myopathy AR Myopathic, 
absent dysferlin 
staining
Early 
adulthood 
Posterior 
lower leg, 
hamstring
Markedly raised CK 
ANO5 ANO5 distal muscular 
dystrophy/distal 
anoctaminopathy
AR Scattered necrotic 
muscle fibres 
Early 
adulthood 
Posterior 
lower leg 
Markedly raised CK 
NEB Early onset distal 
myopathies with nebulin 
defect
AR > AD Grouped muscle 
fibre atrophy 
Childhood Anterior lower 
leg 
ADSSL Early onset ADSSL distal 
myopathy
AR RV Adolescent Weakness in 
legs > arms 
Facial muscle 
involvement 
Abbreviations: AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; RV, rimmed vacuoles; CM, cardiomyopathy; RF, respiratory failure; MFM, myofibrillar 
myopathy.115
Case 13
progress to involve more proximal muscles, though quadriceps are often strik￾ingly spared. CK is typically mild-moderately elevated. Muscle biopsy can reveal 
rimmed vacuoles, perhaps absent in this case due to the choice of a proximal 
muscle biopsy site.
Learning points
• Distal myopathies are a heterogeneous group of rare inherited myopa￾thies, which in most but not all cases predominantly affect the distal 
lower limb muscles.
• They are most clearly classified by the genetic cause. Even though some 
cases still evade diagnosis, detailed clinical assessment will enable the 
clinician to narrow the differential diagnosis substantially.
• It is important to remember that myopathies such as myotonic dys￾trophy type 1, facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) and 
inclusion body myositis (IBM) are much commoner causes of distal 
weakness and should always be considered first.
Further reading
Savarese M et al, Panorama of the distal myopathies, Acta Myol 2020 Dec 
1;39(4):245–265. doi: 10.36185/2532-1900-028.116
Case 14
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 39-year-old woman presented with a 12-month history of progressive proximal 
weakness in the lower limbs, longstanding ptosis and mild swallowing difficul￾ties. Her father had experienced progressive proximal weakness in later adult life 
and now at the age of 71 years was using a wheelchair most of the time. He had 
undergone successful eyelid elevation surgery and was awaiting a gastrostomy 
due to worsening dysphagia with associated recurrent chest infections.
Examination
This woman had bilateral symmetrical ptosis, which did not show signs of exac￾erbation with fatigue. There was some restriction of horizontal and vertical eye 
movements. She had moderate proximal weakness in all four limbs.
Investigations
Anti-acetylcholine receptor antibodies were negative and creatine kinase (CK) 
was raised at 482. Genetic testing revealed an expansion in the first exon of the 
polyadenylation binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1) gene, confirming a diagno￾sis of oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy in both this woman and her father.
Muscle diseases Case 14
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-25
10.1201/9780429429323-25117
Case 14
Case 14
DIAGNOSIS
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy.
Discussion
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy (OPMD) is typically a late-onset genetic 
muscle disease presenting with ptosis, dysphagia and a degree of proximal weak￾ness affecting all four limbs, usually in the fifth or sixth decade. It is caused by the 
expansion (of variable size) of GCN triplets coding for alanine in the first exon 
of the polyadenylation binding protein nuclear 1 (PABPN1) gene. It is possible 
that the gain in function of this protein, which is a ubiquitous polyadenylation 
factor shuttling between the nucleus and the cytoplasm forming poly-A tails in 
eukaryotic mRNA, leads to pathological damage but a number of hypotheses 
have been proposed.
The commonest form is autosomal dominant and so a number of patients have a 
positive family history. This form has a penetrance of <1% for carriers under 40 
years old and is fully penetrant in those older than 70 years. Prevalence has been 
found to be highest (due to founder mutations) in a French-Canadian population 
in Quebec (1:1000) and in Bukhara Jews in Israel (1:600) and estimated to be 
1:200,000 in France. Rarer allelic recessive forms and point mutations have also 
been reported. Some forms, particularly those with two autosomal dominant 
mutations, are more severe and present earlier, but a clear relationship between 
triplet repeat size and phenotype has not been established.
Most patients with OPMD have normal or mildly raised CK levels (although up 
to 5 times normal is reported). Myopathic changes may be evident on electromy￾ography and dystrophic changes on muscle biopsy. Rimmed vacuoles (similar to 
those found in inclusion body myositis) and intranuclear inclusions of tubular 
filaments (containing PABPN1 and other proteins), arranged in palisades or tan￾gles, are often seen on muscle biopsy. However, the diagnosis is usually reached 
by genetic testing. Genetic counselling should be made available for families.
There is currently no preventative, curative or disease-modifying therapy for 
OPMD. Early speech and language therapy and dietetics input are essential to 
manage safe swallowing and enhance nutrition. Cricopharyngeal myotomy and 
botulinum toxin injections to the upper oesophageal sphincter have been used to 
provide some relief from dysphagia, but the effects of these interventions are tem￾porary. Gastrostomy feeding is needed in a number of cases. Cough management 
is important as aspiration pneumonia is a common cause of death in this patient 
group. Physiotherapy input will also enable a graded exercise regime, manage￾ment of falls and support with mobility aids. Eyelid elevation surgery can often 
greatly improve the quality of life for people living with OPMD.118
Muscle diseases
Learning points
• OPMD should be considered in patients with ptosis, swallowing dif￾ficulties and a limb girdle pattern of muscle weakness, particularly in 
cases with a positive family history.
• The differential diagnosis includes myasthenia gravis, mitochondrial 
myopathy (including chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia) 
and myotonic dystrophy.
• Where the condition is considered, diagnosis can usually be made 
by genetic testing, without the need for muscle biopsy, with access to 
genetic counselling for families.
• Care should be taken with swallowing, nutrition and cough manage￾ment. Gastrostomy feeding may needed.
• Eyelid surgery should be considered and can significantly improve qual￾ity of life.
Further reading
Bouchard JP & Barbeau A. (1997) Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy in 
French Canada and North America. Neuromuscular Disorders 7 (Suppl 1) 
S5–11 & S22–29.
Brais B. (1998) Short GCG expansions in the PABP2 gene cause oculopharyngeal 
muscular dystrophy. Nature Genetics 18(2): 164–167.
Richard P, Trollet C, Stojkovic T, de Becdelievre A, Perie S, Pouget A, Eymard B. 
(2017) Correlation between PABPN1 genotype and severity it oculopharyn￾geal muscular dystrophy. Neurology 88(4): 359–365.
Van der Sluijs BM, Lassche S, Knuiman GJ, Kusters B, Heerschap A, Hopman M, 
Schreuder TH, van Engelen BGM & Voermans NC. (2017) Involvement of 
pelvic girdle and proximal leg muscles in early oculopharyngeal muscular 
dystrophy. Neuromuscular Disorders 27(12): 1099–1105.
Van der Sluijs BM, Raz, V, Lammens M, van den Heuvel LP, Voermans NC & 
van Engelen BGM. (2016) Intranuclear aggregates precede clinical onset in 
oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy. Journal of Neuromuscular Disorders
3(1): 101–119.119
Case 15
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 48-year-old man presented with a 35-year history of progressive lower limb 
weakness. His first symptom was difficulty climbing stairs as fast as his friends 
at school. At the time, he attributed this to being overweight. A few years prior 
to presentation, he noted increasing difficulty in lifting objects of any significant 
weight above shoulder height. He did not complain of any additional symptoms, 
including orobulbar or cardiorespiratory symptoms. His father and paternal 
grandmother had been similarly affected and both died in their late 70s with his 
grandmother requiring a wheelchair in her later years but the cause for this was 
unclear. He had four children, none of whom experienced any similar symptoms.
Examination
There was atrophy of his shoulder girdle muscles accompanied by mild weak￾ness of shoulder abduction (MRC grading 4/5) and elbow flexion, and moderate 
weakness of hip flexion (3/5).
Investigations
His creatine kinase (CK) level was 202 IU/L (normal 40–320 IU/L). 
Electromyography (EMG) revealed small, short-duration polyphasic units. 
Muscle biopsy (Figure C15.1) demonstrated myopathic changes accompanied by 
the presence of large subsarcolemmal and sarcoplasmic aggregates which stained 
bright red on modified Gömöri trichrome staining. The aggregates were also 
strongly positive on nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-tetrazolium reductase 
(NADH-TR) and myoadenylate deaminase (AMPDA) histochemical (HC) stain￾ing but were negative on succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) and cytochrome c oxi￾dase (COX) HC stains. The aggregates were additionally highlighted with sarco-/
endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA1) immunohistochemical (IHC) 
staining. Electron microscopy of the muscle confirmed the presence of tubules 
within the muscle fibres (Figure C15.2).
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-26
10.1201/9780429429323-26120
Muscle diseases
Figure C15.1 (A) Haematoxylin and eosin stain reveals mild muscle fibre size 
variation and atrophy. Occasional fibres showing irregular internal slits or holes 
(40×). (B) Modified Gömöri trichrome stain shows small slits and vacuoles in 
fibres, which frequently contain red material (40×). (C) The material within the 
slits and vacuoles is strongly positive on nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NADH) histochemical stain (40×). (D) sarco-/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase 
(SERCA1) immunohistochemical stain highlights positive staining within the slits 
and vacuoles (40×).
Case 15
Figure C15.2 (A) Electron microscopy (EM) demonstrating the presence of 70 to 
400 nm tubules with central dense material in muscle fibres (2 µm). (B) Structure 
of tubules visualised at greater magnification (1 µm).121
Case 15
DIAGNOSIS
Tubular aggregate myopathy (TAM).
Discussion
Tubular aggregates (TAs) are a distinctive histopathological feature with a 
characteristic staining profile. They are observed in 0.5% of muscle biopsies (1). 
Ultrastructural studies show they comprise clusters of closely apposed tubules 
and attempts to categorise them morphologically have been made (2). TAs appear 
as non-specific aggregates within muscle fibres on routine haematoxylin and 
eosin (H&E) stains. Ancillary HC and IHC staining is required to confirm the 
presence of the TAs, which stain red on modified Gömöri trichrome staining and 
are strongly positive on NADH-TR and AMPDA staining. They do not stain on 
other oxidative stains (SDH, COX). TAs can also be highlighted with IHC stain￾ing for SERCA1 and dysferlin and, in some patients, with SERCA2.
TAs are associated with a wide range of hereditary and acquired disorders includ￾ing inflammatory, metabolic and toxic myopathies. Their aetiology is uncertain, 
but it is accepted that they are related to the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) and 
the result of disordered calcium homeostasis. Tubular aggregate myopathies 
(TAMs) are a clinically heterogeneous group of presumed hereditary disorders 
distinguished by the presence of prominent TAs on muscle biopsy. Four clinical 
phenotypes are included under the term “TAM”: exertional myalgia, limb girdle 
myopathy, periodic paralysis and congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS).
Although the underlying genetic cause of each phenotype of TAM is uncertain, 
clinical presentation and investigations can guide molecular genetic investiga￾tion and diagnosis. For example, a diagnosis of CMS with TAs is suggested by 
symptoms and signs of fatigability and neurophysiological evidence of a neu￾romuscular junction disorder. Currently, pathogenic variants in three genes are 
associated with CMS with TAs: GFPT1, DPAGT1 and ALG2. In contrast, the pres￾ence of ophthalmic and haematological abnormalities, including miosis, throm￾bocytopenia and asplenia, are indicative of TAM associated with pathogenic 
variants in STIM1 and ORAI1, genes that encode proteins involved in calcium 
homeostasis.
Finally, the size and staining characteristics of TAs in muscle can aid diagno￾sis (1, 3). Larger TAs in both type I and II muscle fibres are indicative of TAM, 
whereas smaller TAs exclusively observed in type II fibres are usually a secondary 
phenomenon associated with acquired disorders. The H&E staining characteris￾tics of TAs, the electron microscopy appearances and the appearance of TAs on 
SERCA2 IHC staining may guide the clinician in distinguishing between forms 
of TAMs (3).
Learning points
• TAs are derived from the SR and have a distinctive histopathological 
appearance on muscle biopsy.122
Muscle diseases
• TAs are associated with a wide range of acquired and hereditary 
disorders.
• TAMs are a heterogeneous group of hereditary disorders in which TAs 
are prominent.
• Clinical features such as fatigability and miosis and staining charac￾teristics on muscle biopsy may aid in the diagnosis of particular TAMs 
and can be used to direct molecular genetic testing for known genes 
involved in TAMs.
Further reading
1. Funk F, Ceuterick-de Groote C, Martin JJ, et al. Morphological spec￾trum and clinical features of myopathies with tubular aggregates. Histol 
Histopathol. 2013;28:1041–54.
2. Pavlovicová M, Novotová M, Zahradník I. Structure and composi￾tion of tubular aggregates of skeletal muscle fibres. Gen Physiol Biophys. 
2003;22:425–40.
3. Brady S, Healy EG, Gang Q, et al. Tubular aggregates and cylindrical spirals 
have distinct immunohistochemical signatures. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 
2016;75:1171–8.123
Case 16
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 32-year-old woman presented with a 4-year history of progressive proximal 
weakness in all four limbs, with difficulty rising from a seated position, carrying 
shopping bags and unsteadiness on climbing stairs. She also reported mild swal￾lowing difficulties and a degree of muscle stiffness, particularly in the hands on 
cold days. She had had surgery for cataracts in her late 20s, had ongoing problems 
with abdominal pain, and had both significant sleep disruption and excessive 
daytime sleepiness. In recent months she had found that she fell asleep whenever 
she sat down to rest in the day.
Examination
On examination, there was frontal balding, bilateral ptosis, and facial and neck 
weakness. There was weakness grade 4+/5 of shoulder abduction and hip flexion 
(with some wasting of the quadricep muscles bilaterally). Grip and percussion 
myotonia was evident in both hands.
Investigations
Routine blood tests, including creatine kinase (CK), were normal. An abdominal 
ultrasound revealed faecal loading and gallstones. An electrocardiogram (ECG) 
demonstrated first-degree heart block. Lung function tests showed a forced vital 
capacity (FVC) of 45% of predicted and multiple dips in oxygenation overnight.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-27
10.1201/9780429429323-27124
Muscle diseases
Case 16
DIAGNOSIS
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1).
Discussion
Myotonic dystrophy (DM1) is the most common form of adult-onset muscular 
dystrophy, with prevalence of 3–15/100,000. It is an autosomal dominant pro￾gressive multisystem disorder due to an expansion of an unstable trinucleotide 
repeat (CTG) sequence in the myotonic dystrophy protein kinase (DPMK) gene 
on chromosome 19q13.3. The DPMK gene codes for myotonin protein kinase, a 
myosin kinase found in skeletal muscle. DM1 demonstrates genetic anticipation: 
increasing severity and decreasing age of onset in successive generations (which 
also correlates with the length of the CTG repeat sequence). Most patients pres￾ent in adult life, but those with larger repeats may present in childhood and a 
severe (sometimes fatal) congenital form arises when a mother with a moderate￾sized expansion passes on a large expansion to a fetus.
DM1 typically presents with distal onset weakness and myotonia (failure of 
muscle relaxation after contraction) with proximal progression. Ptosis, facial 
weakness, neck weakness (particularly sternocleidomastoid), fatigue, dysphagia, 
gallstones, gastrointestinal dysmotility, frontal balding and early cataracts are 
common. A number of endocrine abnormalities are also associated with DM1: 
impaired glucose tolerance, thyroid and hypothalamic dysfunction, testicular 
atrophy (with male infertility) and menstrual irregularities.
Respiratory complications are multifactorial: obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA), 
respiratory muscle weakness and central apnoea. Respiratory failure (with dia￾phragmatic and intercostal muscle weakness), usually with aspiration pneumo￾nia (due to a weak cough), is the commonest cause of early mortality in DM1. 
Patients with DM1 may have increased sensitivity to drugs that depress ventilator 
drive (including opiates, barbiturates and anaesthetic agents) making planning 
of anaesthesia important.
Cardiac rhythm disturbance, particularly conduction disturbances and tachyar￾rhythmias are also common and contribute significantly to morbidity and mor￾tality, accounting for 30% of deaths in patients with DM1. Cardiomyopathy is 
rarely a feature of DM1.
Fatigue or excessive daytime sleepiness occurs in 40% of patients with DM1 and 
can have a profound effect on quality of life. Respiratory failure (particularly 
hypercapnia) needs to be excluded as a cause, but it more commonly arises as 
part of central nervous system dysfunction. Cognitive and intellectual deficits 
are frequent in adult-onset DM1 but are usually much milder than in those with 
congenital or childhood-onset forms. A range of psychiatric complications are 
reported. Apathy, depression and anxiety are experienced by many with DM1.125
Case 16
The diagnosis can only be confirmed by DNA analysis. Myotonia may be detected 
on electromyography. Patients should be screened for complications, with regu￾lar screening for respiratory and cardiac complications in particular.
Management and treatment require multidisciplinary support from a range of 
therapy services. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) ventilation may 
be used to treat OSA and bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP) for respira￾tory muscle weakness/central apnoea. A number of patients are unable to tolerate 
non-invasive ventilation. A pacemaker or implantable cardioverter defibrillator 
may be required for cardiac rhythm disturbances. Modafinil may be helpful in 
treating excessive daytime sleepiness and mexiletine may alleviate myotonia. 
Gene therapy, including development of antisense molecules that will reduce 
mutant DPMK, offers potential hope for disease-modifying therapies in DM1.
Learning points
• DM1 is the commonest form of adult-onset muscular dystrophy.
• DM1 is a multisystem disorder with a wide range of neurological and 
other medical complications, including diabetes, hypothyroidism and 
early cataracts.
• Respiratory and cardiac complications are common causes of morbidity 
and mortality, requiring lifelong screening and appropriate intervention.
Further reading
Ashizawa T et al. 2019. Consensus-based care recommendations for adults with 
myotonic dystrophy type 1. Neurology Clinical Practice 8(6): 507–520.
Catalano A, Franchini C & Carocci A. 2021. Voltage-gated sodium channel block￾ers: synthesis of mexiletine analogues and homologues. Current Medicinal 
Chemistry 28(8): 1535–1548.
Gonzalez-Alegre P 2019. Recent advances in molecular therapies in neurological 
disease: triplet repeat disorders. Human Molecular Genetics 28(R1): R80–87.
McNally EM, Mann DL, Pinto Y, Bakhta D, Tomiselli G, Nazarian S, Groh WJ, 
Tamura T, Duboc D, Itoh H, Hellerstein L & Mammen PPA 2020. Clinical 
care recommendations for cardiologists treating adults with myotonic 
dystrophy. Journal of the American Heart Association 9(4): e014006. doi: 
10.1161/JAHA.119.014006
Stoodley J, Vallejo-Bedia F, Seone-Miraz D, Debasa-Mouce, Wood MJA & Varela 
MA 2023. Application of antisense conjugates for the treatment of myotonic 
dystrophy type 1. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 24(3): 2697.
Thornton CA, Wymer JP, Simmons Z, McClain C, Moxley RT. 1997. Expansion 
of the myotonic dystrophy CTG repeat reduces expression of the flanking 
DMAHP gene. Nature Genetics 16: 407–1409.
Timchenko L 2022. Development of therapeutic approaches for myotonic dystro￾phies type 1 and type 2. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 23(18): 
10491.126
Case 17
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 30-year-old man presented with a 2-year history of progressive weakness in 
the lower limbs, with increasing difficulty rising from a seated position. He had 
also begun to notice mild weakness in the upper limbs when carrying heavy bags 
or moving furniture. He reported daily muscle pain and stiffness, including dif￾ficulty releasing his hand grip at times, which was a little worse in hot weather.
He did not report any other neurological symptoms and had been systemically 
well.
His mother had been similarly affected by lower limb weakness, muscle pain and 
stiffness. She had started walking with a stick at the age of 48.
Examination
On examination, there was evidence of thinning of the quadriceps muscle bilat￾erally, without fasciculation, and hip flexion weakness grade 4+5. He had bilat￾eral calf hypertrophy. Elbow extension was also mildly weak (4++/5). There was 
evidence of both grip and percussion myotonia in the hands bilaterally. Reflexes 
were present and symmetrical and plantars flexor.
He had mild sensorineural hearing impairment but all other cranial nerves were 
intact and sensory examination was normal.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was raised at 676 U/L. HbA1C was mildly raised at 44 
mmol/mol.
An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed first-degree heart block.
Electromyography revealed myotonic discharges and myopathic changes in mul￾tiple muscle groups.
Genetic testing established the diagnosis.
Muscle diseases Case 17
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-28
10.1201/9780429429323-28127
Case 17
Case 17
DIAGNOSIS
Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2).
Discussion
Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2, previously known as proximal myotonic 
myopathy [PROMM]) is a multisystem autosomal dominant disorder character￾ised by myotonia, proximal weakness early in the course of the disease, and often 
myalgia and fatigue. Myotonia may be identified clinically (grip and percussion 
myotonia) and with electromyography (EMG). Creatine kinase may be mildly 
elevated (<10 times the upper limit of normal).
With an estimated prevalence of 2 per 100,000, DM2 is much less common than 
DM1 and most families with this condition are from Northern Europe. It usually 
presents in adulthood, in the third decade, and although infrequently reported 
in children. It typically causes neck/axial, elbow extension and hip flexion weak￾ness at onset. If distal muscles are affected, this tends to occur later in the disease 
course, and unlike DM1, facial weakness and dysphagia are uncommon (Table 
C17.1).
Systemic features include cardiac conduction defects (20%), posterior subcap￾sular cataracts, sensorineural hearing impairment (60%), insulin insensitivity, 
testicular failure, hyperhidrosis, gastrointestinal disturbance, obstructive sleep 
apnoea and rarely respiratory failure. Magnetic resonance imaging identifies 
white matter changes in over 50% of patients (as well as reduced frontal, parietal, 
thalamic and/or hippocampal grey matter reduction in some). However, cogni￾tive difficulties tend to be much less severe in DM2 than in DM1. Cardiac (annual 
ECG) and respiratory monitoring (at baseline and in the context of symptoms) 
are recommended, as well as screening for other systemic complications.
DM2 is caused by an unstable CCTG repeat sequence expansion in intron 1 of 
the cellular nucleic binding protein (CNBP, previously known as the zinc fin￾ger binding protein gene [ZNF9]) on chromosome 3q21.3. The expansion ranges 
from 75 to 11,000 repeats, and unlike DM1, the size of the repeat does not closely 
correlate with age of onset or disease severity. The repeat sequence disrupts mus￾cle chloride channel RNA, which in turn leads to myotonia. Zinc binding protein 
is found in greatest abundance in skeletal and cardiac muscle in both the cyto￾plasm and on the endoplasmic reticulum. It is involved in the translation of orni￾thine decarboxylase mRNA and in sterol-mediated transcriptional regulation.
Whilst there are currently no curative treatments for DM2, supportive therapy 
(treatment of complications, physiotherapy, occupational therapy, psychological 
support and genetic counselling) can be beneficial. As primary disorders of RNA 
splicing mechanisms, DM2 and DM1 have the potential to be treated or modified 
by gene therapies.128
Muscle diseases
Learning points
• Myotonic dystrophy type 2 is a multisystem autosomal dominant dis￾order, characterised by myotonia and progressive proximal weakness, 
usually presenting in the third decade of life.
• Cardiac conduction defects, respiratory compromise, sensorineural 
deafness, cataracts and other systemic complications can arise.
• Myotonic dystrophy type 2 is much less common than myotonic dystro￾phy but shares a number of features. Early distal weakness and cognitive 
problems are much less common in myotonic dystrophy type 2 than in 
myotonic dystrophy type 1.
• Whilst there are no disease-modifying treatments currently available, 
as a disorder of RNA splicing mechanisms, gene therapy may offer hope 
for the future.
Table C17.1 Comparative features of myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1) and 
type 2 (DM2)
Feature DM1 DM2
Gene DMPK CNBP
Chromosome 19q13.3 3q.21
Mutation type CTG repeat CCTG repeat
Repeat size 50–4000 Mean in 1000s
Age of onset Any Adulthood mainly
Anticipation Yes Not usually
Congenital form Yes Rarely
Facial/neck weakness, 
dysphagia
Common Uncommon
Weak limbs, proximal Late Early
Weak limbs, distal Early Late
Myotonia Mild to moderate Mild to moderate
Electromyography myotonia Very common Common
Myalgia Mild to moderate Mild to severe
Cataracts Very common/early Common
Frontal balding Very common Uncommon
Cardiac dysrhythmia Very common/early Common/late
Respiratory failure Very common/late Uncommon
Cognitive dysfunction Common/mild to 
severe
Uncommon
Gonadal failure Common Uncommon
Excessive daytime sleepiness Very common/early Common/late
Hyperhidrosis Mild Mild to severe129
Case 17
Further reading
Hamel J, McDermott MP, Hilbert JE, Martens WB, Luebbe E, Tawil R, Moxley 
JT & Thornton CA (2022) Milestones of progression in myotonic dystrophy 
type 1 and type 2. Muscle & Nerve 66(4): 508–512.
Ivanovic V, Peric S, Pesovic J, Tubic R, Bozovic I, Petrovic Djordjevic I, Savic￾Pavicevic D, Meola G & Rakocevic-Stojanovic V (2022) Clinical score for 
early diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy type 2. Neurological Sciences Nov 19. 
doi: 10.1007/s10072-022-06507-9.
LoRusso S, Weiner B & Arnold WD (2018) Myotonic dystrophies: targeting ther￾apies in multisystem disease. Neurotherapeutics 15(4): 872–884.
Meola G. (2020) Myotonic dystrophy type 2: the 2020 update. Acta Myologica
39(4): 222–234.
Roy B, Wu Q, Whitaker CH & Felice KJJ (2021) Myotonic muscular dystrophy 
type 2 in CT, USA: a single centre experience with 50 patients. Journal of 
Clinical Neuromuscular Disease 22(3): 135–146.
Udd B, Krahe R, Wallgren-Pettersson C, Falck B & Kalimo H (1997) Proximal 
myotonic dystrophy – a family with autosomal dominant muscular dystro￾phy, cataracts, hearing loss and hypogonadism: heterogeneity of proximal 
myotonic syndromes? Neuromuscular Disorders 7: 217–228.130
Case 18
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 24-year-old presented with generalised muscle stiffness, which at times was 
uncomfortable, and intermittent weakness in the legs. He had always had very 
well-developed musculature but had sometimes struggled with sport at school.
He was working as a builder and reported that if he was working some distance 
from home his muscles would get stiffer and his legs feel weak when he first 
stepped out of the van. Once he got working these symptoms would improve and 
he was able to labour throughout the day. His symptoms were sometimes a little 
worse on a cold day but not markedly so.
He did not report any other neurological symptoms. Other than mild asthma as a 
child, he did not have any other significant medical problems and was not taking 
any medication.
Examination
On examination, there was generalised muscle hypertrophy. There was hand 
grip myotonia and percussion myotonia in the thenar eminence bilaterally. The 
neurological examination was otherwise normal and power was preserved in all 
muscle groups.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was raised at 893 U/l.
Electromyography (EMG) demonstrated early decrement in compound mus￾cle action potentials (CMAPs) with rapid recovery. Cooling did not alter these 
changes. Frequent myotonic discharges were seen, particularly in the lower limbs.
Muscle diseases Case 18
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-29
10.1201/9780429429323-29131
Case 18
Case 18
DIAGNOSIS
Myotonia congenita.
Discussion
Myotonia congenita is a rare genetic condition, with an estimated prevalence 
of 1–7/100,000, caused by mutations in the chloride channel gene CLCN1. It is 
a channelopathy due to dysfunction of an ion channel, voltage-gated chloride 
channel, present in the muscle sarcolemma and one of a group of conditions iden￾tified as non-dystrophic myotonias. Other non-dystrophic myotonias include 
paramyotonia congenita and sodium channel myotonia (including potassium 
and cold-aggravated myotonias). Myotonia congenita is the only muscle chan￾nelopathy known to be inherited in either a recessive (Becker disease) or a domi￾nant (Thomson disease) form.
Whilst the age of onset of myotonia congenita is usually in the first decade, there 
is a wide spectrum of presentation from the first to the fourth decade. The sever￾ity and distribution of myotonia varies, but it is often most marked in the lower 
limbs. Muscle hypertrophy can be very significant and may be overlooked in 
younger patients who are very active.
Myotonia in this condition typically demonstrates the “warm-up phenomenon” 
where symptoms improve with repetitive muscle action and are often worst after 
a period of rest, including transient weakness. A cold environment may exacer￾bate myotonia, but this is much less common than in patients with paramyotonia 
congenita. Myotonia may be seen by examining for lid lag (myotonia of orbi￾cularis oculi more commonly seen in paramyotonia congenita), hand grip and 
percussion of the thenar eminence. In all non-dystrophic myotonias, proximal 
myopathy may develop over time. Unlike myotonic dystrophy, other systemic 
features are not associated with non-dystrophic myotonia.
CK may be raised (usually less than 1000 U/l) but may be normal. Electromyography 
reveals myotonic discharges and a fall in CMAP, reflecting initial muscle weak￾ness, that rapidly recovers with each repetition, reflecting improvement in muscle 
strength. This short exercise test can be used, including at different temperatures, 
to distinguish forms of non-dystrophic myotonia. Genetic testing is diagnostic 
and may require sequencing of the whole CLCN1 gene.
There are currently no drugs that directly target the dysfunctional chloride chan￾nel. However, mexiletine (a sodium channel blocker, including the SCN4A chan￾nel, used in sodium channelopathies and paramyotonia congenita) is the most 
effective and well-tolerated form of treatment for myotonia in this condition. Its 
use has now been supported by two randomised controlled trials in non-dystro￾phic myotonia. Flecainide, propafenone, lamotrigine and acetazolamide have all 
been used to ameliorate symptoms. Gene-modifying therapies may well form 
future treatment for myotonia congenita.132
Muscle diseases
Learning points
• Myotonia congenita is channelopathy caused by mutations in the volt￾age-gated chloride channel gene CLCN1, which can be autosomal reces￾sive (Becker disease) or dominant (Thomson disease).
• Myotonia in this condition demonstrates the “warm-up phenomenon” 
where myotonia improves with exercise and is worst when trying to 
move after a period of rest.
• Muscle hypertrophy can easily be overlooked in young people who 
are very physically active, but muscle stiffness and sometimes proxi￾mal muscle weakness are present in the context of well-developed 
musculature.
• EMG usually demonstrates early decrement in CMAPs and widespread 
myotonic discharges.
• Mexiletine (a cardiac antiarrhythmic sodium channel blocker) is 
the most effective and well-tolerated treatment for myotonia in this 
condition.
Further reading
Jitpimolmard N, Matthews E & Fialho D (2020) Treatment updates for neuro￾muscular channelopathies. Current Treatment Options Neurology 22(10): 
34.
Statland JM, Bundy BN, Wang Y, Rayan DR, Trivedi JR, Sansone VA et al. (2012) 
Mexiletine for symptoms and signs of myotonia in non-dystrophic myoto￾nia: a randomised controlled trial. JAMA 308:1357–1365.
Stunnenberg BC, LoRusso S, Arnold WD, Barohn RJ, Cannon SC, Fontaine B, 
Griggs RC, Hanna MG, Matthews E, Meola G, Sansone VA, Trivedi JR, van 
Engelen BGM, Vicart S, Statland JM. (2020) Guidelines on clinical presen￾tation and management of non-dystrophic myotonias. Muscle and Nerve
62(4):430–444.
Stunnenberg BC, Raaphorst J, Groenewoud HM, Statland JM, Griggs RC, 
Woertman W, et al. (2018) Effect of mexiletine on muscle stiffness in 
patients with nondystrophic myotonia evaluated using aggregated N-of-1 
trials. JAMA 320:2344–2353.
Vivekanandam V, Jaibaji R, Sud R, Ellmers R, Skorupinska I, Germaine L, James 
N, Holmes S, Mannikko R, Jayaseelan D, Hanna MG. (2023) Prevalence of 
genetically confirmed skeletal muscle channelopathies in the era of next 
generation sequencing. Neuromuscular Disorders 33(3):270–273.
Vivekanandam V, Munot P, Hanna MG, Matthews E. (2020) Skeletal muscle 
channelopathies. Neurologic Clinics. 8(3):481–491.133
Case 19
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
An 84-year-old Caucasian woman was referred with a 3-year history of progres￾sive difficulty picking up small objects, which had been initially attributed to 
osteoarthritis. She described her hands as being weak and uncomfortable. For 
many years, she struggled to rise from low chairs but believed this was normal 
for her age. She had recently fallen several times, which she had also attributed to 
her age. On direct questioning, she admitted to mild dysphagia unaccompanied 
by disturbance of speech. Her previous medical history included osteoarthritis, 
gout, bilateral hearing loss and hypertension. She took allopurinol and enalapril 
daily. She had no family history of note.
Examination
There was mild bilateral periocular facial weakness and mild weakness (MRC 
grading 4/5) of neck flexion. Scalloping of the volar (anterior) forearm muscles 
was also identified along with asymmetric mild weakness (4/5) of shoulder 
abduction and elbow extension, and the inability to make a fist with either hand 
(illustrative picture in a male patient Figure C19.1A). Lower limb examination 
revealed bilateral atrophy of the quadriceps muscles (illustrative picture in a male 
patient Figure C19.1B) with moderate asymmetric weakness (3/5) of hip flexion, 
knee extension and ankle dorsiflexion.
Investigations
Her creatine kinase (CK) level was normal (49 IU/L; normal 25–200 IU/L). Nerve 
conduction studies (NCS) were normal. Electromyography (EMG) revealed posi￾tive sharp waves and small, short-duration, polyphasic motor units. A muscle 
biopsy from the deltoid muscle showed a combination of inflammatory and 
myopathic changes with significant variation of muscle fibre size observed (com￾prising a combination of both rounded and angulated atrophic fibres admixed 
with occasional hypertrophic fibres), perimysial and endomysial mononuclear 
inflammation (including invasion of intact muscle fibres, also referred to as par￾tial invasion), rimmed vacuoles (vacuoles within muscle fibres surrounded by 
granular deposits), increased mitochondrial changes, upregulation of expres￾sion of sarcolemmal major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC class I), and 
p62-immunohistochemical staining identified sarcolemmal aggregates.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-30
10.1201/9780429429323-30134
Muscle diseases
Figure C19.1 (A) Scalloping or concavity of the medial (ulnar) aspect of the fore￾arm indicative of atrophy of the volar forearm muscles (arrow) in a male patient 
and the patient attempting to make a closed fist. (B) Marked bilateral atrophy of 
the distal quadriceps muscles in a male patient (arrows).
Case 19135
Case 19
DIAGNOSIS
Inclusion body myositis (IBM).
Discussion
Inclusion body myositis (IBM) is the commonest acquired myopathy in individ￾uals over 50 years of age. It is classified as an idiopathic inflammatory myopathy 
(IIM) along with polymyositis and dermatomyositis, but its clinical presentation 
and response to treatment bear little resemblance to either of these diseases.
IBM appears to be more frequent in Caucasian populations and males are 
affected twice as often as females. It has a characteristic clinical presentation. 
Initial symptoms include difficulty rising from a chair and ascending stairs due 
to proximal lower limb weakness. Sudden falls are typical and result from the 
development of significant early weakness of the quadriceps muscles. Finger flex￾ion weakness impairs manual dexterity and is a less frequent presenting symp￾tom feature but may be reported. Mild dysphagia is common but is rarely the 
presenting complaint. The most frequent signs at presentation are knee exten￾sion weakness (greater than or equal to hip flexion weakness) and long finger 
flexion weakness. Other frequently affected muscles are the periocular muscles, 
elbow extensors, hip flexors and ankle dorsiflexors (1). Limb weakness is often 
asymmetric.
CK is usually mildly elevated in IBM (<1000 U/L) but can be normal or mod￾erately raised. Values above 3000 IU/L are uncommon and should lead to the 
consideration of alternative diagnoses. EMG may show both neurogenic changes 
(fibrillations and positive sharp waves) and myopathic features. Up until the last 
decade, muscle biopsy was the cornerstone of diagnosis. Histopathological fea￾tures classically associated with IBM include the presence of an endomysial lym￾phocytic infiltrate with inflammatory cells invading intact muscle fibres (partial 
invasion), rimmed vacuoles, and 15–18 nm tubulofilamentous inclusions on elec￾tron microscopy or muscle fibre amyloid (Figure C19.2). Although these histo￾pathological findings together are highly specific for IBM, they lack sensitivity, 
and ultrastructural studies and amyloid staining are infrequently performed. 
Additional histopathological features which, when present in an inflammatory 
myopathy, support a diagnosis of IBM are mitochondrial changes and p62-posi￾tive aggregates (1, 2).
The pathogenesis of IBM is uncertain and currently there is no known effective 
treatment available (3, 4). However, an initial trial of rapamycin showed prom￾ise and a larger trial is being conducted along with other trials. Although IBM 
is a slowly progressive disease, it is very disabling due to the early and marked 
involvement of the distal upper limb and proximal lower limb muscles.
Management aims to slow deterioration through regular exercise and to maxi￾mise function with the use of aids. Dysphagia is successfully managed by most 
individuals with IBM. However, for some individuals with IBM, it is a significant 
problem contributing to malnutrition, social phobia and aspiration pneumonia. 136
Muscle diseases
In such situations, treatment options include balloon dilatation or myotomy of 
the cricopharyngeal muscle (if it is hypertrophied), or gastrostomy.
IBM was not thought to be significantly life-limiting. However, a survey revealed 
that it was the primary or secondary cause of death in 40% of individuals affected 
by it (5). In addition, the risk of premature death was sevenfold higher among 
those persons with IBM.
Learning points
• IBM is the commonest acquired myopathy in individuals over 50 years 
of age.
• The clinical presentation of IBM is highly characteristic.
• Muscle biopsy should be considered supportive of the clinical diagnosis 
rather than diagnostic.
• Currently, there is no effective treatment for IBM and management is 
largely supportive.
Further reading
1. Brady S, Squier W, Hilton-Jones D. Clinical assessment determines the 
diagnosis of inclusion body myositis independently of pathological fea￾tures. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry 2013;84:1240–1246.
Figure C19.2 Inclusion Body Myositis muscle biopsy. (A) Haematoxylin and eosin 
stain demonstrating an endomysial inflammatory infiltrate (purple arrow), vacu￾oles within muscle fibres (blue arrows), and necrotic fibres (yellow arrow) (20×). 
(B) Modified Gömöri trichrome showing rimmed vacuoles (blue arrow) and scat￾tered necrotic fibres (yellow arrows) (20×). (C) Major histocompatibility complex 
(MHC) class 1 immunohistochemical (IHC) stain highlighting diffuse increased 
sarcolemmal expression around muscle fibres (20×). (D) p62 IHC stain revealing 
p62-positive granular subsarcolemmal inclusions in rimmed vacuoles (40×).137
Case 19
2. Brady S, Squier W, Sewry C, et al. A retrospective cohort study identifying 
the principal pathological features useful in the diagnosis of inclusion body 
myositis. BMJ Open 2014;4:e004552.
3. Rose MR; ENMC IBM Working Group. 188th ENMC International 
Workshop: Inclusion Body Myositis, 2-4 December 2011, Naarden, The 
Netherlands. Neuromuscul Disord. 2013;23:1044–1055.
4. Benveniste O, Guiguet M, Freebody J, et al. Long-term observational study 
of sporadic inclusion body myositis. Brain. 201;134:3176–3184.
5. Price MA, Barghout V, Benveniste O, et al. Mortality and causes of death in 
patients with sporadic inclusion body myositis: Survey study based on the 
clinical experience of specialists in Australia, Europe and the USA. Journal 
of Neuromuscular Diseases 3, 67–75.138
Case 20
Kezia Austin and Harsha Gunawardena
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 33-year-old woman presented with acute onset of muscle weakness in all four 
limbs, along with difficulty swallowing and voice change. These symptoms had 
progressed rapidly, following a 1-month prodrome of malaise and severe myal￾gia. She had noticed increasingly poor grip strength as well as proximal limb gir￾dle weakness that meant she had been unable to get out of the bath or climb the 
stairs without assistance. She had also developed an erythematous rash over the 
face, back and chest. There were no joint or cardiorespiratory symptoms. Later in 
her clinical course, after around 18 months, she began developing hard subcuta￾neous lesions over the abdomen and right buttock, which gradually became more 
widespread affecting both buttocks, breasts, thighs, arms, spine and scapulae. 
Prior to the onset of these symptoms, she had been fit and well and did not take 
any regular medications.
Examination
On initial examination, she had widespread weakness in both proximal and 
distal muscle groups, including neck flexion. She was dysphonic, with evidence 
of mild respiratory muscle weakness on forced vital capacity testing, and had a 
number of skin changes including heliotrope rash, periorbital oedema, and shawl 
sign over the chest and upper back. She subsequently developed marked atrophy 
of the proximal muscles, as well as widespread calcinosis with areas of overlying 
ulceration and skin necrosis.
Investigations
Initial creatine kinase (CK) was 15,000 U/L (normal range 40–320 U/L), which 
responded to initial treatment and stabilised at 300–800 U/L in the 20 years 
since diagnosis. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated widespread muscle 
oedema, particularly in the gluteus maximus, vastus lateralis and vastus interme￾dius muscles. Initial muscle biopsy of vastus lateralis demonstrated muscle fibre 
necrosis, perifascicular atrophy and infiltration by inflammatory cells. Areas of 
infarction with pale-staining muscle fibres were seen. Some blood vessels had 
thickened walls. A PET-CT scan showed widespread muscle oedema as well as 
calcification in the subcutaneous tissues of the buttocks (Figure C20.1), but no 
evidence of solid organ malignancy. Some years later, myositis immunoblot con￾firmed the presence of anti-nuclear matrix protein-2 (anti-NXP-2) antibodies.
Muscle diseases Case 20
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-31
10.1201/9780429429323-31139
Case 20
Case 20
Treatment
The patient underwent an initial 6-month admission, including extensive reha￾bilitation with physiotherapy and speech and language therapy. Despite an 
initial response to systemic immune suppression, the disease has since proven 
refractory to multiple treatments including glucocorticoids, methotrexate, aza￾thioprine, tacrolimus, infliximab, intravenous immunoglobulin, mycophenolate, 
rituximab and cyclophosphamide. Whilst the patient’s weakness and skin rashes 
stabilised, along with CK levels, her subcutaneous calcinosis progressed and was 
complicated by overlying skin ulceration and superadded infections requiring 
several admissions to hospital for intravenous antibiotic therapy. A low-dose 
intravenous cyclophosphamide regime subsequently provided stabilisation of 
the disease.
Figure C20.1 Radiograph demonstrating extensive subcutaneous calcification 
over the right hemipelvis and buttock.140
Muscle diseases
DIAGNOSIS
Anti-NXP-2 antibody adult-onset dermatomyositis.
Discussion
Dermatomyositis is a rare inflammatory myopathy characterised by proximal 
muscle weakness and typical skin changes. It affects both adults and children, 
and is heterogeneous in its clinical and extramuscular features, response to 
treatment and overall prognosis. Increasing numbers of autoantibodies have 
been identified in dermatomyositis patients, and these can help define individual 
clinical syndromes.
A novel autoantibody – originally termed anti-MJ – was identified in 1997 in 
a cohort of juvenile dermatomyositis patients with severe muscle weakness as 
well as joint contractures and gastrointestinal vasculitis.1
 The antigen was sub￾sequently recognised as NXP-2, antibodies to which have been found in 23% of 
juvenile dermatomyositis patients, and strongly associates with the presence of 
calcinosis.2
Less commonly, anti-NXP-2 antibodies can also be detected in adult dermato￾myositis patients, at a frequency of around 1–2%. Similar to anti-NXP-2 juve￾nile-onset disease, adult patients can also develop calcinosis alongside other 
hallmark clinical features. Calcinosis can be chronic, progressive and refractory 
to treatments despite response with other manifestations. Anti-NXP-2 adult der￾matomyositis can be associated with malignancy and appears to be a cancer￾associated phenotype compared to other clinic-serological subsets but not as 
strong as anti-TIF1 positive dermatomyositis. Interstitial lung disease is not a 
prevalent association.3–6
Although performed less, given the preference of myositis autoantibody screen￾ing, muscle biopsy shows a characteristic pattern of changes including perifas￾cicular atrophy of myofibres combined with variable, often severe lymphocytic 
inflammation in the perimysium. Immunostaining typically demonstrates 
upregulation of inflammation markers, particularly MHC1 (which shows a gra￾dient of staining increasing at the periphery of fascicles) and expression of C5b9 
(or membrane attack complex [MAC]) on the sarcolemma of the same fibres. 
Expression of MXA (myxovirus resistance protein A) and type 1 interferon has 
now been reported on the peripheral atrophic myofibres in classic cases of der￾matomyositis associated with anti-MDA5, anti-NXP-2, anti-TIF1 and anti-MI2 
autoantibodies and can help differentiate dermatomyositis from other inflamma￾tory myopathies.
Immune suppression can be successful in treating patients with dermatomyositis 
and minimising its complications. Glucocorticoids, methotrexate, azathioprine, 
mycophenolate, tacrolimus, infliximab, intravenous immunoglobulin, ritux￾imab and cyclophosphamide have all been used to treat dermatomyositis.141
Case 20
Learning points
• Anti-NXP-2 dermatomyositis is more common in children but can 
affect adult-onset disease.
• Anti-NXP-2 dermatomyositis should be suspected in adult patients with 
relapsing–remitting inflammatory myopathy, refractory skin disease 
and evidence of progressive calcinosis.
• This condition can be difficult to manage and requires aggressive immu￾nosuppression in order to prevent progression of calcinosis, which is 
associated with significant morbidity for patients.
• Autoantibody testing is helpful in identifying causative antibodies. In 
some cases, muscle biopsy may help confirm the diagnosis by demon￾strating classical changes in the muscle.
Further reading
1. Oddis CV, Fertig N, Goel A, et al. Clinical and serological characteriza￾tion of the anti-MJ antibody in childhood myositis. Arthritis Rheum
1997;40(9):S139.
2. Gunawardena H, Wedderburn LR, Chinoy H, et al. Autoantibodies to a 
140‐kd protein in juvenile dermatomyositis are associated with calcinosis. 
Arthritis Rheum 2009;60:1807–14.
3. Ichimura Y, Matsushita T, Hamaguchi Y, et al. Anti-NXP2 autoantibodies 
in adult patients with idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: possible asso￾ciation with malignancy. Ann Rheum Dis. 2012 May;71(5):710–3.
4. Albayda J, Pinal-Fernandez I, Huang W, et al. Antinuclear matrix protein 2 
autoantibodies and edema, muscle disease, and malignancy risk in derma￾tomyositis patients. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken) 2017;69(11):1771–76.
5. Fiorentino DF, Chung LS, Christopher-Stine L, et al. Most patients with 
cancer-associated dermatomyositis have antibodies to nuclear matrix pro￾tein NXP-2 or transcription intermediary factor 1gamma. Arthritis Rheum
2013;65:2954–62.
6. Linqing Zhong, Zhongxun Yu, Hongmei Song. Association of anti-nuclear 
matrix protein 2 antibody with complications in patients with idiopathic 
inflammatory myopathies: A meta-analysis of 20 cohorts. Clin Immunol
2019;198:11–18.142
Case 21
Charlotte David and Joel David
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 59-year-old ex-smoker of 40 pack-years presented with a 5-week history of 
cough and shortness of breath. He had arthralgia of the hands, wrists and shoul￾ders with accompanying morning stiffness. His brother has systemic lupus ery￾thematosus (SLE). There was no pet or asbestos exposure.
Examination
He was apyrexial and normotensive with shortness of breath on exertion and 
oxygen saturation of 93% on air. Chest examination revealed bi-basal crepita￾tions. His hands were swollen particularly at the MCP and PIP joints, as well as 
the wrists. There was rough skin with some peeling at the fingertips. There was 
mild tenderness of the proximal muscles with a suggestion of weak resisted neck 
flexion and hip flexors (MRC grade 4/5).
Investigations
Full blood count revealed a white cell count of 11 × 109
/L (normal range 4–10) 
and neutrophil count of 7.6 × 109
/L (normal range 2–7). The C-reactive protein 
(CRP) was 86 and creatine kinase (CK) was 2192 (20–220 U/L). The chest x-ray 
was consistent with ground glass changes and a possible superimposed infec￾tion. The high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) was consistent with 
non-specific interstitial pneumonitis (NSIP), namely, ground glass opacification, 
reticulation and traction bronchiectasis. The autoantibody profile was ANA posi￾tive with Jo-1 antibody positive. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the upper 
legs showed mild STIR hyperintensity of the left rectus femoris muscle and, to a 
lesser extent, left vastus, intermedius and lateralis. A muscle biopsy from the vas￾tus lateralis demonstrated macrophage-predominant perimysial inflammation 
with perifascicular and myopathic changes, including muscle fibre atrophy and 
regeneration with scattered muscle fibre necrosis.
Muscle diseases Case 21
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-32
10.1201/9780429429323-32143
Case 21
Case 21
DIAGNOSIS
Anti-Jo-1–positive antisynthetase syndrome.
Treatment and outcome
Initially, empirical antibiotics were given to cover a possible chest infection. 
Intravenous (IV) methylprednisolone 500 mg was administered on 3 consecutive 
days and cyclophosphamide 1 g fortnightly for three doses and thereafter every 
3 weeks for a further three doses. This was followed by mycophenolate mofetil 1 
g twice daily (BD).
Pulmonary remission (based on HRCT) and clinical and biochemical muscle 
remission were achieved by 5 months. Six months later, however, the CK rose to 
1980 U/L. The patient was given rituximab 1 g IV and a further pulse 2 weeks 
later. Mycophenolate mofetil was reduced to 750 mg BD, and methotrexate 15 mg 
subcutaneously weekly was added with a reducing prednisolone schedule.
Discussion
Antisythetase syndrome (ASyS) is a multisystem autoimmune disease, charac￾terised by the presence of aminoacyl transfer RNA synthetase antibodies, most 
commonly anti-Jo-1. ASyS is rare and accounts for approximately 30% of inflam￾matory myopathies, more than 50% of which are women with a mean age of 50 
years at diagnosis. Clinical manifestations, illustrated in the case described, are 
interstitial lung disease (ILD), myositis, arthralgia/arthritis, Raynaud’s phenom￾enon, rashes (Gottron’s papules and heliotrope rash, as seen in dermatomyositis), 
mechanic’s hands (rough skin with cracking and peeling at the fingertips and 
along the side of the fingers) and fever. Prognosis and survival rates in ASyS are 
largely dependent on the antibody identified. Anti-PL7–positive or anti-PL12–
positive patients carry a worse prognosis than those who are anti-Jo1 positive. 
This is due to the isolated ILD presentation of the disease, which is the main 
cause of mortality in ASyS patients.
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of ASyS is largely unknown. Like other idiopathic inflamma￾tory myopathies (IMM), it is thought to be mediated by interferon-alpha (IFN-α) 
and cytokines (IL-6/IL-8/anti-TNF-α). Muscle fibre damage releases aminoacyl 
transfer RNA synthetases, which may trigger activation of the innate and adap￾tive immune system, which then targets muscle tissue.
Genetics plays a role in its association with HLA haplotypes, such as DRB1*03:01. 
and environmental factors, such as smoking, are also believed to be involved in 
the pathogenesis.144
Muscle diseases
Clinical manifestations
There are two main classification criteria proposed for the diagnosis of ASyS: 
one by Connors et al. (2010) and the other by Solomon et al. (2011). Both criteria 
require the presence of an aminoacyl transfer RNA synthetase antibody.
Connors et al. (2010) Solomon et al. (2011)
Presence of an aminoacyl transfer 
RNA synthetase antibody plus one 
or more of the following:
• Raynaud’s phenomenon
• Arthritis
• ILD
• Fever (not attributable to 
another cause)
• Mechanic’s hands*
Presence of an aminoacyl transfer RNA 
synthetase antibody plus two major or 
one major and two minor criteria:
Major:
• ILD (not attributable to another cause)
• Polymyositis or dermatomyositis
Minor:
• Arthritis
• Raynaud’s phenomenon
• Mechanic’s hands*
* Mechanic’s hands refer to thick, cracked skin predominately on the fingertips.
The classic triad of ASyS is ILD, myositis and arthritis, however, it is more com￾mon for patients to present with an isolated manifestation, with ILD being the 
most common and serious of the triad. Over time, only half of patients develop 
the complete triad.
Investigations and findings
Autoantibodies. Several autoantibodies (anti-Jo-1, anti-PL7, anti-PL12, anti￾EJ, anti-KS, anti-YRS, anti-Zo) target amino acids related to RNA synthetase 
(involved in protein synthesis). The antibody level can fluctuate concordantly 
with disease activity. Anti-Jo-1 is most prevalent and has a greater association 
with arthritis. It also carries a better prognosis, possibly due to earlier diagnosis. 
Anti-PL7 and anti-PL12 are associated with severe interstitial lung disease.
Respiratory investigations. Given the prevalence of ILD in ASyS, the follow￾ing investigations are recommended at baseline as a biomarker for disease 
progression.
• HRCT: Patterns of changes on CT in keeping with NSIP or less com￾monly, organising pneumonia (mainly consolidation) initially, which 
may later fibrose.
• Lung function tests: Display a restrictive picture (total lung capacity 
<80% predicted) with a reduced diffusion capacity.
• Transthoracic echocardiography: Pulmonary hypertension can develop 
secondary to ILD and carries a worse prognosis.
Muscle investigations and biomarkers.
• CK: elevated.
• Electromyography (EMG): The role of EMG is limited in typical ASyS 
but can be used to identify a suitable area for biopsy.145
Case 21
• Muscle biopsy: This is not routinely performed but may be helpful when 
the diagnosis is not clear-cut. The typical findings include perifascicular 
necrosis and lack of endomysial mononuclear cellular infiltration into 
non-necrotic fibres (a feature present in other myopathies such as inclu￾sion body myositis).
• MRI: This can be used to support the diagnosis through identification of 
changes consistent with muscle oedema.
• Both EMG and MRI can be used as biomarkers. CK is also helpful in 
monitoring disease activity, however, in chronic disease, it may be less 
sensitive due to the loss of muscle mass associated with advanced dis￾ease (Chatterjee et al. 2013).
Joint investigations
Ultrasonography (US): Imitates features of rheumatoid arthritis, mainly joint 
effusions, synovial hypertrophy and tenosynovitis.
Management
Management involves a multidisciplinary approach, namely, respiratory physi￾cians and rheumatologists. First-line treatment for both lung and muscle mani￾festations involves corticosteroids with an adjunctive steroid-sparing agent (such 
as azathioprine, methotrexate or mycophenolate mofetil) to avoid recurrence 
upon weaning steroids. Add-on therapies include tacrolimus and rescue thera￾pies include rituximab, cyclophosphamide and intravenous immunoglobulins 
(IVIG).
As with many immunosuppressive therapies, screening for hepatitis B and tuber￾culosis is required, along with avoidance of live vaccines. Patients require follow￾up for medication titration, side effects and assessment of disease progression.
Learning points
• ASyS is a multisystem autoimmune disease, characterised by the pres￾ence of aminoacyl transfer RNA synthetase antibodies.
• The clinical triad of ASyS is ILD, myositis and arthritis. More com￾monly, it presents with an incomplete triad.
• ILD carries a high morbidity and mortality and is the main contributor 
to survival in ASyS.
• Diagnosis is through the presence of an aminoacyl transfer RNA syn￾thetase antibody, in addition to clinical features.
• Baseline investigations include lung function tests and HRCT of the 
thorax.
• Biomarkers of disease progression include respiratory investigations, 
CK, EMG and muscle MRI.
• The mainstay of treatment is corticosteroids with an additional steroid￾sparing agent.146
Muscle diseases
Further reading
Chatterjee, S., Prayson, R. and Farver, C. Antisynthetase syndrome: not just an 
inflammatory myopathy. Cleve Clin J Med, 2013; 80(10):655–666.
Connors GR, Christopher-Stine L, Oddis CV, Danoff SK. Interstitial lung disease 
associated with the idiopathic inflammatory myopathies: What progress 
has been made in the past 35 years? Chest. 2010;138:1464–1474.
Solomon J, Swigris JJ, Brown KK. Myositis-related interstitial lung disease and 
antisynthetase syndrome. Jornal brasileiro de pneumologia. 2011;37:100–109.147
Case 22
Matthew Wells and Harsha Gunawardena
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 58-year-old woman presented with 6 months of fatigue, anorexia, weight loss 
and intermittent night sweats. This was followed by the development of myalgia 
and a progressive sensation of heavy, stiff legs and altered peripheral sensation. 
She had a dry cough and easy bruising.
Examination
Examination revealed normal muscle bulk and power with no significant muscle 
tenderness to palpation. Both ankle reflexes and the right knee reflex were absent. 
Sensation was reduced to light touch and pinprick in a glove and stocking distri￾bution with preserved joint position and vibration sensation. Cardiorespiratory 
and abdominal examinations were normal.
Investigations
Blood tests showed anaemia, lymphopaenia, deranged liver function tests with 
raised alkaline phosphatase, preserved renal function and significantly elevated 
C-reactive protein. Creatine kinase was very mildly elevated (323 U/L; upper limit 
of normal 200U/L), and there was mild but persistent hypercalcaemia (2.70–2.80 
mmol/L). Autoimmune connective tissue disease screen demonstrated negative 
ANA, cANCA was positive but PR3/MPO specificities were negative. Serum ACE 
was persistently elevated at >100 IU/L. Urinalysis revealed proteinuria and hae￾maturia. Subsequent renal biopsy was non-diagnostic.
A CT scan of the chest, abdomen and pelvis did not show any abnormalities 
apart from moderate splenomegaly. PET-CT revealed diffuse avidity within the 
skeletal muscles without any associated chest or lymph node abnormality. EMG 
was non-diagnostic, and nerve conduction studies confirmed axonal sensorimo￾tor neuropathy.
In view of the clinical presentation, a sural nerve and muscle biopsies were 
performed. A nerve biopsy showed chronic axonal change. The muscle biopsy 
revealed widespread chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate with endomysial 
inflammation, and perifascicular and vessel wall penetration by inflammatory 
cells without fibrinoid necrosis. The key diagnostic feature of the muscle biopsy 
was the identification of loose non-caseating granulomas. Special stains for 
microorganisms were negative.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-33
10.1201/9780429429323-33148
Muscle diseases
Case 22
DIAGNOSIS
Granulomatous vasculitis, clinical syndrome in keeping with sarcoidosis with 
myositis.
Discussion
Sarcoidosis is a heterogeneous multisystem inflammatory disorder of poorly 
understood aetiology. The diagnostic hallmark is granulomatous inflammation 
with an associated suggestive clinical syndrome. In this case, a clinical myopa￾thy with constitutional symptoms and persistently elevated serum ACE levels, 
lymphopaenia, mild hypercalcaemia and splenomegaly raised early suspicion 
for sarcoidosis over a primary systemic vasculitis, infectious or paraneoplastic 
process all of which were high in the differential. In this case muscle biopsy, fol￾lowing FDG PET scan, revealed histology in keeping with the clinical diagnosis 
of granulomatous vasculitis due to sarcoidosis. This demonstrates the need for 
clinicians to have a high index of suspicion for sarcoid myopathy, if the broader 
clinical picture is suggestive, even in the absence of classic or hallmark disease 
such as hilar or parenchymal lung disease.
Historically, three patterns of sarcoid myopathy are recognised:
• Chronic: Insidious onset of often proximal symmetric myalgia and 
weakness of limbs with demonstrable myopathy on neurophysiology. 
Biopsy tends to have granuloma and inflammatory infiltration with 
perivascular inflammation, as demonstrated in this case.
• Nodular: Multiple intramuscular nodular lesions, often tender, with 
normal serum muscle enzyme levels.
• Acute: The least common presentation, with acute and rapid onset prox￾imal weakness with myalgia and elevated serum muscle enzyme levels 
and granulomas on biopsy.1
Previous assessments of organ involvement in sarcoidosis suggested low inci￾dence of muscle involvement (0.4%), but the advent of newer imaging modalities 
such as FDG PET has aided recognition of extrapulmonary disease, with one 
study demonstrating 11.9% of a patient cohort with persistent disabling symp￾toms of sarcoidosis (58% of whom reported disabling arthralgia and/or muscle 
pain) had muscular PET avidity.2,3
 Tiger man sign refers to the relatively specific 
intense linear uptake seen on FDG PET in some cases of sarcoid myopathy.4
Learning points
• Sarcoid myopathy should be included in the differential diagnosis of 
any patient with a clinical myopathy and systemic illness alongside the 
broader differentials of infection, paraneoplastic process and primary 
systemic vasculitis.
• Pattern recognition of the clinical syndrome of sarcoidosis is essential in 
any atypical initial presentation of the disease and this usually includes 
one or more of the following: pulmonary involvement, hypercalcaemia, 149
Case 22
hepatosplenomegaly, lymphadenopathy, ocular disease and cutaneous 
disease.
• Biopsy-proven granulomatous inflammation is essential in making the 
diagnosis and excluding alternative causes of myopathy.
• Normal creatine kinase and EMG studies may not exclude sarcoid 
myopathy.
Further reading
1. Bechman K., Christidis D., Walsh S., Birring S., and Galloway J., 2017. A 
review of the musculoskeletal manifestations of sarcoidosis. Rheumatology,
57(5), 777–783.
2. Baughman R., Teirstein A., Judson M., Rossman M. et al., 2001. Clinical 
characteristics of patients in a case-control study of sarcoidosis. American 
Journal of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 164(1), 1885–1889.
3. Cremers J., Van Kroonenburgh M., Mostard R., Voo S. et al., 2014. Extent of 
disease activity assessed by 18F-FDG PET/CT in a Dutch sarcoidosis popu￾lation. Sarcoidosis Vasculitis and Diffuse Lung Diseases, 18;31(1), 37–45.
4. Weers G., Lhommel R., Lecouvet F., Van Den Bergh P. and Lambert M., 
2012. A tiger man. The Lancet, 380(9856), 1859.150
Case 23
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 70-year-old woman reported a 9-month history of myalgia and difficulty 
climbing the stairs. Six years earlier, she had developed similar symptoms which, 
at the time, were associated with an increased creatine kinase (CK) level of 8000 
IU/L (normal = 25–200 IU/L).
On the previous presentation, her symptoms developed 12 months after she 
started taking a statin for hypercholesterolaemia. The statin was promptly with￾drawn, and she was treated with high-dose prednisolone. She was back to her 
baseline within 6 to 12 months of starting treatment. The dose of prednisolone 
was then tapered over a further 6 months and discontinued.
Currently, she did not report any systemic symptoms and was not taking a statin 
or other treatment for hypercholesterolaemia. She had no family history of note.
Examination
There was bilateral, symmetrical, moderate hip flexion weakness (3/5) and mild 
shoulder abduction weakness (4/5) were identified.
Investigations
Her CK level was 5034 U/L (normal 25–200 U/L). A myositis immunoblot was 
positive for antibodies to 3-hydroxy-3-methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A reductase 
(HMGCR). A muscle biopsy was performed and revealed minimal inflamma￾tion but for a few macrophages within scattered necrotic muscle fibres (Figure 
C23.1A). Immunostaining showed sarcolemmal labelling of scattered fibres with 
membrane attack complex (MAC or C5b-9) (Figure C23.1B), diffuse sarcoplasmic 
staining for p62 in several structurally normal muscle fibres (Figure C23.1C) and 
generalised mild upregulation of the inflammatory marker major histocompat￾ibility complex (MHC) class I (Figure C23.1D). A PET-CT did not show changes 
suggestive of a malignancy.
Outcome
The patient was treated with high-dose oral glucocorticoids and methotrexate 
and made a complete recovery over the following 12–18 months. She remains on 
long-term methotrexate.
Muscle diseases Case 23
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-34
10.1201/9780429429323-34151
Case 23
Case 23
Figure C23.1 (A) Haematoxylin and eosin stain demonstrating myopathic muscle 
with frequent necrotic muscle fibres randomly scattered through fascicles (10×). 
Minimal inflammation observed in the perimysium (not shown). (B) Membrane 
attack complex (MAC or C5b-9) immunohistochemical (IHC) stain demonstrating 
cytoplasmic staining of necrotic fibres with focal sarcolemmal and capillary stain￾ing (20×). (C) p62 IHC stain showing a fine granular sarcoplasmic pattern of stain￾ing in necrotic fibres (20×). (D) Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class 1 
IHC stain demonstrating diffuse upregulation of sarcolemmal expression (10×).152
Muscle diseases
DIAGNOSIS
Immune-mediated necrotising myopathy (IMNM) with antibodies to HMGCR.
Discussion
Statins are the most prescribed medication in the world and although they are 
well tolerated, they are not free from risk, being associated with three muscle 
syndromes or statin-related myopathies. In order of decreasing incidence, these 
conditions comprise myalgia with or without hyperCKaemia, rhabdomyolysis 
and immune-mediated necrotising myopathy (IMNM) (1).
Myalgia associated with statins usually affects the proximal lower limb muscles 
and may be exacerbated by exertion. There is no accompanying weakness. CK 
can be raised but is often normal. The clinical symptoms and serological abnor￾malities respond promptly and completely to statin withdrawal. If, in such a situ￾ation, a statin is believed to be highly beneficial, prescribing options to minimise 
symptoms include dose reduction or switching one statin for another, or using an 
alternative cholesterol lowering agent.
Rhabdomyolysis associated with statins is usually, if not always, iatrogenic. It is 
often the result of exposure to a large statin dose either by starting a high dose 
or suddenly increasing the dose following a cerebrovascular or cardiovascular 
event. It may also occur following the introduction of another medication that 
impairs statin metabolism. Common culprits for the latter include cardiovascu￾lar medications such as amiodarone or verapamil, and some antimicrobial medi￾cations, particularly erythromycin. The typical presentation of statin-related 
rhabdomyolysis is with myalgia, proximal weakness and myoglobinuria. The 
symptoms are usually widespread but may also be localised to certain muscle 
groups. Management again involves stopping the statin and any other offending 
medication combined with the institution of standard care for rhabdomyolysis 
such as intravenous fluid therapy to maintain adequate diuresis and monitoring 
for complications such as electrolyte and acid/base disturbance, compartment 
syndrome, renal failure and cardiac dysrhythmias. Some individuals may require 
analgesia.
IMNM is the term given to a group of muscle disorders grouped by similar patho￾logical findings. Cases are associated with antibodies to HMGCR, the enzymatic 
target of statins, or signal recognition protein (SRP). A third group are seronega￾tive IMNM, in which neither HMGCR nor SRP antibodies are present. HMGCR 
antibody-positive IMNM secondary to statins was first reported in 2010 (2).
Individuals with IMNM present with subacute, symmetric, proximal weakness 
without systemic symptoms. The CK level is typically markedly raised, often 
reaching levels of >5000 IU/L. In contrast, lower CK levels are typically observed 
in classic dermatomyositis associated with other autoantibodies. Muscle biopsy 
in IMNM reveals evidence of muscle fibre necrosis distributed randomly 
throughout the muscle with little associated inflammatory infiltrate. MHC class 
1 staining confirms the inflammatory nature of the process but is often variably 153
Case 23
increased. MAC deposition on the sarcolemma of non-necrotic fibres is noted in 
up to 50% of cases. However, the most useful finding reported is the characteris￾tic diffuse sarcoplasmic deposition of p62 in scattered muscle fibres (3).
Despite its strong association with statin usage, HMGCR antibody-positive 
IMNM is also reported in statin-naive individuals such as children and uncom￾monly in association with underlying malignancy in adults (4). It is therefore 
important to screen statin naïve antibody-positive adults for concomitant cancer.
The natural history of HMGCR-positive IMNM is uncertain (5). In most cases, 
the disease course is one of progressive weakness requiring aggressive immu￾notherapy. Initial treatment is with high-dose glucocorticoids often combined 
with a steroid-sparing agent such as methotrexate. Sometimes, those affected 
may require intravenous immunoglobulin and/or rituximab to help control the 
disease. Relapse many years after successful treatment is observed and, in these 
cases, it is appropriate to screen for malignancy even if the previous episode was 
associated with statin use. Early relapse is often due to inadequate glucocorticoid 
dosage and/or duration of treatment. Very few individuals will improve on with￾drawal of the statin alone.
Learning points
• Statins are associated with three muscle-related presentations: myal￾gia with/without raised CK, rhabdomyolysis and HMGCR-positive 
immune-mediated necrotising myopathy (IMNM).
• IMNM is characterised by subacute, progressive, proximal weakness in 
the absence of marked systemic symptoms and accompanied by signifi￾cantly raised CK levels.
• Muscle biopsy in IMNM shows prominent muscle fibre necrosis with 
minimal inflammation combined with characteristic p62 deposition in 
scattered muscle fibres.
• The natural history of statin-related HMGCR antibody-positive IMNM 
is uncertain and individuals usually require aggressive immunosup￾pressive therapy.
• HMGCR-positive IMNM is reported in association with cancer and 
therefore screening for malignant disease is appropriate in the absence 
of statins use.
Further reading
1. Hilton-Jones D. Statin-related myopathies. Pract Neurol 2018;18:97–105.
2. Christopher-Stine L, Casciola-Rosen LA, Hong G, et al. A novel autoanti￾body recognizing 200-kd and 100-kd proteins is associated with an immune￾mediated necrotizing myopathy. Arthritis Rheum 2010;62:2757–66.
3. Norina Fischer, Corinna Preuße, Josefine Radke, et al. Sequestosome-1 (p62) 
expression reveals chaperone-assisted selective autophagy in immune￾mediated necrotizing myopathies. Brain Pathol. 2020;30:261–71.154
Muscle diseases
4. Allenbach Y, Keraen J, Bouvier AM, et al. High risk of cancer in autoim￾mune necrotizing myopathies: usefulness of myositis specific antibody. 
Brain 2016;139:2131–5.
5. Kushan Karunaratne, Dimitri Amiras, Matthew Pickering, et al. 
Autoimmune necrotising myopathy and HMGCR antibodies. Pract Neurol
2018;18:151–55.155
Case 24
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 24-year-old man was assaulted with a baseball bat and was found to have a 
large subdural haematoma on a CT scan of the head. His initial Glasgow Coma 
Scale (GCS) score was 13, but his score fluctuated within the first 48 hours of 
admission as a consequence of increasing problems with frontal contusions. He 
was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) following insertion of an intra￾cranial pressure monitor and an extraventricular drain. His intracranial pres￾sure was difficult to control and neuromuscular blockers were used as part of his 
management. He was also treated for a lower respiratory tract infection. He was 
ventilated for 28 days, requiring time to wean from ventilation.
Examination
During the course of his admission, this man developed weakness in all four 
limbs with reduced tone and mildly depressed reflexes.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was 1200. Nerve conduction studies and electromyography 
revealed an axonal sensorimotor neuropathy and a myopathy. A routine blood 
test screen for causes of neuropathy and myopathy was negative.
He made a good recovery over 6 months but continued to have mild bilateral foot 
drop and some sensory impairment in his feet.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-35
10.1201/9780429429323-35156
Muscle diseases
Case 24
DIAGNOSIS
Critical illness neuromyopathy.
Discussion
Patients requiring ICU support may acquire weakness due to critical illness 
polyneuropathy (CIP), critical illness myopathy (CIM) and/or muscle disuse 
atrophy. This may only become apparent when sedation is reduced and may 
manifest as difficulty weaning from ventilatory support. One-third of patients 
ventilated for >7 days have neuromuscular injury, 60–70% of those with sepsis/
systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) or acute respiratory distress 
syndrome (ARDS), and 100% of those surviving septic shock and multi-organ 
failure (MOF).
CIP and CIM usually coexist and are associated with the same risk factors. These 
include prolonged ventilation, sepsis, ARDS, MOF, use of corticosteroids or neu￾romuscular blocking agents, poor glycaemic control and prolonged immobility. 
Propofol and benzodiazepines (used as sedatives in ICU) directly inhibit muscle 
excitability, worsening the effects of bed rest. Barbiturates and ketamine interact 
with N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors, which have an important role in muscle 
tropism.
Often CIM may predominate. Patients most commonly present with symmetric, 
flaccid weakness (often with depressed reflexes) with sparing of facial muscles. 
Whilst the diaphragm is often involved, diaphragmatic weakness is twice as 
common as neuromyopathy in the limbs – these two complications of critical 
illness may not correlate.
Muscle strength can be assessed by neurological examination and by using a grip 
myometer. CK levels can rise with necrosis/inflammation but may be normal. 
The diagnosis can be established by nerve conduction studies and electromyog￾raphy. The neuropathy is axonal and usually involves both motor and sensory 
nerves.
Neurophysiological features include:
• Reduced amplitude compound muscle action potentials
• Increased muscle action potential duration
• Reduced amplitude sensory action potentials
• Normal: conduction velocities, distal motor latencies, response to repet￾itive nerve stimulation
• Fibrillation potentials and positive sharp waves may be seen 2–3 weeks 
into the course of the condition
Muscle biopsy is rarely needed in this context, but three main types of CIM are 
recognised: diffuse non-necrotising myopathy selective type 2 fibre atrophy, 
acute myosin-loss myopathy (often associated with steroids and/or neuromus￾cular blockers) and acute necrotising myopathy. Central nervous system causes 157
Case 24
of weakness should be excluded and pre-existing causes of weakness that may be 
unmasked by the physiological pressures of being critically ill.
Ways to prevent CIP/CIM are unclear. Optimising nutrition and minimising risk 
factors where possible may aid recovery. The role of early mobilisation is not yet 
established. Critical illness neuromyopathy is associated with prolonged hospi￾tal admissions and both increased long-term morbidity and mortality. Fifty per 
cent make a good long-term recovery but 25% may have significant long-term 
disability.
Learning points
• Critical illness neuromyopathy (neuropathy, myopathy and disuse atro￾phy) is the commonest cause of neuromuscular impairment in critically 
ill patients.
• Neuropathy and myopathy usually coexist but myopathy often 
predominates.
• Diaphragmatic weakness can occur in association with this condition, 
making weaning from ventilation challenging.
• A number of risk factors, including prolonged ventilation and sepsis, 
have been identified but ways to prevent it are unclear.
• Fifty per cent of patients make a good recovery but 25% are left with 
significant long-term disability.
Further reading
Boelens YFN, Melchers M & van Zanten ARH. 2022. Poor physical recovery after 
critical illness: incidence, features, risk factors, pathophysiology and evi￾dence-based therapies. Current Opinion Critical Care 28(4): 409–416.
Griffiths RD & Hall JB. 2010. Intensive care unit-acquired weakness. Critical 
Care Medicine 38: 779–787.
Hermans G & Van den Burghe G. 2015. Clinical review: intensive care unit 
acquired weakness. Critical Care 19: 274.
Kelmenson DA, Held N, Allen RR, Quan D, Burnham EL, Clark BA, Ho PM, 
Kiser TH, Vandivier RW & Moss M. 2017. Outcomes of Intensive Care Unit 
patients with a discharge diagnosis of critical illness polyneuromyopathy: 
a propensity matched analysis. Critical Care Medicine 45(12): 2055–2060.
Kelmenson DA, Quan D & Moss M. 2018. What is the diagnostic accuracy of 
single nerve conduction studies and muscle ultrasound to identify critical 
illness polyneuropathy: a prospective cohort study. Critical Care 22(1): 342.
Klawitter F, Ehler J, Bajorat R & Patejdl R. 2023. Mitochondrial dysfunction in 
intensive care unit-acquired weakness and critical illness myopathy: a nar￾rative review. Int J Mol Sci 24(6): 5516.
Lad H, Saumar TM, Herridge MS, Dos Santos CC, Mathur S, Batt J & Gilbert 
PM. 2020. Intensive care unit-acquired weakness: not just another muscle 
atrophying condition. Int J Mol Sci 21(21): 7840.158
Muscle diseases
Piva S, Fagoni N & Latronico N. 2019. Intensive care unit-acquired weakness: 
unanswered questions and targets for future research. F1000 Research 
(open access) Faculty Rev 508. doi: 10.12688/f1000research.17376.
Vanhorebeek I Latronico N & Van den Berghe G. 2020. ICU-acquired weakness. 
Intensive Care Medicine 46(4): 637–653.
Younger DS. 2023. Critical illness-associated weakness and related motor disor￾ders. Handbook Clinical Neurology 195: 707–777.159
Case 25
Louisa Kent and Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 55-year-old woman presented with a 6-month history of progressive diffi￾culty getting up from chairs and walking up stairs. On direct questioning, she 
reported difficulty hanging up her washing and changing the bedsheets. She also 
described increased fatigue and had stopped doing her usual hobbies after work. 
She had been commenced on a statin for hyperlipidaemia 12 months previously, 
but this had been stopped a month prior to her appointment after testing showed 
abnormal liver function.
Examination
She was overweight and had puffy facies, proximal upper and lower limb weak￾ness, and a myopathic gait (also known as waddling or Trendelenburg gait). Her 
limb reflexes were unremarkable, although her ankle reflexes were slow to relax 
and there was myoedema on percussion of the quadriceps muscles.
Investigations
Her creatine kinase (CK) level was 800 IU/L (20–200 U/L). Repeat liver function 
tests demonstrated alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotrans￾ferase (AST) levels just above the normal range. Her blood cholesterol was mildly 
raised.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-36
10.1201/9780429429323-36160
Muscle diseases
Case 25
DIAGNOSIS
Her thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) level was markedly raised, confirming 
a diagnosis of hypothyroid myopathy. Treatment with levothyroxine resulted in 
clinical improvement and normalisation of her biochemical abnormalities.
Discussion
Thyroid hormone disturbance is common and is also a well-recognised but some￾times overlooked, reversible cause of myopathy. Hypothyroidism can cause muscle 
symptoms including myalgia, stiffness and weakness. Examination findings are 
those classically seen in hypothyroidism and can include myxoedematous facies, 
dry skin, hair loss and slow pulse rate. Neuromuscular symptoms of hypothyroidism 
often comprise generalised slowness of movement, bilateral calf muscle hypertrophy 
and proximal weakness. Delayed and slow relaxation of tendon reflexes may be pres￾ent (pseudomyotonia or “Woltman sign”) and most easily noted with the ankle jerk 
reflex. Occasionally myoedema, or the “mounding phenomenon”, is seen when direct 
percussion of the muscle elicits transient localised bulging of the muscle (see Further 
reading). However, the symptoms and signs of hypothyroidism can be subtle and can 
go unrecognised unless the condition is specifically considered.
CK in hypothyroid myopathy can range from normal to markedly elevated. 
Other investigation findings include anaemia, elevated liver enzymes (which 
may be of muscle and/or liver origin), hyperlipidaemia and hyponatraemia. If 
performed, electromyography (EMG) will show myopathic changes and sponta￾neous activity. There are no specific changes within the muscle biopsy in hypo￾thyroid myopathy. However, in most cases, following a comprehensive clinical 
assessment and easy access to a thyroid function test, neither neurophysiological 
assessment nor muscle biopsy should be necessary.
Given its prevalence in the population, hypothyroidism should be considered in 
any patient presenting with proximal weakness before more esoteric diagnoses 
such as myositis or muscular dystrophy are considered. As with other endocri￾nopathy-associated myopathies, treatment of the underlying condition usually 
results in resolution of symptoms and signs. However, this may take some time.
In contrast to hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism is a much less common cause of 
myopathy. These patients may also present with limb weakness and occasionally 
bulbar or respiratory muscle weakness. Examination findings include proximal 
muscle wasting and weakness, brisk reflexes and fasciculations mimicking amy￾otrophic lateral sclerosis. Systemic signs of thyrotoxicosis (weight loss, tremor, 
tachycardia and lid lag) or Graves’ disease (exophthalmos, ophthalmoplegia, 
goitre, thyroid acropachy, and pretibial myxoedema) are typically observed fol￾lowing careful clinical examination. CK levels are usually normal in hyperthy￾roidism. EMG, if performed, may show myopathic features. A form of periodic 
paralysis can be caused by thyrotoxicosis. It is most common in Asian men, and 
typically manifests as proximal weakness which may develop following exercise, 161
Case 25
cold exposure or a meal high in carbohydrates, and can last hours to days. 
Thyrotoxicosis has also rarely been reported to cause rhabdomyolysis.
As thyroid disease can mimic a range of inherited and sporadic myopathies, it 
is important to ask about symptoms and look for signs of thyroid disease. It is 
strongly advised to check the TSH in every patient with symptoms and signs 
of muscle disease, or an unexplained deterioration in a patient known to have a 
myopathy, before embarking on more invasive investigations.
Learning points
• It is advisable to check TSH levels for any individual with symptoms or 
signs of muscle disease.
• Clinical history and examination will usually reveal systemic features 
of thyroid disease, negating the need for additional, more invasive 
investigation.
• Thyroid disease can worsen a pre-existing (diagnosed or undiagnosed) 
muscle disorder. This should be considered if symptoms persist or 
worsen despite adequate treatment for thyroid myopathy.
• Conversely, if there is unexplained or rapid deterioration in a patient 
known to have a myopathy, then performance of a TSH level is warranted.
Further reading
Capistrano and Galdino, Teaching Video NeuroImages: Myoedema in hypo￾thyroidism, Neurology, January 26, 2015, https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL
.0000000000001195
Mistry, Wass and Turner, When to consider thyroid dysfunction in the neurol￾ogy clinic, Practical Neurology. 2009 Jun;9(3):145–56. https://doi.org/10
.1136/jnnp.2008.167163162
Case 26
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
A 17-year-old woman had been thoroughly investigated for raised serum trans￾aminase levels, which had been identified on routine blood tests for fatigue. She 
had undergone a serological hepatitis screen, liver ultrasound and liver biopsy. 
At the conclusion of these examinations, she was additionally found to have a 
creatine kinase (CK) of 3500 IU/L (normal 25–200 U/L).
On further questioning, she did not report any symptoms suggestive of a myopa￾thy. She enjoyed sports and played netball regularly at school and for her county 
team. She had never suffered from exercise-induced myalgia, contractures or 
myoglobinuria.
She had an older brother and sister, both of whom were healthy. A three-gener￾ation family pedigree was unremarkable and did not reveal any consanguinity. 
Her birth history and subsequent development were uneventful.
She had no other medical conditions and did not take any regular medications.
Examination
General and neurological examinations were normal.
Investigations
A repeat CK level showed continued elevation, at a level of 2900 U/L (normal 
25–200 U/L). Initial genetic investigation for DMD deletions and duplications 
was negative.
Muscle diseases Case 26
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-37
10.1201/9780429429323-37163
Case 26
Case 26
DIAGNOSIS
ANO5-related hyperCKaemia.
Discussion
This case raises two separate important points. First, raised serum transaminases 
are not always indicative of liver disease and may originate from an unrecognised 
muscle disease. Second, when should and how best to investigate asymptomatic 
hyperCKaemia.
There are many causes for increased serum transaminase levels and often the 
reason for the elevation is clear. However, it is often forgotten that transaminases 
are present in muscle. As a result, it is not unusual to see cases, such as the one 
described here, where a patient with asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic hyper￾CKaemia has undergone extensive, costly and sometimes potentially hazardous 
investigations before creatine kinase (CK) levels are checked. Both alanine ami￾notransferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) are present in mus￾cle. A clue as to the origin of raised transaminases is the serum gamma-glutamyl 
transferase (γGT or GGT), which is not present in muscle and is therefore not 
elevated in muscle-related transaminase elevation.
How to define and best investigate asymptomatic hyperCKaemia is uncertain 
and thus there are several guidelines and algorithms which can be followed (1–3). 
There are two factors which render decision-making difficult in investigation of 
hyperCKemia. The first is that many normal people’s CK levels fall outside the 
quoted upper limit of normal and therefore do not reflect a pathogenic finding.
What is a normal CK depends on several factors, particularly race, sex, age, and 
the level and type of physical exercise undertaken by the individual (4, 5). CK lev￾els are generally higher in Afro-Caribbean individuals compared to Caucasians, 
in men compared to women and in the young in contrast to the old. There is 
guidance on modifying the CK range to consider the effects of race and sex (6). 
Most physical exercise does not have a profound impact on the CK. Having said 
that, individuals who regularly participate in very physical or prolonged exercise 
can routinely have CKs in the thousands. These activities include bodybuilding, 
weightlifting and marathon running. A simple method for confirming whether a 
raised CK is related to exertion, is to recheck it after the individual has refrained 
from strenuous physical exertion for 7 days. In most cases, the CK will return to 
normal or near normal and no further investigation is required.
The second confounding factor is the presence of three CK isoenzymes in serum 
(CK-MM, CK-MB and CK-BB) which are predominantly found in skeletal mus￾cle, cardiac muscle and brain tissue, respectively. Thus, the causes of raised CK 
are varied and not always indicative of a myopathy.
If an elevated CK cannot be explained by race or sex, or persists despite temporary 
cessation of physical exercise, or is just too high to ignore (rule of thumb >1000 
IU/L), there are several causes to be considered. It is helpful to categorise them 164
Muscle diseases
into (1) uncommon primary myopathies and (2) common miscellaneous causes. 
The underlying causes in this latter category of asymptomatic or paucisymptom￾atic hyperCKaemia include medications (most commonly statins especially if 
combined with a medication that inhibits statin metabolism), endocrinopathies 
(most commonly hypothyroidism) and recreational drug use.
Although uncommon, significantly raised CKs, as high as 2000 U/L, can be 
observed in cases of denervation. A cause of hyperCKaemia that is often not 
considered or considered only after more expensive tests have been performed 
is macroCK. Two types of macroCK – type I and type II – are described. The 
cause of both is an increase in the half-life of CK. In type I, CK is complexed to 
immunoglobulin. In type II, oligomeric mitochondrial CK is present in serum. 
MacroCK is observed in inflammatory and neoplastic diseases and can be 
detected by electrophoresis.
Primary myopathic, asymptomatic or paucisymptomatic, causes of raised CK are 
rare. Causative genes include DMD in women and the limb girdle muscular dys￾trophy genes in women and men: CAV3, CAPN, DYSF, FKRP and ANO5. Some 
individuals will go on to develop weakness later in life, and cardiac screening 
is important for those known to carry pathogenic variants in genes associated 
with cardiac diseases such as DMD. Other causes which should be considered 
are early Pompe disease, which may be accompanied by minimal symptoms and 
signs, amyopathic connective tissue disease or the early stage of an inflammatory 
myopathy.
Learning points
• A raised CK is common and often not associated with a primary 
myopathy.
• The quoted normal range for CK is conservative and an individual’s 
race, sex, age and participation in strenuous activity should be consid￾ered when deciding on the need for further investigation.
• In those individuals with a moderately raised, asymptomatic hyperCK￾aemia (<1000 IU/L in Caucasian men and <1500 IU/L in Afro-Caribbean 
men) without obvious cause, combined with a normal examination, 
normal investigations for thyroid disease and an unremarkable neuro￾physiological assessment, further investigation is unlikely to bear fruit.
Further reading
1. Kim EJ, Wierzbicki AS. Investigating raised creatine kinase. BMJ. 2021 Jun 
23;373:n1486. doi: 10.1136/bmj.n1486. PMID: 34162592.
2. Silvestri NJ, Wolfe GI. Asymptomatic/pauci-symptomatic creatine kinase 
elevations (hyperckemia). Muscle Nerve. 2013 Jun;47(6):805–815. doi: 
10.1002/mus.23755. Epub 2013 Apr 29. PMID: 23625835.
3. Kyriakides T, Angelini C, Schaefer J, Sacconi S, Siciliano G, Vilchez JJ 
and Hilton-Jones D. (2010), EFNS guidelines on the diagnostic approach 
to pauci- or asymptomatic hyperCKemia. European Journal of Neurology. 
2010; 17: 767–773.165
Case 26
4. Neal RC, Ferdinand KC, Ycas J, Miller E. Relationship of ethnic origin, 
gender, and age to blood creatine kinase levels. The American Journal of 
Medicine. 2009 Jan;122(1):73–78. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2008.08.033. PMID: 
19114174.
5. Bekkelund SI. Leisure physical exercise and creatine kinase activity. The 
Tromsø study. Scandinavian Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports. 2020 
Dec;30(12):2437–2444. doi: 10.1111/sms.13809. Epub 2020 Sep 18. PMID: 
32799358.
6. Moghadam-Kia S, Oddis CV, Aggarwal R. Approach to asymptom￾atic creatine kinase elevation. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine. 2016 
Jan;83(1):37-42. doi: 10.3949/ccjm.83a.14120. PMID: 26760521; PMCID: 
PMC4871266.166
Case 27
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A fit and healthy 72-year-old man was referred for assessment. He had first been 
seen 2 years earlier in the movement disorders clinic and diagnosed with early 
Parkinson disease complicated by head drop. A whole-spine MRI was unremark￾able and did not reveal an alternative structural cause for the head drop. An ini￾tial trial of Levodopa treatment was ineffective.
On review in the neuromuscular clinic, the patient recalled pain in his neck and 
shoulders when riding his motorcycle beginning 6 years prior to presentation. As 
time progressed, he found that he was unable to hold his head up when wearing 
his motorcycle helmet. He continued to ride a bicycle daily but had increasing 
difficulty controlling his head. More recently, he had noticed that he needed to 
support his head on his hands when sitting and watching television or when talk￾ing with friends.
He denied the presence of weakness beyond his head and neck and did not com￾plain of any of the motor or non-motor symptoms typically associated with 
Parkinson disease. He was one of nine siblings and had no family history of note.
Examination
The main finding on neurological examination was the identification of thin￾ning of the neck extensor muscles and marked weakness (MRC grade 2) of neck 
extension.
Investigations
His creatine kinase (CK) level was 126 U/L (normal 25–200 U/L) and a dried 
blood spot for alpha-glucosidase activity was normal (excluding Pompe disease). 
Nerve conduction studies were normal, however, electromyography (EMG) 
showed widespread myopathic changes in the paraspinal muscles. Review of the 
initial whole-spine MRI performed 2 years earlier revealed diffuse fatty atrophy 
of the paraspinal muscles (Figure C27.1).
Muscle diseases Case 27
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-38
10.1201/9780429429323-38167
Case 27
Figure C27.1 T1-weighted axial MRI sections through the spine showing fatty 
atrophy of the paraspinal muscles, which can be easily missed when not specifi￾cally sought.
Case 27168
Muscle diseases
DIAGNOSIS
Isolated neck extensor myopathy (axial myopathy).
Discussion
Isolated neck extensor myopathy (INEM) is a neuromuscular disorder affecting 
older patients. As with many myopathies, disease progression is gradual over 
many years. The initial complaint is often neck or shoulder pain followed by pro￾gressive weakness of neck extension resulting in head drop. As the condition pro￾gresses, those affected struggle to walk as they cannot see ahead and will adopt 
a recumbent position or support their head with a hand under the chin when 
sitting. Eating can be challenging and travelling by motor vehicle is particularly 
problematic, as those affected lack the necessary strength to control their head as 
the car accelerates or brakes. This is often worse when they travel as passengers 
and during emergency braking. Despite these problems, those affected often cope 
well.
The differential diagnosis of head drop is wide and includes myopathic and non￾myopathic neurological disorders such as motor neurone disease (MND), myas￾thenia gravis (MG) and Parkinson disease (PD). The non-myopathic causes are 
significantly more common in the population and should always be considered 
first. Therefore, symptoms and signs of MND, MG and PD, such as upper motor 
neurone signs, fatigability, fasciculations, bradykinesia and the non-motor fea￾tures of PD, should be carefully sought.
As emphasised in a recent review, axial weakness is a feature of many muscle 
diseases (1). In muscle clinics, it is most often observed in patients with myo￾tonic dystrophy type 1, but it is also described in sporadic muscle disease (e.g., 
inclusion body myositis [IBM]), muscular dystrophies congenital myopathies 
(e.g., RYR1-related myopathy) and metabolic myopathies (e.g., Pompe disease). 
However, in the absence of additional symptoms and signs beyond the weakness 
of neck extension and minimal limb girdle weakness, the diagnosis will invari￾ably be isolated neck extensor myopathy. Features such as cramps and myoglo￾binuria, non-positional dysphagia, contractures, respiratory failure or marked 
weakness beyond the axial muscles should prompt consideration of alternative 
diagnoses.
Excluding MRI, investigations can be unremarkable in INEM, with their main 
use being to exclude alternative diagnoses. In INEM, CK is usually within the 
normal range. EMG is the most useful investigation in excluding alternative 
diagnosis, by helping to identify neurogenic changes and impaired neuromus￾cular transmission associated with MND and MG, respectively. The presence of 
myotonia in the paraspinal muscles is suggestive but not diagnostic of the meta￾bolic myopathy, Pompe disease. Extensive myopathic change on EMG beyond 
the paraspinal muscles would argue against a diagnosis of INEM.
Management of INEM follows a supportive path. Those affected can largely be 
reassured that INEM is a slowly progressive sporadic disorder limited to the axial 169
Case 27
muscles. Cervical collars may help irrespective of the underlying diagnosis of 
head drop and should be used when those affected travel by motorised transport, 
such as car, coach or train. In rare cases, spinal fusion is considered and can be 
highly effective (2) but also quite limiting.
Learning points
• Head drop is observed in several myopathic and non-myopathic neuro￾logical diseases.
• The most common causes are non-myopathic and include motor neu￾rone disease, myasthenia gravis and Parkinson disease.
• INEM is the likely diagnosis in an elderly individual with head drop in 
the absence of additional symptoms and signs.
• Investigations should include CK, EMG and spinal MRI. Paraspinal 
muscle biopsy is not recommended because of the frequent presence of 
non-specific findings.
• Cervical collars are helpful and spinal surgery will have a role in a small 
number of cases.
Further reading
1. Witting N, Andersen LK, Vissing J. Axial myopathy: an overlooked feature 
of muscle diseases. Brain 2016;139:13–22.
2. Karunaratne K, Wade C, Lehovsky J, Viegas S. Spinal surgery for a late￾onset axial myopathy. BMJ Case Rep. 2021;14:e240738.170
Case 28
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
An 18-year-old woman was referred to the neuromuscular clinic with a history 
of exercise intolerance and myalgia. Her symptoms always started within the 
first few minutes of exercising. She could neither sprint nor walk up an incline 
without stopping, but she could play a whole game of hockey without difficulty 
after gently warming up. Her symptoms had affected her for as long as she could 
remember. She had no weakness and did not report exertional muscle contrac￾tures. She had not experienced any episodes of myoglobinuria (black tea- or cola￾coloured urine). She had no family history of note.
Examination
Neurological examination was unremarkable but for the presence of mild asym￾metric scapular winging.
Investigations
An elevated resting creatine kinase (CK) of 6771 IU/L (normal 40–320 IU/L) 
was observed following testing in clinic. A non-ischaemic forearm exercise test 
revealed a rise in serum ammonia (ΔNH3, 162 µmol/L) but no increase in serum 
lactate. A muscle biopsy showed mild variation in muscle fibre diameters with 
subsarcolemmal and sarcoplasmic vacuoles (Figure C28.1A). The vacuoles con￾tained glycogen on periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining (Figure C28.1B). There 
was a complete absence of myophosphorylase staining (Figure C28.1C and D).
Muscle diseases Case 28
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-39
10.1201/9780429429323-39171
Case 28
Case 28
Figure C28.1 A. Haematoxylin and eosin stain demonstrating the presence of 
variably sized subsarcolemmal vacuoles (blue arrows) (20×). (B) Periodic acid￾Schiff (PAS) histochemical (HC) stain highlighting glycogen accumulation in 
the subsarcolemmal vacuoles (20×). (C) Normal control myophosphorylase HC 
stain demonstrating diffuse “blue” positive staining. (D) Myophosphorylase HC 
stain revealing the complete absence of myophosphorylase activity in McArdle 
disease.172
Muscle diseases
DIAGNOSIS
Glycogen storage disorder (GSD) V (McArdle disease) due to compound hetero￾zygous mutations in PYGM.
Discussion
McArdle disease is the commonest of the glycogen storage disorders. It is the 
result of biallelic pathogenic variants in the PYGM gene, which encodes muscle 
protein glycogen phosphorylase (myophosphorylase) catalysing the first step in 
muscle glycolysis. The accepted prevalence of this condition is 1:100,000, but it is 
believed that this may be an underestimate.
McArdle disease has a characteristic clinical presentation of myalgia and cramps 
occurring within the first few minutes of exercising or triggered by sustained 
isometric contraction. The second wind phenomenon is a clinical symptom that 
is pathognomonic of McArdle disease. It describes an improvement in the initial 
exertional symptoms after about 8–10 minutes of aerobic activity after which, the 
affected individual can continue exercising. This phenomenon is well recognised 
and reported by most patients and can be provoked and observed during exercise 
testing. The improvement in symptoms and exercise tolerance is believed to be 
due to the delivery of glucose from the liver and fatty acids to exercising muscles.
Other features observed in McArdle disease are muscle contracture during activ￾ity, rhabdomyolysis (50%), and, rarely, compartment syndrome or renal failure. A 
significant percentage of patients, usually those over 40 years of age, will develop 
fixed upper limb weakness. Atypical presentations of McArdle disease have been 
reported and range from axial myopathy to pauci- or asymptomatic hyperCK￾aemia, and a facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD)-like phenotype. 
Electrocardiogram (ECG) changes, cardiomyopathy, ischaemic heart disease and 
retinopathy are rarely reported in association with McArdle and are not frequent 
enough to support screening.
Of note, activities not commonly thought of as exercise such as chewing (1), sex￾ual intercourse or emotionally intense situations (2), such as cheering at a sports 
match, can provoke myalgia, myoglobinuria, muscle contracture and even rhab￾domyolysis in individuals with McArdle disease. The cause is likely to be sus￾tained isometric muscle contraction.
Despite its characteristic presentation, 90% of individuals with McArdle disease 
initially receive an incorrect medical diagnosis. Frequently, childhood symptoms 
are attributed to “growing pains” (3), and a history of such symptoms should be 
viewed with suspicion. The delay to correct diagnosis is exemplified by the median 
onset of symptoms being 3 years of age and yet the median age of diagnosis is 33 
years of age (3). Ancillary investigations are helpful. The CK level is elevated in 
nearly all patients and serum hyperuricaemia is common. A non-ischaemic fore￾arm exercise test will reveal an excessive rise in ammonia and a blunted lactate 
response to exertion in patients with McArdle disease. If performed, a muscle 
biopsy will typically reveal subsarcolemmal vacuoles containing glycogen and 173
Case 28
absent myophosphorylase activity (Figure C28.1). In recent years, however, both 
the non-ischaemic forearm exercise test and muscle biopsy have been superseded 
by molecular genetic testing. Eighty-five per cent of UK and Northern European 
patients with McArdle disease harbour p.Arg50X and pGly205Ser pathogenic 
variants in PYGM. As a result, the first-line investigation is hotspot analysis by 
gene sequencing or now, more frequently, whole-genome sequencing.
Despite the onset of symptoms with exercise, aerobic exercise is safe and benefi￾cial for patients with McArdle disease. In general, exercise involving isometric 
muscle contraction should be avoided (i.e., planks, leg lifts and wall sits). Advice 
on appropriate exercise regimens should be sought from a specialist neuromus￾cular centre.
Learning points
• McArdle disease is the commonest glycogen storage disorder (GSD) and 
it has a characteristic, arguably diagnostic, clinical presentation.
• The second wind phenomenon is pathognomonic and recognised by 
individuals with McArdle disease, but its significance is commonly 
missed by clinicians.
• Diagnostic testing should start with genetic testing, which may involve 
hotspot mutation testing of PYGM at some centres or a next-generation 
sequencing (NGS) panel at other centres (where available).
• Aerobic exercise is safe, but advice on physical activity should be sought 
from a specialist neuromuscular centre.
Further reading
1. Kouwenberg CV, Voermans NC, Quinlivan R, van den Engel-Hoek L. 
Mastication and oral motor function in McArdle disease: Patient reported 
complaints. Journal of Neuromuscular Disorders. 2018;5:353–357.
2. Brady S, Godfrey R, Scalco RS, et al. Emotionally-intense situations 
can result in rhabdomyolysis in McArdle disease. BMJ Case Reports. 
2014;2014:bcr2013203272.
3. Renata Siciliani Scalco, Jasper M. Morrow, Suzanne Booth, et al. 
Misdiagnosis is an important factor for diagnostic delay in McArdle dis￾ease. Neuromuscular Disorders. 2017;27:852–855.174
Case 29
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 49-year-old woman presented with a 1–2-year history of mildly progressive 
weakness in the lower limbs. Rising from a seated position had become more dif￾ficult and she had found stairs to be more of a struggle with time. She reported 
generalised aches and pains, including low back pain, intermittently requiring 
analgesia. She also reported quite profound fatigue and a variable sleep pattern.
This woman had a longstanding history of anxiety and depression and had been 
taking antidepressants. She had two children who were well and did not report 
any family history of neuromuscular disease.
Examination
On examination, there was mild proximal weakness in the upper limbs, grade 
4+/5 and moderate proximal weakness in the lower limbs grade 4/5. There was no 
focal wasting or fasciculation. Reflexes were present and symmetrical and plan￾tars flexor All cranial nerves and all sensory modalities were intact.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was raised at 808 U/l. Plasma viscosity, thyroid func￾tion, antinuclear antibody and myositis antibody tests were normal or negative. 
Vitamin D levels were low at 38 and vitamin D supplementation was given.
Nerve conduction studies were normal. Electromyography (EMG) showed minor 
changes in the deltoid muscles only.
A muscle biopsy showed mild non-specific myopathic changes. There were no 
vacuoles and both glycogen and acid phosphatase activity levels appeared normal.
Forced vital capacity was 48% of predicted and overnight oximetry revealed 
significant dips in oxygenation. Non-invasive ventilation was initiated at night, 
which led to a markedly improved sleep pattern and some improvement in day￾time fatigue levels.
A Pompe dry blood spot analysis was initially normal with acid alpha-glucosi￾dase (GAA) levels of 8.45 pmol/punch/hour (normal >3.88 pmol/punch/hour). 
Repeat testing revealed a level of 4.5 pmol/punch/hour.
Genetic testing identified a mutation in the GAA gene on chromosome 17.
Muscle diseases Case 29
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-40
10.1201/9780429429323-40175
Case 29
Case 29
DIAGNOSIS
Acid maltase deficiency (Pompe disease or glycogen storage disorder II).
Discussion
Acid maltase deficiency (also known as Pompe disease or glycogen storage dis￾order II and a lysosomal storage disorder) is an autosomal recessive metabolic 
myopathy caused by mutations in the GAA gene on chromosome 17q25.3 encod￾ing acid α-1,4-glucosidase (GAA) or acid maltase. It was first described in 1932 
and since then over 600 different mutations have been reported.
Acid maltase or GAA is a lysosomal enzyme involved in the conversion of gly￾cogen to glucose. Deficiency leads to accumulation of glycogen in lysosomes 
of several different tissues including cardiac, skeletal and smooth muscle 
cells. Vasculopathy and cognitive impairment can form part of this condition. 
Pathogenesis may be directly due to the accumulation of glycogen causing dis￾placement of cellular organelles, abnormal lysosomal activity promoting autoph￾agy and other effects on intermediary metabolism.
The most common form is adult onset with slowly progressive symmetrical prox￾imal limb (often lower limb predominant) and respiratory muscle weakness. In 
one-third of adult cases, respiratory complications (due to respiratory muscle or 
isolated diaphragmatic weakness) are the presenting feature. Respiratory prob￾lems also arise due to disruption of proximal and distal airway structure. Some 
patients develop spine rigidity, scoliosis, ptosis and/or swallowing problems. In 
those presenting in adulthood, there is usually some residual GAA activity of 
10–30% of normal. Unlike other glycogenoses, hypoglycaemia does not occur in 
acid maltase deficiency. This condition is an important differential for muscular 
dystrophy, particularly limb girdle muscular dystrophy.
Two other phenotypes are recognised. First, there is a classic infantile form 
which leads to more severe proximal muscle weakness (due to GAA inactivity); 
enlargement of the tongue; feeding difficulties; and heart, liver and respiratory 
insufficiency. Untreated, most patients die before the age of 3 years. There is also 
a non-classic infantile form which is milder and usually presents in the first years 
of life. In this form, respiratory and skeletal muscles are affected but cardiac 
involvement is rare.
GAA levels can be measured in blood (dry bloodspot) and analysis of lympho￾cytes shows evidence of glycogen granules. Dry bloodspot analysis is used in 
some countries for newborn screening.
In contrast to infantile forms where histological features are usually diagnos￾tic, in adult cases a muscle biopsy may not always exhibit the expected changes. 
Characteristic muscle biopsy features of Pompe disease include sarcoplasmic 
vacuoles within myofibres visible on routine H&E stains (Figure C29.1A). These 
vacuoles contain glycogen (as evidenced by periodic acid-Schiff staining) and 
increased acid phosphatase activity (Figure C29.1B and C). Electron microscopy 176
Muscle diseases
may be helpful in confirming the glycogen content of the vacuoles. Enzyme assays 
can also be performed on muscle, liver or skin fibroblasts. However, genetic anal￾ysis is the most reliable diagnostic modality and can be used to identify gene 
carriers.
Treatment involves intravenous replacement therapy with recombinant 
α-glucosidase (Myozyme), which has been available since 2006. This has a major 
impact on survival and cardiomyopathy in infantile Pompe disease, with some 
patients now surviving into adulthood. The efficacy of therapy is more difficult 
to assess in adult-onset cases, but there is evidence that replacement therapy can 
improve mobility and stabilise respiratory function. Avalglucosidase alfa-ngpt 
(Nexviazyme), a synthetic oligosaccharide available since 2021, offers an alterna￾tive Pompe disease treatment and may be more effective in reducing the accu￾mulation of glycogen. A number of gene-modifying avenues are being explored 
for Pompe disease, providing an attractive way of treating the multisystem com￾plications, including central nervous system manifestations where conventional 
treatments are limited by the blood–brain barrier. This includes using recombi￾nant adenovirus and lentivirus vectors.
People living with Pompe disease will also require lifelong multidisciplinary sup￾portive therapy. This is likely to include respiratory and cardiac support. The first 
patients treated with enzyme replacement therapy in infancy are now surviving 
into adulthood with this multidisciplinary approach to care.
Figure C29.1 Pompe Disease. A. H&E 20× demonstrating multiple vacuoles 
within muscle fibres on background of myopathic changes. B. PAS 20× demon￾strating increased glycogen content within vacuoles. C. Acid Phosphatase 20× 
highlighting increased activity within vacuoles due to increased lysosomal activ￾ity (red staining).177
Case 29
Learning points
• Acid maltase deficiency is a potentially treatable form of metabolic mus￾cle disease. It is currently treated with enzyme replacement therapy and 
a number of gene-modifying therapeutic approaches are being trialled.
• This condition is frequently associated with respiratory failure, with 
respiratory compromise being the presenting feature in one-third of 
adult-onset cases.
• Cardiac involvement is common in the more severe classic infantile￾onset cases but less likely in adult-onset cases. Cardiac outcomes are 
better in those receiving early initiation of enzyme replacement therapy.
• Unlike other glycogenoses, hypoglycaemia does not tend to occur.
• Diagnosis can be made by measuring GAA in blood, analysing glycogen 
granules in lymphocytes and genetic analysis.
• With treatment, patients with infantile-onset may survive into adult￾hood and those with adult-onset disease may experience improvements 
in mobility and stabilisation of respiratory function.
Further reading
Dangouloff T, Boemer F & Servais L. 2021. Newborn screening of neuromuscular 
disease. Neuromuscular Disorders 31(10): 1070–1080.
Dornelles AD, Junges APP, Pereira TV, Krug BC, Goncalves CBT, Llerena JC, 
Kishnani PS, de Oliveira HA & Schwartz IVD. 2021. A systematic review 
and meta-analysis of enzyme replacement therapy in late-onset Pompe dis￾ease. Journal of Clinical Medicine 10(21): 4828.
Iolascon G, Vitacca M, Carroro E, Chisari C, Fiore P, Messina S, Mongini TEG, 
Sansone VA, Toscano A & Siciliano G. 2018. The role of rehabilitation in the 
management of late-onset Pompe disease: a narrative review of the level of 
evidence. Acta Myologica 37(4): 241–251.
Leon-Astudillo C, Trivedi PD, Sun RC, Gentry MS, Fuller DD, Byrne BJ & 
Corti M. 2023. Current avenues of gene therapy in Pompe disease. Current 
Opinion in Neurology 36(5): 464–473.
Platt FM, d’Azzo A, Davidson BL, Neufeld EF & Tifft CJ. 2018. Lysosomal storage 
diseases. Nature Reviews Disease Primers 4(1): 27.
Sarah B, Giovanna B, Emanuela K, Nadi N, Jose V & Alberto P. 2022. Clinical 
efficacy of the enzyme replacement therapy in patients with late-onset 
Pompe disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Journal of Neurology
269(2): 733–741.
Schoser B & Laforet P. 2022. Therapeutic thoroughfares for adults living with 
Pompe disease. Current Opinion in Neurology 35(5): 645–650.
Shah NM, Sharma L, Ganeshamoorthy S & Kaltsakas G. 2020. Respiratory fail￾ure and sleep-disordered breathing in late-onset Pompe disease: a narrative 
review. Thoracic Disease 12(S2): S235–S247.178
Case 30
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 38-year-old man was reviewed in the neuromuscular clinic several months 
after being admitted to hospital with myalgia, proximal weakness and black tea-/
cola-coloured urine. His creatine kinase (CK) on admission was 75,000 U/L (nor￾mal = 40–320 U/L). His symptoms commenced within hours of returning home 
following a transatlantic flight. His CK dramatically decreased over the course 
of a few days with intravenous fluid administration and he was discharged home 
within 7 days.
In clinic, he described feeling unwell towards the end of his trip with symptoms 
of a febrile coryzal illness. As a result, he had not eaten much prior to or during 
his flight home. Further questioning revealed that he had experienced multiple 
episodes of myalgia and myoglobinuria since adolescence. Some, but not all, 
occurred following prolonged exercise. The most memorable episode occurred 
during his honeymoon when he combined a strenuous cycling holiday with a not 
inconsiderable amount of wine. Despite his symptoms, he had always enjoyed 
exercise but had become more sedentary with age.
He did not take any regular medication. He had no family history of note.
Examination
Neurological and systemic examination were normal.
Investigations
His resting CK level was 278 IU/L (40–320 IU/L). Genetic testing established the 
diagnosis.
Muscle diseases Case 30
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-41
10.1201/9780429429323-41179
Case 30
Case 30
DIAGNOSIS
Fatty acid oxidation disorder (FAOD), carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) 
deficiency.
Discussion
The symptoms in this case are those of rhabdomyolysis. Inherited causes of 
rhabdomyolysis are rare and genetically heterogeneous, comprising FAODs, as, 
in this case, glycogen storage disorders (GSDs), mitochondrial myopathy, con￾genital myopathy, and muscular dystrophy including Becker muscular dystrophy 
and limb girdle muscular dystrophy due to pathogenic variants in CAV3, ANO5, 
FKRP or DYSF. CPT II deficiency is due to compound heterozygous mutations 
in CPT2. CPT II is involved in, primarily, fatty acid (FA) β-oxidation and, along 
with other proteins, the transport of long-chain FAs across the mitochondrial 
membrane. 
Commoner causes of rhabdomyolysis include recreational drug use, medications 
such as statins, especially if the dose is increased precipitously or statin metabo￾lism is inhibited by the introduction of another medication, and unaccustomed 
exercise. The most important question for the clinician when a patient presents 
with rhabdomyolysis, after commencing appropriate treatment, is whether to 
investigate for an inherited cause. One helpful mnemonic which may help direct 
further investigations is RHABDO (Table C30.1) [1].
A careful clinical history can often differentiate between FAODs and GSDs. 
Glucose and glycogen are a muscle’s primary energy source during the first 
minutes of exercise and during high-intensity exercise. With longer duration 
exercise (>30 minutes) and when fasting, there is an increasing reliance on FA 
β-oxidation. Thus, symptoms arising early, in the first minutes of exercise or with 
a sudden increase in exercise tempo are indicative of a GSD, whereas symptoms 
arising during or after prolonged exercise or fasting are suggestive of an FAOD. 
Febrile illness, extremes of ambient temperature, certain medications and gen￾eral anaesthetic can also trigger rhabdomyolysis in those with a FAOD.
Table C30.1 When to further investigate an episode of rhabdomyolysis – 
RHABDO
Recurrent episodes of exertional rhabdomyolysis
HyperCKaemia more than 8 weeks after event
Accustomed to exercise
Blood creatine kinase (CK) concentration above 50× upper limit of normal
Drug ingestion insufficient to explain exertional rhabdomyolysis
Other family members affected or other exertional symptoms
Source: Fernandes PM, Davenport RJ, How to do it: investigate exertional rhabdomyolysis 
(or not), Practical Neurology 2019;19:43–48.180
Muscle diseases
FAODs can present at any age. CPT II deficiency is clinically divided into three 
phenotypes: lethal neonatal form; severe infantile form; and mild adult form, 
which is characterised by episodic rhabdomyolysis presenting at almost any age 
between childhood and adulthood. The severe multisystem neonatal-/infantile￾onset forms are typified by hypoketotic hypoglycaemia, weakness, hepatic fail￾ure and cardiomyopathy. In the adult form of CPT II deficiency, interictal CK is 
usually normal and the serum acylcarnitine profile shows an increase in long￾chain FAs.
Investigation of rhabdomyolysis and metabolic myopathy has radically changed 
in recent years because of access to next-generation sequencing (NGS). It is now 
cost-effective to go straight to a gene panel. Prior to this, investigation could be 
a lengthy process including testing of any or all of the following: serum lactate, 
acylcarnitine profile, alpha-glucosidase activity, urinary organic acids, non-isch￾aemic forearm exercise testing, skin biopsy and fibroblast culture, muscle biopsy, 
(some of the histopathological features observed if a muscle biopsy is performed 
are shown in Figure C30.1), and finally sequential genetic testing of individual 
genes known to cause (at the time) rhabdomyolysis. Often the more invasive 
investigations are now used to assess the pathogenicity of variants of uncertain 
significance identified through NGS. 
Figure C30.1 Lipid myopathy (fatty acid oxidation disorder). (A) Haematoxylin 
and eosin stain demonstrating mild myopathic variation in fibre size with 
numerous stippled fibres (10×). (B) Modified Gömöri trichrome stain confirm￾ing the presence of numerous unrimmed vacuoles within type 1 fibres (20×). 
(C) Metachromatic ATPase histochemical stain confirming the presence of vacu￾oles within type 1 (dark blue) muscle fibres (10×). (D) Oil Red O lipid stain revealing 
a marked increase in lipid storage within type 1 muscle fibres (20×). (E) Electron 
microscopy confirming a marked increase in lipids within muscle.181
Case 30
Management of FAODs is focused on patient education about:
1. Avoiding triggers
2. Appropriate exercise and dietary advice including avoidance of dieting 
and fasting, increased dietary slow-release carbohydrates, and reduc￾tion of fat
3. Recognition of the symptoms rhabdomyolysis and when to seek medi￾cal attention because of the risk of renal failure and hyperkalaemia and, 
infrequently, death
Learning points
• FAODs are a rare genetically heterogeneous group of autosomal reces￾sive disorders that can present with rhabdomyolysis between childhood 
and adulthood. CPT II deficiency is one of the commoner FAODs and 
inherited causes of rhabdomyolysis.
• A careful history can differentiate FAODs and GSDs.
• Interictal CK is usually normal or mildly raised in FAOD.
• Management includes: the avoidance of triggers, advice on exercise and 
diet, and education on the recognition and treatment of rhabdomyolysis.
Further reading
1. Fernandes PM, Davenport RJ. How to do it: investigate exertional rhabdo￾myolysis (or not). Practical Neurology 2019;19:43–48.182
Case 31
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
Example 1
History
A 32-year-old man presented 4 days after the start of a cycling holiday with 
increasing proximal lower limb myalgia and stiffness. His creatine kinase (CK) 
was 47,000 U/L (normal = 40–320 U/L) and he was admitted to hospital for man￾agement of rhabdomyolysis.
He was a keen cyclist and reported similar but less severe symptoms with pro￾longed exercise throughout his life. There was no history of black tea- or cola￾coloured urine following exercise. There was no additional significant past 
medical history or family history of note.
Examination following recovery revealed mild scoliosis, and finger flexion and 
Achilles contractures.
Example 2
History
A 56-year-old Caucasian man was referred after the discovery of an elevated 
serum CK level of 1250 U/L (normal = 40–320 U/L) following extensive investi￾gation for elevated transaminase levels. He reported difficulty building muscle as 
a younger man but was otherwise asymptomatic. He did not enjoy sports and had 
not exercised for several decades. Family history revealed that an older brother 
had suffered an episode of malignant hyperthermia when having his tonsils 
removed in adolescence.
Examination
The muscles were well defined, mildly hypertrophied and there was no wasting. 
The neurological examination was otherwise normal.
Investigations
Serum CK was 1250U/L. Genetic testing established the diagnosis.
Muscle diseases Case 31
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-42
10.1201/9780429429323-42183
Case 31
Case 31
DIAGNOSIS
Autosomal dominant RYR1-related myopathy.
Discussion
RYR1 is a large 106 exon-long gene which encodes a calcium channel (RyR1) 
located in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). RyR1 plays a vital role in muscle 
excitation-contraction coupling. Genetic defects in RYR1 result in several muscle 
disorders which are genetically, phenotypically and histopathologically varied. 
Both autosomal recessive (AR) and autosomal dominant (AD) forms have been 
reported. AR RYR1-related disorders tend to be more clinically severe. Adult￾onset RYR1-related disease is usually AD.
Clinical manifestations include scoliosis and joint contractures, malignant 
hyperthermia (MH), axial weakness, muscle hypertrophy and exercise-induced 
symptoms including rhabdomyolysis. King–Denborough syndrome describes an 
AD form of RYR1-related myopathy characterised by MH, dysmorphic features 
and skeletal abnormalities. Episodes of rhabdomyolysis in RYR1-related disease 
typically follow bouts of prolonged exercise in warm or hot environments and/or 
in situations leading to dehydration.
As previously stated, the histopathological changes in RYR1-related disease can 
be varied, ranging from the classical finding of central cores within muscle fibres 
(“central core disease” [CCD]) to multiminicore disease to rod-cord pathologies. 
Subtler forms of the disorder may simply show the isolated finding of congenital 
fibre-type disproportion (Figure C31.1). In some cases, typically in adults, the 
muscle biopsy may be normal.
The cases described here, and Case 11, exemplify the breadth of RYR1-related 
disease and emphasise the significant phenotypic and intrafamilial variability 
often associated with the diagnosis. Diagnosis may be further complicated by the 
frequent identification of variants of uncertain significance in RYR1. These cases 
may require muscle biopsy for histopathological diagnostic support.
Management of RYR1-related rhabdomyolysis follows standard protocols. Some 
experts advocate the early use of dantrolene, which is thought to lessen the sever￾ity or duration of attacks of rhabdomyolysis. 
MH is a severe, potentially fatal, reaction to certain inhaled drugs used for 
general anaesthesia and depolarising neuromuscular blockade. The cause is an 
uncontrolled release of calcium from the SR leading to sustained muscle con￾traction and hypermetabolism. The earliest sign is increased end-tidal CO2. MH 
is normally an AD inherited trait and three hotspots in RYR1 account for most 
pathogenic variants. A smaller number of cases are caused by pathogenic variants 
in CACNA1S and STAC3. Although there are MH testing protocols (in vitro halo￾thane and caffeine contracture testing on a sample of muscle) and referral centres 
for testing in some countries, access to such facilities is limited. Therefore, in 
the absence of testing facilities, a pragmatic approach is to counsel patients with 184
Muscle diseases
RYR1-related disease and family members about the potential risk for MH. This 
is increasingly important as cases of MH linked to pathogenic variants beyond 
the three hotspots are reported and the fact that MH may occur even despite 
an individual having undergone previous (and sometimes multiple) uneventful 
general anaesthesia.
Learning points
• RYR1-related disorders comprise a phenotypically and morphologically 
diverse group of disorders.
• In the absence of access to testing facilities for MH, all patients and 
families with a pathogenic variant in RYR1 should be counselled about 
the risk of MH.
Figure C31.1 Range of findings in RYR1 myopathies. A. Succinate dehydroge￾nase (SDH) (10×) highlighting the presence of cores in type 1 muscle fibres. B. 
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) (20×) demonstrating the presence 
of cores in type 1 muscle fibres. C. SDH (10×) highlighting the presence of multi￾minicores in type 1 fibres. D. Metachromatic ATPase (10×) demonstrating con￾genital fibre type disproportion, with the more darkly staining type 1 fibres at 
least 50% smaller than the adjacent type 2 fibres. Additionally, the stain demon￾strates mild myopathic grouping of fibre types. 185
Case 32
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 71-year-old woman was referred for further management of treatment-resis￾tant seronegative myasthenia gravis. She had presented 6 months earlier with 
a 4-month history of bilateral ptosis and diplopia. She was made aware of the 
ptosis when Her Majesty’s Customs and Excise Officers repeatedly had to ask her 
to open her eyes while trying to use a retinal scanner to confirm her identity on 
her return from an overseas trip. On repeat questioning, she was adamant that 
her ptosis and diplopia varied throughout the day. She denied dysphagia or limb 
weakness and had no family history of note. Acetylcholine receptor (AChR) and 
muscle-specific kinase (MuSK) antibodies were not detected. Her initial neuro￾physiological assessment was unremarkable. Treatment with increasing doses of 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor, pyridostigmine, and glucocorticoids had proved 
ineffective.
Examination
She was of short stature – 4′11″ (143 cm) – with symmetrical ptosis and almost 
complete bilateral ophthalmoparesis with preservation of down-gaze. Diplopia 
and fatigability were not demonstrated.
Investigations
A review of her family photos revealed that she did not have ptosis 4 years earlier, 
but she was significantly shorter than her siblings. Her creatine kinase (CK) and 
serum lactate levels were mildly elevated at 377 IU/L (normal 25–200 U/L) and 
2.5 mmol/l (normal 0.5–2.2 mmol/L), respectively. Electromyography (EMG) 
showed myopathic changes, while single-fibre studies were unremarkable. The 
findings from a deltoid muscle biopsy are shown in Figure C32.1.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-43
10.1201/9780429429323-43186
Muscle diseases
Figure C32.1 (A) Haematoxylin and eosin-stained slide demonstrating minor 
variation in muscle fibre diameters and the presence of a granular fibre (blue 
arrow) (20×). (B) Modified Gömöri trichrome showing ragged red fibres indicat￾ing peripheral accumulation of mitochondria (40×). (C) Cytochrome c oxidase 
(COX) histochemical stain revealing COX-negative muscle fibres (N) (20×). 
(D)  Combined COX/succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) stain with multiple COX￾negative/SDH-positive fibres (blue) (10×).
Case 32187
Case 32
DIAGNOSIS
Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO or PEO) due to a single 
large mitochondrial DNA deletion.
Discussion
Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia (CPEO/PEO) is a mitochondrial 
disorder typified by progressive ophthalmoparesis and ptosis. Symptoms usu￾ally develop in the fifth decade. Additional clinical features such as dysphagia, 
myopathy and neuropathy may also be present. Progression is slow and, as in this 
case, symptoms may go unnoticed by the individual and their family and friends. 
Two-thirds of cases of PEO are due to a single mitochondrial DNA deletion. The 
remainder, in descending frequency, are due to nuclear DNA pathogenic vari￾ants and mitochondrial DNA pathogenic point variants. The clinical presenta￾tion aids molecular genetic testing. For example, if a neuropathy is present in 
addition to PEO, the likely cause is a pathogenic variant in the nuclear DNA (1). 
Primary mitochondrial diseases are caused by pathogenic variants in either 
mitochondrial or nuclear DNA. They are phenotypically protean. It is often said 
that mitochondrial diseases can present at any age and may affect any or multiple 
organs. The range of presenting clinical features includes diabetes mellitus, deaf￾ness, short stature, cardiomyopathy, gastrointestinal symptoms, optic neuropa￾thy, migraine, epileptic seizures, ataxia, neuropathy and myopathy.
Mitochondrial DNA is a 16.5kb circular molecule. Multiple copies are present in 
each cell. It encodes 37 essential mitochondrial proteins. However, hundreds of 
proteins essential to mitochondrial function are encoded by nuclear DNA and 
transported into mitochondria. Consequently, mitochondrial diseases result 
from pathogenic variants in either mitochondrial or nuclear DNA, and inheri￾tance is correspondingly maternal or autosomal. In adults, mitochondrial dis￾eases are more frequently caused by pathogenic variants in mitochondrial DNA. 
The converse is true in childhood when mitochondrial diseases are more fre￾quently due to pathogenic variants in nuclear DNA. The clinical presentation of 
mitochondrial disease also varies with increasing age.
Several classical mitochondrial syndromes are described, such as MERRF (myo￾clonic epilepsy and red ragged fibres), MELAS (mitochondrial encephalomyopa￾thy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes), NARP (neurogenic weakness, ataxia 
and retinitis pigmentosa) and SANDO (sensory ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria 
and ophthalmoplegia). Although these syndromes can aid diagnosis, individuals 
with mitochondrial disease often do not fit neatly into such categories. In older 
adults, PEO and ptosis, and myopathy are the more common presentations.
The differential diagnosis of ptosis and ophthalmoparesis in an older adult 
includes myasthenia gravis (MG) and oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy 
(OPMD). Certain clinical features are useful in differentiating these disorders. 
First, true fatigable weakness is only observed in MG. Although individuals with 
PEO may complain of diplopia, it is not demonstrable on physical examination. 188
Muscle diseases
Second, inferior gaze is relatively spared in PEO. Third, individuals with PEO 
frequently complain of dysphagia (2). However, marked dysphagia argues against 
a diagnosis of PEO and is more suggestive of MG and OPMD.
Management of mitochondrial disease is largely supportive with no curative 
treatment available. It includes surveillance for weight loss and dysphagia, hear￾ing loss, cardiac disease (rhythm disturbances and cardiomyopathy), endocrine 
dysfunction such as diabetes mellitus, and ophthalmological abnormalities 
including ptosis and retinopathy. Despite the absence of an effective treatment, 
identification of the genetic cause is hugely important to individuals and families 
affected by mitochondrial diseases, as it enables accurate genetic counselling and 
guidance on reproductive options.
Learning points
• Mitochondrial diseases are common (affecting 1 in 4300 adults) (3), and 
clinically (phenotypically) and genetically heterogeneous.
• Multisystem involvement is the rule but is not invariable.
• Classic clinical syndromes such as MELAS and MERRF aid diagnosis 
and can help guide molecular genetic testing.
• The main differential diagnoses of PEO in an older adult are MG or 
OPMD. Subacute onset, fatigable weakness on examination, early and 
marked paresis of inferior gaze and severe bulbar involvement argue 
against a diagnosis of mitochondrial disease.
• Management is largely supportive and involves surveillance for compli￾cations of mitochondrial disease such as cataracts, deafness, diabetes 
mellitus and cardiac disease.
Further reading
1. Horga A, et al. Peripheral neuropathy predicts nuclear gene defect in 
patients with mitochondrial ophthalmoplegia. Brain. 2014;137:3200–12.
2. Hedermann G, Løkken N, Dahlqvist JR, Vissing J. Dysphagia is preva￾lent in patients with CPEO and single, large-scale deletions in mtDNA. 
Mitochondrion. 2017;32:27–30.
3. Gorman GS, Schaefer AM, Ng Y, Gomez N, Blakely EL, Alston CL, et al. 
Prevalence of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA mutations related to adult 
mitochondrial disease. Ann Neurol. 2015;77(5):753–9.189
Case 33
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 53-year-old man was acutely admitted to hospital via accident and emergency, 
several months prior to his presentation to clinic, with a possible stroke. His part￾ner described that his symptoms started several days earlier with a severe gen￾eralised headache and vomiting. He had a history of classical migraine without 
aura. Over the following days prior to admission, he developed an expressive dys￾phasia and appeared increasingly confused. He was admitted to the stroke ward, 
where he received standard treatment for an ischaemic stroke. He recovered over 
a period of several weeks and was discharged home.
Further enquiry revealed that he had lost his hearing in his 30s and had a family 
history of maternal deafness. There was no other personal or family history of 
note.
Examination
He was cachectic with asymmetric ptosis (right greater than left), incongruous 
right homonymous hemianopia, marked ophthalmoparesis in all directions and 
unaccompanied by diplopia. He had difficulty rising from a seated position due 
to mild weakness of hip flexion, and cerebellar ataxia affecting the upper and 
lower limbs.
Investigations
Investigations, including full blood count, renal profile, HbA1c, lipid profile 
and creatine kinase (CK), were normal except for a raised serum lactate of 6.5 
mmol/L.
A review of his stroke imaging identified T2 high signal in the left temporal lobe 
with extension into the insular cortex and restricted diffusion with diffusion￾weighted imaging (DWI). Repeat imaging several weeks later showed progres￾sion of the T2 high signal to involve the right frontal and left occipital lobes.
Muscle diseases
Case 33
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-44
10.1201/9780429429323-44190
Muscle diseases
DIAGNOSIS
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes 
(MELAS). Genetic testing for the m.3243A>G point mutation showed that the 
individual had 19% heteroplasmy in blood and 88% in urine.
Discussion
The dual genetic control of mitochondria means that primary mitochondrial dis￾ease is the result of pathogenic variants in either nuclear or mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA). As a result, the pattern of inheritance associated with mitochondrial 
diseases is autosomal (dominant or recessive) or maternal. Although considered 
to be rare, prevalence studies have shown that 1 in 400–500 individuals in the 
population carry the pathogenic mtDNA point variant, m.3243A>G (1), which 
is also the commonest cause of MELAS, and 1 in 100 individuals harbour a sin￾gle pathogenic variant in the mitochondrial polymerase POLG (2–4). However, 
most individuals carrying the pathogenic mtDNA point variant m.3243A>G 
are asymptomatic because the level of mitochondrial heteroplasmy (the ratio of 
normal “wild-type” mitochondrial DNA to pathogenic mitochondrial DNA) is 
below disease-causing threshold. This threshold varies for different mitochon￾drial point variants (5–7).
MELAS is the prototypical mitochondrial disease. It is multisystem, of variable 
severity and maternally inherited. As described earlier, the disease severity is 
related to the degree of heteroplasmy, which varies between tissues. The level of 
heteroplasmy in blood declines with increasing age. Thus, in adults, the level is 
quantified from urinary epithelial cells or skeletal muscle. The canonical clini￾cal features associated with MELAS are progressive external ophthalmoparesis 
(PEO), hearing loss, epilepsy, ataxia, diabetes mellitus, cardiomyopathy, and 
stroke-like episodes (SLEs). In general, management of the medical and neuro￾logical complications of MELAS is little different from their management in the 
absence of mitochondrial disease.
The most severe and dramatic clinical feature of MELAS is the SLE. Although 
relatively quick in evolution, SLEs, unlike a true ischaemic stroke, progress over 
several days and initial symptoms often include headache, nausea and vomit￾ing, confusion (encephalopathy), and seizures. MRI of the brain often shows T2 
high signal in the occipital lobes and extending across vascular territories. The 
pathogenesis of a SLE is not ischaemic but metabolic failure. Whether clinically 
apparent or not, a SLE is typically driven by ongoing seizure activity. Therefore, 
urgent electroencephalography (EEG) and aggressive management of seizure 
activity are of primary importance, along with treatment of any concomitant 
infection and ensuring appropriate hydration and adequate calorie intake. 
Pharmacological management of seizures associated with MELAS should follow 
local protocols, except sodium valproate is best avoided when the genotype is 
unknown. Gastrointestinal pseudo-obstruction can complicate SLEs and should 
be actively sought. Currently, there is no convincing evidence to support the use 191
Case 33
of mitochondrial-specific treatments such as ubiquinone (coenzyme Q10), ribo￾flavin or L-arginine.
MELAS and the mitochondrial pathogenic point mutation m.3243A>G are, 
like many clinical syndromes and genes, associated with genotypic and pheno￾typic variability, respectively. M.3243A>G is the single most frequent cause of 
MELAS, accounting for 80% of cases. The remaining 20% of cases are associ￾ated with other pathogenic mitochondrial DNA point variants and the nuclear 
gene encoding the sole mitochondrial DNA polymerase, POLG. Phenotypes 
associated with m.3243A>G, in addition to MELAS, are PEO, Leigh syndrome, 
maternally inherited diabetes and deafness (MIDD), and isolated myopathy. 
Phenotypic variation can be observed in a family with m.3243A>G and relates to 
an individual’s level of heteroplasmy.
Diagnosing mitochondrial disease is complicated by its clinical heterogeneity, 
variable inheritance and, despite earlier comment, relative rarity. Having sus￾pected mitochondrial disease, investigation is not without complexity. First, 
although certain test results may support a diagnosis of mitochondrial disease 
such as a raised serum lactate, mitochondrial abnormalities on muscle biopsy 
(ragged red muscle fibres or cytochrome c oxidase [COX] negative/succinate 
dehydrogenase [SDH] positive muscle fibres), basal ganglia calcification on head 
CT, or white matter changes on MRI, they lack sensitivity and specificity. Bar 
genetic analysis, there is no gold-standard test for mitochondrial disease. Second, 
genetic testing for mitochondrial disease involves selection of the correct tissue 
sample (blood, urine or muscle) for testing and the most appropriate initial test, 
which may be testing for a common pathogenic point variant in mtDNA, mito￾chondrial DNA depletion or deletions, or assessment for nuclear DNA causes 
of mitochondrial disease. High throughput genetic sequencing has dramatically 
changed the pathway for investigating mitochondrial disease and the need for 
invasive tests such as muscle biopsy, so it is recommended to discuss the appro￾priate testing for suspected mitochondrial disease with a mitochondrial disease 
specialist and local mitochondrial genetic laboratory.
Learning points
• Mitochondrial disease should be considered in a multisystem disor￾der, particularly if ptosis and ophthalmoparesis, hearing loss, epilepsy, 
ataxia, or peripheral neuropathy are present.
• Inheritance of mitochondrial disease is varied and identification of the 
clinical syndrome, such as MELAS, helps to direct genetic testing.
• Clinical features supportive of a SLE are subacute onset and neurologi￾cal progression, headache, nausea and vomiting, confusion, and positive 
neurological symptoms.
• SLEs are seizure-driven and require aggressive anticonvulsant 
treatment.192
Muscle diseases
Further reading
1. Manwaring N, Jones MM, Wang JJ, Rochtchina E, Howard C, Mitchell P, et 
al. Population prevalence of the MELAS A3243G mutation. Mitochondrion. 
2007;7(3):230–3.
2. Winterthun S, Ferrari G, He L, Taylor RW, Zeviani M, Turnbull DM, et al. 
Autosomal recessive mitochondrial ataxic syndrome due to mitochondrial 
polymerase gamma mutations. Neurology. 2005;64(7):1204–8.
3. Hakonen AH, Heiskanen S, Juvonen V, Lappalainen I, Luoma PT, 
Rantamäki M, et al. Mitochondrial DNA polymerase W748S mutation: A 
common cause of autosomal recessive ataxia with ancient European origin. 
Am J Hum Genet. 2005;77(3):430–41.
4. Horvath R, Hudson G, Ferrari G, Fütterer N, Ahola S, Lamantea E, et al. 
Phenotypic spectrum associated with mutations of the mitochondrial poly￾merase gamma gene. Brain J Neurol. 2006;129(Pt 7):1674–84.
5. Ng YS, Martikainen MH, Gorman GS, Blain A, Bugiardini E, Bunting A, et 
al. Pathogenic variants in MT‐ATP6: A United Kingdom–based mitochon￾drial disease cohort study. Ann Neurol. 2019;86(2):310–5.
6. Nesbitt V, Pitceathly RDS, Turnbull DM, Taylor RW, Sweeney MG, 
Mudanohwo EE, et al. The UK MRC Mitochondrial Disease Patient Cohort 
Study: clinical phenotypes associated with the m.3243A>G mutation—
implications for diagnosis and management. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 
2013;84(8):936–8.
7. Gorman GS, Schaefer AM, Ng Y, Gomez N, Blakely EL, Alston CL, et al. 
Prevalence of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA mutations related to adult 
mitochondrial disease. Ann Neurol. 2015;77(5):753–9.
8. Mavraki E, Labrum R, Sergeant K. et al. Genetic testing for mitochondrial 
disease: the United Kingdom best practice guidelines. Eur J Hum Genet
2023;31:148–63.
9. Ng YS, Bindoff LA, Gorman GS, Horvath R, Klopstock T, Mancuso M, 
Martikainen MH, Mcfarland R, Nesbitt V, Pitceathly RDS, Schaefer AM, 
Turnbull DM. Consensus-based statements for the management of mito￾chondrial stroke-like episodes. Wellcome Open Res. 2019 Dec 13;4:201.193
Case 34
Case 34
Stefen Brady
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 58-year-old man was seen in the neuromuscular clinic after reporting symp￾toms of increasing lower limb weakness which had developed over a period of 12 
to 18 months. In adolescence, after presenting with lower limb weakness, he had 
been given a diagnosis of tubular aggregate myopathy (TAM) following a muscle 
biopsy. He was subsequently lost to follow-up for over 30 years.
At his current presentation, he denied the presence of ocular, orobulbar or cardio￾respiratory symptoms, nor did he report any fatigable symptoms. He described 
himself as physically unlike the rest of his family. While most of his family were 
stocky and athletic, he was slim and had never been good at sports. He had no 
other family history of note.
Examination
Cranial nerve examination was normal. He had slim limb muscles with moder￾ate weakness of shoulder abduction and hip flexion (MRC grading 3/5) as well as 
mild weakness of elbow extension and flexion, finger extension, knee extension 
and ankle dorsiflexion (4/5). There was no fatigable weakness of the ocular, oro￾bulbar or limb muscles.
Investigations
The creatine kinase (CK) was normal (96 U/L, normal 40–320 IU/L). 
Electromyography (EMG) showed small, short-duration polyphasic units. 
Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS) of the right median, ulnar and spinal acces￾sory nerves showed decrement of the compound action muscle potential greater 
than 10% and single fibre electromyography (SFEMG) revealed jitter and block￾ing. A muscle biopsy (Figure C34.1) performed when the patient was 15 years old 
showed frequent large sarcoplasmic tubular aggregates in type I and II fibres on 
light microscopy, the presence of which was confirmed with electron microscopy 
(EM) (Figure C34.2).
Follow-up
The patient was commenced on the acetylcholinesterase inhibitor pyridostig￾mine. This led to an improvement in his limb weakness. Later 3,4-diamino￾pyridine (3,4-DAP) was added to his medication regimen with additional 
symptomatic benefit.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-45
10.1201/9780429429323-45194
Muscle diseases
Figure C34.1 (A) Haematoxylin and eosin stain showing mild muscle fibre size 
variation and atrophy with occasional fibres showing irregular internal slits and 
vacuoles. These appear clear in this case but may contain eosinophilic material 
in other cases (40×). (B) Modified Gömöri trichrome highlighting the small slits 
and vacuoles within the muscle fibres, which do, in such cases, often contain red 
material (40×). (C) With nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) histochemi￾cal staining, the material within the slits and vacuoles is strongly positive (40×). 
(D) sarco-/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA1) immunohistochemical 
staining shows positive staining within the slits and vacuoles (40×).
Figure C34.2 (A) Electron microscopy (EM) demonstrating the presence of 70 
to 400 nm tubules with central dense material in muscle fibres. (B) EM at 1 µm 
highlighting the structure of tubules. A number of different forms of TAs are 
described.195
Case 34
DIAGNOSIS
Limb girdle congenital myasthenic syndrome (LG-CMS) due to compound het￾erozygous mutations in DPAGT1.
Discussion
The combination of limb girdle weakness, neurophysiological evidence of 
impairment of the neuromuscular junction and the presence of tubular aggre￾gates (TAs) on muscle biopsy is consistent with a diagnosis of LG-CMS.
Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMS) are a group of rare, mostly autosomal 
recessive disorders characterised by fatigable weakness and neurophysiological 
evidence of abnormality of the neuromuscular junction. At this time, more than 
20 genes have been identified in association with CMS. In the UK, 70% of cases 
are due to acetylcholine receptor (AChR) deficiency and pathogenic variants in 
DOK7 and RAPSYN (1).
LG-CMS is a discreet group of CMS with prominent limb girdle weakness and 
minimal or no craniobulbar involvement. Consequently, LG-CMS may be mis￾diagnosed as a muscular dystrophy. Adult-onset LG-CMS is associated with 
pathogenic variants in genes encoding proteins involved in glycosylation, most 
frequently GFPT1 and DPAGT1 and rarely ALG2, ALG14 and GMPPB.
CK can be normal or markedly raised in patients with LG-CMS, the latter fur￾ther attributing to misdiagnosis. Neurophysiological evidence of neuromuscular 
junction dysfunction should be sought in the proximal muscles in LG-CMS, oth￾erwise it may be missed. TAs on muscle biopsy are well described in LG-CMS 
due to mutations in GFPT1, DPAGT1 and ALG2. Additional reported pathologi￾cal features include the presence of vacuoles and reduced α-dystroglycan stain￾ing of muscle sarcolemma.
Treatments for LG-CMS include acetylcholinesterase inhibitors such as pyr￾idostigmine; 3,4-DAP, which blocks presynaptic potassium channels increas￾ing the amount of acetylcholine within the neuromuscular junction; and 
β-adrenoceptor agonist salbutamol, which is clinically efficacious, however, its 
mechanism of action at the neuromuscular junction is uncertain.
As previously stated, CMS and LG-CMS may be misdiagnosed as muscular dys￾trophy, particularly when symptoms and signs of fatigability are limited or subtle, 
and investigations such as CK levels, neurophysiology and muscle biopsy may be 
misleading. However, in any patient with clinical or neurophysiological evidence 
of muscle fatigability, it is important to first consider a diagnosis of autoimmune 
myasthenia gravis (MG) prior to CMS, as the prevalence of MG is roughly 10–40 
times greater than CMS. Clinical features that favour a diagnosis of CMS rather 
than MG are the childhood onset of symptoms and distal weakness.196
Muscle diseases
Learning points
• LG-CMS is a discreet group of CMS that can be confused with muscular 
dystrophy because of minimal craniobulbar signs and fatigability with 
marked limb girdle weakness.
• Adult-onset LG-CMS is associated with pathogenic variants in genes 
involved in the glycosylation pathway.
• Autoimmune MG is much more common than CMS and should always 
be considered first in patients with clinical or neurophysiological evi￾dence of fatigable weakness.
Further reading
1. Rodríguez Cruz PM, Palace J, Beeson D. The neuromuscular junction and 
wide heterogeneity of congenital myasthenic syndromes. Int J Mol Sci. 2018; 
19:1677.197
Case 35 Case 35
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 22-year-old man presented with progressive difficulty with walking and stand￾ing from a seated position. He had also noticed thinning of the muscles in his legs 
over several years. He did not report any sensory or other neurological symptoms.
Whilst he had reached normal motor milestones in early childhood and attended 
physical education lessons at school, he had never enjoyed sport. He had been 
described as a clumsy child. He had no other significant medical history.
Examination
All cranial nerves were intact. There was symmetrical thinning of the quadriceps 
and hamstrings bilaterally. There were a few fasciculations seen in proximal mus￾cles in all four limbs. Tone, reflexes and co-ordination were normal and plantars 
flexor Sensory function was normal.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was 542 U/L. Nerve conduction studies showed normal 
sensory nerve action potentials and low amplitude compound muscle action 
potentials. Electromyography showed features of denervation (fibrillation poten￾tials, positive sharp waves and fasciculation potentials) as well as re-innervation 
(decreased numbers of motor unit potentials with increased amplitude and pro￾longed duration).
Genetic testing identified a deletion in the SMN1 gene. SMN copy number was 3.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-46
10.1201/9780429429323-46198
Muscle diseases
DIAGNOSIS
Spinal muscular atrophy.
Discussion
Spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) is an autosomal recessive condition characterised 
by degeneration of motor nerves. It is the commonest disorder of motor nerves in 
childhood, with an incidence of 1/10,000 live births. In adults, amyotrophic lat￾eral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common condition to affect motor nerves. SMA is 
discussed here as the distinction between muscle conditions, SMA and ALS can 
be difficult, and SMA is an important differential in patients with neuromuscular 
problems.
SMA is caused by deletion, gene conversion or occasionally point mutation of 
the survival motor neurone gene (SMN1). This leads to a severe reduction in 
SMN protein levels, which in turn leads to degeneration of lower motor neurones 
(although the details of the mechanism for degeneration are unclear). SMN plays 
a critical role in the assembly of small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs), 
which are essential for pre-mRNA splicing.
The SMN2 gene, which is an almost identical paralogue of SMN1 that has arisen 
due to evolutionary duplication, produces small amounts of residual protein, 
which is protective and prevents the lethal outcome of complete loss of SMN 
protein. Disease severity is proportional to the remaining SMN levels, which is 
largely determined by SMN2 copy number.
Three main forms of SMA are recognised based on clinical presentation:
Age of onset Number of 
SMN2 copies
Clinical features
SMA type I Infantile 2 Floppy infant
Never able to sit
Without gene therapy, death 
at <2 years
SMA type II >6 months 3 Able to sit (but may lose this 
ability)
Never able to walk unaided
Kyphoscoliosis usually 
occurs
Bulbar involvement common
Respiratory muscle 
weakness develops in all
SMA type III <3 years, SMA 
type IIIa
>3 years, SMA 
type IIIb
3, SMA type IIIa
4, SMA type IIIb
Able to walk unaided but 
lose ambulation
Most patients with SMA IIIa 
lose ambulation by 14 
years, without gene therapy
Kyphoscoliosis can occur199
Case 35
In very severe cases, onset is in utero (type 0) and fetal hypotonia can lead to 
arthrogryposis. There is also a milder form of the disease (type IV) with onset in 
adulthood, which is slowly progressive. Those with adult-onset SMA are a geneti￾cally heterogeneous group and can present with varying degrees of severity early 
in adult life.
Gene-modifying therapy is now available for people living with SMA. Currently, 
the two licensed therapies are nusinersen (which is delivered by regular intrathe￾cal injections – a loading regimen, followed by three injections per year) and ris￾diplam (an oral agent supplied as a liquid and taken daily). These treatments have 
had excellent early outcomes (with regard to improved muscle strength in the 
limbs, trunk and respiratory muscle function) for babies and children present￾ing with SMA. Their efficacy long term and for patients presenting in adult life is 
being assessed. Further gene replacement therapy trials are underway, including 
onasemnogene abeparvovec.
A number of countries now provide routine newborn screening for SMA. In view 
of the benefits of early intervention with gene therapy, there is a case for these 
programmes to be delivered worldwide.
In making the distinction between SMA and ALS in adults, patients with SMA 
tend to be younger at the onset of symptoms, have early symmetrical involve￾ment of muscles, have frequent early restriction to specific anatomical territories 
(e.g. lower limbs) and show slower progression over years or decades. Those who 
survive into adulthood have later onset bulbar and respiratory problems but most 
do go on to develop these complications over time.
Learning points
• Spinal muscular atrophy is an autosomal recessive condition, due to 
mutations in the SMN1 gene, which is the commonest disorder of motor 
nerves in childhood but can present in early adult life.
• It is an important differential diagnosis to consider in patients present￾ing with muscle wasting. Signs of denervation, including fasciculation, 
may be evident.
• Without gene therapy, patients with the infantile form die before the 
age of 2 years and those with childhood onset usually lose ambulation 
by 14 years.
• Gene-modifying therapy is now available for people living with SMA: 
nusinersen (intrathecal injection) and risdiplam (oral medication).
Further reading
Aragon-Gawinska K, Mouraux C, Dangouloff T, Servais L. 2023. Spinal muscu￾lar atrophy treatment in patients identified by newborn screening – a sys￾tematic review. Genes 29; 14(7): 1377.
Mercuri E, Finkel RS, Muntoni F, Wirth B, Montes, J, Main M, Mazzone ES, Vitale 
M, Snyder B, Quijano-Roy S, Bertini E, Hurst Davis R, Meyer OH, Simonds 
AK, Schroth MK, Graham RJ, Kirschner J, Iannaccone ST, Crawford TO, 200
Muscle diseases
Woods S, Qian Y, Sejersen T. 2018. Diagnosis and management of spinal 
muscular atrophy: Part 1: Recommendations for diagnosis, rehabilitation, 
orthopaedic and nutritional care. Neuromuscular Disorders 28(2): 103–115.
Mercuri E, Finkel RS, Muntoni F, Wirth B, Montes, J, Main M, Mazzone ES, Vitale 
M, Snyder B, Quijano-Roy S, Bertini E, Hurst Davis R, Meyer OH, Simonds 
AK, Schroth MK, Graham RJ, Kirschner J, Iannaccone ST, Crawford TO, 
Woods S, Qian Y, Sejersen T. 2018. Diagnosis and management of spinal 
muscular atrophy: Part 2: Pulmonary and acute care; medications, supple￾ments and immunizations; other organ systems and ethics. Neuromuscular 
Disorders 28(3): 197–207.
Mercuri E, Sumner CJ, Muntoni F, Darras BT & Finkel RS. 2022. Spinal muscu￾lar atrophy. Nature Reviews Disease Primers 8(1): 52.
Nishio H, Niba ETE, Saito T, Okamoto K, Takeshima Y & Awano H. 2023. Spinal 
muscular atrophy: the past, present and future of diagnosis and treatment. 
International Journal of Molecular Sciences 24(15): 11939.
Schorling DC, Pechmann A, Kirschner J. 2020 Advances in treatment of spinal 
muscular atrophy – new phenotypes, new challenges, new implications for 
care. Journal of Neuromuscular Disorders 7: 1–13.201
Case 36
Andria Merrison
PATIENT ASSESSMENT
History
A 36-year-old man presented with a 5-year history of reduced exercise tolerance 
with his ankles giving way at times. He had increasing cramps, particularly in 
the calf muscles. Walking upstairs was difficult and he had recently had a few 
falls. He had also experienced some mild weakness and occasional pins and nee￾dles in the hands. He had noticed thinning of the muscles in the hands, feet and 
calves. He reported mild problems with chewing and occasional difficulties with 
swallowing.
There was no significant past medical history or family history.
Examination
There was mild neck flexion weakness but no other cranial nerve abnormality. 
He had a fine tremor in both hands. Tone was normal. There was mild weakness 
in all muscle groups, worse distally than proximally. Distal symmetrical wasting 
in all four limbs was evident. Ankle jerks were absent but other reflexes were pre￾served and plantars were downgoing. Sensory function was intact.
With time, this man’s symptoms worsened and he developed problems with 
chewing and occasional swallowing difficulties. His sleep pattern was very poor, 
repeatedly waking in the night and feeling fatigued during the day. Fasciculations 
became evident in the face, trunk and all four limbs.
Investigations
Creatine kinase (CK) was raised at 1600 U/L and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 
at 68 U/L. All other blood tests were normal. Neurophysiological testing showed 
mixed neurogenic and myopathic changes, nerve conduction studies showed low 
sensory nerve amplitudes and decreased compound motor action potentials, and 
electromyography showed evidence of denervation. A muscle biopsy was per￾formed. This revealed a combination of muscle fibre necrosis and regeneration 
with associated interstitial fibrosis; changes initially thought to be due to a mus￾cular dystrophy (Figure C36.1). Immunohistochemistry for both muscular dys￾trophies and myofibrillar myopathies was negative.
Lung function tests and overnight oximetry revealed respiratory muscle weak￾ness and nocturnal hypoventilation. Repeat neurophysiological investigations 
were consistent with anterior horn cell dysfunction. Genetic testing confirmed 
the diagnosis.
Muscle diseases
DOI: 10.1201/9780429429323-47
10.1201/9780429429323-47202
Muscle diseases
Case 36
Figure C36.1 Chronic Partial Denervation. A. H&E 10× demonstrating areas of 
group fibre atrophy composed of angulated atrophic fibres. B. Metachromatic 
ATPase 10× highlighting group fibre atrophy of type 1 fibres without fibre type 
grouping. C. PAS 10× showing loss of glycogen content in denervated angulated 
fibres (a soft sign of denervation). D. nNOS 10× immunostaining demonstrating 
loss of sarcolemmal expression in denervated fibres. E. NADH 10× highlighting 
an increase in staining concentration in Type 1 (dark) angulated atrophic/dener￾vated fibres.203
Case 36
DIAGNOSIS
Kennedy’s disease.
Discussion
Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy, also known as Kennedy’s disease, is an 
adult-onset neurodegenerative condition affecting motor neurones in the brain￾stem and spinal cord (Kennedy 1968). It is caused by a trinucleotide (CAG) repeat 
expansion in the androgen receptor (AR) gene on the X chromosome (La Spada 
1991); longer repeats cause earlier onset but not more rapid progression. There is 
an androgen-dependent toxic gain of function in the resultant mutant protein 
which affects transcription and other cellular mechanisms in both motor neu￾rones and muscles. Prevalence is about 1 in 40,000. Most patients present in the 
third or fourth decade of life.
Weakness occurs in both proximal and distal muscles of the upper and lower 
limbs. The presentation may be asymmetric (Rhodes 2009). Dysarthria (nasal 
speech), dysphagia and facial weakness may be present. There may be lower 
motor neurone signs, including decreased or absent tendon reflexes and fascicu￾lations (including in the face and tongue) (Breza 2018). Some patients have sen￾sory symptoms as a consequence of dorsal root ganglion degeneration. Androgen 
insensitivity may manifest as gynaecomastia, reduced fertility and erectile dys￾function. This condition is easily misdiagnosed as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS), but the absence of upper motor neurone signs and the additional features 
of Kennedy’s disease may provide clues (Manzono 2018).
Genetic testing is diagnostic. Ninety per cent of patients have a raised CK (900–
1400 IU/L). Nerve conduction studies usually demonstrate decreased compound 
motor action potentials and reduced sensory amplitudes. Electromyography usu￾ally shows evidence of denervation. Muscle biopsy is not necessary to establish a 
diagnosis but typically shows features of chronic partial denervation, with group 
fibre atrophy without fibre type grouping (Figure C36.1B). Increased internal 
nuclei and pyknotic nuclear clusters may also be seen. However, genetic testing is 
diagnostic for Kennedy’s disease.
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and LDL levels may be raised, and impaired 
glucose tolerance can be associated with this condition. The hormone profile 
may be altered: raised total testosterone; free testosterone, dihydrotestosterone 
and oestradiol; and reduced androstenedione (Rosenbohm 2018). (Although a 
minority may have reduced androgen levels.)
Two-thirds of patients have a positive family history. Being X-linked, it is a disor￾der in males but a minority of females present as partially manifesting carriers, 
usually presenting with muscle cramps (Isihara 2001). Genetic counselling, pre￾implantation and prenatal genetic testing are available.
Progression is typically slow (losing around 2% of muscle strength per year), a 
third of patients require a wheelchair 20 years after diagnosis and many patients 204
Muscle diseases
have a normal life span. Patients with higher testosterone levels may have bet￾ter muscle strength and quality of life. There is currently no curative treatment 
and management focuses on preventing/treating the complications of the dis￾ease (including respiratory support) and maintaining function through exercise, 
physiotherapy and good nutrition.
Learning points
• Consider Kennedy’s disease in a male patient with slowly progressive 
wasting and fasciculations without upper motor neurone signs.
• Gynaecomastia is present in a number of cases.
• A minority of females present as partially manifesting carriers, with 
muscle cramps.
Further reading
Breza M & Koutis G. (2018) Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy (Kennedy dis￾ease): a clinically orientated review of a rare disease. Journal of Neurology
266(3): 565–573.
Grunseich C, Fischbeck KH. (2020) Molecular pathogenesis of spinal muscular 
atrophy (Kennedy’s disease) and avenues for treatment. Current Opinion 
Neurology 33(5): 629–34.
Isihara H, Kanda F, Nishio H et al. (2001) Clinical features and skewed 
X-chromosome inactivation in female carriers of X-linked recessive spinal 
and bulbar muscular atrophy. Journal of Neurology 248: 856–60.
Kennedy WR, Alter M & Sung JH. (1968) Progressive proximal spinal and bulbar 
muscular atrophy of late onset: a sex-linked recessive trait. Neurology 18: 
671–80.
La Spada AR, Wilson EM, Lubahn DB, Harding AE & Fischbeck KH. (1991) 
Androgen receptor gene mutations in X-linked spinal and bulbar muscular 
atrophy. Nature 352: 77–9.
Manzono R, Soraru G, Grunseich C, Fratta P, Zuccaro E, Pennuto M & Rinaldi 
C. (2018) Beyond motor neurones: expanding the clinical spectrum in 
Kennedy’s disease. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Neuropsychiatry
89(8): 808–12.
Marchioretti C, Andreotti R, Zuccaro E, Lieberman AP, Basso M, Pennuto M. 
(2023) Spinal and bulbar muscular atrophy: From molecular pathogenesis 
to pharmacological intervention targeting skeletal muscle. Current Opinion 
Pharmacology 71: 102394.
Rhodes LE, Freeman BK, Auh S et al. (2009) Clinical features of spinal and bul￾bar muscular atrophy. Brain 132: 3242–51.
Rosenbohm A, Hirsch S, Volk AE, Grehl T, Grosskreutz J, Hanisch F, Herrmann 
A, Kollewe K, Kress W, Meyer T, Petri S, Prudlo J, Wessig C, Muller HP, 
Dreyhaupt J, Weishaupt J, Kubisch C, Kassubek J, Weydt P & Ludolph AC. 
(2018) The metabolic and endocrine characteristics in spinal and bulbar 
muscular atrophy. Journal of Neurology 265(5): 1026–1036.205
INDEX
Abdominal muscle weakness, 7, 9, 72
ACE (angiotensin-converting enzyme) 
inhibitors, 68
Acetazolamide, 54, 131
Acetylcholine receptor (AChR), 185, 195
Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, 195
Acid maltase deficiency, 21, 175–177
Adductor magnus, 83, 92
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP), 11
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP), 11, 29
Adult muscle, 30
Afro-Caribbean individuals, 163
Age of onset, 2, 127, 131
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 159, 163
Androgen insensitivity, 203
Angular fibres, 31
Ankle dorsiflexion weakness, 8, 70, 72
Ankle jerks, 201
ANO5-related hyperCKaemia, 163–164
Anoctamin 5 (ANO5) gene, 78
Anti-acetylcholine receptor 
antibodies, 116
Antibodies, muscle
anti-aminoacyl tRNA synthetase (anti￾ARS) antibodies, 14
anti-Ku, 16
anti-MDA5 and anti-SAE antibodies, 
15, 16
anti-Mi2 antibody, 15
anti-NXP2 antibody, 15, 140
anti-PmScl, 16
anti-Ro/SSA, 16
anti-SRP and anti-HMGCR 
antibodies, 14
anti-TIF1-gamma antibody, 15
anti-U1RNP, 16
Anti-Jo-1-positive antisynthetase 
syndrome
clinical manifestations, 144
discussion, 143
investigations and findings, 144–145
joint investigations, 145
management, 145
pathogenesis, 143
treatment and outcome, 143
Antisythetase syndrome (ASyS), 39, 40, 143
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 159, 
163, 203
Asymmetric ptosis, 189
Autosomal dominant (AD), 88
Autosomal dominant limb girdle 
muscular dystrophy, 83–84
Autosomal Recessive limb girdle muscular 
dystrophy R1, 75–76
Autosomal dominant ryanodine receptor 
1 (RYR1)-related myopathy, 
183–184
Avalglucosidase alfa-ngpt (Nexviazyme), 
53, 176
Axonal degeneration, 20, 21
BAG3 gene (Bcl-2–associated athanogene 
3), 107
BAG3 myopathy, 107
Barbiturates, 156
Becker muscular dystrophy (BMD), 38, 47, 
64–65, 72, 179
Beevor’s sign, 70, 72
Benzodiazepines, 156
Bethlem myopathy (BM), 87, 88
Biceps femoris, 92
Bilateral calf hypertrophy, 66
Bilevel positive airway pressure 
(BiPAP), 125
Blood–brain barrier, 176
Botulinum toxin injections, 117
Bulbar weakness, 3
Calf hypertrophy, 7
Calpainopathy, 30, 78
Cardiac complications, 54, 56–57
Cardiac disease, 64
Cardiac dysrhythmia, 83
Cardiac monitoring, 97
Cardiac rhythm disturbance, 124
Cardiovascular complications, 68
carnitine palmitoyltransferase II (CPT II) 
deficiency, 179, 180
Central core disease (CCD), 103, 183
Centronuclear myopathy (CNM), 40, 103
Cervical collars, 169
Channelopathies, 54
Index Index206
Index
Chest examination, 142
Chronic progressive external 
ophthalmoplegia (CPEO/PEO), 
187–188
Cognitive and intellectual deficits, 124
Cognitive impairment, 175
Complex repetitive discharges, 22
Compound muscle action potential 
(CMAP), 19, 130, 193
Computed tomography (CT), 42
Concomitant mitochondrial 
abnormalities, 40
Congenital fibre-type disproportion 
(CFTD), 103
Congenital myasthenic syndrome (CMS), 
121, 195
Congenital myopathy, 40, 103–104
Congo red or crystal violet staining, 36
Connective tissue, 32
Continuous positive airway pressure 
(CPAP) ventilation, 54, 125
Core-rod myopathy (CRM), 103
Cough management, 117
Cramps, 4
Cranial nerve abnormality, 201
Cranial nerve examination, 193
Cranial nerves, 100, 126, 197
C-reactive protein (CRP), 142
Creatine kinase (CK), 11, 74, 75, 82, 90, 95, 
96, 99, 102, 106, 110, 116, 123, 
130, 138, 147, 155, 162, 163, 166, 
174, 178, 182, 185, 189, 193, 195, 
197, 201
Cricopharyngeal myotomy, 117
Critical illness neuromyopathy, 156–157
Cytochrome c oxidase (COX), 35
Deep tendon reflexes, 66
Demyelination, 20
Dermatological signs, 7
Dermatomyositis, 15, 39, 45, 140
3, 4-diaminopyridine (3, 4-DAP), 193
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI), 189
Disease progression, 72
Distal myopathy, 111, 112–114
Distal symmetrical wasting, 201
Drug toxicity, 45
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD), 
7, 30, 38, 42, 47, 51–53, 57, 
67–69
Dysferlinopathy, 30, 78
Dysphagia, 135
Dystrophic muscle, 31
Dystrophinopathy, 42
Early Pompe disease, 164
Echocardiogram, 57, 68, 82, 83, 95, 106
Electrocardiogram (ECG), 57, 123, 171
Electromyography (EMG), 78, 92, 119, 
130, 131, 133, 160, 166, 174, 193, 
197, 203
complex repetitive discharges, 22
fasciculation potentials, 21–22
fibrillation potentials, 21
insertional activity, 21
interference pattern, 21, 23
motor unit potentials, 21–23
myokymia, 22
myotonic discharges, 22
repetitive supramaximal nerve 
stimulation, 23–24
single-fibre EMG and jitter, 24
spontaneous activity, 21
Electron microscopy (EM), 40, 101, 119, 
120, 194, 107
Emery–Dreifuss muscular dystrophy 
(EDMD), 57, 7, 86, 87, 96–97
Endocrine abnormalities, 124
Endomysial mononuclear 
inflammation, 133
Enzyme histochemistry, 28
Eosin stain, 151, 180, 186, 194
European Neuromuscular Centre 
(ENMC), 75
Exercise and rehabilitation 
programmes, 57
Extensor digitorum brevis (EDB), 110
Eyelid elevation surgery, 117
Facial involvement, 2
Facial weakness, 3
Facioscapulohumeral muscular 
dystrophy (FSHD), 26, 48, 
72–73, 171
Fasciculation potentials, 21–22
Fatigue/excessive daytime sleepiness, 124
Fatty acid oxidation disorder (FAOD), 
179–181
Fibrillation potentials, 21
Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), 12
Flecainide, 131
Fukutin-related protein (FKRP) 
mutations, 78
F-wave study, 19207
Index
Gastrointestinal pseudo-obstruction, 190
Gene agnostic exome/genome analysis, 48
Gene-modifying therapy, 131, 199
General anaesthesia, 4, 7
Genetically heterogeneous neuromuscular 
disorders, 48–49
Genetic testing, 74, 75, 82, 90, 116, 131, 
174, 190, 197, 201, 203
Glucocorticoids, 44, 67
Glycogen storage disorder, 7, 34, 53–54
GNE myopathy (hereditary inclusion 
body myopathy/Nonaka 
myopathy), 100–101, 111
Gömöri trichrome (GTC) stain, 31
Granulomatous vasculitis, 148
Graves’ disease, 160
Growth differentiation factor 15 
(GDF15), 12
Haematoxylin stain, 29, 120, 121, 151, 180, 
186, 194
High-resolution computed tomography 
(HRCT), 142
Histochemical techniques, 35–37
H-reflex, 19
Hypercholesterolaemia, 150
Hypothyroidism, 21, 160
Idiopathic inflammatory myopathies 
(IIMs), 10, 11, 13, 143
Immune-mediated necrotising myopathy 
(IMNM), 14, 152
Immunosuppression, 140
Immunohistochemical (IHC) staining, 
38–40, 86
Immunostaining, 39
Inclusion body myositis (IBM), 3, 7, 42, 
100, 135–136
Infant muscle, 30
Inflammatory cells, 32, 33
Inflammatory myopathy, 21, 164
Insertional activity, 21
Inspection
dermatological features of muscle 
disease, 10
manual muscle assessment, 8–9
myotonia, 9–10
reflexes, 9
sensation and coordination, 9
Intensive care unit (ICU), 24, 155
Interference pattern, 21, 23
Intermyofibrillar network, 36
Ischaemic stroke, 189
Isolated neck extensor myopathy (axial 
myopathy), 168–169
Joint laxity, 89
Jordans’ phenomenon, 11
Juvenile dermatomyositis (JDM), 15
Kennedy’s disease, 203–204
Keratosis pilaris, 86
King–Denborough syndrome, 183
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), 11
Lamin A/C (LMNA) gene, 82
Laminopathy, 83
Lamotrigine, 131
LGMD R1 (calpainopathy), 75
Limb girdle congenital myasthenic 
syndrome (LG-CMS), 195–196
Limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD), 
30, 42, 75, 111, 179
Lipid myopathy, 180
Lobulated fibres, 75
Macroautophagy degradation, 107
Macrophage-predominant perimysial 
inflammation, 142
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 42, 
127, 142
Manual muscle assessment, 8–9
McArdle disease, 11, 171–172
McLeod’s disease, 12
Medial gastrocnemius, 43, 81
Metabolic myopathy, 11, 168
Methotrexate, 153
Mexiletine, 131
Mitochondrial disease, 49, 54, 191
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), 27, 
187, 190
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, 
190–191
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic 
acidosis and stroke-like episodes 
(MELAS), 187, 190
Mitochondrial myopathies, 33
Modified Gömöri trichrome stain, 34, 90, 
119, 180, 186, 194
Molecular genetic testing
for deletions and duplications in DMD 
gene, 64, 67
Motor nerve cell bodies, 29
Motor neurone disease (MND), 168208
Index
Motor neuronopathy, 99
Motor unit potentials, 21–23
Multidisciplinary teams (MDTs), 50
Multiminicore disease (MmD), 103
Muscle biopsy, 90, 100, 110, 115, 136, 147, 
156, 170, 107
diagnostic material, 26
IMNM, 152
inflammatory changes, 26
mitochondrial DNA mutation, 27
muscle histochemistry
congenital myopathies, 40
electron microscopy, 40
histochemical techniques, 35–38
histological stains, 29–34
immunohistochemistry, 38–40
neuromuscular conditions, 27
ryanodine receptor 1 (RyR1) 
disorders, 26
Muscle diseases
history
age of onset, 2
cramps, 4
family history, 2
general anaesthesia, 4
muscle involvement distribution, 
2–3
muscle stiffness, 3
myalgia, 3
respiratory and cardiac muscle 
involvement, 4
weakness, 3
muscle examination
clinical signs, 7
inspection, see Inspection
respiratory and cardiac 
complications, 1
specific treatments for, 52
Muscle fatigability, 195
Muscle fibres, 32
Muscle imaging, 42–45
Muscle magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI), 42
Muscle precursor cell fusion, 80
Muscle-specific kinase (MuSK) 
antibodies, 185
Muscle stiffness, 3
Muscle strength, 156
Muscular dystrophy, 7, 26, 79
Myalgia, 3, 152
Myasthenia gravis (MG), 168, 187
Myofibrillar myopathy secondary, 107–108
Myoglobinuria, 170
Myokymia, 22
Myopathic muscle, 30
Myopathy, 31
Myositis-associated antibodies 
(MAAs), 13–14
Anti-Ku, 16
anti-PmScl, 16
anti-Ro/SSA, 16
anti-U1RNP, 16
Myositis immunoblot, 150
Myositis-specific antibodies, 13
anti-aminoacyl tRNA synthetase (anti￾ARS) antibodies, 14
anti-MDA5 and anti-SAE 
antibodies, 16
anti-Mi2 antibody, 15
anti-NXP2 antibody, 15
anti-SRP and anti-HMGCR 
antibodies, 14
anti-TIF1-gamma antibody, 15
Myotonia, 131
Myotonia congenita, 131
Myotonia, 9–10
Myotonic discharges, 22
Myotonic dystrophy, 26, 52, 53
Myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM1), 
124–125, 128
Myotonic dystrophy type 2 (DM2), 
127–128
Neurogenic weakness, ataxia and retinitis 
pigmentosa (NARP), 187
Nebulin (NEB) gene, 92
Nebulin mutations, 92
Neck extension, 166
Neck extensor muscles, 166
Necrotic fibres, 31
Nemaline myopathy, 92–93
Nerve conduction studies (NCS), 110, 166, 
174, 197
compound muscle action potential 
(CMAP), 19
electromyography (EMG), 21–24
H-reflex and F-wave, 19
limitations, 21
sensory conduction study, 19
supramaximal electrical 
stimulation, 19
Neuromuscular conditions, 27
Neuromuscular disease, 174
Neuromuscular examination, 133, 193209
Index
Neuromuscular junction disorders, 1
Next-generation sequencing (NGS), 
46, 180
dystrophinopathy, 47
facioscapulohumeral muscular 
dystrophy (FSHD), 48
genetically heterogeneous 
neuromuscular disorders, 48–49
limitations and further analysis, 49–50
mitochondrial disorders, 49
short tandem repeat expansion 
disorders, 47
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 
(NADH), 194
Non-invasive ventilation, 174
Non-specific interstitial pneumonitis 
(NSIP), 142
North and Central Europe population, 80
Nusinersen (intrathecal injections), 53
Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA), 124
Oculopharyngeal muscular dystrophy 
(OPMD), 47, 117–118, 187
Oil Red/Sudan Black stain, 32, 180
Ophthalmoplegia, 2, 92
Orobulbar signs, 6
Overnight oximetry, 90
Paradoxical myotonia, 3
Paraspinal muscles, 167
Parkinson disease (PD), 166, 168
Periocular weakness (Bell’s 
phenomenon), 70
Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain, 32
Periodic paralysis, 121
Peripheral neuropathy, 1
Phenotype, 191
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
amplification, 47
Polymyositis/dermatomyositis, 45, 52
Pompe disease, 36, 175, 176
Pompe dry blood spot analysis, 174
Primary mitochondrial diseases, 187
Propafenone, 131
Propofol, 156
Proximal (limb girdle) muscle weakness, 2
Reflexes, 9
Repetitive nerve stimulation (RNS), 
23, 193
Repetitive supramaximal nerve 
stimulation, 23–24
Respiratory complications, 54, 55
Respiratory failure, 92, 124
Respiratory involvement, 68
Rhabdomyolysis, 152, 179
Rippling muscle, 9
Risdiplam (oral medication), 53
Rituximab in Myositis (RIM) trial, 15
Ryanodine receptor 1 (RyR1) disorders, 
26, 42, 103
Sarco-/endoplasmic reticulum 
Ca2+-ATPase (SERCA1/2) 
immunohistochemical 
stain, 194
Sarcoid myopathy, 148
Sarcoidosis, 148
Sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), 121
Sclerodactyly, 10
Scoliosis, 92
Sensation and coordination, 9
Sensory ataxic neuropathy, dysarthria 
and ophthalmoplegia 
(SANDO), 187
Sensory conduction study, 19
Sensory nerve action potential 
(SNAP), 19
Serological tests, 11–12
Short tandem repeats (STRs), 47
Shoulder girdle muscles, 119
Signal recognition protein (SRP), 152
Single fibre electromyography (SFEMG), 
24, 193
Skeletal changes, 7
Skin abnormalities, 89
Skin ulceration, 139
Small nucleotide variants (SNVs), 47
Specialised bioinformatic data analysis 
tools, 47
Spinal muscular atrophy, 6, 198–199, 203
Split fibres, 30
Spontaneous activity, 21
Supramaximal stimulation, 19
Survival motor neurone gene (SMN1), 198
Systemic immune suppression, 139
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 
160–161
Thyrotoxicosis, 161
Tiger man sign, 148
Tongue atrophy, 6
Troponin T, 11
TTN-related myopathy, 111, 112210
Index
Tubular aggregate myopathy (TAM), 
121–122
Tubular aggregates (TAs), 121
Type 1 muscle fibres, 28, 32
Type 2muscle fibres, 29
Type 2 fibre atrophy, 35
Ullrich congenital muscular dystrophy 
(UCMD), 87
Ultrasound scan, 42
Upper motor neuron (UMN) signs, 9
Variant of unknown significance (VUS), 
38–39, 48
Vasculopathy, 175
Whole-exome sequencing (WES), 46
Whole-genome sequencing (WGS), 46
X-chromosome, 65
X-linked recessive disorder, 96
Zinc binding protein, 127
