Nanomaterials for 

Sustainable Energy
 
Applications
 
This book provides a detailed overview of different devices and nanomaterials for 
energy storage applications. The application of each nanomaterial is discussed for 
fuel cells, metal–air batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, regenerative fuel cells, 
hydrogen energy, batteries, and redox flow batteries to understand the reaction process 
and material performance improvement for energy storage devices. In addition, 
major challenges, case studies, historical, and future perspective are summarized. 
Features: 
•	 Summarizes state-of-the-art nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion 
applications 
•	 Comprehensive coverage of a wide range of nanomaterials, including synthesis 
and characterization 
•	 Details different energy storage devices, construction, working principles, and 
major challenges 
•	 Covers specific reactions, nanomaterials, and nanocomposites via audio–video 
slides/short films 
•	 Includes case studies pertaining to development of energy storage devices and 
major challenges 
This book is aimed at researchers and graduate students in chemical engineering, 
chemical sciences, nanomaterials, and energy engineering/conversion. Emerging Materials and Technologies 
Series Editor: Boris I. Kharissov 
The Emerging Materials and Technologies series is devoted to highlighting 
publications centered on emerging advanced materials and novel technologies. 
Attention is paid to those newly discovered or applied materials with potential 
to solve pressing societal problems and improve quality of life, corresponding to 
environmental protection, medicine, communications, energy, transportation, 
advanced manufacturing, and related areas. 
The series takes into account that, under present strong demands for energy, 
material, and cost savings, as well as heavy contamination problems and worldwide 
pandemic conditions, the area of emerging materials and related scalable technologies 
is a highly interdisciplinary field, with the need for researchers, professionals, and 
academics across the spectrum of engineering and technological disciplines. The 
main objective of this book series is to attract more attention to these materials and 
technologies and invite conversation among the international R&D community. 
Nanocosmetics 
Drug Delivery Approaches, Applications and Regulatory Aspects 
Edited by: Prashant Kesharwani and Sunil Kumar Dubey 
Sustainability of Green and Eco-friendly Composites 
Edited by Sumit Gupta, Vijay Chaudhary and Pallav Gupta 
Assessment of Polymeric Materials for Biomedical Applications 
Edited by Vijay Chaudhary, Sumit Gupta, Pallav Gupta and Partha Pratim Das 
Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Edited by Piyush Kumar Sonkar and Vellaichamy Ganesan 
Materials Science to Combat COVID-19 
Edited by Neeraj Dwivedi and Avanish Kumar Srivastava 
Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials for Fire-Safe Polymers 
Yuan Hu and Xin Wang 
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/ 
Emerging-Materials-and-Technologies/book-series/CRCEMT Nanomaterials for 
Sustainable Energy 
Applications
Edited by Piyush Kumar Sonkar and 
Vellaichamy GanesanDesigned cover image: © Piyush Kumar Sonkar and Vellaichamy Ganesan 
First edition published 2024 
by CRC Press 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487–2742 
and by CRC Press 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN 
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
© 2024 selection and editorial matter, Piyush Kumar Sonkar and Vellaichamy 
Ganesan; individual chapters, the contributors 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, 
but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of 
all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers 
have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this 
publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this 
form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged 
please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be 
reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access 
www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 
Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978–750–8400. For works that are not 
available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered 
trademarks and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to 
infringe. 
ISBN: 978-1-032-07766-6 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-032-07768-0 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-003-20870-9 (ebk) 
DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709 
Typeset in Times 
by Apex CoVantage, LLC  
Dedicated to our 
Authors, Collaborators and the Scientific team 
& A heartfelt tribute to 
Late Dr. M. Anbu Kulandainathan 
(One of the authors of this book) 
Principal Scientist, Central Electrochemical 

Research Institute Karaikudi, India
 vii
Contents
 
About the Editors ..................................................................................................... ix
 
List of Contributors ...................................................................................................xi
 
Preface ................................................................................................................... xiii
 
Acknowledgments....................................................................................................xv
 
Chapter 1 Introduction: Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications ....... 1 
Shanmugam Manivannan, Raju Praveen, Kyuwon Kim and 
Ramasamy Ramaraj 
Chapter 2 Fuel Cells: Engineered Nanomaterials for Improved Fuel Cell 
Performance and Power Generation ................................................ 25 
Chandni Singh, Uday Pratap Azad, Ashish Kumar Singh and Sunil 
Kumar Singh 
Chapter 3 Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composite 
Materials for Energy Storage: Supercapacitor Applications ............ 50 
Neeraj K. Sah, Shankab J. Phukan, Dasnur Nanjappa Madhusudan, 
Dr. Kamatchi Sankaranarayanan, Dr. Manas Roy and Dr. rer. nat. 
Somenath Garai 
Chapter 4 Supercapacitors: Carbon-Based Nanostructures for 
Supercapacitor Application .............................................................. 77 
Shanu Mishra and Ashish Kumar Mishra 
Chapter 5	 Designing Hollow Structured Materials for Sustainable 
Electrochemical Energy Conversion .............................................. 101 
Baghendra Singh and Arindam Indra 
Chapter 6	 Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications .... 121 
Biplab Kumar Kuila 
Chapter 7 Carbon Quantum Dots ................................................................... 147
 
Karan Surana and Bhaskar Bhattacharya viii	 Contents 
Chapter 8	 Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 

Applications .................................................................................... 160
 
Jianren Wang, Neus Vilà and Alain Walcarius 
Chapter 9	 Metal–Organic Frameworks .......................................................... 186
 
Dr. Murugavel Kathiresan and Dr. M. Anbu Kulandainathan 
Index ......................................................................................................................212
 ix 
About the Editors
 
Dr. Piyush Kumar Sonkar has received his BSc (Chemistry), MSc (Chemistry) 
and PhD (Chemistry) degree from Banaras Hindu University, India. He is presently 
working as an assistant professor in Department of Chemistry, MMV, Banaras 
Hindu University, Varanasi, India. His research interests include nanomaterials, 
nanocomposites, fuel cells, electrochemical devices, supercapacitors, biosensors, 
chemical sensors and new materials. He has published more than 45 international 
and national research papers in various reputed peer reviewed journals. He has 
published six book chapters. He presented his research work in various international/ 
national seminars/workshops and conferences. 
Dr. Vellaichamy Ganesan received his BSc and MSc in Chemistry from Madurai 
Kamaraj University and Bharathidasan University, India, respectively. Later, he 
received his PhD (2000) from Madurai Kamaraj University. After completing 
postdoctoral research in the United States and France, he is now continuing his 
research in the fields of nanomaterials, electroanalysis, electrocatalysis, development 
of fuel cell materials, and photocatalysis in the Department of Chemistry, Banaras 
Hindu University, India as a professor. He is a recipient of IUSSTF fellowship 
(India–USA), Commonwealth Fellowship (UK), and DAAD Fellowship (Germany). 
He has published more than 110 research papers in international/national journals. xi 
Contributors
 
Uday Pratap Azad 
Department of Chemistry, Guru 
Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur 
495009, India 
Bhaskar Bhattacharya 
Department of Physics, Mahila 
Mahavidyalaya, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi—221005, U.P., 
India 
rer. nat. Somenath Garai 
Department of Chemistry, Institute of 
Science, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi 221 005, Uttar Pradesh, 
India 
Arindam Indra 
Department of Chemistry, IIT (BHU), 
Varanasi, UP-221005, India 
Murugavel Kathiresan 
Electro Organic and Materials 
Electrochemistry Division, CSIR￾Central Electrochemical Research 
Institute, Karaikudi, TamilNadu, 
INDIA 
Kyuwon Kim 
Electrochemistry Laboratory for 
Sensors & Energy (ELSE), 
Department of Chemistry, Incheon 
National University, Incheon 22012, 
Republic of Korea 
Biplab Kumar Kuila 
Department of Chemistry, Institute of 
Science, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi-221005, Uttar Pradesh, India 
M. Anbu Kulandainathan 
Electro Organic and Materials 
Electrochemistry Division, CSIR￾Central Electrochemical Research 
Institute, Karaikudi, TamilNadu, 
INDIA 
Dasnur Nanjappa Madhusudan 
Department of Chemistry, Institute of 
Science, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi 221 005, Uttar Pradesh, 
India 
Shanmugam Manivannan 
Department of Chemistry, Institute of 
Science, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi-221005, Uttar Pradesh, 
INDIA 
Electrochemistry Laboratory for 
Sensors & Energy (ELSE), 
Department of Chemistry, 
Incheon National University, 
Incheon 22012, Republic 
of Korea 
Ashish Kumar Mishra 
School of Materials Science and 
Technology Indian Institute 
of Technology (BHU), 
Varanasi-221005, 
INDIA 
Shanu Mishra 
School of Materials Science and 
Technology Indian Institute 
of Technology (BHU), 
Varanasi-221005, 
INDIA xii Contributors 
Shankab J. Phukan 
Department of Chemistry, Institute of 
Science, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi 221 005, Uttar Pradesh, 
India 
Raju Praveen 
School of Chemistry, Madurai Kamaraj 
University, Madurai-625021, Tamil 
Nadu, INDIA 
Ramasamy Ramaraj 
School of Chemistry, Madurai Kamaraj 
University, Madurai-625021, Tamil 
Nadu, INDIA 
Manas Roy 
Department of Chemistry, National 
Institute of Technology Agartala, 
Agartala 799 046, Tripura, India 
Neeraj K. Sah 
Department of Chemistry, Institute of 
Science, Banaras Hindu University, 
Varanasi 221 005, Uttar Pradesh, 
India 
Kamatchi Sankaranarayanan 
Physical Sciences Division, Institute 
of Advanced Study in Science and 
Technology, Guwahati—781035, 
Assam, India 
Ashish Kumar Singh 
Department of Chemistry, Guru 
Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur 
495009, India 
Baghendra Singh 
Department of Chemistry, IIT (BHU), 
Varanasi, UP-221005, India 
Chandni Singh 
Department of Chemistry, Guru 
Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur 
495009, India 
Sunil Kumar Singh 
Department of Chemistry, Guru 
Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur 
495009, India 
Karan Surana 
Department of Chemistry, 
Sardar Patel University, Vallabh 
Vidyanagar, Anand – 388120, 
Gujarat, India 
Email- kssurana9@gmail.com 
Neus Vilà 
Laboratoire de Chimie Physique 
et Microbiologie pour les 
Matériaux et l’Environnement 
(LCPME), UMR 7564 
CNRS-Université de Lorraine, 
405 rue de Vandoeuvre, 54600 
Villers-lès-Nancy, France 
Alain Walcarius 
Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et 
Microbiologie pour les Matériaux 
et l’Environnement (LCPME), 
UMR 7564 CNRS-Université de 
Lorraine, 405 rue de 
Vandoeuvre, 54600 
Villers-lès-Nancy, France 
Jianren Wang 
Laboratoire de Chimie Physique et 
Microbiologie pour les Matériaux 
et l’Environnement (LCPME), 
UMR 7564 CNRS-Université de 
Lorraine, 405 rue de Vandoeuvre, 
54600 Villers-lès-Nancy, 
France 
Hebei Key Laboratory of 
Applied Chemistry, School of 
Environmental and Chemical 
Engineering, Yanshan 
University, Qinhuangdao, 
P.R. China xiii 
Preface
 
The global energy demand has been increasing exponentially in the last few decades. 
This energy demand will be expected to increase much higher in the upcoming years. 
At present, approximately 80% of the global energy requirements are based on fossil 
fuels. The extensive use of fossil fuels causes global warming, energy crisis, and envi￾ronmental pollution. Hence, it is necessary to improve renewable sources of energy 
for sustainable development. Sustainable energy storage devices such as fuel cells, 
biofuel cells, metal–air batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, and redox flow batteries 
may be efficient and suitable alternatives to decrease the excessive use of fossil fuels. 
Here, nanomaterials play an important role in the development/improvement of the 
performance of these energy storage devices in a sustainable way. Generally, low effi￾ciency, high cost, and the low abundance of conventional materials mitigate the bulk 
use of these energy storage devices. Therefore, it is necessary to develop highly effi￾cient, durable, and low-cost materials for energy storage applications. There are the 
variety of nanomaterials documented in the literature for such energy storage appli￾cations. For example, carbon-based nanomaterials, polymer-based nanocomposites, 
mesoporous carbon nitrides, mesoporous silica, metal nanoparticles, metal-organic 
frameworks, metal phosphides, and more are reported for this purpose. However, 
the details about these nanomaterials are scattered in different research papers and 
review articles. It is laborious for the readers to collect all information regarding 
these materials. These difficulties motivate us to write this book Nanomaterials for 
Sustainable Energy Applications that can provide a unique platform for the readers. 
This book is intended as a critical review of nanomaterials for sustainable energy 
applications. However, it is clearly impossible to refer to all the work which has been 
reported in this field. Here, we are providing broad and reasonably complete cover￾age of this field. Although there is no strict boundary for nanomaterials, some of the 
composites of nanomaterials have potential energy storage applications. Compact 
information about different energy storage devices such as fuel cells and batteries, 
biofuel cells, and redox flow batteries is provided in this book. In addition, specific 
nanomaterials and their composites for sustainable energy storage applications are 
also provided in this book. The first part of the book is devoted to a brief introduc￾tion to nanomaterials and their application in energy storage devices (Chapter 1). 
Chapters 2 to 4 provide a brief discussion about the different energy storage devices. 
Here, the working principle, construction, design, and challenges of significant 
energy storage devices are discussed. Chapter 5 is devoted to the designing of hol￾low-structured nanomaterials and their sustainable energy applications. It provides 
special emphasis on structure–function relationships. Structural features would 
be correlated with the desired property for a particular application. The detailed 
applications of individual class of nanomaterials, such as carbon quantum dots and 
polymer-based nanocomposites, are discussed in Chapters 6 to 9. A brief overview 
of the synthesis, characterization, and energy storage application of the nanomateri￾als is discussed in these chapters. Thus, this book is a unique one for beginners and 
researchers working in the field of nanomaterials. xv 
Acknowledgments
 
•	 First of all, we are thankful to our contributing authors for their valuable 
contribution to this book. 
•	 We are thankful to Prof. R. Ramraj for their continuous help, support, and 
suggestions. 
•	 We are thankful to Dr. Arindam Indra for their sincere effort and dedica￾tion to contribute to this book. 
•	 Our heartfelt tribute to the late Dr. M. Anbu Kulandainathan, principal sci￾entist, Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi, India. 
•	 We are thankful to our research group members Mr. Narvadeshwar, Amit 
Kumar Verma, Mamta Yadav, Devesh Kumar Singh, Smita Singh, Ananya 
Tiwari, Varsha Singh, and Vikram Rathour for their help and support. 
•	 We are thankful to Mr. Angesh Kumar Maurya for his help in cover page 
design of the book. 
•	 We are thankful to our colleagues, collaborators, friends, and well-wishers 
for providing moral support for this book. 
•	 We are thankful to our family members and friends for providing continu￾ous moral support in this book. DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-1 1 
1
1 Introduction 
Nanomaterials for 
Sustainable Energy 
Applications 
Shanmugam Manivannan, Raju Praveen, 
Kyuwon Kim and Ramasamy Ramaraj 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
1.1.1 The FuTure Is susTaInable 
Soil, energy, and water are among our extremely treasured reserves, but the way we 
humans exploit these resources contributes to climate change. Recently, worldwide 
concern about energy-related climate change has been tied to the spiraling rate of fos￾sil fuels (Turner, 2015). For the moment, Mother Nature, offering all these resources, 
is itself extremely defenseless to changes in climate. Hence, for improving and modi￾fying functions, effective resource administration is in great need. More than ever, 
interest in renewable energy are rising due to energy demands and climate change. 
Because less awareness in the amalgamation of resource evaluations and rule-mak￾ing precedes contradictory policies and unproductive use of reserves (Yip, Brogioli, 
Hamelers, & Nijmeijer, 2016). The generalized view of how to procure climate, soil 
use, energy, and water utilization determines the cure for the forthcoming crisis. In 
this regard, the imminent energy crisis taken on by the expiration of restricted and 
non-homogenously scattered fossil fuel resources and the global boost in energy 
demand has triggered immense research in the development of sustainable energy 
technologies in the past few decades. In this regard, individuals, as well as commu￾nities, have long diagnosed the destruction that can be instigated to our ecosystem 
and that of the plants and animals we share our planet with; very recently, this has 
been conceded worldwide. A global energy transition is urgently needed to meet the 
objectives, and in the meantime, it is essential to protect the environment from pollu￾tion as well (Z.-F. Yan, Hao, & Lu, 2010). These problems have been encountered due 
to industrialization with urbanization from previous decades. Besides, the demand 
for low-cost, efficient, and sustainable energy production is ever increasing globally. 
The imminent growth in materials science for the past few decades is a promising 
innovation in science and technology to meet sustainable energy production. In par￾ticular, functional materials for sustainable energy applications offer a vital direction 
for the advancement and use of these materials in sustainable energy production.  
2 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
However, the efficiency of most of the proposed functional materials through various 
technologies to harvest sustainable energy is comparatively insignificant, and conse￾quently, it needs to be increased to finally replace traditional technologies centered 
on fossil fuels. It is the efficiency increase of the functional materials-based technol￾ogy that is key to envisioning the suppression of fossil fuel usage. The objective of 
this book is to give an integrated and inclusive demonstration of the fundamentals, 
utilization, and strategy of functional nanomaterials for efficient sustainable energy 
harvesting through various electrochemical energy harvesting and energy storage 
applications. The book presents general coverage of the use and design of functional 
nanomaterials for sustainable energy applications. Consequently, the book delivers 
all the significant aspects, such as nanomaterials’ suitability for use in solar cells, 
fuel cells, and batteries, supercapacitors, biofuel cells, redox flow batteries; potent 
nanomaterials designed to overcome sustainability issues; and recent advancements 
in nanomaterials for sustainable energy applications. 
1.1.2 nanoTechnology: The hope For susTaInable DevelopmenT 
The production and consumption of energy are basic elements of life. The indus￾trial revolution of the past decades has brought us the imminent energy crisis, which 
is widely supplied by resources such as fossil fuels. Besides, environmental issues, 
such as climate change and atmospheric pollution, have mainly risen due to the vast 
dependency and intermittent supply of fossil fuels. Hence, groundbreaking pieces of 
knowledge skilled at adapting and preserving energy on a substantial scale are cru￾cial to elevating the sustainable energy harvesting and advancement of our society 
and economy. Recently, extensive interdisciplinary research on nanomaterials is pre￾ceding to give rise to the generation of a pollution-free environment rich in renew￾able energy resources (Liu, Burghaus, Besenbacher, & Wang, 2010). In this regard, 
to proficiently utilize the inadequate resources, both transmaterialization and dema￾terialization should be obeyed (Huang & Jiang, 2019). The process of moving toward 
reusable materials is referred to as transmaterialization, and the process of restricted 
use of available resources while upholding affluence is referred to as dematerialization. 
(Turner, 2015) This energy transition must occur without leaving any consequences on 
environmental and human health bound to the resources and their consumption. In this 
regard, nanotechnologies are not associated entirely with sustainable energy harvesting 
technologies. But researchers are finding possible pathways in which nanotechnology 
could help us develop potent nanomaterials and technologies to uplift energy sources. 
Nanotechnology has already contributed quite useful technologies, such as techniques 
to retrieve and utilize fossil fuels in a competent way. Nanoemulsions are widely used as 
corrosion-resistant coatings, and nanocatalysts, as well as nanostructured membranes, 
have found suitability in extracting fossil fuels and in nuclear power stations. With 
the aid of nanotechnology, there is huge hope for the advancement of dematerializa￾tion of technology. Advancements in the field of catalysis and energy production have 
already marched in the right direction regarding nanotechnology. Sustainable energy 
harvesting technologies, which are operational with functional nanomaterials such as 
fuel cells, supercapacitors, solar cells, rechargeable batteries, and energy conversion 
and storage devices, are attracting wide attention from researchers. Nanotechnology Introduction 3 
FIGURE 1.1 The strategy of nanomaterials for sustainable energy key challenge areas. 
mainly focuses on offering feasible solutions for electrical power generation as well as 
catalysis, which are majorly contributing to sustainable energy. In addition, functional 
nanomaterials are being used in fabricating solar films, green coatings, high-efficiency 
fuels, and sensor devices. Furthermore, advancements in technologies by employing 
functional nanomaterials will make an immediate and improved influence on eco￾nomic growth, the environment, and better quality of life across improved processes 
and products. Figure 1.1 represents the strategy of functional nanomaterials that may 
be used for key challenging areas. 
1.2 FUNCTIONAL NANOMATERIALS 
The behavior of materials at atomic, molecular, and macromolecular scales signifi￾cantly differ from their corresponding larger scale is referred to as the distinguishing 
property of nanomaterials. Nanotechnology is a multidisciplinary area that involves 
the synthesis, characterization, and modulation of the properties from either the atomic 
or molecular level. Nanotechnology is principally the exploitation of functional materi￾als with at least one dimension measuring less than 100 nanometers (nm). By tuning 
the size, shape, and constituent particles/molecules, the resultant functional nanoma￾terials do display distinctive physical, as well as chemical, properties. Metal, metal 
oxides, carbon-based, and quantum dots are the main studied categories of functional 
nanomaterials. Moreover, it is the high surface-to-volume ratio aroused from the 
nanosized particles that are responsible for the active surface area and, subsequently, 
their superior surface reactivity. Such a property is highly resourceful concerning 
the dematerialization process associated with the energy transition toward renewable 
energy sources. Due to their nanoscale size, they exhibit significantly enhanced elec￾tronic, physical, and chemical properties, and nanotechnology is particularly focus￾ing on these aspects to harvest these exceptional properties of nanomaterials in terms 
of applications in various fields such as medicine, catalysis, sustainable energy, and 
electronics. By understanding all these unique properties, researchers could be able to 
focus on controlling the nanostructures and devices at the atomic, as well as molecular, 
level. Thereby, novel technological outputs are coming and fulfilling the various needs.  
4 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
1.2.1 classIFIcaTIon baseD on DImensIonalITy 
In general, materials can be classified into natural and artificial materials, organic-, 
mineral-, and living matter come under natural materials, and materials that are man￾ufactured by synthetic procedures are referred to as artificial materials. Regarding 
the nanomaterials, most advancements arose through the size effect which is in the 
form of bulk to the nanoscale. Prevalent methods are widely accessible to produce 
multidimensional materials with disparate properties to boost boundary performance. 
Classification of nanomaterials can be made according to their morphology as zero￾dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), and three-dimen￾sional (3D). Our views in this chapter can steer the essential progress in developing 
functional nanomaterials with various properties for sustainable energy applications. 
“Functional materials” can be defined in several ways; the utmost suitable statement 
for functional nanomaterials is the development and study of novel nanomaterials and 
their assembly into multifunctional structures and devices for their application in key 
technological areas (Poh et al., 2018). Figure 1.2 depicts the schematic illustration of 
the different nanostructured materials based on their structural complexity. 
Zero-dimensional: In  0D nanomaterials, all the dimensions exist within the 
nanoscale range. Often, 0D nanomaterials are spherical nanoparticles (NPs) such as 
gold, silver, and platinum NPs in size with a diameter of 1–50 nm. 
FIGURE 1.2 Schematic illustration of the different nanostructured materials based on their 
structural complexity with examples of each category: zero- (OD), one- (1D), two- (2D), and 
three-dimensional (3D).  
Introduction 5 
One-dimensional: In  1D nanomaterials, one dimension is in the nanoscale 
range, meaning one dimension is in the range of 1–100 nm and the other two 
dimensions can be macroscale. Nanotubes, nanorods, and nanowires are examples 
of 1D materials. 
Two-dimensional: In 2D nanomaterials (2D), two dimensions are in the nanoscale 
range and one dimension is in the macroscale range. This class exhibits nanosheets, 
thin-film multilayers, and nano-thin-film-like shapes. In other words, by maintain￾ing a thickness in a nanoscale 2D material’s area can be several square meters. Some 
examples are graphene, nanolayers, and nano-coatings. 
Three-dimensional: Three-dimensional nanomaterials are materials that do not 
have dimensions in the nanoscale, and all the dimensions are confined to the mac￾roscale only. In this category, bulk materials, nanocolloids, and bunches of nanow￾ires, as well as multilayers can be included. It is observed that these 3D materials 
have three arbitrary dimensions outside 100 nm. Besides, in 3D materials, electrons 
move freely within all dimensions since they are fully localized. 
1.2.2 classIFIcaTIon baseD on elecTron conFInemenT 
The term quantum confinement is the spatial confinement of electron-hole pairs 
in one or more dimensions within a material. The energy levels of electrons will 
be not uninterrupted, similar to that of bulk materials, whereas the energy lev￾els of the electrons will be discrete. Because of the detention of the electronic 
wave function, they become a discrete set of energy levels to the physical dimen￾sions of the particles as shown in Figure 1.3. The main cause for quantum confine￾ment is when the physical dimension of the potentials is close to the de Broglie 
wavelength and leads to discrete energy levels. This quantum confinement effect 
can be categorized into three types, 1D confinement (motion is not confined in 
two dimensions), or quantum wells; 2D confinement (motion is not confined 
in one dimension), or quantum wire; and 3D confinement (motion is confined 
in all dimensions (Edvinsson, 2018). 
Based on the quantum confinement effect, an electron–hole pair is generated in 
the bulk lattice during the transfer of an electron from valence bands to conduction 
bands. This process brought the physical partition in between the electron and hole 
pair, and it is described as the exciton Bohr radius (rb). The Bohr radius is so sensi￾tive to the configuration of the nanomaterials, especially semiconductors. The den￾sity of electron states in 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D materials is shown in Figure 1.4, where 
0D nanomaterials have well-defined and quantized energy levels. The quantum con￾finement effect for 0D nanomaterials (quantum dots) can be assessed by using a 
simple effective-mass approximation model. By using the Schrödinger equation, it is 
feasible to envisage and solve the confined energy level for nanomaterials. Besides, 
in 0D materials, the diameter of nanocrystal (L) is in the same order of magnitude 
as the Bohr radius, which is responsible for the quantum confinement of the exci￾ton. This means, if the Bohr radius is very small, discrete energy levels will arise 
from the quantum confinement of the exciton. Furthermore, the inclusion/exclusion 
of a single atom will lead to a substantial transformation over the dimension of the  
 
6 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 1.3 Schematic representation of energy band structures in the atom, bulk 
semiconductor, and quantum nanostructure. 
nanocrystal as well as the bandgap. The discrete energy (En) for different nanomate￾rials can be defined by Equation 1.1. 
2 2 ép h ù 2 2 2 forD 0 : En = ê 2 ú(nx + ny + nz ) (1.1), 
ë û 2mL
where h is Planck’s constant, m is electron mass, L is the diameter of the nanocrystal, 
and n is dimensional coordinates. The 1D materials do exhibit in the nanoscale in 
two dimensions. According to the quantum confinement effect, the discrete energy 
for 1D materials can be defined from the following equation: 
2 2 ép h ù 2 2 forD 1 : E = n + n n ê 2mL2 ú( x y ) (1.2) ë û
The 2D materials do exhibit in nanoscale in only one dimension. This means that 
electrons are allowed to move in only one direction, and their free movement to the 
associated dimensions is restricted. Hence, it is the characteristic of 2D materials  
 
Introduction 7 
FIGURE 1.4 Schematic representation of the broken symmetry and functional form of the 
density of states in 1D, 2D, and 3D confined materials. 
that usually the length is higher than the width. In 2D materials, electrons will also 
undergo confinement as well as delocalization; hence, based on the quantum con￾finement effect, the discrete energy for 2D nanomaterials can be defined from the 
Equation 1.3: 
2 2 ép h ù 2 forD 2 : E n = ê ( ) 2 ú nx (1.3) ë û 2mL
1.2.3 sIze anD shape conTrol oF nanomaTerIals 
The preparation of functional nanomaterials has fascinated rigorous consideration not 
only for underlying scientific interest but also for their technological applications. In 
this regard, producing mono-dispersed nanomaterials with controlled size and/or shape 
are key factors, since their physical, as well as chemical, properties depend firmly on 
the particle size and shape (Asaumi, Rey, Vogel, Nakamura, & Fujii, 2020). In gen￾eral, nanomaterials’ physical, chemical, and biological properties will be different 
in individual atoms or molecules or the corresponding bulk materials. The physical 
shape is the determinant factor for constraining the passage of electrons, holes, exci￾tons, phonons, and plasmons, which have great control over the physical properties of 
functional materials. For instance, the change in color and shape of the nanomateri￾als aroused from the fluctuations in energy levels and its corresponding quantum con￾finement effect. Generally, metal-based, as well as metal oxide-based, nanomaterials 
are acquired mostly via bottom-up preparation routes in which researchers have the 8 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
control to tune the size and shape of the resultant materials. Moreover, the synthesis of 
well-defined nanomaterials has constantly engrossed wide research attention in various 
fields of basic science and technology aspects, particularly for utilizing them in poten￾tial applications, especially towards sustainable energy applications. Besides, to harvest 
better efficiency in terms of application point of view, precise control over nanomateri￾als’ size and shape is required to boost their assets. In addition to the size and shape, 
the following two factors will be more useful in judging the efficiency: (1) the inherent 
nature of active sites, such as facets of the nanomaterials, and (2) the reachable active 
sites, represented from the specific surface area of the nanomaterials. Nanomaterials of 
different shapes have different crystallographic facets and have a different fraction of 
surface atoms on their corners and edges, which makes it interesting to study the effect 
of nanomaterials’ shape on the catalytic activity of various organic and inorganic reac￾tions. Therefore, while designing and synthesizing the functional nanomaterials, the 
previously mentioned two aspects get the priority in determining the final morphology. 
Besides, exploring the well-defined nanomaterial system would reveal the fundamental 
questions to be answered to improve efficiency. Enough contribution has been already 
made by researchers for improving the properties of the nanomaterials in terms of tun￾ing their size and shape over the past decades. Nanomaterials with several morpholo￾gies, such as spheres, cubes, octahedrons, triangles, tetrahedrons, rods/wires, sheets, 
and so forth, have been successfully prepared at various stages. 
1.3 METAL AND METAL-FREE NANOMATERIALS 
Metal nanomaterials which are derived by reducing the corresponding metallic ions 
have been in contemporary research for recent decades, principally due to their 
exceptional plasmonic properties and promising technological proposals. Figure 1.5 
depicts the application fields of nanomaterials. Several industrial reactions do involve 
either metal or metal oxides as catalysts for various advantageous points of view. 
However, their use is limited on the industrial scale due to their high cost, predispo￾sition to gas poisoning, and harmful consequences for the ecosystem. In this regard, 
the need for metal-free nanomaterials comes into the picture, and they must be 
widely available, environmentally adequate, and corrosion-resistant and have a high 
active surface area (Lu et al., 2021). Recently, various carbon nanomaterials evolv￾ing as metal-free alternatives have been actively engaged in cost-effective industrial 
catalytic reactions. In general, the final size and morphology of the metal nanostruc￾tures rely on their synthetic methods as well as stabilizer matrices. In this context, 
metal nanomaterials such as gold (Au), silver (Ag), platinum (Pt), and palladium (Pd) 
are of specific importance owing to their finite band gap between the conduction and 
valence band, where electrons can freely move between them. The freely moving 
electrons/oscillation of the electrons is responsible for the unique behavior of metal 
nanomaterials, referred to as surface plasmon resonance, and it is highly sensitive 
to the metal nanomaterials’ size and shape. Another fascinating property of metal 
nanomaterials is their color, and it is determined by a combination of the parameters, 
such as the nanocrystals’ size and shape and refractive index of the medium. 
When metal/metal-free nanomaterials are being used as catalysts, they should 
be enriched with surface active sites that are essential for the analyte’s adsorption, Introduction 9 
FIGURE 1.5 Application fields of nanomaterials. 
bond-formation, bond breaking, and finally desorption of the product from the cata￾lyst’s surface. Apart from this, exceptional operational steadiness should be there 
throughout the catalytic process to enable efficient completion of the reaction. For 
instance, Pt, Au, and ruthenium (Ru) nanomaterials are used as cathode materials in 
the fuel cell application to speed up oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Meanwhile, 
metal oxides are extensively studied for the hydrogenation and dehydrogenation pro￾cesses. However, as mentioned earlier, the metal-based catalysts (both metal and 
metal-oxide nanomaterials) habitually suffer from various limitations, such as being 
expensive, exercising poor judgment, having low sturdiness, and having adverse 
effects on the ecosystem through the discharging effluents. To overcome these limi￾tations, researchers are exploring nanomaterials owing to their abundance and their 
eco-friendly, unique physiochemical properties and have found that carbon-based 
nanomaterials are a more suitable alternative to use as metal-free catalysts. 
The eminent metal-free catalysts are carbon-based nanomaterials such as fuller￾enes, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene nanosheets, graphitic carbon nitride, and 10 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 1.6 Graphical representation of the foreseen major avenues to organic photoca￾talysis by metal-free 2D materials. The figure was taken from the following article: https:// 
pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acsnano.1c00627 with the granted permission from ACS 
Publications. 
Source: Rosso et al. (2021) 
other graphene-like materials, there are several strategies demonstrated to tailor the 
efficiency of the metal-free nanomaterials. For instance, Rosso et  al. (2021) have 
proposed the major avenues to organic photocatalysis by metal-free 2D materials 
as shown in Figure 1.6. Besides, doping the heteroatoms such as nitrogen (N), fluo￾rine (F), and sulfur (S) will be highly useful in tuning the electronic transport and 
chemical reactivity of the metal-free materials. Furthermore, metal-free catalysts are 
widely being used in energy and environmental applications. However, metal-free 
catalysts are less explored in chemical synthesis and sustainable energy applications. 
1.4 CARBON-BASED NANOMATERIALS 
Carbon has been the most valuable material in human civilizations, science, and 
technological developments (Hu et al., 2019). So far, a diverse range of carbon mate￾rials like fullerenes, CNTs, carbon nanofibers (CNFs), graphene, graphene oxides, 
nanodiamonds, mesoporous carbon, carbon nanohorns, and onion-like carbon are 
availed and offer new opportunities for the development of highly active carbon￾based catalyst (Bazaka, Jacob, & Ostrikov, 2016; Gong, Liu, Li, Yu, & Teoh, 2016). 
Because the carbon materials tendered the highly active specific surface area, high 
conductivity, tunable wettability, and well-balanced pores, the distribution proper￾ties offer improved catalytic properties. The structure of carbon nanomaterials is 
shown in Figure 1.7. Herewith, we highlight recent achievements and progress of car￾bon material–based metal-free electrocatalysts material for sustainable energy appli￾cations like fuel cells, metal–air batteries, supercapacitors, solar cells, and the like. Introduction 11 
Accordingly, substantial modification of carbon materials has recently been directed 
toward the development of metal-free carbon nanomaterials for various catalytic 
processes, involving either oxidation or reduction reactions. High electroactive cata￾lyst materials are encompassed in precious metals, and metal-oxide nanomaterials 
are most utilized. However, the carbon nanomaterials are replaced by the precious 
metal-based electrode process like their high price, scarcity, and limited commer￾cial applications. The advantage of carbon materials was major earth-abundant, eco￾friendly, biocompatible, catalytically active, and durable. The conventional metal 
catalysts were combined with carbon, and they showed better catalytic activities 
compared to pristine metal catalysts. The carbon–metal (C-M) composition displays 
a wide range of accessibility and tunability due to their rich surface chemistries 
and lack of metal dissolution and poisoning properties. The combination of carbon 
nanofibers with electroactive metal nanoparticles has demonstrated profound elec￾trocatalytic activities due to the large surface area and high electrical conductivity. 
FIGURE 1.7 Structure of carbon nanomaterials: Graphite, diamond, fullerene, carbon 
nanotubes, graphene sheet, carbon hybrid materials. 12 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
The ORR in fuel cell (FC) applications is the most hopeful way for the energy con￾version method. The electrocatalyst efficiency can be controlled by the porosity, 
chemical, and electronic environments of the catalysts. And their important elec￾trochemical parameters like onset potential, durability, and tolerance toward anode 
fuels properties indicate their capability in commercial purposes. In particular, the 
carbon-based heteroatom-doped electrocatalysts exhibit improved ORR activity in 
an alkaline medium, paving the way for the development of alkaline fuel cells, as 
well as providing long-time durability. The characteristic ORR occurs at two steps 
either through a four-electron or through two-electron transfer. Among, the 4-e- and 
2-e- have proceeded highly efficient and water as the final product and less efficient 
and hydroperoxide ions as intermediates, respectively. Further, the nitrogen-doped 
different dimensional carbon (1D and 2D) nanomaterials have emerged as the most 
promising catalysts, normally the N-doped carbon (1D and 2D) nanomaterials facili￾tate the surface O2 chemisorption/activation which improves their profound ORR 
catalytic performance. In addition, N-doped single or multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(N-CNTs) were shown their enhanced electrocatalytic ORR activity. The intrinsic 
electrocatalytic ORR activity we observed at different N-containing-group-doped 
CNTs. The real nature of the active sites in N-doped carbon nanomaterials remains 
unclear, it is generally accepted that pyridine and pyrrole nitrogen atoms contribute 
differently to the ORR. 
1.5 NANOCOMPOSITES 
The word Nanocomposites is used for materials consisting of a minimum of two 
nanoscale materials in single phases in order of 100 nm or less. The chemical and 
physical properties of matter can change significantly when the size changes from 
the macro- to the microscale and then from the micro- to the nanoscale level. An 
important feature of a nanocomposite is the large ratio of surface area to volume 
higher than the pristine component phases. The advantage of nanoscience and tech￾nology we can create composites with well-controlled structures on the nanometer 
scale, these nanostructures have large specific surface areas that could offer a fea￾sible platform for catalysis, sensing, and FC applications. A diverse synthetic meth￾odology has been reported for nanocomposite making with various sizes, shapes, 
and compositions. Preceding reports confirm that the inorganic nanomaterials are 
combined with organic materials (polymer or carbon) to prepare a diverse range of 
nanocomposite materials so for. These nanocomposites have received great attention 
and solid support in the field of energy conversion, catalysis, and sensors due to their 
intriguing optical and catalytic properties. The advantage of these nanocomposites 
is that the organic nanomaterial acts as a host material for inorganic nanoparticles 
with high specific surface areas and leads to the enhanced durability properties of 
the nanocomposite. Another advantage of nanocomposite materials is it is manda￾tory to develop facile, rapid, and low-cost synthetic methods for the nanocompos￾ites (inorganic–organic) from the technological point of view. An important task in 
this high-performance nanocomposite’s synthesis is the uniform particle size, size 
distribution, and dispersity. This ensures that the synthetic methodologies like one￾pot (chemical) and mixing (physical) will not affect the desired nanoparticles’ size, Introduction 13 
uniform distribution, aggregation, and uneven properties of the nanocomposite. The 
major advantage of nanocomposites (inorganic–organic) is that they offer both high 
mass transport and electron transfer as a consequence of their enhanced electrocata￾lytic properties. 
1.6 NANOMATERIALS IN ELECTROCHEMISTRY 
Electrochemistry is an important research branch in chemistry; it deals with the 
interrelation of electrical and chemical effects. Electrochemistry is the study of 
reaction and discussion of the composition of the electrode and electrolyte/solution 
interface. The aforesaid system is referred to as an “electrochemical cell”; there are 
two different types of electrochemical processes that can occur at an electrode sur￾face. The first one is Faradaic processes, which are denoted as the charge trans￾fer reactions occurring at the electrode/electrolyte interface that are governed by 
Faraday’s first law. The second one is non-Faradaic processes; thermodynamically 
or kinetically unfavorable, the adsorption and desorption reactions can occur at elec￾trode/electrolyte interface without any charge passes. Faraday’s first law states that, 
during electrolysis, the produced electrical current is proportional to the quantity 
of a chemical species. The electrode process occurs within the double layer and 
generates the charge unbalance in the electrode/electrolyte interface. The electro￾chemistry processes depend on the potential of the electrode, which is related to the 
thermodynamics and kinetics of electrode reactions. Furthermore, the influence of 
the interfacial potential difference gives an important way to use external control on 
an electrode reaction. The electrochemistry technique is the most valuable, sensitive, 
informative, and useful analytical technique in the energy and sensor research field. 
FC and electroanalytical chemistry techniques play an important role in humans’ 
daily life applications. Most of the techniques, such as batteries, electrocatalysis, 
and electrochemical sensors, are very attractive for point-of-care applications. In 
particular, the recent advances in nanoscience and technology in the electrochemi￾cal research area will undoubtedly enlarge the possibility of the profound electro￾chemical process. Various functional nanomaterials and their usage in sustainable 
electrochemistry applications are shown in Figure 1.8. The electrodeposition in the 
facile quick method to prepare the readily available electrodes, as mentioned earlier, 
is electroplating or electrolytic deposition. In this technique, the applied electrical 
current is a reducing agent for metal ions; as a result, the very thin film formed on 
the conductive surface. Electrodeposition is the most promising technology, which 
involves surface phenomena, solid-state processes, and processes occurring in the 
liquid state, thereby drawing on many scientific disciplines. However, electrochem￾istry is not a simple process, but it has many applications in the area of energy pro￾duction and sensor fields. 
1.7 SUSTAINABLE ENERGY APPLICATIONS 
In sustainable energy development, energy storage plays a vital role, and it is often 
dependent on inconsistent and impulsive renewable energy sources, such as wind 
and solar, in terms of constant power supply they are not reliable. In the quest to 14 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 1.8 Various functional nanomaterials and their usage in sustainable electrochemistry 
applications. 
make those sources reliable, technological advancements must be there to store 
up the energy surplus when the sources are consistent and distribute when energy 
manufacture is minimal. Such technological advancement should be accompanied 
by consistency, high accomplishment, competence, large-scale production, and sus￾tainability. Based on chemical, electrochemical, and mechanical, as well as ther￾mal modes, various energy storage systems have been proposed in recent decades 
in which batteries and supercapacitors are highly attractive for their portability. In 
this regard, hydrogen is the most suitable alternative fuel for fossil fuels due to its 
high abundance; carbon-free chemical energy carrier emits water and burned with 
oxygen, and the chemical energy density is 142 MJ. Kg. However, to be considered, 
hydrogen must be produced in a sustainable way, such as through water-splitting and 
photo- and electrocatalytic reactions, by avoiding the production of steam-reforming 
reactions. For technological advancements, a core-level understanding of electroca￾talysis and electrochemical reactions at the electrode surface is required. Introduction 15 
In this context, sustainability goals, such as social equity, sanitization, economy, pub￾lic health, security, and a better environment, can be achieved if we could produce inex￾pensive and sustainable electricity and fuels to fulfill global energy demands. In the past, 
human society witnessed and addressed several challenges, such as control over nuclear 
power, space expeditions, and so on. All these achievements involved a group of intel￾lectuals, but sustainable energy development is different; it requires the active participa￾tion of civilians and researchers together to bring about technological advancements. 
Since energy is a crisis that goes beyond a country’s borders and eventually influences 
the whole human society. Hence, sustainable energy development is of prime impor￾tance and is referred to as “development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs” (Jacobs, 2000). 
Figure 1.9 depicts the pictorial representation of the advantages of sustainable energy in 
everyday life. Sustainable energy can help human society in the following ways: (a) boost 
access to drinking water and sanitization facilities; (b) lower the emission of water, land, 
and air pollutants; (c) decrease the number of deaths and illnesses related to pollution; 
(d) diminish poverty, violence, and inequity; (e) expand the environmental impact of 
transportation systems; and (f) enhances access to clean cooking fuels and technologies. 
FIGURE 1.9 Pictorial representation of the advantages of sustainable energy in everyday 
life.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
To achieve sustainable energy applications through nanomaterials, researchers 
should overcome issues such as the complexity of the energy sector, energy produc￾tion, transformation, distribution, storage, and usage. The eminent nanotechnological 
advancements would offer feasible solutions to overcome all these issues although 
with contrasting effects. The following are a few examples of how sustainable energy 
applications can be developed with the aid of nanomaterials/nanotechnology: 
a.	 Weight reduction: with the increased high volume surface ratio, nanomate￾rials’ weight can be reduced through optimization function; consequently, 
nanotechnology will help to make airplanes and vehicles out of optimized 
plastics or metals with CNTs; thereby, fuel consumption can be abridged. 
b.	 Organic light-emitting diodes: traditional light bulbs do offer only 5% of 
energy to light conversion, whereas by implementing nanolayers of plastic 
and organic pigments, the conversion rate can be tuned up to 50%. 
c.	 Carbon-based nanomaterials: in the automobile industry, by having control 
over the strength and rolling resistance of the tires, fuel savings of up to 
10% can be reached, and carbon black nanomaterials have recently been 
used in the modern automobile industries. 
d.	 Self-cleaning nanoscale layers: installing such surfaces would benefit in 
saving energy and water because frequent cleaning is not required. 
e.	 Nanomaterials for automobiles and industries: nano lubricants, nanoflow 
agents, and nano-insulating materials are finding wide applicability in the 
automobile, industry, and construction fields, respectively. 
f.	 Device fabrication for energy harvesting: different types of nanomaterials 
improve the efficiency of photovoltaic devices, lightweight wind turbine 
blades, lithium-ion batteries, fuel cells, and catalytic converters in vehicles, 
thereby improving energy harvesting, conversion, storage, distribution, and 
usage. 
1.7.1 hybrID nanomaTerIals For susTaInable energy applIcaTIons 
A foremost task in sustainable energy conversion is the advancement of effective 
photo(electro)/electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxy￾gen evolution reaction (OER; M. Yan, Jiang, Yang, He, & Huang, 2020). Functional 
nanomaterials integrated from the inorganic−organic hybrids have proven their 
encouraging possibility to meet the obscure obligations for photo- and electrocataly￾sis. The coherent synthesis of functional nanomaterials with well-defined structures 
has been intensively examined due to the extraordinary properties and captivating 
applications of the resultant materials. In recent times, inorganic−organic hybrids 
have been widely emerging as starting materials for preparing distinct hybrid nano￾materials, in which, inorganic and organic species with nano/molecule/atom-scale 
distribution serve as self-templates and sacrificial agents, respectively, leading mate￾rials with tunable morphologies, band gaps, defects, and spatial arrangements. (Jena, 
2020; Shahbazi Farahani et al., 2022; Y. Yu, Shi, & Zhang, 2018; Zhang et al., 2022) 
Synthesizing diverse hybrid nanomaterials with unusual morphologies becomes fea￾sible with the aid of widely available hybrid precursors and abundant transformation  
Introduction 17 
tools. Hybrid nanomaterials, especially in the photo- and electrocatalytic processes, 
do exhibit excellent performance owing to improved photon adsorption, facilitated 
electron transport, increased active sites, and enhanced intrinsic activity. In general 
hybrid nanomaterials contain inorganic elements that work for chemical reactions 
and organic elements that work for controlling the active sites (Goodman, Zhou, & 
Cargnello, 2020). Furthermore, the large-scale positioning of many types of fuel 
cells and electrolyzers for sustainable energy applications is presently embarrassing 
because of the deficiency of sustainable catalysts. In this regard, prominent hetero￾atom-doped carbon catalysts have been developed for reactions in fuel cells and 
water electrolyzers via various synthetic strategies. There is a substantial challenge 
to the rational design of such hybrid nanomaterials to increase reaction selectivity. 
Besides, by understanding the key role of these hybrid nanomaterials, structural and 
mechanistic characterization plays a vital role. 
1.7.2 hybrID TechnologIes For harvesTIng The susTaInabIlITy 
Sustainable social and economic advancement trusts on novel nanotechnologies 
that offer maximum efficiency at a marginal environmental cost. (Liu et al., 2010) 
However, it is very tricky to apply sustainable approaches across the entire life cycle 
of nanomaterials/nanotechnologies, from design and synthesis to deployment and 
clearance (Neurock, 2010; Tarafder et al., 2020). Catalysis is at the core of many sus￾tainable energy conversion devices and advanced technologies (Ahmed et al., 2022; 
Hu et al., 2019). For instance, water electrolysis can be reflected as a green and prom￾ising technology to produce green hydrogen, and it plays a vital role in advanced 
energy technologies, such as solar fuel production, supercapacitors, metal–air batter￾ies, and so on. Hence, the commercialization of water electrolysis technology needs 
stable, efficient, and cost-effective electrode materials, as well as the construction of 
green hydrogen; a fed fuel cell device needs hybridization between OER and ORR 
(X. Li, Liu, & Xiang, 2022) to obtain the hydrogen required to run the fuel cell from 
a sustainable source, that is, water. Such hybrid technology/device opens the pathway 
for the development of electrode materials based on nonprecious metal catalysts as 
well as metal-free catalysts, they mainly overcome sustainability issues. (L. Li et al., 
2017) Furthermore, OER and ORR are particularly the most difficult ones to carry 
out and the most responsible for the performance of water electrolyzers and fuel 
cells, respectively. Thus, probing for competent, as well as sustainable, catalysts for 
these two reactions is of dominant importance to make these energy systems effi￾cient and generally available. 
The real success of developing sustainable nanomaterials should find the techno￾logical advancements in terms of nanotechnology-based products and processes in 
various industrial sectors as well as everyday needs (Aftab et al., 2020; Jastrzębska & 
Vasilchenko, 2021). Besides, the adoption of sustainable nano-engineering strategies 
can reduce the environmental impacts of products and processes by permitting more 
resourceful use of raw materials and reducing energy consumption, emissions, and 
leftovers (W. Yu, Wang, Park, & Fang, 2020). In this regard, sustainable nanoar￾rays, nanoparticle contrast agents for in vivo imaging, biocompatible implant mate￾rials, and drug delivery are widely used in the healthcare sector. The improvement  
18 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 1.10 Various energy applications harvest sustainability. 
in the sustainability of healthcare systems not only reduces the cost but will also 
lead to the latent environmental benefits in terms of bringing the pharmaceutical 
residues down. In addition, sustainable nanoscale carriers can be employed as con￾trolled delivery systems for fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides in the agriculture 
sector. Also, hybrid sensor devices based on sustainable nanomaterials are in use to 
monitor the crops, soil, and climatic condition thereby resources properly utilized to 
raise the crop yields. In the food and packaging sectors, sustainable nanomaterials￾based devices are employed for monitoring the food quality, moisture, oxygen, and 
presence of microorganisms. In addition, antimicrobial coatings and biodegradable 
materials are made from sustainable nanomaterials, thereby food quality and safety 
in packaging are ensured (Masi, Bollella, Riedel, Lisdat, & Katz, 2020). In lithium￾ion batteries, the use of nanomaterials provides shorter diffusion paths for lithium 
ions, leading to higher charge/discharge rates and much greater energy densities. 
Besides, lithium ions are also better lodged in the electrode lattice, ensuring the 
durability of the battery and bringing it fundamentally safer. Various energy applica￾tions harvesting sustainability are shown in Figure 1.10. 
1.8	 RECENT ADVANCEMENTS IN MATERIALS SCIENCE 
FOR SUSTAINABLE ENERGY APPLICATIONS 
Materials science has been contributing progressively to essential parts of our 
everyday lives with functional nanomaterials as well as their control over their Introduction 19 
specific synthesis. In particular, synthetic strategies and their optimization play 
a vital role in determining the assembly, crystallinity, particle size, morphology, 
porosity, texture, and surface area, along with other properties of materials as well. 
Regarding the sustainability of the nanomaterials, synthetic strategy, consistency 
in preparation, and economic aspects are also to be considered. In this regard, 
advancements in material science in terms of synthesis approaches play a funda￾mental role in achieving efficient sustainable nanomaterials for energy applica￾tions. Recently, several typical material design/architectures were explored, and 
their electro- and photocatalytic properties strongly depend on their design and 
execution. However, the prevalent use of fossil fuels is afflicted with the issues, 
such as the human era experiencing the ever-growing as well as complicated envi￾ronmental issues associated with unpredictable climate change which we are per￾ceiving now. Crude oil availability for the long term has become a very big question 
as well. Consequently, developing a library of sustainable nanomaterials to apply 
with sustainable energy sources is a need of contemporary research in materials 
science. For instance, the breakthrough in the development of sustainable materi￾als owing to defined sizes, shapes, porosities, crystalline phases, and structures 
is already reflected in various sustainable energy systems. However, a complete 
departure from fossil fuels is not possible for at least 15 to 20 years since they 
are the primary source of energy at present. In parallel, novel catalysts, as well 
as approaches, are in progress to manage the fossil fuel supply and to bring down 
its environmental issues. For instance, to promote green Hydrogen as a clean fuel 
that is produced sustainably for the mobility sector, hydrogen-blended compressed 
natural gas (HCNG) is emerging as an excellent interim technology for achiev￾ing emissions reduction and import substitution. Refueling of HCNG blends in 
vehicles can be performed with minimum modifications in the infrastructure that 
is currently under use for dispensing compressed natural gas (CNG). In addition to 
green hydrogen production, the approaches comprise desulfurization, isomeriza￾tion, alkylation, gas-to-liquid conversions, adsorption, carbon dioxide conversion, 
and water-gas shift, and all this strategic research needs sustainable, functional 
nanomaterials. Besides, the framework of the fuel cell design, membrane, and non￾precious metal catalyst development need to be considered. 
The quest for sustainable self-sufficient power sources for micro/nanosystems that 
can be used as sensors and monitoring electronic devices is always there in sustain￾able energy development. In this regard, nanogenerators for converting mechanical 
energy into electricity research are moving ahead. Considering the electrode materi￾als required for the Li-ion batteries, significant progress has been made to achieve 
functional nanomaterials with controlled porosity and structures on a large scale. 
Considering the green hydrogen production and its storage and efficient OER and 
ORR catalysts have been developed, both processes should be merged in a single 
platform to develop the kind of green hydrogen–fed fuel cell device for the proper 
utilization of the produced hydrogen from one of the compartments of the device. 
Furthermore, a solvent-free approach to making materials, referred to as mechano￾chemistry, has emerged as a feasible strategy for making functional nanomaterials; 
thereby, environmental consequences of the solvents can be avoided. (Muñoz￾Batista, Rodriguez-Padron, Puente-Santiago,  & Luque, 2018). MnO is one of the 20 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
key materials in electrochemical energy storage applications, but its usage is highly 
limited by its deprived electronic conductivity and a lack of environmentally benign 
synthesis. A recent study has proposed a steadfast strategy of confining MnO nanow￾ires in pipe-like carbon nanoreactors that exhibited high efficiency in sustainable 
electrochemical energy storage systems. (L. Li et al., 2017). Besides, in the develop￾ment of sustainable nanomaterials, the following strategies are being focused on a 
lot such as alloying noble metals with other sustainable elements, finding the suitable 
support materials for the noble metal catalysts, implementing noble metal–free cata￾lysts as well as metal-free catalysts, heteroatoms, and multi-element-doped carbon 
catalysts. Sustainable life cycles of carbon-based devices for electronics and energy 
applications are shown in Figure 1.11. 
FIGURE 1.11 Sustainable life cycles of carbon-based devices for electronics and energy 
applications. The figure was taken from the following article: https://pubs.acs.org/doi/10.1021/ 
acs.chemrev.5b00566 with the granted permission from ACS Publications under ACS 
AuthorChoice. 
Source: Bazaka, Jacob, & Ostrikov (2016) Introduction 21 
1.9 OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES 
There are opportunities for sustainable nanomaterials to contribute by strengthening 
industrial modernization and affordability, lowering the utilization of raw materials 
and energy, and boosting a fresher environment. The emerging nanotechnological 
advancements have their consequences on all industrial sectors, which include health￾care, agriculture food processing, transport, energy, water, and electronics. Concerning 
the long term, the currently available fossil fuels to meet energy and transport require￾ments and their wastes are unsustainable. In this regard, nanotechnology can pave the 
effective utilization of available resources through hybrid sustainable technologies, 
finding alternatives for precious materials with abundant ones. Thereby, a sustain￾able environment can be promised by lowering the emissions and consumption of 
nonrenewable natural resources. Any scientific revolution carries with it accompany￾ing risks. Nanomaterials’ exposure to the environment might occur during synthesis, 
carriage, storage, supply, custom, and recycling or their disposal. Moreover, exist￾ing precautionary measures may be inadequate concerning the hazards and exposure 
allied with nanomaterials. Hence, prompt action for framing necessary guidelines, 
measures, and nano-specific risk assessment tools is being developed. 
To meet future energy needs in a sustainable way, the following key areas have 
been identified: solar energy utilization, electrical energy storage, hydrogen production 
and storage, and catalysis for energy applications. But there is a huge gap that remains 
between the current science and the technological support to reach it. In addition to 
identifying the technological advancements, it is essential to create awareness among 
researchers and common people about the reality of the energy crisis. Such aware￾ness can assist in moving faster toward the changes needed for sustainable energy in 
the future. In this regard, the enactment of lithium-ion battery technology into elec￾tric and hybrid electric vehicles and portable electronic devices, such as smartphones, 
laptops, and tablets, makes a mandate for efficient, economic, and sustainable nano￾materials for energy storage applications. In the quest for sustainable nanomaterials, 
the economical aspect should be a decisive screening norm. However, longer reaction 
times and procedures and reproducibility issues should be overruled. Hence, rational 
design, control over nucleation and growth, and scalable and reproducible strategies 
are being developed. Furthermore, for the physiochemical characterizations of the pre￾pared nanomaterials, a local instrumentation facility is more important through which 
a better understanding and quick optimization of nanomaterials can be carried out. In 
addition to developing novel nanomaterials, the focus should be on inorganic–organic 
hybrid materials to boost synergism. Through multidisciplinary efforts from physics, 
chemistry, materials science, and chemical engineering, the development of sustain￾able nanomaterials for energy applications could open substantial scientific openings 
for the groundwork of sustainable nanomaterials with captivating performance soon. 
1.10 SUMMARY 
Nanomaterials and hybrid nanomaterials-based technologies have contributed to the 
growth of generous and sustainable activities by making facile and functional nano￾catalysts thereby increasing the use of natural resources and energy. We are nearing 22 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
an era in which functional nanomaterials can be integrated with unique, operational 
properties to contribute to sustainability through the development of cleaner, less 
wasteful production processes, and transport systems. In any form of sustainable 
energy harvesting, low-cost functional nanomaterials can be included to cut down 
the production cost, energy consumption, emissions, and effluents as well as develop 
effective and economic energy storage systems. While looking for sustainable nano￾materials, nano-specific assessment tools must be developed to track the entire life 
cycle of the nanomaterials which could bring the perfect balance between the econ￾omy and the environmental consequences. For instance, while implementing nano￾carriers for pesticides and herbicides in agriculture, we must learn how to control 
damaging insects without eradicating valuable populations, where control over the 
development of sustainable nanomaterials comes into the picture. Sustainable nano￾materials would bring the solution for energy, environmental and security issues 
aroused from the consumption of fossil fuels. Besides, the researchers must realize 
that engaging in sustainable development is not a constraint on innovation but rather 
is a challenge of creativity. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was partially supported by the Incheon National University Research 
Grant in 2016. RR acknowledges the Raja Ramanna Fellowship Scheme, 
Department of Atomic Energy, India. Financial support from IoE seed grant-II 
for new faculty (Scheme No. 6031 (B)) of Banaras Hindu University is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
REFERENCES 
Aftab, S., Shah, A., Nisar, J., Ashiq, M. N., Akhter, M. S., & Shah, A. H. (2020). Marketability 
prospects of microbial fuel cells for sustainable energy generation. Energy & Fuels, 34(8), 
9108–9136. doi:10.1021/acs.energyfuels.0c01766 
Ahmed, M. E., Nayek, A., Križan, A., Coutard, N., Morozan, A., Ghosh Dey, S., . . . Dey, A. 
(2022). A bidirectional bioinspired [FeFe]-hydrogenase model. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society, 144(8), 3614–3625. doi:10.1021/jacs.1c12605 
Asaumi, Y., Rey, M., Vogel, N., Nakamura, Y., & Fujii, S. (2020). Particle monolayer-stabilized 
light-sensitive liquid marbles from polypyrrole-coated microparticles. Langmuir, 36(10), 
2695–2706. doi:10.1021/acs.langmuir.0c00061 
Bazaka, K., Jacob, M. V.,  & Ostrikov, K. (2016). Sustainable life cycles of 
natural-precursor-derived nanocarbons. Chemical Reviews, 116(1), 163–214. doi:10.1021/ 
acs.chemrev.5b00566 
Edvinsson, T. (2018). Optical quantum confinement and photocatalytic properties in two-, 
one- and zero-dimensional nanostructures. Royal Society Open Science, 5(9), 180387. 
doi:10.1098/rsos.180387 
Gong, X., Liu, G., Li, Y., Yu, D. Y. W., & Teoh, W. Y. (2016). Functionalized-graphene com￾posites: Fabrication and applications in sustainable energy and environment. Chemistry of 
Materials, 28(22), 8082–8118. doi:10.1021/acs.chemmater.6b01447 
Goodman, E. D., Zhou, C., & Cargnello, M. (2020). Design of organic/inorganic hybrid cata￾lysts for energy and environmental applications. ACS Central Science, 6(11), 1916–1937. 
doi:10.1021/acscentsci.0c01046 Introduction 23 
Hu, C., Qu, J., Xiao, Y., Zhao, S., Chen, H., & Dai, L. (2019). Carbon nanomaterials for energy 
and biorelated catalysis: Recent advances and looking forward. ACS Central Science, 5(3), 
389–408. doi:10.1021/acscentsci.8b00714 
Huang, J., & Jiang, Y. (2019). Tailoring resource-efficient catalysts for sustainable energy 
and chemical processes. ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, 7(7), 6423–6423. 
doi:10.1021/acssuschemeng.9b01472 
Jacobs, M. (2000). Toward a sustainable future. Chemical  & Engineering News Archive, 
78(10), 5. doi:10.1021/cen-v078n010.p005 
Jastrzębska, A. M., & Vasilchenko, A. S. (2021). Smart and sustainable nanotechnological 
solutions in a battle against COVID-19 and beyond: A critical review. ACS Sustainable 
Chemistry & Engineering, 9(2), 601–622. doi:10.1021/acssuschemeng.0c06565 
Jena, P. (2020). Clusters and nanomaterials for sustainable energy. ACS Energy Letters, 5(2), 
428–429. doi:10.1021/acsenergylett.9b02687 
Li, L., Zhu, J., Niu, Y., Chen, Z., Liu, Y., Liu, S., . . . Jiang, J. (2017). Efficient production 
of coaxial core—shell MnO@Carbon nanopipes for sustainable electrochemical energy 
storage applications. ACS Sustainable Chemistry  & Engineering, 5(7), 6288–6296. 
doi:10.1021/acssuschemeng.7b01256 
Li, X., Liu, Y., & Xiang, Z. (2022). Dithiine bridged phthalocyanine-based covalent organic 
frameworks for highly efficient oxygen reduction reaction. The Journal of Physical 
Chemistry C, 126(8), 4008–4014. doi:10.1021/acs.jpcc.1c10846 
Liu, C.-J., Burghaus, U., Besenbacher, F., & Wang, Z. L. (2010). Preparation and character￾ization of nanomaterials for sustainable energy production. ACS Nano, 4(10), 5517–5526. 
doi:10.1021/nn102420c 
Lu, H., Tournet, J., Dastafkan, K., Liu, Y., Ng, Y. H., Karuturi, S. K., . . . Yin, Z. (2021). 
Noble-metal-free multicomponent nanointegration for sustainable energy conversion. 
Chemical Reviews. doi:10.1021/acs.chemrev.0c01328 
Masi, M., Bollella, P., Riedel, M., Lisdat, F., & Katz, E. (2020). Photobiofuel cell with sustain￾able energy generation based on micro/nanostructured electrode materials. ACS Applied 
Energy Materials, 3(10), 9543–9549. doi:10.1021/acsaem.0c02169 
Muñoz-Batista, M. J., Rodriguez-Padron, D., Puente-Santiago, A. R., & Luque, R. (2018). 
Mechanochemistry: Toward sustainable design of advanced nanomaterials for elec￾trochemical energy storage and catalytic applications. ACS Sustainable Chemistry  & 
Engineering, 6(8), 9530–9544. doi:10.1021/acssuschemeng.8b01716 
Neurock, M. (2010). Engineering molecular transformations for sustainable energy conver￾sion. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 49(21), 10183–10199. doi:10.1021/ 
ie101300c 
Poh, T. Y., Ali, N. A. T. B. M., Mac Aogáin, M., Kathawala, M. H., Setyawati, M. I., Ng, K. 
W., & Chotirmall, S. H. (2018). Inhaled nanomaterials and the respiratory microbiome: 
Clinical, immunological and toxicological perspectives. Particle and Fibre Toxicology, 
15(1), 46. doi:10.1186/s12989-018-0282-0 
Rosso, C., Filippini, G., Criado, A., Melchionna, M., Fornasiero, P.,  & Prato, M. (2021). 
Metal-free photocatalysis: Two-dimensional nanomaterial connection toward advanced 
organic synthesis. ACS Nano, 15(3), 3621–3630. doi:10.1021/acsnano.1c00627 
Shahbazi Farahani, F., Rahmanifar, M. S., Noori, A., El-Kady, M. F., Hassani, N., Neek￾Amal, M., .  .  . Mousavi, M. F. (2022). Trilayer metal—organic frameworks as multi￾functional electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage applications. Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, 144(8), 3411–3428. doi:10.1021/jacs.1c10963 
Tarafder, C., Daizy, M., Alam, M. M., Ali, M. R., Islam, M. J., Islam, R., . . . Khan, M. Z. H. 
(2020). Formulation of a hybrid nanofertilizer for slow and sustainable release of micronu￾trients. ACS Omega, 5(37), 23960–23966. doi:10.1021/acsomega.0c03233 
Turner, C. (2015). Review of chemistry of sustainable energy. Journal of Chemical Education, 
92(4), 601–602. doi:10.1021/ed5008298  
24 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Yan, M., Jiang, Q., Yang, L., He, H., & Huang, H. (2020). Three-dimensional ternary hybrid 
architectures constructed from graphene, MoS2, and graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets 
as efficient electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution. ACS Applied Energy Materials, 3(7), 
6880–6888. doi:10.1021/acsaem.0c00975 
Yan, Z.-F., Hao, Z.-P., & Lu, M. G. Q. (2010). Perspective on sustainable energy technologies 
in Asia and Pacific states. Energy & Fuels, 24(7), 3713–3714. doi:10.1021/ef100411b 
Yip, N. Y., Brogioli, D., Hamelers, H. V. M., & Nijmeijer, K. (2016). Salinity gradients for sus￾tainable energy: Primer, progress, and prospects. Environmental Science & Technology, 
50(22), 12072–12094. doi:10.1021/acs.est.6b03448 
Yu, W., Wang, T., Park, A.-H. A., & Fang, M. (2020). Toward sustainable energy and materi￾als: CO2 capture using microencapsulated sorbents. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry 
Research, 59(21), 9746–9759. doi:10.1021/acs.iecr.0c01065 
Yu, Y., Shi, Y., & Zhang, B. (2018). Synergetic transformation of solid inorganic—organic 
hybrids into advanced nanomaterials for catalytic water splitting. Accounts of Chemical 
Research, 51(7), 1711–1721. doi:10.1021/acs.accounts.8b00193 
Zhang, X., Cui, C., Chen, S., Meng, L., Zhao, H., Xu, F., & Yang, J. (2022). Adhesive iono￾hydrogels based on ionic liquid/water binary solvents with freezing tolerance for flex￾ible ionotronic devices. Chemistry of Materials, 34(3), 1065–1077. doi:10.1021/acs. 
chemmater.1c03386 DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-2 25 
2
2 Fuel Cells 
Engineered Nanomaterials 
for Improved Fuel 
Cell Performance and 
Power Generation 
Chandni Singh, Uday Pratap Azad, Ashish 
Kumar Singh and Sunil Kumar Singh 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
With the development of new technologies, new achievements and new ways of liv￾ing, the world has also proportionately suffered from several critical problems such 
as environmental pollution, energy crisis, weather irregularity and so on. One of the 
major problems that the world has experienced, and which will be further aggravated 
in the near future, is the depletion of energy sources. Energy sources that are envi￾ronmentally friendly reduce pollution in a greener way. In order to overcome this 
problem, the concept of fuel cells emerged. 
Fuel Cell: A fuel cell is an electrochemical device that converts chemical energy 
into electrical energy via a redox reaction. It oxidizes fuel at the anode and reduces 
oxygen from air at the cathode to produce electricity (Vielstich et al., 2003). 
Fuel cells mainly consist of three parts, namely, an anode, a cathode and an elec￾trolyte. At the anode, the oxidation of fuel takes place whose e− are transferred to the 
cathode, where it reduces half of the O2, and the ions of fuel are passed to electrolyte 
and release water, electricity and heat (Figure 2.1). 
Redox reaction occurring in the fuel cell: 
+ ­ H2 ® 2H + 2e a( node) 
(12 O + 2H+ + 2e ) ­ ® H O cathode 2 2 ( ) 
H2 + (1 2)O2 ® H O2 + Wele + Qheat (overall reaction) 
The concept of fuel cells as energy sources is a greener approach as it is quiet 
and static, showing higher thermodynamic efficiency and providing excellent load 
response and a wide range of applications (Sharaf et al., 2014). Mainly fuel cells are 26 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 2.1 Schematic representation of fuel cell. 
classified into the following types: (1) proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEM￾FCs), including direct methanol fuel cells; (2) alkaline fuel cells; (3) phosphoric 
acid fuel cells; (4) molten carbonate fuel cells; (v) solid oxide fuel cells; and (6) mi￾crobial fuel cells (Sammes, 2006; Blomen & Mugerwa, 1993; Mench, 2008; Herper, 
2008; Srinivasan, 2006; Herman et al., 2005). Disadvantages of the fuel cells are 
that they suffer mainly from the expensive platinum catalyst, long-term durability 
and stability issues, the high investment cost-per-kW and the relatively large system 
size and weight (Sharaf et al., 2014) 
To overcome the problems faced to some extent, while using fuel cells, nanotech￾nology is introduced. Therefore, recent developments were undertaken for the synthe￾sis of nanoparticles that led to the formation of various monodisperse nanoparticles 
with controlled composition interparticle interactions, their shape and size (Xia et al., 
2008). To increase the production of current, the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) 
should be enhanced at the cathode. The ORR occurs in the cathode part of the fuel cell, 
and it can be illustrated by the following reaction (Wang et al., 2016). 
In acidic electrolytes: two pathways are adopted for ORR: 
1. 4-e– pathway 
O2 + 4H+ + 4e­ ® 2H2O
2. 2-e– pathway 
O + 2H+ + 2e 2
­ ® H2O2
H O + 2H+ + 2e 2 2
­ ® 2H O2­ ­
­ ­ ­
­ ­ ­
 
 
Fuel Cells 27 
In alkaline electrolytes: two possible pathways for ORR: 
1. 4-e– pathway 
O2 + H2O + 4e ® 4OH
2. 2-e– pathway 
O2 + H2	 
O + 2e ® HO 2 + OH
HO	 2 2 + H O + 2e ® 3OH
In these electrolytes, 4-e– pathways follow direct 4-e– reduction of O2 to form 
H2O in an acidic solution or OH– in basic solutions. Two-e– pathways follow 2-e– 
reductions of O2 to form H2O2 in an acidic solution or HO2- in basic solution, first, 
and then another 2-e– gives H2O or OH–. 
To enhance the ORR at the cathode, electrocatalysts are employed that are eco￾friendly, give wide active sites for reaction, are resistant to corrosion and have high 
conductivity. 
2.2	 VARIOUS TYPES OF NANOMATERIALS USED AS 
ELECTROCATALYST FOR BOOSTING ORR IN THE CATHODE 
2.2.1 noble meTal-baseD nano-elecTrocaTalysT For orr 
The following are some noble metal–based nanomaterials for boosting the ORR in 
the cathode of a fuel cell. 
During the ORR process, the surface of Pt was shielded by the electrolyte or 
hydroxyl ion layer, due to which the active sites of Pt surface get decreased and 
its catalytic efficiency is also reduced (Markovic et al., 1995). So, the synthesis 
of Pt nanoparticles is important for fuel cells as their shape and size are easily 
controlled. 
Catalytic efficiency is greatly influenced by the shape and size of Pt nanoparticles 
(Wang et al., 2008). Pt nanoparticles (NPs) with sizes tunable from 3 nm to 7 nm and 
controlled polyhedral, truncated cubic or cubic shapes have been studied as catalysis 
for ORR in PEMFCs. 
Monodisperse Pt NPs with a controlled size and shape are synthesized by reac￾tion of Pt (acac)2 and a trace amount of Fe(CO)5 (Wang et al., 2007). The size and 
shape of Pt NPs were controlled by injecting Fe(CO)5 into the Pt(acac)2 at different 
temperatures. 
The intrinsic catalytic activity of the Pt NPs for the ORR was measured by using 
a rotating disk electrode (RDE) in 0.5-m H2SO4. The current density (J) was calcu￾lated and applied into Levich-Koutecky plots at different constant potentials. 
1 1 1 1 1
= + = + , J Jk Jdiff Jk Bw 1 2/28 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
0 6. 2nFC 0 D0 2 3 in which B = , h1 6
jk = kinetic current density, jdiff = the diffusion limiting current density, n = overall 
number of electrons transferred, C0 = O2 concentration in the electrolyte (1.26 x 10–3 
molL–1), D0 = diffusion coefficient of O2 in the H2SO4 electrolyte (1.93 x 10–5 cm2s) 
and η = the viscosity of the electrolyte (1.009 x 10–2 cm2s; Markovic et al., 1995). In 
the J–1Vs ω–1/2 plot, the slope is 1/B. 
The number of electrons calculated from the slope for 7-nm Pt nanotubes is 3.6 
and for 3-nm and 5-nm Pt NPs is 0.7. So, the current density for 7-nm Pt nanotubes 
is four times that of 3-nm polyhedral, which indicates a nearly complete reduction of 
O2 to H2O, with a 4-e– pathway on the surface of 7-nm Pt. 
Due to excellent current density and low overpotential, Pt-based catalysts are 
widely used for ORR (Bisen & Nanda, 2020a). But it also shows some drawbacks, 
such as low abundance and high expenses, which limits them for large-scale applica￾tions (Bisen & Nanda, 2020b; Xu et al., 2020). 
Ru-based nanostructures have been investigated for ORR (Bisen & Nanda, 2021). 
Synthesized Ru@NC were uniformly dispersed Ru nanoparticles over N-doped car￾bon nanostructure by one-step pyrolysis of dicyandiamide and ruthenium phthalo￾cyanine at 800 °C as shown in Scheme 2.1. 
The electrochemical ORR catalytic activity of synthesized Ru@NC_800 catalyst 
was investigated and compared with RuPc, Ru@NC_700, Ru@NC_900 and Pt/C 
catalysis. It suggested that the better performance of Ru@NC is due to the formation 
of highly efficient 4-e− transfer via the inner-sphere electron transfer mechanism 
(ISET) pathway in alkaline medium (Bisen & Nanda, 2021). Nanostructures greatly 
suppress the HO2- intermediate, which shows its superior stability over 1000 cycles 
and surpasses the state-of-the-art Pt/C. 
Lin et  al. (2017) synthesized Rh nanoparticles supported on ultrathin carbon 
nanosheets by using salt microcrystal (Rh oleate) heated under an inert atmosphere 
(Scheme 2.2). 
SCHEME 2.1 Schematic synthesis of Ru@NC_800 catalyst by one-step pyrolysis of 
dicyandiamide and ruthenium phthalocyanine (Bisen & Nanda, 2021).  
 
Fuel Cells 29 
The electrochemical performance of Rh/C hybrid nanosheets was evaluated. For 
ORR measurement, a glass carbon RDE is modified. The result shows that the Rh/C 
nanosheets display an excellent ORR activity and show good stability for long-term 
cycling. 
2.2.2 meTal nanoclusTer-baseD caTalysTs For orr 
To enhance the catalytic activity of nano electrocatalysts for ORR, in the concept of 
nanoclusters, it is implied that nanoclusters have definitely structure and composi￾tion; their size is smaller than NPs, and their smaller size gives them a large surface 
area for electrocatalysis. 
Here, some metal nanoclusters are mentioned for improving the electrocatalytic 
activity toward ORR. 
Hwang et  al. (2016) synthesized a hybrid catalyst Pt/FeCo-OMPC (L) for the 
enhancement of ORR activity (Scheme 2.3). 
By using the RDE technique, the ORR polarization curve of the as-prepared 
catalyst was obtained, which was measured in 0.1  M HClO4. To understand the 
enhancement of ORR activity by a Pt nanocluster, density functional theory (DFT) 
was performed. From the obtained result by attempting various methods 5wt% of 
Pt/FeCo- OMPC (L) electrocatalysts show high-ORR mass activity compared to 
Pt/C. 
Zhao et  al. (2016) synthesized an effective catalyst for ORR, an ultrasmall Pd 
nanocluster. They synthesized a palladium nanocluster that was protected by a 4-tert￾butylbenzene thiolate ligand having palladium atoms less than 20 by using a one-phase 
method. The chemical formulated is Pd13–17(SR)18–22 (R= Ph-tBu) (Scheme 2.4). 
Then the synthesized nanocluster was evaluated for ORR activity on the RDE in 
an alkaline solution. From the calculation, the number of electrons transferred in the 
ORR process for ligand-on and ligand-off Pd nanoclusters is 3.7 and 3.9, respectively. 
Both ligand-on and ligand-off Pd nanoclusters follow a direct 4-e− oxygen reduction 
pathway. This report shows an excellent electrocatalyst in fuel cell technology. 
Liu et al. (2013a) synthesized an electrocatalyst (a silver nanocluster supported 
on carbon nanodots for ORR. Carbon nanodot (CN)–supported silver nanocluster 
(AgNC/CNs) was synthesized by two steps. In the first step, CNs were synthesized, 
and in the second step, silver NCs supported on CNs were formed (Scheme 2.5). 
They performed an excellent electrocatalyst for ORR and followed four electron 
pathways. The surfactant-free silver nanocluster supported on CNs also enhances 
photoluminescence. 
2.2.3 TransITIon meTal–baseD nanocaTalysT For boosTIng orr 
As noble metals (Pt, Pd, Ag, Au) have low abundance and high cost, which limit 
their use as catalysts for ORR. In the past few decades, alternatives of precious metal 
have been developed as non–precious metal catalysts (NPMCs), including metal￾free nitrogen-doped carbon (N-doped C) (Chen et  al., 2011a; Zheng et  al., 2011; 
Deng et al., 2011), non–precious metal oxides and metal carbides (Su et al., 2012; 
Esposito & Chen, 2011). 30 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
SCHEME 2.2 Schematic preparation of Rh/C nanosheets via salt-template process 
(Lin et al., 2017). 
SCHEME 2.3 Schematic synthesis of Pt/FeCo-OMPC (L) (Hwang et al., 2016). 
Lin et al. (2014) synthesized an electrocatalyst for ORR in both alkaline and acidic 
conditions. They reported a new noble metal–free Fe-N/C catalyst (Scheme 2.6). 
The synthesized Fe-N/C_800 catalyst shows high ORR activity and major active 
sites. It follows four-e− transfer pathways in both alkaline and acidic conditions. 
Kim et al. (2018) synthesized a nanocatalyst by using a metal-organic framework 
(MOF). Its catalytic activity was investigated for ORR and for azide-alkyne Huisgen 
cycloaddition reaction. The ORR activity of Cu@Cu2O core-shell nanocatalyst was Fuel Cells 31 
SCHEME 2.4 Synthesis process of Pd13–17(SR)18–22 catalyst (Zhao et al., 2016). 
SCHEME 2.5 Schematic representation of AgNC/CNs (Liu et al., 2013a). 
evaluated by plotting Koutecky-Levich (K-L) plots versus reversible hydrogen elec￾trode (RHE). The electron transfer number of Cu@Cu2O core-shell is on average 
3.9 V at 0.45–0.75 V, which suggests that the Cu@Cu2O nanocatalyst follows a direct 
4-e– pathway. This catalyst also shows good catalytic activity for azide-alkyne 
Huisgen cycloaddition under mild reaction conditions. 
To improve ORR activity (Dong et al., 2017) reported a novel high-performance 
electrocatalyst metal nitride/N-rGO. This catalyst was successfully synthesized by 
mounting transition metal nitride nanoparticles on nitrogen-doped reduced graphene 
oxide (RGO) (Scheme 2.7). 
The synthesized TiCoNx/N-rGO were investigated for ORR activity and com￾pared with TiN/N-rGO and commercial Pt/C. It performed excellent ORR activity 
in an alkaline medium with good stability and methanol tolerance. The outstanding 
performance of the catalyst toward ORR is due to the synergy between the binary 
transition metal nitride and N-rGO 
2.2.4 mIxeD-meTal nanocaTalysTs For ImprovIng orr 
To improve ORR activity in the cathode of fuel cells, more and more active catalysts 
have been explored, one of which is the mixed metal–based nanocatalyst. Attempts 
are made for Pt-based bi- and trimetallic electrocatalyst, alloying it with transition 
metals (Stamenkovic et al., 2007; Yano et al., 2007) and a monolayer coating of Pt 
with metal NPs (Gong et al., 2010; Sasaki et al., 2010) 32 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Wang et al. (2013a) synthesized a stable electrocatalyst for ORR. This work pres￾ents an intermetallic core-shell Pt3Co@Pt/C nanoparticle. The ORR activity of the 
catalyst is obtained by using an RDE O2 saturated in 0.1 M HClO4 solution. Pt/C, 
Pt3Co/C-400 and Pt3Co/C-700 electrocatalysts are thin films on RDE. Pt3Co/C-700 
shows higher mass activity than that of Pt3Co/C-400 and pure Pt. 
Noh et al. (2015) proposed a high electrochemical durable ternary PtCuNi NP 
electrocatalyst for ORR. 
To evaluate the ORR activity, d-band center energy module (Hammer et al., 2000) 
is applied. So, it roughly estimates the relative ORR activity of synthesized electro￾catalyst PtskinCuNi with respect to PtskinCu, PtskinNi and pure Pt NPs. The PtskinCuNi 
shows high ORR activity among them all. 
To enhance the ORR activity in acidic media, Jiang et al. (2020) synthesized a 
trimetallic AuPdPb nanowire electrocatalyst. They synthesized core-shell trimetal￾lic catalyst with anisotropic 1D nanostructure (Au@PdPb nanowires) using a two￾step water bath method at 60oC. 
The ORR activity of Au@PdPb nanowires was investigated by using RDE in an 
O2-saturated 1.0 M HClO4 solution. The mass activity for Au@PdPb nanowires at 
SCHEME 2.6 Schematic synthesis of the catalyst Fe-N/C_800 (Lin et al., 2014).  
Fuel Cells 33 
0.85 V is 1.68 higher than that of commercial Pd black and Au@Pd nanowires. The 
Au@PdPb nanowires exhibit excellent ORR activity and stability. 
2.2.5 meTal oxIDe–baseD nanocaTalysTs For orr 
To achieve the goal of cost-effectiveness, noble metal–free and highly active cata￾lyst for ORR, recently, a study has investigated transition metal compounds, such 
as transition metal oxide (Menezes et  al., 2015), chalcogenides (Wu et  al., 2017, 
Balamurugan et al., 2017) and carbides (Huang et al., 2016). Here we mention some 
transition metal oxides that are easier to obtain and control but have some drawbacks 
(mostly they are semiconductors). 
Tong et al. (2017) synthesized an efficient bifunctional catalyst, an electrocatalyst 
that was composed of cobalt oxide (CoOxNPs/BNG) (Scheme 2.8). 
By using a rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) in 0.1 M KOH solution, the ORR 
activity of an electrocatalyst was measured. The number of electrons transferred of the 
electrocatalyst (CoOxNPs/BNG) is 4.0 from 0.2–0.6 V, which suggests that it follows 
4-e– pathways under alkaline conditions. This work provides an idea for developing 
a non–noble metal hybrid for the synthesis of an electrocatalyst (Scheme 2.9). 
Yan et al. (2012) reported an efficient electrocatalyst Cu2O nanoparticle dispersed 
on RGO with a size of about 4 nm (Scheme 2.10). 
The ORR process of the Cu2O/RGO electrode was measured by using RRDE 
voltammograms. The transferred electron number per oxygen molecule is 3.2–3.6 at 
the potential range from −0.4 to −1.0 V. This suggests that the electrocatalyst follows 
a combined pathway of two and four e−. 
To enhance ORR in alkaline media, Raghavendra et al. (2018) reported a RGO￾supported bimetallic nano electrocatalyst. Pd@Au core-shell nanoparticles supported 
SCHEME 2.7 Synthesis of TiCoNx/N-rGO (Dong et al., 2017). 34 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
SCHEME 2.8 Synthesis of (CoOxNPs/BNG) (Tong et al., 2017). 
SCHEME 2.9 Graphical representation of (CoOxNPs/BNG) working as a catalyst for ORR 
and OER (Tong et al., 2017). 
on RGO were synthesized through a two-step synthetic route. In the first step, the 
formation of Pd@Ag/RGO core-shell NPs was done. In the second step, the pure Ag 
shells are replaced with Au particles (Scheme 2.11). 
The electrocatalytic activities of Pd/RGO, Au/RGO and commercial Pt/C 
catalysts were studied for ORR. The onset potential of the catalyst for ORR 
activity Pd@Au/RGO (0.183  V) > Au/RGO (0.167  V) > Pt/C (0.164  V) > Pd/ 
RGO (0.156 V). 
The high ORR activity of Pd@Au/RGO catalyst is due to the electronic mediation 
of Pd by Au, which favors facile adsorption of oxygen and its corresponding reduc￾tion process.  
Fuel Cells 35 
SCHEME 2.10 Representation of synthesis of the Cu2O/RGO composite (Yan et al., 2012). 
SCHEME 2.11 Schematic representation of synthesis of Pd@Au/RGO (Raghavendra et al., 2018). 
2.2.6 nanoDenDrITe-baseD elecTrocaTalysTs For orr 
Attempts are made to synthesize nanostructure with different morphologies, such 
as nanoflowers (Liu et  al., 2021), nanodendrites (Cheng et  al., 2019), nanoprism 
(Abkhalimov et al., 2018) and nanorod (Amirtharaj & Mariappan, 2021). Dendritic 
structure exhibited large surface area, more active sites than other shapes, higher 
porosity and better interconnectivity in the particles (Maniam et al., 2016). Here we 
mention some nanodendrite-based catalysts for improving ORR. 
Xie et al. (2017) designed an amino acid–assisted strategy for constructing a uni￾form dendrite-like PtAu porous nanocluster (PtAuPNCs) (Scheme 2.12). 
The catalytic activity of PtAuPNCs for ORR was studied using a linear sweep 
voltammogram (LSV). The electron transfer number was calculated to be 3.87 and 
3.62 for PtAuPNCs and Pt black catalysts, respectively, according to the slopes of 36 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
SCHEME 2.12 Illustration of the formation of PtAuPNCs (Xie et al., 2017). 
SCHEME 2.13 Schematic representation of formation of the Pt-Ni multiframes (Kwon 
et al., 2018). 
the K-L plots at 0.3V. It shows that for the ORR direct 4-e− transfer pathway was fol￾lowed by a PtAuPNC catalyst. 
Kwon et al. (2018 successfully synthesized dendrite-embedded bimetallic Pt-Ni 
multiframes for ORR (Scheme 2.13).    
 
Fuel Cells 37 
SCHEME 2.14 Schematic synthesis of Pt-on-Pd nanodendrite (Ghosh et al., 2014). 
The Pt-Ni multiframe shows a 30-fold higher electrochemically active surface 
area (ECSA) and mass ORR activity than that of the state-of-the-art Pt/C catalyst. 
This bimetallic Pt-Ni multiframe showed high catalytic activity and durability even 
after 1000 cycles. 
Ghosh et al. (2014) reported Pt-on-Pd dendritic nanostructures of different com￾positions and their catalytic activity toward ORR. The growth of bimetallic nano￾structure of different compositions (Pt64Pd36, Pt52Pd48 and Pt21Pd79) over multiwalled 
carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were synthesized (Scheme 2.14). 
The electroactivity of the Pt-on-Pd electrocatalyst for ORR was studied using an 
RRDE. Mass activity increases in the order Pt52Pd48 < Pt21Pd79 < Pt64Pd36 are due to 
the change in the electronic state of the electrocatalyst. It shows high activity for ORR. 
2.2.7 2D nanomaTerIal-baseD caTalysTs For orr 
For improving electrocatalytic performances, it is important to maximize the sur￾face of the catalyst as the reaction occurs on it. So various attempts are taken to 
fabricate nanostructures (1D, 2D and 3D). 
Here we mention some fabricated 2D nanomaterials for enhancing ORR. 
Lyu et al. (2020) synthesized a 2D PtPd bimetallic nano-electrocatalyst for ORR 
(Scheme 2.15). 
The ORR activity of the 2D nanocatalyst was studied using the K-L equation; the 
calculated n value obtained from the K-L equation is approximately 4.0, which suggests 
that it follows 4-e− pathways. The aspect, which enhances the catalytic activity of a nano￾catalyst for ORR, is the porous structure and the synergistic effect of Pt alloying with Pd. 
To boost the ORR activity, Sahoo et al. (2020) reported a 2D nanocube Pd-based 
catalyst. It is a facile one-pot synthesis of PdNCs from halide ions and polyvinylpyr￾rolidone (PVP) in water under the precise control of acid etching (Scheme 2.16). 38 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
SCHEME 2.15 Systematic synthetic scheme of 2D PtPd bimetallic nanostructure (Lyu 
et al., 2020). 
SCHEME 2.16 Illustration of synthesis of 2D Pd nanotubes (Sahoo et al., 2020). 
SCHEME 2.17 Schematic representation of 2D Pt-on-Pd DNPs (Peng et al., 2020). 
LSVs recorded in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH were used to investigate the activity 
of catalysts toward ORR. It had excellent electrocatalytic activity, with stability for 
ORR and methanol oxidation reaction (MOR). 
To enhance fuel cell performance, Peng et al. (2020) synthesized a bifunctional 
2D Pt-on-Pd dendritic nanosheet (Scheme 2.17). This bimetallic electrocatalyst has a 
hexagonal Pd nanosheet core with spatially separated Pt branches by seed-mediated 
growth.  
Fuel Cells 39 
2.2.8 3D-nanomaTerIal-baseD caTalysTs For orr 
Here we mention some fabricated 3D nanomaterials for enhancing ORR. 
Wu et al. (2012) reported a 3D nanocatalyst for ORR. They synthesized a 3D 
N-doped graphene aerosol supported on Fe3O4 NPs (Fe3O4/NGAs) (Scheme 2.18). 
By studying the ORR activity of (Fe3O4/NGAs) catalyst, they found that the cata￾lyst showed excellent catalytic activity for ORR, with a high current density and a 
lower H2O2 yield in the alkaline medium. 
SCHEME 2.18 Fabrication of Fe3O4/NGAs catalyst stable suspension of GO, iron acetate 
and polypyrrole (ppy) was formed and then treated with hydrothermal self-assembly. Fe and 
ppy supporting graphene hybrid hydrogel were prepared. Then by freeze-drying and thermal 
treatment, a monolithic (Fe3O4/NGAs) hybrid aerogel was obtained (Wu et al., 2012). 
SCHEME 2.19 Schematic representation of 3D hydrogel PVA/GO CNTs (Fu et al., 2018).  
40 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Fu et  al. (2018) reported an aerogel for the high activity of electrocatalyst for 
ORR. The novel electrocatalyst contains 3D hydrogel PVA/GO CNTs, which allows 
efficient capture of Pd3Pb NPs (Scheme 2.19). 
To evaluate the electrocatalytic process of catalyst for ORR. RDE in O2-saturated 
0.1  M KOH solution was investigated and compared with commercial catalysts. 
From the slopes of the K-L plots, the average electron transfer number of Pd3Pb/ 
rGOCNTs is 3.84 in the range of 0.2–0.7 V. 
It has high activity and stability for ORR. The 3D interconnected network pre￾vents it from aggregation, leaching and provides fast accessibility of reactants to the 
Pd3Pb active sites. 
2.2.9	 graphene-supporTeD noble meTal elecTrocaTalysTs 
anD TheIr applIcaTIons 
Graphene, an allotrope of carbon, has unique properties which show its wide appli￾cation in various fields. Here we mention some graphene-based electrocatalysts that 
performed excellently in fuel cell reactions. 
TABLE 2.1
 
Some Electrocatalyst with Their Application (Liu et al., 2014b)
 
Material Application Ref 
Pt/GNs MOR 
ORR 
MOR/ORR 
MOR 
MOR/ORR 
MOR 
MOR 
MOR 
MOR 
MOR/HOR 
(Zhang et al., 2010) 
(Jafri et al., 2010) 
(Li et al., 2009a; Ha et al., 2011) 
(Li et al., 2010b) 
(Qiu et al., 2011) 
(Qiu et al., 2013) 
(Maiyalagan et al., 2012) 
(Liu et al., 2011) 
(Kundu et al., 2011) 
(Yoo et al., 2009, 2011) 
PtPd/GNs MOR 
MOR 
MOR/EOR 
MOR 
(Lu et al., 2013) 
(Guo et al., 2010) 
(Ji et al., 2012a; Yang et al., 2012) 
(Lu et al., 2014) 
PtAu/GNs FAOR 
FAOR 
MOR/ORR 
MOR 
(Rao et al., 2011a) 
(Zhang et al., 2011a) 
(Hu et al., 2011) 
(Yang et al., 2013) 
PtRu/GNs MOR/EOR 
MOR 
MOR 
MOR 
MOR 
(Dong et al., 2010) 
(Wang et al., 2013b) 
(Lv et al., 2011) 
(Li et al., 2010a) 
(Woo et al., 2013) Fuel Cells 41 
Material Application Ref 
PtCo/GNs MOR (Huang et al., 2012) 
ORR (Yan et al., 2013) 
ORR (Ma et al.,2012) 
MOR/ORR (Shen et al., 2012; Yue et al., 2010) 
ORR (Nam et al., 2012) 
PtNi/GNs MOR (Luo et al., 2013) 
MOR (Luo et al., 2012) 
ORR (Zhang et al., 2011) 
MOR (Hu et al., 2012b) 
MOR (Hu et al., 2012c) 
PtFe/GNs ORR (Guo & Sun, 2012) 
MOR (Ji et al., 2012b) 
PtCu/GNs MOR (Liu et al., 2012) 
PtSn/GNs MOR (Anandan et al., 2012) 
MOR (Han et al., 2012) 
PtCr/GNs ORR (Rao et al., 2011b) 
PtAg/GNs MOR (Feng et al., 2011) 
PtPdAu/GNs MOR (Zhang et al., 2011b) 
PtPdCu/GNs EOR (Hu et al., 2012a) 
Pd/GNs FAOR/EOR (Chen et al., 2011b) 
FAOR (Yang et al., 2011b) 
MOR (Zhao et al., 2011) 
ORR/FAOR (Giovanni et al., 2012; Bong et al., 2010) 
FAOR Jiang et al., 2012) 
Pd-MnO2/RGO MOR (Liu et al., 2013c) 
AuPd/GNs ORR (Yang et al., 2011a) 
PdRu/GNs MOR (Awasthi & Singh, 2013) 
PdSn/GNs MOR (Awasthi & Singh, 2012a) 
PdAu/GNs FAOR (Chai et al., 2011) 
PdAg/GNs ORR (Liu et al., 2013b) 
PdRuSn/GNs MOR (Awasthi & Singh, 2012b) 
Pd3Y/GNs ORR/EOR (Seo et al., 2013) 
Au/GNs ORR (Zhang et al., 2012) 
Au/GNs ORR (Li et al., 2009b) 
Au/GNs ORR (Hu et al., 2010) 42 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
2.2.10 graphene-supporTeD nonprecIous meTal elecTrocaTalysTs 
anD TheIr applIcaTIons 
TABLE 2.2 
Various Electrocatalysts and Their Application for Oxygen Reduction 
Reaction (Liu et al., 2014b) 
Catalyst Application Ref 
Fe3O4/N-graphene ORR in alkaline (Wu et al., 2012) 
Co3O4/(N-)rGO ORR/EOR in alkaline (Liang et al., 2011) 
Cu2O/rGO ORR in alkaline (Yan et al., 2012) 
CuO/N-rGO ORR in alkaline (Zhou et al., 2013) 
MnO2/rGO ORR in alkaline Qian et al., 2011) 
IrxV/rGO ORR in alkaline (Zhang et al., 2013) 
2.3 CONCLUSION 
To develop sustainable energy sources for the future, different steps have been taken 
in a greener way. Fuel cells are an excellent approach to becoming a pollution-free 
world. Fuel cells show some drawbacks that are reduced by applying nanotechnology 
to their working. Various nanomaterials are synthesized in this respect to improve 
the reaction in the fuel cell. ORR, which occurs in the cathode part of the fuel cell, is 
one of the important reactions in fuel cells, and to increase it, nano electrocatalysts 
are applied. By using nanocatalysts, fuel production increases in a greener way, with 
a low cost, excellent performance and better durability. They provide wide active 
sites for reactions and increase conductivity and resistance to corrosion. As discussed 
earlier, nano electrocatalyst (noble metal–based nano-electrocatalysts, metal nano￾clusters, transition metal–based and mixed metal nanocatalysts, metal oxide–based 
nanocatalysts, nanodendrite-based electrocatalysts, 2D and 3D nanomaterials-based 
catalyst) have excellent performances in an eco-friendly manner. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
One of the authors, Chandni Singh, gratefully acknowledges the University Grant 
Commission, India, for awarding a fellowship. 
REFERENCES 
Abkhalimov, E. V., Timofeev, A. A., Ershov, B. G. (2018) Electrochemical mechanism 
of silver nanoprisms transformation in aqueous solutions containing the halide ions. 
J Nanopart Res. 20, 26. 
Amirtharaj, S. N., Mariappan, M. (2021) Rapid and controllable synthesis of Mn2O3 nanorods 
via a sonochemical method for supercapacitor electrode application. Appl. Phys. A. 
127, 607. Fuel Cells 43 
Anandan, S., Manivel, A., Ashokkumar, M. (2012) One-step sonochemical synthesis of 
reduced graphene oxide/Pt/Sn hybrid materials and their electrochemical properties. Fuel 
Cells 12, 956–962. 
Awasthi, R., Singh, R. N. (2012a) Optimization of the Pd-Sn-GNS nanocomposite for 
enhanced electrooxidation of methanol. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 37, 2103–2110. 
Awasthi, R., Singh, R. N. (2012b) Synthesis and structural characterization of a ternary pal￾ladium—ruthenium—tin nanoalloy supported on graphene nanosheets for methanol elec￾trooxidation in alkaline medium. Catal. Sci. Technol. 2, 2428–2432. 
Awasthi, R., Singh, R. N. (2013) Graphene-supported Pd-Ru nanoparticles with superior 
methanol electrooxidation activity. Carbon 51, 282–289. 
Balamurugan, J., Peera, S. G., Guo, M., Nguyen, T. T., Kim, N. H., Lee, J. H. (2017) A hier￾archical 2D Ni-Mo-S nanosheet@nitrogen doped graphene hybrid as a Pt-free cath￾ode for high-performance dye sensitized solar cells and fuel cells. J Mater Chem A 5, 
17896–17908. 
Bisen, O. Y., Nanda, K. K. (2020a) Alkaline earth metal based single atom catalyst for the 
highly durable oxygen reduction reaction. Appl. Mater. Today 21, 100846. 
Bisen, O. Y., Nanda, K. K. (2020b) Unique one-step strategy for nonmetallic and metallic 
heteroatom doped carbonaceous materials. ACS Omega 5(51), 32852–32860. 
Bisen, O. Y., Nanda, K. K. (2021) Uniform distribution of ruthenium nanoparticles on nitro￾gen doped carbon nanostructure for oxygen reduction reaction. ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 
4, 12191–12200. 
Blomen, L. J. M. J., Mugerwa, M. N. (1993) Fuel Cell Systems, Plenum Press, New York. 
Bong, S., Uhm, S., Kim, Y. R., Lee, J., Kim, H. (2010) Graphene supported Pd electrocata￾lysts for formic acid oxidation. Electrocatalysis 1, 139–143. 
Chai, J., Li, F.H., Hu, Y. W., Zhang, Q. X., Han, D. X., Niu, L. (2011) Hollow flower-like AuPd 
alloy nanoparticles: One step synthesis, self-assembly on ionic liquid-functionalized gra￾phene, and electrooxidation of formic acid. J. Mater. Chem. 21, 17922–17929. 
Chen, T., Cai, Z., Yang, Z., Li, L., Sun, X., Huang, T., Yu, A., Kia, H. G., Peng, H. (2011a) 
Nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube composite fiber with a core—sheath structure for novel 
electrodes. Adv. Mater. 23, 4620–4625. 
Chen, X. M., Wu, G. H., Chen, J. M., Chen, X., Xie, Z. X., Wang, X. R. (2011b) Synthesis of 
“clean” and well-dispersive Pd nanoparticles with excellent electrocatalytic property on 
graphene oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 3693–3695. 
Cheng, Z.-Q., Li, Z.-W., Xu, J.-H., Yao, R., Li, Z.-L., Liang, S., Cheng, G.-L., Zhou, Y.-H., 
Luo, X., Zhong, J. (2019) Morphology-controlled fabrication of large-scale dendritic silver 
nanostructures for catalysis and SERS applications. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 14, 89. 
Deng, D., Pan, X., Yu, L., Cui, Y., Jiang, Y., Qi, J., Li, W-X., Fu, Q., Ma, X., Xue, Q., Sun, 
G., Bao, X. (2011) Toward N-doped graphene via solvothermal synthesis. Chem. Mater. 
23, 1188–1193. 
Dong, L. F., Gari, R. R. S., Li, Z., Craig, M. M., Hou, S. F. (2010) Graphene-supported plati￾num and platinum—ruthenium nanoparticles with high electrocatalytic activity for meth￾anol and ethanol oxidation. Carbon 48, 781–787. 
Dong, Y., Deng, Y., Zeng, J., Son, H., Liao, S. (2017) A high-performance composite ORR 
catalyst based on the synergy between binary transition metal nitride and nitrogen-doped 
reduced graphene oxide. J. Mater. Chem. A 5, 5829–5837. 
Esposito, D. V., Chen, J. G. (2011) Monolayer platinum supported on tungsten carbides as low￾cost electrocatalysts: Opportunities and limitations. Energy Environ. Sci. 4, 3900–3912. 
Feng, L. L., Gao, G., Huang, P., Wang, A. S., Zhang, C. L., Zhang, J. L., Guo, S. W., Cui, D. 
X. (2011) Preparation of Pt Ag alloy nanoisland/graphene hybrid composites and its high 
stability and catalytic activity in methanol electro-oxidation. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 6, 551. 
Fu, G., Liu, Yu., Wu, Z., Lee, J.-M. (2018) 3D robust carbon aerogels immobilized with Pd3Pb 
nanoparticles for oxygen reduction catalysis. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 1, 4, 1904–1911. 44 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Ghosh, S., Mondal, S., Retna Raj, C. (2014) Carbon nanotube-supported dendritic Pt-on-Pd 
nanostructures: Growth mechanism and electrocatalytic activity towards oxygen reduc￾tion reaction. J. Mater. Chem. A 2, 2233–2239. 
Giovanni, M., Poh, H. L., Ambrosi, A., Zhao, G. J., Sofer, Z., Sanek, F., Khezri, B., Webster, 
M. Pumera, R. D. (2012) Noble metal (Pd, Ru, Rh, Pt, Au, Ag) doped graphene hybrids for 
electrocatalysis. Nanoscale 4, 5002–5008. 
Gong, K. P., Su, D., Adzic, R. R. (2010) Platinum-monolayer shell on AuNi0.5Fe nanoparticle 
core electrocatalyst with high activity and stability for the oxygen reduction reaction. J. 
Am. Chem Soc. 132, 14364–14366. 
Guo, S. J., Dong, S. J., Wang, E. K. (2010) Three-dimensional Pt-on-Pd bimetallic nanoden￾drites supported on graphene nanosheet: Facile synthesis and used as an advanced nano￾electrocatalyst for methanol oxidation. ACS Nano, 4, 547–555. 
Guo, S. J., Sun, S. H. (2012) FePt nanoparticles assembled on graphene as enhanced catalyst 
for oxygen reduction reaction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 2492–2495. 
Ha, H. W., Kim, I. Y., Hwang, S. J., Ruoff, R. S. (2011) One-pot synthesis of platinum nanopar￾ticles embedded on reduced graphene oxide for oxygen reduction in methanol fuel cells. 
Electrochem. Solid-State Lett. 14, B70. 
Hammer, B., Nørskov, J. K. (2000) Theoretical surface science and catalysis—calculations 
and concepts. Adv. Catal. 45, 71–129. 
Han, F., Wang, X. M., Lian, J., Wang, Y. Z. (2012) The effect of Sn content on the electrocata￾lytic properties of Pt-Sn nanoparticles dispersed on graphene nanosheets for the methanol 
oxidation reaction. Carbon 50, 5498. 
Herman, A., Chaudhuri, T., Spagnol, P. (2005) Bipolar plates for PEM fuel cells: A review. 
Int. Journal of Hydrogen Energy 30, 1297–1302. 
Herper, G. D. J. (2008) Fuel Cell Projects for the Evil Genius, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY. 
Hu, C. G., Cheng, H. H., Zhao, Y., Hu, Y., Liu, Y., Dai, L. M., Qu, L. T. (2012a) Newly￾designed complex ternary Pt/PdCu nanoboxes anchored on three-dimensional graphene 
framework for highly efficient ethanol oxidation. Adv. Mater. 24, 5493–5498. 
Hu, Y. J., Jin, J. A., Wu, P., Zhang, H., Cai, C. X. (2010) Graphene—gold nanostructure 
composites fabricated by electrodeposition and their electrocatalytic activity toward the 
oxygen reduction and glucose oxidation Electrochim. Acta, 56, 491–500. 
Hu, Y. J., Wu, P., Yin, Y. J., Zhang, H., Cai, C. X. (2012b) Effects of structure, composition, 
and carbon support properties on the electrocatalytic activity of Pt-Ni-graphene nanocata￾lysts for the methanol oxidation. Appl. Catal. B 111, 208–217. 
Hu, Y. J., Wu, P., Zhang, H., Cai, C. X. (2012c) Synthesis of graphene-supported hollow Pt-Ni 
nanocatalysts for highly active electrocatalysis toward the methanol oxidation reaction. 
Electrochim. Acta 85, 314. 
Hu, Y. J., Zhang, H., Wu, P., Zhang, H., Zhou, B., Cai, C. X. (2011) Bimetallic Pt-Au nanocatalysts 
electrochemically deposited on graphene and their electrocatalytic characteristics towards 
oxygen reduction and methanol oxidation. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 13, 4083–4094. 
Huang, H., Du, C., Wu S., Song, W. (2016) Thermolytical entrapment of ultrasmall MoC 
Nanoparticles into 3D frameworks of nitrogen-rich graphene for efficient oxygen reduc￾tion. J Phys Chem C 120, 15707–15713. 
Huang, H. J., Sun, D. P., Wang, X. (2012) PtCo alloy nanoparticles supported on graphene 
nanosheets with high performance for methanol oxidation. Chin. Sci. Bull. 57, 3071–3079. 
Hwang, S.-M., Choi, Y., Kim, M. G., Sohn, Y. J., Cheon, J. Y., Joo, S. H., Yim, S. D., Kuttiviel, 
K. A., Sasaki, K., Adzic, R. R., Park, G. G.(2016) Enhancement of oxygen reduction reac￾tion activities by Pt nanoclusters decorated on ordered mesoporous porphyrinic carbons. 
J. Mater. Chem. A. 4, 5869–5876. 
Jafri, R. I., Rajalakshmi, N., Ramaprabhu, S. (2010) Nitrogen doped graphene nanoplatelets 
as catalyst support for oxygen reduction reaction in proton exchange membrane fuel cell. 
J. Mater. Chem. 20, 7114–7117. Fuel Cells 45 
Ji, H. Q., Li, M. G., Wang, Y. L., Gao, F. (2012a) Electrodeposition of graphene-supported 
PdPt nanoparticles with enhanced electrocatalytic activity. Electrochem. Commun. 2012, 
24, 17–20. 
Ji, Z. Y., Zhu, G. X.,. Shen, X. P., Zhou, H., Wu, C. M., Wang, M.(2012b) Reduced gra￾phene oxide supported FePt alloy nanoparticles with high electrocatalytic performance 
for methanol oxidation. New J. Chem. 36, 1774–1780. 
Jiang, X., Xiong, Y., Zhao, R., Zhou, J., Lee, J.-M., Tang, Y. (2020) Trimetallic Au@PdPb 
nanowires for oxygen reduction reaction. NanoRes. 13(10), 2691–2696. 
Jiang, Y. Y., Lu, Y. Z., Li, F. H., Wu, T. S., Niu, L., Chen, W. (2012) Facile electrochemical 
codeposition of “clean” graphene—Pd nanocomposite as an anode catalyst for formic acid 
electrooxidation. Electrochem. Commun. 19, 21–24. 
Kim, A., Muthuchamy, N., Yoon, C., Joo, S. H., Park, K. H. (2018) MOF-derived Cu@Cu2O 
nanocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction and cycloaddition reaction. Nanomaterials 8, 
138. 
Kundu, P., Nethravathi, C., Deshpande, P. A., Rajamathi, M., Madras, G., Ravishankar, N. 
(2011) Ultrafast microwave-assisted route to surfactant-free ultrafine Pt nanoparticles on 
graphene: Synergistic co-reduction mechanism and high catalytic activity. Chem. Mater. 
23, 2772–2780. 
Kwon, H., Kabiraz, M. K., Park, J., Oh, A., Baik, H., Choi, S.-I., Lee, K. (2018) Dendrite￾embedded platinum—nickel multiframes as highly active and durable electrocatalyst 
toward the oxygen reduction reaction. Nano Lett. 18, 2930–2936. 
Li, F. H., Yang, H. F., Shan, C. S., Zhang, Q. X., Han, D. X., Ivaska, A., Niu, L. (2009a) The 
synthesis of perylene-coated graphene sheets decorated with Au nanoparticles and its 
electrocatalysis toward oxygen reduction. J. Mater. Chem. 19, 4022–4025. 
Li, H. Y., Zhang, X. H., Pang, H. L., Huang, C. T., Chen, J. H. (2010a) PMo12-functionalized 
graphene nanosheet-supported PtRu nanocatalysts for methanol electro-oxidation. J. 
Solid State Electrochem. 14, 2267–2274. 
Li, Y. J., Gao, W., Ci, L. J., Wang, C. M., Ajayan, P. M. (2010b) Catalytic performance of 
Pt nanoparticles on reduced graphene oxide for methanol electro-oxidation. Carbon 48, 
1124–1130. 
Li, Y. M., Tang, L. H., Li, J. H. (2009b) Preparation and electrochemical performance for 
methanol oxidation of Pt/graphene nanocomposites. Electrochem. Commun. 11, 846–849. 
Liang, Y. Y., Li, Y. G., Wang, H. L., Zhou, J. G., Wang, J., Regier, T., Dai, H. (2011) Co3O4 
nanocrystals on graphene as a synergistic catalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. J. Nat. 
Mater. 10, 780–786. 
Lin, C., Wu, G., Li, H., Geng, Y., Xie, G., Yanga, J., Liu, B., Jin, J. (2017) Rh nanoparticles 
supported on ultrathin carbon nanosheets for high-performance oxygen reduction reaction 
and catalytic hydrogenation. Nanoscale 9, 1834–1839. 
Lin, L., Zhu, Q., Xu, A-W. (2014a) Noble-metal-free Fe-N/C catalyst for highly efficient oxy￾gen reduction reaction under both alkaline and acidic conditions. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 136, 
11027–11033. 
Liu, M., Chen, W. (2013a) Green synthesis of silver nanoclusters supported on carbon 
nanodots: Enhanced photoluminescence and high catalytic activity for oxygen reduction 
reaction. Nanoscale 5, 12558–12564. 
Liu, M., Zhang, R., Chen, W. (2014b) Graphene-supported nanoelectrocatalysts for fuel cells: 
Synthesis, properties and applications. Chem. Rev. 114(10), 5117–5160. 
Liu, M. M., Lu, Y. Z., Chen, W. (2013b) PdAg nanorings supported on graphene nanosheets: 
Highly methanol-tolerant cathode electrocatalyst for alkaline fuel cells. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 23, 1289–1296. 
Liu, R., Zhou, H. H., Liu, J., Yao, Y., Huang, Z. Y., Fu, C. P., Kuang, Y. F. (2013c) Preparation 
of Pd/MnO2-reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite for methanol electro-oxidation in 
alkaline media. Electrochem. Commun. 26, 63–66. 46 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Liu, X. W., Mao, J. J., Liu, P. D., Wei, X. W. (2011) Fabrication of metal-graphene hybrid 
materials by electroless deposition. Carbon 49, 477–483. 
Liu, Y. J., Huang, Y. Q., Xie, Y., Yang, Z. H., Huang, H. L., Zhou, Q. Y. (2012) Preparation 
of highly dispersed CuPt nanoparticles on ionic-liquid-assisted graphene sheets for direct 
methanol fuel cell. Chem. Eng. J. 197, 80–87. 
Liu, Y. J., Niu, S., Hu, R. (2021) FeCo2S4/NH2-GQDs nanoflowers supported on Ni foam as 
novel binder-free electrode for high-performance supercapacitors. Appl. Phys. A. 127, 417. 
Lu, Y. Z., Jiang, Y. Y., Chen, W. (2014) Graphene nanosheet-tailored PtPd concave nanocubes 
with enhanced electrocatalytic activity and durability for methanol oxidation. Nanoscale 
6, 3309–3315. 
Lu, Y. Z., Jiang, Y. Y., Wu, H. B., Chen, W. (2013) Nano-PtPd cubes on graphene exhibit 
enhanced activity and durability in methanol electrooxidation after CO stripping— 
cleaning. J. Phys. Chem. C 117, 2926–2938. 
Luo, B. M., Xu, S., Yan, X. B., Xue, Q. J. (2012) Synthesis and electrochemical properties of 
graphene supported PtNi nanodendrites. Electrochem. Commun. 23, 72–75. 
Luo, B. M., Xu, S., Yan, X. B., Xue, Q. J. (2013) PtNi alloy nanoparticles supported on poly￾electrolyte functionalized graphene as effective electrocatalysts for methanol oxidation. J. 
Electrochem. Soc. 160, F262. 
Lv, R. T., Cui, T. X., Jun, M. S., Zhang, Q., Cao, A. Y., Su, D. S., Zhang, Z. J., Yoon, S. H., 
Miyawaki, J., Mochida, I., Kang, F. Y. (2011) Open-ended, N-doped carbon nanotube— 
graphene hybrid nanostructures as high-performance catalyst support. Adv. Funct. Mater. 
21, 999–1006. 
Lyu, X., Zhang, W.-N., Li, G., Shi, B-W., Zhang, Y.-N., Chen, H., Li, S.-C., Wang, X. (2020) 
Two-dimensional porous PtPd nanostructure electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reac￾tion. Appl. Nano Mater. 3, 8586–8591. 
Ma, Y. W., Liu, Z. R., Wang, B. L., Zhu, L., Yang, J. P., Li, X. A. (2012) Preparation of 
graphene-supported Pt-Co nanoparticles and their use in oxygen reduction reactions. New 
Carbon Mater. 27, 250–257. 
Maiyalagan, T., Dong, X. C., Chen, P., Wang, X. (2012) Electrodeposited Pt on 
three-dimensional interconnected graphene as a free-standing electrode for fuel cell 
application. J. Mater. Chem. Commun., 22, 5286–5290. 
Maniam, K. K., Muthukumar, V., Chetty, R. (2016) Electrodeposition of dendritic palladium 
nanostructures on carbon support for direct formic acid fuel cells Int. J Hyd Ener 41, 
18602–18609. 
Markovic, N. M., Gasteiger, H. A., Ross, P. N. (1995) Oxygen reduction on platinum low￾index single-crystal surfaces in sulfuric acid solution: Rotating ring-Pt(hkl) disk studies 
J. Phys. Chem. 99, 3411–3415. 
Mench, M. M. (2008) Fuel Cell Engines, John Wiley and Sons Ltd., London. 
Menezes, P. W., Indra, A., González-Flores, D., Sahraie, N. R., Zaharieva, I., Schwarze, M., 
Strasser, P., Dau, H., Driess, M. (2015) High-performance oxygen redox catalysis with 
multifunctional cobalt oxide nanochains: Morphology-dependent activity. ACS Catalysis, 
5, 2017–2027. 
Nam, K. W., Song, J., Oh, K. H., Choo, M. J., Park, H., Park, J. K., Choi, J. W. (2012) 
Monodispersed PtCo nanoparticles on hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide treated 
graphene as an effective oxygen reduction reaction catalyst for proton exchange mem￾brane fuel cells. Carbon, 50, 3739–3747. 
Noh, S. H., Han, B., Ohsaka, T. (2015) First-principles computational study of highly stable 
and active ternary PtCuNi nanocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. Nano Research, 
8(10), 3394–3403. 
Peng, X., Lu, D., Qin, Y., Li, M., Guo, Y., Guo, S. (2020) Pt-on-Pd dendritic nanosheets with 
enhanced bifunctional fuel cell catalytic performance. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12, 
27, 30336–30342. Fuel Cells 47 
Qian, Y., Lu, S. B., Gao, F. L. (2011) Synthesis of manganese dioxide/reduced graphene oxide 
composites with excellent electrocatalytic activity toward reduction of oxygen. Mater. 
Lett. 65, 56–58. 
Qiu, H. J., Dong, X. C., Sana, B., Peng, T., Paramelle, D., Chen, P., Lim, S. (2013) Ferritin￾templated synthesis and self-assembly of Pt nanoparticles on a monolithic porous gra￾phene network for electrocatalysis in fuel cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 5, 782–787. 
Qiu, J. D., Wang, G. C., Liang, R. P., Xia, X. H., Yu, H. W. (2011) Controllable deposition of 
platinum nanoparticles on graphene as an electrocatalyst for direct methanol fuel cells. J. 
Phys. Chem. C 115, 15639–15645. 
Raghavendra, P., Reddy, G. V., Sivasubramanian, R., Chandana, P. S., Sarma, L. S. (2018) 
Reduced graphene oxide-supported Pd@Au bimetallic nano electrocatalyst for enhanced 
oxygen reduction reaction in alkaline media. Int J. Hyd. Ener, 22, 43(8), 4125–4135. 
Rao, C. V., Cabrera, C. R., Ishikawa, Y. (2011a) Graphene-supported Pt-Au alloy nanopar￾ticles: A highly efficient anode for direct formic acid fuel cells. J. Phys. Chem. C 115, 
21963–21970. 
Rao, C. V., Reddy, A. L. M., Ishikawa, Y., Ajayan, P. M. (2011b) Synthesis and electrocata￾lytic oxygen reduction activity of graphene-supported Pt3Co and Pt3Cr alloy nanoparticles 
Carbon 49, 931–936. 
Sahoo, L., Gautam, U. K. (2020) Boosting bifunctional oxygen reduction and methanol oxi￾dation electrocatalytic activity with 2D superlattice-forming Pd nanocubes generated by 
precise acid etching. ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 3(8), 8117–8125. 
Sammes, N. (2006) Fuel Cell Technology: Reaching Towards Commercialization, Springer, 
London. 
Sasaki, K., et al. (2010) Core-protected platinum monolayer shell high-stability electrocata￾lysts for fuel-cell cathodes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 49, 8602–8607. 
Seo, M. H., Choi, S. M., Seo, J. K., Noh, S. H., Kim, W. B., Han, B. (2013) The graphene￾supported palladium and palladium—yttrium nanoparticles for the oxygen reduction and 
ethanol oxidation reactions: Experimental measurement and computational validation. 
Appl. Catal. B 129, 163–171. 
Sharaf, O. Z., Orhan, M. F. (2014) An overview of fuel cell technology: Fundamentals and 
applications Renew Sust Ener Rev 32 810–853. 
Shen, J. F., Yan, B., Shi, M., Ma, H. W., Li, N., Ye, M. X. (2012) Fast and facile preparation 
of reduced graphene oxide supported Pt-Co electrocatalyst for methanol oxidation. Mater. 
Res. Bull. 47, 1486–1493. 
Srinivasan, S. (2006) Fuel Cells: From Fundamentals to Applications, Springer Verlag, 
Springer, New York, NY. 
Stamenkovic, V. R. et  al. (2007) Trends in electrocatalysis on extended and nanoscale 
Pt-bimetallic alloy surfaces. Nature Mater. 6, 214–247. 
Su, H.-Y., Gorlin, Y., Mann, I. C., Calle-Vallejo, F., Nørskov, J. K., Jaramillo, T. F., Rossmeisl, 
J. R. (2012) Identifying active surface phases for metal oxide electrocatalysts: A study of 
manganese oxide bi-functional catalysts for oxygen reduction and water oxidation cataly￾sis. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys 14, 14010–14022. 
Tong, Y., Chen, P., Zhou, T., Xu, K., Chu, W., Wu, C., Xie, Y. (2017) A bifunctional hybrid 
electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and evolution: Cobalt oxide nanoparticles strongly 
coupled to B,N-decorated graphene. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 56, 7121–7125. 
Vielstich, W., Lamm, A., Gasteiger, H. A. (Eds.) (2003) Handbook of Fuel Cells, Vol. 3, 
Wiley, Chichester. 
Wang, C., Daimon, H., Lee, Y., Kim, J., Sun, S. (2007) Synthesis of monodisperse Pt nanocu￾bes and their enhanced catalysis for oxygen reduction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 129, 6974–6975. 
Wang, C., Daimon, H., Onodera, T., Koda, T., Sun, S. (2008) A general approach to the size￾and shape-controlled synthesis of platinum nanoparticles and their catalytic reduction of 
oxygen. Angew. Chem. 120, 3644–3647. 48 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Wang, D., Xin, H. L., Hovden, R., Wang, H., Yu, Y., Muller, D. A., DiSalvo, F. J., Abruña, 
Héctor, D. (2013a) Structurally ordered intermetallic platinum—cobalt core—shell 
nanoparticles with enhanced activity and stability as oxygen reduction electrocatalysts. 
Nature Materials 12, 81–87. 
Wang, W., Lei, B., Guo, S. (2016) Engineering multimetallic nanocrystals for highly efficient 
oxygen reduction catalysts. Adv. Energy Mater 6, 1600236. 
Wang, Y. S., Yang, S. Y., Li, S. M., Tien, H. W., Hsiao, S. T., Liao, W. H., Liu, C. H., Chang, 
K. H., Ma, C. C. M., Hu, C. C. (2013b) Three-dimensionally porous graphene—carbon 
nanotube composite-supported PtRu catalysts with an ultrahigh electrocatalytic activity 
for methanol oxidation. Electrochim. Acta 87, 261–269. 
Woo, S., Lee, J., Park, S. K., Kim, H., Chung, T. D., Piao, Y. (2013) Enhanced electrocatalysis 
of PtRu onto graphene separated by Vulcan carbon spacer. Power Sources 222, 261–266. 
Wu, C., Zhang, Y., Dong, D., Xie, H., Li, J. (2017) Co9S8 nanoparticles anchored on nitrogen 
and sulfur dual-doped carbon nanosheets as highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst 
for oxygen evolution and reduction reactions. Nanoscale 9, 12432–12440. 
Wu, Z. S., Yang, S. B., Sun, Y., Parvez, K., Feng, X. L., Mullen, K. (2012) 3D nitrogen-doped 
graphene aerogel-supported Fe3O4 nanoparticles as efficient electrocatalysts for the oxy￾gen reduction reaction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 134, 9082–9085. 
Xia, Y., Xiong, Y., Lim, B., Skrabalak, S. E. (2008) Shape-controlled synthesis of metal nano￾crystals: Simple chemistry meets complex physics? Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 48, 60–103. 
Xie, X.-W, Lv, J.-J., Liu, L., Wang, A.-J., Feng, J.-J., Xu, Q.-Q. (2017) Amino acid-assisted 
fabrication of uniform dendrite-like PtAu porous nanoclusters as highly efficient elec￾trocatalyst for methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions. Int J Hyd Ener 42, 4, 
2104–2115. 
Xu, Z., Zhao, H., Liang, J., Wang, Y., Li, T., Luo, Y., Shi, X., Lu, S., Feng, Z., Wu, Q., Sun, X. 
(2020) Noble-metal-free electrospun nanomaterials as electrocatalysts for oxygen reduc￾tion reaction. Mater. Today Phys. 15, 100280. 
Yang, G. H., Li, Y. J., Rana, R. K., Zhu, J. J. (2013) Pt—Au/nitrogen-doped graphene nano￾composites for enhanced electrochemical activities. J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 1754–1762. 
Yan, X.-Y., Tong, X.-L., Zhang, Y.-F., Han, X.-D., Wang, Y.-Y., Jin, G.-Q., Qin, Y., Guo, X.-Y. 
(2012) Cuprous oxide nanoparticles dispersed on reduced graphene oxide as an efficient 
electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. Chem. Commun. 48, 1892–1894. 
Yang, J., Deng, S. Y., Lei, J. P., Ju, H. X., Gunasekaran, S. (2011a) Electrochemical synthesis 
of reduced graphene sheet-AuPd alloy nanoparticle composites for enzymatic biosensing. 
Biosens. Bioelectron. 29, 159–166. 
Yang, J., Tian, C. G., Wang, L., Fu, H. G. (2011b) An effective strategy for small-sized and 
highly-dispersed palladium nanoparticles supported on graphene with excellent perfor￾mance for formic acid oxidation. J. Mater. Chem. 21, 3384–3390. 
Yang, X., Yang, Q. D., Xu, J., Lee, C. S. (2012) Bimetallic PtPd nanoparticles on Nafion— 
graphene film as catalyst for ethanol electro-oxidation. J. Mater. Chem. 22, 8057–8062. 
Yano, H., Kataoka, M., Yamashita, H., Uchida, H., Watanabe, M. (2007) Oxygen reduction 
activity of carbon-supported Pt−M (M = V, Ni, Cr, Co, and Fe) alloys prepared by nano￾capsule method. Langmuir, 23(11), 6438–6445. 
Yan, Z. H., Wang, M., Huang, B. X., Liu, R. M., Zhao, J. S. (2013) Graphene supported Pt-Co 
alloy nanoparticles as cathode catalyst for microbial fuel cells. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 
8, 149–158. 
Yoo, E., Okada, T., Akita, T., Kohyama, M., Honma, I., Nakamura, J. (2011) Sub-nano-Pt 
cluster supported on graphene nanosheets for CO tolerant catalysts in polymer electrolyte 
fuel cells. J. Power Sources 196, 110–115. 
Yoo, E., Okata, T., Akita, T., Kohyama, M., Nakamura, J., Honma, I. (2009) Enhanced elec￾trocatalytic activity of Pt subnanoclusters on graphene nanosheet surface. Nano Lett. 9, 
2255–2259. Fuel Cells 49 
Yue, Q. L., Zhang, K., Chen, X. M., Wang, L., Zhao, J. S., Liu, J. F., Jia, J. B. (2010) Generation 
of OH radicals in oxygenreduction reaction at Pt-Co nanoparticles supported on graphene 
in alkaline solutions. Chem Commun. 46, 3369–3371. 
Zhang, K., Yue, Q. L., Chen, G. F., Zhai, Y. L., Wang, L., Wang, H. S., Zhao, J. S., Liu, 
J. F., Jia, J. B., Li, H. B. (2011) Effects of acid treatment of Pt−Ni alloy Nanoparticles@ 
Graphene on the kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction in acidic and alkaline solutions. 
J. Phys. Chem. C. 115, 379–38958. 
Zhang, L. S., Liang, X. Q., Song, W. G., Wu, Z. Y. (2010) Identification of the nitrogen species 
on N-doped graphene layers and Pt/NG composite catalyst for direct methanol fuel cell. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 12, 12055–12059. 
Zhang, Q. X., Ren, Q. Q., Miao, Y. Q., Yuan, J. H., Wang, K. K., Li, F. H., Han, D. X., Niu, 
L. (2012) One-step synthesis of graphene/polyallylamine—Au nanocomposites and their 
electrocatalysis toward oxygen reduction Talanta 89, 391–395. 
Zhang, R. 	Z., Chen, W. (2013) Non-precious Ir-V bimetallic nanoclusters assembled on 
reduced graphene nanosheets as catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction. J. Mater. 
Chem. A 1, 11457–11464. 
Zhang, S., Shao, Y. Y., Liao, H. G., Liu, J., Aksay, I. A., Yin, G. P., Lin, Y. H. (2011a) Graphene 
decorated with PtAu alloy nanoparticles: Facile synthesis and promising application for 
formic acid oxidation. Chem Mater. 23, 1079–1081. 
Zhang, Y. Z., Gu, Y. E., Lin, S. X., Wei, J. P., Wang, Z. H., Wang, C. M., Du, Y. L., Ye, W. C. 
(2011b) One-step synthesis of PtPdAu ternary alloy nanoparticles on graphene with supe￾rior methanol electro oxidation activity. Electrochim. Acta 56, 8746–8751. 
Zhao, Y. C., Zhan, L., Tian, J. N., Nie, S. L., Ning, Z. (2011) Enhanced electrocatalytic oxida￾tion of methanol on Pd/polypyrrole—graphene in alkaline medium. Electrochim. Acta 
56, 1967–1972. 
Zheng, Y., Jiao, Y., Chen, J., Liu, J., Liang, J., Du, A., Zhang, W., Zhu, Z., Smith, S. C., 
Jaroniec, M., Lu, G. Q., Qiao. S. Z. (2011) Nanoporous graphitic-C3N4@Carbon metal￾free electrocatalysts for highly efficient oxygen reduction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 133, 
20116–20119. 
Zhoa, S., Zhang, H., House, S. D., Jin, R., Yang, J. C., Jin, R. (2016) Ultrasmall palladium 
nanoclusters as effective catalyst for oxygen reduction reaction. Chem Electro Chem 3, 
1225–1229. 
Zhou, R. F., Zheng, Y., Hulicova-Jurcakova, D., Qiao, S. Z. (2013) Enhanced electrochemi￾cal catalytic activity by copper oxide grown on nitrogen-doped reduced graphene oxide. 
J. Mater. Chem. A 1, 13179–13185. 50 DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-3 
3
3 Polyoxometalate-Induced 
Nano-Engineered 
Composite Materials
 
for Energy Storage
 
Supercapacitor Applications 
Neeraj K. Sah, Shankab J. Phukan, Dasnur 
Nanjappa Madhusudan, Dr. Kamatchi 
Sankaranarayanan, Dr. Manas Roy 
and Dr. rer. nat. Somenath Garai 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
In the present social and economic circumstances, with rapid industrialization, the 
obligation for sustainable and green energy is the foremost requirement for human￾kind. The two prime factors that we need to centralize in our research domain are the 
harvesting and storage of energy. The green and sustainable energy harvested by the 
means of solar, thermal and hydrothermal methods, among others, are stored with 
the assistance of principal energy storage devices, which presumes the conversion 
of electrical or nonmechanical energy into the form of chemical energy/potential 
energy. 
Until now, the Li-ion batteries and supercapacitor (SC)-based devices are playing 
a major role in energy storage devices; the SC stores lesser quantities of energy but 
generates a very high power density. These are also known as ultra-capacitors, as 
well as electrochemical capacitors, which use electrode materials with large surface 
areas and thin electrolytic dielectrics to obtain capacitances that are many orders 
of magnitude higher than normal capacitors. SCs (electrical double-layer capaci￾tors) have a twofold increase in energy storage density over ordinary electrolytic 
capacitors. SCs are capable of achieving greater energy densities that can be charged 
and discharged up to 106 times without significant power loss with a high specific 
power density (Sagadevan et al., 2021). SCs store electrical charge, and that charge– 
discharge cycle can be repeated several times because this process is extremely 
reversible. At the contact between a carbon electrode with a large surface area and 
a liquid electrolyte, SCs store electrical charge in the form of an electrical double 
layer. Electrical double layers are generated and released when electrolyte ions are Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 51 
oriented at the electrolyte/electrolyte contact in a specific manner. SCs possess criti￾cal components like electrodes, electrolytes and the separator; the electrodes are 
typically thin coatings that are applied and electrically linked to a conductive metal 
current collector. The electrode materials must exhibit some characteristics such as 
good conductivity, high-temperature stability, large surface area, high cyclability, 
long-term stability and electrochemical oxidation/reduction resistance, among oth￾ers (Da Silva et  al., 2020). On the basis of the principal electrode materials and 
the principle of operation, electrical double-layer capacitors, pseudocapacitors and 
hybrid capacitors are the three types of SCs known to date. In electrical double-layer 
capacitors, the charge storage mechanism is based on the separation of electronic 
and ionic charges at the interfaces, but in the case of pseudocapacitors and hybrid 
capacitors, the reversible solid-state redox processes that occur concurrently with 
electrostatic contribution regulate the charge–storage process. The introduction of 
nanomaterials is revolutionizing supercapacitors allowing for large storage capac￾ity and a lot of new applications. In recent years, based on the application level, 
asymmetric supercapacitors are designed that are constructed by connecting two 
capacitors in series, one of which is a capacitor and the other is a pseudocapacitor 
or a battery that is achievable by varying electrode capacity ratio (Miller & Simon, 
2008). In the future, asymmetric SCs will play a major role in the energy storage 
field. Although the major problems are that most of them are extremely massive, with 
hard/huge sizes, they suffer from efficiency (wastage of energy 10–30%) and envi￾ronmental-compatible issues. So it is quite impossible to fix the specific demands of 
flexible electronic devices with this parameter (Zhou et al., 2014). Consequently, the 
creation of light, flexible and compact units, along with shape conformability, visual 
variety, outstanding mechanical characteristics, good fabrication, elevated capacity 
and excellent conductivity, are some essential prerequisites for the energy storage 
devices of the future. Interestingly, flexible energy storage technologies, namely, 
flexible lithium-ion battery and SCs, have received a lot of scientific as well as com￾mercial attention in recent years (X. Wang et al., 2014). 
Recent research disciplines have focused more acutely on the consolidated energy 
storage systems than those of the general conventional devices because of their 
various established functions like micro-electromechanical systems, self-powering 
systems and the like. Xie et al. (2014) have demonstrated an electrochromic smart 
window with a self-contained power source with tunable transmittance powered by 
dye-sensitized solar cells that also functions like a photo-charged electrochromic 
supercapacitor with greater areal capacitance along with reversible color shifts. 
SC-based composite electrodes with double-layer capacitance and pseudocapaci￾tance have excellent energy and power densities compared to ordinary capacitors and 
batteries. The charge is stored via charge polarization at the electrical double layer 
in the electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and the pseudocapacitors, 
which store charge generated from specific redox activities, are the two major forms 
of supercapacitors (Y. Yang et al., 2019). The use of pseudocapacitance materials 
instead of EDLC materials can boost specific capacitance; under the same electrode 
area circumstances, the specific capacitance of pseudocapacitance capacitors can 
be 10–100 times higher than that of EDLCs. In addition, the electrode’s operating 
voltage is also an important component in increasing the energy density of devices; 52 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
 
 
 
for example, EDLCs may charge and discharge in seconds for tens of thousands of 
cycles and possess a near-immediate response, in addition to having a higher power 
density. EDLCs have a poor energy density as compared to batteries, whereas the 
energy density (E) of an SC can be increased by raising the specific capacitance 
1 2 (C) or widening the operating voltage (V), according to the equation E = CV
2
(Y. Wang et al., 2016). Recently, Rani et al. (2019) synthesized N-incorporated, thiol￾functionalized reduced-graphene oxide scrolls (NTGS) in concern to enhance the 
energy density of the electrical double-layer capacitors. Zhang et al. (2020) have 
developed a high-performance SC with two species that are self-redox active: Fe2O3 
and layered Ni-Co hydroxide/oxy-hydroxide. Both materials have high surface areas, 
adequate reaction sites, low ion diffusion lengths and increased rate capability due 
to the inclusion of reduced graphene oxide. Nevertheless, their low energy density 
and specific capacitance, however, preclude them from being used in many applica￾tions that need a lengthy duration. Graphene SCs with a high energy density have 
been developed by Yang et al., who have utilized a scalable nano-porous graphene 
manufacturing technique including a simple strengthening procedure in a hydrogen 
environment; with extremely porous graphene electrodes, they have obtained ultra￾high specific gravimetric and volumetric capacitances (H. Yang et  al., 2013). By 
orderly adjusting the quantity of graphene-related additives during mass balancing 
the positive and negative electrodes, Redondo et al. (2020) suggested a new approach 
for increasing the energy density of supercapacitor cells. For various electrodes with 
varied additive loadings, the capacitance has been determined, along with an elec￾trochemically stable potential window. There are primarily three ways of enhancing 
the energy density of supercapacitors: 
a.	 by fine-tuning the surface properties of the electrode materials, the sys￾tem’s capacitance may be improved. 
b.	 by using electrodes and electrolytes with a broad variety of electrochemi￾cally stable potential windows to boost the device’s voltage. 
c.	 alternatively, we can boost capacitance and voltage simultaneously by com￾bining a Faradaic electrode along with a non-Faradaic electrode, as in a 
hybrid method. 
(Demarconnay et al., 2011) 
The improvement of some energy storage devices still lies in its primitive stages 
due to the insufficiency of expedients, environmental questionings and others. Viable 
endeavors are much required for the development of renewable resources of energy 
production for reducing the emissions of toxic substances and hazardous environ￾mental impacts. Undoubtingly, the upcoming research on energy storage devices 
stores many favorable circumstances for modernization and upgradation in the 
energy storage mechanisms. In some opportunities, polyoxometalates (POMs) have 
proved to be an optimistic electrode material for supercapacitor appliances. 
The renowned polynuclear metal-oxo anionic compounds, which are called POMs, 
are widely celebrated due to their discrete and chemically modifiable structures. The 
formation of structurally diversified species with high anionic characteristics and Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 53 
differences in nuclearity ranging from 6 to 368 metal centers per molecule is very 
common in most POM aqueous solutions. Beneficially, the synthetic pathways of the 
POMs are based on economical and effortlessly accessible precursors, due to which 
the large-scale synthesis of the POMs is very promising. The electrode materials are 
based on POMs managed to procure considerable recognition because of their previ￾ously mentioned simplistic synthetic routes, which in turn reduces the inclined issues 
like rapid capacity decay, volume change and phase transition. 
The Keplerate-type POM Mo132 has been utilized by Pakulski et al. (2019) to 
design a new Mo132-DTAB-EEG hybrid as the SC electrode material. Hou et al. 
reported two metallo-calixarene compounds with POM included inside their nano￾cavity [Ag5(C2H2N3)6] [H5⊂SiMo12O40] (1) and [Ag5(C2H2N3)6] [H5⊂SiW12O40] (2), 
(C2H2N3 = 1H-1,2,4-triazole); due to the greater reduction potential and flexibility 
FIGURE 3.1 The carbon materials, conducting organic polymers and a range of inorganic 
electro-active species are shown schematically as three types of components utilized in the 
creation of hybrid materials for energy storage. 
Source: Reproduced from (Dubal et al., 2015), Copyright 2015, with permission from the 
Royal Society of Chemistry. 54 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
 
of the Mo-based Keggin ions, compound-1 has a higher specific capacitance as well 
as cyclic voltammetry stability than compound-2 (Hou et al., 2019). Because of the 
wide negative voltage window and distinct electrochemical behavior, POMs are 
used as pseudocapacitor materials as negative electrode. Wang et al. developed a 
novel asymmetric supercapacitor device with a negative electrode made of a POM￾based coordination polymer; two novel coordination polymers based on POM: 
[Ni(itmb)4 (HPMo12O40)]·2H2O (1) and [Zn(itmb)3(H2O)(HPMo12O40)]·4H2O (2) 
(itmb=1-(imidazo-1-ly)-4-(1,2,4-triazol-1-ylmethyl)benzene) (G. Wang et al., 2020). 
The newly formed POM-based coordination polymers feature Keggin-type {PMo12} 
polyanions with high specific capacitance and redox reactivity, which suggests that 
POM-based coordination polymers might be viable negative electrode materials 
toward high-potential SCs. Three types of components are shown in Figure 3.1 in 
the design of hybrid materials for energy storage. 
This chapter mainly highlights the prime points of extensive presentations of 
POM-based nanostructured composite systems for energy storage applications. 
A descriptive configuration of presumed challenges inclining in the field of energy 
storage processes and SC applications that are endeavored by POM-based composite 
systems along with various synthetic routes of the POM chemistry is set forth. 
3.2	 SYNTHESIS METHODOLOGY FOR POM AND ITS 
COMPOSITE MATERIALS 
The synthetic methodologies of POMs were first discovered by Berzelius in 
1826 when he obtained a yellow precipitate of ammonium phosphomolybdate 
“(NH4)3[PMo12O40]aq” by adding excess amount of ammonium molybdate to the 
phosphoric acid solution (Gouzerh  & Che, 2006). After that, several synthetic 
methodologies were employed to synthesize different classes of POMs. In 1864, 
Galissard de Marignac synthesized heteropoly 12:1 tungstosilicic acids and 
their salts; however, the composition of the heteropoly anion was not clear until 
it was described by Warner in 1907 based on his idea of coordination chemis￾try (Baker  & Glick, 1998), followed by the structural hypothesis as proposed 
by Miolati and Pizzighelli (Gouzerh  & Che, 2006). According to their theory, 
the hypothetical acid “H7[PO6]” was regarded as the parent acid from which 
12-molybdophosphoric acid can be derived via the substitution of O-atom with 
Mo2O7 units. In 1929, Pauling postulated another hypothesis to govern the struc￾tural features of ionic crystals, which was mostly based on ionic radii, should 
also hold to heteropoly anions, but this proposed structure had limitation as 
the edge-sharing options between MO6 octahedra were not taken into account 
(Baker & Glick, 1998). Ultimately, [PMo12O40]3− anion and isostructural anions 
were termed as Keggin anions after the structure of H3[PW12O40].5H2O that 
was characterized by X-ray crystallography in 1934 by James F. Keggin (1934). 
Therefore, the itinerary for the early development of the POM chemistry pos￾tulated the generation of sites on the composition and framework of heteropoly 
anions of the 12-tungstophosphoric acid, which was historically noted down as 
H7[P(W2O7)6] (Miolati-Rosenheim), then as H3[PO4W12O18(OH)36] (Pauling) and 
finally as H3[P(W3O10)4], often written as H3[PW12O40] (Keggin). Later, Souchay Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 55 
 
 
et al. (1945) synthesized numerous POM compounds, including anions consisting 
of both isopoly and heteropoly acids, and focused mainly on the disclosure of the 
formulas and the condensation reaction in solution. He was primarily interested 
in tungstates, but surprisingly, he was also interested in the reduction of MoVI in 
aqueous solutions to comprehend the framework of “molybdenum blue”. After 
that, numerous reduced derivatives were prepared and characterized to validate 
the unparalleled capability of heteropoly anions to behave as an electron pool 
(Gouzerh & Che, 2006). Within an edge-sharing trio of WO6 octahedra, reduced 
heteropolyanions containing several electrons (multiples of six) were discovered 
to undergo intramolecular dissociation (essential factors like pH, temperature, 
solvent type, counter-ion type, heteroatom stereochemistry) caused by the posi￾tioning of WIV centers and the creation of three W-W bonds. The optical and 
EPR spectroscopy has revealed electron movement phenomena in polyanions with 
mixed valences. It was reported that the Keggin- and Dawson-type compounds 
exhibit both configurational/structural and conformational isomerisms and in fact 
the chemistry of lacunary polyoxotungstates self-assemble to larger polyanions, 
e.g., [As4W40O140]28− and [P8W48O184]40−. During the development of polyoxothio￾metalate chemistry, the researchers started using the precursor “[Mo2S2(H2O)6]2+”, 
as a “magic building block”, in order to create cyclic network structures that 
showed prominent host–guest chemistry (Gouzerh  & Che, 2006; Müller et  al., 
2001; Müller & Serain, 2000). In this section, we have insight into the different 
methodologies to synthesize different classes of POMs. 
3.2.1	 synThesIs oF lInDqvIsT sTrucTure [m6o19]n− (m = nb, 
Ta, mo, W, n = 2, 8) 
The first isopoly-Lindqvist anion [Nb6O19]8-, which is also known as hexaniobate, 
was first introduced by Lindqvist in 1953. It can be synthesized by fusing Nb2O5 in 
an alkaline solution (pH of 11) at temperature less than 100°C. It was believed that 
in alkaline solutions the [Nb6O19]8- ion exist as the major niobate form which may 
be easily segregated (M. Nyman et al., 2006). The niobate-based POMs could bind 
inorganic and organic cationic moieties as they have stable biocompatible pH levels 
and strong negative charges. The alkali salts of [Nb6O19]8- ion were known as good 
water-soluble precursors to synthesize heteropolyniobates and considered as the sole 
way to make several heteropolyniobates phases. The heteropolyniobates may be pre￾cipitated from pH 11–12.5 and separated via hydrothermal treatment at temperatures 
above 150°C. M. Nyman et al. (2006) reported a sequence of alkali (K, Rb, Cs) salts 
of [Nb6O19]8− and postulated the formation mechanism of heteropolyanions from the 
Lindqvist ion. The crystals of alkali salts of hexaniobate were obtained by straight 
crystallization from alkali hydroxide solution in high concentration followed by slow 
diffusion of nonsolvents into aqueous precursor solutions. The common step for the 
synthesis of [Nb6O19]8− was the fusing of amorphous Nb2O5. xH2O with excess alkali 
followed by dissolution in an aqueous medium and cooled to room temperature. 
Similarly, the Lindqvist ion of Ta, [Ta6O19]8−, was the only polyanion found to form 
when tantalum oxide Ta2O5 was dissolved in an aqueous alkali hydroxide solution. 
But its form was unknown until 1977 (Keggin, 1934) and a practical, solution-based 56 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
 
 
 
method was reported ten years later (Souchay, 1945). Later on, tetrabutylammonium 
(TBA) salts of protonated [H2Ta6O19]6− cluster were discovered (M. D. Nyman et al., 
2007). Afterward, Anderson et al. introduced a new technique for the production 
of [Ta6O19]8− salts; Na8[Ta6O19] ·15H2O, K7Na[Ta6O19]·14H2O (M. D. Nyman et al., 
2007). It was reported that Rb3Ta(O2)4 and K3Ta(O2)4 could be synthesized with the 
help of TaCl5, hydrogen peroxide and alkali RbOH and KOH. Initially, TaCl5 reacted 
with hydrogen peroxide to form tantalum peroxide, which was used as the precursor 
for synthesizing the salts of tantalum Lindqvist ion with the help of alkali hydroxide 
(KOH, RbOH), K3VO4 and Na3VO4 by condensation method. Here, [VO4]3− were 
used for the catalytic decomposition of peroxide ligands, and their use deduced the 
boiling time. Moreover, salts (alkylammonium) of Lindqvist ion [Mo6O19]2− and 
[W6O19]2− were prepared by Jahr, Fuchs, and Oberhauser in 1968 for the first time, 
using controlled hydrolysis of molybdic and tungstic acid esters (Klemperer, 1990). 
Later on, more convenient preparation methods and synthesis of other salts were 
available like the synthetic procedure for tetrabutylammonium hexamolybdate was 
demonstrated by W. G. Klemperer and his coworkers, which can be explained by the 
following equation (Klemperer, 1990): 
6 Na M2 oO4 +10 HCl + 2 ( ­ 4 n C H 9 ) 4 NBr ®
n C H ) Nù
û [Mo O ] +10 NaCl + 2NaBr + 5 H O 4 9 6 19 2 é
ë( ­ 4 2 
3.2.2 synThesIs oF KeggIn Ion [xm12o40]n−
The first Keggin structure “(NH4)3[PMo12O40]aq” was reported by J.J. Berzelius 
(Gouzerh  & Che, 2006). The synthetic route for the preparation of Keggin 
ion–containing molybdenum and tungsten can be given by the following equations 
(Izumi et al., 1992; Pope & Müller, 1991): 
2­ 2­ 3­
23 H+ + [ HPO 4 ] [ + 12 MoO 4 ] [ ® PMo 12 40 O ] +12 H O2
3­ 2­ + PO4 +12 WO 4 + 27H ® H P3 1 WO 2 40 + 12 H O2 
Notably, the core heteroanion stereochemistry (trigonal: B(III); pyramidal: X(III), 
X=As, Sb, Bi; tetrahedral: Si (IV), Ge(lV), P(V), As(V); octahedral: M2+/3+ cations of 
transition metals) substantially influenced the generation and structure of the hetero￾polyanions. In 1864, the dodecatungstosilicic acid H4[SiW12O40] was initially synthe￾sized by Marignac in an acid medium, which was later considered a Keggin β -isomer 
after the X-ray structure obtained in 1975 (Contant & Herveb, 2002). Tézé et al. reported 
the synthetic procedure and the crystal structure of the γ -isomer of the [SiW12O40]4−, 
which involved the reaction of γ -decatungstosilicate and perchloric acid in the pres￾ence of HCl and ethanol, followed by addition of sodium tungstate for the removal 
of insoluble material. When the filtrate is treated with tetrabutylammonium bromide 
followed by recrystallization from organic solvent produced dodecatungstosilicate Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 57 
 
 
 
 
polyanion (Teze  & Herve, 1990). Furthermore, they synthesized and demonstrated 
the synthetic procedure of the salts of α -[SiW12O40]4− and β -[SiW12O40]4− isomers of 
the Keggin ion. Recently, a new mineral, Kegginite, Pb3Ca3[AsV12O40(VO)].20H2O, 
was found from the Packrat mine, near Gateway, Mesa County, Colorado, U.S.A., and 
the crystal structure of this mineral contains [As5+V125+O40(VO)]12−, an ε -isomer of 
Keggin with a mono-capped moiety (Kampf et al., 2017). 
3.2.3 synThesIs oF lacunary KeggIn Ion 
The plenary-Keggin or α -Keggin anions are usually stable under acidified condi￾tions, but the controlled base hydrolysis leads to the elimination of one, two, or three 
[M=O] fragments from the plenary structure resulting in the formation of lacu￾nary Keggin ions (Sarwar et  al., 2021). These lacunary structures are referred to 
as monolacunary [XW11O39]n−, dilacunary [XW10O36]n− or trilacunary [XW9O34]n− 
depending on the number of metal-polyhedra eliminated. The synthesis of the 
sodium salts of monolacunary [PW11O39]7− Keggin was reported first time in 1983, 
and its first crystal structure was elucidated in 2002 (Honma et  al., 2002). The 
formation of different isomeric forms of lacunary-Keggin derivatives was investi￾gated by recording the 31P-NMR of freshly prepared aqueous solutions of W(VI) 
and P(V) with different acidities. The monolacunary [PW11O39]7− appeared in the 
pH range of 3.5–5, and the further addition of OH- ions, that is, an increase in 
alkalinity of solution (pH; 5.5–7.5), converted the [PW11O39]7− to [PW9O34]9− and 
finally decomposed to tungstates and phosphates (Sarwar et al., 2021). According 
to the number of empty sites, lacunary polyanions can function as ligands with 
a wide range of metal cations, leading to mono-, di-, or tri-capped complexes. 
These complexes were the earliest mixed oxide model materials and were essen￾tial for catalytic applications, notably the oxidation of organic substances. Tézé 
et al. described the preparation method of salts of various lacunary Keggin ions 
( α -, β - and γ -isomer) containing tungsten as addenda moieties (Kampf et al., 2017). 
They reported the synthetic procedure for sodium α -nonatungustosilicate Na10[ α -Si 
W9O34], sodium β -nonatungustosilicate Na9[ β -SiW9O34H].23H2O, potassium 
γ -decatungustosilicte K8[ γ -SiW10O36].12H2O, potassium α -undecatungustosilicate 
K8[ α -SiW11O39].13H2O, sodium β 1-undecatungustosilicate Na8[ β 1-SiW11O39] sol￾vent, potassium β 2-undecatungustosilicate K8[ β 2-SiW11O39].14H2O and potassium 
β 3-undecatungustosilicate K8[ β 3-SiW11O39].14H2O. The synthetic route can be rep￾resented by the following equations: 
2­ 2­ + + 9[WO 4 ] +[SiO 3 ] +10 H +10 Na ® Na 10 [a ­SiWO 9 34 2 ] + 5 H O
2­ 2­ + + ] H O 9 H2 9 [WO4 +[SiO 3 ] +11 H + 9 Na +18 2 ® Na [b ­SiWO 9 34 H].23 H O
2­ 2­ 8­
11 WO + SiO +16 H [ 4 ] [ 3 ] + ® a ­ [ SiWO 11 39 ] + 8 H O2 58 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
 
 
 
2­ 2­ + 11 [WO 4 ] +[SiO 3	 ] +16 H + 8 K + 6 H O 2 ® K 8 2 11 39 [b ­SiWO ].14 H O2
The reaction of transition metal ions (Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Cu) with [PW11O39]7− pro￾duced an enormous range of structures with the formula [PMW11O39]n−. Addi￾tionally, the polyanion also produced monometallic sandwich-type complex units 
[M(α-PW11O39)2]10− with M  =  Zr (IV) or Hf (IV). The reaction of trilacunary 
[PW9O34]9− with series of lanthanide (III) (La, Pr, Nd, Sm, Eu, Gd, Tb, Dy, Er, Tm, 
Yb, and Y) salts generated (1:2) sandwich-type enantiomeric [Ln(α-PW11O39)2]11− 
compounds (Sarwar et al., 2021). 
3.2.4	 synThesIs oF anDerson-evans {[xm6o24]m−, m = W, mo, v; 
x = mn (III) or Fe (III)} 
In 1937, Anderson reported the framework for the 6-molybdoperiodate ion, 
[I7+Mo6O24]5− and additional anhydrous 6-heteropoly compounds that combine to 
create normal salts along with the anticipated number of monovalent cations, based 
on Pauling principles. Evans validated Anderson’s theory by utilizing single-crystal 
X-ray measurements to determine the orientations of the central heteroatom along 
with the Mo-sites in ammonium and potassium normal salts of [Te6+Mo6O24]6− 
(Baker & Glick, 1998; Evans, 1948). 
In order to make inorganic Anderson-Evans POMs, an aqueous phase containing 
metal-oxide anions (MoO4
2−, WO4
2−) and a salt of a templating heteroatom was acidi￾fied. The number and nature of metal-oxide anions, the pH and kind of acid employed, 
the nature and concentration of heteroatoms, the presence of any extra ligands, the 
employment of a reducing agent, the reaction mixture’s temperature and the solvent 
used had a crucial role for the synthesis of Anderson-Evans POM. In order to obtain 
inorganic clusters, two typical synthesis procedures were followed: synthesis in open￾aqueous and hydrothermal environments. Different counter-cations were generally 
introduced during synthesis; however, in some cases, to create the Anderson-Evans 
structure with the necessary counter-cation, cation exchange of previously synthesized 
Anderson-Evans clusters were utilized (Blazevic & Rompel, 2016). In the same line, 
Yan et al. obtained crystal structures of series of the Anderson-Evans Type lantha￾nopolyoxometalates: [Ln(H2O)n]2[TeMo6O24]·6H2O [n = 6 or 7, Ln = La, Ce, Pr and 
Sm] by using sodium molybdate, telluric acid dihydrate and Ln(NO3)3·6H2O as pre￾cursors. The synthetic route involved the aqueous synthesis under reflux conditions, 
along with the pH maintenance at 5.5 (Yan et al., 2008). Piştea et al. (2017) reported 
green techniques for the synthesis of Anderson-Evans polyanions [{XMo6O24}, where 
X = Cr(III), Mn(II), Co(II), Ni(II), and Cu(II),] by using aqueous solutions of precur￾sors followed by varying pH. The authors proposed two green techniques that were 
simple, quick, repeatable and affordable, with crystalline molecules and high yields. 
3.2.5	 synThesIs oF Wells-DaWson sTrucTure [x2m18o62]n−
A new class of POMs currently known as Wells-Dawson structure [X2M18O62]n− was 
initially reported by Rosenheim and his coworkers by preparing dimeric ammo￾nium 9-molybdophosphate-(V) (i.e., 18 molybdodiphosphate) in 1915. After that, Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 59 
 
 
 
A. F. Wells proposed a precise structure for the tungstate isomorph, the dimeric 
(2:18) 9-tungstophosphate anion, in 1945 while Tsigdinos established the formula 
[P2W18O62]6− for the molybdic complex in 1952, based on the structure suggested by 
Wells for the tungstate complex. Within a year, Dawson determined the positions of 
the W atoms in [P2W18O62]6− through the single-crystal X-ray investigation that was 
in harmony with the structure postulated by Wells which constituted the basis of that 
POM cluster as the Wells-Dawson structure (Baker & Glick, 1998). 
The preparation procedure for potassium salt of α, β -isomeric forms of K6P2Wl8O62 
and Well-Dawson structure was demonstrated by R. G. Finke and coworkers. The 
synthesis of α , β mixture of K6P2Wl8O62 involved the heating of Na2WO4.2H2O solu￾tion, followed by the addition of phosphoric acid to the solution. Then, the solu￾tion was refluxed for 5–13 hours and subjected to filtration. The filtrate was further 
treated with solid KCl to obtain the crystals. The α -form was synthesized using the 
α, β mixture, by oxidizing it with bromine followed by bicarbonate and acid workup 
and subsequently recrystallized from hot solution (Finke et al., 1987). Additionally, 
Contant et al. explained the preparation method of potassium octadecatungustodi￾phosphates which involved heating the mixture of sodium tungstate and excess phos￾phoric acid at reflux conditions; the synthetic route can be given by the following 
equation (Contant et al., 1990): 
2­	 6­
18 [WO 4 ] + 32 H P3 4 O ® [P2 1 WO 8 62 ] + 30 [H P2 4 O ] ­ +18 H 2 O
3.2.6	 FormaTIon oF unIque TopologIcally ImporTanT penTagonal 
buIlDIng blocKs anD TheIr selF-assembly For nanoscopIc 
molecular InorganIc conTaIners 
The idea for the introduction of curvature in any of the building blocks of the 
inorganic clusters pioneered the formation of nanosized inorganic clusters having 
concave surfaces. The introduction of central pentagonal bipyramidal {MoO7}­
subunit harnessed the generation of the arch-shaped pentagonal {Mo (Mo)5}-type 
unit, a transient member of the combinatorial dynamic library (CDL) formed on the 
acidification of the molybdate solution. The incomplete reduction of the acidified 
molybdate solution influenced the generation of different building blocks, which 
can self-assemble among themselves to form molybdenum-oxide-based giant clus￾ters. The pentagonal units, the major building blocks of those giant clusters were 
also transferable for the fabrication of orthorhombic Mo(V)Sb and Mo(V)Te oxide 
catalytic phases (Sadakane et  al., 2009). Corresponding pure tungsten-based or 
mixed Mo and W based–pentagonal units were also common (Müller & Gouzerh, 
2012). The representative structures of the container molecules were the following: 
3.2.6.1 Icosahedral Inorganic Superfullerenes or the Keplerates 
The self-assembly of {MoVI(MoVI)5O21(H2O)6}6−-type pentagonal and {MoV
2O4 
(H2O)2}2+-type dumbbell-shaped dinuclear building blocks in the carboxylate buf￾fer (pH about 4) led to the formation of icosahedral shaped [{MoVI(MoVI)5O21(H 
2O)6}12{MoV
2O4(RCO2)}30]42− nanocluster (where R  =  H or alkyl), the topology of 60 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
which matched with the capsid of the most elementary virus, “Satellite Tobacco 
Necrosis Virus” (STNV; Müller & Gouzerh, 2012). As a comparison, similar to the 
12 capsomers of the virus, the central pentagonal bipyramidal {MoO7} subunit of 
12-{Mo(Mo)5}-type pentagons, were also found at the icosahedron’s vertices and were 
linked by 30-{MoV
2}-type dinuclear linkers to form the prototypical capsule with an 
approximate diameter of 3 nm. The linkers of the capsule spanned the vertices of a 
truncated icosahedron, being comparable in shape with C60-Buckminsterfullerene 
but much larger in size justifying its name of “Inorganic Superfullerenes”. However, 
the combination of pentagonal and the dinuclear linkers of the Mo132 capsule can 
also be considered in the following disposition: {Mo11}12≡ {(MoVI)(MoVI5)(MoV
5)} 
reminiscent to Kepler’s early hypothetical representation of the cosmos, as reported 
in his work Mysterium Cosmogrphicum (Kemp, 1998). 
As a general phenomenon, the introduction of preformed {MoV
2O4(H2O)2}2+ 
or {MoV
2O2S2(H2O)2}2+ building blocks into the potent reference center of molyb￾dates or tungstates at pH  =  4, resulted in the generation of {M72Mo60O372}n− or 
{M72Mo60S60O312}n− (M = Mo/W and n depended on the numerals of the cavity inter￾nal ligands present; Müller  & Gouzerh, 2012). Similarly, the presence of certain 
trivalent metal ions, for example, Fe3+, Cr3+ or oxo-species like (VO)2+ in an acidified 
aqueous solution of molybdate or tungstate at pH ≈ 2, led to the evolution of the 
smaller Keplerate of the type {M72M’30}n−; M = Mo/W and M’ = FeIII, CrIII or VOII, 
n depended on the type and the number of the cavity internal ligands present and the 
presence of extra Mo fragments inside the cavity), where the M’ atoms spanned the 
vertices of an icosidodecahedron (Müller & Gouzerh, 2012). The {M72M’30}-clusters 
consisting of 20 {M3M’3O6}-pores (pore outer aperture 0.9 pm) can be plugged by 
ammonium, partially aquatic potassium, barium or gadolinium ions. Although the 
smaller Keplerates are mostly neutral, they tend to behave as “polyprotic nanoacids” 
due to higher Lewis’s acidity of the M’ centers (when M’= Fe/ Cr) by the deproton￾ation of water molecules coordinated to M’ centers. 
3.2.6.2 The Giant Big Wheel or the Bielefeld Wheel: Synthesis 
Molybdenum blue solutions were known to exist naturally by the oxidation of plentiful 
Mo-minerals, especially with its disulfides. In fact, the intervalence charge transfer 
(IVCT) related deep blue coloration is the most abundant species of molybdenum in a 
mild reducing environment, and previously, it could also be synthesized in laboratory 
by simple reduction of the molybdate solution in acidic medium. Several distinct com￾pounds based on wheel-shaped nanocontainer molecules were described by single￾crystal X-ray crystallography and other physical methods since the last 20 years, and 
they may be divided into two classes: Mo154, the large wheel and Mo176 or the Bielefeld 
wheel (Müller & Gouzerh, 2012). Subsequently, Müller and co-workers used NH2OH 
as a reductant; just a few single crystals were separated from a Mo-blue solution. The 
formula was first published with a negative charge error limit (owing to ambiguity in 
the number of protons), but the Bielefeld team labored for months and finally arrived to 
the accurate formula to be [Mo154(NO)14O448H14(H2O)70]28- ≡ [MoVI126MoV
28] ≡ {Mo154} 
as available today (Müller & Serain, 2000). At low pH levels, the Mo36-type cluster 
was recognized as the dominating member of the CDL in aqueous solution, which 
is composed of {(Mo)Mo5}-units (one pentagonal MoO7 unit distributing edges with Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 61 
 
five MoO6 octahedra; Gouzerh & Che, 2006). The species like {MoV
2O4}2+, Fe3+ or 
(VO)2+ were being considered as linkers for the formation of spherical/wheel-shaped 
species by the addition of these linkers to the {Mo36}-cluster’s aqueous solution and 
thereby were utilized as a promoter for the efficient nucleation of Mo36 plugs into the 
inner cavity of the Mo154 wheel structure, which was considered to unveil the central 
dogma of nanoscopic coordinative nucleation under confinement, resembling the dif￾ferent modes of molybdenum storage inside the Azatobactor vinelandii. Interestingly, 
they were also able to replicate similar scenarios in the laboratory conditions as well 
and therefore, justifying the role of the POM systems as the “Nano-Labs”, which will 
also be benchmarked here for energy storage applications. 
3.2.6.3 Nano-Hedgehog or the Blue Lemon 
Apart from these “Keplerates”, the Bielefeld researchers also created a protein-sized 
massive POM cluster of 368 molybdenum atoms, branded as “nano-hedgehog or 
blue lemon”, due to its peculiar shape with metal-oxo spikes facing outward (Müller 
et  al., 2001). The self-assembly pathway was not only dependent on the building 
blocks of the molybdenum dynamic library but also on the pH of the medium and the 
existence of foreign cations as exemplified in the template formation of {M(SO4)}16 
(where M = K+, NH4
+) ring inside the Mo146-type wheel. However, in the absence of 
those cations, the same reaction mixture results in the construction of an extremely 
large (comparable to the size of the proteins like hemoglobin) mixed-valent nanoclu￾ster containing 368 Mo atoms. This largest inorganic nanocluster also belongs to the 
Robin Day classification III and is the intermediate regarding its degree of reduction 
(~30%) compared to the capsules (higher reduced) and the wheels (lower reduced). 
3.2.7 meThoDology oF pom-FabrIcaTeD InorganIc/organIc composITes 
Organic–inorganic hybrid materials established on polymers with conjugation 
received considerable attention in recent years. These materials were used as elec￾trodes for batteries, SCs, fuel cells and solar cells among other energy conversion, 
production and storage technologies. Their importance relied on the wide variety of 
organic and inorganic counterparts from which these hybrids can be constructed. 
A significant amount of new structural polyoxometalates were synthesized, result￾ing in the possibilities of sophisticated nanoscale devices (sensors, nanocontainers, 
and nanoreactors). Controlling the surface textures and characteristics of polyoxo￾metalates, as well as the capacity to build two- and three-dimensionally organized 
structures using efficient organization techniques, are critical in the polyoxometa￾late-based applications (Fan et al., 2012). 
The conductive organic polymers (COPs) bear reversible redox as well as conducting 
properties; also, their low cost and good processability assisted them in being promis￾ing candidates for the fabrication of POM-based composites. Various COPs and their 
derivatives were utilized to fabricate hybrid materials with the POMs, among those 
some common COPs are polythiophene (PT), polyaniline (PANI) and polypyrrole 
(PPy). Typically, the POM can be incorporated into the COP matrix in two ways: (1) the 
deposition of polymer film on the substrate by electropolymerization technique or spin 
coating followed by the dipping of polymer film into the POM-containing solution for 62 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
its immobilization into the matrix of polymers and (2) the chemical or electrochemical 
oxidation of the monomer molecules in the vicinity of POM solution resulted in the 
creation of a polymeric membrane (generally used as the electrolyte in this method). 
The polymerization of monomers like thiophene, pyrrole and aniline is supported by 
the high ionic conductivity, strong oxidizing power and acidic character of heteropoly 
acids. This technique involved depositing of a polymer film on the working electrode 
and doping it with POM molecules, leading to the establishment of a nanostructured 
hybrid material in which the bulky POM molecules were confined in a COP matrix 
(Genovese & Lian, 2015). Gomez-Romero and coworkers reported a hybrid nanocom￾posite material consisting of PANI and polyoxomolybdate, H3[PMo12O40] {PMo12}, 
as electrodes for electrochemical capacitors in a solid state. There are two methods 
that were employed for the production of PANI–POM hybrid materials: (1) combined 
chemical–electrochemical method which involved treatment of aniline with {PMo12} 
followed by the transfer of the resulting product into an acidic solution which was finally 
electrodeposited on a carbon foil, and (2) the direct electrochemical polymerization 
method in which direct electro-polymerization occurred from aniline and {PMo12} 
solution. The authors found thicker, more porous films by a direct method which exhib￾ited higher Faradic current than the films prepared by the combined method. Similarly, 
in 2006, Gomez-Romero and co-workers further reported another hybrid POM com￾posite PEDOT/{PMo12}, for its applications in electrochemical supercapacitors. They 
used a modified synthetic procedure and employed hydrogen peroxide as an external 
oxidant during the synthesis, which was found to have a significant impact on the mate￾rial’s morphology. The layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembling is a promising method, 
typically used in order to fabricate multilayer-nanocomposites, in which oppositely 
charged species like POM anions, cationic surfactants, polymers, polyelectrolytes and 
biological molecules were deposited based on the electrostatic interaction. This method 
may be used to immobilize polyoxometalate clusters into the ultrathin films, allowing 
for a great degree of control over the homogeneity, thickness and inclination of each 
layer at the nanoscale size and the formed composite films showed excellent proper￾ties like electrolytic and photochromic activities. In this process, the first step was the 
immersion of negatively charged substrate like polystyrene-sulfonate (PSS) form or a 
charged monolayer form of an alkyl-silane or alkyl-thiol into a solution of polycation 
due to which adsorption of polycation occurred and formation of a complete layer hap￾pened. Thereafter, immersing the sample in POM solution caused its next film to adsorb 
the nanoclusters, and repeating this alternating deposition led to the formation of the 
multilayers. Thus, every deposition stage took only a few moments due to the high elec￾trostatic interactions; the only need is that the constituents be suitably charged in order 
to adhere irreversibly at the interfaces (Liu et al., 2003). Aside from the cationic connec￾tors, there were a number of additional factors that can influence the architecture of LbL 
thin films, including anion charge, deposition duration, ionic strength, pH and coating 
concentration of the solution. In 2003, Dong and co-workers at Changchun Institute 
of Applied Chemistry fabricated metalloporphyrin-polyoxometalate hybrid film of 
[Tetrakis (N-methylpyridyl) porphyrinato] cobalt (CoTMPyP) and 1:12 silicotungstic 
acid (SiW12) by LBL technique. In acidic conditions, the SiW12-containing multilayer 
screens exhibited exceptional electrocatalytic performance for the hydrogen evolution 
reaction (HER) at significantly higher positive potential. Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 63 
 
 
 
 
The Langmuir, as well as Langmuir-Blodgett methods, were some promising 
routes to organize polyoxometalate clusters into films. The hollow form of Keplerate￾type polyoxometalate {Mo132} was modified by the cationic surfactant, dimethyl￾dioctadecylammonium (DODA), to obtain surfactant-encapsulated clusters (SECs); 
for example, (DODA)40(NH4)2[(H2O)n@Mo132O372(CH3COO)30 (H2O)72] (n = 50), a 
single anionic Keplerate cluster residing in a hydrophobic shell of 40 DODA+ cations 
(Volkmer et al., 2000). The surfactant encapsulated Keplerates were prepared by 
the treatment of the aqueous solution of {Mo132} with the trichloromethane solu￾tion of surfactant DODA-bromide through phase transfer. The cationic part of the 
surfactant molecule was facing toward the negatively charged surface of the cluster 
due to the electrostatic attractions. Similarly, mixed-valence gigantic inorganic ring, 
[Mo154O462H14(H2O)70]
14- ({Mo154}) and DODA were combined by a cation-metathesis 
to form (DODA)20[Mo154O462H8(H2O)70]-hybrid based Langmuir–Blodgett film. The 
chemical stability of the wheels encapsulated by the DODA cationic surfactants in 
CHCl3 was found to be higher than that of the “native” sodium salt of the {Mo154}­
ring in water owing to the semi-hydrophobic confinement derived restricted access 
of water molecules to the nanocluster interior (Akutagawa et al., 2008). 
3.2.8	 synThesIs oF The pom@nano DomaIn carbon 
parTIculaTe–baseD composITes 
So far, we have discussed a lot about POMs that were composed of d-block tran￾sition elements and nano-sized metal anionic oxide, and because of their various 
redox characteristics, they constituted sustainable targets for electrocatalysis. The 
Keggin-type POMs comprised of an encapsulated central (XO4) tetrahedral arrange￾ment and three octahedral connecting corners, edges and end sites made by 12 frag￾ments of MO6 octahedral addenda atoms, which provided favorable accessibility 
of electron transfer through the empty d-orbitals along the metal–oxygen bonds. 
Photochemically, radiolytically and electrochemically Keggin polyoxometalates 
were known to execute stepwise multi-electron reversible redox processes with 
minimal structural alterations; hence, the replacements of addenda or heteroatoms 
can readily change the redox characteristics. It had a broad range of electrochemi￾cal applications, including energy conversion and storage system fuel cells, battery 
applications, pseudocapacitors and sensors, as well as possible electrode material in 
batteries (Y. Kim & Shanmugam, 2013). In acidic media, POMs undergo reversible 
one- or even multi-electron accumulation to create a differentially reduced form of 
POMs, as indicated in Equations 3.1–3.3. 64 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
 
Keggin POMs come in three different crystalline forms: primary, secondary and 
tertiary. The primary form was widely distributed on support and acted as a nano￾Bronsted acid, in an aqueous solution, protons are ionized to produce polyanions. 
However, due to their unique crystal structure, POMs degrade in very dilute aqueous 
media, prompting researchers to immobilize the POMs on apposite base materials 
like silica, metal cations (Fe, Co, Cs, etc.), polymer chains with positive charges 
and on nano-carbon supports. However, there were still some drawbacks, such as a 
strong electrostatic reaction between positively charged polymer matrix and nega￾tively charged POMs were also known to indulge structural or, more important, 
functional modifications. Illustratively, the silica was not suited for electrochemical 
investigations due to its poor conductivity while the POM’s natural stacking interac￾tions with carbon materials provided it an excellent support characteristic. POMs 
were dispersed using a variety of materials made of carbon; comprising activated 
carbon, carbon nanotubes, highly ordered pyrolytic graphite, glassy carbon and gra￾phene sheets (Schwegler et al., 1992). 
3.2.9 preparaTIon oF graphene–poms hybrID sheeT 
Graphene was a one-of-a-kind contender for a POM base material because of its 
small area of surface and high dispersibility in the nano-dimension. Due to its 
variable characteristics like a large area of the surface, high mechanical and ther￾mal characteristics, as well as good electrical properties, graphene, which was 
made up of a monolayer of sp2 carbon atoms, was an appealing material in several 
study domains, comprising electrocatalytic approaches of various kind. However, 
the intensity of the contact between graphene oxide and POMs was not well inves￾tigated in nature. Tessonnier et al. used the POMs to improve the dispersion of 
a thermally reduced graphene oxide (rGO) sheet by using functional groups in 
alkyl chains over the graphene layers (Schwegler et al., 1992). Non-reduced oxygen 
functional moieties, like hydroxyl and carboxyl groups, were partially visible on 
the graphene oxide surface when reduced using the hydrazine reduction technique. 
The electrostatic reaction between phosphomolybdic acid and graphene oxide was 
enhanced by these functional groups. Because this contact was significantly more 
powerful than the charge transfer reaction between pure carbon and POMs, it can 
improve the binding affinity between the two-component materials, resulting in 
an immobilized hybrid catalyst. A modified Hummer technique (Schwegler et al., 
1992) was used to oxidize graphene oxide (GO) made of graphite powder. The 
mixture was then neutralized and dried in an oven after being reduced with hydra￾zine hydrate in a nitrogen environment. Using an ultrasonicator, the rGO is dis￾seminated and ultra-sonicated in deionized water (DI) water for 30 minutes, which 
often induces exfoliation. The POM and the rGO solution were used because they 
can behave as a Bronsted acid and base, respectively, reacting via electrostatic 
contact (Scheme 3.1). The graphene solution was diluted with ethylene glycol in 
this phase to spread the POM over the graphene layer; the diol solvent also helped 
to maintain a suitable, moderate hydrophilic–hydrophobic balance and the pH for 
the interaction with POMs like phosphomolybdic acid. Ultimately, to eliminate 
any physisorbed POMs on the rGO, the filtered contents were rinsed thoroughly Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 65 
 
SCHEME 3.1 Schematic representation of the synthesis of nanohybrid of rGO-Mo132 nano￾container as the cathode material. 
with DI water, before being dried overnight in a vacuum oven to yield charge￾driven homogenous and aggregation-free nanocomposites. 
3.2.10	 preparaTIon oF carbon nanoTube–pom anD carbon 
nanoFIber–pom nanocomposITe 
Chemisorption was a simple and effective method for making nanostructured car￾bon-POM composites because the carbon surface and POM molecules can interact 
strongly. The followings were some of the most typical stages in the production of 
carbon-POM composites: (1) the oxidation of a carbon substrate with a strong acid 
to provide surface functional groups that can be utilized like a POM binding site; 
(2) the carbon substance was subsequently dispersed in an organic-POM or aqueous 
solution, which was disturbed at room temperature by stirring or ultrasonication; 
(3) the solid result was then washed multiple times to eliminate any loose surplus 
species before being dried to produce the surface customized carbon-POM com￾posite (Genovese & Lian, 2015). Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), carbon 
nanofibers (CNFs), mesoporous carbon, activated carbon and graphene may all be 
treated with the aforementioned synthetic methodologies. Cuentas-Gallegos et al. 
(2006) used this method to synthesize POM-MWCNT, as well as POM-CNF, com￾posites, emphasizing the relevance of carbon oxidation. They oxidized both CNF 66 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
 
and MWCNT materials by refluxing them for 7 hours in 2M HNO3, 2M HNO3 with 
0.5 M H2SO4 or 2M H2SO4 and then sonicating the oxidized carbon in a 50 or 75 
weight percent solution of the Keggin POM [PMo12O40]3− {PMo12}. Because of the 
acid treatment, on the carbon surface, different oxygen functional groups, such as 
carbonyl, hydroxyl and carboxylic acid were formed, as indicated by the Fourier 
transform infrared (FTIR) results. The carbon specimens which were reacted with 
2M H2SO4, had the largest concentration of carboxylic acid moieties, which resulted 
a composite matter that was the most distributed, homogeneously ordered {PMo12} 
on the carbon surfaces (Cuentas-Gallegos et al., 2006). 
In research of CNT-[P2W18O62]6- composites, Kang et al. (2004) also dem￾onstrated that the chemisorption process resulted in the delivery of oxygen to its 
surface; they discovered that CNTs that were not oxidized earlier had practically 
negligible POM adhesion. However, the HNO3-refluxed CNTs represented a homo￾geneous and finely dispersed surface ornamentation of {P2W18} nanoparticles after 
sonication in the [P2W18O62]6− {P2W18} solution. As a consequence of these findings, 
it was concluded that oxidized carboxylic groups provided a distinct binding location 
for POM chemisorption and this hypothesis as well as the general process for POM 
chemisorption over the carbon surface, was already widely identified by the FTIR 
method (Cuentas-Gallegos et al., 2006; Kang et al., 2004). The distinctive peak at 
1700 cm−1 (matching to the C=O stretching form of carboxylic groups) in FTIR did 
not vanish for oxidized carbon and carbon–POM composites, but it was moved to 
somewhat higher frequencies, which implied a POM–carboxylic site interaction that 
the carbonyl component of the group was not consumed. Cuentas-Gallegos proposed 
the following mechanism for strong carbon-POM chemisorption that occurs at the 
hydroxyl end of the group, resulting in electron transfer along with the POM reduc￾tion (Cuentas-Gallegos et al., 2006). The concentration of the POM solution, as well 
as the level of carbon oxidation, was an essential specification in the chemisorption 
operation; higher POM solution concentrations result in more POM molecules being 
loaded onto the carbon surface, however, greater quantities of POM might cause 
agglomeration. Because the carbon material was dispersed in a more dilute poly￾oxometalate solution, the average POM crystallite size was lower, and the surface 
modification is more homogeneous and well-dispersed along the whole surface. 
3.3	 APPLICATION OF POM AS ELECTROCHEMICAL 
SUPERCAPACITORS 
Electrochemical capacitors (ECs), aka SCs, deliver superior advancements, practi￾cally in providing greater power density in contrast to batteries; owing to the depen￾dency of their charge storage, the reaction occurs on the surface of the electrode 
materials, in the absence of any diffusion of ions in the bulk materials. Concerning 
the fast harvesting of energy or elevated power distribution capacity, SCs can engage 
as an optimistic substitute for rechargeable batteries. The earliest EC prototype has 
been patented in the year 1957 (Becker, 1957) and the technology has advanced 
ahead to explore the pulsed current system for the fulfillment of the large cur￾rent density together with high specific power (10,000 W Kg−1) for a short period. 
Therefore, it can also be employed to distribute high power pulses while averting Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 67 
the major energy storage units (e.g., battery) from rapid performance deterioration. 
Based on the mechanism of charge storage and functionalization of active materi￾als, electrochemical capacitors can be sorted into three basic classifications, namely, 
EDLCs, pseudo-capacitors and EDLC-pseudo hybrid-SCs. EDLC is the most preva￾lent supercapacitor and is used most frequently in commercial markets, where it 
is also categorized as a wet electrolyte capacitor incorporated with a liquid-phase 
electrolyte containing ions to provide optimum charge transportation. The major￾ity of the liquid phase electrolytes utilize aprotic solvents like diethyl carbonate, 
propylene carbonate, ethylene carbonate or dimethyl carbonate, where the presence 
of solvated salts like lithium hexafluoroarsenate (LiAsF6) or tetraethylammonium 
tetrafluoroborate (TEABF4) and others, are desirable to increase the specific conduc￾tivity. Electrostatic interaction is being used to stockpile the energy in the Helmholtz 
double layers at the point of interface of the electrode surface and the electrolyte by 
EDLC, whereas the derivation of the double-layer capacitance is due to the depen￾dency on the potential of electrostatically reserved surface energy at the interface 
of capacitor electrodes. The second class of SCs, which are known as the pseudoca￾pacitors or Faradaic supercapacitors, are commercially more inert than EDLC and 
have much resemblance with batteries than capacitors themselves, according to their 
operational mechanism. The phenomenon of pseudocapacitance occurs when the 
materials of the electrodes moderate the transfer of electrons to undergo a redox 
reaction on the electrode’s surface, where the reactions enable the crossing of energy 
across the double layer, consonant to the charging and discharging of batteries. With 
the combination of EDLC and pseudocapacitors, hybrid supercapacitors have been 
fabricated, which are the newest and most advanced third type of capacitors. A higher 
amount of specific capacitance is displayed by the hybrid SCs in comparison to the 
conventional EDLCs and the rare pseudocapacitors individually, where the combina￾tion of these two kinds of technology accounts for the asymmetric behavior of these 
capacitors, which is an enhancing factor in its corresponding capacitance values. In 
this type of SC, the negative electrode contains the composites of the same materi￾als as that of the pseudocapacitive electrode and due to the occurrence of Faradaic 
reactions on the negative electrode’s surface; the energy density of these type of SCs 
are very high. 
One of the major obstacles faced by SCs is the low energy density along with 
other soaring obstructions like high production cost, surpassing self-discharge with 
low voltage per cell and the most fruitful effort to overcome the low energy density 
challenge can be realized by fabricating novel and more effective SC electrode mate￾rials (Saubanère et al., 2016). Carbon materials in their diversified formations are 
the most preferred electrode materials for SCs as they possess a large surface area, 
a lower level of toxicity, cost-effectiveness and incorporated electrode fabrication 
technologies. The EDLCs are generally equipped with electrodes of carbon materi￾als like activated carbon, where they showcase many beneficial attributes, namely, 
promising electrical properties and high activated surface area at an average cost as 
well. The activated carbon materials exemplifying porous structures can be obtained 
using activation processes, often exhibiting an extended pore size sequence with 
micropores (<2 nm), mesopores (2–50 nm) and macropores (>50 nm) (Shi, 1996). 
Current predilections in research propound the fact of increasing aspirations of the 68 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
CNTs as an electrode material for EDLC. With a two-dimensional layered structure 
possessing the thickness of an atom, graphene has materialized as a prolific carbon 
material that conveys a high prospect for energy storage devices. The 2D architec￾ture of graphene has been executed to attain a capacitance up to 550 F·g−1, and this 
value justifies the excellent aspects of graphene: chemical stability and high electri￾cal conductivity along with an immensely high specific surface area of 2630 m2·g−1 
(T. Y. Kim et al., 2011). Metal oxides also confer a potent substitution for electrode 
materials due to their low resistivity and high specific capacitance and are gener￾ally applied on pseudocapacitors. The most famous metal oxides are MnO2, NiO, 
RuO2 and IrO2 owing to their profound characteristics like environment amiability 
with an exceptional capacitive performance of MnO2 (S. Chen et al., 2010), endured 
specific capacitance of NiO, which is electrochemically converted from Ni(OH)2 
(Wu & Wang, 2012), and extended stability for the higher number of cycles of RuO2, 
fabricated via the electrodeposition method (Gujar et al., 2007). Conducting poly￾mers have been proven to be another profound element for pseudocapacitor elec￾trode materials with fairly higher values of conductivity, capacitance and equivalent 
series resistance where augmented capacitance values have been observed for a syn￾ergistically stable system of PANI nanofiber composites integrated with graphene 
nanosheets (Li et al., 2011). Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), a conjuga￾tive polymer with conducting properties, exhibits authoritative capacitance perfor￾mances and sets forth standard effective potentials to be asserted as an electrode 
material. In 2014, a novel approach has been grasped to merge poly(3,4-ethylene￾dioxythiophene): poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT: PSS) with graphitic carbon nitride 
(g-C3N4) by LBL assembly to obtain a constructive material for the electrode of SCs. 
The resultant hybrid material has displayed a twofold increment in specific capaci￾tance in contrast to the conventional PEDOT electrodes, where a fixed 96.5% capaci￾tance stability has been accomplished even after the completion of 1000 cycles (X. 
Chen et al., 2015). In the case of hybrid SCs, both polarizable (e.g., carbon) and non￾polarizable (e.g., conducting polymer or metal) electrodes are employed for the stor￾age of charges, where the utilization of both Faradic and non-Faradic processes are 
involved and procured high energy storage capacity while taking advantages of the 
particular properties of both the capacitor and the battery-type electrodes. The three 
significant classifications of hybrid SCs, considering the differences in their designs 
and operational mechanisms, are asymmetric hybrid supercapacitors, composite 
hybrid supercapacitors (CHSs) and hybrid supercapacitors that can be recharged like 
batteries. The asymmetric-type hybrid SCs are equipped with two disparate elec￾trodes, where one acts as a capacitive electrode, while the other acts as a Faradic 
electrode. The applications of carbon derivative materials (Karthikeyan et al., 2010) 
in the capacitor-type electrode instigate harvesting the charge like an electrochemi￾cal capacitor and employing metal or metal oxides (Ma et al., 2017) for the Faradic 
electrodes. However, the principal motive of the CHSs is to synergistically enhance 
the output yield of cycling stability, specific capacitance and conductivity via syn￾ergistic affiliation of the properties of both carbon and metal oxides. The carbon 
or carbon-derived materials will promote the channeling through charge transfer 
processes and by the assistance of redox reactions. The storage of charges can be 
accomplished through the variable valency of metal-oxide materials, contributing Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 69 
to higher specific capacitance and high energy density. Whereas, subjected to asym￾metric hybrid SCs, rechargeable battery–type hybrid SCs are also assembled via 
fusion of two separate electrodes, such as the union of a SC electrode along with a 
battery electrode. This unique hybridization of two electrodes assembly has proven 
to satisfy the higher energy demand of a SC and higher power need hours through a 
battery, assisted by the synergistic combination of energy prospects of batteries with 
cycle life, power, long periodic stability and short recharge time of SCs. Typically, 
PbO2, Ni(OH)2 and LTO(Li4Ti5O12) are the most researched electrode materials to 
fabricate the anode and activated carbon for cathode associated with the battery-like 
hybrid SCs (Du Pasquier et al., 2003). 
Furthermore, the compounds of POMs are also preferred as the electrode mate￾rial for the SCs, as a number of cationic substances like conducting polymers and 
polymeric ionic liquids are incorporated as nano-hybrids with anionic POMs to con￾struct electrodes. These negatively charged inorganic entities with highly porous 
architecture and tunable solubility and with other exclusive characteristics of facile 
redox chemistry, charge transfer and photo- and electrochemistry stand out as an 
obligatory successor of nano-ingredients for the construction of nanocomposites for 
a broad range of energy applications like electrochemical/photochemical catalysis, 
electrochemical sensors, energy conversion and storage utility (Ueda, 2018). The 
introductory hybridization of POMs with conducting polymers to functionalize the 
system as a solid-state electrode material for SCs has been conducted in Barcelona, 
in 2003 where the H3[PMo12O40]/PANI nanocomposite, constructed by electrodepo￾sition method, exhibited an energy density value of 24.4 mJ·cm−2 and an excellent 
capacitance of 195 mF·cm−2 with retaining the cycle stability up to 500 cycles 
(Gómez-Romero et al., 2003). After establishing the name of POM as a potent can￾didate for SC electrode material the researchers from Barcelona have reported two 
novel hybrid composite systems with convenient energy storage applications: an 
amalgamated electrode prepared via assembling phosphotungstic acid (H3PW12O40), 
{PW12} with activated carbon (AC), in 2013 and another hybrid material fabricated 
by merging {PW12} with rGO with the help of hydrothermal treatment, in 2014 
(Suárez-Guevara et al., 2014a, 2014b). The {PW12}/AC composite with the integrated 
properties of the redox-active POM clusters have been added with the double-layer 
capacitance that guides to an inherent incrementation of specific capacitance (254 
F·g−1 for PW12/AC) and increment in the operating voltage by a factor of 60%, 
whereas the specific capacitance value for the {PW12}/RGO composite has been 
recorded to be 276 F·g−1. The organic materials, specifically nano-carbon and its 
derivatives along with organic conducting polymers have validated themselves as the 
most influential companions of POMs to fabricate electrodes for energy storage pur￾poses. This is also because of high conductivity performances and effective chemi￾cal, along with physical, stability of the organic materials as well as the POM 
skeleton. For instance, two Keggin-type heteropolyanions, [PMo12O40]3− {PMo12}and 
[PMo10V2O40]5− {PMo10V2}, have been fused with MWCNTs with the aid of LBL 
deposition for the acquiring incremental in charge storage capacity, for the surface 
modification along with obtaining pseudocapacitance characteristics (Bajwa et al., 
2013). The capacity of charge storage has been heightened by an immense factor of 
five, along with each coating layer of either {PMo12} or {PMo10V2}. With the 70 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
substitution of two vanadium oxides, the exhibition of storage capacity of charge for 
{PMo10V2} has been similar to that of {PMo12}, although the potential window got 
broad. Generally, the conventional chemisorption method is adopted for the fabrica￾tion of nanohybrids of POMs and nano-carbon composites, where the noncovalent 
interactions are commonly predominant and a direct synergistic interaction prevails 
between the POMs and the oxidized surface of carbon composites. Besides the 
Keggin structures, Dawson-type POM merged with AC to assemble SC electrode 
materials has been first reported in 2015, where Dawson-like (NH4)6[P2Mo18O62]·14.2H2O 
{P2Mo18} massed with AC, have exhibited profound electrochemical properties, 
thanks to the cooperative characteristics of the pseudocapacitance of {P2Mo18} and 
the double-layer capacitance of AC (Mu et al., 2015). With a specific capacitance of 
275 F·g−1 at a high value of current density of 6 A·g−1, the {P2Mo18}/AC composite 
electrode also maintains a unique rate capability of 89%, even in the conditions of 
incremental current density from 2 to 6 A·g−1. Under other conditions, the interaction 
of conducting polymers (CPs) with POMs is majorly electrostatic, where, after the 
fabrication of CP via the spin-coating technique or the electro-polymerization tech￾nique, the films of CP are soaked in the solution of POMs and the cationic–anionic 
electrostatic interaction between the CPs and POMs facilitates the immobilization of 
the latter into the polymer matrix. In recent years, many research works have been 
devoted to the new generation of metal-organic framework (MOF)–derived elec￾trodes that can be stabilized kinetically via the functionalization of the ligand or by 
the formation of greatly conductive composites with two-dimensional planar compo￾sition (Sheberla et  al., 2017). Since 2012, MOFs have been distinguished as the 
potential candidates for electrochemical capacitor applications, owing to their many 
efficient features like versatile structural architecture, higher specific surface area 
and embodied pseudocapacitive redox centers. However, owing to the overall medio￾cre chemical stability and electrical conductivity, many undesired restrictions are 
observed in the case of MOFs for electrochemical applications. So, as a progressive 
step towards the synergistic improvement of energy storage devices, integration of 
POMs with MOFs has been proposed to fabricate pristine crystalline POM-based 
MOFs (POMOFs), which consist of an architecture of well-distributed active sites 
(Chai, Gómez-García, et al., 2019; Roy et al., 2018). An integration of arsenic-based 
Keggin-type POM (AsW12O40) with Ag-MOF to submit two composites of 
three-dimensional POMOFs, namely, (imi)2[{Ag3(tpb)2}2(H2O){AsW12O40}2]·6H2O 
(a) and [(Ag7bpy7Cl2){AsWV
2WVI10O40}]·H2O (b), where imi  =  imidazole, 
tpb = 1,2,4,5-tetrakis(4-pyridyl)benzene and bpy = 4,4′ -bipyridyl, have been reported 
in 2020 (Cui et al., 2020). With intricated three-dimensional networks, novel topolo￾gies and intersecting channels, the resultant POMOFs showcased higher order of 
capacitances: 929.7 and 986.1 F·g−1 for (a) and (b), respectively, at a current density 
of 3 A·g−1, along with greater capacity retention rates, better rate capabilities, 
improved conductivities and electrochemical recyclability as compared to their indi￾vidual components. Further, two more hybrid Mo-based POMOF composites have 
been synthesized over hydrothermal reaction, which has been functionalized as 
effective capacitor electrode materials: [CuI
H2(C12H12N6)(PMo12O40)]·[(C6H15N) 
(H2O)2] (c) and [CuII
2(C12H12N6)4(PMoVI9MoV
3O39)] (d), where the two-dimensional 
compound (c) hosts free triethylamine and water molecules whereas the compound Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 71 
(d) existed with a three-dimensional host–guest system, in which entrapment of one￾dimensional POM chains has been observed (Chai, Xin, et al., 2019). Distinguished 
conclusions have been transpired where the composite (c) based electrode displayed 
higher order of specific capacitance that is not only superior to the generality of the 
reported SC POMOF materials but also superior than most advanced SC electrode 
materials that are based on POM and MOF individually. It is an overall indisputable 
point to culminate that the synergistic existence of POM-based MOF composites 
with the cooperative characteristics of water-soluble POM entities and insoluble 
crystalline MOF units, renders vast prospects to broaden the horizons of the POM 
applications and unfolds new research areas for the utilization of MOFs in the field 
of electrochemistry together with energy storage devices. Most recently, hierarchical 
mesoporous carbons (HMCs) were combined with phosphomolybdic acid, 
H3PMo12O40 (PMo12), with a facile synthetic route that can be tuned up to the indus￾trial level, for its application as a hybrid supercapacitor electrode material (HMC– 
PMo12) (Fuentes-Quezada et al., 2022). The results proposed the idea of the adsorption 
of PMo12 Keggins on mesopores can exhibit maximum incorporative as well as elec￾trochemical effects than that of incorporation occurring in the micropores. This 
novel Keggin-Carbon material hybrid electrode improved the electrolyte diffusion 
owing to the relatively larger interconnected mesopores of dimensions about 25 nm, 
and a considerable enhancement (119%) was observed in the capacitance of this 
hybrid electrode along with improved rate capability performance and electron 
transport. To incapacitate the stability issues of polymers, mixed Keggin compound 
of vanadium and tungstate, K5H2[PV4W8O40] ·11H2O (PV4W8) was established into 
the matrix system of polypyrrol, yielding a conventional metal oxide–conducting 
polymer hybrid electrode material (PV4W8/PPy (symmetric)) for the energy storage 
applications (Vannathan et al., 2022). The improvement of ion transfer was reported 
due to this very incorporation of metal oxide on the conducting polymer system. 
Meanwhile, the reported asymmetric PV4W8-PPy/PPy hybrid composite displayed a 
profound cycle stability with excellent specific capacitance of 291 F g−1, which was 
greater than that of conventional PPy and PV4W8 at a current density of 0.4 A g−1. 
Functionalization of the unique properties of the POMs, like the adaptable 
redox actions and tunable surface architecture along with the association of other 
POM entities, can result in a more versatile prospective in designing the future 
generation energy storage electrodes. So recognizing these facts for the upcom￾ing endeavors of POM chemistry should be focused on examining novel ideas 
to optimize the functionalities of the composites as well as upgrade their design 
for electrode surfaces for high-throughput energy storage applications and other 
objectives. 
3.4 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 
It is a great challenge to develop portable, cost-effective, environmentally benign 
and easily modulable electronic materials consisting of relatively larger power 
density along with long cycling life as a charge storage device. In this context, 
POMs have emerged as potential material in energy storage applications due to 
their outstanding redox effects, readily at the molecular level; there is a lot of 72 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
flexibility, unique structures and physicochemical effects. One of the major issues 
to direct the application of POMs as a charge storage device is that they suffer from 
limitations in terms of low conductivity, high solubility and performance issues. 
So, POM-based hybrid electrode materials are employed as effective energy stor￾age systems. POM-based hybrid electrode materials can be modulated by fabri￾cating compatible inorganic/organic molecules, ligand mediation, metal-doping, 
framework assembly and others. 
This chapter illustrates the synthesis methodology of different types of POMs, the 
synthesis of nanocarbon particulate (mainly CNTs and graphene)–supported com￾posites and their beneficial applications as viable electrode materials of the SCs. 
Specific attention needs to be carried out on the amended performance of these 
energy-harvesting systems related to literature-documented reference schemes. 
Furthermore, we have conferred the probable techniques for the optimized fabrica￾tion procedures along with covalent and noncovalent interactions between POMs 
and nanocarbon particulates. The nanocarbon particulates enhance the intrinsic 
redox activity of POM-based composites and facilitate fast reversible electrochemi￾cal redox reactions. These POM-based nanocomposite materials have the ability to 
boost the capability of discharge along with an upsurge the power density of elec￾trochemical SCs. These types of systems make storage reservoirs for charge carriers 
like electrons and thus make ideal environments for charge storage devices. The 
fabrication of POM-based composite systems for the charge storage device is still 
an incipient field and considerable improvements are required for its upgradation to 
industrial applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Mr. Phukan, Mr. Sah, Dr. Garai is thankful to DST IC#3 Projects (DST/TM/EWO/ 
MI/CCUS/15  & DST/TMD/HFC/2K18/06) while Dr. Garai is also thankful to 
SERB Project (ECR/2018/000254), BHU-IOE-SEED Grant and SPARC Project 
(SPARC/2018–2019/P124/SL) for kind financial help. Mr. Sah is thankful to UGC￾CSIR for the JRF fellowships. Dr. Sankaranarayanan thanks DST, Govt. of India for 
the Inspire grant (IFA13-PH-82) and SERB-SRG grant No. SRG/2020/001894. The 
authors are also thankful to their respective Institutions/Universities/Departments as 
affiliated herewith for basic research and infrastructural facilities. 
REFERENCES 
Akutagawa, T., Jin, R., Tunashima, R., Noro, S., Cronin, L.,  & Nakamura, T. (2008). 
Nanoscale assemblies of gigantic molecular {Mo154}-rings: (dimethyldioctadecylammoni 
um)20[Mo154O462H8 (H2O) 70]. Langmuir, 24(1), 231–238. 
Bajwa, G., Genovese, M.,  & Lian, K. (2013). Multilayer polyoxometalates-carbon nano￾tube composites for electrochemical capacitors. ECS Journal of Solid-State Science and 
Technology, 2(10), M3046. 
Baker, L. C. W., & Glick, D. C. (1998). Present general status of understanding of heteropoly 
electrolytes and a tracing of some major highlights in the history of their elucidation. 
Chemical Reviews, 98(1), 3–50. 
Becker, H. I. (1957). Low voltage electrolytic capacitor. Google Patents. Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 73 
Blazevic, A., & Rompel, A. (2016). The Anderson—Evans polyoxometalate: From inorganic 
building blocks via hybrid organic—inorganic structures to tomorrows “Bio-POM.” 
Coordination Chemistry Reviews, 307, 42–64. 
Chai, D., Gómez-García, C. J., Li, B., Pang, H., Ma, H., Wang, X.,  & Tan, L. (2019). 
Polyoxometalate-based metal-organic frameworks for boosting electrochemical capacitor 
performance. Chemical Engineering Journal, 373, 587–597. 
Chai, D., Xin, J., Li, B., Pang, H., Ma, H., Li, K., Xiao, B., Wang, X., & Tan, L. (2019). 
Mo-Based crystal POMOFs with a high electrochemical capacitor performance. Dalton 
Transactions, 48(34), 13026–13033. 
Chen, S., Zhu, J., Wu, X., Han, Q., & Wang, X. (2010). Graphene oxide-MnO2 nanocompos￾ites for supercapacitors. ACS Nano, 4(5), 2822–2830. 
Chen, X., Zhu, X., Xiao, Y., & Yang, X. (2015). PEDOT/g-C3N4 binary electrode material for 
supercapacitors. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 743, 99–104. 
Contant, R., & Herveb, G. (2002). The heteropolyoxotungstates: Relationships between routes 
of formation and structures. Reviews in Inorganic Chemistry, 22(2), 63–112. 
Contant, R., Klemperer, W. G., & Yaghi, O. (1990). Potassium octadecatungstodiphosphates 
(V) and related lacunary compounds. Inorganic Syntheses, 27, 104–111. 
Cuentas-Gallegos, A. K., Martínez-Rosales, R., Rincón, M. E., Hirata, G. A.,  & Orozco, 
G. (2006). Design of hybrid materials based on carbon nanotubes and polyoxometalates. 
Optical Materials, 29(1), 126–133. 
Cui, L., Yu, K., Lv, J., Guo, C., & Zhou, B. (2020). A 3D POMOF based on a {AsW₁ ₂ } clus￾ter and a Ag-MOF with interpenetrating channels for large-capacity aqueous asymmetric 
supercapacitors and highly selective biosensors for the detection of hydrogen peroxide. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 8(43), 22918–22928. 
Da Silva, L. M., Cesar, R., Moreira, C. M., Santos, J. H., De Souza, L. G., Pires, B. M., 
Vicentini, R., Nunes, W., & Zanin, H. (2020). Reviewing the fundamentals of supercapac￾itors and the difficulties involving the analysis of the electrochemical findings obtained for 
porous electrode materials. Energy Storage Materials, 27, 555–590. 
Demarconnay, L., Raymundo-Piñero, E.,  & Béguin, F. (2011). Adjustment of electrodes 
potential window in an asymmetric carbon/MnO2 supercapacitor. Journal of Power 
Sources, 196(1), 580–586. 
Dubal, D. P., Ayyad, O., Ruiz, V., & Gomez-Romero, P. (2015). Hybrid energy storage: The 
merging of battery and supercapacitor chemistries. Chemical Society Reviews, 44(7), 
1777–1790. 
Du Pasquier, A., Plitz, I., Menocal, S., & Amatucci, G. (2003). A comparative study of Li-ion 
battery, supercapacitor and nonaqueous asymmetric hybrid devices for automotive appli￾cations. Journal of Power Sources, 115(1), 171–178. 
Evans Jr, H. T. (1948). The crystal structures of ammonium and potassium molybdotellurates. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 70(3), 1291–1292. 
Fan, D., Hao, J., & Wei, Q. (2012). Assembly of polyoxometalate-based composite materials. 
Journal of Inorganic and Organometallic Polymers and Materials, 22(2), 301–306. 
Finke, R. G., Droege, M. W., & Domaille, P. J. (1987). Trivacant heteropolytungstate deriva￾tives. 3. Rational syntheses, characterization, two-dimensional tungsten-183 NMR, and 10 16­ properties of tungstometallophosphates P2W18M4 (H2O) 2O68 -
and P4W30M4 (H2O) 2O112 
(M= cobalt, copper, zinc). Inorganic Chemistry, 26(23), 3886–3896. 
Fuentes-Quezada, E., Martínez-Casillas, D. C., Cuentas Gallegos, A. K., & de la Llave, E. 
(2022). Effect of hierarchical porosity on PMo12 adsorption and capacitance in hybrid car￾bon—PMo12 electrodes for supercapacitors. Energy & Fuels, 36(7), 3987–3996. 
Genovese, M., & Lian, K. (2015). Polyoxometalate modified inorganic—organic nanocom￾posite materials for energy storage applications: A review. Current Opinion in Solid State 
and Materials Science, 19(2), 126–137. 74 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Gómez-Romero, P., Chojak, M., Cuentas-Gallegos, K., Asensio, J. A., Kulesza, P. J., Casañ￾Pastor, N., & Lira-Cantú, M. (2003). Hybrid organic—inorganic nanocomposite mate￾rials for application in solid state electrochemical supercapacitors. Electrochemistry 
Communications, 5(2), 149–153. 
Gouzerh, P., & Che, M. (2006). From Scheele and Berzelius to Müller. L’actualité Chimique, 298, 1. 
Gujar, T. P., Kim, W.-Y., Puspitasari, I., Jung, K.-D., & Joo, O.-S. (2007). Electrochemically 
deposited nanograin ruthenium oxide as a pseudocapacitive electrode. International 
Journal of Electrochemical Science, 2, 666–673. 
Honma, N., Kusaka, K., & Ozeki, T. (2002). Self-assembly of a lacunary α -Keggin undeca￾tungstophosphate into a three-dimensional network linked by s-block cations. Chemical 
Communications, 23, 2896–2897. 
Hou, Y., Chai, D., Li, B., Pang, H., Ma, H., Wang, X., & Tan, L. (2019). Polyoxometalate￾incorporated metallacalixarene@ graphene composite electrodes for high-performance 
supercapacitors. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 11(23), 20845–20853. 
Izumi, Y., Urabe, K., & Onaka, M. (1992). Zeolite, clay, and heteropoly acid in organic reactions. 
ISBN: 3-527-29011-7; 4-06-205752-2, reference number: DE-94-0G3240; EDB-94-046433. 
Kampf, A. R., Hughes, J. M., Nash, B. P., & Marty, J. (2017). Kegginite, Pb3Ca3[AsV12O40(VO)]·20H2O, 
a new mineral with a novel ε -isomer of the Keggin anion. American Mineralogist, 102(2), 
461–465. 
Kang, Z., Wang, Y., Wang, E., Lian, S., Gao, L., You, W., Hu, C.,  & Xu, L. (2004). 
Polyoxometalates nanoparticles: Synthesis, characterization and carbon nanotube modifi￾cation. Solid State Communications, 129(9), 559–564. 
Karthikeyan, K., Aravindan, V., Lee, S. B., Jang, I. C., Lim, H. H., Park, G. J., Yoshio, M., & 
Lee, Y. S. (2010). A novel asymmetric hybrid supercapacitor based on Li2FeSiO4 and acti￾vated carbon electrodes. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 504(1), 224–227. 
Keggin, J. F. (1934). The structure and formula of 12-phosphotungstic acid. Proceedings 
of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Containing Papers of a Mathematical and 
Physical Character, 144(851), 75–100. 
Kemp, M. (1998). Kepler’s cosmos. Nature, 393(6681), 123–123. 
Kim, T. Y., Lee, H. W., Stoller, M., Dreyer, D. R., Bielawski, C. W., Ruoff, R. S., & Suh, K. S. 
(2011). High-performance supercapacitors based on poly (ionic liquid)-modified graphene 
electrodes. ACS Nano, 5(1), 436–442. 
Kim, Y., & Shanmugam, S. (2013). Polyoxometalate—reduced graphene oxide hybrid cat￾alyst: Synthesis, structure, and electrochemical properties. ACS Applied Materials  & 
Interfaces, 5(22), 12197–12204. 
Klemperer, W. G. (1990). Tetrabutylammonium isopolyoxometalates. Inorganic Syntheses, 
27, 74–85. 
Li, J., Xie, H., Li, Y., Liu, J.,  & Li, Z. (2011). Electrochemical properties of graphene 
nanosheets/polyaniline nanofibers composites as electrode for supercapacitors. Journal of 
Power Sources, 196(24), 10775–10781. 
Lindqvist, I. (1953). The Structure of the hexaniobate ion in 7Na2O.6Nb2O5.32H2O. Arkiv for 
Kemi, 5(3), 247–250. 
Liu, S., Volkmer, D., & Kurth, D. G. (2003). Functional polyoxometalate thin films via elec￾trostatic layer-by-layer self-assembly. Journal of Cluster Science, 14(3), 405–419. 
Ma, W., Chen, S., Yang, S., Chen, W., Weng, W., Cheng, Y., & Zhu, M. (2017). Flexible all￾solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor based on transition metal oxide nanorods/reduced 
graphene oxide hybrid fibers with high energy density. Carbon, 113, 151–158. 
Miller, J. R., & Simon, P. (2008). The chalkboard: Fundamentals of electrochemical capacitor 
design and operation. The Electrochemical Society Interface, 17(1), 31. 
Mu, A., Li, J., Chen, W., Sang, X., Su, Z., & Wang, E. (2015). The composite material based 
on Dawson-type polyoxometalate and activated carbon as the supercapacitor electrode. 
Inorganic Chemistry Communications, 55, 149–152. Polyoxometalate-Induced Nano-Engineered Composites 75 
Müller, A., Das, S. K., Bögge, H., Schmidtmann, M., Botar, A., & Patrut, A. (2001). Generation 
of cluster capsules (Ih) from decomposition products of a smaller cluster (Keggin-Td) 
while surviving ones get encapsulated: Species with core—shell topology formed by a 
fundamental symmetry-driven reaction. Chemical Communications, 7, 657–658. 
Müller, A., & Gouzerh, P. (2012). From linking of metal-oxide building blocks in a dynamic 
library to giant clusters with unique properties and towards adaptive chemistry. Chemical 
Society Reviews, 41(22), 7431–7463. 
Müller, A., & Serain, C. (2000). Soluble molybdenum blues “des pudels kern.” Accounts of 
Chemical Research, 33(1), 2–10. 
Nyman, M., Alam, T. M., Bonhomme, F., Rodriguez, M. A., Frazer, C. S.,  & Welk, M. 
E. (2006). Solid-state structures and solution behavior of alkali salts of the {Nb6O19}8­
Lindqvist ion. Journal of Cluster Science, 17(2), 197–219. 
Nyman, M. D., Anderson, T. M., Alam, T. M., Rodriguez, M. A., Bixler, J. N., & Bonhomme, 
F. (2007). An aqueous route to [Ta6O19] 8-and solid-state studies of isostructural niobium 
and tantalum oxide complexes. Sandia National Lab (SNL-NM). 
Pakulski, D., Gorczyński, A., Czepa, W., Liu, Z., Ortolani, L., Morandi, V., Patroniak, V., Ciesielski, 
A., & Samorì, P. (2019). Novel Keplerate type polyoxometalate-surfactant-graphene hybrids as 
advanced electrode materials for supercapacitors. Energy Storage Materials, 17, 186–193. 
Piştea, I. C., Roba, C.,  & Roşu, C. (2017). Green syntheses of anderson-evans polyan￾ions {XMo6O24} in one-pot procedure. International Multidisciplinary Scientific 
GeoConference: SGEM, 17, 157–161. 
Pope, M. T., & Müller, A. (1991). Polyoxometalate chemistry: An old field with new dimensions 
in several disciplines. Angewandte Chemie International Edition in English, 30(1), 34–48. 
Rani, J., Thangavel, R., Oh, S.-I., Lee, Y. S., & Jang, J.-H. (2019). An ultra-high-energy den￾sity supercapacitor; fabrication based on thiol-functionalized graphene oxide scrolls. 
Nanomaterials, 9(2), 148. 
Redondo, E., Le Fevre, L. W., Fields, R., Todd, R., Forsyth, A. J., & Dryfe, R. A. (2020). 
Enhancing supercapacitor energy density by mass-balancing of graphene composite elec￾trodes. Electrochimica Acta, 360, 136957. 
Roy, S., Vemuri, V., Maiti, S., Manoj, K. S., Subbarao, U., & Peter, S. C. (2018). Two Keggin￾based isostructural POMOF hybrids: Synthesis, crystal structure, and catalytic properties. 
Inorganic Chemistry, 57(19), 12078–12092. 
Sadakane, M., Yamagata, K., Kodato, K., Endo, K., Toriumi, K., Ozawa, Y., Ozeki, T., Nagai, 
T., Matsui, Y., & Sakaguchi, N. (2009). Synthesis of orthorhombic Mo-V-Sb oxide species 
by assembly of pentagonal Mo6O21 polyoxometalate building blocks. Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition, 48(21), 3782–3786. 
Sagadevan, S., Marlinda, A. R., Chowdhury, Z. Z., Wahab, Y. B. A., Hamizi, N. A., Shahid, 
M. M., Mohammad, F., Podder, J., & Johan, M. R. (2021). Fundamental electrochemical 
energy storage systems. In Advances in supercapacitor and Supercapattery (pp. 27–43). 
Elsevier. 
Sarwar, S., Oppel, I., & Kögerler, P. (2021). Organic-inorganic hybrid materials based on 
phthalocyanine, calix [4] arene and polyoxometalate scaffolds. Fachgruppe Chemie. 
Saubanère, M., McCalla, E., Tarascon, J.-M., & Doublet, M.-L. (2016). The intriguing ques￾tion of anionic redox in high-energy density cathodes for Li-ion batteries. Energy  & 
Environmental Science, 9(3), 984–991. 
Schwegler, M. A., Vinke, P., Van der Eijk, M., & Van Bekkum, H. (1992). Activated carbon 
as a support for heteropolyanion catalysts. Applied Catalysis A: General, 80(1), 41–57. 
Sheberla, D., Bachman, J. C., Elias, J. S., Sun, C.-J., Shao-Horn, Y., & Dincă, M. (2017). 
Conductive MOF electrodes for stable supercapacitors with high areal capacitance. Nature 
Materials, 16(2), 220–224. 
Shi, H. (1996). Activated carbons and double layer capacitance. Electrochimica Acta, 41(10), 
1633–1639. 76 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications
Souchay, P. (1945). Contribution a l’etude des heteropolyacides tungstiques. [PhD Thesis]. 
Univ. de Paris. 
Suárez-Guevara, J., Ruiz, V., & Gomez-Romero, P. (2014a). Hybrid energy storage: High volt￾age aqueous supercapacitors based on activated carbon—phosphotungstate hybrid materi￾als. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2(4), 1014–1021. 
Suárez-Guevara, J., Ruiz, V., & Gómez-Romero, P. (2014b). Stable graphene—polyoxo￾metalate nanomaterials for application in hybrid supercapacitors. Physical Chemistry 
Chemical Physics, 16(38), 20411–20414. 
Teze, A., & Herve, G. (1990). Investigation on stability in emulsion stabilized with different 
surface. Inorg. Synth, 27, 85. 
Ueda, T. (2018). Electrochemistry of polyoxometalates: From fundamental aspects to applica￾tions. ChemElectroChem, 5(6), 823–838. 
Vannathan, A. A., Chandewar, P. R., Shee, D., & Mal, S. S. (2022). Asymmetric polyoxometa￾late-polypyrrole composite electrode material for electrochemical energy storage superca￾pacitors. Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry, 904, 115856. 
Volkmer, D., Du Chesne, A., Kurth, D. G., Schnablegger, H., Lehmann, P., Koop, M. 
J., & Müller, A. (2000). Toward nanodevices: Synthesis and characterization of the 
nanoporous surfactant-encapsulated keplerate (DODA) 40(NH4)2[(H2O)n ⊂Mo132O372 
(CH3COO)30(H2O) 72]. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 122(9), 1995–1998. 
Wang, G., Chen, T., Gómez-García, C. J., Zhang, F., Zhang, M., Ma, H., Pang, H., Wang, 
X., & Tan, L. (2020). A high-capacity negative electrode for asymmetric supercapacitors 
based on a PMo12 coordination polymer with novel water-assisted proton channels. Small, 
16(29), 2001626. 
Wang, X., Lu, X., Liu, B., Chen, D., Tong, Y., & Shen, G. (2014). Flexible energy-storage 
devices: Design consideration and recent progress. Advanced Materials, 26(28), 4763–4782. 
Wang, Y., Shen, C., Niu, L., Li, R., Guo, H., Shi, Y., Li, C., Liu, X., & Gong, Y. (2016). 
Hydrothermal synthesis of CuCo ₂ O₄ /CuO nanowire arrays and RGO/Fe ₂ O₃ compos￾ites for high-performance aqueous asymmetric supercapacitors. Journal of Materials 
Chemistry A, 4(25), 9977–9985. 
Wu, H.-Y., & Wang, H.-W. (2012). Electrochemical synthesis of nickel oxide nanoparticu￾late films on nickel foils for high-performance electrode materials of supercapacitors. 
International Journal of Electrochemical Science, 7, 4405–4417. 
Xie, Z., Jin, X., Chen, G., Xu, J., Chen, D., & Shen, G. (2014). Integrated smart electro￾chromic windows for energy saving and storage applications. Chemical Communications, 
50(5), 608–610. 
Yan, X., Mo, S., Ju, Z., Wu, J., & Yao, K. (2008). Synthesis and structure of a series of 
Anderson-Evans type heteropolymolybdates: [Ln(H2O)n]2[TeMo6O24]·6H2O. Synthesis 
and Reactivity in Inorganic, Metal-Organic, and Nano-Metal Chemistry, 38(6), 529–533. 
Yang, H., Kannappan, S., Pandian, A. S., Jang, J.-H., Lee, Y. S., & Lu, W. (2013). Achieving 
both high power and energy density in electrochemical supercapacitors with nanoporous 
graphene materials. arXiv:1311.1413. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1311.1413 
Yang, Y., Li, S., Huang, W., Shangguan, H., Engelbrekt, C., Duan, S., Ci, L., & Si, P. (2019). 
Effective synthetic strategy for Zn0.76Co0.24S encapsulated in stabilized N-doped carbon 
nanoarchitecture towards ultra-long-life hybrid supercapacitors. Journal of Materials 
Chemistry A, 7(24), 14670–14680. 
Zhang, Y., Zeng, T., Huang, D., Yan, W., Zhang, Y., Wan, Q., & Yang, N. (2020). High￾energy-density supercapacitors from dual pseudocapacitive nanoelectrodes. ACS Applied 
Energy Materials, 3(11), 10685–10694. 
Zhou, G., Li, F., & Cheng, H.-M. (2014). Progress in flexible lithium batteries and future 
prospects. Energy & Environmental Science, 7(4), 1307–1338. DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-4 77 
4
4 Supercapacitors 
Carbon-Based 
Nanostructures for 
Supercapacitor Application 
Shanu Mishra and Ashish Kumar Mishra 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
The continuous consumption of existing fossil fuels, their soaring price and the asso￾ciated alarming global warming situation have triggered the urge for developing 
sustainable and renewable sources of energy. Renewable energy sources (solar, wind, 
hydroelectric) are regarded as next-generation energy sources, but the sun does not 
shine all the time and wind does not always blow. So, due to their intermittent nature, 
imbalanced regional distribution and low energy density, these energy sources do not 
show a potential impact unless they are integrated with efficient energy storage tech￾nologies [1, 2]. To resolve issues related to energy demand, the research community 
needs to design clean, efficacious, economical, and eco-friendly energy storage and 
conversion systems. For these reasons, devices like capacitors, conventional batteries, 
fuel cells, and supercapacitors (SCs) are contemplated as electrical and electrochem￾ical storage systems [3, 4]. The different structural/assembly and charge–discharge 
capacities of conventional capacitors, SCs, and batteries are displayed in Figure 4.1a. 
The efficiency of various energy conversion and storage devices is determined by 
their energy and power density. As shown in the Ragone plot (Figure 4.1b) [5], vari￾ous batteries (Li-ion, etc.) are regarded as energy sources (~105 J kg−1), but they 
suffer from slow power delivery, approximately ˂100 W kg−1. Thus, the extensive 
use of batteries is explicitly limited in energy storage systems where high power is 
required. However, conventional capacitors can deliver high power density (106 W 
kg−1) and can provide higher current than batteries, but their energy density (0.1 Wh 
kg−1) is limited [6, 7]. A comparison of key properties (charging time, no of cycles, 
energy density, power density) of SCs with conventional capacitors and batteries is 
outlined in Table 4.1. 
Recently, high energy and power density systems are desired for fast storage/ 
delivery. For instance, in hybrid electric vehicles, a high energy-density device is 
required to travel a longer distance, while a high power-density device provides 
initial acceleration in a short time. Conventional batteries and capacitors are both 
incapable of delivering high energy and power density simultaneously. Nippon Ultrafast 
charge 
discharge 
High capability 
Low energy 
output 
Ultrafas 
Capacitor 
d 
Dielectric
Ca (a) Supercapacitor Battery 
Electrolyte 
Ultrafast 
charge 
discharge 
High capability 
Moderate 
energy output 
Slow charge 
discharge 
Poor capability 
High energy 
output 
U 
d 
Super ca p acitor
1
10
102
103
104
105 
106 
107 
0.01 0.1 1 10 100 1000 
Fuel Batteries 
Energy Density (Wh kg
-1) 
gkW(ytisneDrewoP -1 ) 
(b) 
78 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 4.1 (a) Configurational outlines of conventional capacitors, supercapacitors, and 
batteries; (b) Ragone plot for different energy storage and conversion devices. 
Electric Corporation was the first to commercialize an electrochemical capacitor 
called a “supercapacitor” in 1978. SC technology has the potential to provide a 
bridge between traditional capacitors and batteries as they possess higher energy 
density (1–10 Wh kg−1) than conventional capacitors and higher power density (2–5 
kW kg−1) than conventional batteries, as well as prolonged cycle life, which makes 
them a suitable applicant for industrial uses, such as consumer electronics, mem￾ory backup and regenerative braking energy of electric vehicles, where high power 
and optimal energy capacity is required [8, 9]. A typical example is electric buses 
(traction vehicles) launched in Shanghai (China) in 2006 that uses an SC to store 
energy but can store only 5% of energy compared to batteries. This shortcoming 
can limit them to a couple of miles per charge. The key issue with SCs is producing  
 
Supercapacitors 79 
TABLE 4.1 
Comparison of Key Properties of Capacitors, Supercapacitors and 
Batteries [4, 6] 
Functions Capacitor Supercapacitor Battery 
Time of charging 10–6 to 10–3 s 0.3 to 30 s 1 to 5 h 
Number of cycles Almost infinite 1 million 500–1000 
Energy density (Wh kg−1) ˂0.1 1–10 10–100 
Power density (W kg−1) ˃100,000 10,000 ˂1000 
Coulombic efficiency (%) Almost 100 ˃100 70–80 
Charge storage determinants Electrode area and Microstructure of Thermodynamics and 
Operating temperature (°C) dielectric electrode & active mass 
−20 to 100 electrolyte −20 to 65 
−40 to 85 
them with a high energy density comparable to that of present rechargeable batter￾ies while keeping their intrinsic qualities (high power and prolonged cycling life). 
The development of SCs for industrial application rely on electrode materials and 
comprehending a unified model of electrochemical interfaces at the nanoscale. This 
inspires the researcher toward designing and preparing many novel electrode mate￾rials with various components and structures. Carbon-based nanostructures are 
immensely attractive as electrode materials for flexible and wearable energy storage 
applications due to their intriguing properties, such as the graphene, showing high 
electrical conductivity up to 108 S m−1; good mechanical stability, approximately 
240 to 280 GPa; and high theoretical surface area up to 2600 m2 g−1 [4]. Besides the 
physicochemical stability, their unique pore structure, large-scale synthesis, and the 
presence of accessible electrocatalytic active sites make carbon materials suitable 
for energy storage applications [10–15]. In this chapter, a brief overview of the clas￾sification of SCs, an explanation of charge–storage mechanisms, and characteriza￾tion techniques for studying charge-storage capacity are emphasized. In addition, the 
design and development of SCs with high energy and power density having different 
architectures of carbon materials are discussed in this chapter. 
4.2	 FUNDAMENTALS AND CHARGE STORAGE 
MECHANISM OF SCS 
According to charge-storage mechanism, SCs are divided into two categories: elec￾trochemical double-layer capacitors and pseudocapacitors [16], which are described 
in the following sections. 
4.2.1 elecTrochemIcal Double-layer capacITors 
The working principle of electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) is simi￾lar to conventional capacitors. The energy is stored via the physical adsorption of 80 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications
electrolyte ions at the surface of a porous electrode during charging of the device. 
Owing to their high surface area and very short charge separation distances, EDLCs 
possess higher energy density than traditional electric capacitors. As shown in 
Figure 4.2a, EDLCs consist of two carbon electrodes dipped in a suitable electrolyte 
(KOH, H2SO4, Na2SO4, etc.) and an ion-exchange membrane situated between the 
electrode [17]. The concept of the EDLC model was first described by Hermann 
von Helmholtz in 1853. According to this model, when an electrical conductor is 
immersed in an electrolyte, the opposite charges are accumulated at the interface 
of the electrode/electrolyte and form the double layer separated by an atomic gap. 
This layer is known as a compact or Helmholtz layer [18]. The model is identical to 
traditional two-plate capacitors; these charges are separated electrostatically, and 
no charge transfer occurs during the formation of EDLCs. Furthermore, the Gouy￾Chapman modified the oversimplified model of a rigid charged surface and con￾templated the diffuse layer that arises due to the thermal motion of electrolyte ions. 
The capacitance value of two charged arrays separated by a certain distance should 
increase in proportion to the decrease in distance between them. In other words, as 
point charges get closer to the electrode surface, their capacitance increases dramati￾cally. However, the model fails to explain the formation of highly charged double 
layers at the electrode/electrolyte interface. Otto Stern later integrated the essen￾tials of both Helmholtz-Perrin and Guoy-Chapmann electrical double-layer theories. 
According to this theory, the double layer has two distinct ion distribution regions. 
The first region is approximately single ion thick, and these ions are firmly adsorbed 
to the solid surface and form the inner Helmholtz plane (Helmholtz view), as shown 
in Figure 4.2b [19, 20]. The remaining charges are distributed through the electrolyte 
next to the compact layer as a diffuse layer (Guoy’s view) and are called the outer 
Helmholtz plane (OHP). So the Stern model suggests that as a result of thermal agita￾tion, a part of ions in solution are ‘fixed’ to the electrode and the rest are ‘scattered’ 
in a cloud-like pattern (Figure 4.2b). In the case of SCs, the charge accumulation 
mechanism is based on the surfaces rather than the bulk volume, which is opposite 
to the charge accumulation in batteries. During charging electrons migrate from the 
FIGURE 4.2 (a) Schematic illustration of an electrochemical double-layer capacitor; (b) the 
charge storage mechanism of the double-layer capacitor. 
 
 
Supercapacitors 81 
negative electrode to the positive electrode as a result of an applied external voltage. 
As a result, an anion of electrolyte (A−) travels toward the positive electrode (E1). 
The electrochemical charging process is expressed as E1 + A− = E1
+//A− + e−. While 
discharging, cations (C+) of electrolyte moves toward negative electrode (E2). The 
electrochemical charging process is expressed as E2 + C++ e− = E2−//C+, where // 
represents the electrode–electrolyte interface [21]. 
EDLCs are the most commercialized SCs, in which the charge is physically held 
via electrostatic charge adsorption at the electrode–electrolyte interface. The notable 
characteristic of EDLCs is the absence of charge transfer between the electrode and 
electrolyte interfaces, that is, no Faradaic processes. The capacitance of an EDLC 
electrode can be predicted according to Equation 4.1 [5]: 
where 𝛆r is the dielectric constant of the electrolyte; 𝛆o is the permittivity of free 
space; d is the effective charge separation, that is, Debye length; and A is the accessi￾ble surface area of the electrode material. In comparison to conventional capacitors, 
SCs have a three-dimensional (3D) porous electrode which maximizes the surface 
area. Also, the dielectric layer of SCs consists of a single or several molecular lay￾ers; that is, d is a short molecular distance (few to several Å) while in conventional 
capacitor distance, d reaches up to several microns. As a result, EDLCs may store 
significantly more electric energy than typical dielectric capacitors due to their larger 
effective surface area (A) and shorter charge separation distance (d). The electro￾chemical double layer’s effective thickness varies between 5 to 10 Å, depending on 
the electrolyte ions’ concentration and size, as well as the solvation shell. Based on 
the relative permittivity of the electrolyte medium, the specific capacitance of a car￾bon-based system is expected to be between 10 and 21 μF cm−2. Carbon-based mate￾rials with large specific surface area (1000–3000 m2 g−1) can theoretically achieve 
double-layer capacitances of 300–550 F g−1 [5, 17]. Thus, the carbon-based materials 
(activated carbon, carbon aerogel, carbon nanotubes [CNTs], graphene, etc.) with 
specific surface area show good EDLC behavior with higher specific capacitance 
ideally, but experimentally achieved specific capacitance of these materials are lower 
than expected value due to limited accessibility of surface sites. 
4.2.2 pseuDocapacITors anD hybrID scs 
The word pseudocapacitance was coined by Conway to identify those materials 
that display electrochemical signatures, which are close to those of typical double￾layer capacitors (EDLC) [22]. Unlike EDLCs, pseudocapacitors involve a different 
charge-storing mechanism. Pseudocapacitors store electric energy through revers￾ible Faradic reaction or redox reaction, which occurs at the electrode/electrolyte 
interface involving the passage of charges between the electrode and the electrolyte 
(Figure 4.3a) [23]. During the oxidation process, the electrolyte ions move to the elec￾trode, and during reduction, they move back to the electrolyte. The charge–discharge 
mechanism of a pseudocapacitor is similar to that of a battery. The electrochemical 
charging process is expressed as E1 + A− = E1 
δ +//A− + δe−. However, the discharging 82 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications
process is expressed as E2+ C+ + δe− = E2
δ − // C+, where E1 and E2 are positive and 
negative electrodes and the parameter δe− represents electrosorption valence, related 
to the oxidation–reduction reactions [21]. Generally, metal oxides and conducting 
polymers are fundamental candidates explored as pseudocapacitive electrode mate￾rial [10, 24]. These materials can provide multiple oxidation states for efficient redox 
reaction at the electrode surface, and this may allow the pseudocapacitor to achieve 
high energy density and capacitance. The selection of a suitable potential widow 
is another crucial factor for pseudocapacitor, beyond the appropriate potential the 
electrode will be degraded. The first electrode material to show pseudocapacitive 
behavior was ruthenium dioxide (RuO2). In the case of RuO2 thin film, the charge is 
stored via a Faradic reaction while cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve shows a typical 
capacitive behavior. Thus, the surface redox thermodynamics of pseudocapacitors 
is Faradic, but the capacitance is originated from a linear relationship between the 
amount of electric charge stored (𝚫Q) and applied potential (𝚫U). So, at the time of 
charging, for each addition of electric charges, electrical work must be done. The 
energy storing of the pseudocapacitor is midway between EDLCs and Faradaic reac￾tions. The active centers of pseudocapacitive materials are located near the metal 
oxide surface at a distance ˂ (2Dt)1/2, where D is the diffusion coefficient (cm2 s−1) 
and t is the diffusion time (s). As reported by Dunn, pseudocapacitors have three dif￾ferent Faradaic mechanisms, including underpotential deposition, redox pseudoca￾pacitance, and intercalation pseudocapacitance [25]. Langmuir-type electrosorption 
of hydrogen atoms on a noble metal substrate is a good example of underpotential 
deposition, where hydrogen atoms form an adsorbed monolayer at a distinct metal’s 
surface (Pt, Rh, Ru, etc.) considerably above their redox potential in underpotential 
deposition, as shown in the equation 4.2 [26]:
 M x + + C x Z+
ze- = C M. , (4.2)
where M represents the noble metal (Pt, Ru), C represents the absorbed atoms, 
x denotes the number of absorbed atoms, z represents the absorbed valency, and 
(a)
cation
Electrolyte
cati
e￾e￾e￾e￾H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
H+
e￾e￾e￾e￾Separator
Electrolyte Separator
(b)
Battery type 
Electrode EDLC type
Electrode 
)
H+
+
ion
H+
H+
H+
H
cat
H+
e￾tor
e- t ro Separat
e￾p
e
tion
e￾ti
e
ion
e
e
e
n Positive
Electrode Negative
anion Electrode
FIGURE 4.3 Schematic illustration of (a) pseudocapacitors and (b) hybrid SCs. 
 
 
 
Supercapacitors 83 
so zx represents the number of electrons exchanged. However, in the case of the 
underpotential deposition process, the overpotential ranges are small ranging from 
0.3 to 0.6 V, and the capacitance values are potential dependent [26]. As a result, the 
energy density of the system is limited compared to other pseudocapacitive systems. 
The redox pseudocapacitance occurs by transferring electrons between an oxidized 
(Ox) and a reduced species (Red), that is, electrochemical adsorption of cations on 
the surface of oxidized species, with quick and reversible electron transfer across the 
electrode–electrolyte interface per Equation 4.3 [26]: 
Ox + zC+ + ze­ = RedCz , (4.3) 
where C+ is the adsorbed cation of electrolyte and z denotes the number of trans￾ferred electrons. The metal oxides RuO2, NiO, and MnO2 and conducting polymers 
(polypyrrole and polyaniline) are examples of redox pseudocapacitive materials [10]. 
In such redox pseudocapacitor devices, the capacitance is determined by the reactant 
ions and active site density and the maximum achievable capacitance value is around 
5000 F cm−3 [27]. The intercalation pseudocapacitance is caused via ions intercalation 
into the layers of a redox-active material. The ion intercalation process involves no 
crystallographic phase shift per Equation 4.4 [26]: 
MA + xLi
+ + xe￾y = Li Mx Ay , (4) 
MAy is the host material for lattice intercalation and x denotes the number of trans￾ferred electrons. In the case of cation, intercalation pseudocapacitors show an inter￾mediate behavior between battery and SCs. All three pseudocapacitive mechanisms 
are outcome of various electrochemical interfacial processes, the electrochemical 
fingerprints are similar due to the relationship between potential and the amount of 
charge that emerged as a result of adsorption/desorption at the electrode/electrolyte 
contact. According to the thermodynamic considerations, the charge that forms at the 
interface and the potential (E) are related in Equation 4.5 [26, 28]: 
o RT X E E = ­ ln , (4.5) 
nF 1­ X
where E denotes the potential (V), E⁰ denotes standard potential of the redox cou￾ple, R stands for ideal gas constant (8.314 J mol−1 K−1), n represents the number of elec￾trons, T represents temperature (K), F represents the Faraday constant with usual value 
96485 C mol−1, and X denotes the fractional charge coverage. Using Equation 4.6, the 
capacitance (F g−1) can be calculated in areas where the plot of E vs. X is linear: 
æ nF ö X C = , (6) ç ÷ è m ø E
where m represents the active material’s molecular weight. The capacitance is not 
always constant because the graph of E vs. X is not completely linear, as it is in a 84 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
capacitor, so it is called pseudocapacitance. The thermodynamic basis for pseudoca￾pacitance is described by the preceding relationship that clearly depicts that the reac￾tions near the electrode surface are not constrained by diffusion and so possesses a 
good rate of capability. EDLCs have the advantage of good cyclic stability and high 
power density, while pseudocapacitors offer high energy density. Another class of SC 
is hybrid SC (Figure 4.3b), which combines two different types of electrodes. The 
electrodes are made up of high-power EDLCs materials (carbon-based), on one side, 
and battery-like materials (metal oxides/conducting polymer), on the other side [29]. 
Hence, the device follows both capacitive and Faradaic charge storage mechanisms 
in order to obtain high energy density as well as power density. 
4.3 MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES 
Generally, the electrochemical characteristics of a SCs device are evaluated using 
three main techniques: CV, galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD), and electrochem￾ical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). For instance, in CV, the current is estimated 
at a fixed scan rate in a particular potential window while GCD uses fixed current 
density and the potential is ramped from open circuit voltage to a fixed potential 
value, and EIS uses the capacitance or impedance. The other important parame￾ters as high-specific capacitance, equivalent series resistance (ESR), time constant, 
energy, and power density can be subsequently derived from them. Two-electrode 
cells, three-electrode cells, and a fully packaged actual device could be used in per￾formance characterization experiments. The three-cell electrode is composed of a 
working, a counter, and a reference electrode, and it emphasizes the electrochemical 
behavior of the working electrode and provides vital understandings of a variety of 
applications, including energy storage device design. The two-cell electrode layout 
closely resembles a real SC cell and makes it easy to optimize important features or 
parameters for future prototype design and manufacture. 
4.3.1 cv 
CV is an effective and broadly used operative technique in electrochemistry. It 
determines the current that emerges in an electrochemical cell when the voltage 
exceeds the value indicated by the Nernst equation. Using the CV technique, quali￾tative and pseudo-quantitative studies can be performed to determine the voltage 
range of the device or electrode over a wide range of scan rates. In essence, the 
working electrode’s voltage is increased linearly over time. The electric potential 
is measured between the working and the reference electrode, while the current is 
estimated between the working and counter electrodes. The rate of the potential 
ramp is known as a scan or sweep rate. The voltage sweep rate also efficiently affects 
the device performance of SCs, the capacitance value increases at a slower scan rate 
because at a slower sweep rate, the ion diffusion has sufficient time to reach the inner 
pores of electrode material. The CV curve can easily differentiate the electrochemi￾cal performance of EDLCs, pseudocapacitors, and batteries, as shown in Figure 4.4. 
The CV curve of EDLCs shows a rectangular shape while pseudocapacitors and 
batteries have prominent redox peaks [30]. The redox nature of pseudocapacitors Supercapacitors 85
FIGURE 4.4 Schematic illustration of typical CV curves of an EDLC, a pseudocapacitor, 
and a battery
Source: Adapted from Ref. 30.
a rectangular shape while pseudocapacitors and batteries have prominent redox 
peaks [30]. The redox nature of pseudocapacitors has symmetric and broad pair￾ings, but batteries possess separated oxidation and reduction peaks that clearly 
differentiate the separate charge storage phenomena in batteries and pseudoca￾pacitors. In order to distinguish the pseudocapacitive charge–storage process 
from batteries, a slow scan CV is utilized; that is, the electrode kinetics can be 
revealed by examining the relationships between peak (ip) current and scan rate 
( 𝛎 ) per Equation 4.7 [26]:
 i a
where i is the current acquired at a certain sweep rate, 𝛎 , and a and b are vari￾ables that can be changed. In the case of batteries, b = ½, and for SCs, b = 1, and 
hence, EDLCs and pseudocapacitors show similar CV behavior, which is distinct 
from batteries.
The instantaneous voltage and current response are recorded to examine the elec￾trochemical response. The capacitance can be calculated using Equation 4.8 [20, 31]:
 DQ C = , (4.8)
DV
where 𝚫Q is the integral area of the voltammetry curve, which reflects the total 
charge, and 𝚫V is the working potential window. The specific capacitance of a two￾cell SC device is evaluated using Equation 4.9: 
 
 
86 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
f
2´ ò
v
IdV
Cs = vi
m V , (4.9) vD 
where ʃI dV represents an integral area of one CV curve, m represents the total 
mass loading of active material in prepared device, and 𝛎 is the scan rate. There are 
some advantages and disadvantages of the CV technique. The CV test is used to 
interpret the type of electrochemical reaction and its contribution from an EDLC 
(capacitive) and a propylene carbonate (PC) (Faradic). The CV test is an important 
method to evaluate the specific capacitance value of the electrochemical cell, and it 
can easily detect the degradation process of the electrode. Still, it shows only kinetic 
aspects, and thermodynamic aspects are neglected. 
4.3.2 gcD 
The GCD is the most versatile and accurate technique for characterizing electro￾chemical devices under direct current. The GCD curve can clearly distinguish bat￾tery and capacitive performances. In GCD, the potential varies as a function of time 
with an applied constant current. In accordance with the energy storage mechanism, 
at a constant discharge current, voltage vs. discharge time has a linear relationship 
for EDLCs and pseudocapacitors as shown in Figure 4.5. Pseudocapacitors have lon￾ger charge and discharge periods, indicating that more electrons and electrolyte ions 
are involved in the charge and discharge processes. EDLCs have a sharper slope 
compared to pseudocapacitors because of their lower capacitance and faster dis￾charge. In the ideal capacitor, capacitance is a constant value, independent of the 
potentials. The linear voltage time response is described in Equation 4.10 [30]: 
I D = V Dt , (10) 
C
where the potential is linearly proportional to time and I and C are constant. However, 
the battery maintains a constant voltage during discharge or charge and shows a signifi￾cant voltage plateau with various polarization zones due to its phase change mechanism. 
An IR drop is common for EDLCs, pseudocapacitors, and batteries, and it is orig￾inated due to the internal resistance of electrolytes, electrode material, and a current 
collector. The batteries show an additional sharp potential drop due to concentration 
polarization that is absent in pseudocapacitors and EDLCs as shown in Figure 4.5. 
The characteristic parameters, such as specific capacitance, life cycle, electrochemi￾cal impedance, ESR, and energy and power density, can be evaluated using the GCD 
process. GCD follows a repetitive charging–discharging loop of a SC device. In the 
GCD process, a constant current is applied until a given potential is reached, and the 
output is plotted as potential vs. time. The specific capacitance of SC devices can be 
calculated using Equation 4.11 [31–33]: 
2´´ I Dt Cs = , (4.11) 
mass´DV 
 
Supercapacitors 87 
EDLC 
Battery 
IR drop 
Concentration 
polarization 
Pseudocapacitor 
FIGURE 4.5 Schematic illustration of typical GCD curves of EDLC, pseudocapacitor, and 
battery. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. 30. 
where I denotes the discharge current density, 𝚫t represents the discharge time, 
and m represents the active mass of the both electrodes. The energy density (E) 
and power density (P) of SC devices can be computed using the GCD curves per 
Equations 4.12 and 4.13: 
1 Cs (DV)
2
E = , (4.12) 
2 3.6
E * 3600 P = , (4.13) 
Dt
where Cs is specific capacitance obtained from GCD, 𝚫V is the potential dif￾ference, and 𝚫t is discharge time calculated from the GCD curve. Also, the per￾formance of the supercapacitor device can be determined using volumetric-specific 
capacitance and areal capacitance. In order to estimate the volumetric-specific 
capacitance (F cm−3), the density of the active material of the electrode is multiplied 
by the gravimetric-specific capacitance. Hence, the density of the active material 
and the volumetric capacitance are directly proportional. Similarly, the areal capaci￾tance (F cm−2) is calculated by dividing the electrode’s capacitance with the area of 
the working electrode. The ESR value can be evaluated using IR drop. The ESR is 
computed by dividing the applied constant current by the IR drop (obtained from the 
GCD curve) as ESR= IRdrop/2I. The GCD test is the most widely used method for 
determining the stability of SCs. As observed from Equation 4.12, the high specific  
88 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
capacitance value and voltage window can greatly enhance the energy density value 
of SC devices. Using asymmetric or hybrid supercapacitors is one technique to dra￾matically enhance the voltage window. 
4.3.3 eIs 
EIS is an extremely sensitive and nondestructive characterization technique for sub￾suming small signals and evaluating the resulting response of physio-electrochemical 
characteristics. The EIS can be used to investigate chemical mechanisms at the 
electrode/electrolyte interface. The impedance data is measured by applying a low￾amplitude alternative voltage (5–10 mV) over a wide frequency range (0.01–106 Hz), 
and the results are graphically described as a Nyquist plot. The Nyquist plot illus￾trates the imaginary (Z″ ) and real (Zʹ ) components of the cell impedances, com￾posed of three separate zones: an intercept on the real axis (solution resistance, Rs
), 
a semicircle in the high-frequency zone (charge transfer resistance, Rct), and a linear 
component over low-frequency zones (Warburg resistance, W). The Nyquist plot can 
also be used to distinguish between EDLC, pseudocapacitor, and batteries, as shown 
in Figure 4.6. The EDLC shows a vertical line (90°) from the real axis since there 
is an absence of any Faradic process. EDLCs do not display any semicircle or ion 
diffusion, but practical EDLCs display a semicircle due the presence of functional￾ity or doping. The ideal pseudocapacitor has a very small semicircle accompanied 
by a vertical line at 90°; the small semicircle depicts rapid charge transfer Faradic 
process. Compared to pseudocapacitors, batteries have a significantly bigger semi￾circle followed by a straight line, making a 45° angle from the real axis. The bigger 
semicircle illustrates the slower charge transfer, and the 45° straight line depicts the 
slow diffusion process. 
The Bode plot (Figure 4.6b) is another representation of EIS, which shows rela￾tionship between phase angle and frequency of a cell [34]. Bode plot is an effec￾tive technique to reveal the capacitive and battery behavior of the device by simple 
observation of phase shift at specified frequency values. The gradual increase in the 
phase angle to reach a value of 90° indicate a capacitive behavior. The conventional 
method of calculating capacitance from Bode frequency response can be given by 
equation 14 [35, 36]: 
1 C , (4.14) s = 2Pf Z
where f is the frequency and Z is the impedance. The EIS technique is also used 
to estimate charge transfer or pseudo-charge transfer, capacitive behavior, and 
charge–storage mechanisms. The charge transfer resistance can be calculated from 
the Nyquist plot as the diameter of the semicircle on the real axis [37]. Although 
the EIS is a nondestructive method to evaluate specific capacitance, relaxation 
time for recharging along with detection of various resistances in a system, but it 
evaluates the system at low voltage only, and the system shows discrete behavior 
above 106 Hz. (b) 
EDLC 
Pseudocapacitor 
90⁰ 
45⁰ 
Rs 
Interfacial 
charge 
transfer 
Capacitive 
behavior 
EDL (a) 
Battery 
Capacitive 
behavior 
Diffusion 
Interfacial 
charge 
transfer 
Supercapacitors 89 
FIGURE 4.6 (a) Schematic illustration of typical EIS curves of an EDLC, a pseudocapacitor, 
and battery (adapted from ref. 30); (b) schematic illustration of Bode plot. 
4.4 SC DEVICES 
The supercapacitors are made in different styles for commercial applications, such as 
coin-type assembly, cylindrical assembly, and flexible assembly, as shown in Figure 4.7. 
Two electrodes and electrolyte-saturated separators are placed in a conductive metal 
case during coin cell manufacturing, and the assembly is sealed under high pressure 
to prevent leakage and sorting of cells (Figure 4.7a). The coin-cell design is ideal for 
powering compact devices. The cylindrical cell design of supercapacitors is also used 
in commercial purposes. The design consists of rolling layers of electrode and separa￾tor sheets packed into a metal casing to enhance mechanical durability, as shown in 
Figure 4.7b. Figure 4.7c depicts an alternative design known as the flexible SC assem￾bly (pouch cell), which likewise uses layer-by-layer sheets of electrodes and separators. 
These parts are put together in polymer bags, which are flexible enough and reduce the 
extra weight of devices. So, flexible SCs could benefit from very flexible thin-film elec￾trodes with soft substrates and good electrical conductivity and mechanical strength 
along with flexible electrolytes to provide the shape variable support [38]. Generally, 
three types of electrolytes- aqueous (H2SO4, KCl, KOH, etc.), organic (PC, tetrahydro￾furan [THF], etc.), and ionic liquids (1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate 
EMI-BF4 etc.) are used in SCs. Among them, polymer- and ionic liquid (IL)–based 
electrolytes fulfilled the standard of commercial demand but the inadequate ionic con￾ductivity of ILs hinder the capacitance of the cell. The current research on superca￾pacitors is focused on the miniaturization of mechanically flexible solid-state devices 
(SSDs) that follow the significant trend of portable and wearable electronics. Carbon 
nanomaterials, such as graphene, CNTs, activated carbon, and others, are extensively 
used in the construction of flexible SSDs because of their extraordinary mechanical 
strength (~200 GPa), which allows them to endure bending, folding, or rolling, as well 
as outstanding surface area (~2600 m2g−1), and superior electrical conductivity (~106 
to 107 S m−1) [39]. The development of practical methodologies for achieving high￾performance flexible SCs with planar topologies based on CNTs, graphene, and hybrid 
electrodes are discussed in the following sections [40–42]. 90 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications
4.4.1 CNT-Based FlexiBle sCs
CNTs, as excellent polarizable electrodes, have received a lot of attention because 
of its outstanding electrical conductivity, high surface area, unique porous struc￾ture, and exceptional mechanical and thermal durability. Also, their high aspect ratio 
and open tubular network make them suitable candidates for flexible SCs. Thin-film 
SC configurations can be achieved by spray or brush coating, inkjet printing, and 
dip-drying a CNT suspension onto a highly flexible substrate. Due to the van der 
Waals interaction between 1D CNTs and substrates, CNTs can strongly attach to the 
substrate and provide a continuous conducting path along the length. For example, 
Kaempgen et al. [43] fabricated thin-film SCs using a spray coating of a single-walled 
carbon nanotube (SWCNT) suspension on a flexible polyethylene terephthalate 
(PET) substrate. The network of SWCNTs functions serve as both current collectors 
and electrodes. To achieve a fully flexible device, a printable polymer gel electrolyte 
(PVA-H3PO4) was used as both the separator and the electrolyte. The flexible SWCNT 
film coated on a PET substrate and a polymer gel electrolyte were clubbed to con￾struct the flexible SC devices (Figure 4.8a). Figures 4.8b and 4.8c represent the CV 
and GCD curves of the device, showing the specific capacitance of 36 F g−1. Various 
microfabrication techniques have been established to accurately regulate the inter￾digitated electrode’s structure, made from freestanding CNT films and composites. 
FIGURE 4.7 Schematic of different types of SCs: (a) coin-type assembly, (b) stack rectan￾gular assembly, and (c) flexible assemble.Supercapacitors 91 
FIGURE 4.8 (a) Thin-film SC using sprayed SWCNT films on PET as the electrodes and 
a PVA/H3PO4 as polymer electrolyte and separator; (b) the cyclic voltammetry; and (c) the 
galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the thin film supercapacitor using PVA/H3PO4 
polymer electrolyte (Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2009 American 
Chemical Society); (d) schematics of cross-sectional view of a stretchable micro-SC array 
on a PDMS substrate; and (e) CV curves of micro-SC array obtained while increasing and 
decreasing the strain from 0% to 30% and 30% to 0%. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 
44. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
Kim et al. [44] used bottom-up technique to produce interdigitated electrodes for 
micro-SCs. They fabricated a stretchable micro-SC array by spray coating SWCNTs 
as electrodes and using an ion-gel electrolyte, 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis (tri￾fluoromethylsulfonyl) imide [EMIM][NTf2] (Figure  4.8d). The fabricated flexible 
micro-SCs array exhibited a specific capacitance of 55.3 F g-1, and the device was not 
deteriorated upon increasing and decreasing the strain up to 30% (Figure 4.8e). To 
fulfill the need for a fully stretchable device with 100% stretchability, Niu et al. [45] 
fabricated highly flexible and stretchable SCs using buckled SWCNT films. In order 
to synthesize SWCNT film electrodes having continuous reticulate architecture, they 
combined directly grown SWCNT film with polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) sub￾strate. The electrode performance remains nearly unchanged even under the strain 
of up to 140%. The device showed a high specific capacitance of 48 F g−1 and 53 F 
g−1 with no strain and 120% strain, respectively, using PVA-H2SO4 as both separator 
and electrolyte. 
CNT composites with conductive polymers or transition metal oxides have also 
been examined to further enhance the performance of substrate-supported pristine 
CNT film electrodes. Based on the electron transfer process, the composite endows 
extra pseudocapacitance to carbon network and enhances the specific capacitance of  
 
 
 
92 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
the device [46, 47]. Meng et al. [48] fabricated highly flexible and paper-like CNT/ 
polyaniline (PANI) thin-film electrodes using H2SO4-PVA gel as solid-state elec￾trolytes (Figure 4.9a). In Figure 4.9b, three very flexible electronics are connected 
in series to light a red LED. The device had the thickness of commercial standard 
A4 print paper. The integrated device showed a discharge capacitance of 332 F g−1 
for electrode material, and the device capacitance was 31.4 F g−1 using polymer￾gel electrolyte (PVA-H2SO4). The specific capacitance of the device showed more 
sustainable performance in a polymer-gel electrolyte in comparison to an aqueous 
electrolyte; the inset shows the GCD curve at 1 A  g−1 for both aqueous and gel 
electrolyte (Figure 4.9c). They showed good stability in the device over 1000 GCD 
cycles. Lin et al. [49] developed a flexible and transparent supercapacitor based on 
an aligned multiwalled carbon nanotube/polyaniline (MWCNT/PANI) compos￾ite. The maximum capacitance of 233 F g−1 was obtained from the GCD discharge 
curve for single electrode. The specific capacitances value of the system remains 
almost unchanged with the increasing bent angle from 0° to 180° due to the aligned 
structure. To further increase the integral electrochemical performances, yarn-based 
SCs were used. In this regard, Choi et al. [50] developed waivable super-elastic 
FIGURE 4.9 (a) Schematic illustration of the highly flexible and all-solid-state paper-like 
polymer supercapacitors. (b) A  digital picture that shows three highly flexible devices in 
series to light a red LED (c) The sustainability of PANI/CNT nanocomposite thin-film device 
in aqueous and polymer-gel electrolyte with inset of GDD at 1 Ag−1 (Reproduced with per￾mission from Ref. 48. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (d) Schematic showing 
the preparation and structure of biscrolled CNT/MnO2 hybrid fiber, SEM morphologies of (e) 
As-spun biscrolled hybrid fiber at scale bar of 100 μm. (f) The cross-sectional view of yarn 
at a scale bar of 15 μm. (g) The SEM image of coiled 5-ply, biscrolled yarn (70 wt% MnO2/ 
CNT). (h) Image of two-ply coiled yarn integrated in a fabric. (i) CV curves (at 50mVs−1) for 
nondeformed, bent, mandrel-wrapped, and knotted biscrolled MnO2/CNT yarn. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. 50. Copyright 2016 Nature communication Supercapacitors 93 
biscrolled yarn SCs. The biscrolled yarns were made from the MnO2-coated CNT 
sheets as shown in Figure 4.9d. Biscrolling can boost the loading mass of active 
nanoparticles by up to 99% without compromising the fiber’s mechanical proper￾ties. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of MnO2-loaded biscrolled yarn 
electrode (Figure 4.9e), and its cross-sectional view (Figure 4.9f) shows the produc￾tion of uniform and roughly circular yarn. The five yarns were piled together (5-ply 
electrode) for additional strength as shown in Figure 4.9g. The biscrolled yarn of 
MnO2/CNT was strong and flexible enough to be woven into a textile integrated into 
a fabric (Figure 4.9h). The biscrolled MnO2/CNT fiber showed a specific capacitance 
of 889 mF cm−2 and possessed an energy density of 35.8 μWh cm−2 using PVA-LiCl 
gel electrolyte. The deformed capacitor fibers’ CV was nearly identical to that of 
the nondeformed fibers as showed in Figure 4.9i. No significant changes were found 
when strains of 10%, 20%, and 30% were applied to the CV curves of the stretch￾able supercapacitor. Hence, the biscrolling technique provides strength and electrical 
conductivity and enhances the performance of the capacitance. 
4.4.2 graphene-baseD FlexIble scs 
Graphene is made up of a hexagonally arranged single layer of sp2 hybridized car￾bon atoms. It is considered one of the most enticing materials for flexible SCs due 
to unrivaled physical and chemical features such as unique structural properties, 
large surface area, and high electronic and thermal conductivities along with supe￾rior chemical stability [51–54]. Xie et al. measured the quantum capacitance of gra￾phene, suggesting that single-layer graphene has an inherent capacitance of 21 μF 
cm−2, which set up the highest limit of double-layer capacitance for all carbon-based 
materials [55]. 
In a traditional stacked design in supercapacitors, graphitic carbon-based materi￾als are typically orientated arbitrarily with respect to the current collectors, which 
limits the access of electrolyte ions into the graphitic planes. As a result, the electro￾chemical surface area of graphene layers is not fully utilized. In this regard, Yoo et 
al. [56] demonstrated the in-plane fabrication of reduced multilayer graphene oxide 
(RMGO)–based ultrathin supercapacitors (Figure 4.10a, b). The CV and GCD curves 
of RMGO are shown in Figures 4.10c and 4.10d. The in-plane fabrication enables 
the maximum utilization of electrochemical surface area and a higher capacitance 
value of 390 μF cm−2 for the RMGO device using PVA-H2SO4 gel electrolyte. Few￾layer graphene produced from graphite oxide (GO) is a potentially cost-effective 
material in the fabrication of SCs. Due to its strong sheet-to-sheet van der Waals 
interactions, restacking of graphene sheets reduces the surface area. To avoid the 
problem of restacking in graphene sheets, El-Kady et al. fabricated a conventional 
LightScribe DVD optical drive for laser-induced GO-layer reduction to a graphene 
film electrode without any additional binders. The device showed high power density 
(20 W cm−3), and the system remains almost unchanged even under bending from 
0° to 180° [57]. To further boost the performance of flexible devices, conducting 
polymer and metal-oxide composites of graphene has been extensively studied. The 
introduction of polymer offers good electrochemical and mechanical properties in 
flexible devices. In this regard, Chi et al. [58] fabricated a freestanding graphene 94 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 4.10 (a) Schematic illustration of the device fabricated using the concept of 2D 
in-plane SCs; (b) a prototype flexible supercapacitor device based on reduced multilayer gra￾phene oxide (RMGO) developed using the new in-plane geometry; (c) CV curves obtained 
at different scan rates for RMGO; and (d) the GCD curve of an RMGO SC measured at a 
constant current density of 176 mA g−1. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Ref. 56. Copyright 2011 American Chemical 
Society. 
paper (GP)–based 3D porous graphene hydrogel-polyaniline (GH-PANI) electrode 
using an inkjet printing method. The schematics of ink-printed GH-PANI/GP elec￾trode is shown in Figure 4.11a. Owing to interactions of the graphene nanosheets’ 
stacking, the SEM image of the graphene hydrogel exhibits a 3D porous structure 
(Figure 4.11b). Figure 4.11c shows an SEM image of coral-like PANI loaded onto 
the pore walls of the graphene with numerous interconnected nanorods. The layered 
stack of GH-PANI nanocomposite on GP is shown in Figure  4.11d. This method 
proposed a low-cost and efficient synthesis to fabricate flexible graphene–PANI 
nanohybrid paper with a sizable area and light weight, which also uses the collective 
impact of graphene and PANI. The flexible GH-PANI/GP device showed a maxi￾mum energy density of 24.02 Wh kg−1 along with outstanding mechanical flexibility. 
SCs constructed of robust and flexible yarn can be used as power sources for small 
electronic devices such as mobile phones, medical equipment, and wearable elec￾tronic fabrics, as they can be easily molded into various sizes and structures. Huang  
Supercapacitors 95 
et al. [59] used the electrodeposition technique to fabricate high-tensile-strength stain￾less steel yarns coated with a PPy@MnO2@rGO hierarchical structure as shown in 
Figure 4.12a. The cross-sectional view of the PPy@MnO2@rGO-deposited conductive 
yarn (Figure 4.12b) depicts a thin layer of hierarchical structure that facilitates rapid ion 
FIGURE 4.11 (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of GH–PANI, SEM images 
of GH (b), GH-PANI (c), and (d) GH–PANI layer on GH–PANI/GP at high magnification. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2014 American Chemical 
Society 
FIGURE 4.12 (a) Schematic illustration of the yarn modified by deposition of rGO, MnO2 
and PPy; (b) cross section of the PPy@MnO2@rGO-deposited conductive yarn; and (c) CV 
curves of the all-solid-state yarn SC undergoing consecutive deformations at a scan rate of 
100 mV s−1. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright 2015 American Chemical 
Society. 96 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
movement during charge–discharge. The resultant modified yarns exhibit an outstand￾ing specific capacitance of 411 mF cm−2 in flexible electrodes using PVA-H3PO4 gel 
electrolyte. The yarn supercapacitor was then put through a series of deformation tests, 
in which it was straight, bent, knotted, twisted, and straight again, which shows a slight 
change in the voltammetry curve (Figure 4.12c). This provides clear evidence that yarn￾based SCs possess excellent electrochemical and mechanical properties, and it can be 
used in the modern textile industry to create a variety of wearable electronics. 
Furthermore, Kim et al. [60] developed highly conducting graphene/organic 
semiconducting polymer hybrid core/shell fibers (G@PFs) composed of Cu and 
N co-doped porous graphene fiber through a wet-spinning process (Figure 4.13a). 
Figure  4.13b shows an SEM image of G@PEDOT fiber core-shell morphology. 
The graphene core provides a high surface area of 1174.4 m2 g−1 and open channels 
for the infiltration of electrolytes while Cu and N-doping improve the wettability 
of a graphene sheet. As a consequence, PEDOT-coated porous graphene fibers 
showed a high volumetric-specific capacitance of 263.1 F cm−3 and energy density 
of 7.0 mW h cm−3, along with high cycle life (Figure  4.13c). G@PEDOT fibers 
show exceptional cyclic stability after 20,000 charge-discharge cycles along with 
excellent mechanical flexibility no cyclic deuteriation is observed on bending up to 
180°. In addition to the previously mentioned studies, there have been few recent 
studies on biomass-derived porous carbon as electrode material for high energy 
density SCs. Ghosh and co-workers constructed a high-performance all-solid-state 
flexible asymmetric SC device using coconut fiber–derived porous carbon as the 
anode and CoFe2O4/porous carbon as the cathode, showing a high energy density 
of 50.34 Wh kg−1 and approximately 91% retention for 5000 cycles [61]. Xu et al. 
showed dung beetle forewing carbon (DBFC)–derived nitrogen and oxygen self￾doped porous carbon nanostructure–based symmetric solid-state SC with a high 
specific capacitance of 260 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and excellent capacitance retention 
( ∼90.3%) after 8000 consecutive cycles [62]. 
4.5 SUMMARY 
The aforementioned study summarized the recent progress in SC devices, charge￾storage mechanisms, characterization techniques, and electrode materials. The 
broad range of carbon, with various dimensions and unique morphology, has been 
extensively studied as electrode material for supercapacitor. Carbon-based nano￾structures, such as CNTs and graphene, have been studied substantially as electrode 
materials for portable and wearable electronics power sources due to their phys￾iochemical stability, exceptional conductivity, huge surface area, high mechanical 
strength, and low manufacturing cost. The main methods for fabricating flexible 
carbon electrodes are the deposition of carbon nanomaterials onto a flexible sub￾strate, the production of a flexible, freestanding film and yarn of electrochemically 
active materials. Furthermore, the design and development of graphene and CNT 
composite with conducting polymers and metal oxides are effective approaches to 
high-performance carbon-based SCs, introducing pseudo-active sites to improve 
interfacial interactions. Although significant progress has been made, there are sev￾eral advancements that are required, particularly for carbon-based nanomaterials  
 
 
 
 
Supercapacitors 97 
FIGURE 4.13 (a) Schematic illustration displaying the fabrication steps for G@PFs; (b) 
SEM images showing the cross sections of G@PEDOT fiber; and (c) cycle life of G@PF SC 
devices with inset is GCD profiles of G@PEDOT after 19899 cycles up to 20,000 cycles at 
1.05 A cm-3. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2017 American Chemical 
Society 
such as lowering of operating cost, carbon/electrolyte synergy, and new proposals to 
try different synthesis methods for higher specific capacitance and energy density, 
before these can become commercially available products. 
REFERENCES 
1.	 Liu, C., Li, F., Ma, L. P., & Cheng, H. M. (2010). Advanced materials for energy storage. 
Adv Mater, 22, 28–62. 
2.	 Simon, P., & Gogotsi, Y. (2008). Materials for electrochemical capacitors. Nat Mater, 7, 
845–854. 
3.	 Zhang, H., Cao, G., & Yang, Y. (2009). Carbon nanotube arrays and their composites for 
electrochemical capacitors and lithium-ion batteries. Energy Environ Sci, 2, 932–943. 
4.	 Zhai, Y., Dou, Y., Zhao, D., Fulvio, P. F., Mayes, R. T., & Dai, S. (2011). Carbon materials 
for chemical capacitive energy storage. Adv Mater, 23, 4828–4850. 
5.	 Lokhande, P. E., Chavan, U. S., & Pandey, A. (2020). Materials and fabrication methods 
for electrochemical supercapacitors: Overview. Electrochem Ener Rev, 3, 155–186.  
 
 
 
98 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
6. Hu, B., Wang, K., Wu, L., Yu, S. H., Antonietti, M., & Titirici, M. M. (2010). Engineering 
carbon materials from the hydrothermal carbonization process of biomass. Adv Mater, 
22, 813–828. 
7.	 Meng, C., Gall, O. Z., & Irazoqui, P. P. (2013). A flexible super-capacitive solid-state 
power supply for miniature implantable medical devices. Biomed Microdevices, 15, 
973–983. 
8.	 Jiang, H., Lee, P. S., & Li, C. (2013). 3D carbon based nanostructures for advanced super￾capacitors. Energy Environ Sci, 6, 41–53. 
9.	 Zhang, L. L., & Zhao, X. S. (2009). Carbon-based materials as supercapacitor electrodes. 
Chem Soc Rev, 38, 2520–2531. 
10.	 Mishra, A. K., & Ramaprabhu, S. (2011). Functionalized graphene-based nanocompos￾ites for supercapacitor application. J Phys Chem C, 115, 14006–14013. 
11.	 Mishra, S., Majee, B. P., Maurya, P. K., & Mishra, A. K. (2019). Multifunctional low 
temperature reduced graphite oxides for high performance supercapacitors and SERS 
application. Mater Res Express, 6, 85527. 
12.	 Paquin, F., Rivnay, J., Salleo, A., Stingelin, N., & Silva, C. (2013). Multi-phase semicrys￾talline microstructures drive exciton dissociation in neat plastic semiconductors. J Mater 
Chem C, 3, 10715–10722. 
13.	 Pumera, M. (2011). Graphene-based nanomaterials for energy storage. Energy Environ 
Sci, 4, 668–674. 
14.	 Sun, Y., Wu, Q., & Shi, G. (2011). Graphene based new energy materials. Energy Environ 
Sci, 4, 1113–1132. 
15.	 Zhang, B., Liang, J., Xu, C. L., Wei, B. Q., Ruan, D. B., & Wu, D. H. (2001). Electric 
double-layer capacitors using carbon nanotube electrodes and organic electrolyte. Mater 
Lett, 51, 539–542. 
16. Guan, L., Yu, L., & Chen, G. Z. (2016). Capacitive and non-capacitive faradaic charge 
storage. Electrochim Acta, 206, 464–478. 
17.	 Bokhari, S. W., Siddique, A. H., Sherrell, P. C., Yue, X., Karumbaiah, K. M., Wei, S., 
Ellis, A.V., & Gao, W. (2020). Advances in graphene-based supercapacitor electrodes. 
Ener Rep, 6, 2768–2784. 
18.	 Wang, Y., Zhang, L., Hou, H., Xu, W., Duan, G., He, S., Liu, K., & Jiang, S. (2021). 
Recent progress in carbon-based materials for supercapacitor electrodes: A  review. J 
Mater Sci, 56, 173–200. 
19.	 Wang, Y., Song, Y., & Xia, Y. (2016). Electrochemical capacitors: Mechanism, materials, 
systems, characterization and applications. Chem Soc Rev, 45, 5925–5950. 
20.	 Endo, M., Takeda, T., Kim, Y. J., Koshiba, K.,  & Ishii, K. (2001). High power elec￾tric double layer capacitor (EDLC’s); from operating principle to pore size control in 
advanced activated carbons. Carbon Sci, 1, 117–128. 
21.	 Sarno, M. (2020). Nanotechnology in energy storage: The supercapacitors. Stud Surf Sci 
Catal, 179, 431–458. 
22.	 Chodankar, N. R., Pham, H. D., Nanjundan, A. K., Fernando, J. F., Jayaramulu, K., Golberg, 
D., Han, Y. K., & Dubal, D. P. (2020). True meaning of pseudocapacitors and their perfor￾mance metrics: Asymmetric versus hybrid supercapacitors. Small, 16, 2002806. 
23.	 Chen, X., Paul, R., & Dai, L. (2017). Carbon-based supercapacitors for efficient energy 
storage. Natl Sci Rev, 4, 453–489. 
24.	 Jiang, Y.,  & Liu, J. (2019). Definitions of pseudocapacitive materials: A  brief review. 
Energy Environ Mater, 2, 30–37. 
25.	 Augustyn, V., Simon, P., & Dunn, B. (2014). Pseudocapacitive oxide materials for high￾rate electrochemical energy storage. Energy Environ Sci, 7, 1597–1614. 
26. Shao, Y., El-Kady, M.F., Sun, J., Li, Y., Zhang, Q., Zhu, M., Wang, H., Dunn, B.,  & 
Kaner, R. B. (2018). Design and mechanisms of asymmetric supercapacitors. Chem 
Rev,118, 9233–9280. Supercapacitors 99 
27.	 Costentin, C., & Savéant, J. M. (2019). Energy storage: Pseudocapacitance in prospect. 
Chem Sci, 10, 5656–5666. 
28.	 Winter, M., & Brodd, R. J. (2004).What are batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors? 
Chem Rev, 104, 4245–4269. 
29.	 Zuo, W., Li, R., Zhou, C., Li, Y., Xia, J., & Liu, J. (2017). Battery-supercapacitor hybrid 
devices: Recent progress and future prospects. Adv Sci, 4, 1–21. 
30.	 Xie, J., Yang, P., Wang, Y., Qi, T., Lei, Y., & Li, C. M. (2018). Puzzles and confusions in 
supercapacitor and battery: Theory and solutions. J Power Sources, 401, 213–223. 
31.	 Zhang, R., Xu, Y., Harrison, D., Fyson, J., Southee, D.,  & Tanwilaisiri, A. (2014). 
Fabrication and characterization of energy storage fibres. In 2014 20th International 
Conference on Automation and Computing, Cranfield, UK, IEEE, 228–230. 
32.	 Zhang, R. R., Xu, Y. M., Harrison, D., Fyson, J., Qiu, F. L., & Southee, D. (2015). Flexible 
strip supercapacitors for future energy storage. Int J Autom Comput, 12, 43–49. 
33.	 Zhang, L., & Gong, H. (2015). Improvement in flexibility and volumetric performance 
for supercapacitor application and the effect of Ni-Fe ratio on electrode behaviour. J 
Mater Chem A, 3, 7607–7615. 
34.	 Zhang, J., & Zhao, X. S. (2012). On the configuration of supercapacitors for maximizing 
electrochemical performance. ChemSusChem, 5, 818–841. 
35.	 Kampouris, D. K., Ji, X., Randviir, E. P., & Banks, C. E. (2015). A new approach for the 
improved interpretation of capacitance measurements for materials utilised in energy 
storage. RSC Adv, 5, 12782–12791. 
36. Subramani, K., Sudhan, N., Divya, R., & Sathish, M. (2017). All-solid-state asymmet￾ric supercapacitors based on cobalt hexacyanoferrate-derived CoS and activated carbon. 
RSC Adv, 7, 6648–6659. 
37.	 Fletcher, S., Black, V. J., & Kirkpatrick, I. (2014). A universal equivalent circuit for car￾bon-based supercapacitors. J Solid State Electrochem, 18, 1377–1387. 
38.	 Lu, X., Yu, M., Wang, G., Tong, Y., & Li, Y. (2014). Flexible solid-state supercapacitors: 
Design, fabrication and applications. Energy Environ Sci, 7, 2160–2181. 
39.	 Yang, P., & Mai, W. (2014). Flexible solid-state electrochemical supercapacitors. Nano 
Ener, 8, 274–290. 
40.	 Wang, G., Lu, X., Ling, Y., Zhai, T., Wang, H., Tong, Y., & Li, Y. (2012). LiCl/PVA 
gel electrolyte stabilizes vanadium oxide nanowire electrodes for pseudocapacitors. ACS 
Nano, 6, 10296–10302. 
41.	 Sawangphruk, M., Srimuk, P., Chiochan, P., Krittayavathananon, A., Luanwuthi, S.,  & 
Limtrakul, J. (2013). High-performance supercapacitor of manganese oxide/reduced gra￾phene oxide nanocomposite coated on flexible carbon fiber paper. Carbon N Y, 60, 109–116. 
42.	 Panero, S., Clemente, A., & Spila, E. (1996). Solid state supercapacitors. Solid State Ion, 
86, 1285–1289. 
43.	 Kaempgen, M., Chan, C. K., Ma, J., Cui, Y., & Gruner, G. (2009). Printable thin film 
supercapacitors using single-walled carbon nanotubes. Nano Lett, 9, 1872–1876. 
44.	 Kim, D., Shin, G., Kang, Y. J., Kim, W., & Ha, J. S. (2013). Fabrication of a stretchable 
solid-state micro-supercapacitor array. ACS Nano, 7, 7975–7982. 
45.	 Niu, Z., Dong, H., Zhu, B., Li, J., Hng, H.H., Zhou, W., Chen, X.,  & Xie, S. (2013). 
Highly stretchable, integrated supercapacitors based on single-walled carbon nanotube 
films with continuous reticulate architecture. Adv Mat, 25, 1058–1064. 
46. Yu, G., Xie, X., Pan, L., Bao, Z., & Cui, Y. (2013). Hybrid nanostructured materials for 
high-performance electrochemical capacitors. Nano Ener, 2, 213–234. 
47.	 Hu, L., Chen, W., Xie, X., Liu, N., Yang, Y., Wu, H., Yao, Y., Pasta, M., Alshareef, H. 
N., & Cui, Y. (2011). Symmetrical MnO2—carbon nanotube—textile nanostructures for 
wearable pseudocapacitors with high mass loading. ACS Nano, 5, 8904–8913. 
48.	 Meng, C., Liu, C., Chen, L., Hu, C., & Fan, S. (2010). Highly flexible and all-solid-state 
paperlike polymer supercapacitors. Nano Lett, 10, 4025–4031.  
100 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
49.	 Lin, H., Li, L., Ren, J., Cai, Z., Qiu, L., Yang, Z., & Peng, H. (2013). Conducting polymer 
composite film incorporated with aligned carbon nanotubes for transparent, flexible and 
efficient supercapacitor. Sci Rep, 3, 1–6. 
50.	 Choi, C., Kim, K. M., Kim, K. J., Lepró, X., Spinks, G. M., Baughman, R. H., & Kim, S. 
J. (2016). Improvement of system capacitance via weavable superelastic biscrolled yarn 
supercapacitors. Nat Commun, 7, 1–8. 
51.	 Niu, Z., Zhang, L., Liu, L., Zhu, B., Dong, H., & Chen, X. (2013). All-solid-state flexible 
ultrathin micro-supercapacitors based on graphene. Adv Mater, 25, 4035–4042. 
52.	 Chang, C. W., & Liao, Y. C. (2016). Accelerated sedimentation velocity assessment for 
nanowires stabilized in a non-newtonian fluid. Langmuir, 32, 13620–13626. 
53.	 Pumera, M. (2010). Graphene-based nanomaterials and their electrochemistry. Chem 
Soc Rev, 39, 4146–4157. 
54.	 Rao, C. E. E., Sood, A. E., Subrahmanyam, K. E., & Govindaraj, A. (2009). Graphene: 
The new two-dimensional nanomaterial. Angew Chemie Int Ed, 48, 7752–7777. 
55.	 Xia, J., Chen, F., Li, J., & Tao, N. (2009). Measurement of the quantum capacitance of 
graphene. Nat Nanotechnol, 4, 505–509. 
56. Yoo, J. J., Balakrishnan, K., Huang, J., Meunier, V., Sumpter, B. G., Srivastava, A., 
Conway, M., Mohana Reddy, A. L., Yu, J., Vajtai, R., & Ajayan, P. M. (2011). Ultrathin 
planar graphene supercapacitors. Nano Lett, 11, 1423–1427. 
57.	 El-Kady, M. F., Strong, V., Dubin, S., & Kaner, R. B. (2012). Laser scribing of high￾performance and flexible graphene-based electrochemical capacitors. Science, 335, 
1326–1330. 
58.	 Chi, K., Zhang, Z., Xi, J., Huang, Y., Xiao, F., Wang, S., & Liu, Y. (2014). Freestanding 
graphene paper supported three-dimensional porous graphene-polyaniline nanocompos￾ite synthesized by inkjet printing and in flexible all-solid-state supercapacitor. ACS Appl 
Mater Interfaces, 6, 16312–16319. 
59.	 Huang, Y., Hu, H., Huang, Y., Zhu, M., Meng, W., Liu, C., Pei, Z., Hao, C., Wang, Z., & 
Zhi, C. (2015). From industrially weavable and knittable highly conductive yarns to large 
wearable energy storage textiles. ACS Nano, 9, 4766–4775. 
60.	 Padmajan Sasikala, S., Lee, K. E., Lim, J., Lee, H. J., Koo, S. H., Kim, I. H., Jung, H. 
J., & Kim, S. O. (2017). Interface-confined high crystalline growth of semiconducting 
polymers at graphene fibers for high-performance wearable supercapacitors. ACS Nano, 
11, 9424–9434. 
61.	 Gogoi, D., Makkar, P., Das, M. R., & Ghosh, N. N. (2022). CoFe2O4 nanoparticle deco￾rated hierarchical biomass derived porous carbon based nanocomposites for high-per￾formance all-solid-state flexible asymmetric supercapacitor devices. ACS Appl Electron 
Mater, 4, 795 − 806. 
62.	 Xu, P., Tong, J., Zhang, L., Yang, Y., Chen, X., Wang, J., & Zhang, S. (2022). Dung beetle 
forewing-derived nitrogen and oxygen self-doped porous carbon for high performance 
solid-state supercapacitors. J Alloys Compd, 892, 162129. DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-5 101 
5
5 Designing Hollow 
Structured Materials
 
for Sustainable 
Electrochemical 
Energy Conversion
 
Baghendra Singh and Arindam Indra 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
Sustainable energy conversion technologies based on electrocatalysis are considered 
as the most promising clean and renewable pathways to solve energy and environ￾mental problems (Yi Li et  al., 2021). Electrocatalytic energy conversion involves 
various processes like water splitting, reduction of O2, N2, and CO2, or oxidation 
of H2. Generally, electrocatalysis is kinetically sluggish and proceeds through the 
input of extra energy known as overpotential (Singh et al., 2021). The requirement of 
high overpotential hinders the practical applications of the electrocatalysts in elec￾trochemical water splitting as well as in fuel cells. 
Therefore, the development of highly efficient and durable electrocatalysts with 
excellent electrochemical performance is essential for the development of eco￾friendly energy conversion technologies (Fan et  al., 2022; J. Wang et  al., 2019). 
Designing nanostructured materials with desired compositions, highly porous struc￾tures, large surface areas, and desired morphology can improve the electrochemical 
performance (S. Kim et al., 2022; Xue et al., 2022; Yasin et al., 2022). In this respect, 
hollow-structured materials have attained immense attention in the field of electro￾chemical energy conversion (J. Wang et al., 2019). Hollow-structured nanomaterials 
are defined as the nano- or microstructure having well-defined boundaries and inte￾rior cavities. The unique structural features like low density, high surface-to-volume 
ratio, large pore volume, and small mass- and charge-transport pathways make them 
a potential candidate for various applications in energy conversion (L. Zhou et al., 
2017). Hollow-structured materials are widely employed in batteries, supercapaci￾tors, fuel cells, and electrochemical energy conversion owing to their unique struc￾tural properties (J. Wang et al., 2019). Hence, efforts have been undertaken to design 
hollow-structured materials with different compositions and morphology for excel￾lent electrochemical performance.  
102 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
5.2	 IMPORTANCE OF HOLLOW-STRUCTURED MATERIALS 
Hollow-structured materials have lower density attributed to their extra void spaces 
than their solid counterparts (X. W. Lou et al., 2008, L. Zhou et al., 2017). In addi￾tion, hollow-structured materials provide a large surface area with rich electrochem￾ical active sites and a large contact area between electrode and electrolyte enhancing 
the mass diffusion (Zhao & Jiang, 2009, J. Wang et al., 2019). 
Besides, the interior cavity of the hollow-structured materials results in the expo￾sure of the active sites improving the adsorption properties (X. H. Liu et al., 2020, Yu 
et al., 2016). The open-pore channels in hollow-structured materials lead to very low 
diffusion blockage and sufficient transportation of electrolytes into the inner region 
of the hollow structure (Yu et al., 2016). 
5.3	 STRUCTURAL DIVERSITY OF HOLLOW-STRUCTURED 
MATERIALS 
The hollow materials with diverse structures and morphologies have been designed 
by optimizing synthetic methodologies and reaction conditions (Jun Liu et  al., 
2008). Simple hollow structures with polyhedral, cubic, or bowl-like shapes have 
been developed for the various electrochemical energy conversion processes (J. 
Wang et al., 2019). Complex hollow structures having multiple shells or multiple 
internal chambers or cores have been demonstrated for the various energy conver￾sion processes. The hollow-structured materials with closed single-shelled, open 
hollow, complex hollow, bubble-within-bubble, tube-in-tube, and wire-in-tube 
hollow structures have been synthesized for the electrochemical energy conver￾sion process (Figure 5.1; X. W. Lou et al., 2008). The hollow spheres, core-shell 
spheres, yolk-shell spheres, double-shell spheres, and multi-shell spheres have 
been designed with tunable compositions (Figure 5.1). The open and closed single￾shell structures are the simplest form of hollow-structured nanomaterials, which 
can be synthesized by the soft and hard templating methods. Generally, oil-in￾water or water-in-oil emulsions are utilized to form single-shell hollow materials 
(L. Zhou et al., 2017). 
The open hollow structures have an interior cavity with a polyhedral cage or 
frame-like morphology (Nai et al., 2018). The cage structure has multiple openings 
on its wall while the frame structure involves the complete removal of the walls 
preserving the edges and corners. Furthermore, the single-shelled hollow structures 
can be assembled into secondary spheres, hollow spheres, and fibers to form bubble￾within-bubble, bubble-within-sphere, and bubble-within-fiber structures, respec￾tively, and other different types of hollow structures (J. Wang et al., 2019). 
The spherical hollow-structured materials have an exterior hollow shell and 
interior core, which can move inside the shell (Gong et al., 2019). The spherical 
structures have an extra void space, which can provide total exposure of the active 
center inside the shell. Generally, selective etching, Kirkendall effect, Ostwald rip￾ening, mass relocation, and ion-exchange strategies have been explored to design 
hollow-structured nanomaterials with various structures and morphologies (J. 
Wang et al., 2019). Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 103 
FIGURE 5.1 Schematic illustration of the various hollow structured nanomaterials 
employed in the electrochemical energy conversion processes. 
5.4 PRINCIPLE OF DESIGNING THE HOLLOW STRUCTURE 
Hollow-structured nanomaterials have been designed by using different templates 
or template-free methods. The templated methods involve hard and soft templating 
strategies whereas the template-free methods include Ostwald ripening, Kirkendall 
effect, ion exchange, and selective etching strategy. 
5.4.1 soFT TemplaTIng meThoD 
The amphiphilic molecules such as surfactants and block copolymers are self￾assembled into micelles with different structures when their concentration is higher 
than the critical micelle concentration (CMC; M. Zhu et al., 2020). Such micelles 
can be widely utilized as soft templates to form various hollow nanostructures. The 
micelles are thermodynamically meta-stable and observed to be highly sensitive to 
pH value; the concentration of the amphiphilic molecules, solvents, and organic/ 
inorganic additives; and the ionic strength of the solution. Furthermore, their sensi￾tivity can be utilized for effective control over the morphology and structure of the 104 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
micelle templates (Y. Liu et al., 2013). Hence, micelles are used as the soft templates 
for the construction of hollow-structured nanomaterials with various compositions 
and morphologies (Figure 5.2). 
Soft templates, such as gas bubbles, supramolecular micelles, polymer vesicles, 
and so on, have been employed to fabricate the hollow nanostructures (Yongjun Li 
et al., 2006; Jian Liu et al., 2010; Xu & Wang, 2007). First, the shells are grown 
along the interfacial region, and further the template is removed to form hollow 
nanostructures (X. W. Lou et al., 2008). For example, Pinnavaia and co-workers syn￾thesized mesoporous molecular sieves with vesicle-like hierarchical structures using 
a supramolecular assembly pathway (S. S. Kim et al., 1998). The vesicle shells were 
constructed of one or more silica sheets having a 3-nanometer thickness. 
Zhang et al. also synthesized organosiliceous multilamellar vesicles utilizing a 
single-surfactant vesicle template with Pluronic P85 as the structure-directing agent 
and 1,2-bis(triethoxysilyl)ethane as the organosilica precursor (Y. Zhang et al., 2008). 
Similarly, hollow nanostructures of multi-shelled Cu2O (H. Xu & Wang, 2007), SiO2 
(Gu et al., 2010), and double-shelled ferrihydrite hollow spheres (Z. Wu et al., 2008) 
were designed using cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), carbonaceous sil￾ica, and gas-bubble soft templates, respectively. 
5.4.2 harD TemplaTIng meThoD 
The designing of hollow structured materials by hard-templating method consists of 
four main steps: (1) template preparation, (2) surface modification of the hard tem￾plate, (3) coating/deposition of the desired material, and (4) removal of the template 
(Figure 5.2; Gong et al., 2019). The monodispersity, control over the size and shape, 
and easy synthesis are the main criteria for selecting the templates. The monodis￾persed polymer, polystyrene spheres, silica, carbonaceous microsphere, metal, and 
metal-oxide colloids are the commonly utilized hard templates for the synthesis of 
hollow-structured materials (Pérez-Page et al., 2016; M. Zhu et al., 2021). For exam￾ple, the Si microparticles encapsulated in graphene cages (Si-MP@Gr) were synthe￾sized with yolk-shell structure (Yuzhang Li et al., 2016). Furthermore, the Si-MP@ 
Gr were coated with Ni, and the thickness of the coating was tuned to provide the 
void space. In addition to the hollow carbon nanostructures, nanofiber arrays and 
nanospheres have been successfully designed using anodic aluminum oxide or poly￾styrene sphere as templates. 
5.4.3 sacrIFIcIal TemplaTIng meThoD 
The sacrificial template method has been explored for the development of hollow 
structured materials (X. W. Lou et al., 2008). In this method, the shells are formed 
around the surface of the sacrificial template, and furthermore, these shells are 
observed to adopt the shape of the template (Miao et  al., 2007). Simultaneously, 
the hollow interior cavity is obtained by destroying the sacrificial template. This 
method avoids the template removal process and generates a controllable morphol￾ogy. The template removal is observed to prevent possible damage to the produced 
shell (Figure 5.2; Miao et al., 2007).  
Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 105 
FIGURE 5.2 Schematic representation for the designing of the various hollow-structured 
nanomaterials using soft-template, hard-template, and semi-sacrificial template methods. 
This method is facile as it can be performed in a stirring aqueous solution 
or a hydrothermal system. Several hollow nanotubes and hollow spheres have 
been designed using the sacrificial template method. For example, semicon￾ductor CdX (X  =  Te, Se, S) hollow structures were successfully synthesized 
utilizing Cd(OH)Cl as a sacrificial template by simple stirring method (Miao 
et al., 2007). The hollow structures with hollow spheres or hollow tubes were 
formed by controlling the shape of the sacrificial template. The CdTe hollow 
spheres and hollow tubes were synthesized from Cd(OH)Cl precursors. A dou￾ble-shelled poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and polypyrrole (PPy) 
hollow spheres were also synthesized using Fe3O4 hollow spheres as sacrificial 
templates (Pang et al., 2014). 
5.4.4 selecTIve eTchIng 
Selective etching is known as the selective removal of a part of single-component 
material to generate a hollow cavity by chemical treatment or calcination (Figure 5.3; 
Y. Liu et al., 2013). Recently, the formation of hollow structures has also been dem￾onstrated through the selective etching process of a single-component material, such 
as Prussian blue (PB), Prussian blue analogue (PBA), ZnSn(OH)6, and CoSn(OH)6 
(L. Zhou et al., 2017). For example, the uniform PB hollow particles were developed 
using an acid etching strategy. The PB cubes were treated with 1.0 M HCl solution  
 
 
106 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
at 140 °C for 4 h to produce a hollow interior (Nai et al., 2018). Similarly, Lou group 
synthesized Ni–Co PBA nanocages through a chemical etching approach (Nai et al., 
2018). The Ni–Co PBA nanocubes were treated with ammonia. As a result, the etch￾ing of the Ni–Co PBA nanocubes occurred selectively at the corners and along the 
diagonal direction to form the Ni–Co PBA nanocages. 
The selective etching strategy has also been employed to design the intricate hol￾low structures with various compositions. For example, highly porous and single￾crystalline ZnSn(OH)6 and CoSn(OH)6 nanoboxes were developed by the selective 
etching of the core of ZnSn(OH)6 (L. Wang et al., 2011), and CoSn(OH)6 (Z. Wang 
et al., 2013) nanocubes by NaOH, respectively. Furthermore, a series of CoSn(OH)6 
complex hollow structures are designed including yolk-shell cubes and double-, tri￾ple-, and quadruple-shelled nanoboxes by the repeated deposition of CoSn(OH)6 onto 
pre-grown nanocubes and nanoboxes followed by the etching in the alkaline solu￾tion. The ZnSn(OH)6 multi-shelled hollow structure was also fabricated using the 
same method and further converted into ZnSnO3 (Y. Ma et al., 2015) and Zn2SnO4/ 
SnO2 multi-shelled hollow structure (L. Sun et al., 2016). 
The SiO2 spheres and their derivatives having yolk-shell and hollow struc￾tures were also prepared by the selective etching method (D. Chen et al., 2009; 
Teng et  al., 2014; X.-J. Wu  & Xu, 2010; Q. Zhang et  al., 2008). For example, 
Wong et al. demonstrated the silica shell on Au-nanoparticles (AuNP@silica) by 
a typical Stöber method. Furthermore, AuNP@silica resulted in the formation of 
yolk-shell structured nanoparticles when etched with hot water for 30 min (Wong 
et al., 2011). 
5.4.5 Ion exchange 
The ion-exchange method involves the exchange of ions (either cations or anions) 
between the solution and the solid particles (Figure 5.3; Yan & Rosei, 2014). For 
example, Shen et al. developed a nickel–cobalt sulfide (NiCo2S4) hollow structure by 
the controlled ion exchange during the sulfidation process of nickel cobalt glycerate 
(NiCo-glycerate) spheres (Shen et al., 2015). First, sulfide (S2−) ions were observed to 
react with the surface metal ions of NiCo-glycerate to form NiCo-glycerate@NiCo2S4 
core-shell structure. Furthermore, the inside diffusion of S2− ions and outside diffu￾sion of metal ions resulted in the continuous growth of the NiCo2S4 shell and gener￾ated the well-defined gap between the shell and the inner NiCo-glycerate core. The 
diffusion process became slow with the progress of the reaction and resulted in the 
formation of a secondary NiCo2S4 shell. This ultimately formed a yolk-shell or ball￾in-ball hollow sphere structure. 
5.4.6 osTWalD rIpenIng 
The interface formation between the smaller particles and larger particles results 
in a large difference in the interfacial energy (X. W. Lou et al., 2008). As a result, 
smaller particles are dissolved and redeposited on the larger particles during the 
crystal growth (Figure 5.3). Generally, the dissolution of small crystals or particles 
and the redeposition of the dissolved species on the surfaces of larger crystals or Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 107 
FIGURE 5.3 Schematic representation for the designing of the various hollow-structured 
nanomaterials using selective etching, ion exchange, Ostwald ripening, and Kirkendall effect. 
particles are referred to as Ostwald ripening (Yec & Zeng, 2014). Yang and Zeng 
developed the Ostwald ripening mechanism as a template-free route for the design￾ing of hollow structures (H. G. Yang & Zeng, 2004). In the first step, primary TiO2 
crystallites are synthesized through the hydrolysis of TiF4 under hydrothermal con￾ditions. Furthermore, the TiO2 crystallites aggregate into spherical assemblies for 
the minimization of the total interfacial energy. The inner crystallites are relatively 
small and observed to possess high surface energies and the outer surface crystallites 
are relatively large. As a result, a hollow cavity is formed through dissolution due to 
the removal of the central region of the spheres. 
Recently, Ostwald ripening has been employed to design various hollow nano￾structures, such as Cu2O (L. Zhang & Wang, 2011), TiO2 (H. G. Yang & Zeng, 2004), 
SnO2 (X. W. Lou et al., 2006), and Ni(OH)2 (Y. Wang et al., 2005). For example, a 
variety of Cu2O hollow nanostructures were synthesized using the Ostwald ripening 
approach (L. Zhang & Wang, 2011). The controlled Ostwald ripening resulted in the 
formation of Cu2O hollow structures with single-layer, double-layer, triple-layer, and 
quadruple-layer nanoshells. 
5.4.7 The KIrKenDall eFFecT 
The Kirkendall effect refers to the dissimilar mutual diffusion rates of two metals 
leading to the formation of voids in the zone of the more rapidly diffusing material 
to compensate for the unequal material flow (Figure 5.3; W. Wang et al., 2013). The 
small voids are formed at the interface, and the voids are enlarged due to the surface 
diffusion of atoms. Furthermore, a hollow cavity is generated inside the shell to form 
a hollow structure (W. Wang et al., 2013, Yin et al., 2004). 
The Kirkendall effect has been widely utilized to design various hollow nano￾structures like Cu2O (Gou & Murphy, 2003), Fe2O3 (Cabot et al., 2007), ZnO (B. 
Liu & Zeng, 2004), ZnS (Shao et al., 2005), CoSe2 (J. Gao et al., 2006), and Ag2Se 
(Bernard Ng et al., 2006). For example, Chen et al. synthesized Pt3Ni hollow nano￾frames through the Kirkendall effect (C. Chen et al., 2014). It was observed that the 108 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
surface Ni atoms were more easily oxidized and dissolved than Pt atoms after the 
dispersion of oleylamine-capped PtNi3 polyhedra in nonpolar solvents. This resulted 
in the surface compositional change of PtNi3 from Ni-rich to Pt-rich, leading to the 
formation and enlargement of the void cavity to give a nanoframe-like structure. 
5.5 APPLICATION IN ELECTROCHEMICAL ENERGY CONVERSION 
The sudden global energy demand, continuous industrial development, and pop￾ulation growth give rise to the excessive combustion of fossil fuels (Singh et  al., 
2021; Singh & Indra, 2020b). Electrochemical energy conversion is regarded as the 
most promising pathway for the production of renewable energy (Indra et al., 2018; 
Singh & Indra, 2020b). As high thermodynamic efficiency is observed for the elec￾trochemical energy conversion processes, it has been widely employed as an eco￾friendly technique. In this regard, electrochemical water splitting has been explored 
to produce renewable H2 fuel (Singh & Indra, 2020a). Electrochemical water split￾ting consists of two half-cell reactions: oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in the anode 
and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in the cathode. 
5.5.1 oer 
OER is a bottleneck of the electrochemical water splitting and a thermodynamically 
unfavorable reaction (Indra et al., 2015). The OER is accompanied by the transfer 
of four electrons and four protons involving high-energy reaction intermediates. As 
a result, extra potential in terms of overpotential is required to facilitate the overall 
reaction (Menezes et al., 2015, 2016). In this respect, hollow-structured nanomateri￾als have been explored with superior catalytic performance for OER owing to their 
unique structural and morphological features (Indra et al., 2018). Hollow-structured 
nanomaterials provide several key advantages: (1) individual catalytic functionality 
of species are placed in sequentially localized compartments, enabling the combi￾nation of different incompatible catalytic functions; (2) charge transport, as well as 
electrolyte diffusion, can be improved by controlling the shell pore structure; (3) the 
large specific surface area increases the contact area between catalyst and reactant; 
and (4) the thin shell facilitates charge transfer process (J. Wang et al., 2019). 
In this respect, the α -Ni(OH)2 hollow microspheres were developed as oxygen 
evolution catalyst (M. Gao et al., 2014). The hollow sphere α -Ni(OH)2 delivered the 
current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 331 mV, whereas the Tafel slope 
was recorded to be 42 mV decade−1. The three-dimensional (3D) hollow Co(OH)2 
nanoflowers were developed by using a Cu2O template (H. Liu et  al., 2018). The 
hollow Co(OH)2 nanoflowers reached an OER current density of 10 mA cm-2 at an 
overpotential of 310 mV. 
Furthermore,  hollow NiCo2O4 octahedral nanocages were synthesized using a 
Cu2O-template (Lv et al., 2015). The overpotential of 340 mV was observed for the 
hollow NiCo2O4 octahedral nanocages to reach the current density of 10 mA cm−2. 
The improved OER activity was attributed to the hollow cavity, large roughness, and 
high porosity of the NiCo2O4 nanocages. Co3O4/NiCo2O4 double-shelled box-in-box 
nanocages were also designed with different shell compositions (Figure  5.4a; Hu Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 109 
et al., 2015). The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images clearly showed 
the hollow structure with box-in-box morphology (Figure 5.4b-c). The overpotential 
of Co3O4/NiCo2O4 double-shelled nanocages was reduced by 70 mV compared to the 
Co3O4 nanocages to deliver the same current density (Figure 5.4d). The Tafel slope 
of 88  mV dec-1 was calculated for the double-shelled Co3O4/NiCo2O4 nanocages, 
lower than that of Co3O4 nanocages (110 mV dec−1; Figure 5.4e). The lower Tafel 
slope revealed the faster OER kinetics for the double-shelled Co3O4/NiCo2O4 nano￾cages. This result indicated the importance of rational design of hollow complex 
structures. The NiCo2O4 with a hollow microcuboid structure was also synthesized 
and employed for the overall water splitting (X. Gao et al., 2016). The hierarchical 
NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids showed an anodic current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 
an overpotential of 290 mV. 
5.5.2 her 
HER is a complementary reaction of OER and involves the reduction of water to 
form H2 (Long et al., 2016; K. Zhu et al., 2020). The hydrogen evolution requires 
the input of 0 V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) at pH 0. The reaction is 
pH-dependent and takes place in both acidic and alkaline media. It is facile in the 
acidic medium due to the presence of a sufficient amount of protons. Although 
several strategies have been utilized to improve the catalytic performance of the 
electrocatalysts, the increment in the number of available active sites and surface 
area can be an effective method to improve the HER activity. Therefore, porous 
and hollow structures are particularly important for the electrochemical HER. For 
example, hollow carbon nanobox–encapsulating monodispersed FeP nanoparticles 
(denoted FeP/HCNB) were developed from Prussian blue precursors (Peng et al., 
2019). During the synthesis, the evaporation of zinc species led to the formation of 
hollow-core whereas the decomposition of polydopamine resulted in the formation 
of a porous carbon shell. The resulting FeP/HCNB yielded a current density of 10 
mA cm–2 at the overpotentials of 88 and 180 mV for HER in both acidic and alka￾line media, respectively. The excellent electrochemical stability of FeP/HCNB was 
demonstrated for 15 h. The hollow mesoporous carbon-coated FeP microcubes were 
also designed for the hydrogen evolution reaction (X. Zhu et al., 2016). The Prussian 
blue was synthesized by solvothermal method and further phosphorization under a 
nitrogen atmosphere produced the hollow structured FeP. The catalyst required an 
overpotential of 115 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm–2 for HER. 
The hollow NiCoFeP nanocubes were demonstrated for the excellent HER 
activity in alkaline medium (Guo et  al., 2018b). The NiCoFeP nanocubes were 
developed by the phosphidation of NiCoFe-PBA under the nitrogen atmosphere. 
The catalyst NiCoFeP showed an overpotential of 131  mV for HER at a cur￾rent density of 10 mA cm−2. The Tafel slope 56  mV dec−1 suggested improved 
HER kinetics for hollow NiCoFeP nanocubes. A hollow Co3S4@MoS2 structure 
was also prepared by the ion-exchange method. The CoFe-PBA was treated with 
Na2S and Na2MoO4·2H2O at 120 °C using a hydrothermal approach, resulting in 
the formation of a hollow Co3S4@MoS2 core-shell structure (Guo et al., 2018a). 
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images revealed the formation of a hollow 110 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
core-shell structure of Co3S4@MoS2 (Figure  5.5a–b). The hollow Co3S4@MoS2 
structure exhibited an overpotential of 136 mV for HER to achieve a current den￾sity of 10 mA cm−2 in a 1.0 M KOH solution (Figure 5.5b). The lowest Tafel slope 
value of Co3S4@MoS2 also indicated faster HER kinetics compared to the synthe￾sized catalysts (Figure 5.5c). Moreover, the lowest charge transfer resistance and 
FIGURE 5.4 (a) Schematic representation for the synthesis of the Co3O4/NiCo2O4 double-shelled 
box-in-box nanocages; (b, c) TEM images of Co3O4/NiCo2O4 double-shelled box-in-box nano￾cages; (d) Linear sweep voltammetric profiles for the OER activity of the Co3O4/NiCo2O4 dou￾ble-shelled box-in-box nanocages and Co3O4 nanocages indicating the improved OER activity of 
Co3O4/NiCo2O4; and (e) Tafel plots of Co3O4/NiCo2O4 double-shelled box-in-box nanocages and 
Co3O4 nanocages, showing the lowest Tafel slope value of Co3O4/NiCo2O4. Reproduced from Hu 
et al. (2015) with permission from the American Chemical Society.  
Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 111 
enhanced stability of the core-shell Co3S4@MoS2 were also established by elec￾trochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS; Figure  5.5d) and chronoamperomet￾ric test (Figure 5.5e), respectively. Other hollow nanostructured electrocatalysts, 
including Mo2C, WC, IrNiN, Ni2P, Co2P, and CoMoS3 have also been reported with 
improved hydrogen evolution activity. 
5.6	 ELECTROCHEMICAL CARBON DIOXIDE REDUCTION 
REACTION 
The electrochemical carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction is a cathodic reaction in which 
CO2 is reduced to various carbon species (Kas et al., 2016). In a typical CO2 electro￾lyzer, the anode and the cathode are separated into two chambers by an ion-conduct￾ing membrane (Da Silva Freitas et al., 2021). The thermodynamic potential to drive 
one-electron CO2 reduction to CO2
•¯ is determined to be 1.90 V vs. SHE (standard 
hydrogen electrode), making the reaction unfavorable. The proton-assisted reduction 
of CO2 under the applied potential leads to a wide range of CO2
•¯-derived products. 
It has been observed that the selective production of desired chemicals is challeng￾ing due to the similar redox potentials for all the reaction pathways (Da Silva Freitas 
et al., 2021). To reduce the extra input of potential and get the selective product, 
hollow-structured nanomaterials have been employed. 
For example, a porous hollow fiber copper electrode with a compact 3D geom￾etry was designed with a large surface area and three-phase boundary for the 
gas-liquid reactions. SEM studies revealed the formation of hollow fiber copper 
electrodes (Figure 5.6a–c; Kas et al., 2016). The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) 
was performed in Ar or CO2 saturated electrolyte. The increment in the current 
density during Ar purge was observed due to the evolution of hydrogen, which 
showed an onset potential of about 0.25  V vs. RHE. In contrast, the purging of 
CO2 resulted in a twofold increment in the cathodic current density at potentials 
between 0.2 and 0.4 V vs. RHE (Figure 5.6d). The Faradaic efficiency (FE) of the 
major product was determined by varying the applied potential between 0.15 and 
0.55 V vs. RHE. The onset potential for CO formation was recorded at 0.15 V vs. 
RHE. A maximum FE of 72% was determined toward CO at a potential of 0.4 V 
vs. RHE (Figure 5.6e). The Tafel slope of 255 mV dec−1 was assigned for the rate￾determining step of the generation of COOH intermediate during the CO produc￾tion (Figure 5.6f). Moreover, the lower Tafel slope of 93 mV dec−1 was observed due 
to a nonuniform potential or current distribution in the porous hollow fibers. The 
stability of the Cu hollow fibers was determined for 24 h at an applied potential of 
0.4 V vs. RHE (Figure 5.6g). After a 10% drop in the activity in the first 7 h, the 
catalyst showed stability for 17 h. 
Similarly, hollow cubic Cu2O@Au nanocomposites were developed for electro￾chemical CO2 reduction (Tan et al., 2019). The catalyst showed superior catalytic 
activity for CO2 reduction reaction than Cu2O cubes and hollow cubic Au catalysts. 
The Cu2O@Au catalyst converted CO2 to CO with a maximum (FE) of approxi￾mately 30.1% at −1.0 V vs. RHE. Thin-walled hollow Au–Cu nanoparticles were 
synthesized using the Kirkendall effect for the efficient CO2 reduction reaction 
(J. H. Zhou et al., 2018). The hollow Au–Cu nanoparticles exhibited a maximum 112 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 5.5 (a–b) SEM images of the Co3S4@MoS2 showing the hollow structure morphol￾ogy; (b) LSV curves of Co3S4@MoS2 compared with Co3S4 and MoS2 showing the improved 
HER activity of Co3S4@MoS2; (c) Tafel plots of the Co3S4@MoS2 compared with Co3S4 and 
MoS2 showing the fastest HER kinetics for Co3S4@MoS2; (c) EIS spectra of the Co3S4@ 
MoS2 compared with the Co3S4 and MoS2 indicating the lowest charge transfer resistance 
for Co3S4@MoS2; and (e) chronoamperometric stability test of the Co3S4@MoS2 showing the 
enhanced stability of Co3S4@MoS2 for 10 h. 
Source: Reproduced from Guo et al. (2018a) with permission from Elsevier. 
FE of 53.3% at −0.7  V (vs. RHE) for the conversion of CO2 to CO. The hollow 
Au–Cu-NP/C showed a much higher current density than the Au-NP/C when 
normalized against the Au mass loading. Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 113 
FIGURE 5.6 (a) SEM images of the Cu hollow fiber and (b) outer surface of the Cu hollow 
fiber; (c) cross-sectional image of a perpendicularly broken Cu hollow fiber; (d) linear polar￾ization curves obtained for Cu hollow fibers when CO2 or Ar was purged in 0.3 M KHCO3 
electrolyte; (e) FE of CO, formic acid and H2 as a function of applied potential; (f) overpoten￾tial vs. the log of partial current density for the production of CO using Cu hollow fibers; and 
(g) production of CO at a constant applied potential of −0.4 V for 24 h. 
Source: Reproduced from Kas et al. (2016) with permission from Springer Nature 
5.7 ELECTROCHEMICAL NITROGEN REDUCTION REACTION 
The production of ammonia is essential to improve the food supply for the increasing 
global population (Nazemi et al., 2018). To meet the global demand for ammonia, it 
is important to develop a sustainable and eco-friendly synthetic method that requires 
a smaller amount of energy than the current methods. Recently, nitrogen (N2) has 
been considered as the potential source for the generation of ammonia (Nazemi 114 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
et al., 2018). As the bond energy of diatomic nitrogen is observed to be high (N≡N 
bond energy of 940.95 kJ mol−1), the fixation of nitrogen into ammonia becomes 
difficult. As a result, a complex multistep process is followed to convert diatomic 
nitrogen into ammonia. 
The electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction (ENRR) has been considered to 
be one of the most effective pathways for the production of ammonia under ambi￾ent conditions (Shi et al., 2020). Generally, the electrochemical N2 reduction is a 
potential-driven multistep process, and several proton-coupled electron transfer 
(PCET) processes are involved to convert N2 into NH3. It is a six-electron transfer 
reaction that requires +0.55 V vs. RHE at pH = 0. At pH = 14, the required potential 
is observed to be −1.48 V vs. RHE (Shi et al., 2020). The nitrogen reduction reaction 
mainly involves two pathways (i.e., dissociative pathway and associative pathway). 
In the dissociative pathway, the N–N bond breaking is observed to happen before the 
addition of the H atom followed by the conversion of the individual N atom into NH3. 
However, in the associative pathway, the transformation of the N≡N to the N–N 
bond and the generation of NH3 occur simultaneously. 
FIGURE 5.7 (a) TEM images of AuHNCs; (b) LSV profiles of AuHNCs for the electro￾chemical NRR in an Ar- and N2-saturated environment in 0.5 M LiClO4 aqueous solution 
under ambient conditions; (c) ammonia yield rate and FE at various potentials in 0.5 M 
LiClO4 at 20°C; (d) plot for the ammonia yield vs. cycle number showing a minor decrease in 
ammonia yield and FE in the fifth cycle. 
Source: Reproduced from Nazemi et al. (2018) with permission from Elsevier. Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 115 
In recent years, continuous efforts have been provided for the development of 
N2 reduction reaction catalysts, improving catalytic selectivity and efficiency. In 
this respect, hollow structured materials have been explored recently with excel￾lent catalytic activity for electrochemical N2 reduction reaction (Shi et al., 2020). 
The hollow gold nanocages (AuHNCs) were developed for the electrochemical 
N2 reduction reaction under ambient conditions (Nazemi et al., 2018). The for￾mation of hollow gold nanocages was revealed by TEM studies (Figure  5.7a). 
LSV was performed in an Ar and N2 saturated environment to qualitatively dis￾tinguish between HER and NRR (Figure 5.7b). As the potential was increased 
from 0.4 V vs. RHE, the enhancement in the current density was observed in the 
N2-saturated environment. This was attributed to the formation of NH3 from N2 
by the AuHNC catalyst. 
The chronoamperometry (CA) tests were conducted to determine the ammonia 
yield and FE. The ENRR attained higher selectivity within the potential range of 
0.4 V to 0.6 V vs. RHE. As a result, the highest ammonia yield rate of 3.98 µg cm−2 
h−1 at 0.5 V and an FE of 30.2% at 0.4 V were recorded (Figure 5.7c). The FE was 
increased from 30.2% to 40.5% by increasing the operating temperature from 20 °C 
to 50 °C at −0.4 V vs. RHE. The cyclic stability for ammonia production was also 
well established for AuHNCs (Figure 5.7d). The AuHNCs demonstrated excellent 
stability with a minor decrease in ammonia yield rate and an FE (93.8% performance 
retention) in the fifth cycle. 
Furthermore, hollow CuAu nanoboxes with Cu-rich inner walls were also syn￾thesized to improve the FE in the ENRR (Talukdar et al., 2021). Density functional 
theory (DFT) calculations revealed that the Cu-rich inner walls in the hollow CuAu 
nanoboxes imparted a major role to improve their catalytic performance by reducing 
the free energy ΔG*NNH for the potential-determining step. The highest efficiency of 
7.39% was observed at −0.2 V for hollow CuAu nanoboxes. 
5.8 CONCLUSION 
In this chapter, the importance of designing multi-shell hollow-structure electrocata￾lysts has been explained for electrochemical energy conversion. Complex hollow￾structured materials produce better electrochemical performance compared to the 
hierarchical structure and simple hollow-structured materials. The different strat￾egies adopted to attain hollow-structured materials with various morphology and 
structure have been explained. A series of materials like alloy, metal oxides, sul￾fides, phosphides, hydroxides, and others with multi-shell hollow structures have 
been explored for electrochemical energy conversion like oxygen evolution, hydro￾gen evolution, CO2 reduction, and N2 reduction. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The financial support from the CSIR [Grant no. 01(2977)/19/EMR-II], Govt. of India 
is gratefully acknowledged. Baghendra Singh acknowledges the DST-INSPIRE 
(IF180147) for the research fellowship.  
 
116 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
REFERENCES 
Bernard Ng, C. H., Tan, H., & Fan, W. Y. (2006). Formation of Ag2Se nanotubes and dendrite￾like structures from UV irradiation of a CSe2/Ag colloidal solution. Langmuir, 22(23), 
9712–9717. https://doi.org/10.1021/la061253u 
Cabot, A., Puntes, V. F., Shevchenko, E., Yin, Y., Balcells, L., Marcus, M. A., Hughes, S. 
M., & Alivisatos, A. P. (2007). Vacancy coalescence during oxidation of iron nanopar￾ticles. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 129(34), 10358–10360. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ja072574a 
Chen, C., Kang, Y., Huo, Z., Zhu, Z., Huang, W., Xin, H. L., Snyder, J. D., Li, D., Herron, 
J. A., Mavrikakis, M., Chi, M., More, K. L., Li, Y., Markovic, N. M., Somorjai, G. A., 
Yang, P., & Stamenkovic, V. R. (2014). Highly crystalline multimetallic nanoframes with 
three-dimensional electrocatalytic surfaces. Science, 343(6177), 1339–1343. https://doi. 
org/10.1126/science.1249061 
Chen, D., Li, L., Tang, F., & Qi, S. (2009). Facile and scalable synthesis of tailored silica 
“nanorattle” structures. Advanced Materials, 21(37), 3804–3807. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.200900599 
Da Silva Freitas, W., D’Epifanio, A., & Mecheri, B. (2021). Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction on 
nanostructured metal-based materials: Challenges and constraints for a sustainable path￾way to decarbonization. Journal of CO2 Utilization, 50, 101579. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jcou.2021.101579 
Fan, C., Wu, X., Li, M., Wang, X., Zhu, Y., Fu, G., Ma, T., & Tang, Y. (2022). Surface chemi￾cal reconstruction of hierarchical hollow inverse-spinel manganese cobalt oxide boost￾ing oxygen evolution reaction. Chemical Engineering Journal, 431, 133829. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.cej.2021.133829 
Gao, J., Zhang, B., Zhang, X., & Xu, B. (2006). Magnetic-dipolar-interaction-induced self￾assembly affords wires of hollow nanocrystals of cobalt selenide. Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition, 45(8), 1220–1223. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200503486 
Gao, M., Sheng, W., Zhuang, Z., Fang, Q., Gu, S., Jiang, J., & Yan, Y. (2014). Efficient water 
oxidation using nanostructured α -nickel-hydroxide as an electrocatalyst. Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, 136(19), 7077–7084. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja502128j 
Gao, X., Zhang, H., Li, Q., Yu, X., Hong, Z., Zhang, X., Liang, C.,  & Lin, Z. (2016). 
Hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids as bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall 
water-splitting. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 55(21), 6290–6294. https:// 
doi.org/10.1002/anie.201600525 
Gong, Q., Gao, T., Hu, T., & Zhou, G. (2019). Synthesis and electrochemical energy storage 
applications of micro/nanostructured spherical materials. Nanomaterials, 9(9). https://doi. 
org/10.3390/nano9091207 
Gou, L., & Murphy, C. J. (2003). Solution-phase synthesis of Cu2O nanocubes. Nano Letters, 
3(2), 231–234. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl0258776 
Gu, D., Bongard, H., Deng, Y., Feng, D., Wu, Z., Fang, Y., Mao, J., Tu, B., Schüth, F., & 
Zhao, D. (2010). An aqueous emulsion route to synthesize mesoporous carbon vesicles 
and their nanocomposites. Advanced Materials, 22(7), 833–837. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.200902550 
Guo, Y., Tang, J., Wang, Z., Kang, Y. M., Bando, Y., & Yamauchi, Y. (2018a). Elaborately 
assembled core-shell structured metal sulfides as a bifunctional catalyst for highly effi￾cient electrochemical overall water splitting. Nano Energy, 47, 494–502. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/J.NANOEN.2018.03.012 
Guo, Y., Tang, J., Wang, Z., Sugahara, Y., & Yamauchi, Y. (2018b). Hollow porous heterome￾tallic phosphide nanocubes for enhanced electrochemical water splitting. Small, 14(44), 
1802442. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201802442 Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 117 
Hu, H., Guan, B., Xia, B.,  & Lou, X. W. (David). (2015). Designed formation of Co3O4/ 
NiCo2O4 double-shelled nanocages with enhanced pseudocapacitive and electrocatalytic 
properties. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 137(16), 5590–5595. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/jacs.5b02465 
Indra, A., Menezes, P. W.,  & Driess, M. (2015). Uncovering structure—activity relation￾ships in manganese-oxide-based heterogeneous catalysts for efficient water oxidation. 
ChemSusChem, 8(5), 776–785. https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.201402812 
Indra, A., Song, T., & Paik, U. (2018). Metal organic framework derived materials: Progress 
and prospects for the energy conversion and storage. Advanced Materials, 30(39), 1705146. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201705146 
Kas, R., Hummadi, K. K., Kortlever, R., De Wit, P., Milbrat, A., Luiten-Olieman, M. W. J., 
Benes, N. E., Koper, M. T. M., & Mul, G. (2016). Three-dimensional porous hollow fibre 
copper electrodes for efficient and high-rate electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction. 
Nature Communications, 7. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10748 
Kim, S., Min, K., Kim, H., Yoo, R., Shim, S. E., Lim, D., & Baeck, S.-H. (2022). Bimetallic￾metal organic framework-derived Ni3S2/MoS2 hollow spheres as bifunctional electro￾catalyst for highly efficient and stable overall water splitting. International Journal of 
Hydrogen Energy, 47(13), 8165–8176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhydene.2021.12.208 
Kim, S. S., Zhang, W., & Pinnavaia, T. J. (1998). Ultrastable mesostructured silica vesicles. 
Science, 282(5392), 1302–1305. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.282.5392.1302 
Li, Y, Li, X., Li, Y., Liu, H., Wang, S., Gan, H., Li, J., Wang, N., He, X., & Zhu, D. (2006). 
Controlled self-assembly behavior of an amphiphilic bisporphyrin—bipyridinium—pal￾ladium complex: From multibilayer vesicles to hollow capsules. Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition, 45(22), 3639–3643. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200600554 
Li, Y,  & Shi, J. (2014). Hollow-structured mesoporous materials: Chemical synthesis, 
functionalization and applications. Advanced Materials, 26(20), 3176–3205. https://doi. 
org/10.1002/adma.201305319 
Li, Y., Wang, H., Priest, C., Li, S., Xu, P., & Wu, G. (2021). Advanced electrocatalysis for 
energy and environmental sustainability via water and nitrogen reactions. Advanced 
Materials, 33(6), 2000381. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.202000381 
Li, Y., Yan, K., Lee, H.-W., Lu, Z., Liu, N., & Cui, Y. (2016). Growth of conformal graphene 
cages on micrometre-sized silicon particles as stable battery anodes. Nature Energy, 1(2), 
15029. https://doi.org/10.1038/nenergy.2015.29 
Liu, B., & Zeng, H. C. (2004). Fabrication of ZnO “Dandelions” via a modified kirkendall 
process. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 126(51), 16744–16746. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/ja044825a 
Liu, H., Guo, D., Zhang, W., & Cao, R. (2018). Co(OH)2 hollow nanoflowers as highly effi￾cient electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reaction. Journal of Materials Research, 33(5), 
568–580. https://doi.org/10.1557/jmr.2017.390 
Liu, J., Cao, G., Yang, Z., Wang, D., Dubois, D., Zhou, X., Graff, G. L., Pederson, L. 
R., & Zhang, J.-G. (2008). Oriented nanostructures for energy conversion and storage. 
ChemSusChem, 1(8–9), 676–697. https://doi.org/10.1002/cssc.200800087 
Liu, J., Hartono, S. B., Jin, Y. G., Li, Z., Lu, G. Q. (Max), & Qiao, S. Z. (2010). A facile 
vesicle template route to multi-shelled mesoporous silica hollow nanospheres. Journal of 
Materials Chemistry, 20(22), 4595–4601. https://doi.org/10.1039/B925201K 
Liu, X. H., Lai, W. H., & Chou, S. L. (2020). The application of hollow micro-/nanostruc￾tured cathodes for sodium-ion batteries. Materials Chemistry Frontiers, 4(5), 1289–1303. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c9qm00674e 
Liu, Y., Goebl, J.,  & Yin, Y. (2013). Templated synthesis of nanostructured materials. 
Chemical Society Reviews, 42(7), 2610–2653. https://doi.org/10.1039/c2cs35369e 
Long, X., Wang, Z., Xiao, S., An, Y.,  & Yang, S. (2016). Transition metal based layered 
double hydroxides tailored for energy conversion and storage. Materials Today, 19(4), 
213–226. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MATTOD.2015.10.006 118 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications
Lou, X. W. (David), Archer, L. A., & Yang, Z. (2008). Hollow micro-/nanostructures: Synthesis and 
applications. Advanced Materials, 20(21), 3987–4019. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200800854
Lou, X. W., Wang, Y., Yuan, C., Lee, J. Y., & Archer, L. A. (2006). Template-free synthesis 
of SnO2 hollow nanostructures with high lithium storage capacity. Advanced Materials, 
18(17), 2325–2329. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200600733
Lv, X., Zhu, Y., Jiang, H., Yang, X., Liu, Y., Su, Y., Huang, J., Yao, Y., & Li, C. (2015). Hollow 
mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanocages as efficient electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution reac￾tion. Dalton Transactions, 44(9), 4148–4154. https://doi.org/10.1039/C4DT03803G
Ma, Y., Xie, Q., Liu, X., Zhao, Y., Zeng, D., Wang, L., Zheng, Y., & Peng, D. L. (2015). 
Synthesis of amorphous ZnSnO3 double-shell hollow microcubes as advanced anode 
materials for lithium ion batteries. Electrochimica Acta, 182, 327–333. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.ELECTACTA.2015.09.102
Menezes, P. W., Indra, A., Das, C., Walter, C., Göbel, C., Gutkin, V., Schmeiβer, D., & Driess, 
M. (2016). Uncovering the nature of active species of nickel phosphide catalysts in high￾performance electrochemical overall water splitting. ACS Catalysis, 7(1), 103–109. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.6b02666
Menezes, P. W., Indra, A., Sahraie, N. R., Bergmann, A., Strasser, P., & Driess, M. (2015). 
Cobalt—manganese-based spinels as multifunctional materials that unify catalytic water 
oxidation and oxygen reduction reactions. ChemSusChem, 8(1), 164–171. https://doi.
org/10.1002/cssc.201402699
Miao, J.-J., Jiang, L.-P., Liu, C., Zhu, J.-M.,  & Zhu, J.-J. (2007). General sacrificial tem￾plate method for the synthesis of cadmium chalcogenide hollow structures. Inorganic 
Chemistry, 46(14), 5673–5677. https://doi.org/10.1021/ic700404n
Nai, J., Zhang, J., & Lou, X. W. (David). (2018). Construction of single-crystalline Prussian 
blue analog hollow nanostructures with tailorable topologies. Chem, 4(8), 1967–1982. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CHEMPR.2018.07.001
Nazemi, M., Panikkanvalappil, S. R., & El-Sayed, M. A. (2018). Enhancing the rate of elec￾trochemical nitrogen reduction reaction for ammonia synthesis under ambient condi￾tions using hollow gold nanocages. Nano Energy, 49, 316–323. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nanoen.2018.04.039
Pang, R., Hu, X., Zhou, S., Sun, C., Yan, J., Sun, X., Xiao, S., & Chen, P. (2014). Preparation 
of multi-shelled conductive polymer hollow microspheres by using Fe3O4 hollow spheres 
as sacrificial templates. Chemical Communications, 50(83), 12493–12496. https://doi.
org/10.1039/C4CC05469E
Peng, Z., Qiu, X., Yu, Y., Jiang, D., Wang, H., Cai, G., Zhang, X.,  & Dong, Z. (2019). 
Polydopamine coated prussian blue analogue derived hollow carbon nanoboxes with 
FeP encapsulated for hydrogen evolution. Carbon, 152, 16–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.CARBON.2019.05.073
Pérez-Page, M., Yu, E., Li, J., Rahman, M., Dryden, D. M., Vidu, R., & Stroeve, P. (2016). 
Template-based syntheses for shape controlled nanostructures. Advances in Colloid and 
Interface Science, 234, 51–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CIS.2016.04.001
Shao, H. F., Qian, X. F., & Zhu, Z. K. (2005). The synthesis of ZnS hollow nanospheres 
with nanoporous shell. Journal of Solid State Chemistry, 178(11), 3522–3528. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.JSSC.2005.09.007
Shen, L., Yu, L., Wu, H. Bin, Yu, X.-Y., Zhang, X., & Lou, X. W. (David). (2015). Formation of 
nickel cobalt sulfide ball-in-ball hollow spheres with enhanced electrochemical pseudocapaci￾tive properties. Nature Communications, 6(1), 6694. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms7694
Shi, L., Yin, Y., Wang, S., & Sun, H. (2020). Rational catalyst design for N2 Reduction under 
ambient conditions: Strategies toward enhanced conversion efficiency. ACS Catalysis, 
10(12), 6870–6899. https://doi.org/10.1021/acscatal.0c01081
Singh, B., & Indra, A. (2020a). Designing self-supported metal-organic framework derived 
catalysts for electrochemical water splitting. Chemistry—An Asian Journal, 15(6), 607–
623. https://doi.org/10.1002/asia.201901810Hollow-Structured Materials for Energy Conversion 119 
Singh, B., & Indra, A. (2020b). Prussian blue- and Prussian blue analogue-derived materials: 
progress and prospects for electrochemical energy conversion. In Materials Today Energy 
(Vol. 16, p. 100404). Elsevier Ltd. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtener.2020.100404 
Singh, B., Singh, A., Yadav, A., & Indra, A. (2021). Modulating electronic structure of metal￾organic framework derived catalysts for electrochemical water oxidation. Coordination 
Chemistry Reviews, 447, 214144. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CCR.2021.214144 
Sun, L., Han, X., Jiang, Z., Ye, T., Li, R., Zhao, X., & Han, X. (2016). Fabrication of cubic 
Zn2SnO4/SnO2 complex hollow structures and their sunlight-driven photocatalytic activ￾ity. Nanoscale, 8(26), 12858–12862. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5NR08004E 
Talukdar, B., Kuo, T. C., Sneed, B. T., Lyu, L. M., Lin, H. M., Chuang, Y. C., Cheng, M. 
J., & Kuo, C. H. (2021). Enhancement of NH3 Production in electrochemical N2 Reduction 
by the Cu-Rich inner surfaces of beveled CuAu nanoboxes. ACS Applied Materials and 
Interfaces. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c03454 
Tan, W., Cao, B., Xiao, W., Zhang, M., Wang, S., Xie, S., Xie, D., Cheng, F., Guo, Q., & Liu, 
P. (2019). Electrochemical reduction of CO2 on hollow cubic Cu2O@Au nanocomposites. 
Nanoscale Research Letters, 14(1), 63. https://doi.org/10.1186/s11671-019-2892-3 
Teng, Z., Wang, S., Su, X., Chen, G., Liu, Y., Luo, Z., Luo, W., Tang, Y., Ju, H., Zhao, D., & Lu, 
G. (2014). Facile synthesis of yolk—shell structured inorganic—organic hybrid spheres 
with ordered radial mesochannels. Advanced Materials, 26(22), 3741–3747. https://doi. 
org/https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201400136 
Wang, J., Cui, Y., & Wang, D. (2019). Design of hollow nanostructures for energy storage, 
conversion and production. Advanced Materials, 31(38), 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
adma.201801993 
Wang, L., Tang, K., Liu, Z., Wang, D., Sheng, J.,  & Cheng, W. (2011). Single-crystalline 
ZnSn(OH)6 hollow cubes via self-templated synthesis at room temperature and their pho￾tocatalytic properties. Journal of Materials Chemistry, 21(12), 4352–4357. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/C0JM03734F 
Wang, W., Dahl, M., & Yin, Y. (2013). Hollow nanocrystals through the nanoscale kirkendall 
effect. Chemistry of Materials, 25(8), 1179–1189. https://doi.org/10.1021/cm3030928 
Wang, Y., Zhu, Q., & Zhang, H. (2005). Fabrication of β-Ni(OH)2 and NiO hollow spheres 
by a facile template-free process. Chemical Communications, 41, 5231–5233. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/B508807K 
Wang, Z., Wang, Z., Wu, H.,  & Lou, X. W. (David). (2013). Mesoporous single-crystal 
CoSn(OH)6 hollow structures with multilevel interiors. Scientific Reports, 3(1), 1391. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep01391 
Wong, Y. J., Zhu, L., Teo, W. S., Tan, Y. W., Yang, Y., Wang, C., & Chen, H. (2011). Revisiting 
the Stöber method: Inhomogeneity in silica shells. Journal of the American Chemical 
Society, 133(30), 11422–11425. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja203316q 
Wu, X.-J., & Xu, D. (2010). Soft template synthesis of yolk/silica shell particles. Advanced 
Materials, 22(13), 1516–1520. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200903879 
Wu, Z., Zhang, M., Yu, K., Zhang, S., & Xie, Y. (2008). Self-assembled double-shelled ferri￾hydrite hollow spheres with a tunable aperture. Chemistry—A European Journal, 14(17), 
5346–5352. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/chem.200701945 
Xu, H., & Wang, W. (2007). Template synthesis of multishelled Cu2O hollow spheres with 
a single-crystalline shell wall. Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 46(9), 1489– 
1492. https://doi.org/10.1002/anie.200603895 
Xue, Y., Yan, Q., Bai, X., Xu, Y., Zhang, X., Li, Y., Zhu, K., Ye, K., Yan, J., Cao, D., & 
Wang, G. (2022). Ruthenium-nickel-cobalt alloy nanoparticles embedded in hollow car￾bon microtubes as a bifunctional mosaic catalyst for overall water splitting. Journal of 
Colloid and Interface Science, 612, 710–721. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcis.2022.01.001 
Yan, C., & Rosei, F. (2014). Hollow micro/nanostructured materials prepared by ion exchange 
synthesis and their potential applications. New Journal of Chemistry, 38(5), 1883–1904. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/C3NJ00888F  
 
120 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Yang, H. G.,  & Zeng, H. C. (2004). Preparation of hollow anatase TiO2 nanospheres via 
ostwald ripening. The Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 108(11), 3492–3495. https://doi. 
org/10.1021/jp0377782 
Yasin, G., Ibraheem, S., Ali, S., Arif, M., Ibrahim, S., Iqbal, R., Kumar, A., Tabish, M., 
Mushtaq, M. A., Saad, A., Xu, H., & Zhao, W. (2022). Defects-engineered tailoring of tri￾doped interlinked metal-free bifunctional catalyst with lower gibbs free energy of OER/ 
HER intermediates for overall water splitting. Materials Today Chemistry, 23, 100634. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtchem.2021.100634 
Yec, C. C., & Zeng, H. C. (2014). Synthesis of complex nanomaterials via Ostwald ripening. 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 2(14), 4843–4851. https://doi.org/10.1039/C3TA14203E 
Yin, Y., Rioux, R. M., Erdonmez, C. K., Hughes, S., Gabor, A., & Alivisatos, A. P. (2004). 
Formation of hollow nanocrystals through the nanoscale Kirkendall effect. Science, 
304(5671), 711–714. www.jstor.org/stable/3836820 
Yu, X. Y., Yu, L.,  & Lou, X. W. (2016). Metal sulfide hollow nanostructures for electro￾chemical energy storage. Advanced Energy Materials, 6(3), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 
aenm.201501333 
Zhang, L., & Wang, H. (2011). Interior structural tailoring of Cu2O shell-in-shell nanostruc￾tures through multistep Ostwald ripening. The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 115(38), 
18479–18485. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp2059613 
Zhang, Q., Zhang, T., Ge, J., & Yin, Y. (2008). Permeable silica shell through surface-pro￾tected etching. Nano Letters, 8(9), 2867–2871. https://doi.org/10.1021/nl8016187 
Zhang, Y., Yu, M., Zhou, L., Zhou, X., Zhao, Q., Li, H.,  & Yu, C. (2008). Organosilica 
multilamellar vesicles with tunable number of layers and sponge-like walls via one sur￾factant templating. Chemistry of Materials, 20(19), 6238–6243. https://doi.org/10.1021/ 
cm8011815 
Zhao, Y., & Jiang, L. (2009). Hollow micro/nanomaterials with multilevel interior structures. 
Advanced Materials, 21(36), 3621–3638. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.200803645 
Zhou, J. H., Lan, D. W., Yang, S. S., Guo, Y., Yuan, K., Dai, L. X., & Zhang, Y. W. (2018). 
Thin-walled hollow Au-Cu nanostructures with high efficiency in electrochemical 
reduction of CO2 to CO. Inorganic Chemistry Frontiers, 5(7), 1524–1532. https://doi. 
org/10.1039/c8qi00297e 
Zhou, L., Zhuang, Z., Zhao, H., Lin, M., Zhao, D., & Mai, L. (2017). Intricate hollow struc￾tures: Controlled synthesis and applications in energy storage and conversion. Advanced 
Materials, 29(20). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201602914 
Zhu, K., Shi, F., Zhu, X.,  & Yang, W. (2020). The roles of oxygen vacancies in electro￾catalytic oxygen evolution reaction. Nano Energy, 73, 104761. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
nanoen.2020.104761 
Zhu, M., Cheng, Y., Luo, Q., El-Khateeb, M., & Zhang, Q. (2021). A review of synthetic 
approaches to hollow nanostructures. Materials Chemistry Frontiers, 5(6), 2552–2587. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D0QM00879F 
Zhu, M., Tang, J., Wei, W., & Li, S. (2020). Recent progress in the syntheses and applications 
of multishelled hollow nanostructures. Materials Chemistry Frontiers, 4(4), 1105–1149. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/c9qm00700h 
Zhu, X., Liu, M., Liu, Y., Chen, R., Nie, Z., Li, J., & Yao, S. (2016). Carbon-coated hol￾low mesoporous FeP microcubes: An efficient and stable electrocatalyst for hydrogen 
evolution. Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 4(23), 8974–8977. https://doi.org/10.1039/ 
C6TA01923D DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-6 121 
6
6 Polymer-Based 
Nanocomposites 
in Energy Storage 
Applications 
Biplab Kumar Kuila 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
Electric energy storage systems (ESSs) can store electrical energy from intermit￾tent renewable sources and deliver timely and adequate electric power for porta￾ble electrical and electronic devices, electric vehicles and many other applications. 
Therefore, highly efficient and environmentally friendly energy storage devices with 
low cost are highly demandable in our modern life in order to combat the challeng￾ing issues of depletion of fossil fuels and climate change. Electrochemical energy 
storage systems (EESSs) comprise supercapacitors, batteries and fuel cells (Beaudin 
et al. 2010). There are three major components common in all three ESSs: the elec￾trodes, the electrolyte and the current collector. Generally, the electrodes are made 
of carbon materials, metal oxide and other conducting materials, which are still not 
considered ideal materials. Liquid electrolytes containing lithium salts (e.g., LiPF6) 
in organic solvents (e.g., propylene carbonate) are mostly used in commercial bat￾tery. However, issues like achieving high energy density, performance decay and 
safety related to the leakage of inflammable organic solvents, catching fire and 
explosion related to liquid electrolytes still remain unaddressed. However, polymers 
are used in almost every application and field of our day-to-day life. However, it is 
necessary to modify its properties or upgrade its performance to meet particular 
processing or application requirements. The preparation of polymer nanocomposites 
in which nanomaterials are integrated with polymer is an elegant way to achieve 
such modification or upgradations of polymer properties. Recently, polymer-based 
nanocomposite materials have drawn significant research attention in energy storage 
applications due to their excellent electrical, electrochemical and mechanical prop￾erties arising from the synergistic effect of both the components. Modern electronics 
demand flexible energy storage devices that can only be realized by using polymer or 
its composite as structural materials. In this chapter, we focus on the recent advances 
in developing different types of polymer nanocomposites and their application as 
components of electrochemical energy storage materials. Major challenges to be 
addressed and future perspectives are also highlighted.  
122 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
6.2 POLYMER NANOCOMPOSITES 
Polymer nanocomposites are hybrid materials of polymer and nanomaterial having at 
least one dimension between 1 to 100 nm (Paul & Robeson 2008). In polymer nano￾composites, polymer generally serves as the matrix where the nanomaterials with a 
small amount are dispersed and called nanofillers. The nature and properties of both 
the polymer matrix and the nanofiller have a great effect on the overall properties 
like electric conductivity, ionic conductivity and ease of processing, tensile strength 
and chemical, thermal and mechanical stability. For energy storage applications, two 
types of polymers are mainly considered due to their electro-active properties: (a) 
electron conducting polymers (CPs) and (b) ion CPs. Electron CPs are composed of 
organic monomers having conjugated double bonds and exhibit significant conductiv￾ity compared to conventional polymers (Das & Prusty 2012). Polyaniline (PANI), 
polythiophene (PTh) and polypyrrole (PPy) are examples of such polymers that are 
explored most for various applications together with energy storage (Otero & Cantero 
1999, Abdelhamid et al. 2015, Han et al. 2007, Shown et al. 2015, Wang et al. 2016, 
Singh et al. 2022, Shah et al. 2022), whereas ion CPs or polyelectrolytes generally 
do not have conjugated structure but show conductivity due to presence of ions in 
the pristine form in its ionic structure or ions are externally added (Aziz et al. 2018). 
The good electrical properties of these polymeric materials in combination with other 
properties such as cheap, mechanical flexibility, thermal stability, light weight and 
good processability possessed by conventional polymers make them attractive can￾didates for energy storage applications (Armand 1990). Nanomaterials are integrated 
into the polymer matrix for further improvement of their properties to make them 
more suitable, with the potential as material for energy storage devices. Per the lit￾erature, different nanomaterials like metal, transition metal oxides, carbon, carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs), graphene (GN), ferromagnetic materials, transition-metal chalco￾genides and dendrimers have been used as fillers (Yang et al. 2017, Abdelhamid et al. 
2015, Shown et al. 2015, Wang et al. 2016, Bendrea et al. 2011, Snook et al. 2011, Yin 
et al. 2012, Zhang & Samorì 2017, Kuila 2020). Carbon nanomaterials due to their 
unique structural, chemical, mechanical, thermal, optical and electronic properties 
have attracted tremendous research attention as nanofillers for the preparation of poly￾mer nanocomposites for a wide range of applications (Liu & Kumar 2014, Zhang & 
Samorì 2017, Oueiny et al. 2014). In the last decade, significant progress was made, 
resulting in the opening of new possibilities in the use of these nanocomposites for a 
variety of applications. Specially, graphene has been considered one of the most excit￾ing materials as a rising star on the horizon of materials science (Geim & Novoselov 
2007). GN, which is a single layer of carbon atoms with two-dimensional atomic 
crystal structure, possesses very high mechanical strength (Young’s modulus: 1 TPa; 
intrinsic strength: 130 GPa), high electronic conductivity (room temperature electron 
mobility: 2.5×105 cm2 V−1s−1) and thermal conductivity (>3,000 W/mK), imperme￾ability to gases and many other superior properties, all of which make it extremely 
attractive for making novel polymer nanocomposites (Melechko et al. 2005). As the 
overall performance of the composite materials is highly dependent on the disper￾sion of nanomaterials in a polymer matrix, therefore, a homogeneous dispersion is an 
important issue and must be taken care of during polymer nanocomposite preparation 
(Mittal et al. 2015, Gupta & Price 2016).  
 
Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 123 
6.3 PREPARATION OF CONDUCTIVE POLYMER 
NANOCOMPOSITES 
Hybridization of nanomaterials (NM) with polymer requires prior knowledge of the 
surface chemistry of the nanomaterials, functionality of the polymer and methods that 
will promote polymer–NM interaction. Most generally, two strategies are adopted to 
prepare conductive polymer nanocomposites (CPNCs), either by attaching CPs to the 
surface of NMs through covalent bonding or noncovalent adsorption of the polymer to 
the NMs surface through different interactions like π–π, hydrophobic or electrostatic 
interaction. In the case of a noncovalent strategy, polymer nanocomposites may be pre￾pared using different ways: (1) Direct mixing/blending: the polymer is dissolved in a 
suitable solvent and then nanofiller dispersion or solution is added to the polymer solu￾tion under constant stirring (Li et al. 2011). (2) In situ polymerization: in this method, 
surface-modified nanofillers are added to the monomer solution and polymerization is 
completed by adding an oxidant or an initiator under a stirring condition. The nano￾composite prepared using this strategy results better nanofiller–polymer interaction, 
better dispersion of the nanofiller in polymer matrix and thus enhancing properties 
(Mallick et al. 2005, Wei et al. 2013, Wu et al. 2013a). (3) In situ nanoparticle forma￾tion in the presence of polymer: In this strategy, the nanofiller precursor is added to a 
polymer solution, followed by electrochemical or thermal treatment to prepare CPNC. 
Using this strategy one can generate uniform nanostructures of various morphologies 
inside the polymer matrix (Rastogi et al. 2014). Composite materials of CPs with vari￾ous nanomaterials like CNTs (Oueiny et al. 2014), GN (Zhang & Samorì 2017, Hong 
et al. 2019), metal nanoparticles (Rhazi et al. 2018, Sih & Wolf 2005) and metal oxide 
((Zarrintaj et al. 2019) have been prepared via noncovalent approach with an aim of 
their applications for energy storage. In a covalent approach, the first method includes 
polymer chains with suitable functionality that are reacted with surface functionalized 
nanomaterials via various chemical reactions like click reaction (Arslan & Tasdelen 
2017) and esterification reaction (Kuila et al. 2010, Yang et al. 2014; grafting to poly￾mers with reacting groups are chemically attached to nanomaterials). In the second 
method, initiator or monomer is covalently attached on the nanomaterial surface from 
which polymer chains are initiated through polymerization method like oxidative 
polymerization (grafting from approach; Kumar et al. 2012). Covalent modification 
yields more stable and robust composite materials compared to noncovalent approach 
(Kumar et al. 2012, Zhang et al. 2011, Quintana et al. 2013). Up to date, several reviews 
have been published describing detailed synthesis, properties and applications of the 
polymer composites (Rhazi et al. 2018, Kumar et al. 2018, Oueiny et al. 2014, Utracki 
et al. 2007, Yang et al. 2015), which may be worth reading. 
6.4	 APPLICATIONS OF POLYMER NANOCOMPOSITES FOR 
ENERGY STORAGE DEVICES 
6.4.1 supercapacITors 
Supercapacitors are one type of energy storage device that provides higher power out￾put ( ∼10 Kw/kg) at the cost of low energy density ( ∼5–10 Wh kg−1) (Donne 2013). 
They are mostly suitable for applications where a large amount of electric energy 124 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
is required in a very short span of time like military applications, powering remote 
areas, satellite launches and hybrid electric cars (Conway 1999). Supercapacitors also 
show very low charging and discharging times due to their storage mechanism, which 
is physical in nature and does not involve any slow chemical reaction. Compared to 
batteries, which can deliver power for a maximum of 1000 cycles, supercapacitors 
can keep up its performance for millions of charging/discharging cycles because 
of reversible charging and discharging process without any irreversible chemical 
reaction (Faradaic process) at the electrodes (Yan et al. 2014). A supercapacitor com￾prises two electrodes separated by a dielectric electrolyte. Depending on charge stor￾age mechanism, supercapacitors can be classified as (a) electrochemical double-layer 
(EDL) supercapacitors and (b) pseudosupercapacitors. The working principle of two 
types of supercapacitors is shown in Figure 6.1. In EDL supercapacitor, the charge 
is stored electrostatically at the electrode–electrolyte interface through a reversible 
physical adsorption/desorption process of ions from the electrolyte. Since the charge 
is stored at the interface, so electrode with high surface area per unit mass and high 
conductivity is highly desirable for achieving high capacitance and energy density 
value (Simon & Gogotsi 2008). Other criteria are porous structures of the electrode 
materials with high porosity, high surface area and pore size distribution between 
0.5 and 2 nm. Activated carbon due to its feasibility of large-scale production, low 
cost, high conductivity and mechanical and thermal stability, has been commercially 
used as electrode materials for EDL supercapacitors (Lu et al. 2013). Due to certain 
limitations of activated carbon like large pore-size distribution, higher percentage of 
micropores and few mesopores, the capacitance (100–120 Fg−1) and energy density 
value (4–5 Wh kg-1) remain low (Chen et al. 2017). So other nanostructured carbon 
materials like CNTs, GN, GO and carbon dots have been widely explored in the past 
decade as electrode materials for supercapacitor applications. These nanomaterials 
show exciting results and possibilities for their use as electrode materials along with 
their certain advantages and disadvantages as summarized in recent review articles 
(Shown et al. 2015, Lu et al. 2013, Chen & Dai 2014, Meng et al. 2017, Zhang & 
Zhao 2009). CPs are very exciting candidates for pseudocapacitors due to their high 
FIGURE 6.1 Schematic representation of (a) an EDLC and (b) a pseudocapacitor. 
Source: From Chen, X. et al. Natl. Sci. Rev. 4, 453–489, 2017 with permission Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 125 
theoretical capacitance value, good electrical conductivity, easy production at a large 
scale, low cost and usable for flexible device (Shown et al. 2015). But these polymers 
in pristine form show low cycle life because of the instability arises from expansion/ 
contraction during the charging/discharging process (Shown et al. 2015) and cannot 
be utilized as electrode active material alone. The fabrication of nanocomposite is an 
elegant way to improve the electrochemical performance and stabilities of these CPs 
via synergistic effect. Researchers have explored a wide range of composite materi￾als of CPs with other active nanomaterials, including carbon materials and metal 
oxides, and the progress of which is reviewed here. 
6.4.1.1 CP/Carbon Nanostructured Composite Materials 
Various CPs like PANI, PTh and PPy are integrated with carbon nanostructured 
materials with the aim of supercapacitor applications and significant progress has 
been made in designing new materials, preparation and their performance study. 
Among the CPs, PANI nanocomposite materials are one of the most extensively 
studied materials for supercapacitor applications (Meng et al. 2017). Different types 
of nanostructured materials like GN (Gomez et al. 2011, Wang et al. 2015), GO or 
reduced graphene oxide (rGO; Zhang & Samorì 2017, Hong et al. 2019, Huang et al. 
2018) CNTs (Oueiny et al. 2014), carbon nanofibers (Yanilmaz et al. 2019), carbon 
spheres (Shen et al. 2015) and carbon nanoparticles (Khosrozadeh et al. 2015) are 
hybridized with PANI and supercapacitor performance of these hybrid materials have 
been studied. Gupta et al. first proposed that PANI/single-walled CNT (SWCNT) 
composite material can be successfully used as electrode material for supercapacitor 
application, and the highest capacitance value reported was 463Fg−1 was for 27wt% 
CNT (Gupta & Miura 2006). Mi et al. prepared PANI/MWCNT composite through 
a simple microwave-assisted polymerization method, and the resultant composite 
showed a capacitance value of 322 F/g and a high specific energy density of 22 
W h/kg, which is approximately 12 times higher than pristine multiwalled CNTs 
(MWCNTs; Mi et al. 2007). Another CP that can be a composite with CNTs for 
supercapacitor applications that has been extensively studied is PPy (Kandasamy & 
Kandasamy 2018). Jurewicz et  al. synthesized PPy/CNT nanocomposite by elec￾trochemical polymerization of pyrrole, which showed a specific capacitance of 163 
Fg-1 higher than pristine CNT (50 Fg–1) (Jurewicz et al. 2001). The nanocomposite 
exhibited an open entangled network structure that favors the formation of a three￾dimensional electrical double layer, allowing a more effective pseudocapacitance 
contribution from PPy. 
GN or its derivatives have been widely explored for developing CP-based com￾posite materials with superior electrochemical performance (like high capacitance 
value, long cycle life, higher electrical conductivity and better electrocatalytic activ￾ity) and processibility (Zhang & Samorì 2017, Hong et al. 2019, Huang et al. 2018, 
Kumar  & Baek 2014). For example, porous polyaniline/reduced graphene oxide 
composite materials with molecular-level uniformity were fabricated by a simple 
self-assembly approach (Figure 6.2) that exhibit a high specific capacitance of 808 
Fg−1 (5717 mFcm−2) at a current density of 53.33 Ag−1 (377.4 mA cm−2) with an excel￾lent rate of performance (Wu et al. 2018). Cyclic voltammetric (CV) curves of hybrid 
material (Figure 6.3A) exhibited a rectangular shape superimposed with a pair of 126 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
redox peaks, suggesting the coexistence of both the electrical double-layer capaci￾tance and pseudocapacitance. The galvanostatic charge–discharge plots reveal a 
high specific capacitance of 824 Fg−1 (5830 mFcm−2) is achieved at 2.22 Ag−1 (15.72 
mAcm−2; Figure 6.3B). PANI/RGO composite gel (PGG) with 81.3% PANI content 
FIGURE 6.2 Schematic illustration of solution-based self-assembly method for preparation 
of PANI/RGO composite gel (PGG). 
Source: From Wu et al. Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11, 1280–1286 with permission 
FIGURE 6.3 Capacitive performance of PGG. (A) CV curves of PGG-4 at the scan rate 
of 5 mV s−1, 10ms−1, 25 mVs−1 and 50 mVs−1. (B) GCD curves of PGG-4 at different current 
densities. (C) Specific capacitances of PGG-4 versus current densities. (D) Nyquist plots of 
PGG-4. 
Source: From Wu et al. Energy Environ. Sci. 2018, 11, 1280–1286 with permission Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 127 
(PGG-4) has an excellent rate of performance as shown in Figure 6.3C, even at a 
very high current density of 53.33 Ag−1 (377.4 mAcm−2), the specific capacitance 
remains almost same, 808 Fg−1 (5717 mFcm−2). In the low-frequency part of the 
Nyquist plot (Figure 6.3D), the curve tends toward a vertical line, implying that the 
electrode shows almost ideal capacitive behavior. Recently, Kumari et  al. (2016) 
have described the fabrication of polyaniline graphene nanocomposite with 3D pillar 
structures using a simple supramolecular approach, which shows a high capacitance 
value of 630 Fg−1 at a current density 0.5 A/g with good electrochemical stability. 
Mini et  al. (2011) fabricated PPy/GN nanocomposite by depositing nanolayers of 
GN acting as a template for the electropolymerization of PPy and the nanocom￾posite exhibited a porous 3D structure. The composite material showed very good 
electrochemical performance with an areal capacitance of 151 mFcm−2 (a volume 
capacitance of 151 Fcm−3 and a specific capacitance of 1510 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 
mVs−1) higher than the capacitance value of the individual components. A significant 
amount of research has also been devoted on composite material of PTh and carbon 
nanomaterials aiming superior supercapacitor performance (Fu et al. 2012, Zhang 
et al. 2014, Wang et al. 2013, Kim et al. 2015b). For example, Fu et al. (2012) prepared 
a PTh/MWCNT composite through electrochemical polymerization in an ionic liq￾uid solution, and the composite exhibited a specific capacitance of the 110 F/g at the 
scan rate of 60 mV/s, which is higher than the individual components. 
6.4.1.2 CP/Metal-Oxide Composite Materials 
Metal oxides, especially transition metal oxides (such as RuO2, NiO2, MnO2, V2O5, 
etc.), have been extensively studied in the last decade as rechargeable batteries and 
pseudocapacitor materials because of their excellent stability and redox properties. 
Despite such intriguing properties, poor conductivity and instability in acid electrolyte 
limit their rate capabilities for high power performances and a wide range of applica￾tions in energy storage and conversion (Belanger et al. 2008). To address such issues, 
considerable research efforts have been made to improve the electrochemical perfor￾mance of metal oxide–based electrode materials by exploring composite structures 
with conducting materials like CPs (Liu & Lee 2008). Among them, MnO2 is one of the 
mostly studied metal oxides due to its favorable characteristic properties like excellent 
charge storage capacity, longer cycle stability, low cost and environmental friendliness 
(Huang et al. 2015a, Wei et al. 2011). By hybridizing PANI into MnO2 nanostructures, 
both conductivity and pseudocapacitive performance can be improved (Wang et al. 
2012, Han et al. 2012). For example, Sun et al. (2015) demonstrated the synthesis of 
PANI-coated honeycomb-like MnO2 nanosphere to take advantage of the synergistic 
effect from both PANI and MnO2, by a two-step synthesis procedure (Figure 6.4A). 
Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) image (Figure 6.4B) revealed 
the homogeneous covering of MnO2 nanosphere 90 nm in size with PANI. The capaci￾tive performance of the binary composite is highly dependent on MnO2/aniline mass 
ratio and composite from 1:1 ratio showed a high specific capacitance of 565 F g−1 at 
a discharge current density of 0.8 Ag−1 in a 0.5-M Na2SO4–0.5M H2SO4 electrolyte 
solution (Figure 6.4C & D). The nanocomposite retained 77% its initial capacitance 
after 1000 cycles at 8 A g−1 discharge rate (Figure 6.4E). MnO2 nanostructures were 
also incorporated in other CPs like poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT; Tang 128 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 6.4 (A) Synthesis procedure of PANI@MnO2; (B) FESEM image of the composite; 
(C) charge–discharge curves of different composite at current density of 0.8 A g−1; (D) specific 
capacitances of composites at different current density (0.8–16 A g−1); (E) cyclic stability of 
the nanocomposite. 
Source: From Sun et al. Electrochim. Acta 2015, 180: 977–82 with permission 
et al. 2015) and PPy (Sharma et al. 2008, Huang et al. 2015a) for supercapacitor appli￾cations. Tang et al. (2015) demonstrated a simple but efficient method for the synthesis 
of a core–shell–branch hierarchical MnO2@PEDOT@MnO2 composite via an electro￾chemical deposition strategy. The composite material showed the maximum specific 
capacitance of 449 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 measured through galvano￾static charge/discharge test. Using in-situ polymerization technique, Zhang et al. pre￾pared MnO2-PPy composites and electrochemical study revealed better supercapacitor 
performance of the composite materials with a specific capacitance of 352.8 Fg−1 at 
a current density of 8 mAcm−2 (Zhang et  al. 2013). CPs were also integrated with 
other nanomaterials like MoS2 for supercapacitor applications. PPy/MoS2 composite 
was prepared by growing ultra-thin layers of PPy on MoS2 monolayers through in 
situ polymerization and utilized as efficient electrode material for a supercapacitor 
(Tang et al. 2015). PANI/MoS2 composite materials also show very promising results 
as supercapacitor electrode material with a very high capacitance value of 575 Fg−1 at 
1 Ag−1 (Huang et al. 2013). 
6.4.1.3 CP-Based Ternary Composite 
Despite tremendous progress in the area of CP-based composites for supercapacitor 
applications, the electrochemical performance of these materials is still below the 
maximum possible levels. Recently, research is more focused on ternary compos￾ites to achieve even better electrochemical performance (Chen et al. 2015, Sk et al. 
2015). For achieving high electrochemical performance, the most critical issue is 
controlling the microstructure of the composite and the interaction between each 
component to maximize the synergistic effect of different types of materials. For 
example Mondal et  al. (2017) have synthesized rGO/Fe3O4/PANI nanocomposite Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 129 
using a soft-template-based method and fabricated all solid-state supercapacitor 
device that exhibited capacitance of approximately 283.4 F/g at 1.0 A/g current den￾sity and a maximum energy density 47.7 Wh/kg at the power density of 550 W/kg. 
Recently, Khawas et al. (2017) demonstrated a facile method for preparing a PANI/ 
MnO2 /rGO ternary hybrid with a surface decorated by ordered PANI whiskers for 
supercapacitor applications. The synthetic procedure involves two steps: the prepara￾tion of MnO2-decorated rGO sheets followed by in situ polymerization of aniline. 
The composite materials show a well-defined morphology like tubular fiber, sphere 
resembling structures like natural tubular wiregrass sedge and spherical cactus. The 
hybrid materials show the best capacitance value of 762 F/g at current density 1.4 A/g 
with good electrochemical stability. 
6.4.1.4 CP Composite Materials for Flexible Supercapacitors 
Flexible supercapacitors, a state-of-the-art material, have come out with great poten￾tial for their use in portable and wearable electronic equipment. They follow the 
same fundamental standards as in conventional capacitors but give high flexibil￾ity, high charge storage capacity and low conductivity to electroactive materials to 
obtain high capacitance performance. CPs, which own some unique properties like 
high flexibility, high theoretical capacitance value, good electrical conductivity, easy 
production at large scale and low cost, are considered one of the most attractive 
candidates for flexible supercapacitor applications. There are some excellent reviews 
describing in detail the smart use of CPs or their composite for flexible superca￾pacitor applications (Shown et al. 2015, Meng et al. 2017, Han & Dai 2019, Lu et al. 
2013). Cong et al. developed flexible GN–PANI composite paper by growing a PANI 
nanorod array on GN paper electrochemically for flexible supercapacitor application 
(Figure 6.5; Cong et al. 2013). The freestanding and highly conducting graphene 
paper was prepared by simply coating a thin layer of the mixture of GO suspensions 
and hydroiodic acid (HI) in a Teflon substrate followed by reduction through ther￾mally heating. The GN–PANI composite electrodes show an increased capacitive 
performance of 763 Fg−1 at a discharge current of 1 Ag−1 compared to individual 
components (Figure 6.5b–c). Furthermore, the GN–PANI electrode exhibited good 
cycling stability, with 82% of capacity retention after 1000 cycles (Figure 6.5d). 
6.4.2 lIThIum-Ion baTTerIes 
Lithium (Li)-ion batteries are now the most popular storage devices and are widely 
used for power supplies in mobile phones, tablets, laptops, other portable electronic 
devices and hybrid vehicles. This is due to their extra advantages like high energy 
density (120–170 Whkg-1), operating voltage of up to 4 V, high open-circuit potentials, 
minimal memory effects, fast charging, low self-discharge rates and environmental￾friendliness compared with other conventional batteries (Scrosati  & Garche 2010, 
Long et al. 2016). Figure 6.6 shows the major components of a basic Li-ion cell, which 
consists of a positive electrode (cathode) and a negative electrode (anode) separated 
by an electrolyte and a separator. The separator is generally made of a microporous 
polymer electrolyte, which allows only the transport of Li ions and prevents elec￾tron flow. However, the solid-state Li-ion battery uses a solid electrolyte, not a liquid 130 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 6.5 (a) Schematic illustrations of the formation process of GN–PANI paper; 
(b) GCD curves of graphene paper, PANI film on the Pt electrode and GN–PANI paper at a 
current density of 1 Ag−1; (c) GCD curves of GN–PANI paper at different current densities; 
(d) cycle stability of PANI film on the Pt electrode and GN–PANI paper during the long-term 
charge–discharge process at a current density of 5 Ag−1. 
Source: From Cong et al. Energy Environ. Sci. 2013, 6, 1185–1191 with permission 
electrolyte solution, and the solid electrolyte plays a role of a separator as well. The 
common anode materials are carbon, silicon and metal oxides, whereas the Li salts, 
such as LiCoO2, LiFePO4 and LiMn2O4, are used as cathode material. Generally, Li 
salts, such as LiClO4, LiPF6, LiAsF6 and LiCF3SO3, dissolved in nonaqueous organic 
solvents, such as ethylene carbonate or polyethylene carbonate, are used as the elec￾trolyte (Arya & Sharma 2017). In the charging process, the electrodes are connected 
to an external electric supply. An electrochemical reaction occurs where Li+ ions are 
generated (Figure 6.7) and further transported internally to the anode through the elec￾trolyte. In the external circuit, electrons are forced to be transferred from the cathode 
to the anode. The reversible reaction continues until the full intercalation of layered 
anode materials with the Li+ ions (LixC) complete. In the discharging process, elec￾trons are spontaneously released from the anode to the cathode externally and the Li+ 
ions move from the anode to the cathode internally through electrolyte. This process 
continues until all the LixC is fully transformed into carbon. Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 131 
FIGURE 6.6 (a) Working principle of a Li-ion battery; (b) schematic diagram of a solid￾state Li-ion battery. 
FIGURE 6.7 General electrochemical reactions in Li-ion battery. 132 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
6.4.2.1 Polymer Nanocomposite for Cathode Material in Li-Ion Batteries 
An ideal cathode material should yield high free energy of reaction with Li, should 
intercalate a large amount of Li, should have high electronic conductivity and should 
be nontoxic and environmentally friendly (Deng 2015, Gong  & Yang 2011). Due 
to certain concerns about the current existing material, LiCoO2, such as high cost, 
structural instability, decaying capacity, the presence of toxic Co, a low Li diffu￾sion coefficient and very low electronic conductivity, pushes scientists to explore 
new nanostructured materials for the cathode (Barpanda et al. 2012, Chung et al. 
2012). Different inorganic materials like metal oxides have been hybridized with 
conducting polymer for developing novel cathode materials. For example, vanadium 
oxide, which has a layered structure, low cost, high theoretical capacity, ease of 
synthesis, and abundance and better safety, has been hybridized with conducting 
polymer for Li-ion battery applications (Ponzio et al. 2007, Zhao et al. 2012, Chao 
et al. 2014). For example, Chao et al. (2014) fabricated V2O5 nanoarray-based posi￾tive electrode materials by growing a V2O5 nanobelt array on 3D GN foam (also 
called ultrathin graphene foam [UGF]) followed by a thin mesoporous coating of 
PEDOT through electro-polymerization. SEM images of the individual materials are 
shown in Figure 6.8a–f. The nanocomposite electrode showed ultrafast and stable 
Li-ion storage performance, with higher specific capacitance (265 mAhg−1 at 5C) 
and improved rate and cycling capabilities than the bare V2O5 nanobelt arrays on 
3D GN foam (Figure 6.8g–h). The role of PEDOT in the composite is to facilitate 
the charge transfer, and hence, the reaction kinetics, and protect the nanobelt array 
structure. Yan et al. (2015) fabricated PANI/LiVPO4F composite material via the 
sol-gel method followed by a self-assembly. The electrochemical results concluded 
that PANI/LiVPO4F composite exhibits superior performance with an initial dis￾charge capacity of 149.3 mAh g−1 at 0.1C in the voltage range of 3.0–4.5 V, which is 
much higher than that of pure LiVPO4F (127.5m Ahg−1). A recent review by Gong 
and Yang (2011) and Xu (2014) will be very helpful for further understanding the 
recent progress in developing new materials for cathode application in Li-ion batter￾ies. However, the development of CPs or their nanocomposite with carbon nanoma￾terials for cathode materials has attracted considerable research attention due to their 
light weight, low cost, ease of synthesis and easily tunable properties and flexibility. 
By using polymer nanocomposites with carbon nanomaterials as an electrode, the 
dream of a flexible plastic battery can only be realized. But these materials face 
severe difficulties in terms of chemical stability in the presence of a nonaqueous 
electrolyte, poor Li-ion conductivity, low energy density and low working voltage 
window (Novak et  al. 1997). Wu et  al. prepared 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic 
dianhydride (PTCDA)/carbon nanotube composite (PDTA/CNT) or its correspond￾ing polymer poly(3,4,9,10- perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride ethylene diamine)/ 
carbon nanotube composite (PI/CNT) for using as cathode materials in Li-ion bat￾teries. The composite materials showed better electrochemical performance both in 
terms of rate capability and capacity than pristine PTCDA or its corresponding poly￾mer. Polymerization enhanced the cycling stability of organic cathode materials. 
The retention of capacity of the PI/CNT was 93% after 300 cycles under a current 
of 100 mA g−1, while for PTCDA/CNT, the retention was only 74% after 300 cycles.  
 
Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 133 
The superior electrochemical performance was related to the increased electronic 
conductivity of PTCDA after making a composite with CNTs and lower solubility of 
the polymer in a nonaqueous electrolyte compared to monomer PTCDA (Wu et al. 
2013). Several polymer nanocomposites have been prepared to explore their suitabil￾ity as cathode material for Li-ion batteries (Wakayama et al. 2016, Posudievsky et al. 
2013a). The recent results are also summed up in some recent reviews (Pitchai et al. 
2011, Xu et al. 2013, Myung et al. 2015). 
6.4.2.2 Polymer Nanocomposites for Anode Material in Li-Ion Batteries 
The current standardized, popular material for anode in Li-ion batteries is graph￾ite. Despite several advantages, graphite-based electrode materials have some 
limitations, such as low theoretical reversible energy density, the introduction of 
irreversibility in intercalation/de-intercalation process due to the formation of a 
protective layer at solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI; An et al. 2016, Cheng et al. 
2016), low diffusion rate of lithium (Roy  & Srivastava 2015) and safety issues 
related to lithiation potential (0.2 vs Li/Li+), which is close to the lithium stripping 
voltage (Roy & Srivastava 2015). Transitional metal oxides have been extensively 
explored as anode material in Li-ion batteries based on a conversion reaction mech￾anism that generally provides a high gravimetric specific capacity. As mentioned 
FIGURE 6.8 (a–f) SEM images and photos of UGF (a, d); UGF with V2O5 nanobelts 
(b, e); and UGF−V2O5 /PEDOT core/shell nanobelts (c, f) (fine structures in insets). (g) Rate 
capability and (h) cycling performance of UGF with V2O5 nanobelts and UGF−V2O5 /PEDOT 
core/shell nanobelts 
Source: Collected from Chao et al. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26, 5794–800 with permission 134 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
earlier, the major limitation of these inorganic materials is a low ionic conductivity 
that results in a limited capacity value. An elegant approach to enhance the elec￾tronic or ionic conductivity is to make a composite through the formation of a very 
thin film of conducting polymers (few nanometers) on the surface of the anode 
material (Li et al. 2013, 2017). For example, PPy-coated coaxial MWNTs@MnO2 
was synthesized by in situ polymerization of PPy monomers in the presence of 
preprepared MWNTs@MnO2 (Figure 6.9A & B). As anode material, the compos￾ite exhibited a high reversible capacity of 530 mAh g−1 tested at 1000 mA g−1 even 
after 300 cycles and an excellent rate performance (Figure 6.9C). The better elec￾trochemical performance of MWNTs@MnO2@PPy is attributed to the synergistic 
effect of the MWNT matrix and the highly conductive PPy coating layer. The 
impedance study (Figure 6.9D) revealed that the charge transfer resistance (Rct) 
value of MWCNT@MnO2@PPy is lower than that of MWCNT@MnO2, indicating 
that the PPy coating significantly improved the charge transfer resistance of the 
electrode. MoS2, which has a layered structure, has also been explored for anode 
materials in Li-ion batteries. For example, a MoS2/PANI composite as anode mate￾rial showed a high initial capacity of 910 mAh/g and retained an impressive high 
capacity of 915 mAh/g even after 200 cycles at a current density of 1 A/g (Liu et al. 
FIGURE 6.9 (A) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of MWNTs@MnO2@PPy, 
(B) SEM image of MWNTs@MnO2(upper left), MWNTs@MnO2@PPy (upper right) and 
HR-TEM images of MWNTs@MnO2 (lower left), MWNTs@MnO2@PPy (lower right). (C) 
Cycling performance and (D) EIS profile. 
Source: Collected from Li et al. Electrochim. Acta 2013, 111, 165–71 with permission  
Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 135 
2015). In a different study, an MoS2/PANI composite with optimum composition 
(MoS2:66.7%, polyaniline: 33.1%) exhibited a high charge capacity of 1064 mAh/g 
at a current density of 100 mA/g where the capacitance was retained up to 90.2% 
of initial capacitance value after 50 cycles (Yang et al. 2013a). These results clearly 
indicate the potential of conducting polymer composite materials for developing 
anode materials for Li-ion batteries. 
6.4.3 polymer nanocomposITe maTerIals as a solID-sTaTe elecTrolyTe 
Generally, conventional energy storage devices like supercapacitors and batter￾ies operated by liquid electrolyte, but the safety issues related to leakage of the 
electrolyte limits their importance (Lu et al. 2014). So the replacement of a con￾ventional electrolyte by a solid electrolyte is necessary for development of flex￾ible, light weight and high safety energy storage device (Lu et al. 2014). An ideal 
electrolyte for an energy storage device should have (1) high ionic conductivity 
(>10–4 S cm–1 at room temperature) and very low electronic conductivity, (2) a 
large Li+ ion transference number (close to unity; for Li-ion batteries), (3) electro￾chemical stability in a large voltage window, (4) thermal and chemical stability 
in the battery environment, (5) mechanical stability, and (vi) nontoxic and envi￾ronmentally friendly properties (Li et al. 2016). Polymer electrolytes (macromol￾ecules with constitutional units having ionic or ionizable groups) are considered 
as potential alternatives to liquid electrolyte. Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and its 
derivatives, the most explored polymer electrolytes, can show ionic conductiv￾ity when complexed with alkali metal ions like lithium ions (Cheng et al. 2007). 
Despite several advantages, their room temperature ionic conductivity is still low, 
which limits their applications, and different measures have been taken to solve 
this issue. The development of a polymer electrolyte has undergone three stages 
(Stephan & Nahm 2006), namely, (1) a solid polymer electrolyte (SPE), (2) a gel 
polymer electrolyte (GPE) and (3) a polymer composite electrolyte (PCE). SPEs 
comprise a polymer matrix and a lithium salt and generally show very low ionic 
conductivity. Several attempts were made by adding different type of lithium salts 
(like lithium trifluoromethanesulfonate [LiTf], lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfo 
nimidate) [LiTFSI], lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonimide) [LiBETI], lithium 
perchlorate [LiClO4] and lithium bis(oxalato)borate [LiBOB]) to improve the 
ionic conductivity of SPE, but it still remains low (<10–4 Scm-1 at room tempera￾ture; Xu 2014). A polymer nanocomposite approach of adding different nanofill￾ers like TiO2, SiO2, Fe3O4, Al2O3 and SeZrO2 to polymer electrolytes results in an 
increase in conductivity and mechanical and electrochemical properties (Schaefer 
et al. 2011). For example, poly(methacrylate) (PMA)/poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)­
LiClO4–3 wt% SiO2 composite polymer electrolyte showed the best ionic con￾ductivity of 0.26 mS cm−1 at room temperature (Zhu et al. 2014). The addition of 
inorganic filler can enhance the conductivity of the polymer composite electrolyte 
by two ways: (1) decrease the overall crystallinity of the polymer matrix and (2) 
create additional Li+ ion-conducting pathways through the filler surface regions 
(Croce et al. 2001). GPEs are more promising and practical compared to poly￾mer electrolytes as they show higher ionic conductivity (as high as 10−3S cm−1)  
 
136 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
compared to SPEs (Alipoori et al. 2020). In GPEs, in addition to a polymer elec￾trolyte and an ionic compound (metal salt or acid), an external solvent or plasti￾cizer is added. The solvent or the plasticizer can interact to polymer chains either 
physically or chemically and improves the mobility of ions and hence improve the 
conductivity without much sacrifice of mechanical strength. Since then, a num￾ber of polymers like poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVdF) polyacrylonitrile (PAN), 
poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), thermoplastic 
polyurethane (TPU), poly(propylene carbonate) (PPC) and polyvinyl alcohol have 
been used for polymer gel electrolyte preparation (Suthanthiraraj & Johnsi 2017). 
Recently, different inorganic materials like TiO2 (Lim et al. 2014), SiO2 (Gao et al. 
2013), Sb2O3 (Chen  & Dai 2014) and carbon nanomaterial like graphene oxide 
(GO) (Huang et al. 2014) were introduced into GPEs for further enhancement of 
the ionic conductivity, mechanical property and environmental stability. It has 
been observed that the effect of these additional nanofillers on ionic conductivity 
of the composite gel electrolyte is highly dependent on the surface functionality 
and specific surface area of these fillers (Yang et al. 2013b). For example, Gao and 
coworkers investigated the effect of nano-SiO2 and nano-TiO2 fillers on differ￾ent properties like ionic conductivity, dielectric properties, proton density, ionic 
mobility and environmental stability of silicotungstic acid—H3PO4—poly (vinyl 
alcohol) polymer gel electrolyte (Gao & Lian 2013). The SiO2 fillers based on gel 
electrolyte showed higher moisture content, most stable proton transport network 
and higher proton conductivity. Between the two fillers, SiO2 addition results in 
a reduction in the electrode polarization and a lower double-layer capacitance 
in the supercapacitor. However, TiO2 exhibited the highest intrinsic dielectric 
constant and the highest capacitance. Lim et al. fabricated a composite gel elec￾trolyte based on PVA-LiClO4-TiO2 and investigated the effect of TiO2 addition 
on the electrochemical performance of the supercapacitors with activated car￾bon electrodes (Lim et al. 2014). The composite electrolyte showed a maximum 
ionic conductivity value of 1.30 ×10−4 S.cm−1 with 8 wt% of TiO2 content. TiO2 
nanoparticles by their acid-base properties and surface oxygen atoms, which act 
as vacant coordination sites, increase the amorphous nature of PVA and increase 
the number of mobile Li+ ions. Recently, Zhai et al. developed a series of novel 
nanocomposite polymer gel electrolytes consisting of Poly(vinylidene fluoride￾co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP), ionic liquid of N-methyl-N-methoxyethyl 
piperidiniumbis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (PP12O1TFSI) as a plasticizer and 
nano-sized TiO2 as additive (Zhai et al. 2016). The nano-composite polymer elec￾trolyte NCPE-2, with a composition of 10% TiO2 to PVDF-HFP, showed the best 
ionic conductivity of 2 ×10−3 S·cm−1 with the lowest crystallinity. The LiFePO4/ 
NCPE-2/Li coin-typed cell exhibited a first discharge capacity of 127.9 mAh g−1 
at 0.5C and retained 97.6% of its initial value after 50th cycle. 
6.4.4 polymer nanocomposITe membrane For Fuel cells 
Fuel cells are electrochemical cells that continuously convert chemical energy 
of fuels (hydrogen, methanol, ethanol, etc.) and oxidizing agents (often oxygen) 
into electrical energy through pair of redox reaction (Kim et  al. 2015a). A  fuel Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 137 
FIGURE 6.10 Basic principle of PEMFC. 
cell comprises a cathode and an anode chamber separated by an electrolyte 
(Figure 6.10). There are six kinds of fuel cells classified on the basis of their mode 
of operation, operating temperature, and nature of the electrolyte: (1) alkaline fuel 
cells (AFCs), (2) proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), (3) direct meth￾anol fuel cells (DMFCs), (4) solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs), (5) molten carbonate 
fuel cells (MCFCs) and (6) phosphoric acid fuel cells (PACFs). AFCs, PEMFCs 
and DMFCs use polymer membranes as electrolytes, which is called a polymer 
electrolyte membrane. Here we mainly discuss the recent development of poly￾mer nanocomposite aimed at their use as polymer electrolyte membranes in fuel 
cells. The basic principle of PEMFCs is depicted in Figure 6.10 along with elec￾trode reactions. In PEMFCs, hydrogen is used as fuel, and the charge carrier is 
the hydrogen ion (proton). In the presence of a catalyst at the anode, the supplied 
hydrogen gas split into electrons and protons through a chemical reaction. The pro￾tons then are transported to the cathode through the polymer electrolyte, while the 
electrons proceed along the external circuit and generate electrical power. Oxygen 
is used as a common oxidant that combines with the proton and electron to produce 
water (Figure 6.10; Kim et al. 2015a). 
6.4.4.1 Polymer Nanocomposite as Polymer Electrolyte Membranes 
An ideal polymer electrolyte membrane should exhibit high ionic conductivity (i.e., 
proton conductivity more than 10−2 S/cm) between the electrodes, superior mechan￾ical stabilities in terms of strength and flexibility, zero electronic conductivity, low 
gas permeability, low production cost and chemical inertness toward oxidation and 
reduction (Sebastian & Baglio 2017). Polymer electrolyte membranes also require 
humidification for continuous ion conduction, which sometimes results in mem￾brane degradation and a loss of cell efficiency (Ji & Wei 2009). The most common 
and commercially available polymer membrane material for PEMFC is polymer of 
fluorosulfonic acid ionomers developed by DuPont with the trade name Nafion. The 
major drawbacks with Nafion is that it has a limited dehydration temperature below 
100°C, which can cause slow kinetic reactions, have poor cost-efficiency and cause 
CO poisoning of the platinum electrode catalysts. The performance of a Nafion 138 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
membrane in fuel cells is optimized at a relative humidity approaching 100% and 
an operating temperature of approximately 80°C (Sahu et  al. 2009). Different 
types of polymers like sulfonated poly(ether ether ketone), poly(ether sulfone) and 
poly(benzimidazole) have been explored in the literature as possible replacements 
for the Nafion membranes but not much success (Tohidian et al. 2015). To enhance 
the performance of these proton-conducting polymer electrolytes, nanocomposite 
of these polymers were prepared by hybridizing with different nanofillers of con￾trollable structure and superior properties (Chen et al. 2012, Koyilapu et al. 2020, 
2021, Mukhopadhyay et al. 2020, Kim et al. 2015a). The properties of polymer com￾posite membranes are improved by the synergy between the organic and inorganic 
material properties. The inorganic component in the polymer matrix can suppress 
the fuel diffusion and membrane swelling with a simultaneous improvement of 
mechanical strength and thermal stability of the electrolyte membrane. Already, 
it has been reported that the addition of nanofillers like inorganic particles, such 
as metal oxide (Adjemian et  al. 2006), silica (Jiang et  al. 2006), clay (Koyilapu 
et  al. 2021, Singha et  al. 2019), heteropolyacids (Ramani et  al. 2006), graphene 
and graphene oxide (Sahu et al. 2016, Mahmood et al. 2014) and CNTs (Cele et al. 
2010), have improved the mechanical, gas barrier and thermal stability of a polymer 
electrolyte membrane. 
6.5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTIVE 
In this chapter, we have tried to summarize the latest development on the area of 
polymer nanocomposite-based materials for energy storage applications. The dream 
of light weight, flexible energy storage device for modern and wearable electron￾ics can only be achieved by using polymer nanocomposite as electrode and elec￾trolyte materials. Significant research efforts were made to develop novel polymer 
nanocomposite-based electrode and electrolyte materials for energy storage appli￾cations. Despite many successes, a few challenges are still ahead and need to be 
tackled in the future. At present, energy storage devices like supercapacitors suffer 
from lower energy densities, which can be addressed by developing novel electro￾lytes (especially solid electrolytes for flexible devices and organic electrolytes) with 
high ionic conductivity and larger electrochemical potential windows. For example, 
hybrid energy storage devices like lithium/sodium-ion hybrid capacitors compris￾ing both battery-type and capacitor-type electrodes can output high energy and 
power density. Another major issue with polymer-based materials is the low cycle 
life of the device, which may be addressed by using a redox-active electrolyte that 
will promote fast and reversible charge-transfer process between the electrode and 
the electrolyte and simultaneously lower the extent of unfavorable and irreversible 
redox processes. The synthetic procedure adopted plays a key role in determining 
the final structure/morphology of the composite and the dispersion of the filler in the 
polymer matrix. Despite several established procedures, novel preparation strate￾gies that ensure large-scale production of composite materials, new and reproduc￾ible structure/morphology, better interface and degree of dispersion of nanofiller are 
still needed. A possible synthetic strategy will be to build 3D hybrids with tunable/ 
controlled structures having large specific surface area and good permeability. More Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 139 
theoretical and experimental studies that bring a deeper understanding of the mecha￾nism of energy storage, the interfacial interactions between the electrolyte and the 
electrode and the structure property relationship are highly required. At the end of 
the day, a closer collaboration between laboratory research and industry is highly 
anticipated to solve the challenges and fulfill the ultimate goal of large-scale fabrica￾tion of polymer composite–based, efficient, environmentally friendly and renewable 
storage devices for solving the problems of our daily life. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Dr. BKK also acknowledges DST SERB project CRG/2020/003132 and BHU IOE 
project R/Dev/D/IOE/incentive/ 2021–2022/32409 for financial support. 
REFERENCES 
Abdelhamid, M. E., O’Mullane, A. P., Snook, G. A. 2015. Storing energy in plastics: A review 
on conducting polymers & their role in electrochemical energy storage. RSC Advances 
5(15):11611–26. 
Adjemian, K. T., Dominey, R., Krishnan, L., Ota, H., Majsztrik, P., Zhang, T., et al. 2006. 
Function and characterization of metal oxide-Nafion composite membranes for elevated￾temperature H2/O2 PEM fuel cells. Chemistry of Materials 18:2238–48. 
Alipoori, S., Mazinani, S., Hamed, S., Aboutalebi, Sharif, F. 2020. Review of PVA-based gel 
polymer electrolytes in flexible solid-state supercapacitors: Opportunities and challenges. 
Journal of Energy Storage 27:101072. 
An, S. J., Li, J., Daniel, C., Mohanty, D., Nagpure, S., Wood, D. L. 2016. The state of under￾standing of the lithium-ion-battery graphite solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) and its rela￾tionship to formation cycling. Carbon 105:52–76. 
Armand, M. 1990. Polymers with ionic conductivity. Advance Materials 2:278–86. 
Arslan, M., Tasdelen, M. A. 2017. Polymer nanocomposites via click chemistry reactions. 
Polymers 9:499. 
Arya, A., Sharma, A. L. 2017. Polymer electrolytes for lithium ion batteries: A critical study. 
Ionics 23(3):497–540. 
Aziz, S. B., Woo, T. J., Kadir, M. F. Z., Ahmed, H. M. 2018. A conceptual review on poly￾mer electrolytes and ion transport models. Journal of Science: Advanced Materials and 
Devices 3:1–17. 
Barpanda, P., Nishimura, S.-I., Yamada, A. 2012. High-voltage pyrophosphate cathodes. 
Advanced Energy Materials 2(7):841–59. 
Beaudin, M., Zareipour, H., Schellenberglabe, A., Rosehart, W. 2010. Energy storage for 
mitigating the variability of renewable electricity sources: An updated review. Energy for 
Sustainable Development 14(4):302–14. 
Belanger, D., Brousse, T., Long, J., Long, W. 2008. Manganese oxides: Battery materials 
make the leap to electrochemical capacitors. Electrochemical Society Interfaces 17:49–52. 
Bendrea, A. D., Cianga, L., Cianga, I. 2011. Review paper: Progress in the field of conducting 
polymers for tissue engineering applications. Journal of Biomaterials Application 26:3–84. 
Cele, N. P., Sinha Ray S., Pillai, S. K., Ndwandwe, M., Nonjola S, Sikhwivhilu L, et al. 2010. 
Carbon nanotubes based Nafion composite membranes for fuel cell applications. Fuel 
Cells 10(1):64–71. 
Chao, D., Xia, X., Liu, J., Fan, Z., Ng, C. F., Lin, J., et al. 2014. A V2O5/conductive-polymer 
core/shell nanobelt array on three-dimensional graphite foam: A high-rate, ultrastable, 
and freestanding cathode for lithium-ion batteries. Advanced Materials 26(33):5794–800. 140 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Chen, J., Guo, Q., Li, D., Tong, J., Li, X. 2012. Properties improvement of SPEEK based 
proton exchange membranes by doping of ionic liquids and Y2O3. Progress in Natural 
Science: Materials International 22(1):26–30. 
Chen, X., Paul, R., Dai, L. 2017. Carbon-based supercapacitors for efficient energy storage. 
National Science Review 4:453–89. 
Chen, Y. P., Liu, B. R., Liu, Q., Wang, J., Liu, J. Y., Zhang, H. S., Hu, S. X., Jing, X. Y. 2015. 
Flexible all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor assembled using coaxial NiMoO4 
nanowire arrays with chemically integrated conductive coating. Electrochimica Acta 
178:429–38. 
Chen, T., Dai, L. 2014. Flexible supercapacitors based on carbon nanomaterials. Journal of 
Material Chemistry A 2:10756–75. 
Cheng, H., Zhu, C., Huang, B., Lu, M., Yang, Y. 2007. Synthesis and electrochemical char￾acterization of PEO-based polymer electrolytes with room temperature ionic liquids. 
Electrochimica Acta 52(19):5789–94. 
Cheng, X.-B., Zhang, R., Zhao, C.-Z., Wei, F., Zhang, J.-G., Zhang, Q. 2016. A review of solid 
electrolyte interphases on lithium metal anode. Advanced Science 3(3):1500213. 
Chung, S.-Y., Bloking, J. T., Chiang, Y.-M. 2012. Electronically conductive phospho-olivines 
as lithium storage electrodes. Nature Materials 1(2):123–8. 
Cong, H.-P., Ren, X.-C., Wang, P., Yu, S.-H. 2013. Flexible graphene—polyaniline composite 
paper for high-performance supercapacitor. Energy & Environmental Science 6:1185–91. 
Conway, B. E. 1999. Introduction and historical perspective. In: Conway BE, editor. 
Electrochemical supercapacitors: Scientific fundamentals and technological applications. 
Boston, MA: Springer. pp. 1–9. 
Croce, F., Persi, L., Scrosati, B., Serraino-Fiory, F., Plichta, E., Hendrickson, M. 2001. Role 
of the ceramic fillers in enhancing the transport properties of composite polymer electro￾lytes. Electrochimical Acta 46(16):2457–61. 
Das T. K., Prusty, S. 2012. Review on conducting polymers and their applications. Polymer 
Plastics Technology and Engineering 51(14):1487–500. 
Deng, D. 2015. Li-ion batteries: Basics, progress, and challenges. Energy Science  & 
Engineering 3(5):385–418. 
Donne, S. W. 2013. General principles of electrochemistry. In: Béguin F, Frąckowiak E, edi￾tors. Supercapacitors. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. Germany pp. 1–68. 
Fu, C. P., Zhou, H. H., Liu, R., Huang, Z. Y., Chen, J. H., Kuang, Y. F. 2012. Supercapacitor 
based on electropolymerized polythiophene and multi-walled carbon nanotubes compos￾ites. Material Chemistry & Physics 132:596–600. 
Gao, H., Lian, K. 2013. Effect of SiO2 on silicotungstic acid-H3PO4-poly (vinyl alcohol) electrolyte 
for electrochemical supercapacitors. Journal of Electrochemical Society 160:A505–A510. 
Geim, A. K., Novoselov, K. S. 2007. The rise of graphene. Nature Materials 6:183–91. 
Gomez, H., Ram, M. K., Alvi, F., Villalba, P., Stefanakos, E., Kumar, A. 2011. Graphene￾conducting polymer nanocomposite as novel electrode for supercapacitors. Journal of 
Power Sources 196:4102–28. 
Gong, Z., Yang, Y. 2011. Recent advances in the research of polyanion-type cathode materials 
for Li-ion batteries. Energy & Environmental Sciences 4(9):3223–42. 
Gupta, S., Price, C. 2016. Investigating graphene/conducting polymer hybrid layered com￾posites as pseudocapacitors: Interplay of heterogeneous electron transfer, electric double 
layers and mechanical stability. Composite Part B: Engineering 105:46–59. 
Gupta, V., Miura, N. 2006. Polyaniline/single-wall carbon nanotube(PANI/SWCNT) com￾posites for high performance supercapacitors. Electrochim Acta 52:1721–6. 
Han, J., Li, L., Fang, P., Guo, R. 2012. Ultrathin MnO2 nanorods on conducting polymer 
nanofibers as a new class of hierarchical nanostructures for high-performance superca￾pacitors. Journal of Physical Chemistry C 116:5900–15907. Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 141 
Han, X., Chang, C., Yuan, L., Sun, T., Sun, J. 2007. Aromatic carbonyl derivative polymers as 
high performance Li-ion storage materials. Advance Materials 19:1616–21. 
Han, Y., Dai, L. 2019. Conducting polymers for flexible supercapacitors. Macromolecular 
Chemistry & Physics 220:800355. 
Hong, X., Fu, J., Liu, Y., Li, S., Wang, X., Dong, W., Yang, S. 2019. Recent progress on gra￾phene/polyaniline composites for high-performance supercapacitors. Materials 12:1451. 
Huang, K. J., Wang, L., Liu, Y. J., Wang, H. B., Liu, Y. M., Wang, L. L. 2013. Synthesis 
of polyaniline/2-dimensional graphene analog MoS2 composites for high-performance 
supercapacitor. Electrochimica Acta 109:587–94. 
Huang, M., Li, F., Dong, F., Zhang, Y. X., Zhang, L. L. 2015a. MnO2-based nanostructures for 
high-performance supercapacitors. Journal of Material Chemistry A 3:21380–423. 
Huang, Y., Huang, Y., Meng, W., Zhu, M., Xue, H., Lee, C.-S., Zhi, C. 2015b. Enhanced toler￾ance to stretch-induced performance degradation of stretchable MnO2-based supercapaci￾tors. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 7:2569–74. 
Huang, Y.-F., Wu, P.-F., Zhang, M.-Q., Ruan, W.-H., Giannelis, E. P. 2014. Boron crosslinked 
graphene oxide/polyvinyl alcohol nanocomposite gel electrolyte for flexible solid-state 
electric double layer capacitor with high performance. Electrochimica Acta 132:103–11. 
Huang, Z., Li, L., Wang, Y., Zhang, C., Liu, T. 2018. Polyaniline/graphene nanocomposites 
towards high-performance supercapacitors: A review. Composites Communications 8:83–91. 
Ji, M., Wei, Z. 2009. A review of water management in polymer electrolyte membrane fuel 
cells. Energies 2:1057–106. 
Jiang, R., Kunz, H. R., Fenton, J. M. 2006. Composite silica/Nafion® membranes prepared by 
tetraethylorthosilicate sol-gel reaction and solution casting for direct methanol fuel cells. 
Journal of Membrane Science 272(1):116–24. 
Jurewicz, K., Delpeux, S., Bertagna, V., Beguin, F., Frackowiak, E. 2001. Supercapacitors 
from nanotubes/ polypyrrole composites. Chemical Physics Letter 347(1–3):36–40. 
Kandasamy, S. K., Kandasamy, K. 2018. Recent advances in electrochemical performances 
of graphene composite (graphene-polyaniline/polypyrrole/activated carbon/ carbon 
nanotube) electrode materials for supercapacitor: A  review. Journal of Inorganic and 
Organometallic Polymers and Materials 28:559–584. 
Khawas, K., Kumari, P., Daripa, S., Oraon, R., Kuila, B. K. 2017. Hierarchical polyaniline￾MnO2-reduced graphene oxide ternary nanostructures with whiskers-like polyaniline for 
supercapacitor application. ChemistrySelect 2:11783–9. 
Khosrozadeh, A., Xing, M., Wang, Q. 2015. A  high-capacitance solid-state supercapacitor 
based on free-standing film of polyaniline and carbon particles. Applied Energy 153:87–93. 
Kim, D. J., Jo, M. J., Nam, S. Y. 2015a. A review of polymer—nanocomposite electrolyte mem￾branes for fuel cell application. Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry 21:36–52. 
Kim, M., Lee, C., Seo, Y. D., Cho, S., Kim, J., Lee, G., Kim, Y. K., Jang, J. 2015b. Fabrication 
of various conducting polymers using graphene oxide as a chemical oxidant. Chemistry 
of Materials 27:6238–48. 
Koyilapu, R., Singha, S., Kutcherlapati, S. N. R., Jana, T. 2020. Grafting of vinylimidazo￾lium-type poly(ionic liquid) on silica nanoparticle through RAFT polymerization for con￾structing nanocomposite based PEM. Polymer 195:122458. 
Koyilapu, R., Subhadarshini, S., Singha, S., Jana, T. 2021. An in-situ RAFT polymerization 
technique for the preparation of poly (N-vinyl imidazole) modified Cloisite nanoclay to 
develop nanocomposite PEM. Polymer 212:123175. 
Kuila, B. K. 2020. Nanoheterostructured materials based on conjugated polymer and two 
dimensional materials: Synthesis and applications. 2D Nanoscale Heterostructured 
Materials 2020:91–124. 
Kuila, B. K. Park, K., Dai, L. 2010. Soluble P3HT-grafted carbon nanotubes: Synthesis and 
photovoltaic application. Macromolecules 43(16):6699–705. 142 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Kumar, A., Kumar, V., Awasthi, K. 2018. Polyaniline—carbon nanotube composites: Preparation 
methods, properties, and applications. Polymer-Plastics Technology and Engineering 57:70–97. 
Kumar, N. A., Baek, J.-B. 2014. Electrochemical supercapacitors from conducting polyani￾line—graphene platforms. Chemical Communications 50:6298–308. 
Kumar, N. A., Choi, H.-J., Shin, Y. R., Chang, D. W., Dai, L., Baek, J.-B. 2012. Polyaniline￾grafted reduced graphene oxide for efficient electrochemical supercapacitors. ACS Nano 
6:1715–23. 
Kumari, P., Khawas, K., Nandy, S., Kuila, B. K. 2016. A  supramolecular approach to 
Polyaniline graphene nanohybrid with three dimensional pillar structures for high per￾forming electrochemical supercapacitor applications. Electrochimica Acta 190:596–604. 
Li, J., Zou, M., Zhao, Y., Lin, Y., Lai, H., Guan, L., et al. 2013. Coaxial MWNTs@ MnO2 
confined in conducting PPy for kinetically efficient and long-term lithium ion storage. 
Electrochimica Acta 111:165–71. 
Li, Q., Chen, J., Fan, L., Kong, X., Lu, Y. 2016. Progress in electrolytes for rechargeable 
Li-based batteries and beyond. Green Energy & Environment 1(1):18–42. 
Li, Y., Ye, D., Liu, W., Shi, B., Guo, R., Pei, H. et al. 2017. A three-dimensional core-shell 
nanostructured composite of polypyrrole wrapped MnO2/reduced graphene oxide/carbon 
nanotube for high performance lithium ion batteries. Journal of Colloid and Interface 
Science 493:241–8. 
Li, Y., Zhu, J., Wei, S., Ryu, J., Sun, L., Guo, Z. 2011. Poly(propylene)/graphene nanoplatelet 
nanocomposites: Melt rheological behavior and thermal, electrical, and electronic proper￾ties. Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics 212:1951–59. 
Lim, C.-S., Teoh, K., Liew, C.-W., Ramesh, S. 2014. Capacitive behavior studies on electri￾cal double layer capacitor using poly (vinyl alcohol)—lithium perchlorate based polymer 
electrolyte incorporated with TiO2. Material Chemistry and Physics 143:661–67. 
Liu, H., Zhang, F., Li, W. Y., Zhang, X. L., Lee, C. S., Wang, W. L., Tang, Y. B. 2015. Porous 
tremella-like MoS2/polyaniline hybrid composite with enhanced performance for lithium￾ion battery anodes. Electrochimica Acta 167:132–8. 
Liu, R., Lee, S. B. 2008. MnO2/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) coaxial nanowires by 
one-step coelectrodeposition for electrochemical energy storage. Journal of American 
Chemical Society 130(10):2942–3. 
Liu, Y., Kumar, S. 2014. Polymer/carbon nanotube nanocomposite fibers—a review. ACS 
Applied Material Interfaces 6:6069–87. 
Long, L., Wang, S., Xiao, M., Meng, Y. 2016. Polymer electrolytes for lithium polymer bat￾teries. Journal of Material Chemistry A 4(26):10038–69. 
Lu, P., Xue, D., Yang, H., Liu, Y. 2013. Supercapacitor and nanoscale research towards elec￾trochemical energy storage. International Journal of Smart and Nano Materials 4(1):2–26. 
Lu, X., Yu, M., Wang, G., Tong, Y., Li, Y. 2014. Flexible Solid-State Supercapacitors: Design, 
Fabrication and Applications. Energy & Environmental Science 7:2160–81. 
Mahmood, N., Zhang, C., Yin, H., Hou, Y. 2014. Graphene-based nanocomposites for energy 
storage and conversion in lithium batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells. Journal of 
Material Chemistry A 2(1):15–32. 
Mallick, K., Witcomb, M. J., Dinsmore, A., and Scurrell, M. S. 2005. Fabrication of a metal 
nanoparticles and polymer nanofibers composite material by an in situ chemical synthetic 
route. Langmuir 21:7964–7. 
Melechko, A. V., Merkulov, V. I., McKnight, T. E., Guillorn, M. A., Klein, K. L., Lowndes, 
D. H., Simpson, M. L. 2005. Journal of Applied Physics 97:041301–39. 
Meng, Q., Cai, K., Chen, Y., Chen, L. 2017. Research progress on conducting polymer based 
supercapacitor electrode materials. Nano Energy 36:268–85. 
Mi, H. Y., Zhang, X. G., An, S. Y., Ye, X. G., Yang, S. D. 2007. Microwave-assisted synthesis 
and electrochemical capacitance of polyaniline/multi-wall carbon nanotubes composite. 
Electrochemistry Communications 9:2859–62. Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 143 
Mini, P. A., Balakrishnan, A., Nair, S. V., Subramanian, K. R. V. 2011. Highly super capaci￾tive electrodes made of graphene/poly(pyrrole). Chemical Communications 47:5753–5. 
Mittal, G., Dhand, V., Rhee, K.Y., Park, S.-J., Lee, W.R. 2015. A review on carbon nanotubes 
and graphene as fillers in reinforced polymer nanocomposites. Journal of Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry 21:11–25. 
Mondal, S., Rana, U., Malik, S. 2017. Reduced graphene oxide/Fe3O4/polyaniline nano￾structures as electrode materials for an all-solid-state hybrid supercapacitor, Journal of 
Physical Chemistry C 121(14):7573–83. 
Mukhopadhyay, S., Das, A., Jana, T., Das, S. K. 2020. Fabricating a MOF Material with 
polybenzimidazole into an efficient proton exchange membrane. ACS Applied Energy 
Materials 3:7964. 
Myung, S.-T., Amine, K., Sun, Y.-K. 2015. Nanostructured cathode materials for rechargeable 
lithium batteries. Journal of Power Sources 283:219–36. 
Novak, P., Muller, K., Santhanam, K. S. V., Haas O. 1997. Electrochemically active polymers 
for rechargeable batteries. Chemical Review 97(1):207–82. 
Otero, T. F., Cantero, I. 1999. Conducting polymers as positive electrodes in rechargeable 
lithiumion batteries. Journal of Power Sources 81–82:838–41. 
Oueiny, C., Berlioz, S., Perrin, F.-X. 2014. Carbon nanotube—polyaniline composites. 
Progress in Polymer Science 39:707–48. 
Paul, D. R., Robeson, L. M. 2008. Polymer nanotechnology: Nanocomposites. Polymer 
49(15):3187–204. 
Pitchai, R., Thavasi, V., Mhaisalkar, S. G., Ramakrishna, S. 2011. Nanostructured cathode 
materials: A key for better performance in Li-ion batteries. Journal of Material Chemistry 
21(30):11040–51. 
Ponzio, E. A., Benedetti, T. M., Torresi, R. M. 2007. Electrochemical and morphologi￾cal stabilization of V2O5 nanofibers by the addition of polyaniline. Electrochim Acta 
52(13):4419–27. 
Posudievsky, O. Y., Kozarenko, O. A., Dyadyun, V. S., Jorgensen, S. W., Spearot, J. A., 
Koshechko, V. G., et al. 2013. Mechanochemically prepared ternary hybrid cathode mate￾rial for lithium batteries. Electrochimica Acta 109:866–73. 
Quintana, M., Vazquez, E., Prato, M. 2013. Organic functionalization of graphene in disper￾sions. Account of Chemical Research 46:138–48. 
Ramani, V., Kunz, H. R., Fenton, J. M. 2006. Metal dioxide supported heteropolyacid/ 
Nafion® composite membranes for elevated temperature/low relative humidity PEFC 
operation. Journal of Membrane Science 279(1–2):506–12. 
Rastogi, P. K., Ganesan, V., Krishnamoorthi, S. 2014. A promising electrochemical sensing 
platform based on a silver nanoparticles decorated copolymer for sensitive nitrite determi￾nation. Journal of Material Chemistry A 2:933–43. 
Rhazi, M. E., Majid, S., Elbasri, M., Salih, F. E., Oularbi, L., Lafdi, K. 2018. Recent progress 
in nanocomposites based on conducting polymer: Application as electrochemical sensors. 
International Nano Letters 8:79–99. 
Roy, P., Srivastava, S. K. 2015. Nanostructured anode materials for lithium ion batteries. 
Journal of Material Chemistry A 3(6):2454–84. 
Sahu, A. K., Ketpang, K., Shanmugam, S., Kwon, O., Lee, S., Kim, H. 2016. Sulfonated gra￾phene—Nafion composite membranes for polymer electrolyte fuel cells operating under 
reduced relative humidity. Journal of Physical Chemistry C 120(29):15855–66. 
Sahu, A. K., Pitchumani, S., Sridhar, P., and Shukla, A. K. 2009. Nafion and modified-nafion 
membranes for polymer electrolyte fuel cells: An overview. Bulletin of Material Science 
32(3):285–94. 
Schaefer, J. L., Lu, Y., Moganty, S. S. Agarwal, P., Jayaprakash, N., Archer, L. A. 2011. 
Electrolytes for high-energy lithium batteries. Applied Nanoscience 2:91–109. 144 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Scrosati, B., Garche, J. 2010. Lithium batteries: Status, prospects and future. Journal of Power 
Sources 195(9):2419–30. 
Sebastian, D., and Baglio, V. 2017. Advanced materials in polymer electrolyte fuel cells. 
Materials 10:1163. 
Shah, S. S., Das, H. T., Barai, H. R., Aziz, M. A. 2022, Boosting the electrochemical per￾formance of polyaniline by one-step electrochemical deposition on nickel foam for high￾performance asymmetric supercapacitor. Polymers 14(2):270. 
Sharma, R., Rastogi, A., Desu, S. 2008. Manganese oxide embedded polypyrrole nanocom￾posites for electrochemical supercapacitor. Electrochimica Acta 53:7690–5. 
Shen, K. W., Ran, F., Zhang, X. X., Liu, C., Wang, N. J., Niu, X. Q., Liu, Y., Zhang, D. 
J., Kong, L. B., Kang, L., Chen, S. W. 2015. Supercapacitor electrodes based on nano￾polyaniline deposited on hollow carbon spheres derived from cross-linked co-polymer. 
Synthetic Metals 209:369–76. 
Shown I., Ganguly A., Chen, L.-C., Chen, K.-H. 2015. Conducting polymer-based flexible 
supercapacitor. Energy Science & Engineering 3(1):2–26. 
Sih, B. C., Wolf, M. O. 2005. Metal nanoparticle-conjugated polymer nanocomposites. 
Chemical Communication 3375–84. 
Simon, P., Gogotsi, Y. 2008. Materials for electrochemical capacitors. Nature Materials 
7(11):845–54. 
Singh G., Alam M., Kumar Y., Husain, S. 2022. Highly capacitive mesoporous polyani￾line spheres as scalable and high electrochemical performance supercapacitor electrode. 
ChemistrySelect 7(11):e202200386. 
Singha, S., Koyilapu, R., Dana, K., Jana, T. 2019. Polybenzimidazole-clay nanocompos￾ite membrane for PEM fuel cell: Effect of organomodifier structure polymer. Polymer 
167:13–20. 
Sk, M. M., Yue, C. Y., Jena, R. K. 2015. Non-covalent interactions and supercapacitance of 
pseudo-capacitive composite electrode materials (MWCNT single bond COOH/MnO2/ 
PANI). Synthetic Metals 208:2–12. 
Snook, G. A., Kao, P., Best, A. S. 2011. Conducting-polymer-based supercapacitor devices 
and electrodes. Journal of Power Sources 196(1):1–12. 
Stephan A. M., Nahm, K. 2006. Review on composite polymer electrolytes for lithium bat￾teries. Polymer 47(16):5952–64. 
Sun, X., Gan, M., Ma, L., Wang, H., Zhou, T., Wang, S., et al. 2015. Fabrication of PANI￾coated honeycomb-like MnO2 nanospheres with enhanced electrochemical performance 
for energy storage. Electrochimica Acta 180:977–82. 
Suthanthiraraj, S. A., Johnsi, M. 2017. Nanocomposite polymer electrolytes. Ionics 
23:2531–42. 
Tang, H., Wang, J., Yin, H., Zhao, H., Wang, D., Tang, Z. 2015. Growth of polypyrrole ultra￾thin films on MoS2 monolayers as high-Performance supercapacitor electrodes. Advanced 
Materials 27:1117–23. 
Tang, P., Han, L., Zhang, L., Wang, S., Feng, W., Xu, G., Zhang, L. 2015. Controlled con￾struction of hierarchical nanocomposites consisting of MnO2 and PEDOT for high perfor￾mance supercapacitor applications. ChemElectroChem 2:949–57. 
Tohidian, M., Ghaffarian, S. R., Nouri, M., Jaafarnia, E., Haghighi, A. H. 2015. Polyelectrolyte 
nanocomposite membranes using imidazole-functionalized nanosilica for fuel cell appli￾cations. Journal of Macromolecular Science Part B Physics 54(1):17–31. 
Utracki, L. A., Sepehr, M., Boccaleri, E. 2007. Synthetic, layered nanoparticles for polymeric 
nanocomposites (PNCs). Polymers for Advance Technology 18(1):1–37. 
Wakayama, H., Yonekura, H., Kawai, Y. 2016. Three-dimensional bicontinuous nanocom￾posite from a self-assembled block copolymer for a high-capacity all-solid-state lithium 
battery cathode. Chemisstry of Material 28(12):4453–9. Polymer-Based Nanocomposites in Energy Storage Applications 145 
Wang, H., Lin, J., Shen, Z. X. 2016, Polyaniline (PANi) based electrode materials for energy 
storage and conversion. Journal of Science: Advanced Materials and Devices 1(3):225–55. 
Wang, J.-G., Yang, Y., Huang, Z.-H., Kang, F. 2012. Interfacial synthesis of mesoporous 
MnO2/polyaniline hollow spheres and their application in electrochemical capacitors. 
Journal of Power Sources 204:236–43. 
Wang, S., Ma, L., Gan, M., Fu, S., Dai, W., Zhou, T., Sun, X., Wang, H., Wang, H. 2015. 
Free-standing 3D graphene/polyaniline composite film electrodes for high-performance 
supercapacitors. Journal of Power Sources 299:347–355. 
Wang, Y.C., Tao, S.Y., An, Y.L., Wu, S., Meng, C.G. 2013. Bio-inspired high performance 
electrochemical supercapacitors based on conducting polymer modified coral-like mono￾lithic carbon. Journal of Material Chemistry A 1:8876–87. 
Wei, H., Ding, D., Wei, S., Guo, Z. 2013. Anticorrosive conductive polyurethane multiwalled 
carbon nanotube nanocomposites. Journal of Material Chemistry A 1:10805–13. 
Wei, W., Cui, X., Chen, W. Ivey, D. G. 2011. Manganese oxide-based materials as electro￾chemical supercapacitor electrodes. Chemical Society Review 40:1697–721. 
Wu, H., Wang, K., Meng, Y., Lu, K., Wei, Z. 2013a. An organic cathode material based on a 
polyimide/ CNT nanocomposite for lithium ion batteries. Journal of Material Chemistry 
A 1(21):6366–72. 
Wu, H., Yu, G., Pan, L., Liu, N., McDowell, M. T., Bao, Z., Cui. Y. 2013b. Stable Li-ion bat￾tery anodes by in-situ polymerization of conducting hydrogel to conformally coat silicon 
nanoparticles. Nature Communication 4:1943. 
Wu, J., Zhang, Q., Wang, J., Huang, X., Bai, H. 2018. A self-assembly route to porous poly￾aniline/reduced graphene oxide composite materials with molecular-level uniformity for 
high-performance supercapacitors. Energy & Environmental Science 11:1280–6. 
Xu, K. 2014. Electrolytes and interphases in Li-ion batteries and beyond. Chemical Review 
114:11503–618. 
Xu, X., Lee, S., Jeong, S., Kim, Y., Cho, J. 2013. Recent progress on nanostructured 4 V 
cathode materials for Li-ion batteries for mobile electronics. Mater Today 16(12):487–95. 
Yan, H., Wu, X., Li, Y. 2015. Preparation and characterization of conducting polyaniline￾coated LiVPO4F nanocrystals with core-shell structure and its application in lithium-ion 
batteries. Electrochimica Acta 182:437–44. 
Yan, J., Wang, Q., Wei, T., Fan, Z. 2014. Recent advances in design and fabrication of elec￾trochemical supercapacitors with high energy densities. Advanced Energy Materials 
4(4):1300816. 
Yang, C., Wei, H., Guan, L., Guo, J., Wang, Y., Yan, X., et al. 2015. Polymer nanocomposites 
for energy storage, energy saving, and anticorrosion. Journal of Material Chemistry A 
3(29):14929–41. 
Yang, J., Liu, Y., Liu, S., Li, L., Zhang, C., Liu, T. 2017. Conducting polymer composites: 
Material synthesis and applications in electrochemical capacitive energy storage. Material 
Chemistry Frontiers 1(2):251–68. 
Yang, L. C., Wang, S. N., Mao, J. J., Deng, J. W., Gao, Q. S., Tang, Y., Schmidt, O. G. 2013a. 
Hierarchical MoS2/polyaniline nanowires with excellent electrochemical performance for 
lithium-ion batteries. Advanced Materials 25:1180–4. 
Yang, S., Meng, D., Sun, J., Huang, Y., Huang, Y. and Geng, J. 2014. Composite films of 
poly(3-hexylthiophene) grafted single-walled carbon nanotubes for electrochemical 
detection of metal ions. ACS Applied Material and Interfaces 6:7686–94. 
Yang, X., Zhang, F., Zhang, L., Zhang, T., Huang, Y., Chen, Y. 2013b. A high-performance 
graphene oxide-doped ion gel as gel polymer electrolyte for all-solid-state supercapacitor 
applications. Advanced Functional Materials 23:3353–60. 
Yanilmaz, M., Dirican, M., Asiri, A. M., Zhang, X. 2019. Flexible polyaniline-carbon nano￾fiber supercapacitor electrodes. Journal of Energy Storage 24:100766. 146 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Yin, Z., Ding, Y., Zheng, Q., Guan, L. 2012. CuO/polypyrrole core—shell nanocomposites 
as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Electrochemistry Communications 20:40–3. 
Zarrintaj, P., Khalili, R., Vahabi, H., Saeb, M. R., Ganjali, M. R., Mozafari, M. 2019. 
Chapter 8 — Polyaniline/metal oxides nanocomposites. In: Fundamentals and emerging 
applications of polyaniline, 1st edition. Elsevier, 131–41. 
Zhai, W., Zhang, Y.-W. Wang, L., Cai, F., Liu, X.-M., Shi, Y.-J., Yang, H. 2016. Study of nano￾TiO2 composite polymer electrolyte incorporating ionic liquid PP12O1TFSI for lithium bat￾tery. Solid State Ionics 286:111–11. 
Zhang, A. Q., Xiao, Y. H., Lu, L. Z., Wang, L. Z., Li, F. 2013. Polypyrrole/MnO2 compos￾ites and their enhanced electrochemical capacitance. Journal of Applied Polymer Science 
128:1327–31. 
Zhang, H.Q., Hu, Z.Q., Li, M., Hu, L.W., Jiao, S.Q. 2014. A high-performance supercapacitor 
based on a polythiophene/multiwalled carbon nanotube composite by electropolymeriza￾tion in an ionic liquid microemulsion. Journal of Material Chemistry A 2:17024–30. 
Zhang, L. L., Zhao, X. S. 2009. Carbon-based materials as supercapacitor electrodes. 
Chemical Society Review 38(9):2520–31. 
Zhang, X., Samorì, P.  2017. Graphene/polymer nanocomposites for supercapacitors. 
ChemNanoMat 3:362–72. 
Zhang, X. Y., Hou, L. L., Cnossen, A., Coleman, A. C., Ivashenko, O., Rudolf, P., van Wees, 
B. J., Browne, W. R., Feringa, B. L. 2011. One-pot functionalization of graphene with por￾phyrin through cycloaddition reactions. Chemistry European Journal 17:8957–64. 
Zhao, H., Yuan, A., Liu, B., Xing, S., Wu, X., Xu, J. 2012. High cyclic performance of 
V2O5@PPy composite as cathode of recharged lithium batteries. Journal of Applied 
Electrochemistry 42(3):139–44. 
Zhu, Z., Hong, M., Guo, D., Shi, J., Tao, Z., Chen, J. 2014. All-solid-state lithium organic 
battery with composite polymer electrolyte and pillar[5]quinone cathode. Journal of 
American Chemical Society 136:16461–4. DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-7 147 
7
7 Carbon Quantum Dots
 
Karan Surana and Bhaskar Bhattacharya 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Quantum dots (QDs) in general are zero-dimensional (0D) semiconducting nano￾sized entities whose optical and electronic behavior is intimately linked to their 
size. Controlling the size of the QDs allows us to tailor its bandgap and thereby 
its absorption characteristics. Owing to their quantum confinement effect and the 
ability to generate multiple excitons from a single photon, they are classified sepa￾rately from the usual league of nanomaterials (Surana et al., 2014; Chamarro et al., 
1996; Shabaev et al., 2006). The well-known and studied QDs belong to the group 
II–VI and III–V semiconductors, which have been exploited well for their diverse 
applications. Recently, a new league of carbon (C) and graphene (G) QDs or car￾bon nanodots (NDs) has caused a major stir in the scientific community (Surana 
et al., 2022; Ghaffarkhah et al., 2022). These colorful forms of carbon are being 
actively pursued for their strongly tunable absorbance and fluorescent characteris￾tics. Furthermore, they exhibit excellent biocompatibility, tunable surface function￾alities, and simple synthesis routes, which have further increased their popularity 
(Figure 7.1; Lim et al., 2015). Due to low cytotoxicity and chemical inertness com￾pared to the chalcogenide QDs, these 0D carbons have found application in bio￾chemical sensing, bioimaging, photovoltaics (PVs), catalysis, and drug delivery (Pan 
et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2016; Li et al., 2012; Kumar et al., 2013). 
Despite the association of 0D carbon and graphene with the term quantum dots; 
their quantum confinement effect is yet to be proven (if it exists at all; Cao et al., 2019). 
Interestingly enough, the photoluminescence (PL) property of these NDs arises from 
the surface passivation or the dopant material rather than the C core. The passivation 
materials in turn become responsible for its dynamic characteristics. The existence 
of C QDs was first proposed by Xu et al. (2004), who discovered them during the 
purification of carbon nanotubes (CNTs), while the first true synthesis of C QDs was 
carried out by Sun et al. (2006) from graphite powder which showed luminescence 
only on surface passivation with an organic species. However, the first occurrence of 
fluorescent G QDs from graphene oxide (GO) was reported by Pan et al. (2010). 
In this chapter, we present briefly the synthesis strategies utilized to date along 
with the realized applications. 
7.2 SYNTHESIS OF C QDS 
Similar to the synthesis of any other nanomaterial, C NDs can be prepared by either 
the top-down or the bottom-up approach. 148 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
7.2.1 Top-DoWn approach 
As the name suggests, the top-down approach entails breaking down large or bulk 
carbon structures such as graphene oxide, graphite, activated carbon, carbon soot, 
CNTs, and others by processes, such as electrochemical oxidation, arc discharge, 
and laser ablation. In fact, the first reported appearance of C QDs by Xu et al. (2004) 
involved the purification of CNTs prepared by the arc discharge method. The C QDs 
prepared by Li et al. (2010) in daylight and ultraviolet (UV) light has been depicted 
in Figure 7.2. 
FIGURE 7.1 Properties of carbon QDs. 
FIGURE 7.2 The optical images of C QDs under daylight (left) and UV light (right). 
Source: Li et al. (2010) Carbon Quantum Dots 149 
7.2.2 boTTom-up approach 
7.2.2.1 Hydrothermal/Solvothermal Route 
One of the most commonly reported routes for the synthesis of colorful C NDs is the 
hydrothermal or solvothermal method. Since the only difference between the hydro￾thermal and the solvothermal method is the main solvent, hence for convenience, 
the name ‘hydrothermal’ is used in most cases. Figure 7.3 shows C QDs prepared by 
hydrothermal method in our laboratory. Zhang et al. (2010) reported the formation 
of C QDs with a single precursor, wherein ascorbic acid was mixed with water and 
ethanol and heated at 180 °C for 4 h in a stainless steel autoclave. The finally purified 
yellow-colored solution had an average particle size of approximately 2.5 nm. Liang 
et al. (2016) used purified chitosan powder and acetic acid for preparing C QDs by 
mixing and subjecting them to hydrothermal carbonization at 200 °C for 12 h. The 
identified average particle size was approximately 5 nm. 
A number of papers have reported the use of green precursors for synthesis. For 
instance, Sharma et al. (2019) reported the use of rose petals as a precursor for C 
QDs. The extract from the petals was mixed properly with ethylenediamine and 
L-cysteine, followed by hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C for 5 h. Owing to the reac￾tion time, particles of <5 nm were prepared that had a quantum yield (QY) of 9.6%. 
Lotus root powder as the carbon source was used by Liu et al. (2019). An aqueous 
solution of the powder was subjected to heating at 170 °C for 7 h. For inducing S and 
N dopants, sulfuric acid and ammonium hydroxide were added before hydrothermal 
treatment. Green, yellow, and blue luminescence was observed in undoped, S-doped, 
and N-doped C QDs, respectively, with an average size of approximately 5 nm. Yang 
et al. (2017) used an aqueous solution of strawberry powder for the hydrothermal 
FIGURE 7.3 C QDs on a filter paper (A), daylight (B), and UV light. (Inset) C QDs in a 
beaker. 150 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
treatment at 170 °C for various times ranging from 3–20 h. The luminescence inten￾sity increased gradually, with an increased reaction time, and the average particle 
size recorded was approximately 2.5 nm. Zhao et al. (2018) also employed straw￾berry powder as a carbon precursor but added ammonia for nitrogen doping. Briscoe 
et al. (2015) used a chitin alcoholic solution of chitin, chitosan, and glucose as pre￾cursors for the solvothermal treatment at 200 °C for 6 h. The obtained average par￾ticle size was approximately 15 nm, 8 nm, and 2.5 nm, respectively, while their QY 
was 11.6%, 13.4%, and 1.4%, respectively. 
Guo et al. (2017) used three different precursors for preparing C dots, namely, bee 
pollen, citric acid, and glucose, which were mixed in water and treated at 180 °C for 
4 h. The average particle size of the dots obtained was 2.4, 2.4 and 5.2 nm, respec￾tively, which were used as sensitizers in dye sensitized solar cell (DSSC). De  & 
Karak (2013) reported the use of banana for C QD synthesis. After separating the 
pulp, banana juice was mixed with ethanol and transferred to a glass bottle capped 
FIGURE 7.4 Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images at different magnifications 
(a) 50 nm, (b) 20 nm (with size distribution, inset), and (c) 5 nm and (d) SAED pattern of the 
carbon dots. 
Source: De & Karak (2013) Carbon Quantum Dots 151 
with a cotton cork for heating at 150 °C for 4 h. The obtained dark brown residue 
was mixed with water and ethanol for filtration and centrifuged to collect the C QDs. 
The change in pH did not bring about any shift in the emission wavelength, and the 
average particle size obtained was approximately 3 nm (Figure 7.4). 
7.2.2.2 Microwave Route 
The microwave route for synthesis is quite a popular method of the wet-chemical 
synthesis family as it prepares the end product in a noticeably short time compared 
to other methods. Furthermore, the ability to regulate the size and shape of the end 
product by modifying the reaction parameters; the ultra-fast volumetric reduction 
and high reaction rate aid in its popularity. In a paper by Singh et al. (2018), citric 
acid and urea were chosen as the carbon and nitrogen sources, respectively, and were 
mixed in water while maintaining pH 7. The solution was subjected to microwave 
irradiation at 750 W for 5 min, which resulted in yellow-colored C QDs in pow￾der form. With absorption in the UV region, the average particle size obtained was 
approximately 6.5 nm. The QDs were used for selective detection of the neurotoxin 
quinolinic acid in human serum. This same process was initially reported by Qu 
et al. (2012) where a maximum QY of 40% was obtained at 515 nm. The prepared 
dots were used as fluorescent ink. Citric acid has been a chosen carbon source for 
many studies; for instance, Lim et al. (2018) prepared a homogeneous solution of 
citric acid with ethylenediamine for microwave irradiation at 750 W for 8 min. The 
dialyzed and freeze-dried C QDs had an average size of about 10 nm, a QY of 9.84%. 
In a fascinating report by Zhu et al. (2009), PEG-200 and saccharides were dis￾solved in water. The solution was microwaved at 500 W for a few minutes, leading 
to the formation of yellow to dark brown C QDs. The recorded average PL lifetime 
of the C dots was 8.70 ns with an average particle size below 5 nm. Choi et al. (2017) 
reported a single-step formation of C QDs in which lysine dissolved in distilled 
water was pyrolyzed at 750 W for 5–6 min, resulting in the dark brown QD solution. 
The average PL lifetime was 1.6 ns, and the particle size ranged between 5–10 nm. 
A green precursor was used by Raji et al. (2019) wherein dried jackfruit seeds were 
powdered and mixed with o-phosphoric acid and subjected to microwave irradia￾tion at 600 W for 1.5 min. A clear yellow solution of N-doped C QDs was obtained 
with a PL lifetime of 1.75 ns and an average particle size of 5 nm. Macairan et al. 
(2019) prepared C QD for sensing application by first sonicating glutathione in for￾mamide for a few minutes. The resultant solution was subjected to microwave treat￾ment at 180 °C for 5 min. Dialysis and centrifugation were carried on for days to 
collect the C dots. The prepared dots had an average particle size of 5–9 nm and a 
QY of 6.49%. 
7.2.2.3 Pyrolysis Method 
Pyrolysis is an effective way to decomposing a material to its constituents under heat 
since it is carried out in the absence of oxygen. Dager et al. (2019) heated finely pow￾dered fennel seeds for 3 h at 500 °C, thereby carbonizing the green-colored powder 
to dark gray. The obtained powder was dissolved in deionized water followed by 
centrifugation and dialysis for obtaining the uniform-sized C QDs. Monodispersed 
C QDs of an average size of 3.9 nm were found, and no effect of the excitation  
152 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
wavelength was reported, as the QDs gave PL emission peaks at the same position. 
Wang et al. (2016) treated an aqueous mixture of citric acid and ammonia at 200 °C 
for 3 h for preparing N-doped C QDs. The average size of the QDs was 10.8 nm, and 
the PL peak showed red shifting, with an increase in excitation wavelength. 
7.2.2.4 Wet-Chemical Method 
One of the most versatile methods for synthesizing materials is the wet chemical route 
as it does not require any fancy equipment. Tan et al. (2016) reported the synthesis 
of oil-soluble C QDs whereby 1,2-Hexadecanediol was mixed with octadecene and 
heated at 100 °C for 30 min, followed by heating at 300 °C for 3 h under argon gas. 
The doping of nitrogen and boron was done by the addition of melamine and sodium 
borohydride. The obtained spherical QDs had an average size of about 2.4 nm. 
7.3 APPLICATIONS OF C QDS 
7.3.1 chemIcal sensIng 
One of the versatile applications of C QD lies in the arena of chemical sensing. Among 
the known mechanisms, one of the basic ways is to determine the change in the fluo￾rescence (FL) intensity under the influence of any physical or chemical stimuli. C QDs 
have been successfully used in selectively detecting Hg2+ ions in aqueous solutions and 
live cells (Guo et al., 2013; Huang et al., 2013; Yan et al., 2014). It was reported that the 
FL emission of a C QD solution and C QDs immobilized in sol-gel are sensitive to the 
presence of Hg2+ (Gonçalves et al., 2010). The FL intensity of the C QD was quenched 
by micromolars of Hg2+ ions with a Stern–Volmer constant of 1.3 × 105 M−1. It was 
hypothesized that a stable nonfluorescent complex was formed between C QDs and 
Hg2+ ions, which led to the static quenching. Sensitivity in the order of nanomolars was 
obtained by using N-doped C QDs (Barman & Sadhukhan, 2012). 
Apart from Hg2+, the detection of Cu2+, Pb2+, and Ag+ has also been success￾fully reported (Salinas-Castillo et al., 2013; Wee et al., 2013; Qian et al., 2014). For 
instance, Liu et al. (2012) modified the C QDs with lysine, and bovine serum albu￾min was used for the selective detection of Cu2+ in tap water. The coordination reac￾tion of Cu2+ with the carboxylic and amine group led to the sensing of Cu2+ ions. 
7.3.2 bIosensIng 
C QDs have been successfully explored as fluorescent labels owing to their biocom￾patibility and low toxicity (Cao et al., 2007; Bhunia et al., 2013). Sun et al. (2006) 
presented the first report for in vitro and in vivo bioimaging (Yang et al., 2009a). 
They recorded the optical images of E. Coli ATCC 25922 labeled with PEGylated 
C QD at various excitation wavelengths. In another work by Yang et al. (2009a), an 
aqueous solution of PEGylated C QDs was intravenously injected into mice and the 
FL images were obtained at different excitation wavelengths. Adequate image con￾trast was obtained in both red and green emissions as shown in Figure 7.5. Similar 
results were obtained by Tao et al. (2012) when FL imaging was carried out at differ￾ent excitation wavelengths from 455 to 704 nm. Li et al. (2011) explored the method Carbon Quantum Dots 153 
FIGURE 7.5 Intravenous injection: (a) bright field, (b, d) as-detected fluorescence (excita￾tion/emission wavelengths indicated), and (c, e) color-coded images, as reported by Yang 
et al. (2009a; C QD optical imaging in vivo). 
of FL quenching for the detection of nucleic acids. A high level of selectivity was 
obtained, such that even a single-base mismatch could be identified. Additionally, 
C QDs have also shown positive results as fluorescent probes for detecting small 
bioanalytes like antibacterial drugs. 
Niu & Gao (2014) prepared N-C QDs via a one-step pyrolysis method using glu￾tamic acid as the precursor. The prepared N-C QDs were utilized for the detection of 
amoxicillin, a drug commonly used for treating bacterial infections. It was observed 
that the amoxicillin molecules were able to isolate the N-C QDs from each other, 
which helped in reducing the frequency of nonradiative transitions, thereby leading 
to an increase in the FL intensity. The label-free detection of dopamine was demon￾strated by Qu et al. (2013), who used dopamine as the carbon precursor. The FL of 
the quenched Fe3+-CQD complex was effectively recovered by dopamine. The incre￾ment in FL was directly proportional to the increment in dopamine concentration up 
to a certain molar concentration with a detection limit of 68 nM. 
7.3.3 bIoImagIng 
The optical properties of C QDs make them extremely desirable for biological sys￾tems, both in vitro and in vivo. Generally, the C core of C QDs is nontoxic, and any 
cytotoxicity, if present, is due to the surface passivation agents (Lim et al., 2015). 
To facilitate in vivo imaging, surface passivation agents having low cytotoxicity 
can be utilized at high concentrations. For instance, no toxic effects were traced in 
mice for up to 28 days when 8–40 mg.kg−1 of PEG-passivated C QDs were intrave￾nously injected. The mice subjected to various doses of C QDs and the NaCl control 
exhibited similar levels of physiological indicators, hence confirming the nontoxic 
effect of C QDs at various exposure levels and times. Although the harvested organs 154 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
showed no abnormalities, the amount of C QDs obtained in the liver and spleen was 
higher than in other organs (Yang et al., 2009b). Additionally, the cells were treated 
with various amounts of C QD for assessing cell viability. For C QD concentrations 
up to 18 mg.mL−1, an average cell viability of greater than 95% was obtained, which 
conclusively indicates that C QD are more biocompatible than other semiconductor 
QDs (Baker & Baker, 2010; Bourlinos et al., 2008). 
The study of Hsu et al. (2013) revealed that C QDs are commonly localized in 
the cytoplasm and cell membrane. C QDs bounded in an amphiphilic biocompatible 
polymer were injected in a Chinese hamster and were observed to settle in the cytosol 
after passing through the ovary cell membrane (Fowley et al., 2012). C QDs coated 
with b-PEI by Hu et al. (2014) were observed to have distributed uniformly through 
the cytoplasm. These studies suggest that the localization of C QD is strongly depen￾dent on the utilized surface passivation agent used along with its mode. 
7.3.4 phoTovolTaIcs 
Mirtchev et al. (2012) used the dip-coating method to sensitize the TiO2-coated sub￾strate with C QDs prepared from γ -butyrolactone for 48 h. A sandwich-structured 
quantum dot sensitized solar cell (QDSSC) was prepared with Pt CE and iodine 
electrolyte, yielding an efficiency of 0.13% with a Voc of 0.38 V and Jsc of 0.53 mA/ 
cm2. Since iodine could be a potential corrosive agent to QDs, polysulfide electrolyte 
might serve for better PV characteristics. 
Lim et al. (2018) used C QD prepared from citric acid and ethylenediamine for 
depositing on polyethylenimineethoxylated-coated indium doped tin oxide (ITO) 
glass followed by spin-coating PTB7:PC71BM solution and sequential thermal depo￾sition of MoO3 and Ag. The organic photovoltaic (OPV) device gave a Voc of 0.76 V, a 
Jsc of 16.7 mA/cm2, and a η of 8.34% (Figure 7.6). The addition of C QDs also helped 
in increasing the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of the device from 46.8% to 
FIGURE 7.6 (a) The current density-voltage (J-V) characteristics of devices; (b) EQE spec￾tra of devices. 
Source: Lim et al. (2018) Carbon Quantum Dots 155 
60.9%. Chava et al. (2017) prepared green luminescent C QDs via a hydrothermal 
approach and used them for sensitizing ZnO photoelectrodes. A  maximum η of 
1.18% was achieved with iodine-based electrolyte and a sensitization time of 15 min. 
The study of G QDs as part of an ionic liquid (IL) and iodide-based electrolyte 
was reported by Porfarzollah et al. (2020). The use of only IL or G QDs as electrolyte 
for conventional DSSC resulted in Jsc of 16–17 mA/cm2; however, the combination of 
G QDs and IL rose the Jsc to 19.57 mA/cm2, with a η of 4.57%. 
Zou et al. (2018) reported the study of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) having C QDs 
embedded within the perovskite layer. The optimized addition of 0.1% C QDs led to 
an increment of Jsc to 16.40 mA/cm2. The device without C QDs yielded an efficiency 
of 4.4% while that with C QDs resulted in 7.62%. 
7.3.5 phoTocaTalysIs 
As the name suggests, photocatalysis involves the acceleration of electrons generated 
from photons in the presence of a catalyst. It is used in disintegrating many envi￾ronmental pollutants, such as the conversion of CO2 into small molecular fuels by 
utilizing solar energy. Li et al. (2013) reported that the selective oxidation of alcohols 
to benzaldehydes with 100% selectivity and good conversion efficiency (92%) was 
achieved by small-sized C QDs (< 5 nm). The QDs play the role of an effective near 
infra-red (NIR) light-driven photocatalyst, owing to their NIR light-driven electron 
transfer property and superior catalytic activity for H2O2 decomposition. Similarly, 
Liu et al. (2014) demonstrated that the nanocomposite of AuNP-CQD yielded a con￾version efficiency of 63.8% with a selectivity of 99.9% for the oxidation of cyclohex￾ane to cyclohexanone under the influence of H2O2 as an oxidant under visible light. 
The photocatalytic activities of the C QDs can be controlled by doping the QDs 
and by tailoring the surface passivation agents (Ma et al., 2012; Hu et al., 2013). 
Alternatively, the C QDs of a size of 5–10 nm were used as an acid catalyst in order 
to catalyze a number of organic transformations under visible light in aqueous media, 
owing to their light-induced photon properties in the solution phase (Li et al., 2014). 
7.4 CONCLUSION 
The field of C QDs has only started, and there would be many surprises on the way. The 
excellent absorption and FL properties of C QDs have already ensured their application 
in many diverse areas of science and technology. Among the various synthesis routes, 
the chemical route is simpler and yields nearly monodispersed QDs. Since these QDs 
do not contain any carcinogenic or toxic elements, C QDs are among the best choices 
for applications in living beings for detection. Apart from the mentioned applications, 
many more shall appear in the near future. The field being relatively nascent, it is open 
for significant exploration and needs more focused research for possible applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The financial assistance as Incentive to Senior Faculties under the Institute of 
Eminence Scheme (Dev. Scheme No. 6031) from Banaras Hindu University is 156 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
gratefully acknowledged by the author B.B. The author K.S. is thankful to UGC, 
India for providing the UGC-DS Kothari Postdoc Fellowship (No. F. 4–2/2006 
(BSR)/CH/20–21/0247). 
REFERENCES 
Baker, S. N., & Baker, G. A. (2010). Luminescent carbon nanodots: emergent nanolights, 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 49, 6726–6744. 
Barman, S., & Sadhukhan, M. (2012). Facile bulk production of highly blue fluorescent gra￾phitic carbon nitride quantum dots and their application as highly selective and sensi￾tive sensors for the detection of mercuric and iodide ions in aqueous media, Journal of 
Materials Chemistry, 22, 21832–21837. 
Bhunia, S. K., Saha, A., Maity, A. R., Ray, S. C., & Jana, N. R. (2013). Carbon nanoparticle￾based fluorescent bioimaging probes, Scientific Reports, 3, 1–7. 
Bourlinos, A. B., Stassinopoulos, A., Anglos, D., Zboril, R., Georgakilas, V., & Giannelis, E. 
P. (2008). Photoluminescent carbogenic dots, Chemistry of Materials, 20(14), 4539–4541. 
Briscoe, J., Marinovic, A., Sevilla, M., Dunn, S.,  & Titirici, M. (2015). Biomass-derived 
carbon quantum dot sensitizers for solid-state nanostructured solar cells, Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition, 54(15), 4463–4468. 
Cao, L., Shiral Fernando, K. A., Liang, W., Seilkop, A., Monica Veca, L., Sun, Y. P.,  & 
Bunker, C. E. (2019). Carbon dots for energy conversion applications, Journal of Applied 
Physics, 125(22), 220903. 
Cao, L., Wang, X., Meziani, M. J., Lu, F., Wang, H., Luo, P. G., Lin, Y., Harruff, B. A., Veca, 
L. M., Murray, D., & Xie, S. Y. (2007). Carbon dots for multiphoton bioimaging, Journal 
of the American Chemical Society, 129(37), 11318–11319. 
Chamarro, M., Gourdon, C., Lavallard, P., Lublinskaya, O.,  & Ekimov, A. I. (1996). 
Enhancement of electron-hole exchange interaction in CdSe nanocrystals: A  quantum 
confinement effect, Physical Review B, 53(3), 1336. 
Chava, R. K., Im, Y., & Kang, M. (2017). Nitrogen doped carbon quantum dots as a green 
luminescent sensitizer to functionalize ZnO nanoparticles for enhanced photovoltaic con￾version devices, Materials Research Bulletin, 94, 399–407. 
Choi, Y., Thongsai, N., Chae, A., Jo, S., Kang, E. B., Paoprasert, P., Park, S. Y., & In, I. 
(2017). Microwave-assisted synthesis of luminescent and biocompatible lysine-based car￾bon quantum dots, Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 47, 329–335. 
Dager, A., Uchida, T., Maekawa, T., & Tachibana, M. (2019). Synthesis and characterization 
of mono-disperse carbon quantum dots from fennel seeds: photoluminescence analysis 
using machine learning, Scientific Reports, 9(1), 1–12. 
De, B., & Karak, N. (2013). A green and facile approach for the synthesis of water soluble 
fluorescent carbon dots from banana juice, RSC Advances, 3(22), 8286–8290. 
Fowley, C., McCaughan, B., Devlin, A., Yildiz, I., Raymo, F. M.,  & Callan, J. F. (2012). 
Highly luminescent biocompatible carbon quantum dots by encapsulation with an amphi￾philic polymer, Chemical Communications, 48(75), 9361–9363. 
Ghaffarkhah, A., Hosseini, E., Kamkar, M., Sehat, A. A., Dordanihaghighi, S., Allahbakhsh, 
A., van der Kuur, C., & Arjmand, M. (2022). Synthesis, applications, and prospects of 
graphene quantum dots: a comprehensive review, Small, 18(2), 2102683. 
Gonçalves, H. M., Duarte, A. J., & da Silva, J. C. E. (2010). Optical fiber sensor for Hg (II) 
based on carbon dots, Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 26(4), 1302–1306. 
Guo, X., Zhang, H., Sun, H., Tade, M. O., & Wang, S. (2017). Green synthesis of carbon quan￾tum dots for sensitized solar cells, ChemPhotoChem, 1(4), 116–119. 
Guo, Y., Wang, Z., Shao, H., & Jiang, X. (2013). Hydrothermal synthesis of highly fluorescent 
carbon nanoparticles from sodium citrate and their use for the detection of mercury ions, 
Carbon, 52, 583. Carbon Quantum Dots 157 
Hsu, P. C., Chen, P. C., Ou, C. M., Chang, H. Y., & Chang, H. T. (2013). Extremely high 
inhibition activity of photoluminescent carbon nanodots toward cancer cells, Journal of 
Materials Chemistry B, 1(13), 1774–1781. 
Hu, L., Sun, Y., Li, S., Wang, X., Hu, K., Wang, L., Liang, X. J., & Wu, Y. (2014). Multifunctional 
carbon dots with high quantum yield for imaging and gene delivery, Carbon, 67, 508–513. 
Hu, S., Tian, R., Dong, Y., Yang, J., Liu, J., & Chang, Q. (2013). Modulation and effects of sur￾face groups on photoluminescence and photocatalytic activity of carbon dots, Nanoscale, 
5(23), 11665–11671. 
Huang, H., Lv, J. J., Zhou, D. L., Bao, N., Xu, Y., Wang, A. J., & Feng, J. J. (2013). One-pot 
green synthesis of nitrogen-doped carbon nanoparticles as fluorescent probes for mercury 
ions, RSC Advances, 3(44), 21691–21696. 
Kumar, V., Toffoli, G., & Rizzolio, F. (2013). Fluorescent carbon nanoparticles in medicine 
for cancer therapy, ACS Medicinal Chemistry Letters, 4(11), 1012–1013. 
Li, H., He, X., Kang, Z., Huang, H., Liu, Y., Liu, J., Lian, S., Tsang, C. H. A., Yang, X., & Lee, 
S. T. (2010). Water-soluble fluorescent carbon quantum dots and photocatalyst design, 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 49(26), 4430–4434. 
Li, H., Kang, Z., Liu, Y., & Lee, S. T. (2012). Carbon nanodots: synthesis, properties and 
applications, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 22(46), 24230–24253. 
Li, H., Liu, R., Kong, W., Liu, J., Liu, Y., Zhou, L., Zhang, X., Lee, S. T., & Kang, Z. (2014). 
Carbon quantum dots with photo-generated proton property as efficient visible light con￾trolled acid catalyst, Nanoscale, 6(2), 867–873. 
Li, H., Liu, R., Lian, S., Liu, Y., Huang, H., & Kang, Z. (2013). Near-infrared light controlled 
photocatalytic activity of carbon quantum dots for highly selective oxidation reaction, 
Nanoscale, 5(8), 3289–3297. 
Li, H., Zhang, Y., Wang, L., Tian, J., & Sun, X. (2011). Nucleic acid detection using carbon 
nanoparticles as a fluorescent sensing platform, Chemical Communications, 47(3), 961–963. 
Liang, Z., Kang, M., Payne, G. F., Wang, X., & Sun, R. (2016). Probing energy and electron 
transfer mechanisms in fluorescence quenching of biomass carbon quantum dots, ACS 
Applied Materials & Interfaces, 8(27), 17478–17488. 
Lim, H., Liu, Y., Kim, H. Y., & Son, D. I. (2018). Facile synthesis and characterization of 
carbon quantum dots and photovoltaic applications, Thin Solid Films, 660, 672–677. 
Lim, S. Y., Shen, W., & Gao, Z. (2015). Carbon quantum dots and their applications, Chemical 
Society Reviews, 44(1), 362–381. 
Liu, J. M., Lin, L. P., Wang, X. X., Lin, S. Q., Cai, W. L., Zhang, L. H., & Zheng, Z. Y. (2012). 
Highly selective and sensitive detection of Cu2+ with lysine enhancing bovine serum albu￾min modified-carbon dots fluorescent probe, Analyst, 137(11), 2637–2642. 
Liu, L., Yu, X., Yi, Z., Chi, F., Wang, H., Yuan, Y., Li, D., Xu, K.,  & Zhang, X. (2019). 
High efficiency solar cells tailored using biomass-converted graded carbon quantum dots, 
Nanoscale, 11(32), 15083–15090. 
Liu, R., Huang, H., Li, H., Liu, Y., Zhong, J., Li, Y., Zhang, S., & Kang, Z. (2014). Metal 
nanoparticle/carbon quantum dot composite as a photocatalyst for high-efficiency cyclo￾hexane oxidation, ACS Catalysis, 4(1), 328–336. 
Luo, P. G., Sahu, S., Yang, S. T., Sonkar, S. K., Wang, J., Wang, H., LeCroy, G. E., Cao, L., & 
Sun, Y. P. (2013). Carbon “quantum” dots for optical bioimaging, Journal of Materials 
Chemistry B, 1(16), 2116–2127. 
Ma, Z., Ming, H., Huang, H., Liu, Y., & Kang, Z. (2012). One-step ultrasonic synthesis of 
fluorescent N-doped carbon dots from glucose and their visible-light sensitive photocata￾lytic ability, New Journal of Chemistry, 36(4), 861–864. 
Macairan, J. R., Jaunky, D. B., Piekny, A., & Naccache, R. (2019). Intracellular ratiometric 
temperature sensing using fluorescent carbon dots, Nanoscale Advances, 1(1), 105–113. 
Mirtchev, P., Henderson, E. J., Soheilnia, N., Yip, C. M.,  & Ozin, G. A. (2012). Solution 
phase synthesis of carbon quantum dots as sensitizers for nanocrystalline TiO2 solar cells, 
Journal of Materials Chemistry, 22(4), 1265–1269. 158 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Niu, J., & Gao, H. (2014). Synthesis and drug detection performance of nitrogen-doped car￾bon dots, Journal of Luminescence, 149, 159–162. 
Pan, D., Zhang, J., Li, Z., & Wu, M. (2010). Hydrothermal route for cutting graphene sheets 
into blue-luminescent graphene quantum dots, Advanced Materials, 22(6), 734–738. 
Pan, M., Xie, X., Liu, K., Yang, J., Hong, L.,  & Wang, S. (2020). Fluorescent carbon 
quantum dots—synthesis, functionalization and sensing application in food analysis, 
Nanomaterials, 10(5), 930. 
Porfarzollah, A., Mohammad-Rezaei, R., & Bagheri, M. (2020). Ionic liquid-functionalized 
graphene quantum dots as an efficient quasi-solid-state electrolyte for dye-sensitized solar 
cells, Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics, 31(3), 2288–2297. 
Qian, Z., Ma, J., Shan, X., Feng, H., Shao, L., & Chen, J. (2014). Highly luminescent N-doped 
carbon quantum dots as an effective multifunctional fluorescence sensing platform, 
Chemistry—A European Journal, 20(8), 2254–2263. 
Qu, K., Wang, J., Ren, J., & Qu, X. (2013). Carbon dots prepared by hydrothermal treatment 
of dopamine as an effective fluorescent sensing platform for the label-free detection of 
iron (III) ions and dopamine, Chemistry—A European Journal, 19(22), 7243–7249. 
Qu, S., Wang, X., Lu, Q., Liu, X.,  & Wang, L. (2012). A  biocompatible fluorescent ink 
based on water-soluble luminescent carbon nanodots, Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition, 51(49), 12215–12218. 
Raji, K., Ramanan, V., & Ramamurthy, P. (2019). Facile and green synthesis of highly fluo￾rescent nitrogen-doped carbon dots from jackfruit seeds and its applications towards the 
fluorimetric detection of Au3+ ions in aqueous medium and in in vitro multicolor cell 
imaging, New Journal of Chemistry, 43(29), 11710–11719. 
Salinas-Castillo, A., Ariza-Avidad, M., Pritz, C., Camprubí-Robles, M., Fernández, B., 
Ruedas-Rama, M. J., Megia-Fernández, A., Lapresta-Fernández, A., Santoyo-Gonzalez, 
F., Schrott-Fischer, A., & Capitan-Vallvey, L. F. (2013). Carbon dots for copper detec￾tion with down and upconversion fluorescent properties as excitation sources, Chemical 
Communications, 49(11), 1103–1105. 
Shabaev, A. L., Efros, A. L., & Nozik, A. J. (2006). Multiexciton generation by a single pho￾ton in nanocrystals, Nano letters, 6(12), 2856–2863. 
Sharma, V., Singh, S. K., & Mobin, S. M. (2019). Bioinspired carbon dots: from rose petals to 
tunable emissive nanodots, Nanoscale Advances, 1(4), 1290–1296. 
Singh, R., Kashayap, S., Singh, V., Kayastha, A. M., Mishra, H., Saxena, P. S., Srivastava, 
A., & Singh, R. K. (2018). QPRTase modified N-doped carbon quantum dots: a fluorescent 
bioprobe for selective detection of neurotoxin quinolinic acid in human serum, Biosensors 
and Bioelectronics, 101, 103–109. 
Sun, Y. P., Zhou, B., Lin, Y., Wang, W., Fernando, K. S., Pathak, P., Meziani, M. J., Harruff, B. 
A., Wang, X., Wang, H., & Luo, P. G. (2006). Quantum-sized carbon dots for bright and col￾orful photoluminescence, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 128(24), 7756–7757. 
Surana, K., Mehra, R. M., Soni, S. S., & Bhattacharya, B. (2022). Real-time photovoltaic 
parameters assessment of carbon quantum dots showing strong blue emission, RSC 
Advances, 12(3), 1352–1360. 
Surana, K., Singh, P. K., Rhee, H. W., & Bhattacharya, B. (2014). Synthesis, characterization 
and application of CdSe quantum dots, Journal of Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 
20(6), 4188–4193. 
Tan, L., Huang, G., Liu, T., Fu, C., Zhou, Y., Zhu, Z., & Meng, X. (2016). Synthesis of highly 
bright oil-soluble carbon quantum dots by hot-injection method with N and B Co-Doping, 
Journal of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, 16(3), 2652–2657. 
Tao, H., Yang, K., Ma, Z., Wan, J., Zhang, Y., Kang, Z., & Liu, Z. (2012). In vivo NIR fluores￾cence imaging, biodistribution, and toxicology of photoluminescent carbon dots produced 
from carbon nanotubes and graphite, Small, 8(2), 281–290. Carbon Quantum Dots 159 
Wang, H., Sun, P., Cong, S., Wu, J., Gao, L., Wang, Y., Dai, X., Yi, Q., & Zou, G. (2016). 
Nitrogen-doped carbon dots for “green” quantum dot solar cells, Nanoscale Research 
Letters, 11(1), 1–6. 
Wee, S. S., Ng, Y. H., & Ng, S. M. (2013). Synthesis of fluorescent carbon dots via simple acid 
hydrolysis of bovine serum albumin and its potential as sensitive sensing probe for lead 
(II) ions, Talanta, 116, 71–76. 
Xu, X., Ray, R., Gu, Y., Ploehn, H. J., Gearheart, L., Raker, K., & Scrivens, W. A. (2004). 
Electrophoretic analysis and purification of fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotube 
fragments, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 126(40), 12736–12737. 
Yan, F., Zou, Y., Wang, M., Mu, X., Yang, N., & Chen, L. (2014). Highly photoluminescent car￾bon dots-based fluorescent chemosensors for sensitive and selective detection of mercury ions 
and application of imaging in living cells, Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 192, 488–495. 
Yang, J., Tang, Q., Meng, Q., Zhang, Z., Li, J., He, B., & Yang, P. (2017). Photoelectric conver￾sion beyond sunny days: all-weather carbon quantum dot solar cells, Journal of Materials 
Chemistry A, 5(5), 2143–2150. 
Yang, S. T., Cao, L., Luo, P. G., Lu, F., Wang, X., Wang, H., Meziani, M. J., Liu, Y., Qi, G., & 
Sun, Y. P. (2009a). Carbon dots for optical imaging in vivo, Journal of the American 
Chemical Society, 131(32), 11308–11309. 
Yang, S. T., Wang, X., Wang, H., Lu, F., Luo, P. G., Cao, L., Meziani, M. J., Liu, J. H., Liu, 
Y., Chen, M., & Huang, Y. (2009b). Carbon dots as nontoxic and high-performance fluo￾rescence imaging agents, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 113(42), 18110–18114. 
Zhang, B., Liu, C. Y., & Liu, Y. (2010). A novel one-step approach to synthesize fluorescent 
carbon nanoparticles, European Journal of Inorganic Chemistry, 2010(28), 4411–4414. 
Zhao, Y., Duan, J., He, B., Jiao, Z.,  & Tang, Q. (2018). Improved charge extraction with 
N-doped carbon quantum dots in dye-sensitized solar cells, Electrochimica Acta, 282, 
255–262. 
Zhu, H., Wang, X., Li, Y., Wang, Z., Yang, F., & Yang, X. (2009). Microwave synthesis of 
fluorescent carbon nanoparticles with electrochemiluminescence properties, Chemical 
Communications, 34, 5118–5120. 
Zou, H., Guo, D., He, B., Yu, J., & Fan, K. (2018). Enhanced photocurrent density of HTM-free 
perovskite solar cells by carbon quantum dots, Applied Surface Science, 430, 625–631. 160 DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-8 
8
8 Mesoporous Silica-Based 
Materials for Energy 

Storage Applications
 
Jianren Wang, Neus Vilà and Alain Walcarius 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
Nanotechnology has been booming since the middle of the last century. The resulting 
nanomaterials/nanostructures (1–100 nm in one or more dimensions) with inherent 
functionalities make them competitive in various fields owing to their unique physi￾cochemical features (Kankala et al., 2020; Li et al., 2012). Among nanomaterials, 
the ordered mesoporous silica-based ones have gained strong research interest due 
to their easily controlled topology, large surface area, and organized porous archi￾tectures, as well as their rather low cost (Yan & Zhao, 2007). The first mesoporous 
silica sieve, labeled Mobil Composition of Matter No. 41 (MCM-41), was reported 
in 1992 by Kresge and his co-workers in Mobil Corporation (Kresge et al., 1992). 
This pioneering work opens the door for the controlled synthesis of mesoporous 
silica materials by the micelle-templating method based on sol-gel chemistry. At 
first, cationic surfactants are used as structure-directing agents, leading to the M41­
series made of MCM-41 (two-dimensional [2D] hexagonal, p6mm), MCM-48 (3D 
cubic, Ia3d) and MCM-50 (lamellar, p2; Beck et al., 1992). Then, meso-structured 
silica materials have sprung up, and its family embraces many new members, such 
as the anionic surfactant–templated mesoporous silica series, the Santa Barbara 
Amorphous series, the Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology series, and 
Korean Institute of Science and Technology series, among others (Han & Che, 2013; 
Han & Ying, 2004; Hussain et al., 2014; Lee et al., 2009). 
Several classical procedures have been developed for the preparation of nano￾structured silica, including Stöber (Teng et al., 2013), biphase stratification (Shen 
et al., 2014), or evaporation-induced aggregating assembly (Wei et al., 2011) meth￾ods for getting mesoporous silica particles and evaporation-induced self-assembly 
(Brinker et  al., 2004), electrochemically assisted self-assembly (Walcarius et  al., 
2007; Walcarius, 2021), or Stöber growth (Teng et  al., 2012) methods for meso￾porous silica thin films. A key point in getting good-quality ordered mesoporous 
silica materials is the interplay between the spatial arrangement of the soft template 
and its interactions with the silica source. During their preparation (illustrated in 
Figure 8.1), the micelles formed by surfactants at their critical micelle concentration 
(CMC) play an important role in obtaining the long-range ordered structure (Wan & 
Zhao, 2007). Many of them have been verified to cooperatively self-assemble with Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 161 
the silica network precursors, such as cationic-type (cetyltrimethylammonium chlo￾ride or cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, CTAB), anionic-type (phosphoric acid, 
N-myristoyl-l-alanine, sodium dodecyl sulfate, sulfonic acid, and alkyl carboxylic 
acids), and nonionic-type (block copolymers based on polyethylene oxide [PEO] and 
polypropylene oxide [PPO], and Pluronic F123, as well as F127 and Brij 30) (Kankala 
et al., 2020). Another important parameter affecting the long-range mesoscopic peri￾odic structure is the molar ratio between the silica precursors (usually tetraalkoxysi￾lanes or sodium metasilicate) and the surfactant in the starting sol so that the silica 
frameworks can form around liquid crystal mesophases (Wan & Zhao, 2007). They 
have found applications in various fields (Ciriminna et al., 2013), including electro￾chemistry (Walcarius, 2013). If focusing on the particular example of drug delivery, 
for instance, a variety of mesostructured silica architectures with different pore sizes 
(2–30 nm; Butler et al., 2016; Trewyn et al., 2007; Vallet-Regi et al., 2001), structure 
(hexagonal, cubic, concentric, radial; Chen et al., 2013; Knežević & Lin, 2013; Zhu 
et al., 2014; Zahiri et al., 2020), morphology (core-shell, yolk-shell, sphere, hollow; 
Dai et al., 2015; Fang et al., 2014; Gao et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2011), or surface fea￾tures (roughness, charge, hydrophilic; Angiolini et al., 2018; Luo et al., 2013; Zhang 
et al., 2015), have been successfully prepared in recent years. From the electrochemi￾cal point of view, the most attractive configuration relies on mesoporous silica thin 
films that can be successfully prepared on solid electrode supports thanks to the 
versatility of the sol-gel process (Feng et al., 2013; Walcarius, 2013, 2015). Of par￾ticular interest are the ordered mesoporous silica films enabling fast transport rates 
and easy access to a high number of active sites (Etienne et al., 2007). Among them, 
nanostructured coatings exhibiting vertically aligned nanochannels are expected to 
FIGURE 8.1 Schematic pathway for preparing surfactant-templated mesoporous silicas, 
illustrating a formation mechanism based on a preformed liquid crystal (LC) mesophase 
(route A) or a cooperative process (route B). 
Source: Reproduced from Walcarius (2013). 162 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
 
 
be very promising (Urbanova & Walcarius, 2014). Even if the vertical growth of sol￾gel-derived mesoporous silica thin films is not favored thermodynamically (Brinker 
et al., 1999), few methods are nowadays available to generate highly ordered silica 
films with meso-channels perpendicular to a solid support (e.g., an electrode sur￾face), that is, the electrochemically assisted self-assembly (Goux et al., 2009), the 
Stöber solution growth process (Teng et al., 2012), or other approaches (Kao et al., 
2015). Mesoporous silica films with worm-like channels are also of interest for fast 
electrocatalytic transformations (Ahoulou et al., 2020). 
The functionalization/hybridization of such mesoporous frameworks to tailor their 
inherent properties have also gained great research interest (Lin et al., 2014; Hoffmann 
et al., 2006; Walcarius et al., 2005), notably in order to fulfill the requirements from 
diverse applications involving energy harvesting/storage, separation, drug delivery, 
catalysis, and the like. Their tailorable surficial functional groups are one of the main 
reasons that make them easy to introduce the target species into the framework via 
either physical or chemical interactions like hydrophilic/hydrophobic interaction 
(Butler et al., 2016; Trewyn et al., 2007), covalent bonding (Vilà et al., 2014; Vilà et al., 
2016), van der Waals interactions (Yoo & Woo, 2018), and electrostatic interaction 
(Rakibuddin & Kim, 2020). Up to now, different types of advanced silica-based hybrid 
materials have been synthesized, which can be classified into the following categories: 
1.	 Functional organic molecules attached to silica frameworks. Two general 
methods, namely, covalent conjugation and electrostatic/hydrogen interac￾tions, can be used to achieve such functionalization. For the covalent conju￾gation method, the organic molecules can be introduced onto a silica surface 
by either the condensation of organosilanes with silica source in the starting 
sol or post-synthesis grafting of organosilanes of other derivatization proce￾dures like click chemistry (Vilà et al., 2014; (Brühwiler, 2010; Schlossbauer 
et al., 2008; Etienne et al., 2009). The abundant silanol groups on the silica 
surface also make it possible to immobilize target molecules through elec￾trostatic/hydrogen interactions (Zhou et al., 2015) or via entrapment of supra￾molecular species (Ahoulou et al., 2019). In recent years, different types of 
electroactive molecules have been successfully anchored on the surface of 
mesoporous silica films, such as metallocene derivatives (Wang et al., 2020), 
iron-triazole complexes (Ahoulou et al., 2019) or tetrazine (Vilà et al., 2015), 
for instance, to implement the applications in different fields. 
2.	 Polymer–silica composites. In addition to small molecules, the long-chain 
polymers can also couple with mesoporous silica to form organic–inor￾ganic hybrids, either by means of in situ polymerization of preloaded 
monomers inside silica channels (Peng et al., 2006), or the space-confined 
growth of polymer via electropolymerization inside silica channels (Ullah 
et al., 2021), or even by coating polymer outside the silica architecture to 
form a core-shell composite structure (Paris et  al., 2015). As a result, a 
wide variety of advanced composites have been synthesized by properly 
combining mesoporous silica and various polymers with different physico￾chemical properties, including polyaniline (Ullah et al., 2021), poly(acrylic 
acid) (Chen et  al., 2013), polydopamine (Zheng et  al., 2016), or poly(2­
vinylpyridine) (Niedermayer et al., 2015), among others. Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 163 
 3.	 Inorganic material–silica composites. Inorganic materials, either in a pure 
phase or in composite forms, always show many enhanced activities toward 
specific applications when their size goes down to the nanoscale (Gleiter, 
2000). However, the non-silica periodically ordered inorganic materials, 
such as mesoporous metal (oxides), carbon, C3N4, and others, are diffi￾cult to prepare via similar protocols as that for the mesoporous silica (i.e., 
using soft templates; Walcarius, 2013). Utilizing mesoporous silica as hard 
templates to guide the growth of inorganic materials could be a versatile 
strategy to extend the scope of nanostructured porous materials. Some suc￾cessful examples of ordered mesoporous inorganic materials (or the com￾posites with silica), including chromium oxide, cobalt oxide, manganese 
oxide, carbon, platinum, and others, have been prepared by the so-called 
nanocasting method with silica template (Walcarius, 2013; Kong et  al., 
2016). Besides, the rich surface chemistry of silica also permits its durable 
attachment to different types of inorganic materials, giving rise to other 
hybrid composites (Gushikem & Rosatto, 2001). 
Energy issues are becoming one of the themes in this era due to the rapid progress 
of society and the explosive consumption of non-renewable energy sources, such as 
oil and coal. To avoid the potential upcoming energy crisis, people started to turn 
their attention to utilizing clean energy resources, like wind energy, solar energy, and 
hydropower, among others, and develop energy storage devices to store such renew￾able but intermittent/geographically uneven energy sources (Lin et al., 2018; Simon 
et  al., 2014). The intriguing properties of mesoporous silica materials mentioned 
earlier enable them to become one of the key components for the energy harvesting/ 
storage devices for various reasons, such as (1) the nanoscale ordered structure could 
enhance their activities in terms of the specific energy-related applications since 
the existence of so-called nano-effect (Wan et al., 2015); (2) their tailorable surface 
properties and large surface area are likely to immobilize various guest species, 
which could largely extend the versatility of the final devices; (3) their homoge￾neous and perfectly ordered structure could also build an ideal platform to further 
reveal the fundamentals of the energy harvesting/storage process and let people bet￾ter understand the structure–function relationship. As a result, silica-based materials 
for energy-related applications are gradually becoming a hot research topic. The 
percentage of papers in energy-related fields grew from 9% to 15% over the past 
decades in the category of silica-related research, according to the Web of Science. 
The tremendous advancements in mesoporous silica materials have largely acceler￾ated the development of energy-related devices and will have a significant impact on 
them from a long-term perspective. This chapter gives a brief introduction of silica￾based materials in the field of electrochemical energy storage. 
8.2 LITHIUM-ION BATTERIES 
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have already dominated the energy storage market in 
a wide range of portable electronics, electric vehicles, and renewable energy storage 
systems (Entwistle et al., 2020). Achieving higher energy density is one of the most 
important goals for the further development of LIBs. However, the most commonly 164 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
used graphite anodes in the present market show relatively low theoretical gravi￾metric and volumetric capacities of about 372 mA hg−1 and approximately 840 mA 
hcm−3, respectively (Wang et al., 2018). Therefore, the discovery and optimization 
of advanced anode materials are critical aspects to achieve higher energy densities 
of LIBs. Silica has been considered to be a promising anode material because of its 
high theoretical capacity of 1965 mA hg−1, low discharge potential (<0.5 V vs. Li+/ 
Li), and abundance in the earth’s crust (major constituent of sand; Yan et al., 2013). 
But some severe problems finally restrict the practical application of silica anode 
in the market. To be specific, the real capacity of silica is always far away from the 
theoretical value and fades very fast during the long-term cycling test due to its poor 
conductivity (insulating), slow lithium diffusion rate inside the silica bulk phase, and 
pulverization caused by the huge volume expansion (~200%) during the lithiation 
process. Properly designing nanostructures of silica anodes to migrate the active 
sites from bulk to surface/near-surface region and buffer the strain during lithiation– 
delithiation has proven to be effective in alleviating the existent problems of silica, 
which will improve their energy storage behaviors. 
The construction of silica hollow structures with nano-level skeletons could be 
an effective approach to improve the capacity and to relieve the volume change dur￾ing the charge-discharge processes. For example, Yan et al. (2013) prepared a kind 
of hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes by utilizing Co3[Co(CN)6]2 nanoparticles as the 
hard template, and the schematic illustration of the preparation process is shown in 
Figure 8.2A. After etching the templates using acid, the uniform silica nanocubes 
with a shell thickness of 20 nm and a cavity diameter of 100 nm can be prepared, 
as clearly shown in the corresponding transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and 
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Figure 8.2B).The intercalation of lith￾ium ions into the silica nanocubes occurs at a relatively low potential (below 0.5V vs. 
Li+/Li), and their initial charge capacity of the nano-level silica shell can reach 1457 
mA h g−1 (74% of theoretical capacity), which is much higher than that of graph￾ite anode (372 mA h g−1; Figure 8.2C&D). Despite the thickness of the silica shell 
expanding to 40 nm after the discharge process, the hollow structure can still toler￾ate the volume change and maintain its original shape (Figure 8.2E). As a result, the 
capacity can maintain 63% after 30 consecutive cycles. Similarly, silica nanotubes 
can be prepared by using anodic aluminum oxide as the hard template (Favors et al., 
2014), as illustrated in Figure 8.2F. After etching the template, silica nanotubes with 
a diameter of 200 nm and a shell thickness of 20 nm can be obtained (Figure 8.2G). 
The silica nanotubes can also deliver a capacity of 1040 mA h g−1 at the current 
density of 50 mA g−1 and even a little bit higher capacity of 1247 mAhg−1 after 100 
cycles (Figure 8.2H). 
Properly coupling silica together with some high-conductive materials, like car￾bon or MXenes, for instance, is also one of the promising approaches to improve 
energy storage performance. In this case, the conductive components will not only 
circumvent the inherent poor electrical conductivity of silica but also act as the spacer 
to restrain the large volume variation during their charge-discharge processes. For 
instance, Mu et al. (2020) successfully embedded silica nanoparticles into the inter￾lamination of MXene layers and firmly anchored them on the surface of MXene 
through chemical bonds (Si-C bond, or Si-O bond with OH terminals of MXene). Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 165 
FIGURE 8.2 (A–E) The preparation of hollow porous SiO2nanocubes and their lithium stor￾age properties: (A) The schematic illustration of the hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes formation 
process; (B) TEM and SEM images of the hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes; (C) their cyclic 
voltammetry (CV) curves recorded between 3 and 0 V at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 and (D) 
cycling performance at a current density of 100 mAg-1; the morphology comparison between 
the charge state and discharge state of the hollow porous SiO2 nanocubes. Reproduced from 
Yan et al. (2013). (F–H) The preparation of SiO2 nanotubes and their lithium storage proper￾ties: (F) The schematic illustration of the SiO2 nanotubes formation process; (G) TEM images 
of the SiO2 nanotubes with a scale bar of 400 nm (50 nm for the inset); and (H) the rate per￾formance and the cycling performance at a current density of 50 mA h g−1of silica nanotubes. 
Reproduced from Favors et al. (2014). 
The illustration of the preparation process is given in Figure 8.3A, and the corre￾sponding high-resolution SEM and TEM images confirm the conceived MXene– 
SiO2–MXene laminated structure (Figure 8.3B&C). MXene is a new type of highly 
conductive 2D nanosheets with the highest recorded conductivity of approximately 
104 S cm−1. Therefore, the MXene nanosheets could improve the poor conductivity of 
the electrode and restrain the volume expansion of the embedded silica nanoparticles 
during the charge–discharge processes. From the CV curves of the composites at a 166 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 8.3 (A) The schematic illustration of the preparation process of silica/MXene 
composites; (B&C) the high-resolution SEM and TEM images of the composite; (D) the cor￾responding CV curves in a voltage window of 0 to about 3.0 V at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1; 
(E) the rate performance of the composites at current densities ranging from 100 mA h g−1 to 
3000 mA h g−1; (F) the cycling performance with initial 10 cycles at the current density of 100 
mA h g−1 and the following 180 cycles at the current density of 1000 mA h g−1. 
Source: Reproduced from Mu et al. (2020) 
scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1, a sharp reduction peak at about 0 V represents the lithiation 
reaction of SiO2 (Mu et al., 2020), and the oxidation peaks at about 0.15 and 1.3 V 
are the dealloying of LixSi to Si (Yan et al., 2013) and the delithiation of Li2Si2O5 to 
SiO2 (Chang et al., 2012), respectively (see Figure 8.3D). As shown in Figure 8.3E, 
the silica/MXene composite can achieve a good rate of performance with a capacity 
of 840 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.1 A g−1 and 517 mA h g−1 at a high current 
density of 3 A g−1. Moreover, this composite can remain at its 97% original capacity 
after 100 consecutive cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1 (Mu et al., 2020). 
8.3 LITHIUM–SULFUR BATTERIES 
In contrast to the capacity range of about 150–200 mA h g−1for the LIB cathodes 
(Whittingham, 2004), the high theoretical capacity of the sulfur cathode (1675 mA h g−1) 
and its low cost make lithium−sulfur (Li-S) batteries a promising energy storage system Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 167 
 
for the scenarios sensitive to volumetric and gravimetric capacity (Peng et al., 2017). 
However, the intermediate lithium polysulfides (Li2Sn, 4 ≤ n ≤ 8) between the starting 
sulfur and the final Li2S product could dissolve into the electrolyte or even across the 
separator to reach the anode, rendering a fast capacity fading and low charge efficiency 
due to the, namely, polysulfides’ “shuttle” effect (Mikhaylik & Akridge, 2004). In addi￾tion, some other problems of the sulfur cathode, including its low electronic conductiv￾ity (5 × 10–30 S cm−1 at 25 °C), serious volumetric expansion during lithiation ( ∼80%), 
and the morphology change caused by the redeposition of polysulfides from solution 
phase, seriously impede the practical application of Li-S batteries (Peng et al., 2017). 
8.3.1 sIlIca as The sulFur hosT In lI-s baTTerIes 
Instead of using sulfur alone as the cathode, constructing nanostructured hosts to 
stabilize sulfur inside is an effective way to extend the cycling performance and 
even enhance the reaction kinetics during the sulfur lithiation/delithiation processes 
(Choudhury et al., 2017; Jayaprakash et al., 2011). Carbon-based materials are the 
most studied porous hosts that can facilitate electron transport to improve sulfur con￾version (Wang et al., 2011), but the nonpolar carbon surface is not an ideal substrate 
for absorbing the dissolved polysulfides with polar properties due to weak interac￾tions (Xie et al., 2019). Silica has proven to be a good adsorbent to trap polysulfides 
via physical adsorption and (or) chemical binding with the functional groups on the 
surface of silica, that is, hydroxyl, and the rigid and highly open structure of meso￾porous silica can alleviate the volume expansion of sulfur and facilitate the lithium 
ions’ transfer during the charge–discharge processes. Following this idea, dual com￾posites prepared by engineering silica together with some conductive materials, or 
even pure mesoporous silica, have been claimed to be effective to achieve improved 
energy storage behaviors as host materials for the sulfur cathode (Wu et al., 2017). 
As illustrated in Figure  8.4A, Choi et  al. (2018) chose tetraethyl orthosilicate 
(TEOS) as a silica source and triblock copolymer surfactant as a template to prepare 
pomegranate-like silica with a large surface area and high pore volume, which is 
further used as the sulfur host to obtain the silica/sulfur composite for the cathode of 
Li-S batteries. The mesoporous nature of the as-prepared silica architecture can be 
confirmed by the corresponding TEM image (Figure 8.4B) and the hysteresis loop 
of the nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms (Figure 8.4C). The abundant meso￾pores not only permit a large surface area of 710.1 m2 g−1 but also provide enough 
space to accommodate sulfur. Through a melt infiltration method, the sulfur can be 
homogeneously loaded inside the mesoporous silica, which is proven by the corre￾sponding energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mapping results (Si and S) of the 
silica/sulfur composite, shown in Figure 8.4D. The thermogravimetric curve of the 
composite (Figure 8.4E) also reveals that the weight ratio of sulfur is as high as about 
66.3%, thanks to the ubiquitous mesopores. As shown in Figure 8.4F, the mesoporous 
silica host also gives a strong adsorption ability toward polysulfide (Li2S6), and the 
Li2S6 solution becomes almost transparent after 24 h adsorption, which makes the 
mesoporous silica an ideal host to stabilize the sulfur cathode by relieving the loss of 
soluble polysulfides during the consecutive charge–discharge processes. As a result, 
the silica/sulfur composite can deliver a high coulombic efficiency of 93.7% at the 168 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 8.4 Synthesis of pomegranate-structured silica and sulfur composite materials as 
the cathode for an Li-S battery. (A) The illustration of the composite preparation process; 
(B&C) the TEM image and the nitrogen adsorption/desorption isotherms of the obtained 
porous silica; (D) EDS mapping image of a porous silica/S composite particle, showing the 
distribution of Si and S; (E) thermogravimetric analysis curve of the porous silica/S compos￾ite; (F) polysulfide (Li2S6) adsorption ability of silica materials: digital photos of both porous 
silica particles and silica nanoparticles immersed in Li2S6 solution after 0 h (left) and after 24 
h (right); (G&H) the first charge–discharge voltage profile at the current density of 1.6 Ag−1 and 
the cycling performance of the porous silica/S composite at the current density of 0.8 A g−1. 
Source: Reproduced from Choi et al. (2018) 
current density of 1.6 A g−1 for the initial charge–discharge cycle, and a robust cycling 
performance, as its capacity can still maintain 82.9% (from 1358.6 to 1126.3 mA h 
g−1) after 100 consecutive cycles at the current density of 0.8 A g−1 (Choi et al., 2018). 
Similarly, Wu et  al. argued the crucial role of silica as the sulfur host on the 
basis of a composite material made of hierarchical-porous graphene/C/SiO2 hollow 
microspheres (G/C/SiO2) (Wu et al., 2017). In detail, the spray drying technique has 
been adopted to prill the aqueous ethanol solution containing a certain amount of 
sucrose, graphene oxide and SiO2, giving the G/C/SiO2 microspheres after pyrolysis 
at 900 ℃ , as illustrated in Figure 8.5A. The SEM/scanning transmission electron 
microscopy (STEM) images and the corresponding EDS mapping results reveal the 
highly porous structure of the sphere and the homogeneous distribution of C, O, and Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 169 
 
FIGURE 8.5 (A) The illustration of the preparation process of hierarchical-porous 
graphene/C/SiO2 hollow microspheres (G/C/SiO2) as the sulfur host for Li-S batteries; (B&C) 
the SEM and STEM images of the G/C/SiO2 and the corresponding EDS elemental distribu￾tion of C, O, and Si; (D) the polysulfide (Li2S6) adsorption measurement of different samples: 
Ⅰ: pure Li2S6, Ⅱ: Li2S6+G/C-S, Ⅲ: Li2S6+S-G/C/SiO2, Ⅳ: Li2S6+SiO2; (E) the cyclic perfor￾mance of the G/C-S and S-G/C/SiO2 at the current density of 0.8 A g−1over 400 cycles. 
Source: Reproduced from Wu et al. (2017) 
Si (Figure 8.5B&C). The silica component inside the sample plays a vital role to sta￾bilize sulfur during the long-term charge–discharge test, owing to its strong attrac￾tion toward Li2S6; this can be seen in Figure 8.5D via the very transparent color of 
vial Ⅲ (Li2S6+S-G/C/SiO2) and Ⅳ (Li2S6+SiO2) in comparison to vial Ⅰ (pure Li2S6) 
and Ⅱ (Li2S6+S-G/C, prepared by removing the silica in the starting solution) after a 
6-h adsorption test. As a result, the S-G/C/SiO2 cathode can deliver a high capacity 
retention of 79.6% (from 786.7 to 626.3 mA h g−1) after 400 cycles at the current den￾sity of 0.8 A g−1 (Figure 8.5E). This result is much higher than that of S-G/C cathode 
that gives a 19.3% capacity retention under the same condition (Figure 8.5E), which 
further confirms that silica could be an ideal host for the Li-S batteries. 
8.3.2 sIlIca as The componenT oF The separaTor In lI-s baTTerIes 
A separator is also a key component in energy storage devices, especially for Li-S 
batteries (Peng et al., 2017). In addition to its role in preventing an internal short￾circuit while maintaining the ions diffusion pathway, the separator in Li-S batteries 170 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
should also have the function to avoid the crossing of the polysulfides from the sul￾fur cathode to the lithium anode, as illustrated in Figure 8.6A (Huang et al., 2015). 
Because polysulfides in contact with the anode surface would corrode the lithium 
anode by parasitic reactions and even irreversibly deposit on the anode surface 
FIGURE 8.6 (A) Scheme to show the difference between the normal separator and func￾tionalized separator in Li-S battery. Reproduced from Huang et al. (2015). Digital photos of 
the PP and the PP-SiO2 separators before (B) and after thermal treatment (C) at 150 °C for 
2 h; (D) spreading of the electrolyte droplet and the corresponding contact angles on the PP 
and the PP-SiO2 separators; the SEM images of PP separator (E) and PP-SiO2 separator (F); 
(G) the FTIR spectra of PP separator and PP-SiO2 separator; (H) diffusion test of polysulfides 
(Li2S8) in V-shaped permeating matrix with the PP and the PP-SiO2 separator after 1 h; (I) 
the cyclic performance of the Li-S cell with the PP and the PP-SiO2 separator. Reproduced 
from Li et al. (2017). Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 171 
during the charge–discharge processes, the formation of “dead” sulfur-containing 
species would contribute to passivating the lithium anode. This is one of the most 
important reasons resulting in the fast capacity fading of the final devices. The delib￾erately designed separators/interlayers are able to trap/block the polysulfides to reach 
the anode, which could improve energy storage performance regarding coulombic 
efficiency, self-discharge rate, and cyclic stability of Li-S cells (Li et al., 2015). 
Recent years have witnessed the fast development of the separator in Li-S batteries, 
and different types of advanced membranes including polymer-modified, carbon-mod￾ified, or metal oxide–modified separators and their composites, have been prepared to 
achieve better energy storage performance (Huang et al., 2015). On the basis of experi￾mental evidence and theoretical simulation, SiO2 can serve as the active component 
of the separator to suppress the polysulfides transfer via an adsorption mechanism, 
thanks to the high binding energy between polysulfides and an oxygen atom (Zhu 
et al., 2016). Besides, doping the silica component of the separators can also adjust 
their physiochemical properties such as thermal stability, hydrophilic/hydrophobic 
balance of the interface, and so on (Li et al., 2017). For instance, a mesoporous SiO2­
decorated polypropylene (PP) separator (PP-SiO2) can be simply prepared by immers￾ing the PP separator in a hydrolyzed TEOS solution with the assistance of Tween-80 
as a template, and the digital photos are shown in Figure 8.6B. After decorating PP 
with SiO2, the composite shows much better thermal stability, proved by the attenuated 
shrinkage of the film after a thermal treatment at 150 °C for 2 h (close to the softening 
point of a PP matrix, ca.165 °C), as illustrated on Figure 8.6C. The largely improved 
thermal stability of the PP-SiO2 could enhance the endurability of Li-S batteries, espe￾cially at high operating temperatures. Besides, as shown in Figure  8.6D, the silica 
component can also make the composite more hydrophilic, as the PP-SiO2 can be fully 
wetted while there is still an electrolyte droplet on the PP substrate. The improved 
wettability and high electrolyte uptake ability of the separator could benefit interfacial 
compatibility, reduce the electrolyte filling time, and facilitate Li-ion migration, lead￾ing to an enhanced rate of performance. The microstructure of the PP and the PP-SiO2 
are analyzed with SEM, and the corresponding images are shown in Figure 8.6E and 
Figure 8.6F, respectively. In contrast to the smooth morphology of the PP separator, 
the silica particles, with a diameter ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometers, can 
be observed on the surface of PP-SiO2 sample. The cross-linked silica networks on 
the side of the PP substrate lead to new peaks located at 1100 cm−1 and 955 cm−1 in 
Fourier transform infra-red (FTIR) spectrum of the PP-SiO2 separator (Figure 8.6G), 
originated from the asymmetrical stretching of the Si-O-Si and the stretching of Si-OH 
groups. All these results demonstrate that silica has been successfully introduced on 
the PP membrane surface for the PP-SiO2 sample. The diffusion rate of polysulfides 
(Li2S8) through the PP-SiO2 separator is much slower than that through the pristine PP 
separator, as shown by the shallow color on the right part of the V-shaped permeating 
setup when choosing PP-SiO2 as the separator (Figure 8.6H). As a result, the discharge 
capacity of Li-S battery increases from 852.3 mAh g−1 to 937 mAh g−1 when the bat￾tery is assembled with the PP-SiO2 separator instead of the PP separator (Figure 8.6I). 
The PP-SiO2 separator also extends the life span of the Li-S battery, and 603.5 mAh g−1 
can be retained, which is higher than that of the cell configured with the PP separator 
(383.6 mAh g−1; Li et al., 2017). 172 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
8.4 ALKALI METAL BATTERIES 
The alkali metals are regarded as ideal metallic anode materials in battery systems 
due to the step-change theoretical-specific capacity (Li: 3,860 mA h g−1, Na: 1,166 
mA h g−1, Zn: 820mAh g−1) and low redox potential (Li: −3.040 V, Na: −2.714 V, 
Zn: −0.76 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode). However, the alkali metal anodes 
encounter great challenges in practical application scenarios due to a short life span 
and short-circuiting easily (Kang et al., 2018). One of the main reasons causing these 
problems is the formation of hundreds of microns of metal dendrites/protrusions due 
to the uneven metal electro-stripping/plating process. The surface-formed dendrites 
could possibly be peeled off from the anode into the electrolyte during the striping 
process, resulting in the loss of active materials, or continuously grow across the 
separator membrane to touch the cathode, inducing a short-circuit (Li et al., 2019). 
Recently, developing an artificial interfacial layer between the electrolyte and 
Li-metal electrode has attracted tremendous attention in lithium–metal batteries 
(LMBs). The interfacial layer can prevent side reactions, enable fast Li-ion diffusion, 
and suppress the Li dendrite growth for the efficient operation of the Li-metal anode. 
Recently, developing an artificial interfacial layer between the electrolyte and the 
Li-metal electrode has attracted tremendous attention in LMBs. The interfacial layer 
can prevent side reactions, enable fast Li-ion diffusion, and suppress the Li dendrite 
growth for the efficient operation of Li metal anode. Recently, developing an artifi￾cial interfacial layer between the electrolyte and Li metal electrode has attracted tre￾mendous attention in LMBs. The interfacial layer can prevent side reactions, enable 
fast Li-ion diffusion, and suppress the Li dendrite growth for the efficient operation 
of Li-metal anode. 
Constructing an artificial interfacial layer between the electrolyte and the 
alkali metal electrode could enable breaking this challenge, notably by prevent￾ing side reactions, ensuring fast Li-ion diffusion, and suppressing the growth of 
Li dendrite, contributing to more efficient operation of the metal anode (Chen 
et al., 2020). The mesoporous silica layer has also been identified as an active 
coating layer to suppress the growth of metal dendrites for different types of 
metal anodes, including lithium (Pathak et  al., 2019), zinc (Kang et  al., 2018), 
and sodium (Jiang et al., 2019), via regulating the flux of metal ions and/or even 
reacting with the dendrites during the charge–discharge processes. For example, 
Jiang et al. (2019) constructed a porous nano-SiO2 auxiliary layer on the surface 
of the sodium–metal disk (Na@Silica), by a simple brushing and rolling method, 
for inhibiting the dendrites growth during charge–discharge processes in sodium￾metal batteries. Instead of the free diffusion of sodium ions during the metal 
deposition process, always leading to the formation of dendrites, the insulating 
and highly porous silica layer on the sodium disk surface is likely to play the role 
of water-permeable bricks to disperse and guide the Na+ flux, finally restraining 
the growth of sodium dendrites. The illustration of the difference between the free 
growth and silica-assisted growth of sodium is shown in Figure 8.7A. The opti￾cal photo and SEM image of the bare Na disk (Figure 8.7B) manifest its smooth, 
flat, and shiny metallic surface. After coating the porous nano-SiO2 onside, the 
electrode becomes dim, and the SEM image confirms that there is a highly porous Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 173 
FIGURE 8.7 (A) Schematic illustrations of the Na stripping/plating behavior on (a) bare 
and (b) nano SiO2-coated Na electrodes; (B) top-view SEM image of bare Na electrode and 
the corresponding digital image (inset); (C) top-view SEM image of Na@SiO2 electrode and 
the corresponding digital images (insets); (D) cross-sectional SEM image of the Na@SiO2 
electrode and the corresponding EDX elemental mapping images of Si and Na (insets); (E) a 
comparison of cycling stability of Na@SiO2 composite electrodes and bare Na symmetrical 
cells at 1 mA cm−2 with as tripping/plating capacity of 5 mA h cm−2 in 1MNaPF6/diglyme 
electrolyte; (F, G) morphologies of Na electrode (F) and Na@SiO2 electrode (G) after 100 
stripping/plating cycles at a current density of 1 mA cm−2; (H) voltage profiles of the full bat￾teries with Na or Na@SiO2 as anodes and Na3V2(PO4)3 as cathode at 118 mA g−1. 
Source: Reproduced from Jiang et al. (2019). 
silica layer on the surface of Na@Silica electrode (Figure 8.7C). The correspond￾ing cross-sectional view (Figure 8.7D) also reveals the thickness of the SiO2 layer 
at about 100 μm, and the EDS elemental mapping results show the homogeneous 
distribution of the silicon and sodium in adjoining layers. Figure 8.7E depicts the 
electrochemical behaviors of the symmetric cells with two pieces of Na@SiO2 174 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
electrodes or two pieces of Na electrodes in 1 M NaPF6/diglyme electrolyte at the 
current density of 1 mA cm−2 for a stripping/plating capacity of 5 mA h cm−2. The 
results clearly show that the Na@SiO2 symmetric cell is able to deliver a stable 
and low voltage hysteresis even after 1000 consecutive cycles, indicative of the 
even and highly reversible plating/striping of sodium. On the contrary, the asym￾metric cell gives a large voltage hysteresis, and the voltage even exceeds 0.2 V 
(the maximum voltage window) after about 400 consecutive cycles. The poor 
stability of the silica-free Na cell originates from the generation of dendrites due 
to unstable plating/striping processes, which can be proved by SEM images of 
the electrodes after long-term cycling, where abundant sodium dendrites can be 
observed for the bare Na electrode (Figure 8.7F), but this is not the case for the 
Na@SiO2 electrode (Figure 8.7G). As a result, the battery constructed with Na@ 
SiO2//Na3V2(PO4)3 also gives a better cycling ability than its counterpart of Na// 
Na3V2(PO4)3, as shown in Figure 8.7H. 
Similar to sodium metal electrochemical cells, the artificial silica layer on the 
surface of a lithium metal plate scan also inhibits the growth of lithium dendrites 
during charge–discharge processes. Pathak et al. (2019) reported the coating of a 
lithium metal plate with a thin layer of graphite-silica by radio frequency (RF) sput￾tering method. Such a layer possesses attractive features playing multiple functions, 
such as a conductive skeleton to uniform the electric field, lithium storage sites to 
reduce the lithium deposition current, and a rigid clapboard to spatially restrain the 
dendrite growth. The different lithium plating behaviors on bare lithium plate and 
graphite-silica coated lithium plate are illustrated in Figure 8.8A. According to the 
atomic force microscope (AFM) results (Figure 8.8B&C), the surface of a lithium 
plate is relatively rough with an average surface root mean square (RMS) of 520.1 
nm, whereas this value decreases to 324.5 nm after coating the graphite-silica layer. 
The higher RMS value is unfavorable to the homogeneous growth of the lithium and 
always results in large protuberances on the electrode surface (Guan et al., 2018). 
Besides, such artificial layer turns the surface more hydrophilic (the contact angle 
decreases from 43° on the lithium plate to 0° on the graphite-silica-coated lithium 
plate due to the presence of polar groups on the silica surface), which may facili￾tate the electrolyte transport. More than the mechanism to prevent the growth of 
sodium dendrites, such graphite-silica layer is also active for the lithium ions storage 
(see Section 8.2), which can be confirmed by the peaks (~0.15 V) of graphite-silica￾coated electrode during CV tests in the symmetrical cell, and the two semicircles 
observed by impedance in the high-to-middle-frequencies region (Figure 8.8D&E). 
Therefore, the even lithium plating can be observed for the graphite-silica-coated 
lithium plate, whereas numerous lithium dendrites can be observed for the bare lith￾ium–metal plate (Figure 8.8F). As a result, the symmetrical cell with graphite-silica￾coated lithium as the electrode shows much stability and small voltage hysteresis 
than that of a pure lithium electrode (Figure 8.8G). Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 175 
FIGURE 8.8 (A) Schematic illustration of Li deposition on bare Li and on graphite–SiO2 
bilayer-modified Li; (B&C) AFM topography and contact angle measurement of bare Li plate 
and graphite–SiO2-coated Li plate; (D&E) CV measurements and the impedance test (with a 
10-mV amplitude AC signal and frequencies ranging from 100 kHz to 0.1 Hz) of bare Li and 
graphite SiO2-coated Li in a symmetric cell; (F) SEM images of bare Li and graphite–SiO2­
coated Li after one cycle of plating at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 for a capacity of 1 
mAh cm−2; (G) long-term cycling performance and voltage hysteresis of symmetrical cells of 
bare Li electrode or graphite–SiO2-coated Li electrode at the current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 
for the capacity of 1 mAh cm−2. 
Source: Reproduced from Pathak et al. (2019). 176 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
8.5	 PSEUDOCAPACITORS BASED ON SURFACE 
FUNCTIONALIZATION OF MESOPOROUS 
SILICA WITH REDOX MOLECULES 
Electrical conductivity has always been a fundamental element for energy storage 
electrodes, and the insulating character of silica somehow confines its utilization 
to some extent. However, in contrast to the carbon-based materials (widely used for 
energy storage), mesoporous silica-based solids still hold some irreplaceable advan￾tages, including well-organized structure, large surface area, and high flexibility for 
their surface functionalization (Wan & Zhao, 2007; Wan et al., 2007). If one can 
find an approach to overcome the lack of conductivity, it could widely broaden the 
applied ranges of silica-based materials in the field of energy storage. 
Electron-hopping, a particular electron conduction mechanism, allows electrons 
to transfer “by jumping” among adjacent and close enough redox molecules, directly 
without requiring any conductive properties of the supporting materials (Gibbons & 
Spear, 1966). The electron-hopping mechanism is also able to deliver fast redox kinet￾ics. For example, Amatore et  al. (2007) prepared two monolayer systems to study 
the electron-hopping process, and both molecules contain one terminal ferrocene 
molecule but with different lengths of hydrocarbon. The redox kinetics could reach 
about 106 s−1 for both systems, which is much faster than that of traditional faradic 
materials. This unique charge transfer feature should make possible the use of insulat￾ing materials for energy storage after functionalizing their surface with redox-active 
molecules. Recently, our group reported a ferrocene functionalized mesoporous silica 
film (Fc-MS) on an indium-tin oxide (ITO) electrode substrate (Wang et al., 2020), 
which can be manufactured by combining the Electro-Assisted Self-Assembly method 
and Copper-catalyzed Azide-Alkyne Cycloaddition click reaction, as illustrated in 
Figure 8.9A. The TEM image (Figure 8.9B) of Fc-MS reveals that such film is highly 
porous and composed of fairly ordered hexagonal mesopores, as also identified by the 
hexagonal diffraction spots of the corresponding Fast Fourier transformation (FFT) 
diffractogram (inset image). The cross-sectional view of the sample (Figure 8.9C) fur￾ther reveals the vertical channels run directly from the top to the bottom of the film, 
and the thickness of the film is approximately 105 nm. Before the click reaction, there 
are numerous azide groups on the internal surface of silica channels due to the pres￾ence of an azide-containing silane in the starting sol, and the corresponding sample 
is labeled as Az-MS. After the click reaction, most azide groups are converted into 
ferrocene moieties by the reaction between the azide groups and the ethynyl groups of 
ethynyl ferrocene molecules, which can be evidenced by the evolution of azide signa￾ture (2095 cm−1) in the FTIR spectra (Figure 8.9D). These ferrocene molecules on the 
surface of the vertically aligned silica meso-channels are capable of conducting the 
redox reaction through an electron-hopping process even without the help of the insu￾lating silica substrate, as illustrated in Figure 8.9E, and a pair of symmetrical ferro￾cene redox peaks can be observed during the CV tests performed at various scan rates 
(Figure 8.9F). The Fc-MS electrode can also give an almost linear potential response 
during the galvanostatic charge-discharge processes at various current densities from 
0.4 to 20 A cm−3, indicative of the surface-controlled behavior of the electron-hopping 
governed redox reaction (Figure 8.9G). Calculated from these curves, the capacity that Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 177 
can be delivered by such film is 105 C cm−3 (1.10 mC cm−2) at a current density of 0.4 
A cm−3 and the capacity retention can achieve 48% (50.4 C cm−3) at the current density 
of 20 A cm−3 (Figure 8.9H). The covalently bonded ferrocene molecules on the silica 
wall also show a robust cycling performance, with a capacity retention of 75% after 
1000 consecutive cycles (Figure 8.9I). Not only limited to the ferrocene molecules, but 
FIGURE 8.9 (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the ferrocene-func￾tionalized vertically-aligned mesoporous silica thin films (Fc-MS) on the ITO electrode; 
(B&C) the top view and corresponding FFT pattern (inset) and the cross-sectional view of 
the Fc-MS; (D) IR spectra of Az-MS (before and after the removal of CTAB surfactant) and 
Fc-MS; (E) the illustration of the electron-hopping process among the ferrocene molecules 
on the surface of silica; (F–I) the CV curves at different scan rates, charge–discharge curves 
and corresponding capacities at different current densities, and the cycling performance at the 
scan rate of 200 mV s−1 of Fc-MS in 1 M LiCl; (J) the CV curves of cobaltocenium at different 
scan rates in 1 M LiCl. 
Source: Reproduced from Wang et al. (2020) 178 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
 
 
the energy storage centers can also be extended to other redox molecules, like cobalto￾cenium (Figure 8.9J), indicative of the universal property of such silica film. 
The electrochemically assisted generation of silica films is a method that can be 
applied to uniform deposition on various types of conductive supports, even with 
very complex morphology, such as microporous metal electrodes (Qu et al., 2011), 
metal microfibers (Mazurenko et  al., 2011), or graphene nanosheets (Fang et  al., 
2019), for instance. This feature makes it possible the principle of combining the 
use of ferrocene functionalized silica films (Fc-MS) with advanced substrates of 
more complex morphology and larger surface than flat ITO electrodes, in order to 
increase the loading amount of Fc-MS for the sake of increasing capacity. This is 
what we did (Figure 8.10A) by generating Fc-MS on a freestanding graphene foam 
(GO) prepared by an electro-exfoliation method (Wang et al., 2021), with the idea to 
exploit the extremely large theoretical surface area of this type of 2D carbon mate￾rial (2630 m2 g−1 for graphene). According to the SEM image of GO (Figure 8.10B), 
the most distributed thickness is 9± 6 nm, whereas the sheets’ thickness increases 
to 75 ± 15 nm after coating the ferrocene functionalized silica film on the surface 
of graphene oxide (GO@Fc-MS), implying the thickness of silica layer is about 60 
nm (Figure 8.10C). The EDX mapping results of GO@Fc-MS (Figure 8.10D) also 
prove the uniform coating of Fc-MS on the surface of graphene, based on the homo￾geneous distribution of C, Si, and Fe elements. In comparison to that of GO, the 
CV curve of GO@Fc-MS shows a pair of well-defined and intense ferrocene redox 
peaks (Figure 8.10E), confirming the redox-active property of the silica film onside. 
Besides, the current responses of GO and GO@Fc-MS  are almost overlapped in 
the non-faradic region (0.1 V to 0.2V), demonstrating that the existence of mesopo￾rous silica thin film on its surface does not cause obvious resistance for electrolyte 
transport through the silica-on-graphene oxide layer. The charge-discharge curves 
of EG@Fc-MS (Figure 8.10F) are distorted but without an obvious plateau, which 
means the redox reaction is surface-controlled. Based on these curves, the capacity 
of EG@Fc-MS can reach 196 mC cm−2 (or capacitance of 326 mF cm−2) at a current 
density of 2 mA cm−2, which is higher by about two orders of magnitude in compari￾son to that of Fc-MS on flat ITO substrate (Wang et al., 2021, 2020). 
8.6 CONCLUSION 
Although not electrically conductive, the ordered porous silica materials are prom￾ising for applications in the field of electrochemical energy storage (batteries and 
supercapacitors) owing to their attractive properties, such as an easily accessible 
regular mesostructure, very high specific surface area, and good mechanical stabil￾ity. They can be used as lithium-insertion materials in Li-ion batteries if properly 
designed as silica nanostructures likely to accelerate lithium diffusion and sup￾port volume expansion during lithiation. Restraining the large volume variation 
during charge–discharge processes can be improved by coupling silica with other 
nanomaterials, and if conducting, such nanomaterials can also provide good con￾ductivity to the resulting hybrids. In the field of Li-S batteries, the nanostructured 
silica materials are interesting hosts to accommodate sulfur/polysulfide compounds 
and even accelerate the sulfur lithation/delithiation processes, thus contributing Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 179 
FIGURE 8.10 (A) Schematic illustration of the formation of graphene oxide coated with fer￾rocene functionalized mesoporous silica film (GO@Fc-MS); (B) high-resolution SEM image 
of the graphene oxide electrode (GO) and the corresponding sheets thickness distribution; (C) 
high-resolution SEM image of GO@Fc-MS and the corresponding sheets thickness distribu￾tion; (D) the EDX mapping results (C, Si, Fe) of GO@Fc-MS; (E) CV curves of graphite, GO 
and GO@Fc-MS at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 in 1 M H2SO4; (F) charge/discharge curves of 
GO@Fc-MS obtained at various current densities, from 2 to 100 mA cm−2; (G) the capacities 
of GO and GO@Fc-MS at different current densities from 2 to 100 mA cm−2. 
Source: Reproduced from Wang et al. (2021) 
to robust cycling performance. They can also be used as an active component of 
the separator to prevent the ingress of polysulfides, resulting in better durability 
of Li-S batteries. Related stabilization/protection role of a mesoporous silica layer 
coated onto the surface of metallic anodes can be observed in alkali metal batteries, 
by means of suppressing the growth of metal dendrites usually occurring during 
the charge/discharge processes, thus leading to improved cycling ability. Finally, 180 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
recent investigations on mesoporous silica films decorated with redox-active moi￾eties covalently attached in the interior of the nanochannels reveal effective charge 
propagation by electron-hopping, which can be exploited for supercapacitive energy 
storage applications. Such novel pseudocapacitive materials can be easily coated 
onto the surface of various electrode supports, even with complex topography, by 
electrochemically assisted deposition methods, opening the door to further develop￾ments in the near future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
JW acknowledges a financial support from the China Scholarship Council for his 
doctoral studies. 
REFERENCES 
S. Ahoulou, N. Vilà, S. Pillet, D. Schaniel and A. Walcarius, 2019, Coordination polymers 
as template for mesoporous silica films: a novel composite material Fe(Htrz)3@SiO2 with 
remarkable electrochemical properties, Chemistry of Materials, 31, 5796–5807. 
S. Ahoulou, N. Vilà, S. Pillet, D. Schaniel and A. Walcarius, 2020, Non-covalent immobili￾zation of iron-triazole (Fe(Htrz)3) molecular mediator in mesoporous silica films for the 
electrochemical detection of hydrogen peroxide, Electroanalysis, 32, 690–697. 
C. Amatore, E. Maisonhaute, B. Schöllhorn and J. Wadhawan, 2007, Ultrafast voltam￾metry for probing interfacial electron transfer in molecular wires, ChemPhysChem, 8, 
1321–1329. 
L. Angiolini, S. Valetti, B. Cohen, A. Feiler and A. Douhal, 2018, Fluorescence imaging 
of antibiotic clofazimine encapsulated within mesoporous silica particle carriers: rele￾vance to drug delivery and the effect on its release kinetics, Physical Chemistry Chemical 
Physics, 20, 11899–11911. 
J.S. Beck, J.C. Vartuli, W.J. Roth, M.E. Leonowicz, C.T. Kresge, K.D. Schmitt, C.T.W. Chu, 
D.H. Olson, E.W. Sheppard, S.B. McCullen, J.B. Higgins and J.L. Schlenker, 1992, A new 
family of mesoporous molecular sieves prepared with liquid crystal templates, Journal of 
the American Chemical Society, 114, 10834–10843. 
C.J. Brinker, Y. Lu, A. Sellinger and H. Fan, 1999, Evaporation-induced self-assembly: 
functional nanostructures made easy, Advanced Materials, 11, 579–585, doi: 10.1557/ 
mrs2004.183. 
D. Brühwiler, 2010, Postsynthetic functionalization of mesoporous silica, Nanoscale, 2, 887– 
892, doi: 10.1039/C0NR00039F. 
K.S. Butler, P.N. Durfee, C. Theron, C.E. Ashley, E.C. Carnes and C.J. Brinker, 2016, 
Protocells: modular mesoporous silica nanoparticle-supported lipid bilayers for drug 
delivery, Small, 12, 2173–2185. 
W.S. Chang, C.M. Park, J.H. Kim, Y.U. Kim, G. Jeong and H.J. Sohn, 2012, Quartz (SiO2): 
a new energy storage anode material for Li-ion batteries, Energy an Environmental 
Sciences, 5, 6895–6899. 
L. Chen, L. Li, L. Zhang, S. Xing, T. Wang, Y.A. Wang, C. Wang and Z. Su, 2013, Designed 
fabrication of unique eccentric mesoporous silica nanocluster-based core-shell nano￾structures for pH-responsive drug delivery, ACS Applied Materials and Interfaces, 5, 
7282–7290. 
X. Chen, R. Zhang, R. Zhao, X. Qi, K. Li, Q. Sun, M. Ma, L. Qie and Y. Huang, 2020, 
A “dendrite-eating” separator for high-areal-capacity lithium-metal batteries, Energy 
Storage Materials, 31, 181–186. Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 181 
S. Choi, D. Su, M. Shin, S. Park and G. Wang, 2018, Pomegranate-structured silica/sulfur 
composite cathodes for high-performance lithium—sulfur batteries, Chemistry An Asian 
Journal, 13, 568–576. 
S. Choudhury, M. Zeiger, P. Massuti-Ballester, S. Fleischmann, P. Formanek, L. Borchardt 
and V. Presser, 2017, Carbon onion-sulfur hybrid cathodes for lithium-sulfur batteries, 
Sustaining Energy and Fuels, 1, 84–94. 
R. Ciriminna, A. Fidalgo, V. Pandarus, F. Beland, L.M. Ilharco and M. Pagliaro, 2013, 
The sol-gel route to advanced silica-based materials and recent applications, Chemical 
Reviews, 113, 1303–1340. 
L. Dai, Q. Zhang, H. Gu and K. Cai, 2015, Facile synthesis of yolk-shell silica nanoparticles 
for targeted tumor therapy, Journal of Materials Chemistry B, 3, 8303–8313, doi: 10.1039/ 
c5tb01620g. 
J.E. Entwistle, S.G. Booth, D.S. Keeble, F. Ayub, M. Yan, S.A. Corr, D.J. Cumming and S.V. 
Patwardhan, 2020, Insights into the electrochemical reduction products and processes in silica 
anodes for next-generation lithium-ion batteries, Advanced Energy Materials, 10, 2001826. 
M. Etienne, A. Goux, E. Sibottier and A. Walcarius, 2009, Oriented mesoporous organosilica 
films on electrode: a new class of nanomaterials for sensing, Journal of Nanoscience and 
Nanotechnology, 9, 2398–2406. 
M. Etienne, A. Quach, D. Grosso, L. Nicole, C. Sanchez and A. Walcarius, 2007, Molecular 
transport into mesostructured silica thin films: electrochemical monitoring and compari￾son between p6m, P63/mmc, Pm3n structures, Chemistry of Materials, 19, 844–856, doi: 
10.1021/cm0625068. 
L. Fang, Q.Q. He, M.J. Zhou, J.P. Zhao and J.M. Hu, 2019, Electrochemically assisted depo￾sition of sol-gel films on graphene nanosheets, Electrochemistry Communications, 109, 
106609. 
Y. Fang, G. Zheng, J. Yang, H. Tang, Y. Zhang, B. Kong, Y. Lv, C. Xu, A.M. Asiri, J. Zi, 
F. Zhang and D. Zhao, 2014, Dual-pore mesoporous carbon@silica composite core￾shell nanospheres for multidrug delivery, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 53, 
5366–5370. 
Z. Favors, W. Wang, H.H. Bay, A. George, M. Ozkan and C.S. Ozkan, 2014, Stable cycling of 
SiO2 nanotubes as high-performance anodes for lithium-ion batteries, Scientific Reports, 
4, 1–7. 
D. Feng, J. Wei, M. Wang, Q. Yue, Y. Deng, A.M. Asiri and D. Zhao, 2013, Advances in 
mesoporous thin films via self-assembly process. Advanced Porous Materials, 1, 164–186. 
Y. Gao, Y. Chen, X. Ji, X. He, Q. Yin, Z. Zhang, J. Shi and Y. Li, 2011, Controlled intracel￾lular release of doxorubicin in multidrug-resistant cancer cells by tuning the shell-pore 
sizes of mesoporous silica nanoparticles, ACS Nano, 5, 9788–9798. 
D.J. Gibbons and W.E. Spear, 1966, Electron hopping transport and trapping phenomena in 
orthorhombic sulphur crystals, Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids, 27, 1917–1925, 
doi: 10.1016/0022-3697(66)90122-3. 
H. Gleiter, 2000, Nanostructured materials: basic concepts and microstructure, Acta 
Materialia, 48, 1–29, doi: 10.1016/S1359-6454(99)00285-2. 
A. Goux, M. Etienne, E. Aubert, C. Lecomte, J. Ghanbaja and A. Walcarius, 2009, Oriented 
mesoporous silica films obtained by electro-assisted self-assembly (EASA), Chemistry of 
Materials, 21, 731–741. 
X. Guan, A. Wang, S. Liu, G. Li, F. Liang, Y.W. Yang, X. Liu and J. Luo, 2018, Controlling 
nucleation in lithium metal anodes, Small, 14, 1–21. 
Y. Gushikem and S.S. Rosatto, 2001, Metal oxide thin films grafted on silica gel surfaces: 
recent advances on the analytical application of these materials, Journal of the Brazilian 
Chemical Society, 12, 695–705, doi: 10.1590/S0103-50532001000600002. 
L. Han and S. Che, 2013, Anionic surfactant templated mesoporous silicas (AMSs), Chemical 
Society Reviews, 42, 3740–3752, doi: 10.1039/c2cs35297d. 182 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Y. Han and J.Y. Ying, 2004, Generalized fluorocarbon-surfactant-mediated synthesis of 
nanoparticles with various mesoporous structures, Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition, 44, 288–292, doi: 10.1002/anie.200460892. 
F. Hoffmann, M. Cornelius, J. Morell and M. Froeba, 2006, Silica-based mesoporous organic￾inorganic hybrid materials, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 45, 3216–3251. 
J.Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, 2015, Multi-functional separator/interlayer system for 
high-stable lithium-sulfur batteries: progress and prospects, Energy Storage Materials, 
1, 127–145. 
M. Hussain, D. Fino and N. Russo, 2014, Development of modified KIT-6 and SBA-15­
spherical supported Rh catalysts for N2O abatement: from powder to monolith supported 
catalysts, Chemical Engineering Journal, 238, 198–205. 
N. Jayaprakash, J. Shen, S.S. Moganty, A. Corona and L.A. Archer, 2011, Porous hollow 
carbon@sulfur composites for high-power lithium-sulfur batteries, Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition, 50, 5904–5908. 
F. Jiang, T. Li, P. Ju, J. Sun, C. Liu, Y. Li, X. Sun and C. Chen, 2019, Nano-SiO2 coating 
enabled uniform Na stripping/plating for dendrite-free and long-life sodium metal batter￾ies, Nanoscale Advances, 1, 4989–4994. 
L. Kang, M. Cui, F. Jiang, Y. Gao, H. Luo, J. Liu, W. Liang and C. Zhi, 2018, Nanoporous 
CaCO3 coatings enabled uniform Zn stripping/plating for long-life zinc rechargeable 
aqueous batteries, Advanced Energy Materials, 8, 1–8. 
R.K. Kankala, Y.H. Han, J. Na, C.H. Lee, Z. Sun, S. Bin Wang, T. Kimura, Y.S. Ok, Y. 
Yamauchi, A.Z. Chen and K.C.W. Wu, 2020, Nanoarchitectured structure and surface 
biofunctionality of mesoporous silica nanoparticles, Advanced Materials, 32, 1–27, doi: 
10.1002/adma.201907035. 
K.-C. Kao, C.-H. Lin, T.-Y. Chen, Y.-H. Liu and C.-Y. Mou, 2015, A general method for grow￾ing large area mesoporous silica thin films on flat substrates with perpendicular nano￾channels, Journal of the American Chemical Society, 137, 3779–3782. 
N.Ž. Knežević and V.S.Y. Lin, 2013, A magnetic mesoporous silica nanoparticle-based drug 
delivery system for photosensitive cooperative treatment of cancer with a mesopore-cap￾ping agent and mesopore-loaded drug, Nanoscale, 5, 1544–1551, doi: 10.1039/c2nr33417h. 
B. Kong, J. Tang, Y. Zhang, T. Jiang, X. Gong, C. Peng, J. Wei, J. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Wang, 
G. Zheng, C. Selomulya and D. Zhao, 2016, Incorporation of well-dispersed sub-5-nm 
graphitic pencil nanodots into ordered mesoporous frameworks, Nature Chemistry, 8, 
171–177. 
C.T. Kresge, M.E. Leonowicz, W.J. Roth, J.C. Vartuli and J.S. Beck, 1992, Ordered mesopo￾rous molecular sieves synthesized by a liquid-crystal template mechanism, Nature, 359, 
710–712. 
C.H. Lee, T.S. Lin, C.Y. Mou, 2009, Mesoporous materials for encapsulating enzymes, Nano 
Today, 4, 165–179. 
G.C. Li, H.K. Jing, Z. Su, C. Lai, L. Chen, C.C. Yuan, H.H. Li and L. Liu, 2015, A hydrophilic 
separator for high performance lithium sulfur batteries, Journal of Materials Chemistry 
A, 3, 11014–11020. 
J. Li, Y. Huang, S. Zhang, W. Jia, X. Wang, Y. Guo, D. Jia and L. Wang, 2017, Decoration of 
silica nanoparticles on polypropylene separator for lithium-sulfur batteries, ACS Applied 
Materials and Interfaces, 9, 7499–7504. 
S. Li, Q. Liu, J. Zhou, T. Pan, L. Gao, W. Zhang, L. Fan and Y. Lu, 2019, Hierarchical Co3O4 
nanofiber—carbon sheet skeleton with superior Na/Li-philic property enabling highly 
stable alkali metal batteries, Advanced Functional Materials, 29, 1–10. 
Z. Li, J.C. Barnes, A. Bosoy, J.F. Stoddart and J.I. Zink, 2012, Mesoporous silica nanopar￾ticles in biomedical applications, Chemical Society Reviews, 41, 2590–2605, doi: 10.1039/ 
c1cs15246g. Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 183 
Y. Lin, W. Yantasee and G.E. Fryxell, 2014, Electrochemical sensors: functionalized silica, 
In S.E. Lyshevski (Ed.): Dekker Encyclopedia of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (3rd 
Edition, Vol. 2), CRC Press, pp. 1283–1293. 
Z. Lin, E. Goikolea, A. Balducci, K. Naoi, P.L. Taberna, M. Salanne, G. Yushin and P. Simon, 
2018, Materials for supercapacitors: when Li-ion battery power is not enough, Materials 
Today, 21, 419–436. 
G.F. Luo, W.H. Chen, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, S.X. Cheng, R.X. Zhuo and X.Z. Zhang, 2013, Charge￾reversal plug gate nanovalves on peptide-functionalized mesoporous silica nanoparticles 
for targeted drug delivery, Journal of Materials Chemistry B, 1, 5723–5732. 
I. Mazurenko, M. Etienne, R. Ostermann, B.M. Smarsly, O. Tananaiko, V. Zaitsev and A. 
Walcarius, 2011, Controlled electrochemically-assisted deposition of sol-gel biocomposite 
on electrospun platinum nanofibers, Langmuir, 27, 7140–7147. 
Y.V. Mikhaylik and J.R. Akridge, 2004, Polysulfide shuttle study in the Li/S battery system, 
Journal of the Electrochemical Society, 151, A1969, doi: 10.1149/1.1806394. 
G. Mu, D. Mu, B. Wu, C. Ma, J. Bi, L. Zhang, H. Yang and F. Wu, 2020, Microsphere-like 
SiO2/MXene hybrid material enabling high performance anode for lithium ion batteries, 
Small, 16, 1–9, doi: 10.1002/smll.201905430. 
S. Niedermayer, V. Weiss, A. Herrmann, A. Schmidt, S. Datz, K. Müller, E. Wagner, T. Bein 
and C. Bräuchle, 2015, Multifunctional polymer-capped mesoporous silica nanoparticles 
for pH-responsive targeted drug delivery, Nanoscale, 7, 7953–7964. 
J.L. Paris, M.V. Cabanas, M. Manzano and M. Vallet-Regí, 2015, Polymer-grafted mesoporous 
silica nanoparticles as ultrasound-responsive drug carriers, ACS Nano, 9, 11023–11033. 
R. Pathak, K. Chen, A. Gurung, K.M. Reza, B. Bahrami, F. Wu, A. Chaudhary, N. Ghimire, 
B. Zhou, W.H. Zhang, Y. Zhou and Q. Qiao, 2019, Ultrathin bilayer of graphite/SiO2 as 
solid interface for reviving Li metal anode, Advanced Energy Materials, 9, 1–10, doi: 
10.1002/aenm.201901486. 
H. Peng, J. Tang, L. Yang, J. Pang, H.S. Ashbaugh, C.J. Brinker, Z. Yang and Y. Lu, 2006, 
Responsive periodic mesoporous polydiacetylene/silica nanocomposites, Journal of the 
American Chemical Society, 128, 5304–5305. 
H.J. Peng, J.Q. Huang, X.B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, 2017, Review on high-loading and high￾energy lithium—sulfur batteries, Advanced Energy Materials, 7, 1–54. 
F. Qu, R. Nasraoui, M. Etienne, Y.B. Saint Côme, A. Kuhn, J. Lenz, J. Gajdzik, R. Hempelmann 
and A. Walcarius, 2011, Electrogeneration of ultra-thin silica films for the functionaliza￾tion of macroporous electrodes, Electrochemistry Communications, 13, 138–142. 
M. Rakibuddin and H. Kim, 2020, Sol-gel derived Fe3O4 quantum dot decorated silica com￾posites for effective removal of arsenic (III) from water, Materials Chemistry and Physics, 
240, 122245, doi: 10.1016/j.matchemphys.2019.122245. 
A. Schlossbauer, D. Schaffert, J. Kecht, E. Wagner and T. Bein, 2008, Click chemistry for 
high-density biofunctionalization of mesoporous silica, Journal of the American Chemical 
Society, 130, 12558–12559. 
D. Shen, J. Yang, X. Li, L. Zhou, R. Zhang, W. Li, L. Chen, R. Wang, F. Zhang and D. Zhao, 
2014, Biphase stratification approach to three-dimensional dendritic biodegradable meso￾porous silica nanospheres, Nano Letters, 14, 923–932. 
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and D. Bruce, 2014, Where do batteries end and supercapacitors begin? 
Science, 343, 1210–1211. 
Z. Teng, X. Su, Y. Zheng, J. Sun, G. Chen, C. Tian, J. Wang, H. Li, Y. Zhao and G. Lu, 2013, 
Mesoporous silica hollow spheres with ordered radial mesochannels by a spontaneous 
self-transformation approach, Chemistry of Materials, 25, 98–105. 
Z. Teng, G. Zheng, Y. Dou, W. Li, C.Y. Mou, X. Zhang, A.M. Asiri and D. Zhao, 2012, Highly 
ordered mesoporous silica films with perpendicular mesochannels by a simple Stöber￾solution growth approach, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 51, 2173–2177, doi: 
10.1002/anie.201108748. 184 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
B.G. Trewyn, S. Giri, I.I. Slowing and V.S.Y. Lin, 2007, Mesoporous silica nanoparticle based 
controlled release, drug delivery, and biosensor systems, ChemCommun, 3236–3245. 
W. Ullah, G. Herzog, N. Vilà and A. Walcarius, 2021, Electrografting and electropolymer￾ization of nanoarrays of PANI filaments through silica mesochannels, Electrochemistry 
Communications, 122, 106896. 
V. Urbanova and A. Walcarius, 2014, Vertically-aligned mesoporous silica films, Zeitschrift 
für anorganische und allgemeinem, Chemie, 640, 537–546, doi: 10.1002/zaac.201300442. 
M. Vallet-Regi, A. Rámila, R.P. Del Real and J. Pérez-Pariente, 2001, A new property of MCM￾41: drug delivery system, Chemistry of Materials, 13, 308–311, doi: 10.1021/cm0011559. 
N. Vilà, C. Allain, P. Audebert and A. Walcarius, 2015, Tetrazine-functionalized and ver￾tically-aligned mesoporous silica films with electrochemical activity and fluorescence 
properties, Electrochemistry Communications, 59, 9–12. 
N. Vilà, J. Ghanbaja, E. Aubert and A. Walcarius, 2014, Electrochemically assisted genera￾tion of highly ordered azide-functionalized mesoporous silica for oriented hybrid films, 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 53, 2945–2950. 
N. Vilà, J. Ghanbaja and A. Walcarius, 2016, Clickable bifunctional and vertically aligned 
mesoporous silica films, Advanced Materials Interfaces, 3, 1500440. 
A. Walcarius, 2013, Mesoporous materials and electrochemistry, Chemical Society Reviews, 
42, 4098–4140, doi: 10.1039/c2cs35322a. 
A. Walcarius, 2015, Mesoporous materials-based electrochemical sensors, Electroanalysis, 
27, 1303–1340, doi: 10.1002/elan.201400628. 
A. Walcarius, 2021, Electroinduced surfactant self-assembly driven to vertical growth of ori￾ented mesoporous films, Accounts of Chemical Research, 54, 3563–3575. 
A. Walcarius, D. Mandler, J.A. Cox, M. Collinson and O. Lev, 2005, Exciting new directions 
in the intersection of functionalized sol-gel materials with electrochemistry, Journal of 
Materials Chemistry, 15, 3663–3689. 
A. Walcarius, E. Sibottier, M. Etienne and J. Ghanbaja, 2007, Electrochemically assisted self￾assembly of mesoporous silica thin films, Nature Materials, 6, 602–608. 
F. Wan, X.L. Wu, J.Z. Guo, J.Y. Li, J.P. Zhang, L. Niu and R.S. Wang, 2015, Nanoeffects pro￾mote the electrochemical properties of organic Na2C8H4O4 as anode material for sodium￾ion batteries, Nano Energy, 13, 450–457. 
Y. Wan, Y. Shi and D. Zhao, 2007, Designed synthesis of mesoporous solids via nonionic￾surfactant-templating approach, Chemical Communications, 897–926. 
Y. Wan and D. Zhao, 2007, On the controllable soft-templating approach to mesoporous sili￾cates, Chemical Reviews, 107, 2821–2860, doi: 10.1021/cr068020s. 
H. Wang, X. Yang, Q. Wu, Q. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Jing, J. Wang, S.B. Mi, A.L. Rogach 
and C. Niu, 2018, Encapsulating silica/antimony into porous electrospun carbon nano￾fibers with robust structure stability for high-efficiency lithium storage, ACS Nano, 12, 
3406–3416. 
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J.T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, 2011, 
Graphene-wrapped sulfur particles as a rechargeable lithium-sulfur battery cathode mate￾rial with high capacity and cycling stability, Nano Letters, 11, 2644–2647. 
J. Wang, N. Vila and A. Walcarius, 2020, Redox-active vertically aligned mesoporous silica 
thin films as transparent surfaces for energy storage applications, ACS Applied Materials 
and Interfaces, 12, 24262–24270. 
J. Wang, N. Vilà and A. Walcarius, 2021, Electroactive organically modified mesopo￾rous silicates on graphene oxide-graphite 3D architectures operating with electron￾hopping for high rate energy storage, Electrochimica Acta, 366, 137407, doi: 10.1016/j. 
electacta.2020.137407. 
J. Wei, H. Wang, Y. Deng, Z. Sun, L. Shi, B. Tu, M. Luqman and D. Zhao, 2011, Solvent 
evaporation induced aggregating assembly approach to three-dimensional ordered meso￾porous silica with ultralarge accessible mesopores, Journal of the American Chemical 
Society, 133, 20369–20377. Mesoporous Silica-Based Materials for Energy Storage 185
M.S. Whittingham, 2004, Lithium batteries and cathode materials, Chemical Reviews, 104, 
4271–4301 , doi: 10.1021/cr020731c. 
H. Wu, G. Liu, S. Zhang, J. Shi, L. Zhang, Y. Chen, F. Chen and H. Chen, 2011, Biocompatibility, 
MR imaging and targeted drug delivery of a rattle-type magnetic mesoporous silica nano￾sphere system conjugated with PEG and cancer-cell-specific ligands, Journal of Materials 
Chemistry, 21, 3037–3045. 
H. Wu, Q. Tang, H. Fan, Z. Liu, A. Hu, S. Zhang, W. Deng and X. Chen, 2017, Dual-confined 
and hierarchical-porous graphene/C/SiO2 hollow microspheres through spray drying 
approach for lithium-sulfur batteries, Electrochimica Acta, 255, 179–186. 
J. Xie, B.Q. Li, H.J. Peng, Y.W. Song, M. Zhao, X. Chen, Q. Zhang and J.Q. Huang, 2019, 
Implanting atomic cobalt within mesoporous carbon toward highly stable lithium—sulfur 
batteries, Advanced Materials, 31, 1–7. 
N. Yan, F. Wang, H. Zhong, Y. Li, Y. Wang, L. Hu and Q. Chen, 2013, Hollow porous SiO2 nano￾cubes towards high-performance anodes for lithium-ion batteries, Scientific Reports, 3, 1–6. 
H. Yoo and K. Woo, 2018, Direct hybridization of hydrophobic nanocrystals with colloidal 
silica via van der Waals force, Journal of Physical Chemistry Letters, 9, 2106–2112. doi: 
10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b00695. 
M. Zahiri, M. Babaei, K. Abnous, S.M. Taghdisi, M. Ramezani and M. Alibolandi, 2020, 
Hybrid nanoreservoirs based on dextran-capped dendritic mesoporous silica nanopar￾ticles for CD133-targeted drug delivery, Journal of Cellular Physiology, 235, 1036–1050, 
doi: 10.1002/jcp.29019.v. 
H. Zhang, H. Xu, M. Wu, Y. Zhong, D. Wang and Z. Jiao, 2015, A soft-hard template approach 
towards hollow mesoporous silica nanoparticles with rough surfaces for controlled drug 
delivery and protein adsorption, Journal of Materials Chemistry B, 3, 6480–6489. 
X. Zheng, F. Chen, J. Zhang and K. Cai, 2016, Silica-assisted incorporation of polydopa￾mine into the framework of porous nanocarriers by a facile one-pot synthesis, Journal of 
Materials Chemistry B, 4, 2435–2443. 
Z. Zhou, W. Guo, L. Xu, Q. Yang and B. Su, 2015, Two orders-of-magnitude enhancement 
in the electrochemiluminescence of Ru(bpy)3
2+ by vertically ordered silica mesochannels, 
Analytica Chimica Acta, 886, 48–55. 
J. Zhu, E. Yildirim, K. Aly, J. Shen, C. Chen, Y. Lu, M. Jiang, D. Kim, A.E. Tonelli, M.A. 
Pasquinelli, P.D. Bradford and X. Zhang, 2016, Hierarchical multi-component nanofiber 
separators for lithium polysulfide capture in lithium-sulfur batteries: an experimental and 
molecular modeling study, Journal of Materials Chemistry A, 4, 13572–13581. 
W. Zhu, L. Wan, C. Zhang, Y. Gao, X. Zheng, T. Jiang and S. Wang, 2014, Exploitation of 
3D face-centered cubic mesoporous silica as a carrier for a poorly water soluble drug: 
Influence of pore size on release rate, Materials Science and Engineering C, 34, 78–85. 186 DOI: 10.1201/9781003208709-9 
9
9 Metal–Organic
 
Frameworks
 
Dr. Murugavel Kathiresan and 
Dr. M. Anbu Kulandainathan 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a subclass of coordination polymers 
(hybrid organic–inorganic materials) made by the coordination of metal ions 
with appropriate organic linkers (Figure  9.1; Yaghi, O’Keeffe et  al. 2003). 
Typically they form one-, two- or three-dimensional structures and are often 
porous. The organic linkers are characteristically mono-, di-, tri-, or tetravalent 
ligands that tend to form network structures upon coordination. Metal ions form 
nodes, which connect the linkers’ arms to form a cage-like structure. Because 
of their hollow structure, MOFs have a very large internal surface area. Thus, 
the proper selection of metal ions and organic linkers becomes essential as it 
directs the structure and properties of the MOF. In comparison to other porous 
materials, MOFs have a high degree of structural complexity, homogeneity at 
the atomic level, structural uniformity, pore structures, tunable porosity, and 
adaptability in network topology, dimension, and geometry, as well as chemical 
functionalities (Kitagawa, Kitaura et al. 2004). These features allow research￾ers to precisely tune the topology, porosity, and functionality of frameworks in 
real time for a variety of applications. In addition, these structural frameworks 
can also be modified via post-synthetic modification strategies to improve their 
performance toward specific applications (Dang, Zhu et al. 2017). Consequently, 
MOFs have a great potential for effective integration and exploration in a wide 
range of physical, chemical, and biological applications. MOFs, like Lego bricks, 
can be assembled randomly, and in terms of flexibility, they may outclass previ￾ously known classes of materials. 
MOFs are interesting examples of how the peculiar existence of hollow-struc￾tured materials could provide a slew of advantages, including improved surface-to￾volume ratio, low density, microenvironment, and greater loading capacities, due to 
the synergistic effects of structures and compositions. MOFs are a rapidly developing 
research field that was pioneered by Prof. Omar Yaghi at the University of California, 
Berkeley in the late 1990s (Li, Eddaoudi et al. 1999). More than 90,000 different 
MOF structures have been published so far, with the number steadily increasing 
(Moosavi, Nandy et al. 2020). Further, the structural, as well as chemical diversity of 
MOFs, opens up distinctive prospects for catalysis, electrocatalysis, gas storage and 
separation, drug delivery, sensing, optoelectronics, energy storage applications, and Metal–Organic Frameworks 187 
more (Wang and Astruc 2020). Important electrochemical applications of MOFs are 
in sensors, energy storage and conversion, corrosion inhibition, and electrocatalysis 
(electrocatalytic reduction of toxic metal salts, degradation of toxic compounds, etc.; 
Figure 9.2). By definition, electrochemistry involves the transmission or storing of 
electrons at the electrode–electrolyte interface. As far as electrochemical applica￾tions are concerned, the development of new materials exhibiting high performance 
and low cost is often essential. Most MOFs display poor electronic conductivity 
and therefore cannot be used as electrode materials. To overcome their insulating 
properties, pristine MOFs are often modified for electrochemical applications; that 
is, they are either composited with conducting materials such as graphene, carbon 
FIGURE 9.1 Scheme for the preparation of a MOF. Different metal ions or clusters are 
mixed with organic linkers using a convenient solvent. Coordination polymerization takes 
place between the precursors, resulting in a cross-linked network showing potential voids. 
Source: Adapted with permission from MDPI 2018, Ref. Carrasco (2018) 
FIGURE 9.2 Electrochemical applications of MOFs or MOF-derived materials. 188 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
nanotubes, conducting polymers, and the like or carbonized under inert conditions 
to yield heteroatom-metal-doped carbon matrices subject to the choice of applica￾tion (Scheme 9.1). The redox behavior of metal ions also plays an important role in 
providing a path for electrons. 
The top-left panel shows the application as electrodes in Li-ion batteries, Li-S 
batteries, and supercapacitors. The top-right panel shows the application as elec￾trocatalysts in oxygen evolution, hydrogen evolution, oxygen reduction, CO2 reduc￾tion, alcohol oxidation, and nitrite/bromate reduction reactions. The bottom-left 
panel shows the use as ionic conductor in electrochemical sensors, batteries, and 
fuel cells, and the bottom-right panel shows corrosion inhibition and solar cell 
applications. 
Some of the important electrochemical applications of MOFs are discussed in 
detail in the following sections. 
SCHEME 9.1 Design of MOF-derived carbon-based materials with various morphology 
and composition for the electrocatalysis of oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution, and hydrogen 
evolution reactions. Reproduced with permission from Wang, Chen et al. (2020). Metal–Organic Frameworks 189 
9.2 OXYGEN EVOLUTION REACTION 
Oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is an anodic reaction in recharging aqueous metal– 
air batteries and water electrolyzers. OER kinetics indicates that it is a very sluggish 
reaction owing to the participation of 4 electrons for each water molecule. Hence, 
this reaction typically involves high electric potential in the course of electrolysis 
(1.6–2  V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode [RHE]). IrO2, a rare metal oxide, and 
very expensive catalyst is the benchmark catalyst. Effectual OER electrocatalysis is 
critical for electrochemical water splitting, rechargeable metal–air batteries, and so 
on (Wang, Chen et al. 2020). The crucial assessment parameters for OER comprise 
onset potential, potential to attain 10 mA cm−2 current density, Tafel slope, and so 
on. MOFs with customizable pore sizes, compositions, and morphologies have abun￾dant catalytic sites for OER. Despite their substandard conductivity instigated by the 
insulating behavior of organic ligands and the meager overlap among their p-orbitals 
and d-orbitals, which impedes their electrochemical response (Du, Li et al. 2021). 
Alteration of metal centers with secondary metal can alter their d-band center, 
enhance their electronic configurations, and modify their charge-transfer path, lead￾ing to an enrichment in the catalytic performances toward the OER (Shi, Fu et al. 
2019). In addition, the low mass penetrability caused by the partial meso- as well as 
macro-porosity of bulk MOFs and the obstruction of metal sites by organic ligands is 
furthermore an inevitable constraint for their OER activity (Du, Li et al. 2021). Such 
shortages can be overcome by converting bulk MOFs to an ultrathin MOF layer with 
few nanometer thicknesses. This approach benefits from rapid mass transport as well 
as electron transfer numbers during catalysis, enlarged surface area, and coordina￾tively unsaturated metal centers resulting in an increased OER performance. 
Two-dimensional (2D) Co-MOF nanosheets of approximately 2 nm thickness were 
prepared in a single step by hydrothermal method with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as 
a surfactant (Xu, Li et al. 2018). The prepared nanosheets displayed low overpotential 
and high intrinsic activity under standard OER conditions than the bulk and micro– 
nano Co-MOFs. The observed high OER activity was attributed to the improved elec￾trical conductivity, the existence of coordinatively unsaturated Co sites, and high ease 
of access to active metal centers. However, it was difficult to remove the organic surfac￾tant completely, and as a result, the organic surfactant was shown to bind on the MOF 
surface, which partially blocks the active sites. To overcome this, ultrathin iron-cobalt 
MOF-74 nanosheets were synthesized using amorphous iron-cobalt-oxide nanosheets 
(FeCo-ONS) under hydrothermal conditions wherein FeCo-ONS served both as the 
metal source and template (Figure 9.3). The as-prepared FeCo-ONS nanosheet exhib￾ited a thickness of 2.6 nm and showed a 22-mV low overpotential than the solvother￾mal synthesized sample. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations further showed 
that the OH* adsorption energy barrier on Co sites might be modified by the interac￾tion of Co and Fe, that is, via partial electron transfer from Co to Fe atoms. 
Zhao et al. reported NiCo bimetal–organic framework nanosheets (NiCo-UMOFNs), 
which exhibited high electrocatalytic activity for OER (Zhao, Wang et al. 2016). NiCo￾ultrathin metal–organic framework nanosheets (UMOFNs) were loaded on Cu foam 
electrode, and the modified electrode displayed a low onset potential of 1.39 V and 
an overpotential of 189  mV at 10 mA cm−2 under standard OER conditions. X-ray 190 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
FIGURE 9.3 (a) Fabrication process, (b) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image, 
and (c) atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of FeCo-MNS. The k3-weighted Fourier trans￾form extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra of (d) Fe R-space and (e) Co 
R-space. (f) OER polarization curves measured in 0.1 M KOH. (g) Energy profiles for the 
OER. (h) Schematic representation of the electronic coupling between Fe and Co. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from Du, Li et al. (2021) Copyright 2021, RSC. 
absorption spectroscopy (XAS) shows that the presence of coordinatively unsaturated 
metal atoms in the nanosheets is accountable for high OER activity. Furthermore, DFT 
calculations showed that fewer unfilled 3d eg states of the Ni atoms in NiCo-UMOFNs 
acted as coordinatively unsaturated active metal centers for OER catalysis rather than 
Co. Furthermore, the addition of Co persuaded the coupling effect and enhanced the 
partial charge transfer between Ni2+ to Co2+ resulting in an improved performance. 
Besides ultrathin MOF materials, well-regulated modification of the structure of 
bulk MOFs and specific modulation of their properties also benefit OER catalysis. 
A  bimetallic MOF comprising terephthalic acid (A), 2-aminoterephthalic acid (B) 
(A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6) with structural heterogeneity was synthesized by a simple sol￾vothermal process (Xue, Li et al. 2018). The electronic structure of MOF was mod￾ulated by altering the metal centers and the proportion of two organic linkers. The 
improved bimetallic MOF exhibited rapid water oxidation kinetics with a low Tafel 
slope and delivered an overpotential of 288 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The 
A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6 MOF showed superior performance than its counterparts such 
as A-MOF-Fe, A-MOF-Co, and A-MOF-FeCo1.6 as well as B-MOF-FeCo1.6. Further 
insights from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) indicated charge transfer from 
oxygen to Fe and Co. Table 9.1 summarizes the OER performance of different MOF￾based catalysts. Electrochemical conditions/parameters such as substrate, electrolyte, 
overpotential, Tafel slope, and more are given in detail for easy consideration. 191 Metal–Organic Frameworks TABLE 9.1 Electrocatalytic OER Activities of MOF-Based Catalysts. Reproduced with permission from Du, Li et al. (2021). Catalyst Overpotential at 10 Tafel Slope (mV MOF Substrate Electrolyte Loading (mg Stability Ref. mA cm−2 (mV) dec−1) cm−2) NiCo-UMOFNs GC/CF 1M KOH 0.2/N 250/189 42/N 200 h at 1.48 V (Zhao, Wang et al. 2016) NiFe-UMNs GC 1M KOH 0.4 260 30 10,000 s at 1.51 V (Hai, Jia et al. 2018) Ultrathin Co-MOF GC 1M KOH 0.25 263 74 12,000 s at 10 mA (Xu, Li et al. 2018) cm−2 FeCo-MNS GC 0.1M KOH 0.36 298 21.6 10,000 s at 1.53 V (Zhuang, Ge et al. 2019) CoFe 2D MOFs GC 1M KOH 0.35 274 46.7 10 h at 10 mA cm−2 (Cai, Liu et al. 2020) NiFe-MOF/OM-NFH GC 1M KOH 0.4 270 123 40,000 s at 1.5 V (Li, Ma et al. 2019) Fe:2D-Co-NS NF 1M KOH N 211 46 96 h at 10 mA cm−2 (Huang, Li et al. 2018) A2.7B-MOF-FeCo1.6 GC 1M KOH 0.35 288 39 38,000 s at 10 mA (Xue, Li et al. 2018) cm−2 Fe2Ni-BDC GC 1M KOH 0.255 260 35 10 h at 10 mA cm−2 (Li, Huang et al. 2019) HHTP@ZIF-67 GC 1M KOH N 238 104 12,000 s at 1.494 V (Zhu, Ding et al. 2018) Ni-Fe-MOF NSs GC 1M KOH N 221 56 20 h at 10 mA cm−2 (Li, Wang et al. 2019) CTGU-10c2 GC 0.1M KOH 0.0706 240 58 50 h at 10 mA cm−2 (Zhou, Huang et al. 2019) (Ni2Co)1-xFex-MOF-NF GC 1M KOH 0.54 257 41.3 35 h at 1.488 V (Qian, Li et al. 2019) CoxFe1-x-MOF-74 RDE 1M KOH N 280 56 12 h at 1.51 V (Zhao, Pattengale et al. 2018) (Continued) 192 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications TABLE 9.1 (CONTINUED)
 Catalyst Overpotential at 10 Tafel Slope (mV MOF Substrate Electrolyte Loading (mg Stability Ref. mA cm−2 (mV) dec−1) cm−2) NNU-23 CC 0.1M KOH 1.0 365 77.2 15 h at 10 mA cm−2 (Wang, Dong, Qiao et al. 2018) NiFe-PBA GC 1M KOH 0.25 258 46 100 h at 10 mA cm−2 (Su, Wang et al. 2018) NiFe-MOF NF 0.1M KOH 0.3 240 34 20,000 s at 1.42 V (Nam, Shekhah et al. 2020) NFN-MOF NF 1M KOH 0.6 240 58.8 30 h at 500 mA cm−2 (Senthil Raja, Chuah et al. 2018) NiFeCP NF 1M KOH N 188 29 17 h at 50 mA cm−2 (Li, Li et al. 2019) NiFe NFF 1M KOH N 227 38.9 15 h at 20 mA cm−2 (Cao, Ma et al. 2019) LDH-MOF NF 1M KOH N 275.38 47 10 h at 10 mA cm−2 (Chen, Zhuang et al. 2019) Metal–Organic Frameworks 193 
9.3 OXYGEN REDUCTION REACTION 
Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) refers to the half-reaction where oxygen is reduced to 
water or hydrogen peroxide. Typically in fuel cells, the reduction of oxygen to water is 
preferred since the current is higher. However, the slow kinetics of ORR is accountable 
for major voltage loss in low-temperature H2/air fuel cells even with the benchmark 
Pt-based catalysts. Classically, in ORR, electrochemically molecular oxygen is reduced 
to H2O (acidic media) or OH- (alkaline media) intermediates in a 4-e− pathway or to 
H2O2 (acidic media) or HO2
− intermediates in a 2-e− pathway (Figure 9.4; Xia, Mahmood 
et al. 2016, Kulkarni, Siahrostami et al. 2018) As a result of the higher reaction kinetics 
as well as efficacy, generally, the 4-e− pathway is preferred. In practical applications, 
Pt-based electrocatalysts are best for the 4-e− pathway; however, the high cost, paucity, 
and lower durability confine its well-known application in renewable energy technolo￾gies. As an alternate, earth-abundant transition metal–based catalysts are developed, 
and in this aspect, the development of MOFs based on transition metals with high activ￾ity and durability becomes indispensable. As already known, pristine MOFs lack con￾ductivity, and hence the integration of MOFs with nanomaterials such as nano carbons, 
carbon nanotubes, or inorganic nanoparticles becomes an efficient method to achieve 
significant performance in ORR catalysis (Xia, Mahmood et al. 2016). Following Xu 
and co-workers’ report on the derivatization of MOF using MOF-5 as the starting mate￾rial, numerous MOF-derived materials were reported comprising porous carbons, 
metal/metal oxide, nitride, phosphide-doped carbons, heteroatom-doped carbon, and 
others using MOF as precursors (Li, He et al. 2019). Table 9.2 summarizes the perfor￾mance of reported MOFs and their composites toward ORR electrocatalysis. 
Numerous examinations have established that the local electronic structure, as 
well as physicochemical properties, of catalysts are influential factors for ORR 
activity. In addition to this, heteroatom doping and the introduction of M-N-C sites/ 
FIGURE 9.4 Illustration of the reaction pathway of the ORR and the resulting intermedi￾ates on the catalyst surface through different mechanisms. 
Source: Reproduced with permission from RSC, Li, He et al. (2019) 194 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications TABLE 9.2 A List of MOF-Derived Nonnoble ORR Catalysts and Their Performance. Adapted with permission from RSC, Li, He et al. (2019). ORR Performance MOF-derived Nonnoble Half-Wave Testing Performance (peak power Onset Potential Ref. Electrocatalysts Potential Conditions density, mW cm−2) (V vs. RHE) (V vs. RHE) Co(im)2 0.83 0.77 0.1 M HClO4 – (Ma, Goenaga et al. 2011) ZIF-67–750* 0.86 0.71 0.1 M HClO4 – (Xia, Zhu et al. 2014) ZIF-67–800* 0.92 0.82 0.1 M KOH – (Chen, Ma et al. 2017) ZIF-67+Ni2+-800* 0.070** −0.049** 0.1 M KOH Methanol fuel cell: 4335.6 (Tang, Cai et al. 2016) MIL-88B-NH2–900* 1.03 0.92 0.1 M KOH Alkaline direct fuel cell: 22.7 (Zhao, Yin et al. 2014) ZIF-8 + Fe2+ + Phen + NH3–1050* – – Acid H2/O2 PEMFC: 0.75 @ 0.64 V (Lefèvre, Proietti et al. 2009) Fe-ZIF-8–1000* 0.95 0.82 0.1 M HClO4 – (Wang, Zhang et al. 2016) Zn/Co-ZIF-8–900* 0.982 0.881 0.1 M KOH – (Yin, Yao et al. 2016) ZIF-8 + Fe(acac)3–900* 0.986 0.900 0.1 M KOH – (Chen, Ji et al. 2017) ZIF-8 + Fe(acac)3 + Co(acac)3–900* 0.995 0.920 0.1 M KOH – (Zhang, Chen et al. 2018) ZIF-8 + FePc + DMSO-1000* 0.893 0.804 0.5 M H2SO4 – (Liang, Chen et al. 2017) Fe-ZIF-8–1000* 0.902 0.805 0.1 M HClO4 H2/O2 PEMFC: 1141 (Liu, Liu et al. 2018) Fe-ZIF-8–1100* 0.95 0.85 0.5 M H2SO4 – (Zhang, Hwang et al. 2017) Fe20-PCN-222–800* 0.93 0.776 0.1 M HClO4 – (Jiao, Wan et al. 2018) Cu(BTC)(H2O) + dicyandiamide-800* 0.94 0.869 0.1 M KOH – (Li, Han et al. 2018) 195 Metal–Organic Frameworks Mn-ZIF-8-Cyanimide-1100 & 900* 0.96 0.80 0.5 M H2SO4 H2/O2 PEMFC: 460 (Li, Chen et al. 2018) (two step carbonization) Zn/Co-ZIF-8 + FeCl3–900* 1.06 0.863 0.1 M HClO4 H2/Air PEMFC: 505 (Wang, Huang et al. 2017) ZIF-67 + H2S—1000* −0.04*** −0.14*** 0.1 M KOH – (Chen, Li et al. 2015) ZIF-67 + Se—750* 0.935 0.806 0.1 M KOH – (Wu, Xue et al. 2016) ZIF-67 + Thioacetamide—700* 0.85 0.78 0.1 M HClO4 – (Zhang, An et al. 2016) * Carbonization temperature
 ** The potential is referenced with a standard calomel electrode.
 *** The potential is referenced with an Ag/AgCl electrode.
 196 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
defects were shown to enhance the active sites for ORR. Besides, volcano plots done 
on numerous materials suggested that the integration of heteroatom or metal dopants 
can refrain the electronic structure of catalysts by merging the spin density, charge 
effects, and ligand effect, generating a low overpotential closer to benchmark Pt. 
Hence, the identification of an active site is a crucial step. Furthermore, increasing 
porosity creates a large number of defects, as well as edge sites, which are considered 
active sites for ORR. In addition, hierarchical porous structures with both micro￾and mesopores favor mass transfer ability. Combining all these requirements, such 
as electron transfer, mass transfer, interface compatibility, and so on, MOF deriva￾tives have gained considerable interest as they serve as a promising platform for the 
construction of nonnoble ORR catalysts. 
9.4 HYDROGEN EVOLUTION REACTION 
A sustainable way of hydrogen production can be done by electrochemical water 
splitting, chemo-catalytic water splitting or by photocatalytic pathway to obtain pure 
hydrogen. Hydrogen generation is important as hydrogen can be used as an alternate 
energy source and can fuel power vehicles based on the hydrogen fuel cell (Zaman, 
Noor et al. 2021). Among these, the electrochemical hydrogen generation is limited 
by three factors, such as the short lifetime of the electrode material, the use of noble 
metal catalysts, and thermal efficiency less than the water-splitting thermodynamic 
limits, that is, 1.23 V. Typically HER reactions are carried out under acidic condi￾tions in which most of the metal catalysts show insufficient stability except noble 
metal catalysts (Scheme 9.2). However, electrolyzers established under alkaline con￾ditions are technically well built and commonly exist at the commercial scale. In 
addition, HER in alkaline media does not pose similar stability risks as the one 
tackled in acidic conditions. In alkaline media, HER is controlled by three subtle and 
important descriptors, such as (1) hydrogen adsorption on the surface of the catalyst, 
(2) restriction of the adsorption of the hydroxyl group on the surface of the catalyst 
to prevent catalyst poisoning, and (3) energy required for the dissociation of a water 
molecule (Scheme 9.2). However, the major setback in alkaline HER is the decreased 
reaction kinetics. HER reactions in acidic media are 2–3 magnitude higher than the 
rate of the reaction in alkaline media. In general, HER requires high overpotential, 
and in this case, Pt, Ru, and Pd show better efficiency. Principally, 20% Pt/C is 
used as HER benchmark catalyst, and henceforth, most of the research activities are 
geared toward finding an alternate electrocatalyst with similar or improved stability 
and performance of 20% Pt/C. 
The combined effect of porous properties and framework structure of MOF in 
this regard provides a range of applications, especially in the field of electrocatalysis. 
By proper engineering of the framework and by incorporation of various ligands, 
metal components improved catalytic activity can be achieved. Furthermore, the 
composite preparation with a variety of conducting materials and/or carbonization 
approach generates new MOF-derived materials for electrocatalytic applications, 
especially towards HER. Such a design is expected to lower the HER overpotential, 
improve the kinetics of the reaction, and reduce the cost compared to expensive 
noble metal catalysts. Metal–Organic Frameworks 197 
SCHEME 9.2 Schematic diagram of the Volmer–Heyrovsky and Volmer-Tafel processes on 
a catalyst surface in acidic and alkaline media. Reproduced with permission from Zaman, 
Noor et al. (2021). 
It is recognized that 3D MOFs show better stability (structural and morphologi￾cal) with high porosity. However, 1D/2D MOFs display improved usage of the active 
sites, with low stability and poor porosity. Thus, mingling the advantages of both 
3D and 1D/2D MOFs is extremely desired but remains a great challenge. Also, the 
electrocatalysts that are efficient in acidic media are not effective under alkaline con￾ditions requiring high overpotentials to initiate the catalysis. As discussed in other 198 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
sections pristine MOFs show poor conductivity and poor stability under alkaline 
and acidic conditions; hence, their use as electrocatalysts requires special treatments 
such as composite formation and others. Table 9.3 summarizes the performance of 
some MOF-derived catalysts toward HER. 
9.5 CO2 REDUCTION 
Electrochemical reduction of CO2 to value-added products affords a pathway for 
the decrease of atmospheric CO2 concentration and for the generation of valuable 
carbonaceous fuels/chemicals under ambient conditions (Zhang, Cai et  al. 2021). 
The extreme chemical stability of CO2 molecules poses a challenge in the effective 
conversion of CO2 to value-added products due to the large kinetic and thermo￾dynamic energy barrier. Electrochemical CO2 reduction is a complex reaction that 
involves multiple proton and electron transfer steps as shown in Table 9.1. As can 
be seen from the equation, the process involves the formation of many complex 
intermediates followed by 2-, 4-, 6-, 8-, or 12-electron reduction in aqueous media, 
and the product selectivity is determined by their reaction pathway (Qiao, Liu et al. 
2014). The product selectivity also depends on the mode of interaction and nature of 
binding with the metal centers, and this mode of interaction is different for different 
metals (Kortlever, Shen et al. 2015, Zhang, Hu et al. 2018). Initially, a one-electron 
reduction generates CO2
•¯ radical, which is then absorbed on the surface of the cata￾lyst; upon protonation, *COOH intermediate is formed. Successive proton-coupled￾electron transfer reactions with *COOH intermediate generates CO and H2O; then 
CO desorbs from the catalyst surface. Generation of C2, C3, C4 carbon products 
entails strong adsorption ability of CO intermediate on the catalyst surface which 
promotes further dimerization, multiple proton-coupled-electron-transfer reactions 
then affords multi-carbon products. Thus, it is evident that the catalytic activity 
and selectivity of the products rely on the number of surface active sites, coordina￾tion geometry, electronic structure, and chemical composition of the electrocatalyst 
(Arán-Ais, Gao et al. 2018). Hence, the development of high-performance electro￾catalysts turns out to be essential for the efficient conversion of CO2 to useful chemi￾cals such as CO, CH4, formic acid, methanol, ethane, ethylene, ethanol, and others 
(Shao, Yi et al. 2020). In this trend, MOFs with active metal ion sites, the high spe￾cific surface area turns out to be an ideal platform for the electrochemical reduction 
of CO2, however, the poor electronic conductivity of pristine MOFs hampers their 
direct role towards electrocatalysis. To improve the electronic conductivity, MOFs 
were often composited with conductive materials like carbon nanotubes, graphene, 
conducting polymers, and others. The robust contact between the MOF and these 
substrates leads to an increase in the number of active sites, which further acceler￾ates the charge transfer between the electrode and the catalysts. Besides, these MOFs 
were also carbonized under an inert atmosphere to prepare MOF-derived porous 
nanomaterial that shows improved electronic conductivity as well as enhanced elec￾trocatalytic behavior (Shao, Yi et al. 2020). Carbonization leads to the formation 
of homogeneously dispersed metal/metal-oxide nanoparticles or single metal atom/ 
metal oxide all over the defective graphitic carbon matrix. This approach facilitates 
the contact between dissolved CO2 and active sites. 199 Metal–Organic Frameworks TABLE 9.3 A List of MOF-Derived Nonnoble HER Catalysts and Their Performance. Adapted with permission from RSC, Zaman, Noor et al. (2021). Electrocatalyst Testing η10 (mV) Tafel Slope Stability Ref. Conditions (mV dec−1) 3D Nibpyfcd Hp 0.5 M H2SO4 350 60 30 h (Khrizanforova, Shekurov et al. 2020) 400 65 2000 cycles 3D Cobpyfcd Hp 400 1D Zn(fcdHp) 0.5 M H2SO4 340 110 1000 cycles (Shekurov, Khrizanforova et al. 2019) 2D MOF H3[NiIII3(tht)2] 0.5 M H2SO4 333 80.5 – (Dong, Pfeffermann et al. 2015) THTA—Co H3[Co3(tht)(tha)] 0.5 M H2SO4 283 71 300 cycles (Dong, Zheng et al. 2017) G/THTA—Co G/H3[Co3(tht)(tha)] 230 70 400 cycles, 4 h H3[Ni3(tht)(tha)] 315 76 – Au/Co Fe-MOFNs 0.1 M KOH 115 – (Wang, Jiao et al. 2019) Cu-MOF: HKUST-1 ED 0.5 M H2SO4 590 183.6 – (Li, Lu et al. 2019) HKUST-1HT 660 222.4 – 2D Cu MOF, Cu6(C8H4O4)6(H2O)6· 0.5 M H2SO4 660 100 – (Hu, Pang et al. 2019) H3[P(W3O10)4] Hf12-CoDBP/(CNTs) 0.026 M TFA 650 178 7 h (Micheroni, Lan et al. 2018) CTGU-5 0.5 M H2SO4 388 125 – (Wu, Zhou et al. 2017) CTGU-6 425 176 – Acetylene Black&CTGU-5 44 45 96 h 
(Continued) 200 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications TABLE 9.3 (CONTINUED) Electrocatalyst Testing η10 (mV) Tafel Slope Stability Ref. Conditions (mV dec−1) UiO-66-NH2-Mo-5 0.5 M H2SO4 200 59 7 h (Dai, Liu et al. 2016)
 NENU-500 0.5 M H2SO4 237 96 2000 cycles (Qin, Du et al. 2015)
 NENU-501 392 137
 HUST-201 0.5 M H2SO4 192 79 2000 cycles (Zhang, Li et al. 2018)
 HUST-200 131 51
 (GO 8 wt%) Cu-MOF composite
 0.5 M H2SO4 209 at 30 mA cm−2 84 (Jahan, Liu et al. 2013) Zn0.30Co2.70S4 polyhedra 0.5 M H2SO4 80 47.5 60 h (Huang, Song et al. 2016) CoP CPHs 0.5 M H2SO4 133 51 12 h (Xu, Han et al. 2015) CoP@BCN-1 1.0 M KOH 215 52 2000 cycles (Tabassum, Guo et al. 2017) CuCo@NC 0.5 M H2SO4 145 79 30000 s (Kuang, Wang et al. 2017) Cu3P@NPPC-650 0.5 M H2SO4 89 76 3000 cycles (Wang, Dong, Du et al. 2018) Metal–Organic Frameworks 201 
From Table 9.4, and the literature data, it is clear that the assembly of MOFs 
with a suitable metal center is of extreme importance. For example, for the elec￾trocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO, Co, Fe, Zn, and noble metal–based MOFs 
were used, whereas for the synthesis of C2 and C3 hydrocarbons, Cu-based MOFs 
were employed. Table 9.2 summarizes the electrochemical performance of differ￾ent MOF-based electrocatalysts toward CO2 reduction. Fe and Co exist in several 
oxidation/reduction states, and hence, they offer a better catalytic activity for the 
TABLE 9.4 
Electrochemical Potentials of Possible CO2 Reduction Products in Aqueous 
Solutions 
Possible Half-Reactions of Electrochemical CO2 Reduction Electrode Product 
Potentials (V vs. Name 
SHE) at pH 7 
­ −1.90 CO2 anion CO g + e 2 ( ) ­ ® *COO
radical 
+ ­ −0.61 Formic acid CO2 ( ) g + ® 2H + 2e HCOOH() I
­ ­ ­ −0.43 Formate CO2 ( ) g + H2O I( ) + 2e ® HCOO a( ) q + OH
+ ­ −0.53 Carbon CO ( ) g + 2H + 2e ® CO g( ) + H O( )I 2 2 monoxide 
­ ­ −0.52 Carbon CO g + 2 ( ) H2O I( ) + 2e ® CO g( ) + 2OH
monoxide 
+ ­ −0.48 Formaldehyde CO g 4H + 2e ® HCHO I H O( )I 2 ( ) + ( ) + 2
­ ­ −0.89 Formaldehyde CO2 g 3 ( ) + H2O I( ) + 4e ® HCHO I( ) + 4OH
+ ­ −0.38 Methanol CO2 ( ) g + 6H I( ) + 6e ® CH3OH( )I + H2O I( )
­ ­ −0.81 Methanol CO2 ( ) g + 5H2O I( ) + 6e ® CH O3 H I( ) + 6OH
+ ­ −0.24 Methane CO g + 8H + 8e ® CH g + 2H O I 2 ( ) 4 ( ) 2 ( )
­ ­ −0.25 Methane CO2 ( ) g + 6H2O I( ) + 8e ® CH g 4 ( ) + 8OH
+ ­ 0.06 Ethylene 2CO g +12H +12e ® 2 + 4 2 4 ( ) H O2 ( ) C H g ( )I
­ ­ −0.34 Ethylene 2 ( ) H O I( ) C H g 2 2CO g + 8 2 +12e ® 4 ( ) +12OH
+ ­ 0.08 Ethanol 2CO g 12H +12e ® 3 3 2 2 ( ) + H O2 ( ) + CH CH OH I ( )I
­ ­ −0.33 Ethanol 2 ( ) + H O I CH CH OH I 2CO g 9 2 ( ) +12e ® 3 2 ( ) +12OH ( )I 
202 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
electroreduction of CO2. Hod and co-workers (Hod, Sampson et  al. 2015) elec￾trodeposited a thin film of Fe-MOF-525 on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass. 
Fe-MOF catalytically reduced CO2 to syngas CO and H2 with 100% Faradaic 
efficiency. Similarly, Dong and co-workers (Dong, Qian et  al. 2018) prepared a 
composite catalyst with carbon black and Fe-porphyrin-based MOF and used it as 
an electrocatalyst for the electroreduction of CO2 to CO in a CO2-saturated 0.5 M 
KHCO3 solution with 91% Faradaic efficiency. Co displays oxidation state-depen￾dent coordination geometries, such as square planar, tetrahedral, pyramidal, and 
octahedral. Lan and co-workers reported the hydrothermal synthesis of polyoxo￾metalate (POM)-metalloporphyrin organic frameworks (M-PMOF) and tested their 
electrocatalytic reduction activity in CO2-saturated 0.5M KHCO3 solution (Wang, 
Huang et al. 2018). The synergistic effects of POM and Co-porphyrin contributed 
to the excellent electrocatalytic performance with a remarkable Faradaic efficiency 
of 99% for CO production. 
Cu metal has been well studied for its electrocatalytic behavior towards CO2 
reduction. However, the first study on the use of copper-based MOF as an electro￾catalyst was reported by Hinogami and co-workers (Hinogami, Yotsuhashi et al. 
2012), wherein a copper rubeanate MOF was synthesized by mixing rubeanic acid 
and aqueous CuSO4 solution. Cu-rubeanate MOF on carbon paper showed a highly 
selective reduction to formic acid (98% selectivity) in 0.5M KHCO3 with a cur￾rent efficiency of 30%. The performance of the MOF electrocatalyst was compared 
to that of the Cu metal electrode under the same conditions. Results showed that 
the MOF electrode displayed 0.2V more positive onset potential than the Cu metal 
electrode and produced a 13-fold greater amount of formic acid than the Cu metal 
electrode. The high selectivity of the Cu-MOF electrode was ascribed to the low 
electron density on metallic sites and weak adsorption of CO2 on the MOF surface 
compared with the Cu metal electrode. This weak adsorption is responsible for the 
selective production of formic acid. Besides the structure of MOF, the solvent also 
plays an important role in the catalytic activity and product selectivity. Kumar et al. 
(Senthil Kumar, Senthil Kumar et al. 2012) reported the electrochemical prepara￾tion of Cu3(BTC)2 MOF and its electrocatalytic activity towards the preparation of 
oxalic acid with 51% Faradaic efficiency and 90% purity (Figure 9.5). Zinc-based 
MOFs with 4–6 coordination numbers were synthesized and their electrocatalytic 
activities towards CO2 reduction were investigated. Wang and co-workers reported 
the synthesis of Zn-based zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-8). ZIF-8 synthe￾sized using ZnSO4 showed the highest electrocatalytic activity for the conversion 
of CO2 to CO with a Faradaic efficiency of 65% (Wang, Hou et al. 2017). Apart 
from these transition metal-based MOFs, noble metal–based electrocatalysts were 
also synthesized and their activity toward the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 was 
investigated. Re-SURMOF-based electrocatalyst showed excellent conversion of 
CO2 to CO with 93% Faradaic efficiency (Ye, Liu et al. 2016). The superior perfor￾mance of Re-SURMOF is attributed to the charge transport among the electrode 
interface and Re-MOF redox catalyst. 
Apart from pristine MOF materials, MOF-derived materials were also employed 
as electrocatalysts (Singh, Mukhopadhyay et  al. 2021). It is well known that metal 
nodes in MOFs act as active centers for catalysis. The high-temperature treatment of Metal–Organic Frameworks 203 
FIGURE 9.5 Electrochemical reduction of CO2 to oxalic acid on Cu3(BTC)2 MOF. 
MOFs yields metal nanoparticles or single-metal atom-embedded porous carbon mate￾rials that show distinct advantages for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction with improved 
electronic conductivity, specific surface area, and the like. Table 9.5 summarizes the 
performance of MOF-based electrocatalysts toward electrochemical CO2 reduction. 
9.6 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE PROSPECTS 
The development of effectual nonnoble electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution, oxy￾gen reduction (ORRs), hydrogen reduction, and CO2 reduction (CO2RRs) reactions 
have attracted widespread attention owing to their prominence in energy conversion 
applications. Therefore, the exploitation of the basis of catalytic activity of elec￾trocatalysts has become an everlasting topic for both theoretical and experimental 
researchers. The research on the modulation of isolated components to improve the 
catalytic activity does not solve the obstinate challenges. While designing these cata￾lysts, structure-level thinking is required rather than restraining the catalyst from 
one dimension. MOFs, with their hierarchical structure, intrinsic porosity, high sur￾face area, and structural and morphological tunability, show promising aspects as 
electrocatalysts; however, there are other issues that have to be considered for the 
successful deployment of these materials. As far as electrocatalysis is concerned, 
MOFs were used as electrode materials both on the anodic side for the oxidation 
and on the cathodic side for the reduction of specific substrates (water, CO2, etc.); 
however, the poor conducting nature of these materials hinders such activity. MOFs 
are frequently functionalized/composited with conducting materials such as CNT, 
graphene, conducting polymers, and the like or carbonized to render graphitized 
metal-oxide materials as a step to improve their conductivity. Typically, such com￾posites show improved conductivity with active metal sites, and hence, they are ideal 
electrocatalysts compared to pristine MOF materials. Water splitting and ORRs, as 204 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications TABLE 9.5 MOF-Based Electrocatalysts and Their Performance Toward Electrochemical CO2 Reduction Electrode Potential Products Faradaic Efficiency (%) Ref. Zn-BTC MOF/CP −2.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl	 CH4 80.1 ± 6.6 (Kang, Zhu et al. 2016) CO 7.9 ± 2.6 ZIF-8 −1.8 V vs. SCE	 CO 65 (Wang, Hou et al. 2017) Re-SURMOF/FTO −1.6 V vs. NHE	 CO 93 ± 5 (Ye, Liu et al. 2016) Fe-MOF-525/FTO −1.3 V vs. NHE	 CO 54 ± 2 (Hod, Sampson et al. 2015) H2 45 ± 1 ZIF-8-derived Fe-N-C −0.6 V vs. RHE	 CO 91 (Huan, Ranjbar et al. 2017) ZIF-8-derived Ni SAs/N-C −1.0 V vs. RHE	 CO 71.9 (Zhao, Dai et al. 2017) Ag2O/layered ZIF −1.2 V vs. RHE	 CO 80.5 (Jiang, Wu et al. 2017) ZIF-Fe-CNT-FA-p −0.86 V vs. RHE	 CO 100 (Guo, Yang et al. 2017) C-AFC/ZIF-8 −0.43 V vs. RHE	 CO 93 (Ye, Cai et al. 2017) Al2(OH)2TCPP-Co −0.7 V vs. RHE	 CO 76 (Kornienko, Zhao et al. 2015) M-PMOF −0.8 V vs. RHE	 CO 98.7 (Wang, Huang et al. 2018) Co/Zn ZIFs derived Co-N2 Overpotential 520 mV	 CO 94 (Wang, Chen et al. 2018) Copper rubeanate MOF −1.2 V vs. SHE	 HCOOH 65 (Hinogami, Yotsuhashi et al. 2012) Cu3(BTC)2 −1.12 V vs. Ag/Ag+	 Oxalic acid 51 (Senthil Kumar, Senthil Kumar et al. 2012) HKUST-1 mediate Cu −1.07 V vs. RHE	 C 2H4 45 (Nam, Bushuyev et al. 2018) GDE-Cu-MOF −1.8 V vs. SCE	 C 2H4 16 (Qiu, Zhong et al. 2018) Cu-based HKUST-1 10 mA.cm-2	 CH3OH 5.6 (Albo, Vallejo et al. 2017) C2H5OH 10.3 OD Cu/C-1000 (Cu-based HKUST-1) −0.1 V vs. RHE	 CH 3OH 45.2 (Zhao, Liu et al. 2017) C2H5OH Cu2(L)-e/Cu −1.4 V vs. Ag/Ag+	 HCOOH 90.5 (Kang, Li et al. 2020)  
Metal–Organic Frameworks 205 
well as CO2RRs, are frequently studied electrocatalytic reactions that are well estab￾lished. In all these electrocatalytic reactions, noble metal catalysts, such as Pt or 
IrO2/RuO2, serve as the benchmark catalysts and their scarcity, as well as high cost, 
demand the search for cheaper alternatives with excellent electrocatalytic perfor￾mance. As alternatives, inorganic transition metals, metal oxides, metal-free carbon 
composites, and others were widely investigated for their electrocatalytic behavior. 
Among these, MOF-derived catalysts have secured a special place as they contain 
both the metal sites as well as conductive carbon matrices with high surface area, 
intrinsic porosity, and other properties well suited for electrocatalysis. From previ￾ous studies, it is evident that an ideal catalyst should contain active metal sites, car￾bon support, and high surface area. MOF-derived metal/metal oxide–based carbon 
materials satisfy these criteria. In addition, the chances to design MOF composites 
are plenty and offer unique physicochemical properties, stability under alkaline/ 
acidic conditions, and more. Theoretical studies supported by experimental tuning 
at the molecular level would offer plenty of chances for the generation of possible 
catalysts with efficient electrocatalytic activity. 
REFERENCES 
Albo, J., D. Vallejo, G. Beobide, O. Castillo, P. Castaño and A. Irabien (2017). “Copper-Based 
Metal—Organic Porous Materials for CO2 Electrocatalytic Reduction to Alcohols.” 
ChemSusChem 10(6): 1100–1109. 
Arán-Ais, R. M., D. Gao and B. Roldan Cuenya (2018). “Structure- and Electrolyte-Sensitivity 
in CO2 Electroreduction.” Accounts of Chemical Research 51(11): 2906–2917. 
Cai, M., Q. Liu, Z. Xue, Y. Li, Y. Fan, A. Huang, M.-R. Li, M. Croft, T. A. Tyson, Z. Ke and 
G. Li (2020). “Constructing 2D MOFs from 2D LDHs: A Highly Efficient and Durable 
Electrocatalyst for Water Oxidation.” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 8(1): 190–195. 
Cao, C., D.-D. Ma, Q. Xu, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu (2019). “Semisacrificial Template Growth 
of Self-Supporting MOF Nanocomposite Electrode for Efficient Electrocatalytic Water 
Oxidation.” Advanced Functional Materials 29(6): 1807418. 
Carrasco, S. (2018). “Metal-Organic Frameworks for the Development of Biosensors: 
A Current Overview.” Biosensors 8(4). 
Chen, B., R. Li, G. Ma, X. Gou, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia (2015). “Cobalt sulfide/N,S Codoped 
Porous Carbon Core—Shell Nanocomposites as Superior Bifunctional Electrocatalysts 
for Oxygen Reduction and Evolution Reactions.” Nanoscale 7(48): 20674–20684. 
Chen, B., G. Ma, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia (2017). “Metal-Organic-Frameworks Derived Cobalt 
Embedded in Various Carbon Structures as Bifunctional Electrocatalysts for Oxygen 
Reduction and Evolution Reactions.” Scientific Reports 7(1): 5266. 
Chen, J., P. Zhuang, Y. Ge, H. Chu, L. Yao, Y. Cao, Z. Wang, M. O. L. Chee, P. Dong, 
J. Shen, M. Ye and P. M. Ajayan (2019). “Sublimation-Vapor Phase Pseudomorphic 
Transformation of Template-Directed MOFs for Efficient Oxygen Evolution Reaction.” 
Advanced Functional Materials 29(37): 1903875. 
Chen, Y., S. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Dong, W. Chen, Z. Li, R. Shen, L. Zheng, Z. Zhuang, D. Wang 
and Y. Li (2017). “Isolated Single Iron Atoms Anchored on N-Doped Porous Carbon as 
an Efficient Electrocatalyst for the Oxygen Reduction Reaction.” Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition 56(24): 6937–6941. 
Dai, X., M. Liu, Z. Li, A. Jin, Y. Ma, X. Huang, H. Sun, H. Wang and X. Zhang (2016). 
“Molybdenum Polysulfide Anchored on Porous Zr-Metal Organic Framework to Enhance 
the Performance of Hydrogen Evolution Reaction.” Journal of Physical Chemistry C 
120(23): 12539–12548. 206 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Dang, S., Q.-L. Zhu and Q. Xu (2017). “Nanomaterials Derived from Metal—Organic 
Frameworks.” Nature Reviews Materials 3(1): 17075. 
Dong, B.-X., S.-L. Qian, F.-Y. Bu, Y.-C. Wu, L.-G. Feng, Y.-L. Teng, W.-L. Liu and Z.-W. Li 
(2018). “Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 to CO by a Heterogeneous Catalyst of Fe— 
Porphyrin-Based Metal—Organic Framework.” ACS Applied Energy Materials 1(9): 
4662–4669. 
Dong, R., M. Pfeffermann, H. Liang, Z. Zheng, X. Zhu, J. Zhang and X. Feng (2015). “Large￾Area, Free-Standing, Two-Dimensional Supramolecular Polymer Single-Layer Sheets for 
Highly Efficient Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution.” Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition 54(41): 12058–12063. 
Dong, R., Z. Zheng, D. C. Tranca, J. Zhang, N. Chandrasekhar, S. Liu, X. Zhuang, G. Seifert 
and X. Feng (2017). “Immobilizing Molecular Metal Dithiolene—Diamine Complexes 
on 2D Metal—Organic Frameworks for Electrocatalytic H2 Production.” Chemistry—A 
European Journal 23(10): 2255–2260. 
Du, J., F. Li and L. Sun (2021). “Metal—Organic Frameworks and Their Derivatives as 
Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction.” Chemical Society Reviews 50(4): 
2663–2695. 
Guo, Y., H. Yang, X. Zhou, K. Liu, C. Zhang, Z. Zhou, C. Wang and W. Lin (2017). 
“Electrocatalytic Reduction of CO2 to CO with 100% Faradaic Efficiency by Using 
Pyrolyzed Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks Supported on Carbon Nanotube Networks.” 
Journal of Materials Chemistry A 5(47): 24867–24873. 
Hai, G., X. Jia, K. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Wu and G. Wang (2018). “High-Performance Oxygen 
Evolution Catalyst using Two-Dimensional Ultrathin Metal-Organic Frameworks 
Nanosheets.” Nano Energy 44: 345–352. 
Hinogami, R., S. Yotsuhashi, M. Deguchi, Y. Zenitani, H. Hashiba and Y. Yamada (2012). 
“Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide using a Copper Rubeanate Metal Organic 
Framework.” ECS Electrochemistry Letters 1(4): H17–H19. 
Hod, I., M. D. Sampson, P. Deria, C. P. Kubiak, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp (2015). 
“Fe-Porphyrin-Based Metal—Organic Framework Films as High-Surface Concentration, 
Heterogeneous Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of CO2.” ACS Catalysis 5(11): 
6302–6309. 
Hu, A., Q. Pang, C. Tang, J. Bao, H. Liu, K. Ba, S. Xie, J. Chen, J. Chen, Y. Yue, Y. Tang, Q. Li and 
Z. Sun (2019). “Epitaxial Growth and Integration of Insulating Metal—Organic Frameworks 
in Electrochemistry.” Journal of the American Chemical Society 141(28): 11322–11327. 
Huan, T. N., N. Ranjbar, G. Rousse, M. Sougrati, A. Zitolo, V. Mougel, F. Jaouen and M. 
Fontecave (2017). “Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 Catalyzed by Fe-N-C Materials: 
A Structure—Selectivity Study.” ACS Catalysis 7(3): 1520–1525. 
Huang, J., Y. Li, R.-K. Huang, C.-T. He, L. Gong, Q. Hu, L. Wang, Y.-T. Xu, X.-Y. Tian, S.-Y. 
Liu, Z.-M. Ye, F. Wang, D.-D. Zhou, W.-X. Zhang and J.-P. Zhang (2018). “Electrochemical 
Exfoliation of Pillared-Layer Metal—Organic Framework to Boost the Oxygen Evolution 
Reaction.” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 57(17): 4632–4636. 
Huang, Z.-F., J. Song, K. Li, M. Tahir, Y.-T. Wang, L. Pan, L. Wang, X. Zhang and J.-J. 
Zou (2016). “Hollow Cobalt-Based Bimetallic Sulfide Polyhedra for Efficient All-pH￾Value Electrochemical and Photocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution.” Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 138(4): 1359–1365. 
Jahan, M., Z. Liu and K. P. Loh (2013). “A  Graphene Oxide and Copper-Centered Metal 
Organic Framework Composite as a Tri-Functional Catalyst for HER, OER, and ORR.” 
Advanced Functional Materials 23(43): 5363–5372. 
Jiang, X., H. Wu, S. Chang, R. Si, S. Miao, W. Huang, Y. Li, G. Wang and X. Bao (2017). 
“Boosting CO2 Electroreduction Over Layered Zeolitic Imidazolate Frameworks Decorated 
with Ag2O Nanoparticles.” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 5(36): 19371–19377. Metal–Organic Frameworks 207 
Jiao, L., G. Wan, R. Zhang, H. Zhou, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang (2018). “From Metal—Organic 
Frameworks to Single-Atom Fe Implanted N-doped Porous Carbons: Efficient Oxygen 
Reduction in Both Alkaline and Acidic Media.” Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition 57(28): 8525–8529. 
Kang, X., L. Li, A. Sheveleva, X. Han, J. Li, L. Liu, F. Tuna, E. J. L. McInnes, B. Han, S. Yang 
and M. Schröder (2020). “Electro-Reduction of Carbon Dioxide at Low Over-Potential at 
a Metal—Organic Framework Decorated Cathode.” Nature Communications 11(1): 5464. 
Kang, X., Q. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and B. Han (2016). “Highly Efficient 
Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 to CH4 in an Ionic Liquid using a Metal—Organic 
Framework Cathode.” Chemical Science 7(1): 266–273. 
Khrizanforova, V., R. Shekurov, V. Miluykov, M. Khrizanforov, V. Bon, S. Kaskel, A. 
Gubaidullin, O. Sinyashin and Y. Budnikova (2020). “3D Ni and Co Redox-Active Metal— 
Organic Frameworks based on Ferrocenyl Diphosphinate and 4,4′ -Bipyridine Ligands 
as Efficient Electrocatalysts for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction.” Dalton Transactions 
49(9): 2794–2802. 
Kitagawa, S., R. Kitaura and S.-I. Noro (2004). “Functional Porous Coordination Polymers.” 
Angewandte Chemie International Edition 43(18): 2334–2375. 
Kornienko, N., Y. Zhao, C. S. Kley, C. Zhu, D. Kim, S. Lin, C. J. Chang, O. M. Yaghi and 
P. Yang (2015). “Metal—Organic Frameworks for Electrocatalytic Reduction of Carbon 
Dioxide.” Journal of the American Chemical Society 137(44): 14129–14135. 
Kortlever, R., J. Shen, K. J. P. Schouten, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. M. Koper (2015). “Catalysts 
and Reaction Pathways for the Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide.” Journal of 
Physical Chemistry Letters 6(20): 4073–4082. 
Kuang, M., Q. Wang, P. Han and G. Zheng (2017). “Cu, Co-Embedded N-Enriched 
Mesoporous Carbon for Efficient Oxygen Reduction and Hydrogen Evolution Reactions.” 
Advanced Energy Materials 7(17): 1700193. 
Kulkarni, A., S. Siahrostami, A. Patel and J. K. Nørskov (2018). “Understanding Catalytic 
Activity Trends in the Oxygen Reduction Reaction.” Chemical Reviews 118(5): 2302–2312. 
Lefèvre, M., E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J.-P. Dodelet (2009). “Iron-Based Catalysts with 
Improved Oxygen Reduction Activity in Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells.” Science 
324(5923): 71. 
Li, F., G.-F. Han, H.-J. Noh, S.-J. Kim, Y. Lu, H. Y. Jeong, Z. Fu and J.-B. Baek (2018). 
“Boosting Oxygen Reduction Catalysis with Abundant Copper Single Atom Active Sites.” 
Energy & Environmental Science 11(8): 2263–2269. 
Li, F.-L., P. Wang, X. Huang, D. J. Young, H.-F. Wang, P. Braunstein and J.-P. Lang (2019). 
“Large-Scale, Bottom-Up Synthesis of Binary Metal—Organic Framework Nanosheets 
for Efficient Water Oxidation.” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 58(21): 
7051–7056. 
Li, H., M. Eddaoudi, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi (1999). “Design and Synthesis of an 
Exceptionally Stable and Highly Porous Metal-Organic Framework.” Nature 402(6759): 
276–279. 
Li, J., M. Chen, D. A. Cullen, S. Hwang, M. Wang, B. Li, K. Liu, S. Karakalos, M. Lucero, 
H. Zhang, C. Lei, H. Xu, G. E. Sterbinsky, Z. Feng, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, Z. Wang 
and G. Wu (2018). “Atomically Dispersed Manganese Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction in 
Proton-Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells.” Nature Catalysis 1(12): 935–945. 
Li, J., W. Huang, M. Wang, S. Xi, J. Meng, K. Zhao, J. Jin, W. Xu, Z. Wang, X. Liu, Q. Chen, 
L. Xu, X. Liao, Y. Jiang, K. A. Owusu, B. Jiang, C. Chen, D. Fan, L. Zhou and L. Mai 
(2019). “Low-Crystalline Bimetallic Metal—Organic Framework Electrocatalysts with 
Rich Active Sites for Oxygen Evolution.” ACS Energy Letters 4(1): 285–292. 
Li, L., J. He, Y. Wang, X. Lv, X. Gu, P. Dai, D. Liu and X. Zhao (2019). “Metal—Organic 
Frameworks: A Promising Platform for Constructing Non-Noble Electrocatalysts for the 
Oxygen-Reduction Reaction.” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 7(5): 1964–1988. 208 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Li, W., F. Li, H. Yang, X. Wu, P. Zhang, Y. Shan and L. Sun (2019). “A  Bio-Inspired 
Coordination Polymer as Outstanding Water Oxidation Catalyst Via Second Coordination 
Sphere Engineering.” Nature Communications 10(1): 5074. 
Li, X., D.-D. Ma, C. Cao, R. Zou, Q. Xu, X.-T. Wu and Q.-L. Zhu (2019). “Inlaying Ultrathin 
Bimetallic MOF Nanosheets into 3D Ordered Macroporous Hydroxide for Superior 
Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution.” Small 15(35): 1902218. 
Li, X.-F., M.-Y. Lu, H.-Y. Yu, T.-H. Zhang, J. Liu, J.-H. Tian and R. Yang (2019). “Copper￾Metal Organic Frameworks Electrodeposited on Carbon Paper as an Enhanced Cathode 
for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction.” ChemElectroChem 6(17): 4507–4510. 
Liang, S., R. Chen, P. Yu, M. Ni, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang and W. Yang (2017). “Ionically Dispersed 
Fe(ii)—N and Zn(ii)—N in Porous Carbon for Acidic Oxygen Reduction Reactions.” 
Chemical Communications 53(83): 11453–11456. 
Liu, Q., X. Liu, L. Zheng and J. Shui (2018). “The Solid-Phase Synthesis of an Fe-N-C 
Electrocatalyst for High-Power Proton-Exchange Membrane Fuel Cells.” Angewandte 
Chemie International Edition 57(5): 1204–1208. 
Ma, S., G. A. Goenaga, A. V. Call and D.-J. Liu (2011). “Cobalt Imidazolate Framework 
as Precursor for Oxygen Reduction Reaction Electrocatalysts.” Chemistry—A European 
Journal 17(7): 2063–2067. 
Micheroni, D., G. Lan and W. Lin (2018). “Efficient Electrocatalytic Proton Reduction with 
Carbon Nanotube-Supported Metal—Organic Frameworks.” Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 140(46): 15591–15595. 
Moosavi, S. M., A. Nandy, K. M. Jablonka, D. Ongari, J. P. Janet, P. G. Boyd, Y. Lee, B. Smit 
and H. J. Kulik (2020). “Understanding the Diversity of the Metal-Organic Framework 
Ecosystem.” Nature Communications 11(1): 4068. 
Nam, D.-H., O. S. Bushuyev, J. Li, P. De Luna, A. Seifitokaldani, C.-T. Dinh, F. P. García 
de Arquer, Y. Wang, Z. Liang, A. H. Proppe, C. S. Tan, P. Todorović, O. Shekhah, C. 
M. Gabardo, J. W. Jo, J. Choi, M.-J. Choi, S.-W. Baek, J. Kim, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley, 
M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent (2018). “Metal—Organic Frameworks Mediate Cu 
Coordination for Selective CO2 Electroreduction.” Journal of the American Chemical 
Society 140(36): 11378–11386. 
Nam, D.-H., O. Shekhah, G. Lee, A. Mallick, H. Jiang, F. Li, B. Chen, J. Wicks, M. Eddaoudi 
and E. H. Sargent (2020). “Intermediate Binding Control Using Metal—Organic 
Frameworks Enhances Electrochemical CO2 Reduction.” Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 142(51): 21513–21521. 
Qian, Q., Y. Li, Y. Liu, L. Yu and G. Zhang (2019). “Ambient Fast Synthesis and Active Sites 
Deciphering of Hierarchical Foam-Like Trimetal—Organic Framework Nanostructures 
as a Platform for Highly Efficient Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalysis.” Advanced Materials 
31(23): 1901139. 
Qiao, J., Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang (2014). “A Review of Catalysts for the Electroreduction 
of Carbon Dioxide to Produce Low-Carbon Fuels.” Chemical Society Reviews 43(2): 
631–675. 
Qin, J.-S., D.-Y. Du, W. Guan, X.-J. Bo, Y.-F. Li, L.-P. Guo, Z.-M. Su, Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-Q. Lan 
and H.-C. Zhou (2015). “Ultrastable Polymolybdate-Based Metal—Organic Frameworks 
as Highly Active Electrocatalysts for Hydrogen Generation from Water.” Journal of the 
American Chemical Society 137(22): 7169–7177. 
Qiu, Y.-L., H.-X. Zhong, T.-T. Zhang, W.-B. Xu, P.-P. Su, X.-F. Li and H.-M. Zhang (2018). 
“Selective Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide Using Cu Based Metal Organic 
Framework for CO2 Capture.” ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 10(3): 2480–2489. 
Senthil Kumar, R., S. Senthil Kumar and M. Anbu Kulandainathan (2012). “Highly Selective 
Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide using Cu Based Metal Organic Framework 
as an Electrocatalyst.” Electrochemistry Communications 25: 70–73. Metal–Organic Frameworks 209 
Senthil Raja, D., X.-F. Chuah and S.-Y. Lu (2018). “In Situ Grown Bimetallic MOF-Based 
Composite as Highly Efficient Bifunctional Electrocatalyst for Overall Water Splitting 
with Ultrastability at High Current Densities.” Advanced Energy Materials 8(23): 
1801065. 
Shao, P., L. C. Yi, S. M. Chen, T. H. Zhou and J. Zhang (2020). “Metal-Organic Frameworks 
for Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide: The Role of Metal Centers.” Journal 
of Energy Chemistry 40: 156–170. 
Shekurov, R., V. Khrizanforova, L. Gilmanova, M. Khrizanforov, V. Miluykov, O. Kataeva, Z. 
Yamaleeva, T. Burganov, T. Gerasimova, A. Khamatgalimov, S. Katsyuba, V. Kovalenko, 
Y. Krupskaya, V. Kataev, B. Büchner, V. Bon, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel, A. Gubaidullin, O. 
Sinyashin and Y. Budnikova (2019). “Zn and Co Redox Active Coordination Polymers as 
Efficient Electrocatalysts.” Dalton Transactions 48(11): 3601–3609. 
Shi, Q., S. Fu, C. Zhu, J. Song, D. Du and Y. Lin (2019). “Metal—Organic Frameworks-Based 
Catalysts for Electrochemical Oxygen Evolution.” Materials Horizons 6(4): 684–702. 
Singh, C., S. Mukhopadhyay and I. Hod (2021). “Metal—Organic Framework Derived 
Nanomaterials for Electrocatalysis: Recent Developments for CO2 and N2 Reduction.” 
Nano Convergence 8(1): 1. 
Su, X., Y. Wang, J. Zhou, S. Gu, J. Li and S. Zhang (2018). “Operando Spectroscopic 
Identification of Active Sites in NiFe Prussian Blue Analogues as Electrocatalysts: 
Activation of Oxygen Atoms for Oxygen Evolution Reaction.” Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 140(36): 11286–11292. 
Tabassum, H., W. Guo, W. Meng, A. Mahmood, R. Zhao, Q. Wang and R. Zou (2017). 
“Metal—Organic Frameworks Derived Cobalt Phosphide Architecture Encapsulated 
into B/N Co-Doped Graphene Nanotubes for All pH Value Electrochemical Hydrogen 
Evolution.” Advanced Energy Materials 7(9): 1601671. 
Tang, H., S. Cai, S. Xie, Z. Wang, Y. Tong, M. Pan and X. Lu (2016). “Metal—Organic￾Framework-Derived Dual Metal- and Nitrogen-Doped Carbon as Efficient and Robust 
Oxygen Reduction Reaction Catalysts for Microbial Fuel Cells.” Advanced Science 3(2): 
1500265. 
Wang, H.-F., L. Chen, H. Pang, S. Kaskel and Q. Xu (2020). “MOF-Derived Electrocatalysts 
for Oxygen Reduction, Oxygen Evolution and Hydrogen Evolution Reactions.” Chemical 
Society Reviews 49(5): 1414–1448. 
Wang, J., Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. 
Wu and Y. Li (2017). “Design of N-Coordinated Dual-Metal Sites: A Stable and Active 
Pt-Free Catalyst for Acidic Oxygen Reduction Reaction.” Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 139(48): 17281–17284. 
Wang, Q. and D. Astruc (2020). “State of the Art and Prospects in Metal—Organic Framework 
(MOF)-Based and MOF-Derived Nanocatalysis.” Chemical Reviews 120(2): 1438–1511. 
Wang, R., X.-Y. Dong, J. Du, J.-Y. Zhao and S.-Q. Zang (2018). “MOF-Derived Bifunctional 
Cu3P Nanoparticles Coated by a N,P-Codoped Carbon Shell for Hydrogen Evolution and 
Oxygen Reduction.” Advanced Materials 30(6): 1703711. 
Wang, S.-S., L. Jiao, Y. Qian, W.-C. Hu, G.-Y. Xu, C. Wang and H.-L. Jiang (2019). “Boosting 
Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution over Metal—Organic Frameworks by Plasmon￾Induced Hot-Electron Injection.” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 58(31): 
10713–10717. 
Wang, X., Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. 
Yang, X. Hong, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li (2018). “Regulation of Coordination Number over 
Single Co Sites: Triggering the Efficient Electroreduction of CO2.” Angewandte Chemie 
International Edition 57(7): 1944–1948. 
Wang, X., H. Zhang, H. Lin, S. Gupta, C. Wang, Z. Tao, H. Fu, T. Wang, J. Zheng, G. Wu and X. 
Li (2016). “Directly Converting Fe-Doped Metal—Organic Frameworks into Highly Active 
and Stable Fe-N-C Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction in Acid.” Nano Energy 25: 110–119. 210 Nanomaterials for Sustainable Energy Applications 
Wang, X.-L., L.-Z. Dong, M. Qiao, Y.-J. Tang, J. Liu, Y. Li, S.-L. Li, J.-X. Su and Y.-Q. 
Lan (2018). “Exploring the Performance Improvement of the Oxygen Evolution Reaction 
in a Stable Bimetal—Organic Framework System.” Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition 57(31): 9660–9664. 
Wang, Y., P. Hou, Z. Wang and P. Kang (2017). “Zinc Imidazolate Metal—Organic 
Frameworks (ZIF-8) for Electrochemical Reduction of CO2 to CO.” ChemPhysChem 
18(22): 3142–3147. 
Wang, Y.-R., Q. Huang, C.-T. He, Y. Chen, J. Liu, F.-C. Shen and Y.-Q. Lan (2018). “Oriented 
Electron Transmission in Polyoxometalate-Metalloporphyrin Organic Framework for 
Highly Selective Electroreduction of CO2.” Nature Communications 9(1): 4466. 
Wu, R., Y. Xue, B. Liu, K. Zhou, J. Wei and S. H. Chan (2016). “Cobalt Diselenide 
Nanoparticles Embedded within Porous Carbon Polyhedra as Advanced Electrocatalyst 
for Oxygen Reduction Reaction.” Journal of Power Sources 330: 132–139. 
Wu, Y.-P., W. Zhou, J. Zhao, W.-W. Dong, Y.-Q. Lan, D.-S. Li, C. Sun and X. Bu (2017). 
“Surfactant-Assisted Phase-Selective Synthesis of New Cobalt MOFs and Their Efficient 
Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution Reaction.” Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition 56(42): 13001–13005. 
Xia, W., A. Mahmood, Z. Liang, R. Zou and S. Guo (2016). “Earth-Abundant Nanomaterials 
for Oxygen Reduction.” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 55(8): 2650–2676. 
Xia, W., J. Zhu, W. Guo, L. An, D. Xia and R. Zou (2014). “Well-Defined Carbon Polyhedrons 
Prepared from Nano Metal—Organic Frameworks for Oxygen Reduction.” Journal of 
Materials Chemistry A 2(30): 11606–11613. 
Xu, M., L. Han, Y. Han, Y. Yu, J. Zhai and S. Dong (2015). “Porous CoP Concave Polyhedron 
Electrocatalysts Synthesized from Metal—Organic Frameworks with Enhanced 
Electrochemical Properties for Hydrogen Evolution.” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 
3(43): 21471–21477. 
Xu, Y., B. Li, S. Zheng, P. Wu, J. Zhan, H. Xue, Q. Xu and H. Pang (2018). “Ultrathin 
Two-Dimensional Cobalt—Organic Framework Nanosheets for High-Performance 
Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution.” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 6(44): 
22070–22076. 
Xue, Z., Y. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Geng, B. Jia, J. Tang, S. Bao, H.-P. Wang, Y. Fan, Z.-w. Wei, 
Z. Zhang, Z. Ke, G. Li and C.-Y. Su (2018). “Modulating Electronic Structure of Metal￾Organic Framework for Efficient Electrocatalytic Oxygen Evolution.” Advanced Energy 
Materials 8(29): 1801564. 
Yaghi, O. M., M. O’Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim (2003). 
“Reticular Synthesis and the Design of New Materials.” Nature 423(6941): 705–714. 
Ye, L., J. Liu, Y. Gao, C. Gong, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, C. Wöll and L. Sun (2016). “Highly 
Oriented MOF Thin Film-Based Electrocatalytic Device for the Reduction of CO2 
to CO Exhibiting High Faradaic Efficiency.” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 4(40): 
15320–15326. 
Ye, Y., F. Cai, H. Li, H. Wu, G. Wang, Y. Li, S. Miao, S. Xie, R. Si, J. Wang and X. Bao 
(2017). “Surface Functionalization of ZIF-8 with Ammonium Ferric Citrate Toward High 
Exposure of Fe-N Active Sites for Efficient Oxygen and Carbon Dioxide Electroreduction.” 
Nano Energy 38: 281–289. 
Yin, P., T. Yao, Y. Wu, L. Zheng, Y. Lin, W. Liu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, X. Hong, Z. Deng, G. Zhou, 
S. Wei and Y. Li (2016). “Single Cobalt Atoms with Precise N-Coordination as Superior 
Oxygen Reduction Reaction Catalysts.” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 
55(36): 10800–10805. 
Zaman, N., T. Noor and N. Iqbal (2021). “Recent Advances in the Metal—Organic Framework￾Based Electrocatalysts for the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction in Water Splitting: A Review.” 
RSC Advances 11(36): 21904–21925. Metal–Organic Frameworks 211 
Zhang, C., B. An, L. Yang, B. Wu, W. Shi, Y.-C. Wang, L.-S. Long, C. Wang and W. Lin 
(2016). “Sulfur-Doping Achieves Efficient Oxygen Reduction in Pyrolyzed Zeolitic 
Imidazolate Frameworks.” Journal of Materials Chemistry A 4(12): 4457–4463. 
Zhang, D., W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Chen, L. Zheng, Y. Gong, Q. Li, R. Shen, Y. Han, W.-C. 
Cheong, L. Gu and Y. Li (2018). “Isolated Fe and Co Dual Active Sites on Nitrogen-Doped 
Carbon for a Highly Efficient Oxygen Reduction Reaction.” Chemical Communications 
54(34): 4274–4277. 
Zhang, H., S. Hwang, M. Wang, Z. Feng, S. Karakalos, L. Luo, Z. Qiao, X. Xie, C. Wang, D. 
Su, Y. Shao and G. Wu (2017). “Single Atomic Iron Catalysts for Oxygen Reduction in 
Acidic Media: Particle Size Control and Thermal Activation.” Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 139(40): 14143–14149. 
Zhang, J., W. Cai, F. X. Hu, H. Yang and B. Liu (2021). “Recent Advances in Single Atom 
Catalysts for the Electrochemical Carbon Dioxide Reduction Reaction.” Chemical Science 
12(20): 6800–6819. 
Zhang, L., S. Li, C. J. Gómez-García, H. Ma, C. Zhang, H. Pang and B. Li (2018). “Two 
Novel Polyoxometalate-Encapsulated Metal—Organic Nanotube Frameworks as Stable 
and Highly Efficient Electrocatalysts for Hydrogen Evolution Reaction.” ACS Applied 
Materials & Interfaces 10(37): 31498–31504. 
Zhang, W., Y. Hu, L. Ma, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, X. Xue, R. Chen, S. Yang and Z. Jin (2018). 
“Progress and Perspective of Electrocatalytic CO2 Reduction for Renewable Carbonaceous 
Fuels and Chemicals.” Advanced Science 5(1): 1700275. 
Zhao, C., X. Dai, T. Yao, W. Chen, X. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li (2017). 
“Ionic Exchange of Metal—Organic Frameworks to Access Single Nickel Sites for Efficient 
Electroreduction of CO2.” Journal of the American Chemical Society 139(24): 8078–8081. 
Zhao, K., Y. Liu, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. Yu (2017). “CO2 Electroreduction at Low 
Overpotential on Oxide-Derived Cu/Carbons Fabricated from Metal Organic Framework.” 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces 9(6): 5302–5311. 
Zhao, S., H. Yin, L. Du, L. He, K. Zhao, L. Chang, G. Yin, H. Zhao, S. Liu and Z. Tang 
(2014). “Carbonized Nanoscale Metal—Organic Frameworks as High Performance 
Electrocatalyst for Oxygen Reduction Reaction.” ACS Nano 8(12): 12660–12668. 
Zhao, S., Y. Wang, J. Dong, C.-T. He, H. Yin, P. An, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Gao, L. Zhang, J. 
Lv, J. Wang, J. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Zhao and 
Z. Tang (2016). “Ultrathin Metal—Organic Framework Nanosheets for Electrocatalytic 
Oxygen Evolution.” Nature Energy 1(12): 16184. 
Zhao, X., B. Pattengale, D. Fan, Z. Zou, Y. Zhao, J. Du, J. Huang and C. Xu (2018). “Mixed￾Node Metal—Organic Frameworks as Efficient Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Evolution 
Reaction.” ACS Energy Letters 3(10): 2520–2526. 
Zhou, W., D.-D. Huang, Y.-P. Wu, J. Zhao, T. Wu, J. Zhang, D.-S. Li, C. Sun, P. Feng and X. 
Bu (2019). “Stable Hierarchical Bimetal—Organic Nanostructures as High Performance 
Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction.” Angewandte Chemie International 
Edition 58(13): 4227–4231. 
Zhu, R., J. Ding, Y. Xu, J. Yang, Q. Xu and H. Pang (2018). “π-Conjugated Molecule Boosts 
Metal—Organic Frameworks as Efficient Oxygen Evolution Reaction Catalysts.” Small 
14(50): 1803576. 
Zhuang, L., L. Ge, H. Liu, Z. Jiang, Y. Jia, Z. Li, D. Yang, R. K. Hocking, M. Li, L. Zhang, 
X. Wang, X. Yao and Z. Zhu (2019). “A Surfactant-Free and Scalable General Strategy 
for Synthesizing Ultrathin Two-Dimensional Metal—Organic Framework Nanosheets 
for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction.” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 58(38): 
13565–13572. 212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Index
 
Note: Page numbers in italics refer to figures, those in bold refer to tables. 
0D nanomaterials, 4, 147 
1D classification 
based on dimensionality, 4–5 
based on electron confinement, 5–7 
2D classification 
based on dimensionality, 4–5 
based on electron confinement, 5–7 
2D nanomaterial-based electrocatalysts for ORR, 
37–38 
3D classification 
based on dimensionality, 4–5 
based on electron confinement, 5–7 
3D nanomaterial-based electrocatalysts for ORR, 
39–40 
A 
acidic media, for hydrogen evolution reactions, 
109, 196–198, 197 
acidic pathways for ORR in fuel cells, 26 
activated carbon, 124 
alkali metal batteries, 172–175 
alkaline media, for hydrogen evolution reactions, 
109, 196–198, 197 
alkaline pathways for ORR in fuel cells, 27 
ammonia production, in nitrogen reduction 
reaction, 113–115 
amoxicillin, 153 
Anderson-Evans structure synthesis, 58 
anodes 
alkali metals, 172 
fuel cells, 25 
lithium-sulfer batteries, 170–171 
polymer nanocomposites in lithium-ion 
batteries, 129–130, 133–135 
silica in lithium-ion batteries, 163–166 
see also electrodes 
artificial materials, 4 
asymmetric-type hybrid supercapacitors, 68–69 
automobiles, 16, 78 
B 
batteries 
alkali metal batteries, 172–175 
energy and power density, 77–79, 78, 79 
lithium-sulfur batteries, 166 
measurement of electrochemical 
characteristics, 84–89 
see also lithium-ion batteries 
Bielefeld wheel synthesis, 60–61 
bimetallic MOF, 190 
bioimaging, with carbon quantom dots, 153–154 
biosensing, with carbon quantom dots, 152–153 
biscrolled yarns, 92, 93 
blue lemon polyoxometalate (POM) cluster, 61 
Bode plot, 88, 89 
Bohr radius, 5 
C 
capacitors 
electrochemical capacitors (ECs), 50, 66 
energy and power density, 77–79, 78, 79 
see also supercapacitors 
carbon-based nanomaterials 
life cycles for electronics and energy 
applications, 20 
as metal-free catalysts, 9, 10–12 
in polymer nanocomposites, 122, 124 
structures, 10–12 
in supercapacitors, 79, see also 
supercapacitors, with carbon-based 
electrodes 
carbon dioxide reduction reaction 
with hollow-structured nanomaterials, 
111–112, 113 
in metal–organic frameworks, 198, 201, 
201–203, 204 
carbon–metal composites, 11 
carbon nanotubes, see CNT 
carbon particulate-based composites, POM 
synthesis, 63–64 
carbon quantom dots, 147–159 
applications, 152–155
 
bioimaging, 153–154
 
biosensing, 152–153
 
chemical sensing, 152
 
photocatalysis, 155
 
photovoltaics, 154–155
 
bottom-up approaches to synthesis, 149–152 
hydrothermal/solvothermal method, 
149–151 
microwave method, 151 
pyrolysis method, 151–152 
wet-chemical method, 152 
luminescent property, 147, 149–150
 
top-down approach to synthesis, 148
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Index 213 
catalysts 
for hybrid technologies, 17–18 
as metal and metal-free nanomaterials, 8–10 
see also electrocatalysts 
cathodes 
boosting ORR, see nanomaterials used as 
electrocatalysts for boosting ORR 
in fuel cells, 25–26 
polymer nanocomposites in lithium-ion 
batteries, 129–130, 132–133 
sulfur in lithium-sulfur batteries, 166–169 
see also electrodes 
chemical sensing with carbon quantom dots, 152
 
CNT-based flexible supercapacitors, 90–93
 
CNT (carbon nanotube) polymer nanocomposites
 
in lithium-ion batteries, 132–133 
in supercapacitors, 125
 
CNT-POMs and carbon nanofiber-POMs, 65–66
 
coconut fiber-derived porous carbon, 96
 
coin-cell design of supercapacitors, 89, 90
 
composite hybrid supercapacitors (CHSs), 68–69
 
composites, see nanocomposites; polymer
 
nanocomposites 
conducting polymers (CPs), 68, 69, 122, see 

also supercapacitors, with polymer 

nanocomposites
 
conductive organic polymers (COPs), 61–62
 
copper-based MOF, 202
 
current density, 27
 
CV (cyclic voltammetric) curves for 

supercapacitor measurement, 84–86, 

125–126
 
cylindical stack design of supercapacitors, 89, 90
 
D 
Dawson-type POMs, 55, 58–59, 70
 
de Broglie wavelength, 5
 
dematerialization, 2
 
dendrite (nano)-based electrocatalysts for ORR, 

35–37 
density of electron states, 5–7 
dimensionality as classification of nanomaterials, 
4–5
 
direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs), 137
 
discrete energy for nanomaterials, 5–7
 
dung beetle forewing carbon (DBFC), 96
 
E 
EDLCs, see electrochemical double-layer 
capacitors 
EIS (electrochemical impedance spectroscopy) 

for supercapacitor measurement, 88, 

89, see also Nyquist plots
 
electrical double-layer capacitors, 50–52
 
electric vehicles, 78
 
electrocatalysts 
in fuel cells, see nanomaterials used as 
electrocatalysts for boosting ORR 
in metal–organic frameworks, see metal– 
organic frameworks 
see also catalysts 
electrocatalytic energy conversion, see hollow￾structured nanomaterials
 
electrocatalytic processes, 16–17
 
electrochemical capacitors (ECs), 50, 66
 
electrochemical cell, 13
 
electrochemical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs)
 
with carbon-based materials, 79–81, 84–89
 
with conducting polymers, 124
 
with POM materials, 51–52, 67–68
 
electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction, 
113–115 
electrochemical supercapacitors from POM, 
66–71
 
electrochemical water splitting, 108–111
 
electrochemistry, 13, 14, 187
 
electrodeposition, 13
 
electrodes, 51–52, 68–69, 121, 178
 
in supercapacitors, 80, 82, 84, 89–92
 
see also anodes; cathodes
 
electrolytes
 
in fuel cells, acidic and alkaline pathways for 

ORR, 26–27
 
in lithium-ion batteries, 121, 129–130
 
in solid-state supercapacitors, 92
 
in solid-state with polymer nanocomposites, 

135–136 
in supercapacitors, 89
 
electron conducting polymers, 122
 
electron confinement, 5–7
 
electron hopping, 176, 177
 
energy conversion, see electrocatalysts; fuel cells
 
(FC); hollow-structured nanomaterials 
energy storage
 
components in devices, 53–54, 121
 
devices and their efficiencies, 77–79, 78, 79
 
see also batteries; metal-organic frameworks; 

polymer nanocomposites; POMs; 

silica-based materials; supercapacitors
 
etching, selectivity of hollow structures, 

105–106, 107
 
exciton Bohr radius, 5
 
F 
Faradaic processes, 13, 81–83
 
Faradaic supercapacitors, 67
 
Faraday’s first law, 13
 
flexible supercapacitor designs, 89
 
CNT-based, 90–93
 
graphene-based, 93–96
 
polymer composites, 129, 130
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
214 Index 
fossil fuels, prevalence, 19
 
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) method, 66
 
fuel cells (FC), 25–49
 
applications, 12
 
defined, 25
 
disadvantages of, 26
 
electrolyte pathways for ORR, 26–27
 
polymer nanocomposites as membranes, 

136–138
 
redox reaction, 25
 
types, 26, 137
 
types of nanomaterials used in, see
 
nanomaterials used as electrocatalysts 
for boosting ORR
 
functional materials, 4
 
functional nanomaterials, 3–8
 
functional organic molecules attached to silica 

frameworks, 162
 
G 
GCD (galvanostatic charge/discharge) for 
supercapacitor measurement, 86–88, 
126
 
gel polymer electrolyte (GPE), 135–136
 
giant big wheel synthesis, 60–61
 
graphene, in polymer nanocomposites, 122, 125, 

129, 130
 
graphene-based flexible supercapacitors, 93–96
 
graphene hydrogel-polyaniline (GH-PANI), 94, 

95
 
graphene-POMs hybrid sheet preparation, 64–65
 
graphene supercapacitors, 52, 68, 79
 
graphene-supported electrocatalysts for ORR
 
noble metals, 40–41 
nonprecious metals, 42
 
graphite in lithium-ion batteries, 133
 
green precursors for synthesis of carbon quantum 

dots, 149, 151
 
Guoy-Chapman electrical double-layer theory, 80
 
H 
hard templating method of hollow structures, 
104, 105
 
Helmholtz layer/plane, 80
 
Helmholtz-Perrin electrical double-layer theory,
 
80
 
HER, see hydrogen evolution reaction
 
hexaniobate, 55
 
hierarchical mesoporous carbons (HMCs), 71
 
hollow gold nanocages, 115
 
hollow-structured nanomaterials, 101–120
 
advantages, 102
 
design principles, 103, 105, 107
 
hard templating method, 104
 
ion exchange method, 106
 
Kirkendall effect, 107–108 
Ostwald ripening, 106–107 
sacrificial templating method, 104–105 
selective etching, 105–106 
soft templating method, 103–104 
electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction 

reaction, 111–112, 113
 
electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction, 

113–115
 
electrochemical water splitting, 108
 
hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), 

109–111, 112
 
oxygen evolution reaction (OER), 

108–109, 110
 
structural diversity, 102, 103
 
see also metal–organic frameworks
 
hybrid nanomaterials, for sustainable energy 
applications, 16–18
 
hybrid supercapacitors, 51, 67, 68–69, 84
 
hydrogen, as alternative fuel, 14, 19
 
hydrogen-blended compressed natural gas 

(HCNG), 19
 
hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
 
with hollow-structured nanomaterials, 

109–111, 112
 
in metal–organic frameworks, 196–198, 

199–200 
hydrothermal method for synthesis of carbon 
quantom dots, 149–151 
I
 
icosahedral inorganic superfullerenes 
(Keplerates), 59–60, 63
 
inorganic material–silica composites, 163
 
inorganic–organic hybrid materials, POM-

fabricated, 61–63
 
inorganic–organic hybrids, 16
 
intercalation pseudocapacitance, 82–83
 
ion conducting polymers, 122
 
ion exchange method of hollow structures, 106, 

107
 
IR drop, 86–87 
K 
Keggin-carbon hybrid electrode, 71
 
Keggin ion 
and compounds, 54–55 
synthesis of, 56–57 
Kegginite mineral, 57
 
Keggin POMs, 63–64
 
Keplerates (icosahedral inorganic 

superfullerenes), 59–60, 63
 
Keplerate-type POMS, 53
 
Kirkendall effect of hollow structures, 107,
 
107–108  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
L 
Index 215 
lacunary Keggin ion synthesis, 57–58 
Langmuir-Blodgett methods, 63 
layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembly, 62 
light-emitting diodes, 16 
LightScribe DVD optical drive, 93 
Lindqvist structure synthesis, 55–56 
lithium-ion batteries 
hybrid technologies, 18, 21 
with polymer nanocomposites, 129–135 
anode material, 133–135 
cathode material, 132–133 
with silica-based materials, 163–166 
lithium-sulfur batteries, 166–171 
silica as component of separator, 169–171 
silica as sulfur host, 167–169 
luminescent property of carbon quantom dots, 
147, 149–150 
M 
materials science, for sustainable energy 
applications, 18–20 
mechanochemistry, 19 
mesoporous silica materials, see silica-based 
materials 
metal-free nanomaterials as catalysts, 8–10 
metal nanocluster-based electrocatalysts for 
ORR, 29 
metal nanomaterials as catalysts, 8–10 
metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), 186–211 
applications and structure, 186–188 
carbon dioxide reduction, 198, 201, 201–203, 
204 
hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), 196–198, 
199–200 
oxygen evolution reaction (OER), 189–190, 
191–192 
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), 193, 
194–195, 196 
POM integration, 70–71, 202 
metal oxide-based nanocatalysts for ORR, 33–35 
metal-oxide composites in conducting polymers, 
127–128 
micelles, 103–104 
microwave method for synthesis of carbon 
quantom dots, 151 
mixed-metal nanocatalysts for ORR, 31–33 
MnO2 nanostructures, 127–128 
Mobil Composition of Matter No. 41, 160 
MOFs, see metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) 
molybdenum blue, 55, 60 
multiwalled carbon nanotube/polyaniline 
(MWCNT/PANI), 92 
MWNTs, 134 
MXenes, 164–166 
N 
Nafion, 137–138 
nanoclusters, 29 
nanocomposites, 11, 12–13, see also polymer 
nanocomposites; POMs 
nanodendrite-based electrocatalysts for ORR, 
35–37 
nanodots, 147 
nanofillers, 122 
nano-hedgehog POM cluster, 61 
nanomaterials, introduced, 1–24 
about the need for sustainable energy 
production, 1–2 
applications in sustainable energy, 9, 13–18 
carbon-based, 10–12 
categories of functional nanomaterials, 3 
control of size and shape, 7–8 
dimensionality classification, 4–5 
in electrochemistry, 13, 14 
electron confinement classification, 5–7 
hybrid nanomaterials, 16–18 
materials science, 18–20 
metal and metal-free, as catalysts, 8–10 
nanocomposites, 12–13 
nanotechnology and sustainable energy 
production, 2–3 
opportunities and challenges, 21 
nanomaterials used as electrocatalysts for 
boosting ORR, 27–42 
2D nanomaterial-based, 37–38 
3D nanomaterial-based, 39–40 
graphene-supported noble metals, 40–41 
graphene-supported nonprecious metals, 42 
metal nanocluster-based, 29 
metal oxide-based, 33–35 
mixed-metals, 31–33 
nanodendrite-based, 35–37 
noble metal-based, 27–29 
transition metal-based, 29–31 
nanosheets, in metal–organic frameworks, 
189–190 
nanotechnology 
definition, 3 
sustainable energy production, 2–3 
N-doped carbon nanomaterials, 12 
nitrogen reduction reaction, electrochemical, 
113–115 
noble metal-based nano-electrocatalysts for 
ORR, 27–29 
non-Faradaic processes, 13 
Nyquist plots, 88, 126, 127 
O 
one-dimensional (1D) classification 
based on dimensionality, 4–5  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
216 Index 
based on electron confinement, 5–7 
organic–inorganic hybrid materials, POM￾fabricated, 61–63 
organic linkers, 186–187 
Ostwald ripening of hollow structures, 106–107, 
107
 
overpotential, 101, 108
 
oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
 
with hollow-structured nanomaterials, 

108–109, 110
 
in metal–organic frameworks, 189–190, 

191–192 
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) 
in fuel cells, 9, 12, 26–27 
in metal–organic frameworks, 193, 194–195, 
196
 
see also nanomaterials used as 

electrocatalysts for boosting ORR
 
P 
PANI (polyaniline)
 
graphene hydrogel-polyaniline (GH-PANI),
 
94, 95
 
multiwalled carbon nanotube/PANI 

(MWCNT/PANI), 92
 
PANI-POM hybrid materials, 62
 
polymer nanocomposites, 125–130
 
PEDOT, 68, 132
 
pentagonal units and self-assembly for 
nanoscopic molecular containers, 
59–61 
icosahedral inorganic superfullerenes 
(Keplerates), 59–60
 
large wheel or Bielefeld wheel, 60–61
 
nano-hedgehog or blue lemon, 61
 
photocatalysis
 
with carbon quantom dots, 155
 
with hybrid nanomaterials, 16–17
 
photovoltaics, with carbon quantom dots, 
154–155
 
polymer composite electrolyte (PCE), 135, 136
 
polymer electrolyte membranes, 137–138
 
polymer nanocomposites, 121–146
 
definition and properties of, 122
 
energy storage systems, 121
 
as fuel cell membranes, 136–138
 
in lithium-ion batteries, 129–135
 
preparation strategies: covalent bonding and 

noncovalent adsorption, 123
 
as solid-state electrolyte, 135–136
 
in supercapacitors, 123–129, see also
 
supercapacitors, with polymer 
nanocomposites
 
polymer–silica composites, 162
 
polypyrrol (PPy), 71, 95, 125, 127–128, 134
 
POMs (polyoxometalates) composite materials
 
applications as electrochemical 
supercapacitors, 66–71
 
as electrode material, 52–54
 
history of POM chemistry, 54–55
 
synthesis methodologies, 54–66
 
Anderson-Evans structure, 58
 
carbon nanotube-POMs and carbon 

nanofiber-POMs, 65–66
 
carbon particulate-based composites, 

63–64 
graphene-POMs hybrid sheet, 64–65 
inorganic-organic hybrid materials, 61–63 
Keggin ion, 56–57 
lacunary Keggin ion, 57–58 
Lindqvist structure, 55–56 
pentagonal units and self-assembly, 59–61 
Wells-Dawson structure, 58–59 
precious metals, 11
 
proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs), 

137
 
pseudocapacitors
 
based on surface functionalization of 

mesoporous silica, 176–178, 179
 
with carbon-based materials, 81–84, 84–89
 
with conducting polymers, 124–125
 
with POM materials, 51, 67
 
pyrolysis method for synthesis of carbon 
quantom dots, 151–152 
Q 
quantom dots, see carbon quantom dots 
quantum confinement, 5–7 
R 
Ragone plots, 77, 78
 
redox pseudocapacitance, 82–83
 
redox reaction in fuel cells, 25
 
reduced multilayer graphene oxide (RMGO), 

93, 94
 
S 
sacrificial templating method of hollow 
structures, 104–105 
selective etching of hollow structures, 105–106, 
107
 
self-assembly, see pentagonal units and self￾assembly for nanoscopic molecular 
containers 
self-cleaning nanoscale layers, 16
 
shape control of nanomaterials, 7–8
 
silica-based materials, 160–185
 
alkali metal batteries, 172–175
 
categories of, 162–163
 
energy storage issues, 163
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Index 217 
lithium-ion batteries, 163–166 
lithium-sulfur batteries, 166–171 
procedures for preparation of nanostructured 
silica, 160–162 
pseudocapacitors based on surface 
functionalization of mesoporous 
silica, 176–178, 179 
single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT), 90–91, 
125 
size control of nanomaterials, 7–8 
soft templating method of hollow structures, 
103–104, 105 
solid polymer electrolyte (SPE), 135 
solid-state electrolytes 
with polymer nanocomposites, 135–136 
in supercapacitors, 92 
solid-state lithium-ion batteries, 129–130, 131 
solvothermal method for synthesis of carbon 
quantom dots, 149–151 
stack design of supercapacitors, 89, 90 
stainless steel yarns, 95–96 
Stern model, 80 
supercapacitors 
EDLCs, see electrochemical double-layer 
capacitors
 
energy density, 50, 52, 77–79, 79, 80
 
hybrid, 51, 67, 68–69, 84
 
with POM electrodes, see POMs
 
power density, 66–67, 77–79, 79
 
pseudo, see pseudocapacitors
 
types of, 51–52, 124
 
supercapacitors, with carbon-based electrodes, 
77–100 
carbon-based nanostructures as electrode 
materials, 79 
charge storage mechanisms, 79–84
 
of EDLCs, 79–81
 
of hybrid SCs, 84
 
of pseudocapacitors, 81–84
 
device designs for commercial applications, 
89, 90
 
flexible SCs, CNT-based, 90–93
 
flexible SCs, graphene-based, 93–96
 
measurement of electrochemical
 
characteristics, 84–89
 
CV curves, 84–86
 
EIS, 88, 89
 
GCD, 86–88
 
supercapacitors, with polymer nanocomposites, 
123–129 
carbon nanostructured composites, 125–127 
flexible supercapacitors, 129, 130 
metal-oxide composites, 127–128 
ternary composites, 128–129 
surface plasmon resonance, 8 
sustainable energy 
advantages, 15 
applications with nanomaterials, 9, 13–18 
nanotechnology, 2–3 
see also energy conversion; energy storage 
T 
Tafel slopes, 108–111 
templated methods of designing hollow 
structures, 103–105 
ternary composites, 128–129 
three-cell electrode, 84 
three-dimensional (3D) classification 
based on dimensionality, 4–5 
based on electron confinement, 5–7 
three-dimensional (3D) nanomaterial-based 
electrocatalysts for ORR, 39–40 
transition metal-based nanocatalysts for ORR, 
29–31 
transition metal oxides, in polymer composites, 
127 
transmaterialization, 2 
two-cell electrode, 84 
two-dimensional (2D) classification 
based on dimensionality, 4–5 
based on electron confinement, 5–7 
two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterial-based 
electrocatalysts for ORR, 37–38 
U 
ultra-capacitors, 50 
ultrathin graphene foam (UGF), 132 
underpotential deposition, 82–83 
V 
vanadium oxide, 132 
W 
water electrolysis, hybrid technologies for, 17 
wearable electronic fabrics, 94–95, 96, 129 
Wells-Dawson structure synthesis, 58–59 
wet-chemical method for synthesis of carbon 
quantom dots, 152 
wheel-shaped nanocontainer molecules, 
60–61 
Y 
yarns 
biscrolled, 92, 93 
stainless steel, 95–96 
Z 
zero-dimensional (0D) nanomaterials, 4, 147 
