NANOTECHNOLOGY FOR 
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
An Innovative and Eco-Friendly ApproachNANOTECHNOLOGY FOR 
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach
Edited by
Vishnu D. Rajput
Abhishek Singh
Tatiana M. Minkina
Krishan K. Verma
Awani Kumar SinghFirst edition published 2024
Apple Academic Press Inc. CRC Press
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW,
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA Suite 300, Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742 USA
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19, 4 Park Square, Milton Park,
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK
© 2024 by Apple Academic Press, Inc.
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
Reasonable eforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted 
to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to 
publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so 
we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized in any 
form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, microflming, and 
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on CCC 
please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identifcation 
and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
ISBN: 978-1-77491-235-5 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-77491-236-2 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-00333-312-8 (ebk)
CIP data on fle with US Library of Congress
CIP data on fle with Canada Library and ArchivesAbout the Editors
Dr. Vishnu D. Rajput
Vishnu D. Rajput, PhD, is Associate Professor (Leading Researcher) at 
Southern Federal University, Russia. His ongoing research is based on soil 
contamination, i.e, potentially toxic elements, and metallic nanoparticles, 
and investigating the bioaccumulation, bio/geo-transformations, uptake, 
translocation, and toxic effects of metallic nanoparticles on plant physiology, 
morphology, anatomy, the ultrastructure of cellular and subcellular organelles, 
cytomorphometric modifications, and DNA damage. He comprehensively 
detailed the state of research in environmental science in regard to “how 
nanoparticles/heavy metals interact with plants, soil, microbial community, 
and the larger environment. He has published over 200 publications, including 
over 100 peer-reviewed articles, nine books, and many book chapters and 
conference articles. He is an internationally recognized reviewer and has 
received outstanding reviewing certificates from Elsevier and Springer. He 
is an editorial board member of various journals. He received “certificate 
for appreciation 2019” and “Certificate of Honor 2020” from the Southern 
Federal University, Russia, for his outstanding contribution in academic, 
creative research, and publication activities.
Dr. Abhishek Singh
Abhishek Singh is presently a PhD Research Scholar at Sardar Vallabh Bhai 
Patel University of Agriculture and Technology, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh, 
India. He has published a book, four Scopus-indexed, and two book chapters, 
as well as review papers, abstracts, and Hindi English popular articles in 
different national international level journal and magazines. He presented a 
poster presentation at the XIV Agricultural Sciences Congress–2019, ICAR, 
New Delhi, and presented at the 5th Global Outreach Conference in India. 
He has been a member of the different national and international scientific 
societies of agriculture. He earned an integrated MS in Plant Biotechnology vi About the Editors
at Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, Technology and Sciences 
(formerly Allahabad Agricultural Institute) Allahabad, India.
Prof. Dr. Tatiana M. Minkina
Tatiana M. Minkina, PhD, is the Head of the Soil Science and Land 
Evaluation Department of Southern Federal University, Russia. She is 
also Head of the International Master’s Degree Educational Program 
“Management and Estimation of Land Resources” (2015–2022), accredited 
by ACQUIN. Her area of scientific interest is soil science, biogeochemistry 
of trace elements, environmental soil chemistry, including soil monitoring, 
assessment, modeling, and remediation using physicochemical treatment 
methods. Currently, she is handling projects funded by the Russian 
Scientific Foundation, Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian 
Federation, and Russian Foundation of Basic Research. She is a member of 
the Expert Group of Russian Academy of Science, International Committee 
on Contamination Land, Eurasian Soil Science Societies, International 
Committee on Protection of the Environment, and International Scientific 
Committee of the International Conferences on Biogeochemistry of Trace 
Elements. A prolific author, Dr. Minkina has published numerous scientific 
publications and has been an invited editor of the MDPI Open Access 
Journal by Water. She is an editorial board member of several journals as 
well. Dr. Minkina was awarded a Diploma of the Ministry of Education and 
Science of the Russian Federation for her many years of long-term work 
for development and improvement of the educational process, significant 
contribution to the training of highly qualified specialists.About the Editors vii
Dr. Krishan K. Verma
Krishan K. Verma, PhD, is a Visiting Scientist at the Sugarcane Research 
Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences and Guangxi Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Nanning, Guangxi, China. He has 10 years of research 
experience in the field of biotic and abiotic stresses, i.e., environmental 
toxicology, plant physiology, metallic nanoparticles. His research focuses on 
environmental toxicology, plant physiology and molecular biology, and their 
impacts on growth and physiological adaptations of plants to environment 
and how they affect the plant structure. He has published more than 54 
scientific research articles, including five books. He has been serving as an 
editorial board member of various peer-reviewed journals.
Prof. Dr. Awani Kumar Singh
Awani Kumar Singh, PhD, is presently working as Principal Scientist of 
Horticulture-Vegetable Science at the ICAR-IARI, New Delhi, India. He is 
a Fellow of CHAI, Noni, Royal Association for Science-led Socio-cultural 
Advancement (RASSA), and Progressive Horticulture. He has received a 
Best Scientist Award. To date, he has published many research papers in 
national and international journals of repute, research articles, research 
abstracts, book chapters, training manuals, and other publications, as well 
as three books. He has delivered many TV and radio talks on the topic of 
protected cultivation in DD1, DD-Kisan, FM-Gold, MGMG etc. He has 
developed eight high-yielding varieties of different vegetable crops. He has 
guided several MSc and PhD students in Vegetable Science. He has also 
contributed responsibility as Chairman and Co-chairman in various society 
seminars and symposia. He continues to promote protected cultivation cum 
hi-tech cum smart technology in vegetable crops.Contributors.............................................................................................................xi
Abbreviations.......................................................................................................... xv
Acknowledgment .................................................................................................... xix
Preface ................................................................................................................... xxi
PART I : Nanotechnology: An Introduction to Nanoparticles...........................1
1. Nanotechnology as the Cutting Edge for Sustainable Agriculture.............3
Vishnu D. Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Sapna Rawat, Ragini Sharma, 
Tatiana M. Minkina, Awani Kumar Singh, Victoria Shuvaeva, and Olga Nazarenko
PART II: Nanoparticles for Crop Production ...................................................17
2. Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means.........19
Krishan K. Verma, Munna Singh, Vishnu D. Rajput, Chhedi Lal Verma, and 
Marina Burachevskaya
3. Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests...................................37
Pravin Khaire, Someshree Mane, Tanaji Narute, and Narayan Musmade
PART III: Improving Soil Fertility and Crop Protection.................................57
4. Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture 
and Their Response on Soil Health and Plant Growth..............................59
Pramod U. Ingle,Vaishnavi S. Parma, and Aniket K. Gade
5. Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing 
Soil Fertility and Productivity .....................................................................75
Navodita Maurice
6. Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against 
Pathogenic Microbes and Pests..................................................................129
Immanuel Suresh J. and Iswareya Lakshimi V.
7. Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress............................163
Fathy Elbehiry, Hassan El-Ramady, and Heba Elbasiouny
Contentsx Contents
8. The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction 
with Soil Biota .............................................................................................183
Monika Mahajan, Anuchaya Devi, Bhavisha Sharma, and Rajeev Pratap Singh
PART IV: Emerging Nanotechnological Tools and 
Techniques for Crop Improvement ...........................................................203
9. Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in 
the Nano-Era ...............................................................................................205
Anamika Kashyap, Kunal Tanwar, Pooja Garg, Sujata Kumari, 
Pham Thi Thu Ha, Sanjay Singh, and Mahesh Rao
10. Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution...........225
Sukh Veer Singh, Rakhi Singh, and Sadhan Jyoti Dutta
11. Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement...........255
Mainak Barman, Surachita Das, Subhra Mukherjee, and Satish Kumar Singh
12. Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and 
Pest Management........................................................................................281
Zahra Ghorbanzadeh, Rasmieh Hamid, Mohammad Reza Ghafari, 
Bahador Maleknia, Rukam S. Tomar, and Feba Jacob Thoppurathu
13. Nanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding ..........307
Sapna Rawat, Abhishek Singh, Vishnu D Rajput, Ragini Sharma, 
Saglara Mandzhieva, and Awani Kumar Singh
14. Nanobionics Aid in Agriculture .................................................................325
Abhishek Singh, Priyadarshani Rajput, Sapna Rawat, Svetlana Sushkova, and 
Vishnu D. Rajput
15. Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as 
Sensing Materials........................................................................................333
Shivangi Mishra, Rakhi Singh, and Sukh Veer Singh
Index.....................................................................................................................351Contributors
Mainak Barman
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya, West Bengal 
Marina Burachevskaya
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia
Surachita Das
Department of Human Physiology, Vidyasagar University, West Bengal, India
Anuchaya Devi
Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 
Uttar Pradesh, India
Sadhan Jyoti Dutta
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, 
Haryana, India
Fathy Elbehiry
Central Laboratory of Environmental Studies, Kafr El-Sheikh University, Al-GeishStreet, 
Kafr El-Sheikh, Egypt
Heba Elbasiouny
Department of Environmental and Biological Sciences, Home Economics Faculty, Al-Azhar University, 
Tanta, Egypt
Aniket K. Gade
Department of Biotechnology, Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University, Amravati, Maharashtra, India
Pooja Garg
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Delhi 110012, India
Mohammad Reza Ghaffari
Department of Systems Biology, Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute of Iran (ABRII), 
Agricultural Research Education and Extension Organization (AREEO), Karaj, Iran
Zahra Ghorbanzadeh
Department of Systems Biology, Agricultural Biotechnology Research Institute of Iran (ABRII), 
Agricultural Research Education and Extension Organization (AREEO), Karaj, Iran
Pham Thi Thu Ha
Genomic Research Institute and Seed, Ton Duc Thang University, Vietnam
Rasmieh Hamid
Cotton Research Institute of Iran (CRII), Agricultural Research, Education and Extension Organization 
(AREEO), Gorgan, Iran
Pramod U. Ingle
Department of Biotechnology, Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University, Amravati, Maharashtra, India
Immanuel Suresh J.
Department of Microbiology, The American College, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, Indiaxii Contributors
Anamika Kashyap
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Delhi, India
Pravin Khaire
Department of Plant Pathology and Agriculture Microbiology, PGI, Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, 
Rahuri, Maharashtra, India
Sujata Kumari
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Delhi, India
Monika Mahajan
Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 
Uttar Pradesh, India
Bahador Maleknia
Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran
Saglara Mandzhieva
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia
Someshree Mane
Department of Plant Pathology and Agriculture Microbiology, PGI, Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, 
Rahuri, Maharashtra, India
Navodita Maurice
Prophyl Ltd., Dózsa György út 18, Mohács, Hungary
Tatiana M. Minkina
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia
Shivangi Mishra
Department of Food Science and Technology, National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship 
and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana, India
Subhra Mukherjee
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, Bidhan Chandra Krishi Viswavidyalaya, 
West Bengal, India
Narayan Musmade
Department of Plant Pathology and Agriculture Microbiology, PGI, Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, 
Rahuri, Maharashtra, India
Tanaji Narute
Department of Plant Pathology and Agriculture Microbiology, PGI, Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, 
Rahuri, Maharashtra, India
Olga Nazarenko
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia
Vaishnavi S. Parma
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, 
West Bengal, India
Priyadarshani Rajput
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia
Vishnu D. Rajput
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, RussiaContributors xiii
Hassan El-Ramady
Soil and Water Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Kafrelsheikh University, Kafr El-Sheikh, Egypt
Mahesh Rao
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Delhi 110012, India
Sapna Rawat
Department of Botany, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
Bhavisha Sharma
Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 
Uttar Pradesh, India
Ragini Sharma
Department of Zoology, Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana, India
Victoria Shuvaeva
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia
Abhishek Singh
Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, College of Agriculture, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel University 
of Agriculture and Technology, Meerut, Uttar Pradesh, India
Awani Kumar Singh
Centre for Protected Cultivation, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, India
Department of Zoology, Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana, India
Satish Kumar Singh
Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agricultural University, 
Bihar, India
Munna Singh
Department of Botany, University of Lucknow, Lucknow, India
Rajeev Pratap Singh
Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, 
Uttar Pradesh, India
Rakhi Singh
Department of Food Science and Technology, National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship 
and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana, India
Sanjay Singh
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Delhi 110012, India
Sukh Veer Singh
Department of Food Science and Technology, National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship 
and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, Haryana, India
Svetlana Sushkova
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, Rostov-on-Don, Russia
Kunal Tanwar
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Delhi, India
Feba Jacob Thoppurathu
Centre for Plant Biotechnology and Molecular Biology, Kerala Agricultural University, Thrissur, Indiaxiv Contributors
Rukam S. Tomar
Department of Biotechnology, Junagadh Agricultural University, Junagadh, Gujarat, India
Iswareya Lakshimi V.
Department of Microbiology, The American College, Madurai, Tamil Nadu, India
Chhedi Lal Verma
Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, ICAR-Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, 
Regional Research Station, Lucknow, India
Krishan K. Verma
Key Laboratory of Sugarcane Biotechnology and Genetic Improvement (Guangxi), 
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Guangxi Key Laboratory of Sugarcane Genetic Improvement/
Sugarcane Research Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanning, Guangxi, ChinaAbbreviations
ABC ATP-binding cassette 
ADP adenine triphosphate
AFM atomic force microscopy
Ag+ silver ions
Ag silver
AgNPs silver nanoparticles
Al2O3 aluminum oxide 
ALS acetolactate synthase
AMF arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi
As arsenic
BHU Banaras Hindu University
BIS Bureau of Indian Standard
BN boron nitride 
Ca calcium
CGPs cyanophycin grana proteins 
CNMs carbon nanomaterials 
CNTs carbon nanotubes
COD chemical oxygen demand 
CP chlorophyll-binding protein
CTAB cetyl trimethylammonium bromide
Cu copper
CuO copper oxide
CuO-NPs copper oxide nanoparticles
Cu(OH)2 copper (II) hydroxide 
CuSO4 copper sulphate
DH dehydrogenase
EC European Commission
eCO2 elevated CO2
EILs economic injury levels 
ENPs engineered nanoparticles
EPS extracellular polymeric substances
FDAH fluorescent diacetate hydrolase
Fe iron
FETs field-effect transistorsxvi Abbreviations
FSSAI Food Safety and Standard Authority of India
Fv/Fm photosystem II
GA gum Arabic
GNR graphene nanoribbons
HYV high-yielding varieties
IAA indole acetic acid
ICM integrated crop management 
IESD Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development
IISR Indian Institute of Soybean Research
ILs introgression lines
IOE Institute of Excellence
IPM integrated pest management
IRRI International Rice Research Institute 
IVASSD in vitro assisted single seed descent
K potassium
LDHs layered double hydroxides 
LEDs light-emitting diode
LEEP lipid exchange envelope penetration 
LiP lignin peroxidase
LPS lipopolysaccharide
MAS marker-assisted selection
MBC microbial biomass 
Mn manganese
MnP manganese peroxidase
Mo molybdenum
MOFPI Ministry of Food Processing Industries
MoS2 molybdenum disulfide 
MSN mesoporous silica nanoparticle 
MTBE methyl tert-butyl ether 
MWCNTs multi-walled carbon nanotubes
N nitrogen
Na sodium
NAIPs nanoagri-input products 
NAM nested association mapping 
NC nanocomposites
nCeO2 cerium oxide 
nCr2O3 chromium trioxide
NFs nano-fertilizers
NFs nano-formulationsAbbreviations xvii
NIFTEM National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and 
Management 
NMs nanomaterials
NPs nanoparticles
NSs nanosensors
NT nanotechnology
NUE nutrient use efficiency
NW nanowire
nZVI nanoscale zero-valent iron
ONT Oxford Nanopore Technologies
OP organophosphorus
OTUs operational taxonomic units 
P phosphorus
PAH polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons
PB Prussian blue
PCB polychlorineated biphenyl
PDA polydopamine 
PGPR promoting rhizobacteria
PGPR plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria
PM powdery mildews
PPO polyphenol oxidase
Pst pseudomonas syringae pv.tomato
PS II photosystem II
qPCR quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction
RFID radiofrequency identification detector 
RGA rapid generation advance
RNAi RNA-interference 
ROS reactive oxygen species
RZM root zone mass 
SB speed breeding
Se selenium
SiO2 silicon dioxide
Si3N4 silicon nitride 
S-layer surface layer
SMRT single-molecule real-time 
SNP single nucleotide polymorphism
SNV single nucleotide variation
SOM soil organic matter 
SPR surface plasma resonancexviii Abbreviations
SWCNTs single-walled carbon nanotubes
TEM transmission electron microscope
Th thorium 
TiO2 titanium dioxide 
TNE turmeric oil nanoemulsions
TTI temperature indicator
UNDESA United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs
WDP water dispersible powder
WHO World Health Organization
WS water-soluble
Zn zinc
ZnO zinc oxide
ZnONPs zinc oxide nanoparticles
ZnSO4 zinc sulphate
ZrO2 zirconiaAcknowledgment
We are thankful to the contributors for their effort and interest in this project, 
in which we have found the collaboration of each of the participating authors 
to be priceless. It is our great pleasure to offer you our sincere thanks for 
completing this important project for all of us. 
We are also very thankful to Apple Academic Press, for their infnite 
patience in this project. 
Finally, we would like to ofer our sincere thanks to the Ministry of 
Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation, no. 0852-2020-
0029 for providing fnancial support and facilities for our research.Preface
Nanotechnology is an emerging tool that influences human civilization 
through its wide range of applications from Earth to space. Nanobiosci￾ence has received a lot of interest in the recent couple of decades, involving 
research focused on its applications in electronics, power, biomechanics, and 
biological sciences. In the area of agriculture, the effectiveness of nanoscience 
is unavoidable, and several types of research are demonstrating their capacity 
to enhance food security, safety, and agro-systems through various strategies 
due to increased agricultural economic output and the establishment of innova￾tive food materials. The editors are confident that this book provides recent 
updates on nanobiotechnology, soil science, plant breeding, food science, tool 
design, conceptualization, utilization, and governance, and the impacts of such 
approaches on properties of the soil and plant states, as well as environmental 
factors. Graduate students, research scholars, as well as other decision makers 
in the area of agriculture and allied sectors, may benefit from this book.
The book is categorized into four sections.
Part I—Nanotechnology: An Introduction to Nanoparticles—presents 
chapters on the introduction of nanotechnology. The frst chapter focuses on the 
current application of nanotechnology with an introduction. Part II—Nanopar￾ticles for Crop Production—presents chapters related to nanofertilizers and 
nanopesticides related to crop production and protection from plant diseases 
and their management. Part III—Improving the Soil Fertility and Crop Protec￾tion—presents chapters on modern nano-approaches for improving the soil 
fertility and productivity. Part IV—Emerging Nanotechnological Tools and 
Techniques for Crop Improvement—presents chapters on crop improvement 
with the help of recent and emerging tools like speed breeding, biotechnology, 
and genetic engineering combined with nanotechnological approaches. 
This new book, Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture, provides a 
signifcant addition to the feld of agriculture and crop sciences. However, 
this unique compilation work would not be conceivable without the help of 
experts and the signifcant contributors globally.
Editors: 
Vishnu D. Rajput, Abhishek Singh, 
Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and 
Awani Kumar SinghPART I 
Nanotechnology: An Introduction to 
NanoparticlesNanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 1
Nanotechnology as the Cutting Edge for 
Sustainable Agriculture
VISHNU D. RAJPUT1
, ABHISHEK SINGH2
, SAPNA RAWAT3
, 
RAGINI SHARMA4
, TATIANA M. MINKINA1
, AWANI KUMAR SINGH5
, 
VICTORIA SHUVAEVA1
, and OLGA NAZARENKO1
1
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia
2
Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, College of Agriculture, 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel University of Agriculture and Technology, 
Meerut, UP, India
3
Department of Botany, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India
4
Department of Zoology, Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana, India
5
Centre for Protected Cultivation, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute, New Delhi, India
ABSTRACT
The upcoming decade will be difficult in many areas of life. One of the 
main challenges could be unfavorable climatic or environmental conditions 
that affect crop yields and hence the increasing demand for higher products, 
the demand for various industrial products with higher quality requirements, 
smart automotive, and many more. Nanotechnology has gained popularity 
in recent years as a result of its known potential for use and implementa￾tion in various key sectors like medical drugs, medicine, catalysis, energy, 4 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
material, and plant science research. Nanoparticles (NPs) are small in size 
with larger surface area (1–100 nm) and have many wonderful applications. 
Such extraordinary functions of NPs are used in sustainable agriculture, 
for the development of nano-enabled products, that is, nano-insecticides, 
nano-pesticides, fertilizers, etc. NPs have recently been suggested as an 
alternate approach for controlling plant pets such as insects, fungus, and 
weeds. Antimicrobial properties are there in several NPs and are used in 
food packaging processes, for example, silver NPs are highly used for such 
purposes. Apart from their antimicrobial properties, NPs like Si, Ag, Fe, Cu, 
Al, Zn, ZnO, TiO2
, CeO2
, Al2
O3
, and carbon nanotubes have been also shown 
to have negative impacts on plant development. This chapter examines the 
field application of NPs in sustainable agriculture, future perspectives, and 
growing environmental concerns. 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
The agricultural sector is the most important as it provides major raw materials 
for various industries such as food and fodder. Limited natural resources and 
raising population claim economical, viable, environmental, and efficient 
agricultural development. Agricultural development is important to eradicate 
poverty and hunger among raising population in the present situation. Hence, 
a bold step is required for agricultural development. Sustainable agriculture 
can strengthen this applied prospect to get rid of hunger and poverty among 
the growing population. As a result, new and inventive approaches such 
as nanotechnology are required for sustainable agriculture. This new tech￾nique, which focuses on increasing agricultural production, should be used 
(Yunlong and Smit, 1994). Professor Norio Tanaguchi (1974) coined this 
concept (Bulovic et al., 2004). Later, nanotechnology developed a variety 
of methods for precisely isolating nanoparticles (Bonnell and Huey, 2001). 
Nanotechnology is named after the prefx “nano” derived from Greek 
word “dwarf” and the term “nano” technically refers to 1 billionth. The 
virus, on the other hand, is around 100 nm in size. Nanotechnology is a 
term refers to materials that are between 0.1 and 100 nm (Ghidan et al., 
2017). Because of their diminutive size, they are more active and have a 
larger surface area. It has been discovered that europium and dopant atoms 
interact and produce magnetic properties. In the bulk of biological process 
sectors, altered nanomaterials are more reactive (Popkropinvy et al., 2007; 
Prasad, 2014). Changing the characteristics of nanomaterials allows for Nanotechnology as the Cutting Edge for Sustainable Agriculture 5
the formation of novel electronic associations, plasmonic capabilities, 
and quantum confnement-related optical properties. (Prasad et al., 2016). 
Agriculture forms the foundation of the economy of the third world coun￾tries. Agricultural research has always been concerned with improving the 
productivity and production of crops, food manufacturing, food protection, 
and the environmental efects of food production, storage, and distribution. In 
addition to packaging, NM is also used in fortifcations and food processing 
(Shafq et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2017). New molecular and cellular biology 
methods for separating, identifying, and quantifying individual molecules 
are required to be especially developed. 
Rapid advances in suitable agricultural research, such as reproductive 
science and technology, the conversion of agricultural and food wastes to 
energy, and other useful byproducts via enzymatic, nano-bioprocessing, 
and disease prevention and treatment in plants and animals, are all possible 
thanks to nanotechnology (Pilarska et al., 2017). It is documented that the 
nano-enabled products are already in commerce and applying for sustain￾able agriculture such as nanofertilizers, growth stimulators, soil-improving 
agents, or nano-sensors so on, and gained popularity as smart and controlled 
delivery. However, rapid application of NPs also raised concern for soil 
microbiota, accumulation in plants, and risks to human health through food 
chain (Rajput et al., 2020). The introductory chapter of this new book is 
discussing all the above-discussed possibilities for sustainable agriculture 
and raised concern for feld application of NPs.
1.2 NANOTECHNOLOGY: MANIPULATION OF MATTER AT THE 
ATOMIC LEVEL
The practice of manipulating, engineering, or gathering of different atoms, 
molecules or molecular dusters to create new devices and materials with 
different features is known as nanotechnology (Rajput et al., 2020). It can 
work from (1) bottom up, that is, nanostructures are created by manipulating 
individual atoms and molecules, mainly involves biology or chemistry. (2) 
Top down, that is, the size of tiniest nanoscales is shrinked as in photonics 
applications in nanoelectronics and nanoengineering (Ghidan and Antary, 
2020). Nanotechnology is based on nanometer-sized particles’ unique 
features. The nanoscale structure is the first level of organization occurring 
in biological systems, where all fundamental functions are rigorously speci￾fied. (Ghidan et al., 2017). Nanotechnology is capable of revolutionizing 6 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
science by allowing scientists to use physics, engineering, chemistry, and 
biology to manipulate nuclear or molecular matter. Nanotechnology is wide 
and multidisciplinary field of study and development that has exploded in 
popularity in recent years around the world. It allows researchers to better 
comprehend the relationship between macroscopic features and molecular 
structure in plant, biological, and animal origin materials. It already has a 
considerable influence on the business which will certainly increase in the 
future (Fig. 1.1).
FIGURE 1.1 Diagrammatic representation of nanotechnology product.
1.3 FIELD APPLICATION OF NPs FOR SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE
In conventional mode of agriculture, huge amount of fertilizers and pesticides 
are used that affected adversely our ecosystem. Minimum amount of agro￾chemicals should be used to protect ecosystem and environment. Sustainable 
agriculture is meant to get higher returns at low input. Nanotechnology can 
help to maintain agriculture in sustainable way with enhanced efficacy. 
Nano-plant growth promoters such as nanofertilizers, nanopesticides, and 
nanoherbicides have greater application in agriculture at low cost. The major 
concern in agriculture about using nanomaterials is the mechanism of their 
penetration to applied surfaces and risk involved. Although new technolo￾gies have been developed for synthesis and application of nanomaterials in Nanotechnology as the Cutting Edge for Sustainable Agriculture 7
agriculture. Hence, this chapter is critically aimed to highlight application 
of nanoparticles in agriculture in sustainable way to enhance output at low 
input. In agriculture, some other applications of NTs such as attenuating 
natural pesticides and biopesticides, the measured and controlled release of 
fertilizers supported by NM, micronutrients, nanosensors, organic fertilizers 
(Rajput et al., 2020). 
FIGURE 1.2 Number of nanoproducts, companies, and the countries involved in the 
agriculture related nano products development.
Source: Statnano.
Websites keeping updated records on NPs showed total nano-enabled 
products: 9245 manufactured by 64 countries including 2658 companies 
(https://product.statnano.com/; accessed July 7, 2021). In the agriculture 
sector, 232 products related to plant protection, fertilizers, soil improvement, 
plant breeding, and animal husbandry are making available. Figures 1.1 and 
1.2 illustrate diferent felds and uses of NPs in agriculture.
1.3.1 NPs AND CROP PROTECTION 
Due to limited resources and progressive climate change, food security has 
become a key concern for the growing population. That means change in 
climatic baselines like ecological pollution, water scarcity, cold, alkalinity, 
salinity, and toxicity of metals. Advanced nanomaterial engineering nanofer￾tilizers can enhance the crop production in adverse environment. Salinity 
can create a severe issue in crop production. Under NaCl stress condition in 
tomato and squash, nano-SiO2
 can improve proline accumulation, fresh and 
dry plant weight, seed germination as well as chlorophyll content (Haghighi et 8 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
al., 2012). Similarly, Foilar spray of FeSO4
 showed positive response toward 
salinity stress, highest photochemical efficiency of photosystem II (Fv/Fm) 
and iron (Fe) content, reduced substantial amount of sodium (Na) content in 
sunflower leaves while increased shoot dry weight, leaf area, net CO2
 assimi￾lation rate, sub-stomatal CO2
 concentration (Ci), and chlorophyll content 
(Torabian et al., 2017). Nanofertilizers application accelerated plant growth 
and productivity thus they can act as effective tool in agriculture. Nanoma￾terials can also act as an effective tool in detoxification and remediation of 
heavy metals. In rice, Cd stress tolerance is improved on applying nano-Si 
at 2.5 mM (Wang et al., 2015). Crop production is also severely affected by 
abiotic as well as biotic stress (Oerke et al., 2006). Nanomaterials can reduce 
the risk of pest and diseases (Rizwan et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2016). Botrytis 
cinerea, Alternaria alternate, Colletotrichum gloeospoiodes, Monilinia 
fructicola, Verticillium Dahliae, Rastonia solanacearum, Fusarium solani, 
Fusarium oxysporum, and Phytophthora infestans cause a variety of plant￾and soil-borne diseases which can be controlled by nanomaterial oxides such 
as CuO, Mgo, and ZnO (Malandrakis et al., 2019; Shenashen et al., 2017). 
Hence, nanofertilizers have great potential toward crop protection.
1.3.1.1 NANO-INSECTICIDES
NPs can contain organic and inorganic ingredients in different forms such 
as micelles and particles. Nanoformulations can lead to increased solubility 
of less soluble active ingredient and thus protecting active ingredient from 
premature degradation. Nanoformulations have significant impact on active 
ingredient and can introduce of new ingredient into the environment. Gopal 
et al. prepared nanopesticides and compared their efficacy with conventional 
ones. Pathogen control was found to be five times as effective with nano￾hexaconazole. Similarly, nanosulfur is 10 times more efficient than water 
dispersible powder (WDP) formulations for mite control. Nicotine carbox￾ylate nanoemulsion was created using a series of fatty acids (C10–C18) and 
a surfactant, and it demonstrated insecticide formulation bioactivity against 
Drosophila melanogaster adults by determining the lethal time 50 (Casa￾nova et al., 2005). When nanomatrices made of carboxylic acid and metallic 
cation come into touch with water, they breakdown and produce a bioactive 
chemical (Beasley and Collins, 1970). Chemical bonding is required to be 
broken through hydrolysis affecting polymer–insecticide bonds according to 
Allen et al. (1971). Release of bioactive compounds also depends upon the 
chemical nature of molecules as well as structure of macromolecule.Nanotechnology as the Cutting Edge for Sustainable Agriculture 9
1.3.1.2 NANOFUNGICIDES
Plant pathogen can impact a plant severely at any growth stage of plant. 
Phythophora, Rhizoctonia solani, and Fusarium spp. attack on soil buried 
and aerial part of plant, while B. cinerea can infect fruit and green tissue of 
plant. They also cause significant damage to the plant. Worldwide fungicide 
market is more than €500 million only for B. cinerea (Pinmentel et al., 2009). 
Conventional methods to control plant pathogen are neither cost effective 
nor environmental friendly. Consequently, it has become the major concern 
for scientists and public. Estimated fungicide usage is about 2.5 million tons 
and harm reach 100 billion dollars annually due to pesticides (Pimentel et al., 
2009). Harmful effects of pesticides are dual, one is the nonbiodegradable 
properties and another is harmful effect on human and animal health (Koul et 
al., 2008). Hence, development of nanomaterials based antifungal is needed 
as an alternative replacing poisonous elements. Nanofungicides are entities 
with nanometer size range having unique qualities due to their small size. 
Wide variety of products have been developed so far (European Commission 
Joint Research Center, 2010). Nanopesticide formulation includes organic 
ingredients, silica-based nanoparticles and titanium dioxide, emulsions, and 
nanoclay (Matthews et al., 2000). Nanotechnology-based product with broad 
spectrum use, nontargeted effect, and public concern can be abridged.
1.3.1.3 NANOMATERIAL AS NANOHERBICIDES
The nanoherbicide formulation is prepared by exploiting nanotechnological 
potential of nanosized preparation for their effective delivery into plant. They 
are based on a particular formulation to improve their efficacy, increased 
solubility and reduced toxicity as compared to conventional herbicide 
(Grillo et al., 2014). Nanomaterial-based herbicide system can maintain 
their prolonged release for the effective herbicide control (Manjunatha et 
al., 2016). Specific herbicide encapsulated into nanomaterials aims to target 
receptors present in root cells as they are translocated to inhibit glycolysis 
once they enter the root system. Thus, create starvation and kills targeted 
weed. Encapsulated herbicide provides controlled release of herbicide thus 
weeds can be completely destroyed (Grillo et al., 2012). Adjuvents are also 
added to the nanomaterial-based formulation for its effectiveness. Nanopar￾ticles can act as nanoformulation in combination with herbicides. Herbicide 
delivery by nanoparticle system is mostly containing biodegradable poly￾meric compounds having nontoxic metabolites.10 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
1.3.1.4 NANOMATERIAL AS NANOFERTILIZER 
Nanofertilizers are basically conventional fertilizers encapsulated with 
nanomaterials used for slow entry of nutrients into plants enhances 
fertility of the soil and productivity (Zulfiquar et al., 2019). Slow release 
of nanomaterials has minimum impact on environment with high produc￾tivity. Due to the use of highly reactive nanomaterials, they interact 
with fertilizers and make their effective absorption by plants (Prasad et 
al., 2017). Nanofertilizers with their slow release can enhance nutrient 
usage, enhance bioavailability with high surface area, prevent leaching, 
reduce volatilization, and lessen the environmental threats (Solanki et 
al., 2015). Encapsulation of nutrients can be done either by entrapping 
with nanomaterials or coating with nanomaterials or by delivery in the 
form of nanoemulsion (Iqbal et al., 2019). Effectiveness of nanofertil￾izers depends upon preparation of nanoformulation, soil conditions, and 
mode of application of nanofertilizers (Zulfiquar et al., 2019). Agricul￾tural growth and their economic distribution are affected by the efficacy 
of fertilizer distribution. This phenomenon is influenced by numerous 
factors like uptake efficiency of plants, leaching effect, soil combination, 
and chemical composition. Chemical fertilizers can severely affect soil 
fertility and can enhance environmental pollution. Current agricultural 
research focuses on finding an alternative to chemical fertilizers, that is, 
environmental friendly and easy to biodegrade.
Hence, nanofertilizers carry a great potential to increase agricultural 
output while overcoming the imitation of conventional fertilizers.
1.4 PLANT UPTAKE AND TRANSLOCATION OF NANOPARTICLES
A series of transformations are needed to NPs to increase their bioavail￾ability and decreasing their toxicity. Plant roots absorb NPs through their 
roots, which then accumulate in subcellular and cellular organelles. First 
step of NPs absorption is bioaccumulation (Nair et al., 2010). Root cells 
are semipermeable to NPs, restricting large size NPs. After penetrating cell 
walls, NPs travel apoplastically across extracellular gaps until they reach 
the vascular cylinder, where they then ascend unidirectionally through the 
xylem (Fig. 1.3A). Nanotechnology as the Cutting Edge for Sustainable Agriculture 11
FIGURE 1.3 Diagrammatic representation of translocation of nanoparticle, accumulation, 
and toxicity.
For symplastic movement, NPs enter the vascular cylinder by crossing 
the Casparian strip barrier through binding to endodermal carrier proteins. 
NPs travel through plasmodesmata through cytoplasmic internalization 
(Tripathi et al., 2017). NPs those are unable to internalize aggregate on 
casparian strips can modify their absorption (Ruttkay-Nedecky et al., 2017). 
NPs that are taken up by cell are found in nuclei, cortical cytoplasm, and cell 
wall of epidermis (Wang et al., 2012). NPs accumulation and translocation 
are accompanied by physiological structure of cells, the interaction of soil 
with nanomaterials, and the intrinsic stability of nanoparticles (Fig. 1.3B) 
(Janmohammadi et al., 2016). Moreover, NP coating and morphology play a 
substantial role on their action on plants.
1.5 CONCERNS
Because of the significant effect of nanotechnology on food business and 
commodities which enter the market, safety of food will continue to be a top 12 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
priority (Kamle, 2020). This demand will drive the use of nanotechnology 
in food safety and security sensing applications, as well as technology that 
warns consumers and vendors when food is approaching its expiry date, new 
antimicrobial coatings, and dirt-resistant plastic bags (Sekhon, 2014). Poten￾tially harmful consequences, hazards, and dangers for the environment and 
human health need to be handled with extraordinary caution and dedication 
(Fig. 1.3C). Accurate handling must be done using appropriate dosage and 
safety guidelines for the release of NPs into the atmosphere, their persis￾tence, transport, distribution, fate, and ecological consequences. Instruc￾tions for occupational workers’ health protection must also be presented, 
sponsored, and guaranteed. For the identification, characterization, and 
pharmacological or toxicological studies of NPs, global methods and SOPs 
must be established. Following are some of the important features:
• For the assessment of the dangers associated with NPs, more precise 
universally accepted methodologies for the detection and character￾ization of NP are required.
• In different mediums, the allowed limits of distinct NPs must be 
defined.
• Additional funding and studies should be directed toward deter￾mining the underlining mechanism of interaction of the food chain 
with NPs, as well as their epigenetic consequences.
• Because a particular attribute of NPs, that is, large volume: mass 
ratio which makes it more likely to interact with biomolecules, toxi￾codynamic, and toxicokinetic investigations should be thoroughly 
understood from the perspective of agroecosystems.
• Other aspects such as distribution of NPs, their fate, transporta￾tion, bioavailability, etc. need to be addressed as research areas in 
agro-nanotechnology.
• To further strengthen the field of research, in particular, the impact 
on the environment and humans, laboratory, organizational, geopo￾litical, and other layers of joint research and capacity building are 
also discussed at different levels.
Depending on the size and surface chemistry of nanoparticles, some 
types of nanoparticles exhibit large-scale bioretention, and such nanopar￾ticles may accumulate within the body beyond potentially unsafe levels that 
may afect human health. For example, many cells can penetrate membranes 
and generate reactive oxygen species (redox oxygen species) in their 
vicinity, causing the cell to be damaged although any chemical additives and Nanotechnology as the Cutting Edge for Sustainable Agriculture 13
nanoparticles must be collected at the time of food packaging. Keep a certain 
amount and these certain quantities of nanoparticles are harmful to human 
health factors were not found. Moreover, within these limits, fertilizers pack￾aged with nanoparticles can be legally sold in the market for the consumer.
1.6 CCONCLUSIONS
Agriculture is the only source of human nourishment that should produce 
from intermediate and final inputs using cutting-edge technologies. As a 
result, adopting new contemporary agricultural technology is critical. Despite 
having relatively modern agricultural methods, emerging nations continue to 
struggle with a shortage of high-value food crops. Although there is a lot of 
evidence regarding individual nanoparticles, the toxicity levels of diverse 
NPs are yet unknown, therefore the use of these nanomaterials is unsatisfac￾tory owing to a lack of understanding about risk assessments in database 
and alarm systems, as well as international coordination on directives and 
regulations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The Ministry of Science and Higher Education of Russian Federation 
provided financial support for the study (no. 0852-2020-0029).
KEYWORDS
• fertilizer
• nano-insecticide
• nanotechnology
• pesticides
• risk
• sustainable agriculture14 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
REFERENCES
Allan, G. G.; Chopra, C. S.; Neogi, A. N.; Wilkins, R. M. Design and Synthesis of Controlled 
Release Pesticide-Polymer Combinations. Nature 1971, 234, 349–351.
Beasley, M. L.; Collins, R. L. Water-Degradable Polymers for Controlled Release of 
Herbicides and Other Agents. Science 1970, 169, 769–770.
Bonnell, D. A.; Bulovic, V.; Mandell, A.; Perlman, A. Molecular Memory Device. US 
20050116256 A1, 2004.
Bonnell, D. A.; Huey, B. D. Basic Principles of Scanning Probe Microscopy. In Scanning 
Probe Microscopy and Spectroscopy: Theory, Techniques, and Applications, 1st ed.; 2001. 
Casanova, H.; Araque, P.; Ortiz, C. Nicotine Carboxylate Insecticide Emulsions: Effect of the 
Fatty Acid Chain Length. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2005, 53, 9949–9953.
European Commission Joint Research Center; Considerations on a definition of nanomaterial 
for regulatory purposes; Reference Report, (2010).
Ghidan, A. Y.; Al-Antary, T. M.; Salem, N. M.; Awwad, A. Facile Green Synthetic Route to 
the Zinc Oxide (ZnONPs) Nanoparticles: Effect on Green Peach Aphid and Antibacterial 
Activity. J. Agric. Sci. 2017, 9, 131–138.
Ghidan, A. Y.; Antary, T. M. Applications of Nanotechnology in Agriculture. Appl. 
Nanobiotechnol. 2020. DOI: 10.5772/intechopen.88390.
Gopal, M.; Kumar, R.; Goswami, A. Nano-pesticides - A Recent Approach for Pest Control. 
J. Plant Protec. Sci. 2012, 4(2), 1–7.
Grillo, R.; dos Santos, N. Z. P.; Maruyama, C. R.; Rosa, A. H.; de Lima, R.; Fraceto, L. F. 
Poly(‐capro‐ lactone)Nanocapsules as Carrier Systems for Herbicides: Physico‐chemical 
Characterization and Genotoxicity Evaluation. J. Hazard. Mat. 2012, 231–232, 1–9.
Grillo, R.; Pereira, A. E.; Nishisaka, C. S.; de Lima, R.; Oehlke, K.; Greiner, R.; Fraceto, 
L. F. Chitosan/Tripolyphosphate Nanoparticles Loaded With Paraquat Herbicide: An 
Environmentally Safer Alternative for Weed Control. J. Hazard. Mat. 2014, 278, 163–171.
Haghighi, M.; Afifipou, Z.; Mozafariyan, M. The Effect of N-Si on Tomato Seed Germination 
Under Salinity Levels. J. Biol. Environ. Sci. 2012, 6, 87–90.
Iqbal, M. A. Nano-Fertilizers for Sustainable Crop Production Under Changing Climate: A 
Global Perspective. In: Sustainable Crop Production; Hasanuzzaman, M., Fujita, M., Filho, 
M. C. M. T., Nogueira, T. A. R., Eds.; IntechOpen, 2019.
Janmohammadi, M.; Amanzadeh, T.; Sabaghnia, N.; Ion, V. Effect of Nano-silicon Foliar 
Application on Safflower Growth Under Organic and Inorganic Fertilizer Regimes. 
Botanica 2016, 22, 53–64.
Koul, O.; Walia, S.; Dhaliwal, G. S. Essential Oils as Green Pesticides: Potential and 
Constraints. Biopestic Int. 2008, 4(1), 63–84.
Manjunatha, S. B.; Biradar, D. P.; Aladakatti, Y. R. Nanotechnology and its Applications in 
Agriculture: A review. J. Farm Sci. 2016, 29(1), 1–13.
Matthews, G. A. Pests, Pesticides and Pest Management. In: Highlights in Environmental 
Research; Mason, J., Ed.; Imperial College Press: London, 2000; pp 165–189.
Nair, R.; Varghese, S. H.; Nair, B. G.; Maekawa, T.; Yoshida, Y.; Kumar, D. S. Nanoparticulate 
Material Delivery to Plants. Plant Sci. 2010, 179(3), 154–163.
Oerke, E. C. Crop Losses Topests. J. Agric. Sci. 2006, 144, 31–43. DOI: 10.1017/
S0021859605005708.
Pilarska, A.; Wysokowski, M.; Markiewicz, E.; Jesionowski, T. Synthesis of Magnesium 
Hydroxide and Its Calcinates by a Precipitation Method With the Use of Magnesium Sulfate 
and Poly (Ethylene Glycols). Powder Technol. 2013, 235, 148–157.Nanotechnology as the Cutting Edge for Sustainable Agriculture 15
Pimentel, D. Pesticide and Pest Control. In: Integrated Pest Management: Innovation￾Development Process; Peshin, P., Dhawan, A. K., Eds.; Springer: Dordrecht, Netherlands, 
2009; pp 83–87.
Pokropivny, V.; Lohmus, R.; Hussainova, I.; Pokropivny, A.; Vlassov, S. Introduction to 
Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology; University of Tartu: Tartu, (2007); p 225.
Prasad, R.; Bhattacharyya, A.; Nguyen, Q. D. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: 
Recent Developments, Challenges, and Perspectives. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 10–14.
Prasad, R.; Kumar, V.; Prasad, K. S. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: Present 
Concerns and Future Aspects. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2014, 13, 705–713. DOI: 10.5897/
AJBX2013.13554 
Prasad, R.; Pandey, R.; Barman, I. Engineering Tailored Nanoparticles With Microbes: Quo 
vadis. WIREs Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol. 2016, 8(2), 316–330. DOI: 10.1002/wnan.1363. 
Rajput, V.; Minkina, T.; Mazarji, M.; Shende, S.; Sushkova, S.; Mandzhieva, S.; Burachevskaya, 
M.; Chaplygin, V.; Singh, A.; Jatav, H. Accumulation of Nanoparticles in the Soil-Plant 
Systems and Their Effects on Human Health. Ann. Agric. Sci. 2020, 65, 137–143.
Rizwan, M.; Ali, S.; ur Rehman, M. Z.; Malik, S.; Adrees, M.; Qayyum, M. F.; Alamri, S. A.; 
Alyemeni, M. N.; Ahmad, P. Effect of Foliar Applications of Silicon and Titanium Dioxide 
Nanoparticles on Growth, Oxidative Stress, and Cadmium Accumulation by Rice (Oryza 
sativa) Acta Physiol. Plant. 2019, 41, 35. DOI: 10.1007/s11738-019-2828-7.
Ruttkay-Nedecky, B.; Krystofova, O.; Nejdl, L.; Adam, V. Nanoparticles Based on Essential 
Metals and Their Phytotoxicity. J. Nanbiotechnol. 2017, 15(1), 33.
Shafiq, M.; Anjum, S.; Hano, C.; Anjum, I.; Abbasi, B. H. An Overview of the Applications of 
Nanomaterials and Nanodevices in the Food Industry. Foods 2020, 9, 148.
Singh, Y.; Meher, J. G.; Raval, K.; Khan, F. A.; Chaurasia, M.; Jain, N. K.; Chourasia, M. 
K. Nanoemulsion. Concepts, Development and Applications in Drug Delivery. J. Control. 
Release 2017, 252, 28–49.
Statnano, 2021 [Online]. https://product.statnano.com/industry/agriculture
Torabian, S.; Zahedi, M.; Khoshgoftar, A. H. Effects of Foliar Spray of Nano-particles of 
FeSO4 on the Growth and Ion Content of Sunflower Under Saline Condition. J. Plant 
Nutr. 2017, 40, 615–623. DOI: 10.1080/01904167.2016.1240187.
Tripathi, D. K.; Singh, S.; Singh, V. P.; Prasad, S. M.; Dubey, N. K.; Chauhan, D. K. Silicon 
Nanoparticles More Effectively Alleviated UV-B Stress Than Silicon in Wheat (Triticum 
aestivum) Seedlings. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2017, 110, 70–81.
Wang, S. H.; Wang, F. Y.; Gao, S. C. Foliar Application With Nano-silicon Alleviates Cd 
Toxicity in Rice Seedlings. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2015, 22, 2837–2845. DOI: 10.1007/
s11356-014-3525-0.
Wang, S. H.; Wang, F. Y.; Gao, S. C.; Wang, X. G. Heavy Metal Accumulation in Different Rice 
Cultivars as Influenced by Foliar Application of Nano-silicon. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2016,
227, 228. DOI: 10.1007/s11270-016-2928-6.
Wang, Z.; Xie, X.; Zhao, J.; et al. Xylem-and Phloem-based Transport of CuO Nanoparticles 
in Maize (Zea mays L.). Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46(8), 4434–4441. 
Yunlong, C.; Smit, B. Sustainability in Agriculture: A General Review. Agric. Ecosyst. 
Environ. 1994, 49, 299–307. DOI: 10.1016/0167-8809(94)90059-0 
Zulfiqar, F.; Navarro, M.; Ashraf, M.; Akram, N. A.; Munné-Bosch, S. Nanofertilizer Use for 
Sustainable Agriculture: Advantages and Limitations. Plant Sci. 2019, 289, 110270.PART II 
Nanoparticles for Crop ProductionNanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable 
Alternative to Conventional Means
KRISHAN K. VERMA1
, MUNNA SINGH2
, VISHNU D. RAJPUT3
, 
CHHEDI LAL VERMA4
, and MARINA BURACHEVSKAYA3
1
Key Laboratory of Sugarcane Biotechnology and Genetic Improvement 
(Guangxi), Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs/Guangxi Key 
Laboratory of Sugarcane Genetic Improvement/Sugarcane Research 
Institute, Guangxi Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanning, 
Guangxi, China
2
Department of Botany, University of Lucknow, Lucknow, India
3
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia
4
Irrigation and Drainage Engineering, ICAR-Central Soil Salinity 
Research Institute, Regional Research Station, Lucknow, India
CHAPTER 2
ABSTRACT
Agriculture and agro-industries benefit significantly from nanobioscience. 
Nano-scale fertilizers allow nutrients to be released slowly and consistently, 
enhancing soil profile. It improves nutrient use efficiency and reduced fertil￾izer wastage and the cost of crop cultivation. The increasing availability of 
nutrients causes plants to upregulate photosynthetic capacity, resulting in 
maximum productivity and biomass production. Nano-scale fertilizers are 
advantageous because they reduce synthetic fertilizer application frequency 
and soil toxicity. Synthetic fertilizers are not only expensive for farmers, 20 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
but they can also be damaging to humans and the atmospheric environment. 
Because there are limited cultivated lands and water sources, agricultural 
system development can only be achieved by increasing resource use effi￾ciency while minimizing loss to the production bed through the practical 
application of innovative technologies.
2.1 INTRODUCTION
Agriculture with maximum crop yield is required to reduce the risk of 
hunger and increase food grain security (Singh et al., 2021). Due to a 
dynamic era of climate variables, an expanding human populace, and 
limited agri-farms and freshwater resources, food grain production, and 
delivery are heightened and ongoing stress worldwide (Usman et al., 
2020). Combining modern technology capabilities with considerable 
adjustments to current global food production systems could solve this 
problem (Dwevedi et al., 2016; Shang et al., 2019; Singh et al., 2021). The 
application of high rates of agrochemicals is currently significant support 
for modern agriculture. Agrochemical production will increase in the near 
future to feed nearly 10 billion population by 2050 (FAO, 2017; Diatta et 
al., 2020; Seleiman et al., 2020). Synthetic chemical fertilizers are applied 
to boost crop performance and output. Current farming approaches have 
not succeeded in improving/upgrading plant mineral accumulation, 
nutrient usage efficiency (NUE), and crop production (Adnan et al., 
2020). Synthetic fertilizers are widely used in agriculture, typically have 
low NUE values (Guo et al., 2018).
As a result, agricultural sustainability can be achieved by implementing 
and applying novel strategies (Shang et al., 2019) that increase worldwide 
food capacity while also protecting resources of nature and the environment 
(Arora, 2018). Nanobioscience can potentially change the current synthetic 
framework used in modern agricultural systems (Prasad et al., 2017) by 
improving the capacity of innovative agrochemicals and delivering solu￾tions to agro-ecological challenges (Usman et al., 2020). The application of 
nanofertilizers (NFs) in agriculture has garnered a lot of attention in recent 
years (Kah et al., 2019; Kerry et al., 2017; Seleiman et al., 2020). Nanobio￾science has the great potential to create advanced forms of fertilizers that 
will help enhance worldwide food production capacity and feed the rising 
global populace (Feregrino-Perez et al., 2018; Diatta et al., 2020; Seleiman 
et al., 2020).Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means 21
FIGURE 2.1 Bioprocess of nanofertilizers (NFs).
Nanofertilizers are micro or macronutrients that have been encapsulated or 
coated by nanoparticles (DeRosa et al., 2010; Rajput et al., 2017). NFs can 
use various synthetic chemicals (e.g., modifed synthetic fertilizers) or green 
produced from multiple plant organs (Singh and Kumar, 2017). Green synthesis 
is a contamination-free and environmentally benefcial method of producing 
nanoparticles since it involves bio-organisms, that is, plants, fungus, and bacteria 
(Lee et al., 2020) (Fig. 2.1). No toxic substances or chemicals are utilized to 
produce these microorganisms, minimizing, and stabilizing agents (Iravani et 
al., 2015). NFs are used to enhance the soil fertility profle and quality and the 
bioavailability of plant nutrients (Chhipa, 2017; Singh and Kumar, 2017) and 
yield quality (Brunner et al., 2006). NFs are suitable for advanced agriculture 
because of their vast surface area and a slow and consistent release of nutrients
(Prasad et al., 2017; Seleiman et al., 2020; Pitambara and Shukla, 2019).
2.2 ADAPTATION AND UPTAKE MECHANISMS OF NANOFERTILIZER 
IN PLANTS 
The uptake and accumulation of NFs from soil to plants must investigate 
because this information could help determine which NFs are better for 
plants. If NFs or NPs prefer to go along the xylem, irrigation is the most 
convenient approach to apply them. Meanwhile, the exogenous application 22 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
is advised and acceptable if NFs move by phloem (Pitambara and Shukla, 
2019). The content of NFs, particle size of NPs, and plant cell mechanisms 
influence the nutrients uptake and accumulation processes released by NFs 
in plants (Rico et al., 2011; Pitambara and Shukla, 2019).
2.3 FOLIAR AND SOIL EXPOSURE OF NFs IN PLANTS 
Before entering plant tissues, NPs must pass through the cuticular barrier 
in foliar applications (Pollard et al., 2008). The cuticular and stomatal path￾ways make up the cuticle layer of leaves, a waxy coating with two stages. 
Nonpolar solutes use the lipophilic pathway to reach the plant leaves via 
diffusion process (Rajput et al.,2021), whereas the stomatal pathway is used 
by polar solutes (Eichert et al., 2008). The cuticular pathway allows NPs with 
less than 5.0 nm to enter the cuticle via the cuticular route. NPs greater than 
5.0 nm, on the other hand, have been shown to enter plants through foliar 
application in few studies (Lv et al., 2019). Changes in leaf ultrastructure 
and the frequency and diameter of stomata between a variety of plants, on 
the other hand, may affect NP uptake by foliar application (Wiesner et al., 
2009). After entering the leaf apoplast, NPs may enter long distances via the 
plant’s circulatory system by following the stomatal pathway (Lough and 
Lucas, 2006; Lv et al., 2019).
The uptake of NPs by the roots is infuenced by plant morphology, 
growth stage, exposure conditions, particle size, and rhizosphere processes. 
In the roots of Arabidopsis thaliana, silicon (SiO2
) NPs with 50 to 200 nm 
diameter were discovered (Slomberg and Schoenfsch, 2012). The surface 
charge impacts NPs absorption and translocation in plants (Lv et al., 2019). 
Varieties of plants have shown varying NP uptake capacities, likely due to 
diferences in physiological and metabolic mechanisms (Lv et al., 2019).
Nanoparticles are frst adsorbed on the roots’ surface, then move via a 
series of barriers to enter the plant’s vascular system (Lv et al., 2019). The 
frst barrier is the root cuticle layer analogous to the leaf cuticle layer in 
a composition. Nanoparticles penetrate the root epidermis after crossing 
the cuticle on the root surface. NPs can penetrate the root epidermis via 
apoplastic or symplastic pathways. According to several demonstrations, 
NPs can penetrate cell wall pores frst, then migrate into intercellular gaps in 
the apoplastic pathway (Lv et al., 2019). The cell wall pore diameter, ranging 
from 5 to 20 nm, prevents NPs smaller than 20 nm from passing through the 
apoplastic route. As a result, the Casparian strip around the vascular system Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means 23
is the apoplastic pathway’s most signifcant barrier. Another hypothesis is the 
symplastic pathway (Rico et al., 2011; Lv et al., 2019), in which NPs travel 
from one cell to another cell by plasmodesmata. When NPs enter the central 
cylinder, they fow through the xylem’s transpiration stream to the plant’s 
upper parts (LaRue et al., 2012).
2.4 MACRONUTRIENT NFs: THEIR FUNCTION AND IMPACT ON 
PLANTS 
Fertilizers are essential for plant development and increase crop productivity 
and quality because they provide the necessary elements for plant devel￾opment. Plants need a sufficient supply of macronutrients as N, P, and K 
(Czymmek et al., 2020; Kumar et al., 2019; Adeyemi et al., 2020; Batta 
et al., 2018). Because most of these nutrients are poorly absorbed by plant 
roots, farmers often apply maximum fertilizer quantity to partly compensate 
for their minimum NUE, resulting in a well-known adverse effect on soil, 
water, and the atmospheric environment (Seleiman et al., 2020; Czymmek et 
al., 2020; Chhipa, 2017; Seleiman et al., 2013). For sustainable agriculture, 
the use of NFs will enhance fertilizer NUE, improve plant productivity, and 
reduce the harmful effects of traditional fertilizers (Seleiman et al., 2020; Liu 
and Lal, 2015; Battaglia et al., 2018). NFs release nutrients precisely in the 
plant roots, decreasing nutrient losses by avoiding rapid variations in the soil 
composition. NFs are formed from various materials and carriers, including 
hydroxyapatite NPs, zeolite, mesoporous silica NPs, N, Cu, Zn, Si, C, and 
polymeric NPs (Guo et al., 2018; Liscano et al., 2000; Mikhak et al., 2017). 
2.4.1 NITROGEN NFs
Nitrogen (N) is a vital mineral element for plants and can be found in various 
amino acids, proteins, DNA, ATP, chlorophylls, and cellular structural units. 
The majority of metabolic activities and regulatory mechanisms in plants 
require an adequate amount of nitrogen. Plants absorb nitrogen as NO−3
and NH+4 (Seleiman et al., 2020; Preetha and Balakrishnan, 2017). One of 
the most significant drawbacks of traditional N fertilizer is the excess rate 
of volatilization and leaching during and shortly after application in the 
field. Nitrogen-based NFs could deliver a steady supply of N at a moderate 
frequency to reduce these losses. NPK-coated NFs were recently employed 
on coffee plants grown in a greenhouse. The authors found that applying 24 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
NPK NF to coffee plants increased nutrient uptake and growth by enhancing 
the leaf numbers/area and leaf gas exchange capacity (Ha et al., 2018). 
Nitrogen in NFs is advised since it can result in a slower nitrogen release, 
lower volatilization and leaching rates, increased nutrient absorption, and 
improved plant performance and yield (Table 2.1).
2.4.2 PHOSPHORUS NFs 
After nitrogen, phosphorus (P) is an important element for better plant perfor￾mance. ATP, ADP (adenine triphosphate), phospholipids, and sugar phosphate 
are the energy transfer molecules. Photosynthetic capacity, respiration, and 
DNA biosynthesis are associated (Soliman et al., 2016). The availability of 
P affects plant growth and production efficiency (Preetha and Balakrishnan, 
2017). Because of its lengthy release time and high soil fixation, phosphorus 
in synthetic fertilizers is not readily available. NFs now supplied P for 45–55 
days after treatment, whereas conventional P synthetic fertilizers release all 
nutrients in 10 days (Liu and Lal, 2015). NFs could boost the NUE of P in 
some plants (Liu and Lal, 2015). In addition to contributing to high NUE, 
biosafe NFs that are a P source were found to consider enhancing biomass, 
production, and crop quality (Patra et al., 2013; Table 2.1).
2.4.3 POTASSIUM NFs 
After nitrogen and phosphorus, potassium (K) is a crucial element, and it 
plays a critical action mechanism in all of a plant’s physiochemical func￾tions to maintain proper plant development. Potassium is linked with various 
processes in plants, including stomatal opening, photosynthetic responses, 
photosynthate translocation, protein synthesis, ionic balance, water interac￾tions, and enzymatic mechanisms (Preetha and Balakrishnan, 2017). Abiotic 
stresses, that is, water-deficit and excess light intensity are more resistant 
in plants with adequate K levels (Sohair et al., 2018; Wang et al., 2013; 
Taha et al., 2020). According to the scientists, utilizing a nano-K fertilizer 
could decrease K losses in the soil while simultaneously providing a longer 
supply of K to crops. Cucurbita pepo’s growth, biomass, and quality were 
significantly improved by foliar application of nano-K fertilizer (Gerdini, 
2016). By lowering K losses into the soil and leading, K NFs may prevent 
soil quality, enhance water uptake, and improve physiological and yield 
parameters (Table 2.1).Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means 25
2.4.4 MICRONUTRIENT NANOFERTILIZERS AND THEIR ROLE 
Micronutrients are essential for optimizing plant production and quality 
and enhance plant resistance capacity to different unfavorable conditions 
(Seleiman et al., 2012; 2013; 2020). The use of nanoscale structures to 
synthesize micronutrients could improve their solubility and bioavailability, 
aid in their uniform distribution of soil dispersion, and reduce micronutrient 
adsorption and fixation to soil colloids.
2.4.5 ZINC NFs
Zn is a structural component co-factor for various proteins and enzymes, and 
it is essential for proper plant growth. Auxin regulation, protein metabolism, 
carbohydrate biosynthesis, and plant protection against biotic and abiotic 
stresses are all zinc-dependent processes (Broadley et al., 2007). Zinc NFs in 
ZnO are more efficient and cost-effective than synthetic fertilizers (Khanm 
et al., 2018; Seleiman et al., 2020); they are frequently used in advanced 
agri-systems (Seleiman et al., 2020). It can be used for soil mixing, seed 
priming, and foliar application. High concentrations of trace metals like Zn, 
on the other hand, may harm plant growth by inducing metabolic alterations 
(Ali et al., 2020). The use of Zn NFs has been shown in studies to improve 
crop germination, seedling growth, and productivity (Seleiman et al., 2020). 
Zn NFs in ZnO are the most widely used NFs in modern agriculture, with 
uses in foliar, soil mixing, and seed priming; they are also less expensive than 
synthetic Zn fertilizers. They improve crop yield and quality by promoting 
growth (Table 2.1). 
2.4.6 IRON NFs
Chlorophyll synthesis, DNA synthesis, chloroplast ultrastructure, respiration, 
and other metabolic pathways all require iron (Fe). Plants require a small 
quantity of Fe for growth, but its deficit or excess harms their physiological 
and metabolic functions (Palmqvist et al., 2017). Iron availability is generally 
high in well-watered soils. However, Fe in these soils produces insoluble 
ferric complexes at neutral pH values, leaving it unavailable to plants. As a 
result, Fe-enriched fertilizers may assist plants in absorbing Fe. In relation 
to normal and/or traditional Fe sources, Fe NFs have been demonstrated in 
several studies to improve the germination and growth of various crops. The 26 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
development of spinach was aided by iron pyrite nanoparticles (Srivastava et 
al., 2014). Under field conditions, assessed improved root growth in peanut 
applied with Fe NPs relative to control (Rui et al., 2016). Fe NFs could be an 
excellent alternative source, especially in soils with low Fe levels (Table 2.1).
2.4.7 MANGANESE NFs
Manganese (Mn) is a micronutrient element important for nitrogen metabo￾lism, photosynthetic capacity, fatty acids, ATP, and protein production 
(Palmqvist et al., 2017). Despite this, Mn may be hazardous to various plants 
depending on the chemical characteristics of acidic soil. Manganese also 
aids plants in coping with a variety of stresses. Mn applications have been 
shown to increase wheat, maize, sugarcane, soybeans, and common beans 
growth and productivity (Fageria, 2001; Dimkpa and Bindraban, 2016). Mn 
NPs binds to the chlorophyll-binding protein (CP43) of photosystem-II at 
the physiological level, increasing the photosynthetic mechanisms’ electron 
transport chain and overall efficiency (Pradhan et al., 2013). Fertilized plants 
with Mn NFs have a higher nitrogen uptake and metabolic activities than 
their bulk counterparts (Pradhan et al., 2013, Table 2.1).
2.4.8 COPPER NFs 
Copper (Cu) is a component of regulatory proteins involved in plants’ 
photosynthetic and respiration mechanisms and a cofactor of antioxida￾tive enzymes, that is, SOD and AsO. Copper imbalance causes different 
problems, that is, chlorosis, necrosis, stunted growth, low seed, grain, fruit 
yield, and finally, and low crop yield (Rai et al., 2018). Because the amount 
of organic matter in the soil influences Cu availability, Cu NPs in the soil 
can be significant due to their broad surface area, maximum solubility, and 
reactivity (Hong et al., 2015). CuO NPs in the field increased the soybeans 
and chickpeas germination (%) and root development (Adhikari et al., 2012). 
Cu NFs can improve biochemical and yield characteristics significantly and 
positively, but they must be used with caution (Table 2.1).
2.4.9 SILICON NFs 
For proper plant fitness, silicon (Si) has been placed between essential and 
nonessential components. However, it provides some benefits to plants 
(Rastogi et al., 2019; Seleiman et al., 2019). Although silicon is abundant Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means 27 TABLE 2.1 Types of NFs and Concentrations With the Application Focus and Effects Found on Crop Plants. NFs Plant species Application Concentration Response Source nZn Cotton (Gossypium barbadense L.) Soil irrigation 0–200 mg L−1 Growth and yield traits enhanced except root DW and S/R ratio. Enhance the content of nZn can decrease P uptake and accumulation to leaves and consequently minimize the ratio of P/Zn Hussein and Abou-Baker, 2018 nZn Soybean (Glycine max L.) Petridish 0–1 mg L−1 Germination and percentage rate enhanced, but dry mass reduced Sedghi et al., 2013 nZn Okra (Abelmoschus esculentus L.Moench) Foliar spray 0–10 mg L−1 Increased chlorophyll content, enzyme activities, and decreased proline and sugar level Alabdallah and Alzahrani, 2020 nZn and nSi Mango (Mangifera indica L.) Foliar spray nZn: 0–150 mg L−1 and nSi: 0–300 mg L−1 Upgrade plant performance, uptake of minerals, and photosynthetic capacity Elsheery et al., 2020 nSi Tomato (Solanum lycoper- sicum L.) In vitro culture 0–3 mM Up and downregulated genes help to alleviate the salinity stress Almutairi, 2016 nSi Strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa) Nutrient soil 0–100 mg L−1 Improved growth characteristics, enhanced proline, chlorophyll content, improved/ balance epicuticular wax layer, LRWC, and canopy temperature Avestan et al., 2019 nSi Banana (Musa acuminata “Grand Nain”) In vitro 0–600 mg L−1 Increased plant growth, development, and photosynthetic pigments, improved leaf gas exchange, maintain K+ and Na+ balance, reduce cell wall damage Mahmoud et al., 2020 nSi Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) Nutrient solution 0–10 µM Increased antioxidants enzyme activities to mitigate UV-B generated oxidative stress Tripathi et al., 2017 nFe Menthe (Mentha piperita L.) Hoagland solution 0–30 µM Downregulated proline and MDA content, the suppressed antioxidative activities Askary et al., 201728 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture NFs Plant species Application Concentration Response Source nFe Moldavian dragonhead (Dracocephalum moldavica L.) Foliar spray 0–90 mg L−1 Enhanced leaf area-expansion, phenolic, flavonoid, and anthocyanin activities and GPX, APX, CAT, and GR activities Moradbeygi et al., 2020 nFe Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) Soil mixture 0–100 mg kg−1 soil Maintain growth and physiological parameters, Fe content, and decrease cadmium level Adrees et al., 2020 nZn Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) Soil culture 100–1000 mg kg−1 soil Dose-dependent responses on biomass and antioxidant activities Moghaddasi et al., 2017 nCu Maize (Zea mays L.) - 0.04–0.12% Enhanced growth parameters by enhancing the activities of α-amylase and starch content Saharan et al.,2016 nMn Mung bean (Vigna radiate L.) Hoagland solution 0.05 ppm Increase biomass, stem, and root height. Also, greater photophosphorylation and upregulated oxygen evolution in chloroplasts Pradhan et al., 2013 nN Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Soil irrigation 25–100% Enhanced tillers per plant, height, and dry mass Rathnayaka et al., 2018 nP Soybean (Glycine max L.) – 0–100 mg L−1 Enhanced productivity and root length Liu and Lal, 2015 nP Lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) Soil culture 0–100 mg kg−1 soil Enhanced P level and dry mass Taskin et al., 2018 nK Peanut (Arachis hypogaea L.) Soil irrigation 1500–2500 mg L−1 Enhanced morphological and biological yield. Asgari et al., 2018 nB Pomegranate (Punica granatum cv. Ardestani) Foliar spray 0–6.5 mg L−1 Improve nutrient uptake, increase the number of fruits, quality, and productivity. No changes were noted in antioxidant and total anthocyanins activities. Davarpanah et al., 2016 TABLE 2.1 (Continued)Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means 29
in the earth, plants only absorb it in mono-silicic acid from the soil. Due to 
its varied function in plants’ resistance to different stresses, Si has recently 
received a lot of attention (Seleiman et al., 2019). Si has been shown to 
enhance plant adaptation strategies to ion toxicity, temperature, drought, 
chilling, UV, waterlogging, and salinity stresses (Rastogi et al., 2019; 
Seleiman et al., 2019). Furthermore, using SiO2
 in conjunction with organic 
fertilizers can boost overall plant performance (Janmohammadi et al., 2016; 
Seleiman et al., 2020). Si NPs-based nanosensors and nanozeolites have 
been used successfully in agriculture to monitor soil moisture and increase 
soil water retention (Rastogi et al., 2019). Si NPs could be used as fertilizers 
for plants that need a certain amount of silicon to flourish or as nano-carriers 
to assist agriculture is becoming more sustainable (Table 2.1).
2.4.10 BORON NFs 
Boron (B) is a necessary component for forming cellular walls, the movement 
of photosynthetic organisms from leaves to active sites, and the production 
of flowers and fruits (Davarpanah et al., 2016). B NFs or NPs have been 
shown in studies to enhance plant growth and productivity (Ibrahim and Al 
Farttoosi, 2019). Genaidy et al. (2020) applied as-sprayed nano-boron on 
olive plants; the plants produced the most fruit with the highest seed oil 
content. Taherian et al. (2019) used B nanofertilizer on calcareous soil on 
alfalfa plants. They harvested a high-yielding crop with good forage quality. 
Finally, NFs of B may help increase crop production (Table 2.1).
2.5 DEVELOPMENT OF NFs FOR AGRO-ECOSYSTEMS 
In upcoming years, agriculture will be under enhancing overload to maintain 
food safety for a fast-growing global populace while also lowering its total 
environmental effect. Modification of current fertilization methods could be 
one choice for increasing biomass and grain yields. Plants required sufficient 
mineral elements for proper development. The minerals are delivered to them 
in synthetic fertilizers, which have been steadily rising in adoption among 
growers throughout the globe since the era of the green revolution (De la Luz 
Mora et al., 2007). Innovative fertilizers, such as NFs have been suggested 
as a technique to improve fertilizer NUE by allowing for a more regulated 
and slower nutrient release that better matches crop’s long-term nutritional 
needs (DeRosa et al., 2010; Bley et al., 2017). Semipermeable coatings on the 
surfaces of or inside fertilizers may be utilized to achieve a coherent and slow 30 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
release of nutrients for a long time (Naz and Sulaiman, 2016). This would 
result in a new fertilizer framework that delivers the appropriate quantity of 
nutrients at the crucial period and significant nutrient loss to the environment. 
2.6 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE ASPECTS 
According to sustainable agriculture, nanobioscience can generate new novel 
fertilizer methods to boost global food security and feed the rising worldwide 
populace. Because of their huge surface areas and slow and consistent release 
of nutrients, NFs have potential as part of smart crop production systems 
in sustainable agriculture. Because of these promising properties, they are 
perfect for application in the advanced agricultural system. The usage of NFs 
in agriculture will benefit both production and resistance to biotic and abiotic 
challenges. By delivering active ingredients more efficiently, boosting 
nutrient and NUE uptake, and minimizing fertilizer loss due to volatilization, 
leaching, runoff, and wasted energy during production, NFs may help mini￾mize fertilizer use. Seed coverings with NFs and nanosensors can also lower 
agricultural crop production costs and environmental issues. Future research 
should focus on the safety, bioavailability, and toxicity of various NFs used 
in agriculture. Bio-synthesized or green synthesized nano-biofertilizers and 
NFs should be investigated to increase yields in sustainable agriculture.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Dr. Rajput and Dr. Burachevskaya would like to recognize The Ministry 
of Science and Higher Education of Russian Federation provided financial 
support for the study (no. 0852-2020-0029).
KEYWORDS
• agro-industries
• fertilizers
• innovative technologies
• nanoscale
• nutrient use efficiency
• toxicityNanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means 31
REFERENCES
Adeyemi, O.; Afshar, R. K.; Jahanzad, E.; Battaglia, M. L.; Luo, Y.; Sadeghpour, A. Effect 
of Wheat Cover Crop and Split Nitrogen Application on Corn Yield and Nitrogen Use 
Efficiency. Agronomy 2020, 10, 1081.
Adhikari, T.; Kundu, S.; Biswas, A. K.; Tarafdar, J. K.; Rao, A. S. Effect of Copper Oxide 
Nano Particle on Seed Germination of Selected Crops. J. Agric. Sci. Tech. 2012, 2, 815.
Adnan, M.; Fahad, S.; Zamin, M.; Shah, S.; Mian, I. A.; Danish, S.; Zafar-Ul-Hye, M.; 
Battaglia, M. L.; Naz, R. M. M.; Saeed, B.; Saud, S.; Ahmad, I.; Yue, Z.; Brtnicky, M.; 
Holatko, J.; Datta, R. Coupling Phosphate-Solubilizing Bacteria With Phosphorus 
Supplements Improve Maize Phosphorus Acquisition and Growth Under Lime Induced 
Salinity Stress. Plants 2020, 9, 900.
Adrees, M.; Khan, Z. S.; Ali, S.; Hafeez, M.; Khalid, S.; Ur Rehman, M. Z.; Hussain, A.; 
Hussain, K.; Chatha, S. A. S.; Rizwan, M. Simultaneous Mitigation of Cadmium and 
Drought Stress in Wheat by Soil Application of Iron Nanoparticles. Chemosphere 2020,
238, 124681.
Alabdallah, N. M.; Alzahrani, H. S. The Potential Mitigation Effect of ZnO Nanoparticles on 
(Abelmoschus esculentus L. Moench) Metabolism Under Salt Stress Conditions. Saudi. J. 
Biol. Sci. 2020, 27, 3132–3137.
Almutairi, Z. M. Effect of Nano-Silicon Application on the Expression of Salt Tolerance 
Genes in Germinating Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.) Seedlings Under Salt Stress. 
Plant Omics 2016, 9, 106.
Arora, N. K. Agricultural Sustainability and Food Security. Environ. Sustain.2018, 1, 217–219.
Asgari, S.; Moradi, H.; Afshari, H. Evaluation of Some Physiological and Morphological 
Characteristics of Narcissus Tazatta Under BA Treatment and Nano-potassium Fertilizer. J. 
Chem. Health Risks 2018, 4.
Askary, M.; Talebi, S. M.; Amini, F.; Bangan, A. D. Effects of Iron Nanoparticles on Mentha 
Piperita L. Under Salinity Stress. Biologija 2017, 63, 65–75.
Avellan, A.; Yun, J.; Zhang, Y.; Spielman-Sun, E.; Unrine, J. M.; Thieme, J.; Li, J.; Lombi, E.; 
Bland, G.; Lowry, G. V. Nanoparticle Size and Coating Chemistry Control Foliar Uptake 
Pathways, Translocation, and Leaf-to-Rhizosphere Transport in Wheat. ACS Nano 2019, 
13, 5291–5305.
Battaglia, M. L.; Groover, G.; Thomason, W. E. Harvesting and Nutrient Replacement 
Costs Associated With Corn Stover Removal in Virginia; Virginia Cooperative Extension 
Publication: Ettrick, VA, 2018; CSES-229NP.
Bley, H.; Gianello, C.; Santos, L. D. S.; Selau, L. P. R. Nutrient Release, Plant Nutrition, and 
Potassium Leaching From Polymer-Coated Fertilizer. Rev. Brasil. Ciênc. Solo. 2017, 41, 
0160142.
Broadley, M. R.; White, P. J.; Hammond, J. P.; Zelko, I.; Lux, A. Zinc in Plants. New Phytol. 
2007, 173, 677–702.
Brunner, T. J.; Wick, P.; Manser, P.; Spohn, P.; Grass, R. N.; Limbach, L. K.; Bruinink, A.; 
Stark, W. J. In-Vitro Cytotoxicity of Oxide Nanoparticles, Comparison to Asbestos, Silica, 
and the Effect of Particle Solubility. Environ. Sci. Technol.2006, 40, 4374–4381.
Chhipa, H. Nanofertilizers and Nanopesticides for Agriculture. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2017, 
15, 15–22.
Czymmek, K.; Ketterings, Q.; Ros, M.; Battaglia, M.; Cela, S.; Crittenden, S.; Gates, D.; 
Walter, T.; Latessa, S.; Klaiber, L.; Albrecht, G. The New York Phosphorus Index 2.0; 32 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Agronomy Fact Sheet Series; Fact Sheet #110; Cornell University Cooperative Extension: 
Ithaca, NY, 2020.
Davarpanah S.; Tehranifar A.; Davarynejad, G.; Abadia, J.; Khorasani, R. Effects of Foliar 
Applications of Zinc and Boron Nano-Fertilizers on Pomegranate (Punica granatum cv. 
Ardestani) Fruit Yield and Quality. Sci. Hortic. 2016, 210, 57–64.
De la Luz Mora, M.; Cartes, P.; Núñez, P.; Salazar, M.; Demanet, R. Movement of NO3
--N 
and NH4+ -N in an Andisol and its Influence on Ryegrass Production in a Short-Term Study. 
J. Soil Sci. Plant. Nutr. 2007, 7, 46–63.
DeRosa, M. C.; Monreal, C.; Schnitzer, M.; Walsh, R.; Sultan, Y. Nanotechnology in 
Fertilizers. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5, 91.
Diatta, A. A.; Thomason, W. E.; Abaye, O.; Thompson, T. L.; Battaglia, M. L.; Vaughan, L. 
J.; Lo, M.; Filho, J. F. D. C. L. Assessment of Nitrogen Fixation by Mungbean Genotypes 
in Different Soil Textures Using 15N Natural Abundance Method. J. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 
2020, 20, 2230–2240.
Dimkpa, C. O.; Bindraban, P. S. Fortification of Micronutrients for Efficient Agronomic 
Production, A Review. Agron. Sustain. Dev. 2016, 36, 1–26.
Dwivedi, S.; Saquib, Q.; Al-Khedhairy, A. A.; Musarrat, J. Understanding the Role of 
Nanomaterials in Agriculture. In Microbial Inoculants in Sustainable Agricultural 
Productivity; Springer Science and Business Media LLC: Heidelberg, Germany, 2016; pp 
271–288.
Eichert, T.; Kurtz, A.; Steiner, U.; Goldbach, H. E. Size Exclusion Limits and Lateral 
Heterogeneity of the Stomatal Foliar Uptake Pathway for Aqueous Solutes and Water￾Suspended Nanoparticles. Physiol. Plant. 2008, 134, 151–160.
Elsheery, N. I.; Helaly, M. N.; El-Hoseiny, H. M.; Alam-Eldein, S. M. Zinc Oxide and 
Silicone Nanoparticles to Improve the Resistance Mechanism and Annual Productivity of 
Salt-Stressed Mango Trees. Agronomy 2020, 10, 558. DOI: 10.3390/agronomy10040558.
Fageria, V. D. Nutrient Interactions in Crop Plants. J. Plant. Nutr. 2001, 24, 1269–1290.
FAO. The Future of Food and Agriculture-Trends and Challenges; Annual Report, FAO: 
Rome, Italy, 2017.
Feregrino-Perez, A. A.; Magaña-López, E.; Guzman, C.; Esquivel, K. A General Overview 
of the Benefits and Possible Negative Effects of the Nanotechnology in Horticulture. Sci. 
Hortic. 2018, 238, 126–137.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO). FAO Statistics Division; 
[Online]. http.//www.fao.org/faostat/en/#data/QC/visualize (accessed 20 Mar 2021).
Genaidy, E. A. E.; Abd-Alhamid, N.; Hassan, H. S. A.; Hassan, A. M.; Hagagg, L. F. Effect 
of Foliar Application of Boron Trioxide and Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles on Leaves Chemical 
Composition, Yield and Fruit Quality of Olea europaea L. cv. Picual. Bull. Natl. Res. Cent. 
2020, 44, 106.
Gerdini, F. Effect of Nano Potassium Fertilizer on Some Parchment Pumpkin (Cucurbita 
pepo) Morphological and Physiological Characteristics Under Drought Conditions. Intl. J. 
Farm Alli Sci. 2016, 5, 367–371.
Guo, H.; White, J. C.; Wang, Z.; Xing, B. Nano-Enabled Fertilizers to Control the Release and 
Use Efficiency of Nutrients. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Heal. 2018, 6, 77–83.
Ha, N. M. C.; Nguyen, T. H.; Wang, S. L.; Nguyen, A. D. Preparation of NPK Nanofertilizer 
Based on Chitosan Nanoparticles and its Effect on Biophysical Characteristics and Growth 
of Coffee in Green House. Res. Chem. Intermed. 2018, 45, 51–63.Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means 33
Hong, J.; Rico, C. M.; Zhao, L.; Adeleye, A. S.; Keller, A. A.; Peralta-Videa, J. R.; Gardea￾Torresdey, J. L. Toxic Effects of Copper-Based Nanoparticles or Compounds to Lettuce 
(Lactuca sativa) and Alfalfa (Medicago sativa). Environ. Sci. Process. Impacts 2015, 17, 
177–185.
Hussein, M. M.; Abou-Baker, N. H. The Contribution of Nano-Zinc to Alleviate Salinity 
Stress on Cotton Plants. R. Soc. Open Sci. 2018, 5, 171809. 
Ibrahim, N. K.; Al-Farttoosi, H. A. K. Response of Mung Bean to Boron Nanoparticles and 
Spraying Stages (Vigna Radiata L.). Plant. Arch. 2019, 19, 712–715.
Iravani, S.; Korbekandi, H.; Mirmohammadi, S.; Zolfaghari, B. Synthesis of Silver 
Nanoparticles, Chemical, Physical and Biological Methods. Res. Pharm. Sci. 2015, 9, 
385–406.
Janmohammadi, M.; Amanzadeh, T.; Sabaghnia, N.; Ion, V. Effect of Nano-Silicon Foliar 
Application on Safflower Growth Under Organic and Inorganic Fertilizer Regimes. Bot. 
Lith. 2016, 22, 53–64.
Kah, M.; Tufenkji, N.; White, J. C. Nano-Enabled Strategies to Enhance Crop Nutrition and 
Protection. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14, 532–540.
Kerry, R. G.; Gouda, S.; Das, G.; Vishnuprasad, C. N.; Patra, J. K. Agricultural 
Nanotechnologies, Current Applications and Future Prospects. In Microbial Biotechnology; 
Springer Science and Business Media LLC: Singapore, 2017; pp 3–28.
Kumar, P.; Lai, L.; Battaglia, M. L.; Kumar, S.; Owens, V.; Fike, J.; Galbraith, J.; Hong, C. 
O.; Farris, R.; Crawford, R.; Crawford, J.; Hansen, J.; Mayton, H.; Viands, D. Impacts of 
Nitrogen Fertilization Rate and Landscape Position on Select Soil Properties in Switchgrass 
Field at Four Sites in the USA. CATENA 2019, 180, 183–193.
LaRue, C.; Laurette, J.; Herlin-Boime, N.; Khodja, H.; Fayard, B.; Flank, A. M.; Brisset, 
F.; Carriere, M. Accumulation, Translocation and Impact of TiO2
 Nanoparticles in Wheat 
(Triticum aestivum spp.), Influence of Diameter and Crystal Phase. Sci. Total. Environ. 
2012, 431, 197–208.
Lee, K. X.; Shameli, K.; Yew, Y. P.; Teow, S. Y.; Jahangirian, H.; Rafiee-Moghaddam, R.; 
Webster, T. J. Recent Developments in the Facile Biosynthesis of Gold Nanoparticles 
(AuNPs) and Their Biomedical Applications. Int. J. Nanomed. 2020, 15, 275–300.
Liscano, J. F.; Wilson, C. E.; Norman, R. J.; Jr, Slaton, N. A. Zinc Availability to Rice From 
Seven Granular Fertilizers; Arkansas Agricultural Experiment Station: Fayetteville, CA, 
2000, pp 963.
Liu, R.; Lal, R. Synthetic Apatite Nanoparticles as a Phosphorus Fertilizer for Soybean 
(Glycine max). Sci. Rep. 2015, 4, srep05686.
Liu, R.; Lal, R. Potentials of Engineered Nanoparticles as Fertilizers for Increasing Agronomic 
Productions. Sci. Total. Environ. 2015, 514, 131–139.
Lough, T. J.; Lucas, W. J. Integrative Plant Biology, Role of Phloem Long-Distance 
Macromolecular Trafficking. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 2006, 57, 203–232.
Lv, J.; Christie, P.; Zhang, S. Uptake, Translocation, and Transformation of Metal-Based 
Nanoparticles in Plants, Recent Advances and Methodological Challenges. Environ. Sci. 
Nano. 2019, 6, 41–59.
Mahmoud, L. M.; Dutt, M.; Shalan, A. M.; El-Kady, M. E.; El-Boray, M. S.; Shabana, Y. M.; 
Grosser, J. W. Silicon Nanoparticles Mitigate Oxidative Stress of In Vitro Derived Banana 
(Musa acuminata ‘Grand Nain’) Under Simulated Water Deficit or Salinity Stress. South 
Afr. J. Bot. 2020, 132, 155–163.34 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Mikhak, A.; Sohrabi, A.; Kassaee, M. Z.; Feizian, M. Synthetic Nanozeolite/nanohydroxyapatite 
as a Phosphorus Fertilizer for German Chamomile (Matricaria chamomilla L.). Ind. Crop. 
Prod. 2017, 95, 444–452.
Moghaddasi, S.; Fotovat, A.; Hkoshgoftarmanesh, A. H.; Karimzadeh, F.; Khazaei, H. R.; 
Khorassani, R. Bioavailability of Coated and Uncoated ZnO Nanoparticles to Cucumber in 
Soil With or Without Organic Matter. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2017, 144, 543–551.
Moradbeygi, H.; Jamei, R.; Heidari, R.; Darvishzadeh, R. Investigating the Enzymatic 
and Non-Enzymatic Antioxidant Defense by Applying Iron Oxide Nanoparticles in 
Dracocephalum Moldavica L. Plant Under Salinity Stress. Sci. Horticult. 2020, 272, 
109537.
Naz, M.; Sulaiman, S. A. Slow-Release Coating Remedy for Nitrogen Loss From Conventional 
Urea, A Review. J. Control. Release 2016, 225, 109–120.
Palmqvist, N. M.; Seisenbaeva, G. A.; Svedlindh, P.; Kessler, V. G. Maghemite Nanoparticles 
Acts as Nanozymes, Improving Growth and Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Brassica napus. 
Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2017, 12, 1–9.
Patra, P.; Choudhury, S. R.; Mandal, S.; Basu, A.; Goswami, A.; Gogoi, R.; Srivastava, C.; 
Kumar, R.; Gopal, M. Effect Sulfur and ZnO Nanoparticles on Stress Physiology and Plant 
(Vigna radiata) Nutrition. In Advanced Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology; Springer: 
Guwahati, India, 2013; pp 301–309.
Pitambara, A.; Shukla, Y. M. Nanofertilizers: A Recent Approach in Crop Production. 
Nanotechnol. Agric. Crop Prod. Prot. 2019, 25–28.
Pollard, M.; Beisson, F.; Li, Y.; Ohlrogge, J. B. Building Lipid Barriers, Biosynthesis of Cutin 
and Suberin. Trends Plant Sci. 2008, 13, 236–246.
Pradhan, S.; Patra, P.; Das, S.; Chandra, S.; Mitra, S.; Dey, K. K., Akbar, S.; Palit, P.; Goswami, 
A. Photochemical Modulation of Biosafe Manganese Nanoparticles on Vigna radiata, A 
Detailed Molecular, Biochemical, and Biophysical Study. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 
13122–13131.
Prasad, R.; Bhattacharyya, A.; Nguyen, Q. D. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture, 
Recent Developments, Challenges, and Perspectives. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1014.
Preetha, P. S.; Balakrishnan, N. A Review of Nano Fertilizers and Their Use and Functions in 
Soil. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci. 2017, 6, 3117–3133.
Rai, M.; Ingle, A. P.; Pandit, R.; Paralikar, P.; Shende, S.; Gupta, I.; Biswas, J. K.; Da Silva, S. 
S. Copper and Copper Nanoparticles, Role in Management of Insect-Pests and Pathogenic 
Microbes. Nanotechnol. Rev. 2018, 7, 303–315.
Rajput, V. D.; Minkina, T.; Feizi, M.; Kumari, A.; Khan, M.; Mandzhieva, S.; Sushkova, S.; 
El-Ramady, H.; Verma, K.; Singh, A.; Hullebusch, E.; Singh, R.; Jatav, H.; Choudhary, 
R. Effects of Silicon and Silicon-Based Nanoparticles on Rhizosphere Microbiome, Plant 
Stress and Growth. Biology 2021, 10, 7–9.
Rajput, V. D.; Minkina, T.; Sushkova, S.; Viktoriia, T.; Saglara, M.; Andrey, G.; Dina, N.; 
Natalya, G. Effect of Nanoparticles on Crops and Soil Microbial Communities. J. Soils 
Sediments 2017, 18, 179–187.
Rastogi, A.; Tripathi, D. K.; Yadav, S.; Chauhan, D. K.; Živcák, M.; Ghorbanpour, M.; 
El-Sheery, N. I.; Brestic, M. Application of Silicon Nanoparticles in Agriculture. 3 Biotech
2019, 9, 1–11.
Rathnayaka, R.; Iqbal, Y.; Rifnas, L. Influence of Urea and Nano-Nitrogen Fertilizers on the 
Growth and Yield of Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Cultivar ‘Bg 250’. Biol. Life Sci. 2018, 5, 7–17.Nanofertilizers: A Sustainable Alternative to Conventional Means 35
Rico, C. M.; Majumdar, S.; Duarte-Gardea, M.; Peralta-Videa, J. R.; Gardea-Torresdey, J. L. 
Interaction of Nanoparticles With Edible Plants and Their Possible Implications in the Food 
Chain. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2011, 59, 3485–3498.
Rui, M.; Ma, C.; Hao, Y.; Guo, J.; Rui, Y.; Tang, X.; Zhao, Q.; Fan, X.; Zhang, Z.; Hou, 
T.; Zhu, S. Iron Oxide Nanoparticles as a Potential Iron Fertilizer for Peanut (Arachis 
hypogaea). Front. Plant. Sci. 2016, 7, 815.
Saharan, V.; Kumaraswamy, R. V.; Choudhary, R. C.; Kumari, S.; Pal, A.; Raliya, R.; Biswas, 
P. Cu-chitosan Nanoparticle Mediated Sustainable Approach to Enhance Seedling Growth 
in Maize by Mobilizing Reserved Food. J. Agricul. Food. Chem. 2016, 64, 6148–6155.
Sedghi, M.; Hadi, M.; Toluie, S. G. Effect of Nano Zinc Oxide on the Germination Parameters 
of Soybean Seeds Under Drought Stress. Annal. West Univ. Timisoara ser Biol. 2013, 16, 
73–78.
Seleiman, M. F.; Alotaibi, M.; Alhammad, B. A.; Alharbi, B.; Refay, Y.; Badawy, S. A. Effects 
of ZnO Nanoparticles and Biochar of Rice Straw and Cow Manure on Characteristics of 
Contaminated Soil and Sunflower Productivity, Oil Quality, and Heavy Metals Uptake. 
Agronomy 2020, 10, 790.
Seleiman, M. F.; Refay, Y.; Al-Suhaibani, N.; Al-Ashkar, I.; El-Hendawy, S.; Hafez, E.; 
Suhaibani, A.; Ashkar, A.; Hendawy, E. Integrative Effects of Rice-Straw Biochar and 
Silicon on Oil and Seed Quality, Yield and Physiological Traits of Helianthus annuus L.
Grown Under Water Deficit Stress. Agronomy 2019, 9, 637.
Seleiman, M. F.; Santanen, A.; Jaakkola, S.; Ekholm, P.; Hartikainen, H.; Stoddard, F. L.; 
Makela, P. Biomass Yield and Quality of Bioenergy Crops Grown With Synthetic and 
Organic Fertilizers. Biomass Bioenergy 2013, 59, 477–485.
Seleiman, M. F.; Santanen, A.; Stoddard, F. L.; Mäkelä, P. Feedstock Quality and Growth of 
Bioenergy Crops Fertilized With Sewage Sludge. Chemosphere 2012, 89, 1211–1217.
Shang, Y.; Hasan, K.; Ahammed, G. J.; Li, M.; Yin, H.; Zhou, J. Applications of Nanotechnology 
in Plant Growth and Crop Protection, A Review. Molecules 2019, 24, 2558.
Singh, M. D.; Kumar, B. A. Bio Efficacy of Nano Zinc Sulphide (ZnS) on Growth and Yield 
of Sunflower (Helianthus annuus L.) and Nutrient Status in the Soil. Int. J. Agric. Sci. 
2017, 9, 3795–3798.
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova. Sci. Publishers, Inc., 2020; 
vol 1, pp 73–100. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V.; Singh, A. K.; Sengar, R. S.; Singh, R. K.; Minkina, T. Transformation 
Techniques and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. In 
Policy Issues in Genetically Modified Crops, 2021; pp 515–542. 
Slomberg, D. L.; Schoenfisch, M. H. Silica Nanoparticle Phytotoxicity to Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 10247–10254.
Sohair, E. E. D.; Abdall, A. A.; Amany, A. M.; Hossain, M. F.; Houda, R. A. Effect of Nitrogen, 
Phosphorus and Potassium Nano Fertilizers With Different Application Times, Methods 
and Rates on Some Growth Parameters of Egyptian Cotton (Gossypium barbadense L.). 
Biosci. Res. 2018, 15, 549–564.
Soliman, A. S.; Hassan, M.; Abou-Elell, F.; Ahmed, A. H.; El-Feky, S. A. Effect of Nano 
and Molecular Phosphorus Fertilizers on Growth and Chemical Composition of Baobab 
(Adansonia digitata L.). J. Plant Sci. 2016, 11, 52–60.36 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Srivastava, G.; Das, C. K.; Das, A.; Singh, S. K.; Roy, M.; Kim, H.; Sethy, N.; Kumar, A.; 
Sharma, R. K.; Singh, S. K.; Philip, D.; Das, M. Seed Treatment With Iron Pyrite (FeS2
) 
Nanoparticles Increases the Production of Spinach. RSC Adv. 2014, 4, 58495–58504.
Taha, R.; Seleiman, M. F.; Alotaibi, M.; Alhammad, B. A.; Rady, M. M.; Mahdi, A. H. A. 
Exogenous Potassium Treatments Elevate Salt Tolerance and Performances of Glycine 
max L. by Boosting Antioxidant Defense System Under Actual Saline Field Conditions. 
Agronomy 2020, 10, 1741.
Taherian, M.; Bostani, A.; Omidi, H. Boron and Pigment Content in Alfalfa Affected by 
Nano Fertilization Under Calcareous Conditions. J. Trace Elements Med. Biol. 2019, 53, 
136–143.
Taskın, M. B.; Sahin, O.; Taskin, H.; Atakol, O.; Inal, A.; Gunes, A. Effect of Synthetic Nano￾Hydroxyapatite as an Alternative Phosphorus Source on Growth and Phosphorus Nutrition 
of Lettuce (Lactuca sativa L.) Plant. J. Plant. Nutr. 2018, 41, 1148–1154.
Tripathi, D. K.; Singh, S.; Singh, V. P.; Prasad, S. M.; Dubey, N. K.; Chauhan, D. K. Silicon 
Nanoparticles More Effectively Alleviated UV-B Stress Than Silicon in Wheat (Triticum 
aestivum) Seedlings. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2017, 110, 70–81.
Usman, M.; Farooq, M.; Wakeel, A.; Nawaz, A.; Alam Cheema, S.; Rehman, H. U.; Ashraf, 
I.; Sanaullah, M. Nanotechnology in Agriculture, Current Status, Challenges and Future 
Opportunities. Sci. Total. Environ. 2020, 721, 137778.
Wang, W. N.; Tarafdar, J. C.; Biswas, P. Nanoparticle Synthesis and Delivery by an Aerosol 
Route for Watermelon Plant Foliar Uptake. J. Nanoparticle Res. 2013, 15, 1–13.
Wiesner, M. R.; Lowry, G. V.; Jones, K. L.; Hochella, J. M. F.; Di Giulio, R. T.; Casman, E.; 
Bernhardt, E. S. Decreasing Uncertainties in Assessing Environmental Exposure, Risk, and 
Ecological Implications of Nanomaterials. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2009, 43, 6458–6462.Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at 
Eliminating Pests
PRAVIN KHAIRE, SOMESHREE MANE, TANAJI NARUTE, and 
NARAYAN MUSMADE
Department of Plant Pathology and Agriculture Microbiology, PGI, 
Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri, Maharashtra, India
CHAPTER 3
ABSTRACT
The agricultural sector provides, specifically and indirectly, food for human 
consumption. As the global population grows, new innovations such as 
biotechnology and nanotechnology (NT) need to be used in agricultural 
research. NT refers to substances, constructions, and operations that function 
on a scale of 100 nanometers or less. Every year, plant pests and pathogens 
damage 20–40% of crops. Synthetic pesticides that are potentially damaging 
to society and the environment are being used to control plant diseases. 
Nanomaterials have the potential to improve pesticides by lowering toxicity, 
lengthening their shelf lives, and enhancing the dispersion of pesticides that 
are poorly soluble in water, all of which could benefit the environment. In 
this chapter, we will look at two ways that nanoparticles can be utilized to 
treat pathogenic microorganisms. As a defensive nanoparticle, or for the 
molecules of insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, and gene silencing, either 
independently. Not many nanocomposites products were manufactured for 
agriculture, along with several potential benefits linked to the utilization 
of nanoparticles. Several variables could explain the absence of industrial 
products, such as insufficient field studies and underuse of pest-crop host 
systems. NT’s has made rapid advances in other fields, and the only way to 38 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
maintain with this advancement for smart agriculture is to consider the basic 
problems of science and to resolve technical gaps in order to provide rational 
and promote the production of industrial nano-formulations.
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
Taniguchi (1974) initially established the term nanotechnology (NT) in 
science, which focuses on the manufacture and deployment of nano-partic￾ulate matter (1–1-00 nm or 1.0 × 10-9 m). When it is nano compressed, it 
acts differently and exhibits some new features that in its macro-size type 
are utterly absent. These days, farmers are continuously dealing with pests 
and diseases threatening their crops. Fungal pathogens must be regulated 
if the need for higher quality and diverse food for consumers in developed 
countries is to be met, whereas elevated cereals, vegetables, and fruits are 
an indication of development of the economy (Singh et al., 2021b). Crop 
disease and insects induce loss in crop productivity, with global losses of 
20–40% annually (Flood, 2010). The employment of chemical products, 
such as insects, fungicides, and herbicides, is a significant factor in the 
current pest control (Stephenson, 2003). The resistance of pathogens and 
insect pests to agrochemicals (pesticides and fungicides) is increasingly 
now becoming critical threat (Singh et al., 2021a). These activities are now 
being reassessed due to concern over potential health and environmental 
implications. Nanomaterials (NMs) have helped in the invention of modern 
facilities and agricultural goods with an amazing capability to handle the 
issues alluded to above (Singh et al., 2020). Application of NT has made 
considerable advances in medicine and pharmacology but has gained rela￾tively less attention in agriculture (Sinha, 2017; Balaure, 2017). Nowadays 
in the field of plant hormone, germination of seeds, water treatment, target 
gene transfer, nano-barccoding, nano-devices, and controlled agricultural 
chemical produces, the use of NT to agriculture is being researched (Hayles, 
2017). NPs, such as structure, pore surface morphology features, can be 
found by the scientists to serve as protectants or for effective and selective 
distribution by adsorption, encapsulating of an active component such as a 
pesticide (Khandelwal, 2016). The pesticides and other active compounds 
will intricately link the opportunity to suppress crop diseases in a current 
frontier as agricultural NT is growing. Opportunity to provide a new era with 
pesticides and other active substances for the suppression of plant diseases 
will significantly increase as agricultural NT grows. The use of NMs in Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 39
PDM is a novel and innovative method that may find very useful in the 
coming years with the advancement of the NT application component. NT 
has new opportunities for PDM use in a number of ways. The safest and 
most successful way is direct soil delivery of NPs to seeds or aerial plant 
parts to protect crop against pathogenic invasion. Throughout this way, NPs 
can inhibit the development of pathogens in a manner similar to pesticides. 
Since NPs should be injected directly into the soil, it would have a significant 
impact on nontarget species, in particular mineral microorganisms, which 
are fixed and solubilized. Subsequently, NMs, carbon nanotubes, cups, etc., 
can be utilized as providers of some trendy compounds like pheromones, 
chemical substances stimulating the SAR, polyamine synthesis inhibitors, 
and even pesticide a.i (Khan et al., 2014). NPs may offer a range of benefits, 
as carriers (Hayles, 2017), like,
a) Improved life span,
b) Enhanced water-soluble (WS) pesticide solubility,
c) Decreased toxicity and increased site-specific absorption of the 
target pest.
Other potential advantage of nano-carrier is to increase the action 
power and nanopesticides to stabilize. The number of operations decreases 
efectively, while reducing toxicity and saving costs under environmental 
restrictions (UV and rain) (Fig. 3.1). 
In this chapter of the book, writers explore recent developments in RNA￾interference (RNAi) PDMs that use both NPs themselves as guardians, NPs 
as providers for pesticides, fungicides, herbicides, and dsRNs.
3.2 PLANT DISEASE MANAGEMENT BY DIFFERENT FORMS OF NPs
3.2.1 NPs AS PROTECTORS 
Taniguchi in (1974), the term NT was first used as the main discipline for 
the composition and deployment of nanoparticles of any substance (1–1-00 
nm or 1.0 × 10-9 m). When the substance is reduced to micro-size, it is 
composed of specific new chemical, physical, and biological qualities that 
are totally missing in the macro-size. The ability of NPs alone is particular 
for the protection of plants from pests, flies, bacteria, fungus, and viruses in 
the seed of leaves and roots. Metal NPs such as silver, copper, zinc oxide, and 
titanium dioxide are intensively analyzed for their antiviral and antibacterial 
characteristics (Fig. 3.1; Table 3.1).40 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
TABLE 3.1 AgNPs Antimicrobial Activity Against Different Pathogenic Microorganisms.
Crop Source/mode of AgNPs synthesis used in 
the analysis
Pathogens target References
Pumpkin The nanosized silica–silver prepared by 
combining nanosilver with silica molecules 
and water-soluble polymer and exposing a 
solution including silver salt, silicate, and 
water-soluble polymer to radioactive rays
Powdery mildews (PM) Park et al.,
(2006)
Oak AgNPs supplied by BioPlus Co., Ltd. Wilt pathogen Raffaelea 
sp.
Kim et al., (2007)
Cut 
gerbera
Nanosilver (Shanghai Huzheng Nano 
Technology Co. Ltd., China)
Stem-end bacteria Liu et al., (2009)
Rice AgNPs provided by Quantum Sphere Inc., 
Santa Ana, CA
Bipolaris sorokiniana 
and Magnaporthe grisea
Jo et al., (2009)
– AgNPs synthesized using high-voltage arc 
discharge method
Fusarium culmorum Kasprowicz et 
al., (2010)
– Colloidal solution of AgNPs supplied by 
BioPlus Co. (Pohang, Korea)
Colletotrichum sp. Lamsal et al., 
(2011a)
Cucumber 
and 
pumpkins 
AgNPs supplied by BioPlus Co. Ltd. 
(Pohang, Korea) 
PM Lamsal et al., 
(2011b) 
– Colloidal solution of AgNPs provided by 
BioPlus Co. Ltd. (Pohang, Korea)
Different phyto￾pathogenic fungi
Kim et al., (2012)
Tomato Nanosized Ag–silica hybrid complex 
prepared by γ-irradiation
Pseudomonas syringae Chu et al., (2012)
FIGURE 3.1 This schematic shows NPs as protectants combating a broad range of pests 
and pathogens.Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 41
This quantum gives a broad summary and update of the current case studies 
for the existing NPs. The creation of “green synthesis” in plants, bacteria, 
fungus, or yeast lately gained in relevance from Silvery NP (Table 3.2).
TABLE 3.2 Number of Living Organisms That Synthesize NPs.
Living organisms Type of NPs 
produced
Produced 
size of NPs
References
Plants/medicinal plants
Alfalfa Medicago sativa Gold and silver 20–40 nm Gardea-Torresdey et 
al., (1999)
Mustard Brassica juncea Gold nanotriangles
Gold NPs
– Lamb et al., (2001)
Camphor 
tree
Cinnamomum 
camphora
Gold and silver 55–80 nm Huang et al., (2007)
Aloe Aloe vera Silver NPs 15–15.6 nm Zhang et al., (2008)
Oat Avena sativa Gold NPs 25–85 nm Shanker et al., (2005)
Tamarind 
leaf extract
Tamarindus 
indica
Gold nanotriangles 20–40 nm Paciotti et al., (2004)
Chilli Capsicum annum Silver NPs – Chandran et al., 
(2006)
Cochin 
grass
Cymbopogon 
flexuous
Gold NPs – Hong-Juan et al., 
(2006)
Neem Azadirachta 
indica
Silver NPs, gold 
NPs, and silver and 
gold bimetallic
50–100 nm Shanker et al., (2004)
Hops Humulus lupulus Gold NPs – Rai et al., (2006)
Desert￾willow
Chilopsis linearis Silver NPs Ankamwar et al., 
(2005)
Sweet 
scented 
geranium
Pelargonium 
graveolens
Silver NPs 16–40 nm Shanker et al., (2003)
Indian 
gooseberry
Emblica 
officinalis
Silver and gold NPs 10–20 
nm and 
15–25 nm, 
respectively
Lopez et al., (2005)
Bacterial pathogens
Klebsiella aerogens CdS NPs 20–200 nm Husseiny et al., (2007)
Desulfovibrio desulfuricans Palladium – Nair and Pradeep, 
(2002)42 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Living organisms Type of NPs 
produced
Produced 
size of NPs
References
Magnetotactic bacteria Magnetic (Fe3
O4
) 
and Greigite (Fe3
S4
) 
– Klaus-Joerger, (2001)
Clostridium thermoaceticum CdS NPs – Mandal et al., (2006)
Pseudomonas aeruginosa Gold NPs 5–15 nm Yong et al., (2002)
P. stutzeri Silver NPs 100–200 nm Beveridge et al., 
(1980); Joerger et al., 
(2000)
Shewanella algae Gold NPs 10–20 nm 
intracel￾lularly and 
50–500 nm 
extracellularly 
Lengke and Southam, 
(2005)
Rhodopseudomonas capsulate Gold NPs – He et al., (2008)
Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans Gold NPs – Gericke and Pinches, 
(2006)
Fungal pathogens
Thermonospora sp. Gold NPs 8 nm Ahmad et al., (2003)
Trichothecium sp. Gold NPs – Ahmad et al., (2003)
Phaenerochaete 
chrysosporium
Silver NPs – Basavaraja et al., 
(2008)
Aspergillus fumigatus Silver NPs 5–25 nm Armendariz et al., 
(2004)
Verticillum sp. Silver and gold NPs 20–25 nm Mukherjee et al., 
(2001)
Fusarium semitectum Silver NPs – Bhainsa et al., (2006)
Fusarium oxysporum Silver and gold NPs 20–40 nm 
and 5–15 nm, 
respectively
Mukherjee et al., 
(2002); Ahmad et al., 
(2003)
Colletotrichum sp. Gold NPs 20–40 nm Shanker et al., (2003)
3.3 SYNTHESIZING OF THE AGNPs BY MICROORGANISMS 
The extraction of NPsthrough microorganisms is defined as the green method 
of getting NPs. Production of NPs by organisms is a relatively easy process 
that can be performed by nutritional media and equipment utilized routinely 
in a plant pathology laboratory. Enrichment and isolation technologies allow 
for microorganisms tolerant/resistant to metals and capable of synthesizing 
NMs ideally through mining sites, sea fields, etc. (Fig. 3.2).
TABLE 3.2 (Continued)Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 43
NT research focuses on the creation and application of nanoparticles 
of various components and combinations. NPs are also employed as anti￾microbial agents for a variety of purposes, including the treatment of plant 
diseases. The generation of NPs can be performed by a number of physi￾ological mechanisms (Rajput et al., 2017; Rajput et al., 2021).
3.3.1 FUNGI AS A SOURCE OF NPs
The use of fungi in NP synthesis is somewhat new. With rapid downstream 
processing, simple operation (Mandal et al., 2006), and the ability to release 
a significant share of catalysts, fungi have surpassed bacteria as natural “NF” 
lines. Nonetheless, because fungi are eukaryotes, they are less susceptible 
to genetic alteration than prokaryotes. As a result, genetic manipulation of 
fungus for the generation of additional NPs would be more difficult. To 
better monitor the form, size, and other required qualities of the synthesized 
NMs, it is necessary to understand the process of NP synthesis in microbial 
systems.
3.3.2 BACTERIA AS A SOURCE OF NPs
Prokaryotes have received significantly more attention for nanoparticle 
biosynthesis than other species (Mandal et al., 2006). Mainly silver, gold, FeS, 
and magnetite NPs and quantic points of cadmium sulfide (CdS), zinc sulfide 
(ZnS), and lead sulfide (PbS) are biosynthesized by bacterium (Table 3.2).
3.3.3 VIRUSES AS A SOURCE OF NPs
Plant viruses, in particular spherical/icosahedral plant viruses, are examples 
of organic compounds NT or NPs. A tobacco necrosis virus satellite measuring 
only 18 nm in diameter is the smallest known plant virus (Hoglund, 1968). The 
viruses consist of RNA/DNA single or double-stranded as a protein-coated 
genome. The protein coat/shell serves as a container for carrying nucleic acid 
molecules from one host to another, both structurally and functionally. Their 
ability to penetrate, transmit nucleic acid genomes to specified locations in 
the host genome, reproduce, package nucleic acid, and escape from the host 
cell in the ordered manner that nanoscience requires. Young et al. (2008) 
conducted a systematic investigation of the utilization of plant viruses as 
bio-templates for NMs and their applications.44 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
FIGURE 3.2 Typical process for synthesis of microbial NPs. 
3.4 THE USE OF NT IN THE TREATMENT OF PLANT DISEASE 
In the short to medium term, a variety of NTs can help improve current crop 
control procedures. The subject of NT field implementations is also being 
discussed (Kar et al., 2014; Li et al., 2007). Field implementations of nanosci￾ence are likewise a hot topic. By correctly monitoring when and where pesti￾cides, herbicides, and fertilizers are formed, NPs have the ability to strengthen 
the effectiveness and security of these products (Rai and Ingle, 2012). Metal 
NPs have been demonstrated to be beneficial against plant diseases, insects, 
as well as pests in previous studies (Choudhury et al., 2010). A fungicide that 
utilizes NMs to activate its pathogen-killing capability only when it comes 
into contact with invading pathogens is being developed. As a result, the use 
of nanoscience in phytopathology and food contamination is investigated, 
with effective technological advancements demonstrated (Fig. 3.3).
3.4.1 AGNPs USE AS AN ANTIMICROBIAL AGENT 
Researchers have been able to explore the antibacterial properties of metal 
NPs thanks to the recent development of NMs and NT. To mention a few 
fields, NPs are used in medicine, pharmaceuticals, pollution monitoring, Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 45
technology, and agriculture/plant science (Navarro et al., 2008). Chemicals 
based on silver ions and silver are highly harmful to microbes (Sondi and 
Salopek-Sondi, 2004). As a result, silver ions have been used in a variety 
of compositions, and a mixture of Ag nanoparticles and amphiphilic hyper￾branched macromolecules has recently been shown to generate an efficient 
antibacterial surface coating (Retchkiman-Schabes et al., 2006). Copper, 
zinc, titanium, magnesium, gold, alginate, and silver NPs have all been 
studied, but Ag NPs have been found to be particularly effective against 
bacteria, viruses, and fungus (Bhatia, 2016) (Dutta and Kaman, 2017). 
Soil can influence NPs, but it can also modify other soil characteristics 
like contaminants and pathogens. Under controlled conditions, the AgNPs 
activity against 18 phytopathogens has previously been documented (Prabhu 
and Poulose, 2012).
3.4.2 ANTIMICROBIAL PATHWAYS FOR NANOMETAL TOXICITY 
Lemire et al. (2013) proposed five mechanisms of action: (1) release of 
toxic ions (Cd2C, Zn2C, Ag C) that bind to sulfur-containing proteins; this 
FIGURE 3.3 Applications of NPs for plant disease management.46 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
accumulation prevents proteins from working properly in the membrane and 
interferes with cell permeability; (2) genotoxic toxic ions that kill DNA, 
resulting in cell death; (3) genotoxic toxic ions that kill DNA, resulting in 
cell death. (4) Electron transport is disrupted, protein oxidation occurs, and 
the membrane potential collapses as a result of contact with CeO2
 or nC60; 
(5) reactive oxygen species (ROS) are produced (reactive oxygen species) 
specific types of protein, membrane, or DNA malfunction could be caused 
by ROS-mediated cellular damage and diverse metal-catalyzed oxidation 
processes (Zeng et al., 2007). (6) Obstructing nutrition absorption. These 
processes are not self-contained, meaning that multiple mechanisms may be 
engaged at the same moment. NPs may benefit from multi-goal operations 
in their fight against numerous plant pathogens.
3.4.3 ANTIFUNGAL PROPERTIES OF NPs
Disease control in food crops is critical. Falletta’s current study focuses on 
developing nonhazardous management choices that are less hazardous to 
man and livestock, as well as addressing the scarcity of synthetic fungicides 
(2008). Only a few articles have looked into the antifungal effects of Ag NPs 
(Reo, 2008; Kim, 2008). Efficacy against clinical isolates and ATCC strains 
of Candida spp. and Trichophyton mentagrophytes has been investigated in 
numerous previous investigations (Li, 2012; Panacek, 2006; Min, 2009). 
As technological advancements have made their manufacturing more cost￾effective, nanosized silver crystals have become increasingly commonly used 
as antibacterial agents. Plant disease prevention is one of silver’s potential 
applications. Silver can be used to manage a number of plant microorgan￾isms in a somewhat more practical form than synthetic fungicides since it 
inhibits plant infections in a variety of ways (Park, 2006; Oh, 2006). Botrytis 
cinerea is resistant to Ag-SiO2 NPs, despite their potent antifungal proper￾ties. According to the researchers, Ag2
S NMs on amorphous silica particles 
show antifungal properties against Aspergillus niger (Fateixa et al, 2009). 
ZnO and ZnTiO3
 nanopowders were tested for biocidal efficacy against the 
fungus A. niger (Ruffolo et al., 2010). The ZnTiO3 nanocomposite (NC) 
was shown to be more effective at inhibiting development than ZnO (Jo 
et al., 2009). The antifungal activity of silver ions and nanoparticles was 
investigated using Bipolaris sorokiniana and Magnaporthe grisea. Both 
silver ions and NPs have been reported to decrease disease development in 
phytopathogenic fungi in vitro and in vivo (Woo et al., 2009). The antifungal 
capabilities of Ag NPs were explored by (Min et al., 2009), who focused Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 47
on sclerotium-forming phytopathogenic fungi. Panacek et al. (2006) looked 
explored how Ag NPs affected Candida albicans (I and II), Candida tropi￾calis, and Candida parapsilosis pathogenic yeasts in terms of fungistatic and 
fungicidal effects. The antifungal activity of Ag NPs was evaluated against 
the unknown ambrosia fungus Raffaelea sp., which has killed a large number 
of oak trees in Korea (Woo et al., 2009). Kasprowicz et al. (2010) looked 
at the effect of Ag NPs on F. culmorum plant pathogenic spores. Silver 
NPs show antifungal efficacy against F. oxysporum, according to Musarrat 
et al. (2010). Silver NPs considerably reduced the quantity of germination 
pieces and sprout length when compared to the control. The effect of nano￾silver liquid on green onion white rot caused by Sclerotium cepivorum was 
investigated (Jung et al., 2010). Synthetic fungicides may provide a greater 
risk to humans and wildlife than silver nanoparticles. Furthermore, in algae, 
plants, and fungi, NP toxicity can be accompanied by some beneficial effects 
(Sondi and Salopek-Sondi, 2004). Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, a plant 
disease that causes anthracnose in a variety of fruits, was used to assess the 
antifungal effectiveness of Ag NPs. In the presence of Ag NPs, C. gloeospo￾rioides development was significantly slowed in a dose-dependent manner 
(Aguilar-Mendez et al., 2010).
A. niger, a facultative pathogenic food-borne pathogen, was also examined 
in a comparison of elemental sulfur and nano-sulfur. Sulfur nanoparticles were 
discovered to be more potent than the natural form (Choudhary et al., 2010). 
Using diferent concentrations of Ag NPs, the inhibitory activity of fungal 
plant pathogenic pathogens Alternaria alternata, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, 
Macrophomina phaseolina, Rhizoctonia solani, B. cinerea, and Curvularia 
lunata was examined. Surprisingly, Ag NPs at 15 mg had a strong inhibitory 
efect against a wide range of infections (Krishnaraj et al., 2012). In vitro 
tests revealed that chitosan and Cu-chitosan NPs were of similar size and 
consistency, which could explain their superior antifungal efcacy against A. 
alternata, M. phaseolina, and R. solani. Cu-chitosan NPs also suppressed A. 
alternata fungal growth to the greatest extent. When applied to chitosan and 
Cu-chitosan NPs, the antifungal efectiveness of chitosansaponin NPs was 
reported to be modest (Saharan et al., 2013).
3.4.4 NANOSIZED COMPOUNDS 
Since it was first used to treat damaged plants, WS silicate solution has 
proven to be an effective preventative against powdery mildew (PM) and 
downy mildew (Khaydarov et al., 2011). Plants’ physiological function and 48 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
development were boosted, as well as disease and stress tolerance (Kanto et 
al., 2004). The inhibitory effect of nanosized silica-silver on Pseudomonas 
syringae and Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria was investigated at 
various concentrations, and it was discovered that at 100 ppm, 100% growth 
prevention of Pseudomonas syringae and X. campestris pv. vesicatoria 
occurred. At 10 ppm of nanosized silica-silver, M. grisea, B. cinerea, C. 
gloeosporioides, Pythium ultimum, and R. solani all grew by 100% inhibi￾tion (Oh, 2006). Nanosized silica silver at 0.3 ppm effectively controlled 
PMs in pumpkin in field and greenhouse studies. Erysiphe cichoracearum 
had gone from the leaf surfaces in just 3 days. Sphaerotheca pannosa var. 
rosae, or rose PM, was used to investigate the antifungal effectiveness of 
colloidal nanosilver (1.5 nm average diameter) (Kim et al., 2008). Nano￾copper has been shown to be efficient against bacterial diseases such as rice 
blight (Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae) and mung leaf spot (X. campestris
pv. phaseoli) (Gagoi et al., 2009).
3.4.5 DELIVERY NETWORKS FOR NMs 
To overcome biological barriers to involvement targeting, smart dosage forms 
for pesticides can be created using NT with a combination of time-controlled, 
spatially targeted, self-regulated, remotely regulated, preprogrammed, or 
multifunctional capabilities (Bouwmeester et al., 2009). Pesticides and 
herbicides, fungicides, plants, insects, soils, and the ecosystem may all be 
investigated using smart nano-carriers. There is a lot more potential in using 
a smarter delivery strategy to increase the performance of fungicides in 
farming methods. Such advancements in plant protection technologies will 
allow them to be utilized in crop protection (Boumeester et al., 2009). Quick 
distribution systems could be installed right away to improve the management 
of plant diseases with chemicals (fungicides, insecticides, and herbicides). 
Dispersing pesticides within the crop and approaching the action stage, on 
the other hand, is a more difficult task. If NPs can be delivered and guided to 
specified regions via the crop vascular system, they can be used for phytos￾anitary applications with a small amount of ingredients, reducing the risk of 
environmental contamination and chemical presence in the crop for future 
commercialization. Plant pathogens including fungi, viruses, bacteria, and 
parasitic plants, for example, may be targeted with NPs (Abd-Eslam, 2012). 
Food science uses nano-delivery systems, which is an important category 
of NPs (Letchford and Burt, 2007; Taylor et al., 2005). Commercial products 
with 100–250 nm NPs are substantially more WS, which means they are Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 49
more efective. Commercial products containing 100–250 nm NPs are much 
more WS, resulting in increased efcacy. Nanofungicides, nanopesticides, 
and nanoherbicides are widely used in agriculture (e.g., CruiserMaxx and 
Subdue MAXX), and commercial products contain 100–250 nm NPs are 
much more WS, resulting in increased efcacy (Owalade et al., 2008). Many 
industries employed nano-emulsions of nanoscale particles, which might 
be liquid or oil-based, to manufacture consistent pesticide or herbicide NP 
concentrations ranging from 200 to 400 nanometers in size (Rickman et al., 
1999). M. grisea was confrmed to be eradicated from contaminated rice 
plants using “Nano Green,” a product made by combining various bio-based 
chemicals (Gogoi et al., 2009).
3.4.6 PLANT RESISTANCE IS BEING IMPROVED 
Plants are vulnerable to a variety of disease-causing agents, such as preda￾tory insects, worms, and a variety of other pathogens, as well as drought, 
which both result in significant financial loss. The only way to avoid these 
reductions is to cultivate resistant plant varieties. Crop resistance would aid 
in the control of the aforementioned agents, allowing for the resolution of 
the problem of financial harm. Nanobiotechnology uses NPs, nanofibers, 
and nanocapsules to give a simple set of strategies for copying genes and 
improving plant resistance (McKnight et al., 2003; Rai et al., 2012). The 
effective insertion and incorporation of plasmid DNA into the plant genome 
has been confirmed by gene expression (Filipenko et al., 2007). Nanostruc￾tures agricultural changes can improve plant and disease resistance through 
genetic engineering (McKnight et al., 2003). NT can be used in agriculture 
to tackle specific plant-pathology issues, including as plant–pathogen inter￾actions, and to bring novel crop disease management strategies (Torney et 
al., 2007). For example, using nanotechnological ways to transfer resistance 
genes into plant cells can result in the generation of disease-resistant types 
that save money on agrochemicals (Boumeester et al., 2009).
3.4.7 NANO-PESTICIDES MADE OF SLIVER NPs
Rapid advances in nano-pesticide technology have encouraged a number 
of international organizations to explore potential issues related to the need 
for NT for agricultural production over the last 2 years (Kah and Hofman, 
2014). Since Ag has antimicrobial activity towards microbes and is nontoxic 50 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
to mankind, it has a broad array of applications in metal and compound form 
(Elchiguerra et al., 2005; Yeo et al., 2003). NT has improved recently the 
efficacy of Ag NPs (Kim et al., 2008). Ag NPs have a higher surface area￾to-volume ratio, which enhances their interaction with microorganisms and 
permeation potential (Kim et al., 2008). Microbes have wreaked havoc on 
the atmosphere and ecology. This is the product of new pathogens entering 
nations, causing disease and the death of tree species (for example, in the 
United States and Europe) (Boumeester et al., 2009). Insect pests and fungal 
diseases must also be shielded from invading agricultural products and wild￾life. As a result, a disease-control mechanism is required, and nano-pesticide 
manufacturing could help with plant disease management (Boumeester et 
al., 2009). In lab conditions, the effect of Ag NPs on the oak wilt-causing 
fungal phytopathogen Raffaelea sp was investigated (Woo et al., 2009). 
According to the researchers, AgNPs destroy fungal hyphae, interfere with 
microbial absorption, and inhibit fungal and conidial germination. AgNPs 
suppress the hyphal growth of R. solani, S. sclerotiorum, and S. minor in 
a dose-dependent manner, according to (Min et al., 2009). (Jo et al., 2009) 
investigated the antifungal activity of various silver ions and nanoparticles 
against B. sorokiniana and M. grisea. They discovered that silver ions and 
Ag NPs affect the growth of spore colonies and the course of disease in 
phytopathogenic fungus. These data suggest that Ag NPs may have a lot of 
promise as phytopathogen control nano-pesticides.
3.5 CONCLUSIONS
NT has the ability to revolutionize existing pest control systems and provide 
solutions for agricultural applications. Nanopesticides are clearly an 
appealing advancement, as shown by the aforementioned debate, due to their 
possible benefits for the human health and the environment. Even so, NT 
in agriculture has yet to be commercialized. The effectiveness and toxicity 
of nanostructures pesticides on soil and the ecosystem must be investigated 
further. Only two insecticides loaded on NPs have been tested in the field. 
Song et al. (2012) loaded chlorfenapyr into silica NPs with extra emulsions, 
and imidacloprid into sodium alginate NPs (Kumar et al., 2014). Another 
issue with nanoparticles in plant protection research in its early phases is 
the scarcity of long-term tests. For example, Mitter et al. (2017) evaluated 
a topical delivery system called BioClay for the protection of virus plants 
20 days after foliar sprays for RNAi/nanoparticle and (Mitter et al., 2017) Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 51
evaluates a topical delivery system called Bio Clay for the protection of 
plants from viruses 20 days after foliar sprays for RNAi/nanoparticle (Zhao 
et al., 2017). Nanopesticides are indeed a new technical development in 
which regulatory authorities have yet to develop a specific concept of what 
constitutes a nano-pesticide and what does not (Kookana et al., 2014). The 
results of nanopesticides, versus traditional pesticides, may be based on the 
absorption, bioavailability, concentration, and potency of the NPs, and the 
proportion of the active attached to it, according to (Kookana et al., 2014). 
In addition, there is a paucity of research on pesticide resistance and how 
NMs might aid in reducing its frequency. Fungi are becoming more frequent 
in these applications, and they may be able to develop nanobiofactories for 
metallic NPs that are both rapid and environmentally sustainable. Pesticide 
use that has gone unchecked has resulted in a plethora of problems, including 
affects on human health, pollinating insects, and domestic animals, as well 
as the entry of this material into the water and soil, and its direct and indirect 
effects on habitats. Chemicals utilized wisely at the nanoscale could be a 
feasible solution to the problem.
In order to get greater understanding of the fundamental association 
processes in an intricate bio-nano environment, material researchers and 
biologists must cooperate and introduce signifcant knowledge from other 
felds. The proper NPs may be chosen from a complete grasp of the structural 
characteristics of nanoparticles including the shape, the size, the function 
groups, and the active loading/adsorption capability. The agricultural NT 
research and innovation landscape is highly interesting, since the possibili￾ties ofered by NPs for delivering benefcial products are being thoroughly 
investigated. The authors state that multiple disciplines and integrated work 
would provide a solid foundation for bringing NT crop safety applications 
to fruition.
KEYWORDS
• agriculture sector
• nanoparticles
• nano-pesticides
• plant diseases management52 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
REFERENCES
Abd-Elsalam, K. A. Nanoplatforms for Plant Pathogenic Fungi Management. Fungal 
Genomics Biol. 2012, 2, 107.
Aguilar-Mendez, M. A.; Martın-Martınez E. S.; Ortega-Arroyo, L.; Cobian-Portillo, G.; 
Sanchez-Espındola, E. Synthesis and Characterization of Silver Nanoparticles: Effect on 
Phytopathogen Colletotrichum gloesporioides. J. Nanopart. Res. 2010, 13, 2525–2532.
Ahmad, A.; Senapati, S.; Khan, M. I.; Kumar, R.; Ramani, R.; Srinivas, V.; Sastry, 
M. Intracellular Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles by a Novel Alkalotolerant 
Actinomycete, Rhodococcus Species. Nanotechnology 2003, 14, 824–828. https.//
iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/0957-4484/14/7/323/pdf
Armendariz, V.; Herrera, I.; Peralta-Videa, J. R. Size Controlled Gold Nanoparticle Formation 
by Avena Sativa Biomass: Use of Plants in Nanobiotechnology. J. Nanopart. Res. 2004,
6, 377–382. https.//doi.org/10.1007/s11051-004-0741-4
Balaure, P. C.; Gudovan, D.; Gudovan, I. Nanopesticides: A New Paradigm in Crop Protection. 
New Pestic. Soil Sens. 2017, 129–192.
Basavaraja, S.; Balaji, S. D.; Lagashetty, A. K.; Rajasab, A. H.; Venkataraman, A. Extracellular 
Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using the Fungus Fusarium semitectum, Mater. Res. 
Bull. 2008, 43(5), 1164–1170.https.//doi.org/10.1016/j.materresbull.2007.06.020.(https.//
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0025540807002358)
Bhainsa, K. C.; D’Souza, S. F. Extracellular Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using the 
Fungus Aspergillus fumigatus. Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 2006, 47(2), 160–164. DOI: 
10.1016/j.colsurfb.2005.11.026. https.//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16420977/
Bhatia, S. Nanoparticles Types, Classification, Characterizatio-n, Fabrication Methods and 
Drug Delivery Applications. In Natural Polymer Drug Delivery Systems; Springer: Cham, 
2016. https.//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-41129-3_2
Bouwmeester, H.; Dekkers, S.; Noordam, M. Y.; Hagens, W. I.; Bulder, A. S.; Heer, C. de.; 
Voorde, S. E.C. G. t.; Wijnhoven, S. W. P.; Marvin, H. J. P.; Sips, A. J. A. M. Review of 
Health Safety Aspects of Nanotechnologies in Food Production. Regul. Toxicol. Pharmacol. 
2009, 53(1), 52–62. https.//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19027049/
Choudhury, S. R.; Nair, K. K.; Kumar, R.; Gogoi, R.; Srivastava, C.; Gopal, M.; 
Subhramanyam, B. S.; Devakumar, C.; Goswami, A. Nanosulfur: A Potent Fungicide 
Against Food Pathogen, Aspergillus niger. AIP Conf. Proc. 2010, 1276, 154–157. DOI: 
https.//doi.org/10.20546/ijcmas.2017.606.336 
Dutta, P.; Kaman, P. K. Nanocentric Plant Health Management With Special Reference to 
Silver. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 2017, 6(6), 2821–2830. 
Elchiguerra, J. L.; Burt, J. L.; Morones, J. R.; Camacho- Bragado, A.; Gao, X.; Lara, H. H.; 
Yacaman, M. J. Interaction of Silver Nanoparticles With HIV-1. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2005,
3, 1–10.
Falletta, E.; Bonini, M.; Fratini, E.; Lo Nostro, A.; Pesavento, G.; Becheri, A. Clusters of Poly 
(acrylates) and Silver Nanoparticles: Structure and Applications for Antimicrobial Fabrics. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112, 1175811766.
Fateixa, S.; Neves, M. C.; Almeida, A.; Oliveira, J.; Trindade, T. Anti-Fungal Activity of SiO2
/
Ag2
S Nanocomposites 234 M.A. Alghuthaymi et al. against Aspergillus niger. Coll. Surf. 
B 2009, 74, 304308.
Filipenko, E. A.; Filipenko, M. L.; Deineko, E. V.; Shumnyi, V. K. Analysis of Integration 
Sites of T-DNA Insertions in Transgenic Tobacco Plants. Cytol. Genet. 2007, 41,199–203.Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 53
Flood, J. The Importance of Plant Health to Food Security. Food Secur. 2010, 2, 215–231. 
The importance of plant health to food security | SpringerLink.
Gajbhiye, M.; Kesharwani, J.; Ingle, A.; Gade, A.; Rai, M. Fungus Mediated Synthesis of 
Silver Nanoparticles and Their Activity Against Pathogenic Fungi in Combination With 
Fluconazole. Nanomedicine 2009, 5, 382386.
Gardea-Torresdey, J. L.; Tiemann, K. J.; Gamez, G.; Dokken, K. Effects of Chemical 
Competition for Multi-Metal Binding by Medicago sativa (alfalfa). J. Hazard. Mat. 1999,
69(1), 41–51. DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3894(99)00057-6. https.//europepmc.org/article/
med/10502605
Gericke, M.; Pinches, A. Biological Synthesis of Metal Nanoparticles. Hydrometallurgy
2006, 83(1–4), 132–140. DOI: 10.1016/j.hydromet.2006.03.019.
Ghormade, V.; Deshpande, M. V.; Paknikar, K. M. Perspectives for Nano-Biotechnology 
Enabled Protection and Nutrition of Plants. Biotechnol. Adv. 2011, 29, 792–803. Perspectives 
for nano-biotechnology enabled protection and nutrition of plants - ScienceDirect
Gogoi, R.; Dureja, P.; Singh, P. K. Nanoformulations: A Safer and Effective Option for 
Agrochemicals. Indian Farm. 2009, 59(8), 7–12.
Hayles, J.; Johnson, L.; Worthley, C.; Losic, D. Nanopesticides: A Review of Current Research 
and Perspectives. New Pestic. Soil Sens. 2017, 193–225. Nanopesticides. a review of 
current research and perspectives - ScienceDirect
He. L.; Liu, Y.; Mustapha, A.; Lin, M. Antifungal Activity of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles 
Against Botrytis cinerea and Penicillium expansum. Microb. Res. 2010, 166, 207–215.
He, S.; Guo, Z.; Zhang, Y.; Zhirui, G.; Ning, G. Biological Synthesis of Gold Manowires 
Using Extract of Rhodopseudomonas capsulate. Biotechnol. Prog. 2008, 24, 476–480. 
https.//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/18293997/
Huang, J. W.; Cunnigham, S. D. Lead Phytoextraction: Species Variation in Lead Uptake 
and Translocation. New Phytol. 1996, 134, 75–84. https.//nph.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
full/10.1111/j.1469-8137.1996.tb01147.x
Jo, Y. K.; Kim, B. H.; Jung, G. Antifungal Activity of Silver Ions and Nanoparticles on 
Phytopathogenic Fungi. Plant Dis. 2009, 93, 1037–1043. 
Jung, J. H.; Kim, S. W.; Min, J. S.; Kim, Y. J.; Lamsal, K.; Kim, K. S. The Effect of Nano￾Silver Liquid Against the White Rot of the Green Onion Caused by Sclerotium cepivorum. 
Mycobiology 2010, 38(1), 39–45.
Kah, M.; Hofmann, T. Nanopesticide Research: Current Trends and Future Priorities. Environ. 
Int. 2014, 63, 224–235.
Kanto, T.; Miyoshi, A.; Ogawa, T.; Maekawa, K.; Aino, M. Suppressive Effect of Potassium 
Silicate on Powdery Mildew of Strawberry in Hydroponics. J. Gen. Plant Pathol. 2004,
70, 207–211. 
Kar, P. K.; Murmu, S.; Saha, S.; Tandon, V.; Acharya, K. Anthelmintic Efficacy of Gold 
Nanoparticles Derived From a Phytopathogenic Fungus, Nigrospora oryzae. PLoS One, 
2014, 9(1), 84693.
Kasprowicz, M. J.; Kozio, M.; Gorczyca, A. The Effect of Silver Nanoparticles on 
Phytopathogenic Spores of Fusarium culmorum. Can. J. Microbiol. 2010, 56, 247–253.
Khandelwal, N.; Barbole, R. S.; Banerjee, S. S.; Chate, G. P.; Biradar, A. V.; Khandare, J. J.; 
Giri, A. P. Budding Trends in Integrated Pest Management Using Advanced Micro- and 
Nano-Materials: Challenges and Perspectives. J. Environ. Manag. 2016, 184, 157–169. 
Khaydarov, R. R.; Khaydarov, R. A.; Evgrafova, S.; Estrin, Y. Using Silver Nanoparticles as 
an Antimicrobial Agent. NATO Science Peace Security Series A, 2011; pp 169–177. 54 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Kim, H.; Kang, H.; Chu, G.; Byun, H. Antifungal Effectiveness of Nanosilver Colloid Against 
Rose Powdery Mildew in Greenhouses. Solid State Phenom. 2008, 135, 1518.
Kookana, R. S.; Boxall, A. B. A.; Reeves, P. T.; Ashauer, R.; Beulke, S.; Chaudhry, Q.; 
Cornelis, G.; Fernandes, T. F.; Gan, J.; Kah, M. Nanopesticides. Guiding Principles for 
Regulatory Evaluation of Environmental Risks. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2014, 62, 4227–
4240. Nanopesticides. guiding principles for regulatory evaluation of environmental risks 
- PubMed (nih.gov) 
Krishnaraj, C.; Ramachandran, R.; Mohan, K.; Kalaichelvan, P. T. Optimization for Rapid 
Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles and its Effect on Phytopathogenic Fungi. Spectrochimica 
Acta Part A 2012, 93, 95–99. 
Kumar, S.; Bhanjana, G.; Sharma, A.; Sidhu, M.; Dilbaghi, N. Synthesis, Characterization 
and on Field Evaluation of Pesticide Loaded Sodium Alginate Nanoparticles. Carbohydr. 
Polym. 2011, 101, 1061–1067.
Lamb, A. E.; Anderson, C. W. N.; Harkamp, R. The Induced Accumulation of Gold in the 
Plants Brassica juncea, Berkheya coddii, and Chicory. Chem. N.Z. 2001, 65, 34–36. 
https.//www.researchgate.net/publication/291293247_The_induced_accumulation_of_gold_
in_the_plants_Brassica_juncea_Berkheya_coddii_and_chicory
Lamsal, K.; Kim, W. S.; Jung, H. J.; Kim, S. Y.; Kim, S. K.; Lee, S. Y. Inhibition Effects of 
Silver Nanoparticles Against Powdery Mildews on Cucumber and Pumpkin. Mycobiology
2011, 39(1), 26–32. https.//www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3385079/
Letchford, K.; Burt, H. A Review of the Formation and Classification of Amphiphilic 
Block Copolymer Nanoparticulate Structures: Micelles, Nanospheres, Nanocapsules and 
Polymersomes. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 2007, 65, 259–269.
Li, G.; He, D.; Qian, Y.; Guan, B.; Gao, S.; Cui, Y.; Yokoyama, K.; Wang, L. Fungus-Mediated 
Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Aspergillus terreus. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2012,
13, 466–476.
Li, Z. Z.; Chen, J. F.; Liu, F.; Liu, A. Q.; Wang, Q.; Sun, H. Y.; Wen, L. X. Study of UV-Shielding 
Properties of Novel Porous Hollow Silica Nanoparticle Carriers for Avermectin. Pest 
Manag. Sci. 2007, 63, 241–246.
Mandal, D.; Bolander, M. E.; Mukhopadhyay, D.; Sarkar, G.; Mukherjee, P. The Use of 
Microorganisms for the Formation of Metal Nanoparticles and Their Application. Appl. 
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2006, 69, 485–492.
McKnight, T. E.; Melechko, A. V.; Griffin, G. D.; Guillorn, M. A.; Merkulov, V. I.; Serna, F.; 
Hensley, D. K.; Doktycz, M. J.; Lowndes, D. H.; Simpson, M. L. Intracellular Integration 
of Synthetic Nanostructures With Viable Cells for Controlled Biochemical Manipulation. 
Nanotechnology 2003, 14, 551–556.
Min, J. S.; Kim, K. S.; Kim, S. W.; Jung, J. H.; Lamsal, K.; Kim, S. B.; Jung, M.; Lee, Y. S. 
Effects of Colloidal Silver Nanoparticles on Sclerotium-Forming Phytopathogenic Fungi. 
Plant Pathol. J. 2009, 25, 376–380. 
Mitter, N.; Worrall, E. A.; Robinson, K. E.; Li, P.; Jain, R. G.; Taochy, C.; Fletcher, S. J.; 
Carroll, B. J.; Lu, G.; Xu, Z. P. Clay Nanosheets for Topical Delivery of RNAi for Sustained 
Protection Against Plant Viruses. Nat. Plants 2017, 3, 16207.
Mukherjee, P.; Ahmad, A.; Mandal, D.; Senapati, S.; Sainkar, S. R.; Khan, M. I. R.; Parishcha, 
P.; Ajaykumar, V.; Alam, M.; Kumar, R.; Sastry, M. Fungus-Mediated Synthesis of Silver 
Nanoparticles and Their Immobilization in the Mycelia Matrix. A Novel Biological Approach 
to Nanoparticle Synthesis. Nano Lett. 2001, 1(10), 515–519. DOI: 10.1021/nl0155274. Nano-Pesticides: A Dab Hand at Eliminating Pests 55
https.//www.scirp.org/(S(i43dyn45teexjx455qlt3d2q))/reference/ReferencesPapers.
aspx?ReferenceID=810601
Musarrat, J.; Dwivedi, S.; Singh, B. R.; Al-Khedhairy, A. A.; Azam, N. A. A Production of 
Antimicrobial Silver Nano-Particles in Water Extracts of the Fungus Amylomyces rouxii
Strain KSU-09. Biores. Technol. 2010, 101, 8772–8776.
Navarro, E.; Baun, A.; Behra, R.; Hartmann, N. B.; Filser, J.; Miao, A. J.; Quigg, A.; Santschi, 
P. H.; Sigg, L. Environmental Behavior and Ecotoxicity of Engineered Nanoparticles to 
Algae, Plants, and Fungi. Ecotoxicology 2008, 17, 372–386. 
Oh, S. D.; Lee, S.; Choi, S. H.; Lee, I. S.; Lee, Y. M.; Chun, J. H.; Park, H. J. Synthesis 
of Ag and AgSiO2
 Nanoparticles by y-irradiation and Their Antibacterial and Antifungal 
Efficiency Against Salmonella Enteric Serovar Typhimurium and Botrytis cinerea. Coll. 
Surf. A 2006, 275, 228233.
Owolade, O. F.; Ogunleti, D. O.; Adenekan, M. O. Titanium Dioxide Affects Disease 
Development and Yield of Edible Cowpea. Electron. J. Environ. Agric. Food Chem. 2008,
7(50), 2942–2947.
Panacek, A.; Kolar, M.; Vecerova, R.; Prucek, R.; Soukupova, J.; Krystof, V.; Park, H. J.; 
Kim, S. H.; Kim, H. J.; Choi, S. H. A New Composition of Nanosized Silica-Silver for 
Control of Various Plant Diseases. Plant Pathol. J. 2006, 22, 295302.
Prabhu, S.; Poulose, E. K. Silver Nanoparticles: Mechanism of Atimicrobial Action, 
Synthesis, Medical Applications, and Toxicity Effects. Int. Nano Lett. 2012, 2, 32. DOI: 
10.1186/2228-5326-2-32. https.//link.springer.com/article/10.1186/2228-5326-2-32#citeas
Rai, M.; Deshmukh, S.; Gade, A.; Elsalam, K. A. Strategic Nanoparticles-Mediated Gene 
Transfer in Plants and Animals A Novel Approach. Curr. Nano 2012, 8, 170–179.
Rajput, V. D.; Tatiana, M.; Svetlana, S.; Tsitsuashvili, V.; Mandzhieva, S.; Gorovtsov, A.; 
Nevidomskyaya, D.; Gromakova, N. Effect of Nanoparticles on Crops and Soil Microbial 
Communities. J. Soils Sediments 2017, 18, 179–187.
Rajput, V. D.; Minkina, T.; Kumari, A.; Harish, Singh.; Verma, V. K.; Verma, K. K.; 
Mandzhieva, S.; Sushkova, S.; Srivastava, S.; Keswani, C. Coping With the Challenges of 
Abiotic Stress in Plants: New Dimensions in the Field Application of Nanoparticles. Plants 
(Basel) 2021, 10(6), 1221. 
Rai, M.; Ingle, A. Role of Nanotechnology in Agriculture With Special Reference to 
Management of Insect Pests. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2012, 94, 287–293.
Retchkiman-Schabes, P. S.; Canizal, G.; Becerra-Herrera, R.; Zorrilla, C.; Liu, H. B.; 
Ascencio, J. A. Biosynthesis and Characterization of Ti/Ni Bimetallic Nanoparticles. Opt. 
Mater. 2006, 29, 95–99.
Rickman, D.; Luvall, J. C.; Shaw. J.; Mask, P.; Kissel, D.; Sullivan, D. Precision Agriculture, 
Changing the Face of Farming. [Online], 1999. wwwghccmsfcnasagove/ precisionag/
Roe, D.; Karandikar, B.; Bonn-Savage, N.; Gibbins, B.; Roullet, J. B. Antimicrobial Surface 
Functionalization of Plastic Catheters by Silver Nanoparticles. J. Antimicrob. Chemother.
2008, 61, 869876.
Ruffolo, S. A.; La, Russa.; M. F.; Malagodi, M.; Oliviero, R. C.; Palermo, A. M.; Crisci, G. 
M. ZnO and ZnTiO3
 Nanopowders for Antimicrobial Stone Coating. Appl. Phys. A 2010,
100, 829834. 
Saharan, V.; Mehrotra, A.; Khatik, R.; Rawal, P.; Sharma, S. S.; Pal, A. Synthesis of Chitosan 
Based Nanoparticles and Their In Vitro Evaluation Against Phytopathogenic Fungi. Int. J. 
Biol. Macromol. 2013, 62, 677–683. 56 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Shankar, S. S.; Ahmad, A.; Sastry, M. Geranium Leaf Assisted Biosynthesis of Silver 
Nanoparticles. Biotechnol. Prog. 2003, 19(6), 1627–1631. DOI: 10.1021/bp034070w. 
PMID. 14656132. https.//pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/14656132/
Shankar, S. S.; Rai, A.; Ahmad, A.; Sastry, M. Rapid synthesis of Au, Ag, and Bimetallic Au 
core-Ag Shell Nanoparticles Using Neem (Azadirachta indica) Leaf Broth. J. Coll. Interf.
Sci. 2004, 275(2), 496–502. DOI: 10.1016/j.jcis.2004.03.003. PMID. 15178278. https.//
pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15178278/
Sinha, K.; Ghosh, J.; Sil, P. C. New Pesticides: A Cutting-Edge View of Contributions 
From Nanotechnology for the Development of Sustainable Agricultural Pest Control 
A2—Grumezescu, Alexandru Mihai. In New Pesticides and Soil Sensors; Academic Press: 
Cambridge, MA, 2017.
Singh, A.; Rajput, V.; Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V.; Chokheli, V. A.; Singh, R. K. Modern 
Sustainable Techniques for Enhancing Crop Production. In Sustainable Soil Fertility 
Management, 2021b; pp. 73–100. ISBN: 978-1-53619-055-7.
Singh, A., Rajput, V.; Singh, A. K.; Sengar, R. S.; Singh, R. K.; Minkina, T. Transformation 
Techniques and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. In 
Policy Issues in Genetically Modified Crops, 2021a; pp 515–542.
Sondi, I.; Salopek-Sondi, B. Silver Nanoparticles as Antimicrobial Agent: A Case Study on E. 
coli as a Model for Gram-negative Bacteria. J. Coll. Interf. Sci. 2004, 275, 177–182.
Song, M. R.; Cui, S. M.; Gao, F.; Liu, Y. R.; Fan, C. L.; Lei, T. Q.; Liu, D. C. Dispersible 
Silica Nanoparticles as Carrier for Enhanced Bioactivity of Chlorfenapyr. J. Pestic. Sci. 
2012, 37, 258–260.
Stephenson, G. R. Pesticide Use and World Food Production: Risks and Benefits. ACS 
Publications: Washington, DC, 2003.
Taniguchi, N. On the Basic Concept of ‘Nano-technology’. In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Production Engineering Tokyo; ; Japan Soc Precision Engineering: Tokyo,
1974; pp 18–23.
Taylor, T. M.; Davidson, P. M.; Bruce, B.D.; Weiss, J. Liposomal Nanocapsules in Food 
Science and Agriculture. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2005, 45, 587–605.
Torney, F.; Trewyn, B. G.; Lin, S. Y.; Wang, K. Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles Deliver 
DNA and Chemicals Into Plants. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2007, 2, 295–300.
Woo, K. S.; Kim, K. S.; Lamsal, K.; Kim, Y. J.; Kim, S. B.; Jung, M.; Sim, S. J.; Kim, 
H. S.; Chang, S. J.; Kim, J. K.; Lee, Y. S. An In Vitro Study of the Antifungal Effect of 
Silver Nanoparticles on Oak Wilt Pathogen Raffaelea sp. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2009,
19, 760–764.
Yeo, S. Y.; Lee, H. J.; Jeong, S. H. Preparation of Nanocomposite Fibers for Permanent 
Antibacterial Effect. J. Mater. Sci. 2003, 38, 2143–2147.
Zeng, F.; Hou, C.; Wu, S. Z.; Liu, X. X.; Tong, Z.; Yu, S. N. Silver Nanoparticles 
Directly Formed on Natural Macroporous Matrix and Their Anti-Microbial Activities. 
Nanotechnology 2007, 18, 1–8. 
Zhao, P.; Cao, L.; Ma, D.; Zhou, Z.; Huang, Q.; Pan, C. Synthesis of Pyrimethanil-Loaded 
Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles and Its Distribution and Dissipation in Cucumber Plants. 
Molecules 2017, 22, 8.PART III
Improving Soil Fertility and 
Crop ProtectionNanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology 
in Sustainable Agriculture and Their 
Response on Soil Health and Plant 
Growth
PRAMOD U. INGLE1
,VAISHNAVI S. PARMA2
, and ANIKET K. GADE1
1
Department of Biotechnology, Sant Gadge Baba Amravati University, 
Amravati, Maharashtra, India 
2
Department of Agriculture and Food Engineering, 
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal, India
CHAPTER 4
 ABSTRACT
Agriculture has always been a global concern whether its productivity or 
fertility of soil. The productivity mostly relies on the quality, health, and soil 
fertility. Soil fertility also depends upon macro and micronutrient constituent 
as well as the population of soil microbiota. However, for better crop produc￾tion and protection, sustainable agriculture practices are carried out with the 
aid of advancing technology. Nanotechnology is gaining much importance in 
agriculture in recent time for application of nanoparticles (NPs), nonmaterials, 
and nanoformulations, which has benefited agriculture by promoting soil 
organic matter, enhancing soil fertility, and microbial activity. Conversely, it 
also perturbs the microbial community when this applicant accumulates into 
the soil beyond certain limits. This chapter will provide account on mode of 
entrance of NPs into the soil, its positive and negative effect on the soil and 
its microbiome, interaction of soil microbial community.60 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Agriculture acts as an interface between humans and the environment and is 
responsible for the modification of soil and the ecosystem. Soil quality and 
ecosystem have greatly impacted because of an unhealthy way of agriculture 
practices, which leads to vulnerability of agriculture and natural resources. 
Therefore, there is a requisite need for agricultural development and this can 
be ensured by adapting a new format of safe agricultural produce, which also 
helps to bring down environmental pollution (Singh et al., 2021). Sustainable 
agriculture is the key solution for the holistic future of mankind’s survival. 
These are deliberately practiced to overcome global population demand for 
food and are mainly adept to protect the environment by preventing its natural 
resources and also to retain or improve its soil fertility (Rajput et al., 2021). 
Moreover, the feasible enhancement of soil fertility, agricultural growth, and 
productivity can be strengthened by the implication of pioneering technolo￾gies. Nanotechnology is often documented as a promising next-generation 
technology. Nanotechnology is one such field whose principal techniques 
are based on the nanoscale dimension of about 1–100 nm (Klaine et al., 
2008). This nanosize range molecule bears specific, unique chemical, and 
optical properties. Along with those nanoparticles (NPs) also possesses 
specific surface plasma resonanceand high surface-to-volume ratios that add 
to its potential for various applications (Pramanik et al., 2020). Whereas the 
counterpart bulk materials have a dimension greater than 100 nm and possess 
lower reactivity as they do not have a high surface-to-volume ratio (Hermes 
Pérez-Hernández et al., 2019). Nanotechnology has traded its progress 
across the broad spectrum including biological and nonbiological areas and 
this is mainly due to their size-structure-dependent physicochemical proper￾ties. This advanced technology catalyzes enhanced agricultural productivity 
and growth rate. Undoubtedly, nanotechnology has a remarkable role in the 
second green revolution. Since it contributes to the sustainability of agricul￾ture as a provider of nanosensors, nanopesticides (NPs), and nanofertilizers 
(NFs), nanocarriers, nanochips, also nanopackaging or nanocoating that 
increases shelf life and durability of the food products. While using these 
nanotechniques a better level of understanding about its potential toxic 
impacts on soil and other living systems are usually required. 
Various forms of newly designed NFs are made commercially available 
very recently. These NFs are composed of various formulations developed 
through thorough experimentation and optimization. The main components 
of these NFs are metal, metal oxides, and quantum dots. Metal NPs includes Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture 61
In, Mo, Ni, Ti, W, Zn, Al, Bi, Si, Ag, Sn, Co, Cu, Au, and Fe. The core 
of metal oxide NPs is made of NiO, MgO, SiO2
, SnO2
, ZnO, TiO2
, ZrO2
, 
Al2
O3
, CeO2
, CuO, Cu2
O, In2
O3
, and La2
O3
 (Ebbs et al., 2016; Olkhovych et 
al., 2016; Ebrahimi et al., 2016; Van et al., 2016; Singh and Kumar, 2016; 
Cvjetko et al., 2017; Priesteret et al., 2017; McGee et al., 2017; You et al., 
2017). NPs have proven their widespread applications in various felds 
including agriculture due to their multifunctional ability (Yadav et al., 2014; 
Keller and Lazareva, 2014; Servin et al., 2017; Rajput et al., 2018). An online 
database (www.nanodb.dk) has enlisted thousands of nano-based products 
and huge quantities of these NPs and their ever-increasing production due to 
continuous consumption by various industries (Yadav et al., 2014; Rajput et 
al., 2020a). 
This unceasing production, use, and continuous disposal have led to the 
release of tons of NPs into the soil, water, and air. Major amount is accumu￾lated in soil through drainage, landflls, sludge, and waste. At the same time 
the amount released into water and air cannot be neglected (Keller et al., 
2013). This ever-increasing accumulation of NPs into the environment may 
lead to their constant exposure with the various life forms present at the site 
of release and disposal, causing harmful efects on the biotic components of 
the environment (Yadav et al., 2014). 
This chapter recapitulates the various modes of NPs entry into the soil, 
its positive and negative efect onto the soil, fertility, and its microbiome, 
interaction of soil microbial community with NPs.
4.2 TYPES AND ROLE OF SOIL MICROBIAL COMMUNITY
Soil microbial populations have a significant role in preserving the 
ecosystem, soil health, and biological production. Soil productivity and soil 
fertility are influenced by the presence of soil microbial communities. Soil 
is a habitat of a wide range of distinct microbial populations also refers as 
soil microbiome, and this diversity is usually because soil environmental 
conditions are heterogeneous (Bollen, 1956). The diverse microbial popula￾tion depicts complexity and variability within the community, and this is due 
to genetic variation, functional groups difference, and relative abundance 
within taxons of the community. This distinct soil microbiome attributes a 
healthy soil–plant relationship, while those with low microbial diversity are 
often regarded as unhealthy soil. Slight alteration or any effect in microbial 
population significantly results in environmental change. Thus, the active 62 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
microbial population is inextricably associated with soil health. Aforesaid, 
the soil is swarmed with a zillion of a living organism comprising of micro 
and macroflora and fauna. This diverse entity includes every other type of 
bacteria, actinomycetes, fungi, algae, and fauna like protozoa, nematodes, 
mites, collembola, earthworm, etc. It also provides shelters to many inver￾tebrates such as worms, insects, and mammals like rabbits, rodents, and 
badgers. However, among these microbial communities, rhizospheric soil 
bacteria like N2
-fixing rhizobacteria or plant growth-promoting rhizobac￾teria, and other symbiotic rhizospheric microorganisms like cyanobacteria, 
which inhabits the rhizosphere of all plants are a more prominent biological 
tool in the sustainability of agriculture. Since these bacteria are capable to 
stimulate plant growth and other biocontrol activities (Meena et al., 2016). 
Soil microorganisms contribute to soil fertility for sustainable agriculture 
by influencing efficiency of nutrient cycling, soil carbon sequestration, 
modifying soil physical structure, greenhouse gas emission, and water 
regimes, enhancing the effectiveness of nutrient acquisition by the flora and 
improving plant health, and regulating the soil organic matter dynamics by 
mediating cation-exchange capacity, the soil S-N-P reserves, toxicity, and soil 
acidity (Singh et al., 2011). Even though, soil enzymes covalently contribute 
along with the soil microorganism in metabolic processes and biochemical 
processes of soil that involve formation and decomposition of organic 
compounds and humus; various oxidation-reduction reactions, hydrolysis, 
and transformation of plants, animals, and microorganism residues (You et 
al., 2017). To a certain extent, these enzymes provide aid to soil microbial 
processes. This soil biota remains viable as long as there is a carbon source 
for energy. Moreover, the activity of microbial biomass and their size is 
mainly governed by the entry of substrate into the soil (Rajput et al., 2020a).
4.3 IMPORTANCE OF SOIL QUALITY IN AGRICULTURE
Soil forms the basis of an ecosystem where it plays a vital function for living 
system that indorses environmental quality, sustains biological productivity, 
and maintain plant and animal health. Sustainable developments of agricul￾ture productivity are subject to the concept of soil health. Soil is an intricate 
arrangement of organic and inorganic matter, air, soil microbial biomass, 
water, and other biotic and abiotic components. In general, “soil fertility” is 
the capability of the soil to provide water in adequate amounts and essential 
plant nutrients to nurture the plant for its growth and development. It is well Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture 63
documented that healthy soil has an abundance of a nutrient element like C, 
N, O, S, P, Ba, Mg, Mn, Ca, Fe, Zn, Mo, Si, Al, K, Na, Sr, Rb, and nanosized 
minerals along with this it is also a hub of carbonates, silicates, sulfates, 
hydroxides, oxides, and phosphates, which somehow play a crucial role in 
maintaining soil fertility. Any organic matter present in soil is degraded by 
the microorganisms present and making it available for the plants and other 
life forms associated. Thus, ultimately increasing the fertility of soil (Bollen, 
1956).
Moreover, a fertile soil not only provides vital nutrients for the growth of 
crop plant but, also supports a miscellaneous and active biotic components, 
a typical soil structure maintenance, and allows for an uninterrupted decom￾position (Bünemann et al., 2018). Soil quality is important both for agro￾ecosystems and natural ecosystems as it helps in maintaining environmental 
quality and also promote biodiversity conservation. A soil status is typically 
defned by the presence of a microbiological and biochemical ailment in 
the soil, which is directly related to its natural soil fertility. Although, soil 
productivity depends upon several factors but microbes have a dominant 
role. Healthy soil is an indicator of active soil microbial population, which 
bears the potential to enhance agricultural production (Bharti et al., 2017). 
Soil quality is also assessed by the presence of biological indicators such 
as the microbial biomass, soil organic matter, soil respiration, ATP content, 
soil fatty acid profles, potential nitrogen (N) mineralization capacity, soil 
enzyme activities, and DNA characterization (Igalavithana et al., 2017). But 
the constantly accumulating chemical through various modes may hamper 
the diferent components of soil. They may have a deliberate efect on soil 
microbes leading to the reduction in microbial biomass and ultimately 
reducing the soil fertility. In contrast to the chemical fertilizers and soil 
applicants, NPs can be a reliable alternative for improving soil fertility and 
aid the sustainable agricultural practices. These NPs act as NFs and are 
emerging as an alternative to chemical fertilizers. NFs can be designed to 
encapsulate nutrients and growth promoters and their controlled and targeted 
release as desired. Through controlled release of nutrients and increase in the 
nutrient utilization efciency NFs may exert positive efect both in soil and 
present microfora (Manjunatha et al., 2016; Zulfqar et al., 2019). For this 
purpose, the biologically synthesized nanomaterials are applied and the NPs 
are fabricated so as to cause minimal losses to the soil microbiota and the 
environment. Still the market availability of the NFs is lacking due to some 
limitations.64 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
4.4 VARIOUS ELEMENTS OF AGROECOSYSTEM AFFECTED BY NPs
Besides all the reported benefits of NPs, exaggerated use causes diverse 
effects on the various components of environment. The NPs applied to crops 
and fields ultimately run-off to the soil, water, and atmosphere (Ali et al., 
2020). Figure 4.1 shows the various elements of agroecosystem, which are 
impacted after exposure with the NPs.
FIGURE 4.1 Different elements of agroecosystem affected by nanoparticles.
4.5 MODES OF NPs ENTRY INTO ENVIRONMENT
Post application fate of NPs is precisely unpredictable. The NPs may be 
either get absorbed by microbial flora of soil, uptaken by plant roots and 
leaves, and sometimes carried away with the air currents as an aerosol. As 
far as the release of NPs in soil is taken into account, there are several ways 
including leaching, surface run-off, etc. (Gladkova and Terekhova, 2013; Ali 
et al., 2020; Rajput et al., 2020b). Figure 4.2 represents the various routs of 
NPs entrance and impacting the environment.Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture 65
FIGURE 4.2 Various modes of nanoparticle entry into environment.
NFs are responsible for increased biosource of nutrients and are 
ecofriendly. They can improve organic carbon uptake and soil aggregation 
(Manjunatha et al., 2016). A good quantity of literature is available with 
respect to the impact of NPs on plants. But the reports indicating efect 
of NPs on soil microbes and their application as a soil applicant is scanty. 
Still, it is important to study the soil microbial communities for determining 
hazardous efects of NFs of NPs (Holden et al., 2014; Rajput et al., 2020a).
4.6 APPLICATION OF NPs IN ENHANCING SOIL MICROBIAL AND 
ENZYMATIC ACTIVITY
NPs are found to increase the microbial activity and also supports soil organic 
carbon cycle. This will help in addressing the infertile lands, wastelands, and 
support the vegetation and farming on barren lands. NPs are responsible for 
crop growth and increasing fertility and ultimately enabling farmers for coping 
up with the increasing food demands of population (Javed et al., 2019). For 
the sustainable use of soil, it is required to protect microbial biomass and its 
diversity (Torsvik and Øvreås, 2002). Impact of NPs is a function of its type, 
concentration, and enzymatic activity of soil. Ultimately, the larger surface 
availability of NPs for different enzyme activities including photosynthesis 
gives more yield and protects plants from biotic and abiotic stress thereby 66 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
increasing the nutrient uptake efficiency (Preetha and Balakrishnan, 2017; 
Duhan et al., 2017).
But, the higher concentrations of NPs are reported to have negative 
efects on the soil enzyme activity. A report by Jośko et al. (2014) indicated 
reduction in dehydrogenase enzyme activity of soil by high concentration of 
NPs. Ability of soil for self-cleaning, balancing nutrient, and mediating the 
processes of plant nutrition, fertility, and microbial diversity are hampered 
due to higher NPs concentration (Janvier et al., 2007; Suresh et al., 2013; 
Bondarenko et al., 2013). Thus it is needed to study the toxicity efect of 
NPs in various types of soils for better understanding of their impact on soil 
pollutants and their mobility (Calvarro et al., 2014). In excess quantities, the 
NPs show signifcant negative efects in soil (Grün et al., 2018; Grün and 
Emmerling, 2018; Rajput et al., 2020a). 
4.7 FATE OF NPs AND CONTRIBUTION TO FERTILITY, YIELD, AND 
REDUCING NPs TOXICITY
4.7.1 APPLICATION OF NPs IN MAINTAINING SOIL FERTILITY
The template of environmental soil is naturally concentrated with NPs, such 
as primary particles, aggregates, and agglomerates. The presence of nanosize 
particles and microparticle along with humic substance provide soil a high 
porosity and specific surface area. The natural compositions of soil are because 
of continual chemical and physical weathering and re-arrangement of its geo￾genic constituents associated with a higher bioactivity that transform both 
minerals and dead organic matter. However, environmental constraint and 
human action together are responsible for change in biophysical condition 
and structure of soil. This change results in depletion, erosion modification, 
or disturbance of soil that generally considered as harmful or undesirable. 
This has led to the phenomenon of soil degradation that results in the disap￾pearance of nutrients and mineral needed for plant growth. Thus, the aim of 
nanotechnology is to make soils more fertile and reproducible by improving 
its nutrient efficiency, which can be used for better environmental security 
and greater productivity. NPs facilitate nutrient management by ensuring 
the availability of nutrients to plant as per their requirement. It also makes 
sure that ions present in soil system must be available according to plant 
needs, as exchange of ions (e.g., NH4
+
,
 HPO4
2−, H2
PO4
−
, PO4
3−, Zn2+) is the 
base of nutrient transport in soil-plant systems, adsorption, and desorption 
(e.g., phosphorus nutrients and solubility and precipitation of iron) reactions Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture 67
(Mukhopadhyay, 2014). Moreover, the nutrients in soil can be buildup 
with application of NFs. NFs are an emerging alternative to conventional 
fertilizer, which aims at supplying one or more micro and macronutrients 
to the plant–soil system and enhances the growth and productivity. These 
nutrient-embedded NPs or NFs can be used in aqueous suspension. These 
are dissolved in desired solvent and, release the nutrient/s as soluble ions. 
These soluble nutrient ions are comprehensively absorbed by the plants. 
The application of NFs not only eliminates the contamination of drinking 
water but also has a potential of low eutrophication and also addresses 
soil fixation issues (Liu et al., 2015). Soil degradation is one such severe 
environmental issue, which has impacted soil productivity, and fertility and 
also a major cause of soil pollution. However, this issue can be ameliorated 
by the application nanozeolites. Soil acidity could possibly neutralize with 
the use of nanozeolite. Similarly, iron NPs are used for the remediation of 
dirtied soil (Baragano et al., 2020). More likely, the contamination is due to 
heavy application of pesticides, heavy metal, and radionucucliodes. These 
zerovalent iron NPs have strong affinity against heavy metals and organic 
compounds (Galdames et al., 2020). Like iron NPs, calcium carbonate NPs 
bear an excellent soil binding properties that help in formation of soil micro 
aggregates and macro aggregate. All engineered NPs have myriad applica￾tion in restoring soil fertility. Nonetheless, it is highly needed to understand 
the behavior of NPs as this provide apt about toxicity in soil ecosystem.
4.7.2 CONTROLLED RELEASE OF NUTRIENT TO SOIL
The zest of applying nanotechnology in the field of agriculture resulted in 
the upliftment of the agricultural production. This technology engineered the 
material that adds value to agriculture NPs and nanomaterials in the form 
of NFs has been an alternative approach to provide mineral nutrients to the 
plant instead of traditional fertilizers. These nanostructured micronutrient 
fertilizers contribute to plant nutrition through either incorporating nanoele￾ments by adsorption or absorption or by encapsulation on NPs. The applica￾tion of these NFs to soil is mainly as a substrate or by foliar spray. The hybrid 
NPs with metal ions encapsulated in their core can be used for the meticulous 
release of micro and macronutrients (Tarafder et al., 2020). However, these 
NFs must have greater control over the speed and release time of the nutrient 
element.68 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
4.7.3 TRANSLOCATION OF NPs INTO PLANTS
Aforesaid, NPs are applied as NFs to soil nutrient-deficient plant, exog￾enously either through irrigation or by foliar spray. In either of the form, 
the accumulated nanonutrients are released from NFs and translocated into 
plant through roots to leaves or vice-versa via plant vascular system. NPs 
applied to soil are firstly adsorbed on the root surface followed by trans￾location via symplastic and apoplastic pathways into the xylem, passing 
the endodermis, and then locating to the whole plant through the vascular 
bundles. While foliar-applied NPs up taken and translocated from leaves to 
roots via stomatal pathway, where NPs travel distantly through the vascular 
system of plants when entered through leaf apoplast. Endocytosis or pores or 
channels can mediate the entry of various NPs and are transported through 
the cell. However, multiple factors such as the size of NPs, composition of 
NFs, exposure conditions, morphology and physiology of plants, and the 
pore-diameter of the plant cell wall affects the uptake and translocation of 
NPs (Seleiman et al., 2021).
4.7.4 EFFECT OF NPs ON PLANT GROWTH
Nanotechnology accelerated almost every sector of agriculture science, 
but the applications of nanostructured micronutrient fertilizers, have great 
effect on the development and plant growth. However, the effect of NPs 
either positive or negative on plant mainly relies upon the concentration, 
structure, physical, and biochemical properties of NPs and also depends on 
the plant species. NP positively brings out various physiological changes in 
plant, which indirectly or directly influenced the growth and development. 
Applications of sulfur and zinc oxide metal NPs with appropriate concen￾tration have significantly enhanced the total lipids, amino acids, proteins, 
thiol, and chlorophyll contents. Even, it has been reported that the enzy￾matic activity including catalase, peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, ferric 
reductase activity, malondialdehyde content, root-apoplastic iron, and the 
root activity has also been increased. Moreover, growth and development 
of plant species show major response when the photosynthetic activity get 
altered as electron transport rates is improved and chlorophyll content is 
increased this generally occurs when plant species are treated with metal 
NPs (Javed et al., 2019).Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture 69
4.7.5 DECREASE IN TOXICITY LEVEL IN SOIL
Soil proclaims to be the largest inheritor of both natural and artificial NPs. 
Wide applications such as NFs, nanopesticides, seed treatment, and appli￾cants, are imparting toxic effect on soil and agro-environment if susceptible 
to large agglomeration and exposure time. These NPs and/or NFs applied 
to the plant–soil system, it undergoes certain transformation that leads to 
accumulation into the soil, and when interacted with plants, these NFs are 
translocated to other plant part where it starts accumulating in cellular or 
subcellular organelle. These correspond to change in the physiological 
process like photosynthesis and transpiration rate, growth, and also the 
cellular and subcellular integrity of organelles of plant (Morales-Díazet al., 
2017; Rajput et al., 2020a, 2020b). As these NPs are getting translocated their 
concentration at the sink, that is, soil is reducing. Thus, it can be claimed that 
their potential toxicity is also decreasing with the continuous translocation.
4.8 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE PROSPECTIVE
The NFs are the formulation designed to supplement the soil or foliar 
application in agricultural crops. They have the micronutrients encapsulated 
in their core. These NP formulations are applied for soil applicants, foliar 
sprays, seed treatment, etc. The unused portion of these ultimately goes 
to the soil as a residue. This residual content starts accumulating into the 
soil. The continuous use and ever-increasing amount in the soil may lead 
to the toxic effect on the elements of environment and more pronounce￾able on agro-ecosystem. This may hamper the macro and microflora of the 
soil without discriminating the useful and harmful ones. Toxicity impact on 
the useful microorganisms that help in micronutrient availability for plants 
through biodegradation of organic and inorganic contents of soil, will reduce 
their load from rhizosphere of plants. Resulting in the scarcity of nutrients 
for the plant roots.
The NPs enter environment through various modes as discussed above. 
The NPs applied to the crops and soil will stay unavailable for microbes as 
well as for the plants. Thus, contributing to the losing soil vigor and higher 
toxicity content of soil. The increase in the threshold concentration of NPs in 
soil will also decrease the microbial and soil enzymatic activity. To counteract 
these problems the nanoformulations and NFs applied to the agricultural 
feld are needed to be designed in such a way that they are readily available 70 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
to the plants, easily enacted by the benefcial microbial counterparts without 
hampering their number and activity. At the same time, it should be kept 
into consideration that there is a control over the retrieval of nutrients from 
nanoformulations applied and their accessibility and translocation into plants 
is monitored properly. The precise guidelines and policies are needed to be 
designed for the minimal loss and higher availability and efcient utilization 
of nutrients from NFs to the desired purpose.
KEYWORDS
• microbial community
• microbiome
• soil fertility
• soil microbiota
• sustainable agriculture 
REFERENCES
Ali, M. A.; Ahmed, T.; Wu, W.; Hossain, A.; Hafeez, R.; Islam Masum, M. M.; Li, B. 
Advancements in Plant and Microbe-Based Synthesis of Metallic Nanoparticles and Their 
Antimicrobial Activity Against Plant Pathogens. Nanomaterials 2020, 10(6), 1146. DOI: 
10.3390/nano10061146.
Bharti, V. S.; Dotaniya, M. L.; Shukla, S, P.; Yadav V. K. Managing Soil Fertility Through 
Microbes. Prospects, Challenges and Future Strategies. In Agro-Environmental 
Sustainability; 2017, chapter 5. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-49724-2_5.
Bollen, W. B. Microorganisms and Soil Fertility; Oregon State Monograph. Studies in 
Bacteriology: Oregon, 1956, vol 1.
Bondarenko, O.; Juganson, K.; Ivask, A.; Kasemets, K.; Mortimer, M.; et al. Toxicity of Ag, 
CuO and ZnO Nanoparticles to Selected Environmentally Relevant Test Organisms and 
Mammalian Cells In Vitro: A Critical Review. Arch. Toxicol. 2013, 87, 1181–1200.
Bünemann, E. K.; Bongiorno, G.; Bai, Z.; Creamer, R. E.; De Deyn, G.; Goede, R.; Fleskens, 
L.; Geissen,V.; Kuyper, T.; Mäder, P.; Pulleman, M.; Sukkel, W.; Groenigen, J. W. V.; 
Brussaard, L. Soil Quality – A Critical Review. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2018, 120, 105–125. 
https.//doi.org/10.1016/j.soilbio.2018.01.030.
Calvarro, L. M.; de Santiago-Martín, A.; Gómez, J. Q.; González-Huecas, C.; Quintana, J. R.; 
et al. Biological Activity in Metal-Contaminated Calcareous Agricultural Soils. The Role 
of the Organic Matter Composition and the Particle Size Distribution. Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. 2014, 21, 6176–6187.Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture 71
Cvjetko, P.; Milošić, A.; Domijan, A. M.; VinkovićVrček, I.; Tolić, S.; Peharec Štefanić, P.; 
Letofsky-Papst, I.; Tkalec, M.; Balen, B. Toxicity of Silver Ions and Differently Coated 
Silver Nanoparticles in Allium cepa Roots. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2017, 137, 18–28.
Duhan J. S.; Kumara, R.; Kumara, N.; Kaura, P.; Nehrab, K.; Duhan, S. Nanotechnology: The 
New Perspective in Precision Agriculture. Bio-tech. Rep. 2017, 15, 11–23.
Ebbs, S. D.; Bradfield, S. J.; Kumar, P.; White, J. C.; Musante, C.; Ma, X. Accumulation of 
Zinc, Copper, or Cerium in Carrot (Daucuscarota) Exposed to Metal Oxide Nanoparticles 
and Metal Ions. Environ. Sci. Nano. 2016, 3, 114–126.
Ebrahimi, A.; Galavi, M.; Ramroudi, M.; Moaveni, P. Effect of TiO2 Nanoparticles on 
Antioxidant Enzymes Activity and Biochemical Biomarkers in Pinto Bean (Phaseolus 
vulgaris L.). J. Mol. Biol. Mol. 2016, 6(1), 58–66.
Gladkova, M. M.; Terekhova, V. A. Engineered Nanomaterials in Soil. Sources of Entry and 
Migration Pathways. Moscow Univ. Soil Sci. Bull. 2013, 68, 129–134.
Grün, A. L.; Emmerling, C. Long-Term Effects of Environmentally Relevant Concentrations 
of Silver Nanoparticles on Major Soil Bacterial Phyla of a Loamy Soil. Environ. Sci. Eur. 
2018, 30, 1–13.
Grün, A. L.; Straskraba, S.; Schulz, S.; Schloter, M.; Emmerling, C. Long-Term Effects of 
Environmentally Relevant Concentrations of Silver Nano-Particles on Microbial Biomass, 
Enzyme Activity, and Functional Genes Involved in the Nitrogen Cycle of Loamy Soil. J. 
Environ. Sci. 2018, 69, 12–22.
Holden, P. A.; Schimel, J. P.; Godwin, H. A. Five Reasons to Use Bacteria When Assessing 
Manufactured Nanomaterial Environmental Hazards and Fates. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
2014, 27, 73–78.
Igalavithana, A. D.; Lee, S. S.; Niazi, N. K.; Lee, Y. H.; Kim, K.; Park, J.; Moon, D. K.; Ok, Y. 
S. Assessment of Soil Health in Urban Agriculture: Soil Enzymes and Microbial Properties. 
Sustainability 2017, 9(2), 310. DOI: 10.3390/su9020310.
Janvier, C.; Villeneuve, F.; Alabouvette, C.; Edel-Hermann, V.; Mateille, T.; et al. Soil Health 
Through Soil Disease Suppression: Strategy From Descriptors to Indicators. Soil Biol. 
Biochem. 2007, 39, 1–23.
Javed, Z.; Dashora, K.; Mishra, M.; Fasake, V. D.; Srivastva, A. Effect of Accumulation of 
Nanoparticles in Soil Health- A Concern on Future. Front Nanosci. Nanotech. 2019, 5, 1–9. 
DOI: 10.15761/FNN.1000181.
Jośko, I.; Oleszczuk, P.; Futa, B. The Effect of Inorganic Nanoparticles (ZnO, Cr2O3, CuO 
and Ni) and Their Bulk Counterparts on Enzyme Activities in Different Soils. Geoderma 
2014, 232, 528–537.
Keller, A. A.; Lazareva, A. Predicted Releases of Engineered Nanomaterials: From Global to 
Regional to Local. Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett. 2014, 1, 65–70.
Keller, A. A.; McFerran, S.; Lazareva, A.; Suh, S. Global Life Cycle Releases of Engineered 
Nanomaterials. J. Nanopart. Res. 2013, 15, 1692.
Manjunatha, S. B.; Biradar, D. P.; Alada-katti, Y. R. Nanotechnology and its Applications in 
Agriculture: A review. J. Farm. Sci. 2016, 29(1), 1–13.
McGee, C. F.; Storey, S.; Clipson, N.; Doyle, E. Soil Microbial Community Responses 
to Contamination With Silver, Aluminium Oxide and Silicon Dioxide Nanoparticles. 
Ecotoxicology 2017,26(3), 449–458.
Meena, V. D.; Dotaniya, M. L.; Rajendiran, S.; Coumar, M, V.; Kundu, S.; Rao, A. S. A Case 
for Silicon Fertilization to Improve Crop Yields in Tropical Soils. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
India Sect. B Biol. Sci. 2013, 84(3), 505–518.72 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Morales-Díaz, A. B.; Ortega-Ortíz, H.; Juárez-Maldonado, A.; Cadenas-Pliego, G.; González￾Morales, S.; Benavides-Mendoza, A. Application of Nanoelements in Plant Nutrition and 
its Impact in Ecosystems. Adv. Nat. Sci. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2017, 8(1), 013001. DOI: 
10.1088/2043-6254/8/1/013001. 
Mukhopadhyay, S. Nanotechnology in Agriculture: Prospects and Constraints. Nanotechnol.
Sci. Appl. 2014, 7, 63–71. http.//dx.doi.org/10.2147/NSA.S39409.
Olkhovych, O.; Volkogon, M.; Taran, N.; Batsmanova, L.; Kravchenko, I. The Effect of 
Copper and Zinc Nanoparticles on the Growth Parameters, Contents of Ascorbic Acid, 
and Qualitative Composition of Amino Acids and Acylcarnitines in Pistiastratiotes L. 
(Araceae). Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2016, 11, 218.
Pramanik, P.; Krishnan, P.; Maity, A.; Mridha, N.; Mukherjee, A.; Rai, V. Applications of 
Nanotechnology in Agriculture. In Environmental Nanotechnology; Dasgupta, N., et al., 
Eds.; Chem. Sustain. World 2020, 4, 32. https.//doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-26668-4_9
Priester, J. H.; Moritz, S. C.; Espinosa, K.; Ge, Y.; Wang, Y.; Nisbet, R. M.; Schimel, J. P.; 
Goggi , S. A.; Gardea-Torresdey, J. L.; Holden, P. A. Damage Assessment for Soybean 
Cultivated in Soil With Either CeO2 or ZnO Manufactured Nanomaterials. Sci. Total 
Environ. 2017, 579, 1756–1768.
Rajput, V.; Minkina, T.; Mazarji, M.; Shende, S.; Sushkova, S.; Mandzhieva, S.; Jatav, H. 
Accumulation of Nanoparticles in the Soil-Plant Systems and Their Effects on Human 
Health. Ann. Agric. Sci. 2020, 65(2), 137–143. DOI: 10.1016/j.aoas.2020.08.001.
Rajput, V. D.; Singh, A.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T. M.; Sushkova, S. Impact of Nanoparticles 
on Soil Resource. Nanomat. Soil Remediat. 2020a, 65–85. DOI. https.//doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-822891-3.00004-9.
Rajput, V., Minkina, T., Feizi, M., Kumari, A., Khan, M., Mandzhieva, S., Sushkova, S., 
El-Ramady, H., Verma, K., Singh, A., Hullebusch, E., Singh, R., Jatav, H.; Choudhary, 
R. Effects of Silicon and Silicon-Based Nanoparticles on Rhizosphere Microbiome, Plant 
Stress and Growth. Biology 2021, 10(8), 7–9.
Seleiman, M. F.; Almutairi, K. F.; Alotaibi, M.; Shami, A.; Alhammad, B. A.; Battaglia, M. L. 
Nano- Fertilization as an Emerging Fertilization Technique. Why Can Modern Agriculture 
Benefit From Its Use? Plants 2021, 10, 2. https.//dx.doi.org/10.3390/plants10010002. 
SelvaPreetha, P.; Balakrishnan, N. A Review of Nano Fertilizers and Their Use and Functions 
in Soil. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 2017, 6(12), 3117–3133.
Servin, A. D.; De la Torre-Roche, R.; Castillo-Michel, H.; Pagano, L.; Hawthorne, J.;Musante, 
C.; Pignatello, J.; Uchimiya, M.; White, J. C. Exposure of Agricultural Crops to Nanoparticle 
CeO2 in Biochar-Amended Soil. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2017, 110, 147–157.
Singh, D.; Kumar, A. Impact of Irrigation Using Water Containing CuO and ZnO Nanoparticles 
on Spinach oleracea Grown in Soil Media. Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 2016, 97,
548–553.
Singh, J, S.; Pandey, V. C.; Singh D. P. Efficient Soil Microorganisms. A New Dimension for 
Sustainable Agriculture and Environmental Development. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 2011, 
140, 339–353. DOI: 10.1016/j.agee.2011.01.017.
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova Science Publishers Inc., 2020; 
vol 1, pp 73–100. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Rawat, S.; Sharma, R.; Singh, A. K.; Singh, A. K.; Tomar, R. S. 
In Emerging Tools for SustainableAgriculture and Food Security; Rajput, Deepika Book 
Agency: New Delhi, Delhi, 2021; vol 1, pp 1–15. Possible Prospects of Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture 73
Suresh, Y.; Annapurna, S.; Bhikshamaiah, G.; Singh, A. K. Characterization of Green 
Synthesized Copper Nanoparticles: A novel approach. In International Conference on 
Advanced Nanomaterials Emerging Engineering Technologies, 2013; pp 63–67.
Tarafder, C.; Daizy, M.; Alam, M. M.; Ali, M. R.; Islam, M. J.; Islam, R.; Khan, M. Z. H. 
Formulation of a Hybrid Nanofertilizer for Slow and Sustainable Release of Micronutrients. 
ACS Omega 2020, 5(37), 23960–23966. DOI: 10.1021/acsomega.0c03233
Torsvik, V.; Øvreås, L. Microbial Diversity and Function in Soil: From Genes to Ecosystems. 
Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 2002, 5(3), 240–245.
Van, N. L.; Ma, C.; Shang, J.; Rui, Y.; Liu, S.; Xing, B. Effects of CuO Nanoparticles on 
Insecticidal Activity and Phytotoxicity in Conventional and Transgenic cotton. Chemosphere 
2016a, 144, 661–670.
Yadav, T.; Mungray, A. A.; Mungray, A. K. Fabricated Nanoparticles: Current Status and 
Potential Phytotoxic Threats. Rev. Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 2014, 230, 83–110.
You, T.; Liu, D.; Chen, J.; Yang, Z.; Dou, R.; Gao, X.; Wang, L. Effects of Metal Oxide 
Nanoparticles on Soil Enzyme Activities and Bacterial Communities in Two Different Soil 
Types. J. Soils Sediments 2017, 18, 211–221. DOI: 10.1007/s11368-017-1716-2.
Zulfiqar, F.; Navarro, M.; Ashraf, M.; Akram, N. A.; Munné-Bosch, S. Nanofertilizer Use for 
Sustainable Agriculture: Advantages and Limitations. Plant Sci. 2019, 289, 110270. DOI: 
10.1016/j.plantsci.2019.Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil 
Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility and 
Productivity
NAVODITA MAURICE
Prophyl Ltd., Dózsa György út 18, Mohács, Hungary
CHAPTER 5
ABSTRACT
Nanotechnology has revolutionized agricultural practices by providing vast 
applications for instance, metal, and non-metal-based nanoparticles (NPs) 
(carbon nanotubes, TiO2
, Ag, ZnO, CuO NPs, etc.), nanopesticides, and 
nanofertilizers for targeted release. NPs offer vast applications as they have 
variable shapes, sizes, are highly stable, have strong reactivity with larger 
surface areas for interacting with plants and microbes. NPs gain access into 
the soil by nanoagrochemicals, animal faeces, atmospheric deposition, plant 
litter, and industrial wastes. The excessive usage of NP is not considered safe 
for plants as well as for microbes. Distinct NPs have distinct iveramifications 
on the plant and microbial relations. Antimicrobial properties of NPs against 
the microbial populations (bacteria and fungi) have been well studied. NPs 
can cause cellular deformation in bacteria and alteration of hyphal structure 
in fungi. The effect of NPs on microbes is dose dependent. NPs, in general, 
show positive effects on microbes in lower concentrations; however, they 
inhibit microbial enzyme activity as well as microbial growth at elevated 
levels. Some bacteria can grow well at elevated concentrations of NPs 
showing their tolerance toward the toxicity of NPs. The following chapter 76 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
focuses on how NPs influence the microbes thriving in the soil followed by 
their effects on their physiological traits.
5.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanotechnology can be exemplified as an inventive, multifaceted scientific 
way of establishing, shaping, and utilization of substances at the nano-grade 
(Ali et al., 2019). Nano is the one billionth unit and therefore the substances 
are evaluated as the billionth of a meter in nanotechnology. Nanometer 
is commensurate to 10 hydrogen atoms set side by side. Nanotechnology 
despite being confined to minuscule elements also finds its utilization in 
multidisciplinary approaches of biology, physics, and chemistry and allied 
sciences. Nanoparticles (NPs) measuring smaller in size than 100 nm lie in 
an intermediary state of an atom and its associated elements, with the possi￾bility of changing physicochemical properties (conductivity, sensitivity) 
(Mishra and Kumar, 2009). 
Nanotechnology has found its immense application in the agricultural 
sector as to feed a population of above seven billion is a real challenge 
(Singh et al., 2015; Singh et al., 2020). Nanotechnology not only fnds its 
application in the agricultural feld, but scientists all over the world are 
frequently studying and modifying the characteristics of the nanoparticles 
for the improvement of growth and developmental processes of the plants 
(Singh et al., 2020). Materials of nano-size can easily take up by bacteria 
and are capable of penetrating the plant cells but can result in phytotoxic 
behavior if the dose of these nanomaterials is elevated to higher levels (Liu et 
al., 2009). Consequences of agrochemicals generated after the utilization of 
nanotechnological approaches in relation to the developmental processes of 
agricultural plants are being regularly tested by scientists all over the globe. 
The major advantages of nanotechnology in the current scenario encompass 
plant treatment with nanocides, disease prevention, and maintenance of 
nutrient value with the application of nano-fertilizers. 
Distinctive nanomaterials for instance, carbon nanotubes, magnetic 
particles, polymers, quantum dots, metals, and nonmetals are under inves￾tigation all around the world (Rico et al., 2015). The exclusive features 
of nanoparticles include disease checkup, detection of pathogens, and 
enhanced nutrient adsorption by plant surface. These remarkable features 
boost up the future prospects of agricultural and food industries. NPs have 
the potential to detect the disease-causing agents (Prasad et al., 2014). The 
surface structure, smaller surface/volume proportion, agglomeration, as well Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 77
as enhanced reaction rate of NPs have emphasized their use as modern tools 
in various felds, for example, targeted drug delivery, nano-pharmacology, 
nano-medicine, and agrochemical processes. Currently, nanomaterials are 
being tested both in vivo and ex vivo studies (Agrahari and Dubey, 2020) 
(Fig. 5.1).
5.2 NANOPARTICLES
Nanoparticles are engineered and designed in such a manner that they have 
peculiar chemical and surface characteristics. A diverse array of NPs has 
been produced, for example, magnetic, metallic oxide and gold nanopar￾ticles, silica-based NPs, carbon-based NPs (nanotubes, grapheme, and 
fullerenes), and quantum dots (Wang et al., 2016). Carbon nanotubes enable 
faster seed germination as they can penetrate seed husks. Usage of optimal 
concentrations, targeted delivery with low levels of toxicity is possible with 
nanoparticles for example, silica-based NPs loaded with pesticides protect 
from photodegradation (Wang et al., 2016). Quantum dots measuring 2–10 
nm in diameter are effective semiconductor elements that are the tools of 
cellular imaging. The exclusive delivery system of nanoparticles has made 
them suitable to be used in the biotic forms of life ranging from human life 
to the plant systems. However, the usage of nanoparticles is an effective 
and fresh technique that demands intensive search to achieve the targeted 
goals. The usage of nanoparticles in the agricultural systems has however 
increased, but it has also posed some potential serious threats to the environ￾ment (Kreyling et al., 2006). Nanomaterials have been used worldwide as 
they are now easily available and can be easily designed from a vast array 
of segments (Geisler-Lee et al., 2012). The gathering propensity followed by 
less solubilizing efficiency (especially water) of the nanoparticles limits their 
entry in most of the living organisms. Few nanoparticles can gain access into 
humans and animals through food, skin, water, and air (Jain et al., 2016). 
They can also circulate in the trophic levels and may concentrate within the 
top predators resulting in enhanced toxicity among the animals of noticeable 
levels of food web (Krysanov et al., 2010). Metal oxide nanoparticles, for 
example, carbon-based fullerenes and titanium oxide nanoparticles result in 
enhanced toxicity among the microbes. Fullerenes are low mobility in soil 
and water. The toxicity of nanoparticles is dependent on its physicochemical 
characteristics and size. It is assumed that the quantities of the nanopar￾ticles that can gain access into the body of organisms are liable to increase 
in the future, especially among the higher trophic level organisms. The 78 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
higher accumulation of nanoparticles in the tissues and organs can alter the 
cellular structure. The usage of conventional methods of pest control by the 
farmers has already altered the soil’s natural flora (Thul and Sarangi, 2015) 
and releasing these chemicals loaded within the nanoparticles has solved 
the problem a bit (Gruère et al., 2011). The elevated levels of pernicious 
and agglomerating nature of these NPs have opened ways for the usage of 
biodegradable nanoparticles including their impact on organisms (Krysanov 
et al., 2010). The awareness regarding NP accumulation in surroundings as 
well as in the organisms is at the preliminary stage at present. 
FIGURE 5.1 Application of nanotechnology (modified from Agrahari, S.; Dubey, A. 
Nanoparticles in plant growth and development. In Biogenic Nano-Particles and Their Use in 
Agro-Ecosystems; Ghorbanpour, M., Bhargava, P., Varma, A., Choudhary, D., Eds.; Springer: 
Singapore, 2020; pp 9–37).
5.2.1 NATURAL ORIGIN OF NPs 
Diverse applications of NPs increase environmental contamination issues. 
NPs can enter the atmosphere by intentional as well as accidental ways. 
Releasing these NPs in water, soil, or air is a menace as they are very tiny 
and can remain in the air or are transported through water. Their accumu￾lation of soil for a prolonged period can alter its physicochemical proper￾ties as well as pollute the water present in the soil (Tripathi et al., 2012). 
Nanoparticle-coated painting materials followed by artificial pigments, 
however, are more treacherous as they can gain entry into the soil and water. 
Nanomaterial-coated optical and electronic goods are the major pollutants of 
landfills. Cosmetics containing NPs are also the major contaminants of soil Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 79
and water. The processes used in the manufacturing of nanoparticle-coated 
goods affect the leaching rate. Nanoparticle sources can be point-based 
NPs and non-point-based NPs. Point agents include research laboratories, 
production followed by storage sections, as well as wastewater plants (Tiede 
et al., 2016). These NPs enter the surroundings as sludge and treated water 
from the treatment plants, as it is almost impossible to separate NPs from the 
wastewater. Sewage sludge contains silver NPs drained out by the cosmetic 
industry, drinks, food, as well as textile product washing (McGillicuddy et 
al., 2017). Titanium oxide (TiO2
) NPs are used in wastewater treatment and 
water purification reactors and around 99% of the TiO2
 NPs accumulate in 
the sludge of the wastewater after treatment (Yadav et al., 2014). Treatments 
plants also have different types of microbes that can also convert metals 
into NPs for example, elemental selenium NPs are being produced by the 
reduction of selenate (SeO4
2−) and selenite (SeO3
2−) in the active sludge (Jain 
et al. 2016). NPs can also react with other constituents of the waste and 
therefore can result in the formation of new compounds during the treatment 
process. The non-point sources of NPs include paints, cosmetics, etc. The 
self-cleaning and antimicrobial feature of photocatalytic TiO2
 NPs makes 
them suitable for the paint industry and paint coatings can also real the NPs 
in the surroundings (Shandilya et al., 2015). Zinc oxide (ZnO) as well as 
TiO2
 NPs find their applications in the cosmetic industry. Sanchez-Quiles 
and Tovar-Sanchez (2014) found an elevated concentration of TiO2
 NPs due 
to the prolonged accumulation of sunscreen lotion used by the bathers in 
the Palmira beach water (Majorca Island, Spain). Apart from its negative 
side, nanotechnology also finds its potential application in the decrease of 
the organic pollution of soil as well as environmental remediation (Li et al., 
2016). Application of NPs against soil remediation, however, adds to more 
accumulation of NPs and demands more research. Nanofertilizers are the 
new tools of nutrient delivery systems utilizing carbon, iron, manganese, 
and zinc oxide. Nanosensors and smart delivery systems play a role in pest 
control. Vehicle exhaust release, combustion processes, smoke, and soot are 
the sources of NPs in the air (Kashyap et al., 2015).
5.3 EFFECT OF NPs
NPs have shown beneficial results on the plant developmental processes as 
they can be sources of waste-energy conversion, nanofertilizers, nanopesti￾cides for targeted delivery. A diverse variety of NPs show different effects on 
morphology followed by physiology of plants. Their reactivity size, chemical 
constitution may be positive as well as negative for the plant growth. The 80 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
widely used metal NPs are derived from gold, silver, copper, zinc, titanium 
oxide, and cerium oxide. However, ferric oxide, manganese-cobalt-ferric 
oxide NPs now these days are also being produced. Both metal and carbon￾based NPs can accumulate reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading to plant 
stress. The attributable creatures of carbon-based NPs are due to their 
chemical or mechanical or electrical features (Singh et al., 2015). Single￾walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) now these days are considered nano 
transporters as they are involved in the transport of DNA and other materials 
(dyes) across and also from the outer environment into the cells. However, 
multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) increase water as well as plant 
cell nutrient uptake and therefore promote plant propagation. Siddiqui et al. 
(2015) reported efficacy of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) against ROS aggrega￾tion followed by peroxidation of lipids in seedling root tips and cell cultures. 
NPs perforate the plant cell walls, strengthening water uptake and therefore 
enhance the seed germination (Agrahari and Dubey, 2020). NPs have found 
their application in medicine, cosmetics, biosensors, environmental remedia￾tion, wastewater treatment, catalysts, etc., which has raised a concern about 
human and environmental health. NPs can negatively affect some microbes, 
for instance, bacteria, yeasts, fungi, marine diatoms (Karlsson et al., 2009), 
and some fishes (zebrafish). The major NPs co-receptors are soil microor￾ganisms and growing plants. Soil microbes are the most accurate indicators 
of altered soil characteristics (Saison et al., 2010).
5.4 INFLUENCE OF NANOPARTICLES ON THE MICROBIAL 
COMMUNITIES
Application of NPs in the soil environment is risky as it can influence the 
essential bacterial and fungal populations. NPs are administered in the soil 
by several activities for example, as nanopesticides, nanofertilizers for crop 
improvement, wastewater sludge, and sewage treatment, aerial emulsion 
(Coll et al., 2016). Soil respiration followed by enzyme activity measure￾ment can give us a clear picture about the levels of NPs accumulated in the 
soil. TiO2
 and CuO NPs decrease the enzyme activity of soil, especially in 
the paddy fields (Xu et al., 2015). Enzyme activity especially the phospha￾tase, urease, invertase, and catalase as well as the number of bacteria also 
undergo decline in the presence of TiO2
, Fe3
O4
, ZnO, as well as CeO2 NPs 
present in the black and saline-alkali soils (You et al., 2017). This indicated 
that NPs can also affect the process of nitrogen fixation. Fe3
O4
 NPs in higher 
levels can decrease the number of soil bacteria (Jiling et al., 2016). The Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 81
populations of P and K-solubilizing bacteria and Azotobacter are affected 
in the presence of Zinc oxide and CeO2
 NPs. TiO2 NPs pose an adverse 
effect on the microbial diversity, number, and enzyme activity. Biogenic 
gold (Au-NPs) does not show any harmful effect to plants and soil microbes 
(Maliszewska, 2016). The synthesis of ZnO-NPs by chemical and biological 
methods showed antibacterial response against a number of beneficial soil 
bacteria, for instance, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacillus 
subtilis, and Staphylococcus aureus (Lakshmi et al., 2012). Cu-NPs are a 
major threat to beneficial as well as pathogenic bacterial species (Lofts et al., 
2013). CuO-NPs can cause cellular collapse, membrane degradation, cavi￾ties, blebs, holes, and cell lysis of bacteria present in the soil and therefore 
are very toxic (Concha-Guerrero et al., 2014). The repercussion of CuO-NPs 
on the soil microbes is less understood at present. Inorganic NPs are more 
lethal to soil microbes than the organic ones. CuO and Ag-NPs even decrease 
the rate of leaf decomposition by microbes (Frenk et al., 2013).
5.4.1 CARBON NANOMATERIALS (CNMs)
CNMs have gained widespread usage due to their exclusive performance 
assets and the commonly applied CNMs comprise carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 
fullerene, and graphene (Zhang et al., 2013). CNT as well as graphene 
production has undergone tremendous increase in the last decade (Chen et 
al., 2018). CNTs and graphene are often used as substitutes for equipment 
made up of copper and silver due to their good electrical conduction (Politou 
et al., 2016) which in turn increases the environmental pollution (Aitola et 
al., 2015). Graphene and fullerenes serve as transporters in the drug delivery 
and have proven to be suitable against disease prevention (Mehra et al., 
2018). CNMs also improve performance of catalysts, concrete (Norhasri 
et al., 2017). The multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) enhance 
photochemical quantum production and photosynthesis protein expression 
in plants, thereby promoting growth and rate of photosynthesis (Fan et al., 
2018). MWCNTs have a positive outcome on triazine herbicide adsorption 
in watery phase (D’Archivio et al., 2018). Fullerene discovery has brought 
new insights in the field of research; they are composed of carbon atoms 
and have a cavern spherical or tubular layout (Taylor and Walton, 1993). 
C60 is the first discovered fullerene molecule (Kroto et al., 1985) with a 
32-faced football shape and 0.7-nm diameter (David, 1992). The graphite arc 
method is widely used for the fullerene production (Gao et al., 2019). C60 
has wide applications, for instance, it is used as a lubricant in batteries and 82 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
superconductors (Guldi and Prato, 2000). CNTs are composed of single or 
multilayered graphite sheets curled at a certain angle around the center with 
diameters from picometers to nanometers, smooth hollow nanotubes. They 
have low density, high strength, strong hydrophobic nature and are major one￾dimensional CNMs at the moment. CNTs find application in the lithium-ion 
batteries and electronic devices (Baughman et al., 2002). Graphene is a well￾known carbon allotrope characterized by high mechanical strength, excellent 
mobility, high thermal conductivity, and excellent light transmission. These 
excellent features of graphene make it an important part of semiconductors, 
batteries, etc., and also a tool in biology, chemistry, physics, energy, and 
environmental science (Zhu et al., 2010). Despite having great economic 
benefits for the humans and plants CNMs have been found to be a threat for 
the environment and various organisms. CNMs can result in early embryonic 
death of animals as well as can inhibit plant and animal development. CNTs 
from composite materials are agents of pollution of the environment (Laux 
et al., 2018). It is already established that microorganisms have an important 
part in ecological balance restoration. The role of microbes in the mainte￾nance of pollution-free environments is remarkable and safe in comparison 
with chemical followed by physical methods (Chen et al., 2017) (Table 5.1).
TABLE 5.1 Effects of Different CNMs on Microbes. (Chen et al., 2017)
Carbon 
nanomaterials
Positive effects Negative effects
SWNTS Promote growth and metabolic 
activity of tolerant bacteria 
(Lower concentrations)
Cause cell rupture, suppressed 
microbial diversity, inhibit microbial 
enzyme activity 
(Higher concentrations)
MWNTs Promote growth of tolerant 
microbes, elevated populations of 
atrazine degrading microbes 
(Lower concentrations)
Reduce microbial enzyme activity 
and biomass, microbial cell rupture 
(Higher concentrations)
Graphene Increases microbial biomass, 
enhanced microbial enzyme 
activity 
(Lower concentrations)
Reduces number of nitrogen fixing 
bacteria, iron-reducing bacteria, and 
destruction of cellular structure 
(Higher concentrations)
Fullerenes Increase biocarbon content 
(Higher concentrations)
Reduce microbial number, cell 
viability, membrane integrity
(Higher concentrations)Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 83
5.4.1.1 EFFECT OF FULLERENE ON THE MICROBIAL POPULATIONS
Several studies have indicated that fullerene can alter the microbial structure 
and soil biomass. The aftereffect of toxicity of fullerenes on microbes present 
in a fertile potted soil was studied by Hao et al. (2018). The composition of 
the bacterial community was tested 30 days after the treatment and it turned 
out that the amount of Planctomyces, Nitrospira, and Lysobacter declined 
considerably. Higher concentrations of fullerene also increase the bio-carbon 
content of the soil that can be utilized as an equipment for the detection 
of balance of the organic matter of the soil as bio-carbon determines soil 
balance (Thakur et al., 2015). Tong et al. (2007) applied independently 
suspensions of fullerenes and granular fullerenes to the soil of the corn field 
and tested the structural and functional changes in the microbial communi￾ties and found very minor changes in the two soil samples. Different doses 
of fullerenes were added to the clay loam by Johansen et al. (2008) and their 
results suggested that small doses have a very little effect on the microbial 
respiration, while increasing the dose can alter populations of bacteria with 
a fast-growing rate. Fullerenes assimilated in the organic matter of the soil 
can be absorbed by plants that do not decompose easily and therefore can be 
accumulated in the plants which in turn can alter the microbial populations 
of the soil (Avanasi et al., 2014).
Several reports have indicated that fullerenes can indirectly infuence 
microorganisms of the soil for instance, although they promote crop produc￾tion by enhancing the nutrient uptake of inorganic elements followed by 
organic content by crops, they restrain soil microbe endurance (Monica 
and Cremonini, 2014). The colonial composition of bacteria and eukaryotes 
grown in the anaerobic digesters with and without fullerenes showed no 
toxic efect of fullerenes on the microbes (Nyberg et al., 2008). Soils rich 
in organic matter and clay content are slightly impacted by fullerenes and 
therefore the natural colonization of microbes can be maintained in such 
soils (Berry et al., 2017). Fullerene has the potential to modify composition 
of the aquatic microbe aggregation. C60 and SWCNT toxicity on the micro￾fora (aquatic) was examined by Blaise et al. (2008). Their studies indicated 
that C60 casted very little efect on the microbes in comparison with other 
eight nanomaterials. Fullerenes casted little efect on the aquatic microbial 
populations of the river water in comparison with the CNTs (Lawrence et al., 
2016). Direct and long-term treatment of bacteria with fullerenes can cause 
cellular deformation as well as reduced cell viability followed by membrane 
rectitude (Kang et al., 2011). Fullerenes have shown a strong negative efect 84 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
on Escherichia coli when compared with Bacillus subtilis in the aquatic 
media that can be due to their anti-peptidoglycan surface layers (Lyon et al., 
2007). Addition of E. coli to a solution of fullerenes along with humic acid 
and fulvic acid (natural organic matter) in diferent concentrations resulted 
in slower growth and lower carbon dioxide production by the bacteria, but 
increasing the organic matter content resulted in elevated growth and carbon 
dioxide production (Li et al., 2008). In general, fullerenes have a little efect 
on microbes in comparison with other nanomaterials as organic content 
have the potential of mitigating fullerene efect on the microbial popula￾tions (Lawrence et al., 2016). Johansen et al. (2008) tested the pristine C60 
fullerene ecotoxicological efect on growth activity followed by genetic 
diversity of soil microbes, especially bacteria and protozoans for 2 weeks. 
They found that the bacterial colony-forming units (CFUs) dropped instantly 
after incorporation of fullerenes on the day of onset of the experimental trial, 
especially for the fast-growing bacteria where the declination was 3–4-fold 
higher. This fnding indicates that C60 fullerene treatment afects the bacteria 
with a fast-growing rate as C60 can directly interact with the cells resulting 
in the formation of ROS that deters DNA and membrane lipids (Isakovic et 
al., 2006). C60 fullerene serves as an antioxidant in vivo, but this behavior 
is strongly dependent upon its functionalization (Gharbi et al., 2005). Fuller￾enes can indirectly inhibit growth of bacteria by adsorbing crucial growth 
elements like vitamins or minerals. The indirect and direct efects of C60 
fullerenes are strictly confned to fast-growing bacteria. Microbes are rather 
fexible for the changes in the soil environment and bacterial species that can 
tolerate toxicity will grow after a period of time (Nannipieri et al., 2003). It 
can be predicted from the studies of Johansen et al. (2008) bacterial cultures 
obtained from the C60 treated soils when incubated on the DNP medium 
showed three- to four-fold increase in the CFUs at the end of 2 weeks indi￾cating a larger proportion of slow growing bacteria that have lower nutrient 
demands. Fullerenes do not afect the microbial respiration, suggesting that 
soil organic matter (SOM) mineralization rate remains unaltered (Ekelund 
et al., 2003). The microbial biomass, however, remains unafected by 
fullerenes, but Tong et al. (2007) found that increasing the concentration 
of fullerenes lowers the amount of microbial biomass. Higher levels of 
fullerenes in the soil can chemically change the soil matrix (Thostenson et 
al., 2001). C60 fullerenes did not show any efect on the population of the 
protozoans in general, but higher fullerene concentration resulted in a slight 
decrease (Johansen et al., 2008). Fullerene exposure for a short time does not 
alter the bacteria as well as the protozoan community of the soil. Protozoans Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 85
ingest soil and other small latex particles (Matz et al., 2002). Protozoans can 
ingest C60 particles suspended with the clay particles (Boenigk et al., 2005). 
The average diameter of C60 fragments lies below 200 nm and therefore it 
is hard to estimate whether these particles caused any efect on the cellular 
organelles of the protozoans after ingestion although they have food prefer￾ences (Rønn et al., 2001). C63(COOH)6
 (carboxylic acid-fullerene derivative) 
afects the gram-positive bacteria in a denial manner, but no efect has been 
found on gram-negative bacteria (Tsao et al., 2002). 
5.4.1.2 EFFECT OF MWCNTS ON THE MICROBIAL POPULATIONS
Several studies have emphasized the efficacy of MWCNTs on soil microor￾ganisms. Ge et al. (2016) added MWCNTs to the dry soil and found a drop 
in the microbial biomass. PCR sequencing results predicted that MWCNTs 
immensely altered the bacterial flora of the soil; however, the fungal commu￾nity remained unharmed. A short-term exposure of MWCNTs can reduce the 
microbial enzyme activity as well as microbial biomass (Chung et al., 2011). 
Addition of lower amounts of MWCNTs to the agricultural topsoil can affect 
the vegetative growth of plants as well as microbial populations as at lower 
levels bacterial population increases (Ge et al., 2018). The soil enzyme 
potential, soil respiration, as well as microbe number of the sandy loamy 
soil remained unaffected after the addition of lower doses of MWCNTs as 
found by Shrestha et al. (2013). Presence of higher MWCNT content in the 
soil can cause declination of the population of specific bacteria (Waddlia, 
Opitutus), while the number of some bacterial species can increase (Pseu￾domonas, Nocardia, Rhodococcus). Higher MWCNT content can transform 
the dominant microbial groups into microbial communities that can tolerate 
higher MWCNT contents in the soil. Kerfahi et al. (2015) added natural 
and acid-treated MWCNTs in different concentrations to overgrown soil 
samples and found no effect on the diversity of the bacteria; however, the 
acid-treated MWCNTs significantly altered the soil bacteria community. The 
bacterial species that were more resistant to the acid-treated MWCNTs were 
found to be increased. MWCNTs can also affect the microbes of the aquatic 
environment. Wastewater containing higher concentrations of MWCNTs can 
immensely affect the chemical oxygen demand (COD) and nutrient content 
resulting in reduction of microbial biomass and bacterial population that 
can effectively treat the sewage water. MWCNTs in lower concentrations 
increase glycogen accumulating microbial populations when treated for a 86 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
long time (Hai et al., 2014). MWCNTs can result in rupture of microbial 
cells resulting in alteration of the cellular structure and their increased levels 
can result in cytoplasmic loss (Yadav et al., 2016). MWCNTs have variable 
structures and a sharp one can kill the microbial cells (Hai et al., 2014). 
Lower concentrations of MWCNTs promote growth of atrazine-degrading 
microbes by elevating gene expression, cell division, and growth (Zhang 
et al., 2015). Studies have indicated that MWCNTs fail to cast an effect on 
microorganisms that display a great role in the bioremediation of petroleum, 
but they can boost these microbial populations as well (Abbasian et al., 2016). 
Organic biomass dissolved in an aquatic medium lowers MWCNT toxicity 
against microbes as mobile CNTs are lost. The more the organic biomass the 
lesser is the effect of CNTs (Kang et al., 2011). MWCNTs can inhibit as well 
as promote growth of microbes and this effect of MWCNTs is related to the 
microbial species, concentration and structure of MWCNTs as well as the 
external environment. Toxicity of MWCNTs is governed by their different 
size and functionalization. MWCNTs have the potential to form hollow 
structures that allow larger surface areas in the aqueous medium facilitating 
pollutant adsorption. The sorption capacity of MWCNTs is dependent upon 
their size; the larger the surface area, the larger is the pollutant adsorption 
(Fan et al., 2018). The acid-functionalized MWCNTs hold better adsorption 
potential as compared with the simple MWCNTs. MWCNT’s adsorption 
capacity is directly related to the functionalization time (D’Archivio et al., 
2018). The loose three-dimensional structure of MWCNTs not only provides 
sites for pollutant adsorption but also nabs a wide array of microbes resulting 
in the reduction of microbial count (Akasaka and Watari, 2009).
5.4.1.3 EFFECT OF SWCNTS ON THE MICROBES
SWCNTs have the potential to amend biomass as well as soil microbial 
constitution. Jin et al. (2014) added SWCNTs to the top soil samples and 
found that with increasing the concentration of SWCNTs the number of 
major microbes declined. Gram-positive bacteria can modify the composi￾tion of their intracellular lipids in response to the SWCNTs. E. coli biomass 
undergoes rapid declination in the presence of SWCNTs (Rodrigues and 
Elimelech, 2010). The extent of impact of SWCNTs on microbial population 
in the paddy soil is proportional to the amount of SWCNTs (Zhou et al., 
2013). Microbial biomass and enzyme activity undergo rapid declination 
with increasing the amount of SWCNTs in the soil; however, a very minimal Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 87
effect appears if the content of SWCNTs is low. SWCNTs can be categorized 
as natural SWCNTs, m-polyaminobenzene sulfonic acid functionalized 
ones, and polyethylene glycol functionalized ones at different concentrations 
when added to soil samples with more and lesser organic content caused 
reduced respiration rate (soil) and microbial biomass whereas functional￾ized SWCNTs had more drastic effect than the natural SWCNTs. Soil 
samples with lower organic matter showed minute change in the microbial 
biomass (Tong et al., 2012). The feedback of different microbes to carboxyl 
functionalized SWCNTs is different for example, major populations switch 
back to their original state after interacting with carboxyl-functionalized 
SWCNTs within a short period of time; however, the fungal populations 
do not respond the same (Rodrigues et al., 2013). Carbon and phosphorus 
cycle of soil also determines the effect of SWCNTs on microbes. The special 
conformational changes can reduce the degradation of SWCNTs. SWCNTs 
can adapt between the lignin peroxidase (LiP) and manganese peroxidase 
(MnP) residues and therefore restrain its degradation (Chen et al., 2016) as 
it can either suppress or enhance the stability of the hydrogen bonding and 
hydrophobic nature of the ligand as well as biological enzyme (Chen et al., 
2016). SWCNTs during catalytic oxidation may disrupt water molecules 
as well as catalytic enzymes, thereby hindering the normal pollutant and 
lignin degradation. Natural and functionalized SWCNTs can modify some 
microbial enzymes in the soil and they are toxic to aquatic microbes (Chen 
et al., 2017). The toxicity of CNMs against the microbes can be correlated 
to their diameters (Liu et al., 2009). SWCNTs can inhibit microbial respira￾tion in wastewater treatment plants within a short period of time (Luongo 
and Zhang, 2010). SWCNTs in lower doses in the activated sludge systems 
usually support bacterial growth promoting pollutant degradation (Goyal et 
al., 2010). Qu et al. (2016) observed that SWCNTs shield phenol degrading 
microorganisms in phenol-containing wastewater treatment plants as they 
are capable of increasing the phenol removal rate in the wastewater. Parise 
and Zhang (2014) examined the influence of short and long, functionalized 
short, and long SWCNTs on microbial populations of sewage plants and 
concluded that long SWCNTs are more toxic than the short SWCNTs, while 
functionalized SWCNTs casted more pronounced effects on microbial popu￾lations than simple ones as long and functionalized SWCNTs greatly affect 
the microbial respiration in comparison to the natural and short SWCNTs. 
Lower concentrations of SWCNTs in the soil promote microbial growth and 
degradation of organic matter thereby increasing soil fertility (Qian et al., 
2018).88 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
5.4.1.4 EFFECT OF GRAPHENE ON MICROBES
The smaller diameter, larger surface area along with a strong surface anti￾bacterial ability of graphene in comparison to fullerenes, MWCNTs and 
SWCNTs makes it a friendly nanomaterial for the microbes (Qu et al., 2016). 
Ren et al. (2015) studied the influence of graphene on microbes thriving in 
the soil with the help of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(qPCR) as well as pyrosequencing technology. They reported that graphene 
can significantly affect the number and microbial community structure 
depending upon the exposure time and concentration. Graphene can posi￾tively benefit the enzyme activity of soil microbes and the number of bacteria 
degrading pollutants in the soil if its concentrations are lower in the soil as 
after a period of time microbes regain their original levels. Higher doses of 
graphene reduce the number of soils ammoxidating microbes for example, 
digestive spirochete and black pine fungus resulting in alterations in the soil 
nitrogen cycle. Lower doses of graphene oxide promote cell growth as it 
increases cellular proliferation and attachment (Ruiz et al., 2011). However, 
graphene oxide has the potential to change soil bacterial composition and 
structure by resulting in an increased population of iron-reducing and 
nitrogen-fixing bacterial populations (Du et al., 2016). Hao et al. (2018) 
observed that by increasing graphene oxide concentration of paddy fields 
soil microbial counted also reduced as it disrupts oxidative balance, growth 
ratio, as well as rate of plant photosynthesis (Du et al., 2016). Migration 
of graphene into the soil particles decreases with increased ion intensity 
(Lanphere et al., 2013). Addition of inorganic salts and organic matter to 
the soil also affects graphene migration due to graphene encapsulation by 
inorganic and organic biomass (Dinesh et al., 2012). Graphene influence 
on aquatic microbes is analogous to the populations of the soil. Graphene 
is undoubtedly more toxic to microbes lacking membranes than microbes 
with membranes (Akhavan and Ghaderi, 2010). The polymer–graphene 
oxide composites in aquatic environments are more toxic than the natural 
ones as it can alter the structure of intracellular materials by destroying 
the cellular structure of microbes resulting in death (Mejias Carpio et al., 
2012). This nanomaterial is also not easily degradable due to its highly stable 
structure (Kurapati et al., 2015). Chen et al. (2017) studied graphene and 
graphene composite degradation by microbial with enzymatic degradation 
methods. They reported that microbes could degrade graphene and graphene 
composite much better in comparison with the enzymes. Graphene has low 
solubility in water that is why their effects are more pronounced in the soil as Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 89
compared to that in water. Graphene oxide is more toxic than graphene and 
is very difficult to degrade (Chen et al., 2019). 
5.4.1.5 COMPARISON BETWEEN DIFFERENT CNMS AND THEIR 
EFFECT ON MICROBES
It has been proven that different CNMs cast different effects on microbial 
populations, for example, fullerenes have a less impact (Hao et al., 2018) 
while graphenes have significant influence on soil microbes (Qu et al., 
2016). SWCNTs cast higher effect than MWCNTs on soil microbes due to 
the differences in their diameters, surface area (Qu et al., 2016). However, 
both are toxic as they cause cell membrane damage, proliferate ROS forma￾tion, cellular structure, and composition alterations (Magrez et al., 2006). 
Damage to the microbial cell membrane poses the cell for further negative 
effects. Organic matter mollifies the influence of CNMs on microbes, 
thereby protecting the microbial cells. MWCNTs decrease the counts of 
beneficial bacterial species, for example, E. coli as well as P. aeruginosa
in wastewater treatment plants (Srivastava et al., 2004). They also mitigate 
counts of bacterial and viral strains that override the populations of microbes 
harmful to humans in water (Brady-Estevez et al., 2008); however, they also 
reduce efficiency of sewage treatment systems (Luongo and Zhang, 2010). 
MWCNTs and SWCNTs both enhance the growth of microbes participating 
in the crude oil and phenol decomposition in lower concentrations (Abbasian 
et al., 2016). Global researches have concluded that composite nanomate￾rials are more superior than the ordinary ones and can be applied for biore￾mediation purposes (Mauter and Elimelech, 2008). Fullerenes incorporated 
in the soil decrease the counts of gram-negative bacterial strains (Tong et 
al., 2007). Graphenes enhance microbial enzyme activity in soil resulting in 
material transfer and removal of pollutants; however, they can alter micro￾bial aggregations (Ren et al., 2015). Although fullerenes have little toxic 
effect on microbes in comparison with different types of CNMs, their higher 
accumulation in the soil can drop the pollutant degradation rate (Tong et al., 
2007). Impact of CNMs on microbial populations is strongly dependent upon 
the type of microbial strains. CNM toxicity can harm the cell membrane 
or electrostatic equilibrium of the cells, causing oxidative stress resulting 
in altered lipid and protein structures, abnormal cell metabolism, and later 
death. 90 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
5.4.2 TITANIUM OXIDE (TIO2) NPs
Augmentation of NPs to soil changes the prokaryotic community structure, 
but the fungal communities remain unchanged indicating susceptible nature 
of prokaryotes to TiO2 as well as ZnSO4
 NPs than fungal species (Moll et 
al., 2017). NPs mesh directly with the surfaces of bacteria (Neal, 2008). The 
sensitivity of bacteria and fungi toward the NPs is due to their different surface 
interactions as observed with TiO2
 NPs (Shah et al., 2014). A larger part of 
the research has targeted the TiO2
 NPs interaction with bacterial communi￾ties rather than fungal species (Burke et al., 2015). It is a well-established 
fact that different NPs cast affect the bacterial communities of the soil differ￾ently, but exact mechanism of interaction between plant exudates, bacteria, 
and NPs is not known yet (Ge et al., 2014). TiO2
 NPs negatively affect the 
abundance of some prokaryotic operational taxonomic units (OTUs) while 
positively increasing the ampleness of other prokaryotes and fungi belonging 
to Ascomycota. Longer exposure of NPs shows a pronounced effect on the 
soil bacterial (Ge et al., 2012). TiO2
 NPs have shown to strongly affect 
the population of 25 microbial taxa that serve as “bio-indicators” (van der 
Heijden and Hartmann, 2016). The explicit nature of these microbial species 
is unknown and further technological advancements are required (Schlaeppi 
et al., 2016). The dominion of NPs on micobes is determined by their crystal 
structure and size of the particle (Moll et al., 2017). The crystal structures of 
anatase and rutile TiO2
 NPs affect the structure of the bacterial community. 
Anatase particles (5–10 nm) have few effects than rutile (55 nm) (Shah et al., 
2014). Influence of NPs on microorganisms of the soil can also be studied by 
physical interactions for instance, hetero-aggregation with soil (Shah et al. 
(2014). Microbial populations are also affected by soil texture that determines 
the effect of TiO2
 NPs (Simonin et al., 2015). Bacterial populations are lesser 
in loamy soils in comparison with silty clay and sandy loam soils. Farming 
practices like different levels of fertilization also shape the microbial abun￾dance and their reaction with NPs (Leff et al., 2015). Arbuscular mycorrhizal 
fungi (AMF) comprise a crucial group of fungi which is not affected by TiO2
NPs as the root colonization remains untouched (Burke et al., 2015). Du et 
al. (2011) found that wheat shoot biomass decreases with long time exposure 
of TiO2
 NPs as during the long exposure there are changes in the soil texture 
and composition. Treating the soil with zinc sulfate (ZnSO4
) increases the 
wheat biomass (Lindsay, 1972) and has a positive effect on soil bacterial 
abundance (Gogos et al., 2016). Research conducted by several researchers Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 91
have reported that TiO2
 NPs have distinct aftereffects on distinctive plant 
types (Giorgetti et al., 2019). 
The signifcance of NPs on the microbial populations related to crop 
productivity has gained much interest in the last decade as NPs as micronu￾trients are used as fertilizers (Wang et al., 2019). The crystalline phases of 
TiO2
 namely anatase and rutile signifcantly afect the plant parameters, espe￾cially biochemical, physiological, and genotoxic (Tan et al., 2018). Anatase 
is signifcantly more toxic to plants than rutile. A mixture of NPs is less 
toxic than anatase as it afects germination of seeds as well as permeability 
of membranes (Silva et al., 2016). Anatase alone or mixed with anatase + 
rutile induces elevated levels of oxidative stress along with damage in the 
ultrastructure of roots (Giorgetti et al., 2019). Anatase showed preferential 
translocation in rice plants when a mixture of anatase and rutile was given to 
rice plants (Cai et al., 2017). Bellani et al. (2020) investigated the anatase and 
rutile TiO2
 NP efect singly and mixed on soil bacteria and mineral nutrition 
of Pisum sativum L. Both anatase and rutile TiO2
 NPs under the transmission 
electron microscope (TEM) look highly compact with a prism-like shape. 
Rutile is rod-like with a minor axis of 20–25 nm and a major axis of 30–100 
nm while anatase measures 20–80 nm in size. Both of them together appear 
spherical in shape. Addition of TiO2
 NPs signifcantly infuences the avail￾ability of iron (Fe) and phosphorus (P) levels of the soil. About 18–30% 
declination has been observed in the manganese and 15% iron contents 
of soil on treatment with TiO2
 NPs. Phosphorus availability has also been 
found to decline with TiO2
 NPs. However, little efect has been observed 
for the availability of potassium (K), calcium (Ca), and zinc (Zn) contents 
of soil. The dose, treatment followed by association of TiO2
 NPs with soil 
has shown a positive enhancement in the availability of potassium, calcium, 
magnesium, and zinc. TiO2
 NPs in low doses cause bacterial community 
biostimulation (Siracusa, 2018). TiO2
 NPs form aggregates in the soil with the 
soil particles (Conway and Keller, 2016). Carboxylic acids, phenols, amines, 
and alcoholic functional groups cover TiO2
 NPs (hydrophilic coating) and 
therefore afect their interaction with particulates of soil (Rowley et al., 
2018). Manganese oxy or hydroxides occupy a larger surface area and so are 
chemically efective as they partake either in oxidation-reduction reactions 
or in cation-exchange with TiO2
 NPs or other active substances (Gasparatos, 
2013). TiO2
 NPs can reduce the availability of Mn in the soils resulting 
in changes of the Mn oxidation state altering plant growth (Bellani et al., 
2020). The lowering of rhizosphere pH and exudate excretion by the roots 
can combat with the TiO2
 NPs to make Mn available to the plants. TiO2
 NPs 92 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
can also reduce the available fraction of Fe in the soil by the mechanism of 
adsorption or complexation. TiO2
 NPs adsorb phosphate ions and therefore 
form adsorption surface complexes, thereby limiting their availability to the 
plants (Kang et al., 2011). Chen et al. (2016) concluded that anatase has 
higher adsorption potential in the aqueous phosphate solution in comparison 
with rutile. Inorganic ions and organic matter of the soil can recast the P-TiO2
interaction. Lower doses of TiO2
 cause biostimulation and stress response in 
the bacterial communities. Higher doses of TiO2 NPs, however, reduced the 
microbial abundance without afecting any defnitive bacterial community. 
Plants and microbial populations usually compete for the available nutrients 
in the soil and therefore, amplify the negative efects of NPs present in high 
amounts (Ge et al., 2013). The reduction in soil microbial diversity can be 
assigned to the fact that NPs induce the formation of ROS by alleviating 
oxidative stress; they are adsorbed by the cell membrane and also cause 
osmotic accentuation (Sohm et al., 2015). Reduction in root length and the 
increased shoot length has been reported when higher doses of TiO2
 NPs 
were given to pea plants by Lyu et al. (2017). TiO2
 NPs are toxic even if 
added in smaller doses as they form big aggregates with the soil particles and 
later penetrate the cell membrane of the roots causing cellular deformation 
(Clément et al., 2013). Mn, Zn, and P are highly infuenced nutrients when 
soils are treated with TiO2
 NPs for example, in the nonavailability of Mn in 
the soils treated with TiO2
 NPs there was no Mn in the plant roots followed 
by plant shoots. Mn is essential for plant growth; it is a catalyst in the photo￾system II (PS II) and also participates in several physiological processes of 
the plants. There are no visible symptoms that show its defciency in plants. 
Application of TiO2
 NPs in the soil, however, shows increased nitrogen (N) 
content in the plant shoots indicating their translocation and assimilation, 
but the performance of N-fxing symbiotic bacteria in the treated soil needs 
further attention. Roots of the plants growing in the soils treated with TiO2
NPs show declined growth and highly depleted mineral nutrients, especially 
P, K, Mn, and Zn in comparison with their aerial parts. Changes in the ultra￾structure of roots have been noticed, for example, changes in the integrity of 
the membrane, alterations in the mineral nutrition, and transport efciency of 
roots (Giorgetti et al., 2019). Micronutrients mollify toxic-free radicals and 
initiate production of hormones and enzymes in plants afecting the physi￾ological functions of plants concerned with biotic/abiotic stress as well as 
uptake of nutrients. The amino acid composition of wheat and peanut crops 
was found to be diferent when soils were treated with TiO2
 NPs. Among 
wheat grains a uniform expansion in the overall amino acid content without Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 93
any marked efect on the plant growth was observed while the grain weight 
and total amino acid content of peanuts was remarkably reduced indicating 
an adverse efect of TiO2
 NPs (Wang et al., 2019). Contemporary factors 
can afect the uptake of minerals in plants, especially when concerned with 
TiO2
 NPs as allied microbes and root membranes can undergo modifca￾tion (Bellani et al., 2020). A delicate but convincing efect of NPs has been 
observed in the AMF community (Burke et al., 2015). TiO2
 NPs altered the 
composition of AMF in the rhizosphere (Feng et al. 2013). TiO2
 NP afects 
the AMF community more than the bacterial ones as AMF colonizes within 
the roots system and therefore is at higher risks of TiO2
 (Seeger et al., 2009). 
AMF are essential plant mutualists as they enhance the nutrient uptake and 
growth of plants (Smith and Read, 2008) and changes produced by TiO2
 NPs 
can also afect these essential parameters (Avio et al., 2006). 
5.4.3 COPPER OXIDE NANOPARTICLES
Soil serves as a large reservoir that can accumulate a huge quantity of NPs 
gathering from different sources for example from the nano agrochemicals 
and wastewater treatment systems (Zhao et al., 2018). Influence of NPs 
on terrestrial ecosystem has been thoroughly examined (Gao et al., 2019). 
Minor differences have been reported between the natural and ionic NPs, for 
example, transfiguration of soluble Cu (copper acetate or copper citrate) and 
copper oxide nanoparticles (CuO-NPs) in the paddy soils shows very minor 
differences (Gao et al., 2019). Copper (II) hydroxide (Cu(OH)2
) nanopes￾ticide is regarded as an alternative to copper sulfate (CuSO4
) used in the 
organic farming practice. The usage of Cu(OH)2
 nanopesticide is increasing 
every year and therefore there is a greater demand of understanding the side 
effects of this nanopesticide on the terrestrial ecosystems than the natural 
CuSO4
. Momentous changes in the metabolic profiling of the spinach plants 
have been observed when Zhao et al. (2018) tested the biochemical behavior 
of spinach plants with Cu (OH)2
 nanopesticides where nitrogen metabolism 
shows a pronounced effect. Soil bacterial communities are sensitive to the 
pollutants alternating the soil environment (Wu et al., 2019). The bacterial 
populations and their enzyme activities have an important role in the soil 
as they participate in the nutrient cycling, degradation of pollutants, and 
crop production (Gámiz et al., 2019). The indicators of soil health are many 
enzymes for instance, catalase, urease, acid phosphatase, and invertase 
(Zhang et al., 2020). The reduction in the amenable soil carbon and clay 94 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
particles has been observed if the urea hydrolysis undergoes declination. 
Metal-associated NPs namely, CuO-NPs, Ag-NPs, and ZnO-NPs release 
metal ions in the soil in the presence of oxygen and can pose an effect on 
the bacterial communities, thereby modifying the enzyme activity of acid 
phosphatase which relies on organic matter composition and content of 
the soil (Gallo et al., 2018). Slight changes have been observed in the urea 
hydrolysis of organic carbon-rich pasture soils when incorporated with Cu as 
Cu bioavailability was increased (Adhikari et al., 2018). Impact of different 
Cu nanofertilizers (commercial nano-Cu(OH)2
, Cu(OH)2
 nanopesticide 
formulation (NPF) as well as commercial unformulated Cu(OH)2
 nanorods 
(NR), AI of NPF (AI-NPF), and NPF dispersing agent) soil enzyme potency 
namely, invertase, acid phosphatase followed by catalase were tested 
by Zhang et al. (2020). Since enzyme activity of soil directly influences 
bacteria (Zeng et al., 2019) the consequences of nano-Cu(OH)2 as well as 
Cu(OH)2
 nanopesticides resembling CuSO4
 on soil bacteria were tested by 
Zhang et al. (2020). They observed that AI-NPF resulted in a significant 
boost of the bacterial communities as compared to CuSO4
 suggesting that 
this NPF can enhance the number of bacteria in the soil during a shorter 
exposure. Both nano-Cu(OH)2 and Cu(OH)2
 nanopesticide caused declina￾tion in the bacterial counts. CuSO4 and dispersing agents showed no effect 
on the soil bacteria. Differences in the bacterial OTUs have been observed 
when the soils were treated with CuSO4
 and NPF respectively indicating 
that CuSO4
 application can temporarily increase the bacterial populations 
that later decline; however, very minute changes have been noticed if ionic 
copper was augmented in the soil (Bernard et al., 2009). NPF can alter the 
bacterial composition during long exposures. Dominance of Proteobacteria 
has been reported with the soils brushed with CuSO4
, NPF, and NR, whereas 
nano-Cu(OH)2 and Cu(OH)2
 nanopesticides reduced the populations of these 
bacteria. Similarly, a declination in the populations of Actinobacteria has 
been observed in the soils treated with Cu(OH)2
 nanopesticides, suggesting 
that they can alter the composition of microbial communities. Replacement 
of traditional copper materials by Cu(OH)2
 nanopesticides to prevent micro￾bial plant diseases seems to be a promising tool for reducing copper load 
in the soil. AI-NPF and CuSO4
 show reduction in the urease activity but 
elevated catalase activity. They not only reduce the dominance of Actinobac￾teria but also affect its community composition. This indicates that Cu(OH)2
nanopesticides can alter the bacterial population as well as structure of the 
community.Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 95
5.4.4 SILVER NPs
Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have magnificent antimicrobial characteris￾tics and therefore they are suitable for several purposes (Kim et al., 2017). 
AgNPs have a diameter between 1 and 50 nm and they have a larger surface 
area along with higher reactive potentials in comparison with other NPs 
(Wijnhoven et al., 2009). Due to their excessive usage the soil is now highly 
loaded with them (Sun et al., 2014) and therefore they are risky to the soil 
environment as well as to the microbial populations (Kumar et al., 2015). 
Many researchers have supported that AgNPs hinder plant growth (Pokhrel 
and Dubey, 2013), obstruct microbial diversity and their activity (He et 
al., 2016), and therefore change the composition of microbial populations 
(Kumar et al., 2015). AgNPs can accumulate in plants and therefore can 
gain access at the trophic levels (Nair et al., 2010). They can also result in 
induced oxidative stress (Dimkpa et al., 2013). Soil microbes maintain the 
ecological balance by enhancing the fertility of soil and degrading the waste 
matter (Camenzind et al., 2018). Enzymes produced by microbes are essen￾tial components of mineral cycles (Bastida et al., 2008). If microbes in the 
soil are under stress the biogeochemical cycles are also affected (McGee et 
al., 2017). Scant knowledge is accessible regarding the interaction of AgNPs 
with soil microbes (Grün et al., 2019). Currently, it is known that AgNPs 
cause toxicity on microbes as they can concentrate in the soil (Samarajeewa 
et al., 2017) and their toxicity is dependent upon their amount in soil (Peyrot 
et al., 2014). Majority of pronounced effects of AgNPs in relation to soil 
microbes have been observed at higher concentrations (Grün et al., 2019). 
Montes de Oca-Vásquez et al. (2020) tested AgNPs at the real levels on the 
diversity, biomass, and microbial activity in a Coffea arabica cultivated soil 
and found no pronounced effect of AgNPs on the microbial populations. Their 
results were similar to other researchers who also did not find any significant 
change in the soil microbial populations (Asadishad et al., 2018). However, 
AgNPs affect the abundance of some fungal species, namely, Mortierella
(opportunistic decomposer), phylum Mortierellomycota showing increase in 
their populations (Montes de Oca-Vásquez et al., 2020). Natural dominance 
of Mortierella in soil is relatively significant as it acts as a decomposer of 
organic content (Brabcová et al., 2018). Mortierella uptakes organic carbon 
from the soil essential for its growth (López-Mondéjar et al., 2018). These 
silver NPs can alter bacterial and fungal colonies resulting in the relatively 
higher populations of Morteriella. The relative abundance of Fusarium and 
Fusicolla usually decreases if the content of Mortierella increases in soil 96 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
after the application of AgNPs. Fusarium spp. are responsible for causing 
disease in the crop plants (barley, wheat, triticale, oats, and rye) all over the 
world and it is now well known that NPs have a toxic nature (Tarazona et 
al., 2019). The arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) correlating about 80% 
of the plants are beneficial in increasing the phosphorus (P) uptake in plants 
and also serve as a barrier against metal stress (Cornejo et al., 2013). AMF 
are also involved in the metal transport by activating the associated genes 
(Chen et al., 2019). AMF not only decreases the cadmium transporter gene 
expression resulting in lower cadmium concentration in rice but also affects 
the gene expression of P and arsenite transporters (Glassop et al., 2005). 
AMF mitigate AgNP and zinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnONPs) phytotoxicity 
by decreasing metal accumulation in plants via reducing metal bioavailability 
or increasing glomain secretion (Siani et al., 2017). AMF also interacts with 
soil microbes altering the microbial abundance in the mycorrhizosphere 
or rhizosphere (Rodriguez-Caballero et al., 2017). They also interact with 
phosphate-solubilizing as well as nitrogen-fixing bacteria to elevate uptake 
of nutrients as they are deficient in secretion of enzymes associated with 
organic matter degradation (Zhang et al., 2018). AMF can also collaborate 
with bacterial populations and therefore enhance decomposition of organic 
matter and obtain nutrients for their growth (Xu et al., 2018). 
Cao et al. (2020) tested the efect of AgNPs in diferent concentrations 
on AMF afecting maize-microbe response and found that the positive 
efects of AMF are not plant limited (Diagne et al., 2018). Soils treated with 
AgNPs have a reduced P concentration. Under the infuence of AMF usually 
an adverse efect of AgNPs on metabolic reactions of the soil microbes 
followed by P availability is mollifed. AMF also mitigates the adverse efect 
of cadmium on soil microbes (Aghababaei et al., 2014). However, under 
the infuence of AgNPs AMF alters the bacterial populations of the soil 
resulting in the abundance of those bacteria that can help the plant to resist 
the stress generated by AgNPs (Chen et al., 2019). AMF releases carbon-rich 
substances that have a positive efect on soil bacterial growth (Zhang et al., 
2018). AMF in general do not show a positive efect on all soil microbes, 
but they have a specifc preference for some as they lower the counts of 
few soil microbes (Marschner and Timonen, 2006). Bacilli bacteria have 
important roles in the decomposition of organic P to make it available to 
plants (Artursson et al., 2006) and they usually associate with AMF serving 
as “mycorrhizal helper bacteria” (Bonfante and Anca 2009). In the soils 
treated with AgNPs the populations of Bacilli were found to be higher in the 
presence of AMF and AMF positively infuenced Anaerolineaepopulations Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 97
(Cao et al., 2020). Anaerolineae belong to the phylum Chlorofexi and are 
anaerobic bacteria that participate in the decomposition of amino acids and 
carbon (Yamada and Sekiguchi, 2009). The relatively high population of 
Anaerolineae and Bacilli under the infuence of AMF, however, decreased 
the relative abundance of Nitrospira (Rodriguez-Caballero et al., 2017). 
Nitrospira are nitrite-oxidizing bacteria having a role nitrogen cycle (Daims 
et al., 2001) and AMF also partakes in nitrogen transport in the host plants 
resulting in a competition for nitrogen between AMF and bacteria (Nuccio 
et al., 2013). Xu et al. (2018) found that AMF causes increase in the number 
of Nitrospira colonies as well as rate of organic matter decomposition. AMF 
can afect the bacterial population in soil by afecting plant growth (Philippot 
et al., 2013). The physiological properties of the plants can also shape the 
bacterial populations in association with AMF (Rodriguez-Caballero et al., 
2017). Global research has indicated that AgNPs lose their antibacterial 
properties in the solution of concentrated electrolytes. AgNPs inhibit aerobic 
respiration in Paracoccus denitrificans in comparison with E. coli and B. 
subtilis (Lok et al., 2007). The AgNP efect on the microbial and enzyme 
activity along with soil microbial biomass for four months was examined 
by Hänsch and Emmerling (2010). They reported that AgNPs reduced the 
microbial biomass and they had a dose-dependent efect; however, the levels 
of nitrogen were not afected at all. AgNPs afect the diferent taxonomic 
groups of soils (bacteria, fungi, and grasser protozoans). 
5.4.5 ZINC OXIDE NPs (ZNO-NPs)
The ZnO-NPs rank third in the utilization scale of the metal-based NPs in 
the world (Peng et al., 2017). ZnO has a photocatalytic and photo-oxidizing 
effect on biological species and is biologically safe (Sirelkhatim et al., 2015). 
Earlier several studies reported the decisive influences of ZnO-NPs, but their 
continuous usage has increased their toxicity in the environment (Rajput et 
al., 2017). However, the toxic nature of these NPs is size and shape depen￾dent (Khare et al., 2015). Hanna et al. (2013) investigated toxic behaviors of 
highly used NPs, namely, NiO, ZnO, CuO on Leptocheirus plumulosus, an 
estuarine amphipod, and reported that higher levels of Zn dissolved in the 
sediment in comparison with other NPs indicating higher dissolution rate of 
ZnO-NPs. It is now known about the toxicity of ZnO-NPs in relation to the 
aquatic organisms (Jośko et al., 2016). Researchers have concluded that NPs 
alone or in combination with metals can alter the microbial community and 98 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
structure (Xu et al., 2015). Several researchers have examined the toxicity of 
NPs (ZnO-NPs and CuO-NPs) and have found that they have antimicrobial 
characteristics in the in vitro experiments (Dinesh et al., 2012). Ecotoxic 
nature of ZnO-NPs on soil microbes in response to ammonification, fluo￾rescent diacetate hydrolase (FDAH) activity, microbial respiration, and 
dehydrogenase (DH) activity caused decreased number of phosphorus and 
potassium-solubilizing bacteria and Azotobacter, reduced levels of fluores￾cein diacetatehydrolysis, catalase, and urease activities, as well as reduced 
thermogenic metabolism. Ammonification and respiration processes also 
showed a drop (Shen et al., 2015). ZnO-NPs have been found to be toxic 
against gram-positive as well as gram-negative bacterial species as they 
completely inhibit their growth by altering their biochemical processes 
(Reddy et al., 2007). ZnO-NPs are gifted with antimicrobial properties on E. 
coli, S. aureus, as well as B. subtilis bacterial species along with some fungal 
species also, for example, Aspergillus fumigatus and A. flavus (Navale et 
al., 2015). ZnO-NPs’ antibacterial property on bacterial pathogens (food as 
well as water-borne) (C. jejuniand V. cholerae) shows alterations in their 
cellular structure resulting in death of these species (Manzoor et al., 2016). 
ZnO-NPs also show antimicrobial activity with P. putida (an essential 
soil bacterium) (Zeng et al., 2016). ZnO-NPs show a bacteriostatic effect 
in comparison with the CuO and AgO-NPs that have bactericidal activity 
(Gajjar et al., 2009). ZnO-NPs suppress indole acetic acid (IAA) produc￾tion in P. chlororaphis, plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) 
while CuO-NPs increase phytohormone production (Dimkpa et al., 2015). 
ZnO-NPs display bactericidal effects on Sinorhizobium meliloti, a symbi￾otic diazotrophic soil bacterium (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2012). However, 
ZnO-NPs are extensively used in bioremediation due to their antibacterial 
activity (Ahmed et al., 2017). ZnO-NPs have been found to be toxic when 
tested against the marine algae Chlorella vulgaris as the cell viability of 
the algae shows correlation with the concentration and exposure time of 
ZnO-NPs (Suman et al., 2015). Antibacterial activity of ZnO-NPs toward 
E. coli, B. subtilis, and K. pneumoniae indicates that it is superior to TiO2
NPs (Ge et al., 2011). Shi et al. (2020) examined the influence of ZnO-NPs 
on soil microbes. They reported the abundance of 11 phyla, namely, Verru￾comicrobia, Proteobacteria, Planctomycetes, Acidobacteria, Patescibacteria, 
Actinobacteria, Gemmatimonadetes, Bacteroidetes, Firmicutes, Chloroflexi, 
and Cyanobacteria. Proteobacteria were the champions in the relative abun￾dance from the classes, viz., Deltaproteobacteria, Alphaproteobacteria, and 
Gammaproteobacteria with lower fractions of Actinobacteria. However, the Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 99
dominance of the phyla was variable with times of exposure and dosage 
concentrations. The abundance of cyanobacteria, however, did not show 
any significant change. It can be assumed that ZnO-NPs are not toxic to 
Cyanobacteria, Patescibacteria, and Verrucomicrobia but are toxic to Bacte￾roidetes and Gemmatimonadetes. ZnO-NPs inhibit polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons (PAH) as well as organic matter degradation and therefore 
affect the relative abundance of Bacteroidetes which have an essential role 
in their degradation (Li et al., 2014). Dominance of bacterial communities 
at the genus level in response to the ZnO-NPs was investigated by Shi et al. 
(2020). They found higher populations of Acinetobacter, Azospirillum, and 
Ohtaekwangia while a declination of Piscinibacter and Sphingomonas on 
the day 0 of ZnO-NPs application. However, after 30 days the populations 
of Sphingomonas, Lysobacter, Flavisolibacter, and Gemmatimonas showed 
declined numbers, while the numbers of Altererythrobacter, Ramlibacter, 
Lacunisphaera, Ohtaekwangia, and Opitutus showed increase. Altererythro￾bacter, Ohtaekwangia, and Massilia have important roles in the carbon cycle 
and their populations usually increase with increasing the ZnO-NPs levels 
(Li et al., 2014). Terrimonas partakes in breaking of methyl tert-butyl ether 
(MTBE) as well as phenanthrene and is also sensitive to the elevated levels 
of ZnO-NPs (Wu and Xu, 2016). However, populations of Piscinibacter
(MTBE-degrading bacteria) showed significant increase with the increased 
concentrations of ZnO-NPs, indicating that hydrocarbon-degrading bacteria 
can better tolerate the elevated levels of heavy metals as well as antibiotic 
concentrations (multidrug resistant) (Hamidat et al., 2016). This can be 
stated that ZnO-NPs cast a pressure on the essential soil microbes to develop 
resistance against the heavy metals as well as other contaminants (Hemala 
et al., 2014). The microbial populations of Burkholderiales, Gammapro￾teobacteria, and Actinobacteria increase with increasing doses of ZnO-NPs 
(Li et al., 2015). ZnO-NPs may reduce the risk of soil plant diseases and 
therefore can reduce pesticide usage. The populations of Pseudomonas (a 
phosphate-solubilizing Gammaproteobacteria) show declination within 
30 days of exposure time due to the low availability of free phosphorus. 
ZnO-NPs in general can suppress the populations of bacteria participating 
in phosphorus cycle, soil metabolic activity, and organic pollutant degrada￾tion but can enhance the communities of bacteria suppressing the growth of 
plant pathogens. Low levels of ZnO-NPs have an adverse influence on the 
polyphenol oxidase (PPO) activity (Altantuya, 2015). 100 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
5.4.6 CERIUM OXIDE (CEO2) AND CHROMIUM TRIOXIDE (CR2O3) NPs
Scant amount of researches has been executed till now to determine the 
influence of cerium and chromium trioxide nanoparticles in relation with 
the soil microbial populations. In the last decade the usage of these two NPs 
has undergone significant increase posing a threat for the environment and 
organisms (Hu et al., 2015). Luo et al. (2020) tested cerium oxide (nCeO2
) 
and chromium trioxide (nCr2
O3
) NPs on bacterial strains at increased as 
well as ambient atmospheric CO2
. Toxicity of Cr2
O3
 NPs on mammalian 
(Alarifi et al., 2016) followed by plant cells (Kumar et al., 2015) along with 
the aquatic environment is already known, but their effect on the long-term 
elevated CO2
 (eCO2
) and soil microbes is not known yet. Increase in the 
levels of nCeO2
 and nCr2
O3
 showed decreased enzyme activity of the soil 
microbes (Luo et al., 2020). Toxicity of nCeO2
 and nCr2
O3
 is dependent upon 
the free metal particles and they can damage the membrane of the cell as well 
as the DNA (Jośko et al., 2016). Elevated levels of nCeO2
, nCr2
O3
, and eCO2
decrease the soil pH, increase accumulation of ROS causing DNA damage, 
enzyme inactivation (Wang et al., 2016b). The nCeO2
 and nCr2
O3
 can also 
enhance ROS generation within the microbes which are toxic to them. 
nCr2
O3
 is more toxic than nCeO2
 (Jośko et al., 2016). eCO2
 also enhances 
the negative effect of NPs on soil microbes affecting the abundance of alpha 
and beta communities similar to other NPs (Yadav et al., 2014). The enzy￾matic potential recovery by microbes under the effect of nCeO2
 and nCr2
O 
and eCO2
 can occur due to the decreased levels of available Ce and Cr or 
by growth of tolerant bacteria (Blagodatskaya et al., 2010). It is proposed 
that eCO2
 can change the availability of soil carbon to microbes (Carrillo et 
al., 2018). Soil microbial biomass (MBC) is an essential source of organic 
carbon and any change in it can alter microbial enzyme activity (Dai et al., 
2004). nCr2
O3
 and nCeO2
 also pose an inhibitory effect on MBC formation 
leading to stress in order to ensure survival (Gupta and Diwan, 2017). nCr2
O3
and nCeO2
 also increase the alpha-bacterial community suggesting the fast 
adaptation of microbes against elevated levels of NPs as similar results have 
been obtained with Ag-NPs (Sheng et al., 2018). Research has indicated an 
explicit correlation among NPs as well as bacteria must be present to notice 
a trend in the microbial number declination (Gómez-Sagasti et al., 2019). 
In the presence of eCO2
 situations nCr2
O3
 and nCeO2
 can be useful as they 
reduce the toxicity of NPs in soil (Luo et al., 2020). Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 101
5.4.7 GOLD NPs
Changing climate and natural resource depletion has oriented the synthesis 
of gold nanoparticles or (Au-NPs) Ag-NPs from plant extracts opening the 
way for agro-industrial laboratories (Awad et al., 2019). Extensive research 
has been done to test the influence of Au-NPs on elongation of roots, germi￾nation of seeds followed by plant response against NPs (Ribeiro et al., 2019). 
Distinctive types of plant extracts have been tested for the production of 
Au-NPs and it has been reported that Au-NPs have efficient antimicrobial 
property against fungal and bacterial species (Ali et al., 2019). The differ￾ences between the Au-NPs prepared from different plant extracts show higher 
levels of sapogenins, flavonoids, carbohydrates, and steroids, therefore 
ensuring the stability of NPs (Yugay et al., 2020). Au-NPs have a precise size 
and shape that enables them to interact with the cell wall and cell membrane 
of microbes by changing the osmoregulation, permeability, respiration, as 
well as electron transport within the cell causing death (Rashmi et al., 2020). 
The true phenomenon behind the antimicrobial nature of Au-NPs is still 
hidden. It is believed that Au-NPs have a firm preference toward phosphorus 
and sulfhydryl groups and therefore they can seriously harm the cellular 
ingredients of the bacterial cell. According to one hypothesis Au-NPs can 
gain access within bacterial cell membrane and therefore can attach with the 
NADH dehydrogenases and generate ROS leading to respiratory chain inter￾ruption. These ROS can also associate with phosphorus or sulfur containing 
cell constituents, DNA, and proteins (Ahmad et al., 2018). Biocidal feature 
of Au-NPs is dependent on the dose as at higher levels the NPs interact with 
the nucleic acids as well as with the cytoplasmic organelles (Chauhan et al., 
2013). Au-NPs show higher preference toward gram-negative bacteria rather 
than gram-positive ones. Gram-positive bacteria have a thick peptidoglycan 
layer that makes the penetration of NPs inside the bacterial cell difficult, 
while the layer is thinner in gram-negative bacteria due to which the NPs 
can gain access within the bacterial cell (Muthuvel et al., 2014). Au-NP 
antimicrobial assay shows significantly good results for Proteus vulgaris, S. 
aureus, K. pneumoniae, and E. coli (Annamalai et al., 2013). The antimicro￾bial activity of Au-NPs synthesized from Annona muricata extract is higher 
against Clostridium sporogenes (Folorunso et al., 2019). Au-NPs produced 
from Jasminum auriculatum leaf extract show antifungal property against 
Aspergillus fumigatus (Balasubramanian et al., 2020). 102 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
5.5 INFLUENCE OF NPs ON MICROBIAL GROWTH 
5.5.1 PLANT PATHOGENS
NPs exhibit antimicrobial responses in the medical microbiological processes 
(Seil and Webster, 2012). NPs can influence plant pathogens (bacteria as 
well as fungi) (Dimpka et al., 2013). Influence of NPs on oomycetes is 
also under investigation. CuO-NPs can control the growth of Phytophthora 
infestans infecting the tomato plants where necrotic and chlorotic spots were 
noticed only on the leaves (Giannousi et al., 2013). These signs were not 
observed on lime plants. The symptoms of powdery mildew (infectious 
fungal strains are Golovinomycescichoracearum as well as Sphaerotheca 
fusca fungi) infecting cucumber and pumpkin plants are minimized by the 
use of Ag-NPs (Lamsal et al., 2011). However, Ag-NPs affect the conidial 
germination and mycelial growth in the in vitro tests. A wide array of 
research has been conducted on the antimicrobial activity of ZnO-NPs. 
ZnO-NPs also display antimicrobial properties. ZnO-NPs can suppress 
infectious plant fungal species from growing. ZnO-NPs also suppress the 
growth of Botrytis cineria and Penicillum expansum fungi responsible for 
causing gray mold in fruits (pears, apples) (He et al., 2012). ZnO-NPs (light 
activated) are more lethal to B. cinerea as conidial growth and development 
is hindered (Kairyte et al., 2013). Aspergillus flavus as well as A. niger (fruit 
molds) growth is also suppressed by the use of ZnO-NPs (Jayaseelan et al., 
2012). Fusarium graminearum growth has been found to be suppressed by 
ZnO-NPs in vitro studies (Dimpka et al., 2013). Similarly, F. verticillioides 
growth was inhibited by ZnO-NPs as ROS formation was observed while 
fungal hyphae underwent deformation (Savi et al., 2013). Fusarium spp. 
produce a toxin, fumonisin in cereals. ZnO NPs also inhibit mycelial growth 
of Pythium ultimum. 
5.5.2 PROFITABLE SOIL MICROORGANISMS
NPs not only find applications in pest control but they are also used in soil 
remediation, improvement of agricultural crop production (Dimpka, 2014). 
Extensive research has already been done so as to understand NP interaction 
with microbes especially bacteria (Ingle et al., 2014). It has been reported 
that metal-based NPs namely CuO, ZnO, Fe3
O4
 or SnO2
, CeO2
, Ag NPs alter 
the soil microbial populations (Gitipour et al., 2013). TiO2
 and ZnO-NPs 
reduce diversity as well as microbial biomass (Ge et al., 2011). Fe3
O4
-NPs Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 103
enhance the growth of microbes, modify their structure thereby resulting in 
increased enzyme activity (acid phosphatase, amylase, urease, and invertase) 
(Fan et al., 2018). Fe3
O4
 and SnO2
 NPs increase the microbial C/N2
 ratio 
in the soil and also modified metabolism of microbes in the polluted soils 
(Antisari et al., 2013). Si, Au, Cu, and Pd NPs failed to influence popula￾tions of bacterial species (Shah and Belozerova, 2009). SiO2
 NPs not only 
augmented protein content and microbial biomass of bacteria in the soil 
but also boosted maize germination (Karunakaran et al., 2014). CeO2 and 
ZnO NPs are lethal to Sinorhizobium meliloti as they inhibit cell count and 
growth. These two NPs alter polysaccharides followed by cell wall’s protein 
configuration of the extracellular polymeric substances (EPS). CeO2
-NPs are 
bacteriostatic to S. melba while ZnO-NPs have bactericidal effect on the 
same strain (Bandyopadhyay et al., 2012). TiO2
-NPs suppress Azotobater 
vinelandii, B. megaterium, B. brevis, as well as Pseudomonas fluorescens 
growth, while ZrO2 (zirconia) NPs show different effect on these strains 
(Karunakaran et al., 2014). ZnO and Ag-NPs with higher concentrations 
suppress the growth of P. aeruginosa, B. barbaricus, and B. subtilis (Dhas 
et al., 2013). P. fluorescens and B. subtilis are sensitive to the lethal effects 
of TiO2
, ZnO, SiO2
, and Al2
O3
-NPs. ZnO-NPs cause total mortality in these 
strains in comparison with other NPs (Jiang et al., 2009). B. subtilis growth 
was inhibited by ZnO, CuO, Sb2
O3
, and NiO2
 NPs (Baek et al., 2011). Growth 
rate of P. putida KT2440 (a biosensor strain) and P. chlororaphis O6 (PcO6) 
declines when Ag as well as CuO-NPs are applied (Gajjar et al., 2009). IAA 
production decreases by ZnO-NP application while siderophore production 
increases; however, an opposite effect has been noticed with CuO-NPs (Fang 
et al., 2013). 
5.5.3 NPs AND MICROBES OF AGRICULTURAL IMPORTANCE
Microbes have a very characteristic role to play in the biogeochemical 
cycles followed by organic matter decomposition despite forming symbiotic 
collaborations with plants. Some microbes attach with the plant species in a 
positive manner where they increase the availability of essential nutrients to 
plants thereby increasing plant growth rate. Fungal strains usually associate 
with plants and increase their tolerance levels against heat, drought and also 
increase the protection mechanism against different infectious pathogens as 
well as insects. However, further research needs to be done (Table 5.2) for 
utilization of NPs for the betterment of crop production.104 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
5.5.3.1 BIOLOGICAL NITROGEN FIXATION
NP concentration has an essential role to play in maintaining the health of soil 
microbes. ZnO-NPs can change the morphological structure of Rhizobium 
leguminosarum bv. viciae 3841 community. Such a morphological alteration 
can influence the nodulation of roots and therefore changes in the nitrogen￾fixing cycle (Huang et al., 2014). CeO2
 NPs can fully inhibit the microbial 
activity of nitrogen-fixing bacteria at 1000 ppm (Priester et al., 2012). 
The nitrogen-fixing potential of Rhizobium is inhibited at higher levels of 
Ag-NPs (Kumar et al., 2015). However, lower doses of NPs positively affect 
microbes of the soil, for instance, Ag-NPs in lower concentrations promote 
root nodulation cowpea (Mehta et al., 2016). The nitrogenase activity of 
cluster bean, green gram, moth bean, and cowpea shows an increase at lower 
concentrations of ZnO-NPs; however, decrease is noticed at higher doses 
(Kumar et al., 2015). Ag-NPs do not cast any negative alteration on gene 
expression of the denitrifying (Pseudomonas stutzeri. napB, nirH, norB, as 
well as narG), nitrifying (Nitrosomonas europaea. amoC2, and amoA1), and 
nitrogen fixing (Azotobacter vinelandii. nifH, nifD, anfD, and vnfD) bacteria 
but inhibit the gene expression at higher concentrations (Yang et al., 2013). 
Gene expression in Nitrosococcus oceani and Nitrosospira multiformis is 
also affected by Ag-NPs when used at higher doses (Beddow et al., 2014). 
Ag, TiO2
 and ZnO NPs in combination at higher levels suppressed the 
frequency of nodulation in S. and M. trancatula (Judy et al., 2016). The 
potential of ammonia-oxidizing bacteria is reduced at higher doses of Ag 
and Fe NPs which affects the nitrification process. These NPs repress the 
growth of bacteria by associating with the bacterial cell surface and therefore 
hinder wastewater treatment by biological means (Michels et al., 2017). 
The biological nitrogen-fixing efficiency of Anabaena variabilis undergoes 
declination under the influence of TiO2
-NPs with long exposures (Cherchi 
and Gu, 2010). Declination in the bacterial growth enhances production of 
stress indicators, namely, cyanophycin grana proteins (CGPs) against NPs. 
TiO2 and ZnO-NPs also decrease the population of nitrogen-fixing bacteria 
(Ge et al., 2012). However, TiO2
-NPs increased nutrient uptake in clover 
plants (Moll et al., 2017). The root nodule development and therefore the 
nitrogen fixation was slowed in peas grown in hydroponics with TiO2
-NPs 
(Fan et al., 2018). CeO2 NPs also alter microbial populations at higher doses. 
ZnO-NPs not only inhibited the growth of Sphingomonas and Rhizobium but 
also caused a negative effect on other bacterial species (Azotobacter, Ensifer, 
Clostridium, and Rhodospirillaceae) regardless the host plants (Ge et al., Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 105 TABLE 5.2 Influence of NPs on the Beneficial Traits of Agriculturally Important Microbes. Concentration Different types of nanoparticles Ag ZnO TiO2 Fe CeO2 Mo Cu Low Increases ecological behavior of AMF Upregulates expression of nitrifying genes Delay NF Negatively affects AMF colonization Reduces NF Reduces AMF colonization Complete NF shutdown Increases nodulation – High Inhibits NF Suppresses gene expression of nitrifiers and dentrifiers Enhances nodulation Enhances nutrient uptake with AMF Inhibits sidero- phore production Delays nodulation in hydrponics Inhibits P-solubilization – – – Inhibits siderophore production106 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
2014). A double-fold enhancement has been observed in the root nodule 
formation of chickpea seeds when molybdenum (Mo-NPs) was administered 
in the soil (Taran et al., 2014). 
5.5.3.2 ARBUSCULAR MYCORRHIZAL FUNGI (AMF)
AMF have a diverse array of symbiotic associations followed by thoroughly 
researched plant microbe relations. They mitigate the stress levels in plants, 
therefore enabling the plants to develop tolerance. They help the plants to 
fight against ROS, metal lethality, and stress factors by forming a covering 
around the roots. Several researchers have reported that heavy metals, NPs, 
and other contaminants enter the plant system via roots (Upadhyaya et al., 
2010). Researchers have conducted several studies to figure out the effect 
of AMF and metal NPs. AMF mollifies the toxicity of Fe3
O4
 NPs in the 
maize fields on the bacterial populations (Cao et al., 2020). Gemmatimon￾adetes, Chloroflexi, and Nitrospira have been found in higher proportions 
in soils treated with Fe3
O4
 NPs remaining unchanged in the presence of 
AMF. However, increasing the concentrations of Fe3
O4
 NPs AMF also had 
negative effects as glomalin content, mycorrhizal colonization followed 
by nutrient uptake by the roots underwent declination (Feng et al., 2013). 
TiO2 as well as Ag-NPs also repress mycorrhizal colony formation on the 
roots of plants (Dubchak et al., 2010). Ag-NPs however under the increased 
levels increased the stress tolerance behavior in the AMF (Feng et al., 2013). 
The growth and nutrient uptake increased even at a higher concentration of 
ZnO-NPs in soybean plants in the presence of AMF (Wang et al., 2016a). 
These facts indicate that AMF inhibits the toxic influence of NPs toward soil 
and therefore increases plant growth. 
5.5.3.3 SECONDARY METABOLITES
The profitable soil microbes produce secondary metabolites and therefore 
enhance plant growth. Siderophore is utilized by microbes to capture free 
iron radicals important for their survival. The metal NP and microbe interac￾tion can enhance siderophore production that regulates plant–microbe inter￾actions. Scant information is available regarding the influence of NPs on 
secondary metabolite production. CuO-NPs downregulate the gene expres￾sion of pyoverdine siderophore in Pseudomonas chlororaphis O6 resulting in 
the suppression of siderophore production (Dimkpa et al., 2013). TiO2
-NPs Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 107
at higher doses repress siderophore production in P. fluorescens, P. aerugi￾nosa, and B. amyloliquefaciens. ZnO-NPs increase the iron-binding capacity 
at higher concentrations. TiO2
 and ZnO-NPs at higher concentrations inhibit 
the phosphate-solubilizing efficiency of P. fluorescens, P. aeruginosa, and B. 
amyloliquefaciens (Haris and Ahmad, 2018). 
5.5.3.4 BIOCONTROL ACTIVITY
Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPRs) residing in the rhizosphere 
of plants enhance plant growth by regulating the populations of phytopatho￾gens via biocontrol mechanisms (Liu et al., 2017). Rangaraj et al. (2014) 
investigated biocontrol efficiency of the fluorescent pseudomonads by the 
application of nano-silica in maize plants. They found that higher silica 
levels resulted in increased phenolic activity, roughness of the leaves but 
lesser stress levels. Higher phenol levels lead to accumulation of silica in 
the leaf epidermis and therefore provide a physical barrier with increased 
resistance against diseases. Ag and ZnO-NPs increase antifungal activity of 
P. protegens in association with Candida albicans. Antifungal compound 
(pyrrolnitrin) production at higher doses of Ag and SiO2
 NPs in P. protegens
inhibited its growth (Khan et al., 2018). NP accumulation at sublethal doses 
can enhance the biocontrol efficiency of useful microbes and therefore it can 
be an option to enhance crop productivity in a safer manner. 
5.6 INTERACTIONS BETWEEN MICROORGANISMS AND NPs AT 
THE CELLULAR LEVEL
The NPs and microbe interactions have been described as toxic as the majority 
of the NPs possess antimicrobial properties (Raghunath and Perumal, 2017). 
The metal NP and microbial interactions are useful at agricultural followed 
by industrial as well as environmental levels (Guilger et al., 2017). Majority 
of the metals partake in cellular functions and so therefore are essential for the 
life activities. Microbes uptake these metal elements in different forms and 
thereby act as source and reservoirs of essential nutrients. The microbe–plant 
interactions enrich the chemical, physical, and biological characteristics of 
soil and therefore increase crop production and soil fertility. For sustain￾able agriculture complete knowledge regarding the associations of NPs with 
microbes is mandatory. Metals like Zn, Cu, Fe, and Mn are essential for 
growth and sustenance of microbial communities (Porcheron et al., 2013), 108 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
but high levels of these metals are toxic as they can damage the cellular 
structure leading to death of microbial cells (Lima e Silva et al., 2012). 
Other metals, for example, Pb, Hg, and Al assemble within the microbial 
cells and cause cellular malfunctions and DNA damage (Oves et al., 2016). 
To overcome the higher levels of metals, microbes have tolerance mecha￾nisms that serve as extracellular barriers and therefore prevent the entry of 
excess metal ions. The ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABC) participate 
in metal ion movement within as well as out of the cellular compartments 
so that detoxifcation can occur by specific enzymes (Ianeva, 1993). NPs 
offer a large surface area with varied chemical reactivity as well as quantum 
effects (Fig. 5.2). The possible mechanisms of NP interaction with microbial 
cells include membrane potential loss, membrane disruption, oxidation of 
proteins, ROS formation, and nucleic acid’s integrity disruption (Slavin et 
al., 2017). Cell wall regulates the susceptibility and tolerance of bacterial 
species against NPs (Hajipour et al., 2012). NP oxides usually attach to the 
bacterial cell wall by Van der Waals forces (hydrophobic), but they can also 
attach via electrostatic interactions or by receptor-ligand methods (Parikh 
and Chorover, 2006). The electrostatic interactions of NPs with bacterial cell 
walls not only disrupt the structure of bacterial cell membrane but also attack 
other essential cell wall components, namely, amide, carboxyl, phosphate, 
carbohydrate moieties, and hydroxyl groups (Leone et al., 2007). Bacterial 
cell wall’s lipopolysaccharide (LPS) layer serves as an initial interaction site 
for both bacteria and NPs (Guan et al., 2005). S-layer (surface layer, made 
up of glycoproteins present in monolayer) also interacts with NPs (Prakash 
et al., 2011). Some NPs gain entry within the cell by endocytosis where they 
settle within the endolysosomes and therefore cannot reach cytosol (Conner 
and Schmid, 2003). The prism-shaped, polygonal, or hierarchical Ag-NPs 
show inhibitory effects on the growth of both gram-negative (E. coli) and 
gram-positive (S. aureus) bacterial species in comparison with both spherical 
and disc-shaped NPs (Nateghi and Hajimirzababa, 2014). Higher antibacte￾rial efficiency has been noticed in the plate-shaped Ag-NPs against E. coli
in comparison with the cube-shaped but spherical NPs (Kim et al., 2017). 
Spherical Ag-NPs exhibit strong antibacterial potential toward P. aeruginosa
(Raza et al., 2016). It can be suggested that the shape of NPs orients their 
effects on the microbes as different shapes have different surface areas and 
therefore different interactions with the microbes are generated (Buszewski 
et al., 2018). Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 109
FIGURE 5.2 Effects of nanoparticles on bacterial and fungal cells (modified from 
Mahawar, H.; Prasanna, R. Prospecting the Interactions of Nanoparticles With Beneficial 
Microorganisms for Developing Green Technologies for Agriculture. Environ. Nanotechnol. 
Monitor. Manag. 2018, 10, 477–485).
5.7 CONCLUSIONS
NPs due to their special features have attracted the attention of scientists all 
over the globe as a source for sustainable agriculture leading to crop produc￾tion. The application of NPs for the improvement of soil activity and crop 
growth has undergone tremendous increase in the last decade. Excessive 
increase has increased the risk of environmental pollution and soil contami￾nation. NPs also appeared to pose a threat for the soil microbial communi￾ties altering their cellular composition and essential biological processes. 
Several types of NPs are toxic to microbes if used in higher concentrations; 
however, at lower levels they show significant effects on microbes as well 
as on plants. Many NPs have antimicrobial activities that inhibit microbial 
growth. The deleterious effects of NPs depend upon their size and concentra￾tions applied in the soil. NPs are also toxic to aquatic microbes as well as 
microbes involved in the sewage and sludge treatment systems. NPs are a 
boon if used in small amounts and handled with care. They are a threat if 
used on larger concentrations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am grateful to Gábor Draskovits, Laboratory Researcher, Dr. József Marek 
Animal Health Laboratory, Prophyl Kft., Dózsa György út 18, Mohács-7700, 
Hungary for his innovative ideas, motivation, and continuous moral support 
in writing this chapter. I also want to thank Prof. (Dr.) Pramod W. Ramteke 
(now retired), former Dean PG Studies and Head, Department of Biological 110 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Sciences, Faculty of Science, Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, 
Technology and Sciences, Prayagraj-211007, UP, India. Last, but not the 
least, wisdom shared by Dr. Pradeep Kumar Shukla, Assistant Professor, 
Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Sam Higginbottom 
University of Agriculture, Technology and Sciences, Prayagraj-211007, UP, 
India cannot be ignored as he has always been a source of inspiration to me. 
KEYWORDS
• antimicrobial properties
• nanoparticles
• nanotechnology
• soil microbes
• toxicity
REFERENCES
Abbasian, F.; Lockington, R.; Palanisami, T.; Megharaj, M.; Naidu, R. Multiwall Carbon 
Nanotubes Increase the Microbial Community in Crude Oil Contaminated Fresh Water 
Sediments. Sci. Total Environ. 2016, 539, 370–380. 
Adhikari, K. P.; Saggar, S.; Hanly, J. A.; Guinto, D. F.; Taylor, M. D. Why Copper and Zinc 
are Ineffective in Reducing Soil Urease Activity in New Zealand Dairy-Grazed Pasture 
Soils. Soil Res. 2018, 56, 491–502.
Aghababaei, F.; Raiesi, F.; Hosseinpur, A. The Combined Effects of Earthworms and 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi on Microbial Biomass and Enzyme Activities in a Calcareous 
Soil Spiked With Cadmium. Appl. Soil Ecol. 2014, 75, 33–42. 
Agrahari S.; Dubey A. Nanoparticles in Plant Growth and Development. In Biogenic Nano￾Particles and Their Use in Agro-Ecosystems; Ghorbanpour, M., Bhargava, P., Varma, A., 
Choudhary, D., Eds.; Singapore: Springer, 2020; pp 9–37.
Ahmad, H. R.; Zia-ur-Rehman, M.; Sohail, M. I.; ul Haq, M. A.; Khalid, H.; Ayub, M. A.; 
Ishaq, G. Effects of Rare Earth Oxide Nanoparticles on Plants. In Nanomaterials in plants, 
algae, and microorganisms. Academic Press: Pittsburgh, 2018; pp 239–275. 
Aitola, K.; Zhang, J.; Vlachopoulos, N.; Halme, J.; Kaskela, A.; Nasibulin, A. G.; Kauppinen, 
E. I.; Boschloo, G.; Hagfeldt, A. Carbon Nanotube Film Replacing Silver in High￾Efficiency Solid-State Dye Solar Cells Employing Polymer Hole Conductor. J. Solid State 
Electrochem. 2015, 19, 3139–3144. 
Akasaka, T.; Watari, F. Capture of Bacteria by Flexible Carbon Nanotubes. Acta Biomater. 
2009, 5, 607–612. Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 111
Akhavan, O.; Ghaderi, E. Toxicity of Graphene and Graphene Oxide Nanowalls Against 
Bacteria. ACS Nano. 2010, 4, 5731–5736. 
Alarifi, S.; Ali, D.; Alkahtani, S. Mechanistic Investigation of Toxicity of Chromium Oxide 
Nanoparticles in Murine Fibrosarcoma Cells. Int. J. Nanomed. 2016, 11, 1253–1259. 
Ali, J.; Ali, N.; Wang, L.; Waseem, H.; Pan, G. Revisiting the Mechanistic Pathways for 
Bacterial Mediated Synthesis of Noble Metal Nanoparticles. J. Microbiol. Meth. 2019, 159,
18–25.
Altantuya, S. Transport and Aggregation Behavior of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles in the Natural 
Soil and Water Environment. Doctoral Dissertation, Zhejiang Gongshang University, 2015.
Annamalai, A.; Christina, V. L. P.; Sudha, D.; Kalpana, M.; Lakshmi, P. T. V. Green Synthesis, 
Characterization and Antimicrobial Activity of Au NPs Using Euphorbia hirta L. Leaf 
Extract. Coll. Surfaces B Biointer. 2013, 108, 60–65. 
Antisari, L. V.; Carbone, S.; Gatti, A.; Vianello, G.; Nannipieri, P. Toxicity of Metal Oxide 
(CeO2
, Fe3
O4
, SnO2
) Engineered Nanoparticles on Soil Microbial Biomass and Their 
Distribution in Soil. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2013, 60, 87–94. 
Artursson, V.; Finlay, R. D.; Jansson, J. K. Interactions Between Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Fungi and Bacteria and Their Potential for Stimulating Plant Growth. Environ. Microbiol. 
2006, 8, 1–10. 
Asadishad, B.; Chahal, S.; Akbari, A.; Cianciarelli, V.; Azodi, M.; Ghoshal, S.; Tufenkji, N. 
Amendment of Agricultural Soil With Metal Nanoparticles: Effects on Soil Enzyme Activity 
and Microbial Community Composition. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2018, 52, 1908–1918. 
Avanasi, R.; Jackson, W. A.; Sherwin, B.; Mudge, J. F.; Anderson, T. A. C60 Fullerene Soil 
Sorption, Biodegradation, and Plant Uptake. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48, 2792–2797.
Avio, L.; Pellegrino, E.; Bonarim, E.; Giovannetti, M. Functional Diversity of Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizal Fungal Isolates in Relation to Extra-Tadical Mycelial Networks. New Phytol. 
2006, 172, 347–357. 
Awad, M. A.; Eisa, N. E.; Virk, P.; Hendi, A. A.; Ortashi, K. M. O. O.; Mahgoub, A. S. 
A.; Elobeid, M. A.; Eissa, F. Z. Green Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles: Preparation, 
Characterization, Cytotoxicity, and Anti-Bacterial Activities. Mat. Lett. 2019, 256, 126608.
Baek, Y.-W.; An, Y.-J. Microbial Toxicity of Metal Oxide Nanoparticles (CuO, NiO, ZnO, and 
Sb2
O3
) to Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and Streptococcus aureus. Sci. Total Environ. 
2011, 409, 1603–1608. 
Balasubramanian, S.; Kala, S. M. J.; Pushparaj, T. L. Biogenic Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles 
Using Jasminum auriculatum Leaf Extract and Their Catalytic, Antimicrobial and 
Anticancer Activities. J. Drug Deliv. Sci. Technol. 2020, 57, 101620. 
Bandyopadhyay, S.; Peralta-Videa, J. R.; Plascencia-Villa, G.; Jose-Yacaman, M.; Gardea￾Torresdey, J. L. Comparative Toxicity Assessment of CeO2
 and ZnO Nanoparticles Towards 
Sinorhizobium meliloti, A Symbiotic Alfalfa Associated Bacterium, Use of Advanced 
Microscopic and Spectroscopic Techniques. J. Hazard. Mater. 2012, 241, 379–386.
Bastida, F.; Kandeler, E.; Moreno, J. L.; Ros, M.; García, C.; Hernández, T. Application 
of Fresh and Composted Organic Wastes Modifies Structure, Size and Activity of Soil 
Microbial Community Under Semiarid Climate. Appl. Soil Ecol. 2008, 40, 318–329. 
Baughman, R. H.; Zakhidov, A. A.; Heer, W. A. D. Carbon Nanotubes—The Route Toward 
Applications. Science 2002, 5582, 787–792. 
Beddow, J.; Stolpe, B.; Cole, P.; Lead, J. R.; Sapp, M.; Lyons, B. P., Colbeck, I.; Whitby, C. 
Effects of Engineered Silver Nanoparticles on the Growth and Activity of Ecologically 
Important Microbes. Environ. Microbiol. Rep. 2014, 6, 448–458. 112 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Bellani, L.; Siracusa, G.; Giorgetti, L.; Di Gregorio, S.; Castiglione, M. R.; Spanò, C.; 
Muccifora, S.; Bottega, S.; Pini, R.; Tassi, E.TiO2
 Nanoparticles in a Biosolid-Amended 
Soil and Their Implication in Soil Nutrients, Microorganisms and Pisum sativum Nutrition. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020, 190, 110095. 
Bernard, L.; Maron, P. A.; Mougel, C.; Nowak, V.; Leveque, J.; Marol, C.; Balesdent, J.; 
Gibiat, F.; Ranjard, L. Contamination of Soil by Copper Affects the Dynamics, Diversity, 
and Activity of Soil Bacterial Communities Involved in Wheat Decomposition and Carbon 
Storage. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2009, 75, 7565–7569.
Berry, T. D.; Filley, T. R.; Clavijo, A. P.; Bischoff Gray, M.; Turco, R. Degradation and 
Microbial Uptake of C60 Fullerols in Contrasting Agricultural Soils. Environ. Sci. Technol. 
2017, 51, 1387–1394. 
Blagodatskaya, E.; Blagodatsky, S.; Dorodnikow, M.; Kuzyakov, Y. Elevated Atmospheric 
CO2
 Increases Microbial Growth Rates in Soil: Results of Three CO2
 Enrichment 
Experiments. Global Change Biol. 2010, 16, 836–848. 
Blaise, C.; Gagne, F.; Ferard, J. F.; Eullaffroy, P. Ecotoxicity of Selected Nano-Materials to 
Aquatic Organisms. Environ. Toxicol. 2008, 23, 591–598. 
Boenigk, J.; Wiedlroither, A.; Pfandl, K. Heavy Metal Toxicity and Bioavailability of 
Dissolved Nutrients to a Bacterivorous Flagellate are Linked to Suspended Particle Physical 
Properties. Aq. Toxicol. 2005, 71, 249–259. 
Bonfante, P.; Anca, I. A. Plants, Mycorrhizal Fungi, and Bacteria: A Network of Interactions. 
Ann. Rev. Microbiol. 2009, 63, 363–383. 
Brabcová, V.; Štursová, M.; Baldrian, P. Nutrient Content Affects the Turnover of Fungal 
Biomass in Forest Topsoil and the Composition of Associated Microbial Communities. Soil 
Biol. Biochem. 2018, 118, 187–198. 
Brady-Estevez, A. S.; Kang, S.; Elimelech, M. A Single-Walled-Carbon-Nanotube Filter for 
Removal of Viral and Bacterial Pathogens. Small 2008, 4, 481–484. 
Burke, D. J.; Pietrasiak, N.; Situ, S. F.; Abenojar, E. C.; Porche, M.; Kraj, P.; Lakliang, Y.; 
Samia, A. C. S. Iron Oxide and Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticle Effects on Plant Performance 
and Root Associated Microbes. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2015, 16, 23630–23650. 
Buszewski, B.; Railean-Plugaru, V.; Pomastowski, P.; Rafińska, K.; Szultka-Mlynska, M.; 
Golinska, P.; Wypij, M.; Laskowski, D.; Dahm, H. Antimicrobial Activity of Biosilver 
Nanoparticles Produced by a Novel Streptacidiphilus durhamensis strain. J. Microbiol. 
Immunol. Infect. 2018, 51, 45–54. 
Cai, F.; Wu, X.; Zhang, H.; Shen, X.; Zhang, M.; Chen, W.; Gao, Q.; White, J. C.; Tao, 
S.; Wang, X. Impact of TiO2
 Nanoparticles on Lead Uptake and Bioaccumulation in Rice 
(Oryza sativa L.). Nano Impact 2017, 5, 101–108. 
Camenzind, T.; Hättenschwiler, S.; Treseder, K. K.; Lehmann, A.; Rillig, M. C. Nutrient 
Limitation of Soil Microbial Processes in Tropical Forests. Ecol. Monographs 2018, 88,
4–21. 
Cao, J.; Feng, Y.; Lin, X.; Wang, J. A Beneficial Role of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi in 
Influencing the Effects of Silver Nanoparticles on Plant-Microbe Systems in a Soil Matrix. 
Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020, 27, 11782–11796.
Carrillo, Y.; Dijkstra, F.; LeCain, D.; Blumenthal, D.; Pendall, E. Elevated CO2
 and Warming 
Cause Interactive Effects on Soil Carbon and Shifts in Carbon Use by Bacteria. Ecol. Lett. 
2018, 21, 1639–1648. Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 113
Chauhan, R.; Kumar, A.; Abraham, J. A Biological Aproach to the Synthesis of Silver 
Nanoparticles With Streptomyces sp JAR1 and its Antimicrobial Activity. Sci. Pharm. 2013, 
81, 607–624. 
Chen, M.; Qin, X.; Zeng, G. Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Release Affects the Microbial 
Enzyme-Catalyzed Oxidation Processes of Organic Pollutants and Lignin Model 
Compounds in Nature. Chemosphere 2016, 163, 217–226. 
Chen, M.; Qin, X.; Zeng, G. Biodegradation of Carbon Nanotubes, Graphene, and Their 
Derivatives. Trends Biotechnol. 2017, 35, 836–846. 
Chen, M.; Sun, Y.; Liang, J.; Zeng, G.; Li, Z.; Tang, L.; Zhu, Y.; Jiang, D.; Song, B. 
Understanding the Influence of Carbon Nanomaterials on Microbial Communities. Environ. 
Int. 2019, 126, 690–698. 
Chen, M.; Zhou, S.; Zhu, Y.; Sun, Y.; Zeng, G.; Yang, C.; Xu, P.; Yan, M.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, W. 
Toxicity of Carbon Nanomaterials to Plants, Animals and Microbes, Recent Progress From 
2015-Present. Chemosphere 2018, 206, 255–264. 
Cherchi, C.; Gu, A. Z. Impact of Titanium Dioxide Nanomaterials on Nitrogen Fixation Rate 
and Intracellular Nitrogen Storage in Anabaena variabilis. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2010, 44,
8302–8307.
Chung, H.; Son, Y.; Yoon, T. K.; Kim, S.; Kim, W. The Effect of Multi-Walled Carbon 
Nanotubes on Soil Microbial Activity. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2011, 74, 569–575. 
Clément, L.; Hurel, C.; Marmier, N. Toxicity of TiO2
 Nanoparticles to Cladocerans, Algae, 
Rotifers and Plants – Effects of Size and Crystalline Structure. Chemosphere 2013, 90,
1083–1090. 
Coll, C.; Notter, D.; Gottschalk, F.; Sun, T.; Som, C.; Nowack, B. Probabilistic Environmental 
Risk Assessment of Five Nanomaterials (nano-TiO2
, nano-Ag, nano-ZnO, CNT, and 
fullerenes). Nanotoxicology 2016, 10, 4.
Concha-Guerrero, S. I.; Brito, E. M. S.; Piñón-Castillo, H. A.; Tarango-Rivero, S. H.; Caretta, 
C. A.; Luna-Velasco, A.; Duran, R.; Orrantia-Borunda, E. Effect of CuO Nanoparticles 
Over Isolated Bacterial Strains From Agricultural Soil. J. Nanomater. 2014, 13, (2014). 
Conner, S. D.; Schmid, S. L. Regulated Portals of Entry into the Cell. Nature 2003, 422,
37–44. 
Conway, J. R.; Keller, A. A. Gravity-Driven Transport of Three Engineered Nanoparticles in 
Unsaturated Soils and Their Effects on Soil pH and Nutrient Release. Water Resour. 2016, 
98, 250–260. 
Cornejo, P.; Perez-Tienda, J.; Meier, S.; Valderas, A.; Borie, F.; Azcon-Aguilar, C.; Ferrol, N. 
Copper Compartmentalization in Spores as a Survival Strategy of Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Fungi in Cu-Polluted Environments. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2013, 57, 925–928. 
Dai, J.; Becquer, T.; Rouiller, J. H.; Reversat, G.; Bernhard-Reversat, F.; Lavelle, P. Influence 
of Heavy Metals on C and N Mineralisation and Microbial Biomass in Zn-, Pb-, Cu-, and 
Cd-Contaminated Soils. Appl. Soil Ecol. 2004, 25, 99–109. 
Daims, H.; Nielsen, J. L.; Nielsen, P. H.; Schleifer, K. H.; Wagner, M. In situ Characterization 
of Nitrospira-Like Nitrite Oxidizing Bacteria Active in Wastewater Treatment Plants. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiology 2001, 67, 5273– 5284.
D’Archivio, A. A.; Maggi, M. A.; Odoardi, A.; Santucci, S.; Passacantando, M. Adsorption 
of Triazine Herbicides From Aqueous Solution by Functionalized Multiwall Carbon 
Nanotubes Grown on Silicon Substrate. Nanotechnology 2018, 29, 065701.
David, W. I. F.; Ibberson, R. M.; Dennis, T. J. S.; Hare, J. P.; Prassides, K. Structural Phase 
Transitions in the Fullerene C60. Europhys. Lett. 1992, 18, 219. 114 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Dhas, S. P.; Shiny, P. J.; Khan, S. S.; Mukherjee, A.; Chandrasekaran, N. Toxic Behavior 
of Silver and Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles on Environmental Microorganisms. J. Basic 
Microbiol. 2013, 54, 916–927
Diagne, N.; Baudoin, E.; Svistoonoff, S.; Ouattara, C.; Diouf, D.; Kane, A.; Ndiaye, C.; Noba, 
K.; Bogusz, D.; Franche, C.; Duponnois, R. Effect of Native and Allochthonous Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizal Fungi on Casuarina equisetifolia Growth and its Root Bacterial Community. 
Arid Land Res. Manag. 2018, 32, 212–228. 
Dimkpa, C. O.; McLean, J. E.; Britt, D. W.; Anderson, A. J. Antifungal Activity of ZnO 
Nanoparticles and Their Interactive Effect With a Biocontrol Bacterium on Growth 
Antagonism of the Plant Pathogen, Fusarium graminearum. Bio Metals 2013, 26, 913–924. 
Dimpka, C. O. Can Nanotechnology Deliver the Promised Benefits Without Negatively 
Impacting Soil Microbial Life? J. Basic Microbiol. 2014, 54, 889–904. 
Dimpka, C. O.; McLean, J. E.; Britt, D. W.; Anderson, A. J. Nano-CuO and Interaction With 
Nano-ZnO or Soil Bacterium Provide Evidence for the Interference of Nanoparticles in 
Metal Nutrition of Plants. Ecotoxicology 2015, 24, 119–129. 
Dinesh, R.; Anandaraj, M.; Srinivasan, V.; Hamza, S. Engineered Nanoparticles in the Soil 
and Their Potential Implications to Microbial Activity. Geoderma 2012,173–174, 19–27. 
Du, S.; Zhang, P.; Zhang, R.; Lu, Q.; Liu, L.; Bao, X.; Liu, H. Reduced Graphene Oxide 
Induces Cytotoxicity and Inhibits Photosynthetic Performance of the Green Alga 
Scenedesmus obliquus. Chemosphere 2016, 164, 499–507. 
Dubchak, S.; Ogar, A.; Mietelski, J. W.; Turnau, K. Influence of Silver and Titanium 
Nanoparticles on Arbuscular Mycorrhiza Colonization and Accumulation of Radio￾Caesium in Helianthus annuus. Spanish J. Agri. Res. 2010, 8, 103–108. 
Ekelund, F.; Olsson, S.; Johansen, A. Changes in the Succession and Diversity of Protozoan 
and Microbial Populations in Soil Spiked With a Range of Copper Concentrations. Soil 
Biol. Biochem. 2003, 35, 1507–1516. 
Fan, X.; Xu, J.; Lavoie, M.; Peijnenburg, W.; Zhu, Y.; Lu, T.; Fu, Z.; Zhu, T.; Qian, H. 
Multiwall Carbon Nanotubes Modulate Paraquat Toxicity in Arabidopsis thaliana. Environ. 
Pollut. 2018, 233, 633–641. 
Fang, T.; Watson, J. L.; Goodman, J.; Dimkpa, C. O.; Martineau, N.; Das, S.; McLean, J. 
E.; Britt, D. W.; Anderson, A. J. Does Doping With Aluminum Alter the Effects of ZnO 
Nanoparticles on the Metabolism of Soil Pseudomonads? Microbiol. Res. 2013, 168, 91–98. 
Feng, Y. Z.; Cui, X. C.; He, S. Y.; Dong, G.; Chen, M.; Wang, J. H.; Lin, X. The Role of 
Metal Nanoparticles in Influencing Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Effects on Plant Growth. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 9496–9504.
Folorunso, A.; Akintelu, S.; Oyebamiji, A. K.; Ajayi, S.; Abiola, B.; Abdusalam, I.; Morakinyo, 
A. Biosynthesis, Characterization and Antimicrobial Activity of Gold Nanoparticles From 
Leaf Extracts of Annona muricata. J. Nanostruct. Chem. 2019, 9, 111–117. 
Frenk, S.; Ben-Moshe, T.; Dror, I.; Berkowitz, B.; Minz, D. Effect of Metal Oxide Nanoparticles 
on Microbial Community Structure and Function in Two Different Soil Types. PLoS One
2013, 8, e84441.
Gajjar, P.; Pettee, B.; Britt, D. W.; Huang, W. J.; Johnson, W. P.; Anderson, A. J. Antimicrobial 
Activities of Commercial Nanoparticles Against an Environmental Soil Microbe, 
Pseudomonas putida KT2440. J. Biol. Eng. 2009, 3, 9.
Gallo, A.; Manfra, L.; Boni, R.; Rotini, A.; Migliore, L.; Tosti, E. Cytotoxicity and Genotoxicity 
of CuO Nanoparticles in Sea Urchin Spermatozoa Through Oxidative Stress. Environ. Int. 
2018, 118, 325−333.Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 115
Gámiz, B.; Velarde, P.; Spokas, K. A.; Cox, L. Dynamic Effect of Fresh and Aged Biochar 
on the Behavior of the Herbicide Mesotrione in Soils. J. Agri. Food Chem. 2019, 67,
9450−9459.
Gao, X.; Rodrigues, S. M.; Spielman-Sun, E.; Lopes, S.; Rodrigues, S.; Zhang, Y.; Avellan, 
A.; Duarte, R. M. B. O.; Duarte, A.; Casman, E. A.; Lowry, G. V. Effect of Soil Organic 
Matter, Soil pH, and Moisture Content on Solubility and Dissolution Rate of CuO NPs in 
Soil. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019, 53, 4959−4967.
Gasparatos, D. Sequestration of heavy metals from soil with Fe-Mn concretions and nodules.
Environ. Chem. Letters2013,11, 1–9. 
Ge, Y.; Priester, J.H.; Mortimer, M.; Chang, C.H.; Ji, Z.; Schimel, J.P.; Holden, P.A. Long￾term effects of multiwalled carbon nanotubes and graphene on microbial communities in 
dry soil.Environ.Sci. Technol.2016,50, 3965–3974.
Ge, Y.; Priester, J. H.; van de Werfhorst, L. C.; Walker, S. L.; Nisbet, R. M.; An, Y.-J.; 
Schimel, J. P.; Gardea-Torresdey, J. L.; Holden, P. A. Soybean Plants Modify Metal Oxide 
Nanoparticle Effects on Soil Bacterial Communities. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2014, 48,
13489–13496. 
Ge, Y.; Schimel, J. P.; Holden, P. A. Identification of Soil Bacteria Susceptible to TiO2
 and 
ZnO Nanoparticles. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2012, 78, 6749e6758.
Ge, Y.; Shen, C.; Wang, Y.; Sun, Y. Q.; Schimel, J. P.; Gardea-Torresdey, J. L.; Holden, P. A. 
Carbonaceous Nanomaterials Have Higher Effects on Soybean Rhizosphere Prokaryotic 
Communities During the Reproductive Growth Phase Than During Vegetative Growth. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2018, 52, 6636–6646.
Ge, Y. G.; Schimel, J. P.; Holden, P. A. Evidence for Negative Effects of TiO2
 and ZnO 
Nanoparticles on Soil Bacterial Communities. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45, 1659–1664. 
Geisler-Lee, J.; Wang, Q.; Yao, Y.; Zhang, W.; Geisler, M.; Li, K.; Huang, Y.; Chen, Y.; 
Kolmakov, A.; Ma, X. Phytotoxicity, Accumulation and Transport of Silver Nano-Particles 
by Arabidopsis thaliana. Nanotoxicology 2012, 7, 323–337. 
Gharbi, N.; Pressac, M.; Hadchouel, M.; Szwarc, H.; Wilson, S. R.; Moussa, F. (60) Fullerene 
is a Powerful Antioxidant In Vivo With no Acute or Subacute Toxicity. Nano Lett. 2005, 5, 
2578–2585. 
Giannousi, K.; Avramidis, I.; Dendrinou-Samara, C. Synthesis, Characterization and 
Evaluation of Copper-Based Nanoparticles as Agrochemicals Against Phytophthora 
infestans. RSC Adv. 2013, 3, 21743.
Giorgetti, L.; Spanò, C.; Muccifora, S.; Bellani, L.; Tassi, E.; Bottega, S.; Di Gregorio, 
S.; Siracusa, G.; Sanità di Toppi, L.; Ruffini Castiglione, M. An Integrated Approach 
to Highlight Biological Responses of Pisum sativum Root to Nano-TiO2
 Exposure in a 
Biosolid-Amended Agricultural Soil. Sci. Total Environ. 2019, 650, 2705–2716. 
Gitipour, A.; El Badawy, A.; Arambewela, M.; Miller, B.; Scheckel, K.; Elk, M.; Ryu, 
H.; Gomez-Alvarez, V.; Domingo, J. S.; Thiel, S.; Tolaymat, T. The Impact of Silver 
Nanoparticles on the Composting of Municipal Solid Waste. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 
47, 14385–14393. 
Glassop, D.; Smith, S. E.; Smith, F. W. Cereal Phosphate Transporters Associated With the 
Mycorrhizal Pathway of Phosphate Uptake into Roots. Planta 2005, 222, 688–698. 
Gogos, A.; Moll, J.; Klingenfuss, F.; van der Heijden, M.; Irin, F.; Green, M.; Zenobi, R.; 
Bucheli, T. Vertical Transport and Plant Uptake of Nanoparticles in a Soil Mesocosm 
Experiment. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2016,14. 116 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Gómez-Sagasti, M. T.; Epelde, L.; Anza, M.; Urra, J.; Alkorta, I.; Garbisu, C. The Impact of 
Nanoscale Zero-Valent Iron Particles on Soil Microbial Communities is Soil Dependent. J. 
Hazard. Mater. 2019, 364, 591–599. 
Goyal, D.; Zhang, X. J.; Rooney-Varga, J. N. Impacts of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes 
on Microbial Community Structure in Activated Sludge. Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 2010, 51,
428–435. 
Gruère, G.; Narrod, C.; Abbott, L. Agricultural, Food, and Water Nanotechnologies for the 
Poor. International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, 2011.
Grün, A. L.; Manz, W.; Kohl, Y. L.; Meier, F.; Straskraba, S.; Jost, C.; Drexel, R.; Emmerling, 
C. Impact of Silver Nanoparticles (AgNP) on Soil Microbial Community Depending on 
Functionalization, Concentration, Exposure Time, and Soil Texture. Environ. Sci. Eur.
2019, 31, 15. 
Guan, Z.; Breazeale, S. D.; Raetz, C. R. H. Extraction and Identification by Mass Spectrometry 
of Undecaprenyl Diphosphate-MurNAc-pentapeptide-GlcNAc From Escherichia coli. 
Analyt. Biochem. 2005, 345, 336–339. 
Guilger, M.; Pasquoto-Stigliani, T.; Bilesky-Jose, N.; Grillo, R.; Abhilash, P. C.; Fraceto, L. 
F.; De Lima, R. Biogenic Silver Nanoparticles Based on Trichoderma harzianum Synthesis, 
Characterization, Toxicity Evaluation and Biological Activity. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 44421.
Guldi, D. M.; Prato, M. Excited-State Properties of C60 Fullerene Derivatives. Acc. Chem. 
Res. 2000, 33, 695–703. 
Gupta, P.; Diwan, B. Bacterial Exopolysaccharide Mediated Heavy Metal Removal: A 
Review on Biosynthesis, Mechanism and Remediation Strategies. Biotechnol. Rep. 2017, 
13, 58–71. 
Hai, R.; Wang, Y.; Wang, X.; Du, Z.; Li, Y. Impacts of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes on 
Nutrient Removal From Wastewater and Bacterial Community Structure in Activated 
Sludge. PLoS One 2014, 9, e107345.
Hajipour, M. J.; Fromm, K. M.; Ashkarran, A. A.; de Aberasturi, D. J.; de Larramendi, I. 
R.; Rojo, T.; Serpooshan, V.; Parak, W. J.; Mahmoudi, M. Antibacterial Properties of 
Nanoparticles. Trends Biotechnol. 2012, 30, 499–511. 
Hamidat, M.; Barakat, M.; Ortet, P.; Chaneac, C.; Rose, J.; Bottero, J.-Y.; Bottero, J. Y.; 
Heulin, T.; Achouak, W.; Santaella, C. Design Defines the Effects of Nanoceria at a Low 
Dose on Soil Microbiota and the Potentiation of Impacts by the Canola Plant. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 2016, 50, 6892–6901.
Hanna, S. K.; Miller, R. J.; Zhou, D.; Keller, A. A.; Lenihan, H. S. Accumulation and Toxicity 
of Metal Oxide Nanoparticles in a Soft Sediment Estuarine Amphipod. Aq. Toxicol. 2013, 
143, 441–446. 
Hänsch, M.; Emmerling, C. Effects of Silver Nanoparticles on the Microbiota and Enzyme 
Activity in Soil. J. Plant Nut. Soil Sci. 2010, 173, 554–558. 
Hao, Y.; Ma, C.; Zhang, Z.; Song, Y.; Cao, W.; Guo, J.; Zhou, G.; Rui, Y.; Liu, L.; Xing, B. 
Carbon Nanomaterials Alter Plant Physiology and Soil Bacterial Community Composition 
in a Rice-Soil-Bacterial Ecosystem. Environ. Pollut. 2018, 232, 123–136. 
Haris, Z.; Ahmad, I. Impact of Metal Oxide Nanoparticles on Beneficial Soil Microorganisms 
and their Secondary Metabolites. Int. J. Life Sci. Scien. Res. 2017, 3, 1020–1030. 
He, L.; Liu, Y.; Mustapha, Z.; Lin, M. Antifungal Activity of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles 
Against Botrytis cinerea and Penicillium expansum. Microbiol. Res. 2012, 166, 207–215. Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 117
He, S. Y.; Feng, Y. Z.; Ni, J.; Sun, Y. F.; Xue, L. H.; Feng, Y. F.; Yu, Y. L.; Lin, X. G.; Yang, 
L. Z. Different Responses of Soil Microbial Metabolic Activity to Silver and Iron Oxide 
Nanoparticles. Chemosphere 2016, 147, 195–202. 
Hemala, L.; Zhang, D.; Margesin, R. Cold-Active Antibacterial and Antifungal Activities 
and Antibiotic Resistance of Bacteria Isolated From an Alpine Hydrocarbon-Contaminated 
Industrial Site. Res. Microbiol. 2014, 165, 447–456. 
Hu, Z.; Xu, M.; Shen, Z.; Yu, J. C. A Nanostructured Chromium (III) Oxide/Tungsten(VI) 
Oxide p-n Junction Photoanode Toward Enhanced Efficiency for Water Oxidation. J. 
Mater. Chem. A. 2015, 3, 14046–14053. 
Huang, Y. C.; Fan, R.; Grusak, M. A.; Sherrier, J. D.; Huang, C. P. Effects of Nano-ZnO on 
the Agronomically Relevant Rhizobium-Legume Symbiosis. Sci. Total Environ. 2014, 497,
78–90. 
Ianeva, O. D. Mechanisms of Bacteria Resistance to Heavy Metals. Mikrobiolohichnyĭ 
zhurnal 1993, 71, 54–65.
Ingle, A. P.; Duran, N.; Rai, M. Bioactivity, Mechanism of Action, and Cytotoxicity of Copper￾Based Nanoparticles: A Review. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2014, 98, 1001–1009. 
Isakovic, A.; Markovic, Z.; Todorovic-Markovic, B.; Nikolic, N.; Vranjes-Djuric, S.; 
Mirkovic, M.; Dramicanin, M.; Harhaji, L.; Raicevic, N.; Nikolic, Z.; Trajkovic, V. Distinct 
Cytotoxic Mechanisms of Pristine Versus Hydroxylated Fullerene. Toxicol. Sci. 2006, 91,
173–183. 
Jain, R.; Matassa, S.; Singh, S.; van Hullebusch, E. D.; Esposito. G.; Lens, P. N. Reduction 
of Selenite to Elemental Selenium Nanoparticles by Activated Sludge. Environ. Sci. Pollut. 
Res. Int. 2016, 23, 1193–1202. 
Jayaseelan, C.; Rahuman, A. A.; Kirthi, A. V.; Marimuthu, S.; Santhoshkumar, T.; Bagavan, 
A.; Gaurav, K.; Karthik, L.; Bhaskara Rao, K. V. Novel Microbial Route to Synthesize 
ZnO Nanoparticles Using Aeromonas Hydrophila and Their Activity Against Pathogenic 
Bacteria and Fungi. Spectrochim. Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 2012, 90, 78–84. 
Jiang, W.; Mashayekhi, H.; Xing, B. Bacterial Toxicity Comparison Between Nano and 
Micro-Scaled Oxide Particles. Environ. Pollut. 2009, 157, 1619–1625.
Jiling, C.; Youzhi, F.; Xiangui, L.; Junhua, W. Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Alleviate the 
Negative Effects of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles on Bacterial Community in Rhizospheric 
Soils. Front. Environ. Sci. 2016, 4, 10.
Jin, L.; Son, Y.; DeForest, J. L.; Kang, Y. J.; Kim, W.; Chung, H. Single-Walled Carbon 
Nanotubes Alter Soil Microbial Community Composition. Sci. Total Environ. 2014, 
466–467, 533–538.
Johansen, A.; Pedersen, A.; Jensen, K. A.; Karlson, U.; Hansen, B. M.; Scott-Fordsmand, J. 
J.; Winding, A. Effects of C60 Fullerene Nanoparticles on Soil Bacterial and Protozoans. 
Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2008, 27, 1895–1903. 
Jośko, I.; Oleszczuk, P.; Skwarek, E. The Bioavailability and Toxicity of ZnO and Ni 
Nanoparticles and Their Bulk Counterparts in Different Sediments. J. Soils Sed. 2016, 16,
1798–1808. 
Judy, J. D.; Kirby, J. K.; McLaughlin, M. J.; Cavagnaro, T.; Bertsch, P. M. Gold Nanomaterial 
Uptake From Soil is not Increased by Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Colonization of Solanum 
lycopersicum (Tomato). Nanomaterials 2016, 6, 68.
Kairyte, K.; Kadys, A.; Luksiene, Z. Antibacterial and Antifungal Activity of Photoactivated 
ZnO Nanoparticles in Suspension. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 2013, 128, 78–84. 118 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Kang, S. A.; Li, W.; Lee, H. E.; Phillips, B. L.; Lee, Y. J. Phosphate Uptake by TiO2
: Batch 
Studies and NMR Spectroscopic Evidence for Multisite Adsorption. J. Coll. Int. Sci. 2011, 
364, 455–461. 
Karlsson, H. L.; Gustafsson, J.; Cronholm, P.; Möller, L. Size Dependent Toxicity of Metal 
Oxide Particles–a Comparison Between Nano- and Micrometer Size. Toxicol. Lett. 2009, 
188, 112–118. 
Karunakaran, G.; Suriyaprabha, R.; Manivasakan, P.; Rajendran, V.; Kannan, N. Influence 
of Nano and Bulk SiO2
 and Al2
O3
 Particles on PGPR and Soil Nutrient Contents. Curr. 
Nanosci. 2014, 10, 604–612. 
Kashyap, P. L.; Xiang, X.; Heiden, P. Chitosan Nanoparticle-Based Delivery Systems for 
Sustainable Agriculture. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2015, 77, 36–51. 
Kerfahi, D.; Tripathi, B. M.; Singh, D.; Kim, H.; Lee, S.; Lee, J.; Adams, J. M. Effects of 
Functionalized and Raw Multi-Walled Carbon Nanotubes on Soil Bacterial Community 
Composition. PLoS One 2015, 10, e0123042.
Khan, S. T.; Ahmad, J.; Ahamed, M.; Jousset, A. Sub-lethal Doses of Widespread Nanoparticles 
Promote Antifungal Activity in Pseudomonas Protegens CHA0. Sci. Total Environ. 2018, 
627, 658–662. 
Khare, P.; Sonane, M.; Nagar, Y.; Moin, N.; Ali, S.; Gupta, K. C.; Satish, A. Size Dependent 
Toxicity of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles in Soil Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. 
Nanotoxicology 2015, 9, 423–432. 
Kim, D. H.; Park, J. C.; Jeon, G. E.; Kim, C. S.; Seo, J. H. Effect of the Size and Shape of 
Silver Nanoparticles on Bacterial Growth and Metabolism by Monitoring Optical Density 
and Fluorescence Intensity. Biotechnol. Bioproc. Eng. 2017, 22, 210–217. 
Kreyling, W. G.; Semmler-Behnke, M.; Möller, W. Health Implications of Nanoparticles. J. 
Nanopart. Res. 2006, 8, 543–562. 
Kroto, H. W.; Heath, J. R.; O’Brien, S. C.; Curl, R. F.; Smalley, R. E. C60. Buckminsterfullerene. 
Nature 1985, 318, 162–163. 
Krysanov, E. Y.; Pavlov, D. S.; Demidova, T. B.; Dgebuadze, Y. Y. Effect of Nano-Particles on 
Aquatic Organisms. Biol. Bull. 2010, 37, 406–412. 
Kumar, D.; Rajeshwari, A.; Jadon, P. S.; Chaudhuri, G.; Mukherjee, A.; Chandrasekaran, N.; 
Mukherjee, A. Cytogenetic Studies of Chromium (III) Oxide Nanoparticles on allium cepa
Root Tip Cells. J. Environ. Sci. 2015, 38, 150–157. 
Kurapati, R.; Russier, J.; Squillaci, M. A.; Treossi, E.; Menard-Moyon, C.; Del Rio-Castillo, 
A. E.; Vazquez, E.; Samori, P.; Palermo, V.; Bianco, A. Dispersibility-Dependent 
Biodegradation of Graphene Oxide by Myeloperoxidase. Small 2015, 11, 3985–3994. 
Lakshmi, J. V.; Sharath, R.; Chandraprabha, M. N.; Neelufar, E.; Abhishikta, H.; Malyasree, 
P. Synthesis, Characterization and Evaluation of Antimicrobial Activity of Zinc Oxide 
Nanoparticles. J. Biochem. Technol. 2012, 3, S151–S154.
Lamsal, K.; Kim, S.-W.; Jung, J. H.; Kim, Y. S.; Kim, K. S.; Lee, Y. S. Inhibitions Effects of 
Silver Nanoparticles Against Powdery Mildews on Cucumber and Pumpkin. Mycobiology 
2011, 39, 26–232. 
Lanphere, J. D.; Luth, C. J.; Walker, S. L. Effects of Solution Chemistry on the Transport of 
Graphene Oxide in Saturated Porous Media. Environ. Sci.Technol. 2013, 47, 4255–4261.
Laux, P.; Riebeling, C.; Booth, A. M.; Brain, J. D.; Brunner, J.; Cerrillo, C.; Creutzenberg, 
O.; Estrela-Lopis, I.; Gebel, T.; Johanson, G.; Jungnickel, H.; Kock, H.; Tentschert, J.; Tlili, 
A.; Schäffer, A.; Sips, A. J. A. M.; Yokel, R. A.; Luch, A. Challenges in Characterizing Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 119
the Environmental Fate and Effects of Carbon Nanotubes and Inorganic Nanomaterials in 
Aquatic Systems. Environ. Sci. Nano. 2018, 5, 48–63. 
Hao, Y.; Ma, C.; Zhang, Z.; Song, Y.; Cao, W.; Guo, J.; Zhou, G.; Rui, Y.; Liu, L.; Xing, B. 
Carbon Nanomaterials Alter Plant Physiology and Soil Bacterial Community Composition 
in a Rice-Soil-Bacterial Ecosystem. Environ. Pollut. 2018, 232, 123–136.
Lawrence, J. R.; Swerhone, G. D. W.; Dynes, J. J.; Hitchcock, A. P.; Korber, D. R. Complex 
Organic Corona Formation on Carbon Nanotubes Reduces Microbial Toxicity by 
Suppressing Reactive Oxygen Species Production. Environ. Sci. Nano 2016, 3, 181–189. 
Leff, J. W.; Jones, S. E.; Prober, S. M.; Barberan, A.; Borer, E. T.; Firn, J. L.; Harpole, W. 
S.; Hobbie, S. E.; Hofmockel, K. S.; Knops, J. M. Consistent Responses of Soil Microbial 
Communities to Elevated Nutrient Inputs in Grasslands Across the Globe. Proc. Nat. Acad. 
Sci. 2015, 112, 10967–10972. 
Leone, L.; Ferri, D.; Manfredi, C.; Persson, P.; Shchukarev, A.; Sjoberg, S.; Loring, J. 
Modeling the Acid–Base Properties of Bacterial Surfaces: A Combined Spectroscopic 
and Potentiometric Study of the Gram-Positive Bacterium Bacillus Subtilis. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 2007, 41, 6465–6471.
Li, D.; Lyon, D. Y.; Li, Q.; Alvarez, P. J. J. Effect of Soil Sorption and Aquatic Natural Organic 
Matter on the Antibacterial Activity of a Fullerene Water Suspension. Environ. Toxicol. 
Chem. 2008, 27, 1888–1894. 
Li, Q.; Chen, X.; Zhuang, J.; Chen, X. Decontaminating Soil Organic Pollutants With 
Manufactured Nanoparticles. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2016, 23, 11533–11548. 
Li, X.; Rui, J.; Mao, Y.; Yannarell, A.; Mackie, R. Dynamics of the Bacterial Community 
Structure in the Rhizosphere of a Maize Cultivar. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2014, 68, 392–401. 
Li, X.; Zhang, Y.; Ding, C.; Jia, Z.; He, Z.; Zhang, T.; Wang, X. Declined Soil Suppressiveness 
to Fusarium Oxysporum by Rhizosphere Microflora of Cotton in Soil Sickness. Biol. Fert. 
Soils 2015, 51, 935–946. 
Lima e Silva, A. A. D.; Carvalho, M. A.; de Souza, S. A.; Dias, P. M. T.; Silva Filho, R. G. 
D.; Saramago, C. S.; Bento, C. A.; Hofer, E. Heavy Metal Tolerance (Cr, Ag, and Hg) in 
Bacteria Isolated From Sewage. Braz. J. Microbiol. 2012, 43, 1620–1631. 
Lindsay, W. L. Zinc in Soils and Plant Nutrition. In Advances in Agronomy; Brady, N. C., Ed.; 
Academic Press, 1972; pp 147–186. 
Liu, K.; Newman, M.; McInroy, J. A.; Hu, C. H.; Kloepper, J. W. Selection and Assessment 
of Plant Growth-Promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR) for Biological Control of Multiple Plant 
Diseases. Phytopathology 2017, 107, 928–936. 
Liu, Q.; Chen, B.; Wang, Q.; Shi, X.; Xiao, Z.; Lin, J.; Fang, X. Carbon Nanotubes as 
Molecular Transporters for Walled Plant Cells. Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 1007–1010. 
Liu, S.; Wei, L.; Hao, L.; Fang, N.; Chang, M. W.; Xu, R.; Yang, Y.; Chen, Y. Sharper and 
Faster “Nano Darts” Kill More Bacteria: A Study of Antibacterial Activity of Individually 
Dispersed Pristine Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube. ACS Nano 2009, 3, 3891–3902. 
Lofts, S.; Criel, P.; Janssen, C. R.; Lock, K.; McGrath, S. P.; Oorts, K.; Rooney, C. P.; 
Smolders, E.; Spurgeon, D. J.; Svendsen, C.; Eeckhout, H. V.; Zhao, F. Z. Modelling the 
Effects of Copper on Soil Organisms and Processes Using the Free Ion Approach Towards 
a Multi-Species Toxicity Model. Environ. Pollut. 2013, 178, 244–253. 
Lok, C. N.; Ho, C. M.; Chen, R.; He, Q. Y.; Yu, W. Y.; Sun, H.; Tam, P. K. H.; Chiu, J. F.; Che, 
C. M. Silver Nanoparticles: Partial Oxidation and Antibacterial Activities. J. Biol. Inorg. 
Chem. 2007, 12, 527–534. 120 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
López-Mondéjar, R.; Brabcová, V.; Štursová, M.; Davidová, A.; Jansa, J.; Cajthaml, T.; 
Baldrian, P. Decomposer Food Web in a Deciduous Forest Shows High Share of Generalist 
Microorganisms and Importance of Microbial Biomass Recycling. ISME J. 2018, 12,
1768–1778. 
Luo, J.; Song, Y.; Liang, J.; Li, J.; Islam, E.; Li, T. Elevated CO2
 Mitigates the Negative Effect 
of CeO2
 and Cr2
O3
 Nanoparticles on Soil Bacterial Communities by Alteration of Microbial 
Carbon Use. Environ. Pollut. 2020, 263, 114456.
Luongo, L. A.; Zhang, X. J. Toxicity of Carbon Nanotubes to the Activated Sludge Process. J. 
Hazard. Mater. 2010, 178, 356–362. 
Lyon, D. Y.; Brunet, L.; Hinkal, G. W.; Wiesner, M. R.; Alvarez, P. J. J. Antibacterial Activity 
of Fullerene Water Suspensions (nC60) is not due to ROS-Mediated Damage. Nano Lett. 
2007, 8, 1539–1543. 
Lyu, S.; Wei, X.; Chen, J.; Wang, C.; Wang, X.; Pan, D. Titanium as a Beneficial Element for 
Crop Production. Front. Plant Sci. 2017, 8, 597.
Magrez, A. E. A.; Kasas, S.; Salicio, V.; Pasquier, N.; Seo, J. W.; Celio, M.; Catsicas, S.; 
Schwaller, B.; Forró, L. Cellular Toxicity of Carbon-Based Nanomaterials. Nano Lett. 
2006, 6, 1121–1125. 
Mahawar, H.; Prasanna, R. Prospecting the Interactions of Nanoparticles With Beneficial 
Microorganisms for Developing Green Technologies for Agriculture. Environ. Nanotechnol. 
Monitor. Manag. 2018, 10, 477–485. 
Maliszewska, I. Effects of the Biogenic Gold Nanoparticles on Microbial Community 
Structure and Activities. Ann. Microbiol. 2016, 66, 785–794. 
Manzoor, U.; Siddique, S.; Ahmed, R.; Noreen, Z.; Bokhari, H.; Ahmad, I. Antibacterial, 
Structural and Optical Characterization of Mechano-Chemically Prepared ZnO 
Nanoparticles. PLoS One 2016, 11, e0154704.
Marschner, P.; Timonen S. Bacterial Community Composition and Activity in Rhizosphere of 
Roots Colonized by Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi. In Microbial Activity in the Rhizoshere; 
Mukerji, K. G., Manoharachary, C., Singh, J., Eds.; Soil Biol. Springer: Berlin, Heidelberg 
2006; vol 7.
Matz, C.; Boenigk, J.; Arndt, H.; Jurgens, K. Role of Bacterial Phenotypic Traits in Selective 
Feeding of the Heterotrophic Nanoflagellate Spumella sp. Aq. Microbial Ecol. 2002, 27,
137–148.
Mauter, M. S.; Elimelech, M. Environmental Applications of Carbon-Based Nanomaterials. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2008, 42, 5843–5859.
McGee, C. F.; Storey, S.; Clipson, N.; Doyle, E. Soil Microbial Community Responses 
to Contamination With Silver, Aluminium Oxide and Silicon Dioxide Nanoparticles. 
Ecotoxicology 2017, 26, 449–458. 
McGillicuddy, E.; Murray, I.; Kavanagh, S.; Morrison, L.; Fogarty, A.; Cormican, M.; Dockery, 
P.; Prendergast, M.; Rowan, N.; Morris, D. Silver Nanoparticles in the Environment 
Sources, Detection and Ecotoxicology. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 575, 231–246. 
Mehra, N. K.; Jain, A. K.; Nahar, M. Carbon Nanomaterials in Oncology: An Expanding 
Horizon. Drug Discov. Today 2018, 23, 1016–1025. 
Mehta, C. M.; Srivastava, R.; Arora, S.; Sharma, A. K. Impact Assessment of Silver 
Nanoparticles on Plant Growth and Soil Bacterial Diversity. 3 Biotech 2016, 6, 254–263. 
Mejias Carpio, I. E.; Santos, C. M.; Wei, X.; Rodrigues, D. F. Toxicity of a Polymergraphene 
Oxide Composite Against Bacterial Planktonic Cells, Biofilms, and Mammalian Cells. 
Nanoscale 2012, 4, 4746–4756. Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 121
Michels, C.; Perazzoli, S.; Soares, H. M. Inhibition of an Enriched Culture of Ammonia 
Oxidizing Bacteria by Two Different Nanoparticles: Silver and Magnetite. Sci. Total 
Environ. 2017, 586, 995–1002.
Mishra, V. K.; Kumar, A. Impact of Metal Nano-Particles on the Plant Growth Promoting 
Rhizobacteria. Digest J. Nanomater. Biostruct. 2009, 4, 587–592.
Moll, J.; Klingenfuss, F.; Widmer, F.; Gogos, A.; Bucheli, T. D.; Hartmann, M.; van der Heijden, 
M. G. A. Effects of Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles on Soil Microbial Communities and 
Wheat Biomass. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2017, 111, 85–93. 
Monica, R. C.; Cremonini, R. Nanoparticles and Higher Plants. Caryologia 2014, 62,
161–165. 
Montes de Oca-Vásquez, G.; Solano-Camposc, F.; Vega-Baudrit, J. R.; López-Mondéjar, R.; 
Odriozola, I.; Vera, A.; Moreno, J. L.; Bastida, F. Environmentally Relevant Concentrations 
of Silver Nanoparticles Diminish Soil Microbial Biomass but do not Alter Enzyme 
Activities or Microbial Diversity. J. Hazard. Mater. 2020, 391, 122224.
Muthuvel, A.; Adavallan, K.; Balamurugan, K.; Krishnakumar, N. Biosynthesis of Gold 
Nanoparticles Using Solanum nigrum Leaf Extract and Screening Their Free Radical 
Scavenging and Antibacterial Properties. Biomed. Prevent. Nutr. 2014, 4, 325–332. 
Nair, R.; Varghese, S. H.; Nair, B. G.; Maekawa, T.; Yoshida, Y.; Kumar, D. S. Nanoparticulate 
Material Delivery to Plants. Plant Sci. 2010, 179, 154–163. 
Nannipieri, P.; Ascher, J.; Ceccherini, M. T.; Landi, L.; Pietramellara, G.; Renella, G. 
Microbial Diversity and Soil Functions. Eur. J. Soil Sci. 2003, 54, 655–670. 
Nateghi, M. R.; Hajimirzababa, H. Effect of Silver Nanoparticles Morphologies on 
Antimicrobial Properties of Cotton Fabrics. J. Text. Inst. 2014, 105, 806–813. 
Navale, G. R.; Thripuranthaka, M.; Late, D. J.; Shinde, S. S. Antimicrobial Activity of ZnO 
Nanoparticles Against Pathogenic Bacteria and Fungi. JSM Nanotechnol. Nanomed. 2015, 
3, 1033.
Neal, A. L. What Can be Inferred From Bacterium Nanoparticle Interactions About the 
Potential Consequences of Environmental Exposure to Nanoparticles? Ecotoxicology 2008, 
17, 362–371. 
Norhasri, M. S. M.; Hamidah, M. S.; Fadzil, A. M. Applications of Using Nano Material in 
Concrete: A Review. Const. Build. Mater. 2017, 133, 91–97. 
Nuccio, E. E.; Hodge, A.; Pett-Ridge, J.; Herman, D. J.; Weber, P. K.; Firestone, M. K. An 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungus Significantly Modifies the Soil Bacterial Community and 
Nitrogen Cycling During Litter Decomposition. Environ. Microbiol. 2013, 15, 1870–1881. 
Nyberg, L.; Turco, R. F.; Nies, L. Assessing the Impact of Carbon Materials on Anaerobic 
Microbial Communities. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2008, 42, 1938–1943. 
Oves, M.; Khan, S.; Qari, H.; Felemban, N.; Almeelbi, T. Heavy Metals: Biological Importance 
and Detoxification Strategies. J. Bioremed. Biodegrad. 2016, 7, 334.
Parikh, S. J.; Chorover, J. ATR-FTIR Spectroscopy Reveals Bond Formation During Bacterial 
Adhesion to Iron Oxide. Langmuir 2006, 22, 8492–8500. 
Parise, A.; Zhang, J. Activity Inhibition on Municipal Activated Sludge by Single Walled 
Carbon Nanotubes. J. Nanopart. Res. 2014, 16.
Peng, C.; Xu, C.; Liu, Q.; Sun, L.; Luo, Y.; Shi, J. Fate and Transformation of CuO 
Nanoparticles in the Soil-Rice System During the Life Cycle of Rice Plants. Environ. Sci. 
Technol. 2017, 51, 4907−4917.122 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Peyrot, C.; Wilkinson, K. J.; Desrosiers, M.; Sauvé, S. Effects of Silver Nanoparticles on 
Soil Enzyme Activities With and Without Added Organic Matter. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 
2014, 33, 115–125. 
Philippot, L.; Raaijmakers, J. M.; Lemanceau, P.; van der Putten, W. H. Going Back to the 
Roots: The Microbial Ecology of the Rhizosphere. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 2013, 11, 789–799. 
Pokhrel, L. R.; Dubey, B. Evaluation of Developmental Responses of Two Crop Plants 
Exposed to Silver and Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles. Sci. Total Environ. 2013, 452–453,
321–332. 
Politou, M.; Asselberghs, I.; Soree, B.; Lee, C. S.; Sayan, S.; Lin, D.; Pashaei, P.; Huyghebaert, 
C.; Raghavan, P.; Radu, I.; Tokei, Z.; De Gendt, S.; Heyns, M. Single- and Multilayer 
Graphene Wires as Alternative Interconnects. Microelect. Eng. 2016, 156, 131–135. 
Porcheron, G,; Garénaux, A.; Proulx, J.; Sabri, M.; Dozois, C. M. Iron, Copper, Zinc, and 
Manganese Transport and Regulation in Pathogenic Enterobacteria: Correlations Between 
Strains, Site of Infection and the Relative Importance of the Different Metal Transport 
Systems for Virulence. Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 2013, 3, 90.
Prakash, A.; Sharma, S.; Ahmad, N.; Ghosh, A.; Sinha, P. Synthesis of Ag Nps by Bacillus 
Cereus Bacteria and Their Antimicrobial Potential. J. Biomater. Nanobiotechnol. 2011, 2,
156–162. 
Prasad, R.; Kumar, V.; Prasad, K. S. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: Present 
Concerns and Future Aspects. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 2014, 13, 705–713. 
Qian, H.; Ke, M.; Qu, Q.; Li, X.; Du, B.; Lu, T.; Sun, L.; Pan, X. Ecological Effects of Single￾Walled Carbon Nanotubes on Soil Microbial Communities and Soil Fertility. Bull. Environ. 
Contam. Toxicol. 2018, 101, 536–542. 
Qu, Y.; Zhang, X.; Shen, W.; Ma, Q.; You, S.; Pei, X.; Li, S.; Ma, F.; Zhou, J. Illumina MiSeq 
Sequencing Reveals Long-Term Impacts of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes on Microbial 
Communities of Wastewater Treatment Systems. Bioresour. Technol. 2016, 211, 209–215. 
Raghunath, A.; Perumal, E. Metal Oxide Nanoparticles as Antimicrobial Agents: A Promise 
for the Future. Int. J. Antimicrob. Agents. 2017, 49, 137–152. 
Rajput, V. D.; Minkina, T.; Sushkova, S.; Tsitsuashvili, V.; Mandzhieva, S.; Gorovtsov, A.; 
Nevidomskaya, D.; Gromoakova, N. Effect of Nanoparticles on Crops and Soil Microbial 
Communities. J. Soils Sed. 2017, 1–9. 
Rangaraj, S.; Gopalu, K.; Muthusamy, P.; Rathinam, Y.; Venkatachalam, R.; Narayanasamy, 
K. Augmented Biocontrol Action of Silica Nanoparticles and Pseudomonas Fluorescens
Bioformulant in Maize (Zea mays L.). RSC Adv. 2014, 4, 8461–8465. 
Rashmi, B. N.; Harlapur, S. F.; Avinash, B.; Ravikumar, C. R.; Nagaswarupa, H. P.; Anil 
Kumar, M. R.; Gurushantha, K.; Santosh, M. S. Facile Green Synthesis of Silver Oxide 
Nanoparticles and Their Electrochemical, Photocatalytic and Biological Studies. Inorg. 
Chem. Comm. 2020, 111, 107580.
Raza, M. A.; Kanwal, Z.; Rauf, A.; Sabri, A. N.; Riaz, S.; Naseem, S. Size-and Shape 
Dependent Antibacterial Studies of Silver Nanoparticles Synthesized by Wet Chemical 
Routes. J. Nanomater. 2016, 6, 74.
Reddy, K. M.; Feris, K.; Bell, J.; Wingett, D. G.; Hanley, C.; Punnoose, A. Selective Toxicity 
of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles to Prokaryotic and Eukaryotic Systems. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2007, 90, 213902.
Ren, W.; Ren, G.; Teng, Y.; Li, Z.; Li, L. Time-Dependent Effect of Graphene on the Structure, 
Abundance, and Function of the Soil Bacterial Community. J. Hazard. Mater. 2015, 297,
286–294. Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 123
Ribeiro, C. A. S.; Albuquerque, L. J. C.; de Castro, C. E.; Batista, B. L.; de Souza, A. L. M.; 
Albuquerque, B. L.; Zilse, M. S.; Bellettini, I. C.; Giacomelli, F. C. One-Pot Synthesis of 
Sugar-Decorated Gold Nanoparticles With Reduced Cytotoxicity and Enhanced Cellular 
Uptake. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 2019, 580, 123690.
Rico, C. M.; Peralta-Videa, J. R.; Gardea-Torresdey, J. L. Chemistry, Biochemistry of Nano￾Particles, and Their Role in Antioxidant Defense System in Plants. In Nanotechnology and 
Plant Sciences; Springer: Cham, 2015, pp 1–17.
Rodrigues, D. F.; Elimelech, M. Toxic Effects of Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes in the 
Development of E. coli Biofilm. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2010, 44, 4583–4589.
Rodrigues, D. F.; Jaisi, D. P.; Elimelech, M. Toxicity of Functionalized Single-Walled Carbon 
Nanotubes on Soil Microbial Communities: Implications for Nutrient Cycling in Soil. 
Environ. Sci. Technol. 2013, 47, 625–633.
Rodriguez-Caballero, G.; Caravaca, F.; Fernandez-Gonzalez, A. J.; Alguacil, M. M.; 
Fernandez-Lopez, M.; Roldan, A. Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Inoculation Mediated 
Changes in Rhizosphere Bacterial Community Structure While Promoting Revegetation in 
a Semiarid Ecosystem. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 584, 838–848. 
Rønn, R.; Ekelund, F.; Grunert, J. Protozoan Predation on the Bacteria Mycobacterium 
Chlorophenolicus and Pseudomonas Chlororaphis in Soil Microcosms. Biol. Fert. Soils. 
2001, 33, 126–131. 
Rowley, M. C.; Grand, S.; Verrecchia, É. P. Calcium-Mediated Stabilization of Soil Organic 
Carbon. Biogeochemistry 2018, 137, 27–49. 
Ruiz, O. N.; Fernando, K. A.; Wang, B.; Brown, N. A.; Luo, P. G.; Mcnamara, N. D.; 
Vangsness, M.; Sun, Y. P.; Bunker, C. E. Graphene Oxide: A Nonspecific Enhancer of 
Cellular Growth. ACS Nano. 2011, 5, 8100–8107. 
Saison, C.; Perreault, F.; Daigle, J. C.; Fortin, C.; Claverie, J.; Morin, M.; Popovic, R. Effect 
of Core Shell Copper Oxide Nanoparticles on Cell Culture Morphology and Photosynthesis 
(Photosystem II Energy Distribution) in the Green Alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Aq. 
Toxicol. 2010, 96, 109–114. 
Samarajeewa, A. D.; Velicogna, J. R.; Princz, J. I.; Subasinghe, R. M.; Scroggins, R. P.; 
Beaudette, L. A. Effect of Silver Nano-Particles on Soil Microbial Growth, Activity and 
Community Diversity in a Sandy Loam Soil. Environ. Pollut. 2017, 220, 504–513. 
Sanchez-Quiles, D.; Tovar-Sanchez, A. Sunscreens as a Source of Hydrogen Peroxide 
Production in Coastal Waters. Environ. Sci.Technol. 2014, 48, 9037–9042.
Savi, G. D.; Vitorino, V.; Bortoluzzi, A. J.; Scussel, V. M. Effect of Zinc Compounds on 
Fusarium Verticillioides Growth, Hyphae Alterations, Conidia, and Fumonisin Production. 
J. Sci. Food Agri. 2013, 93, 3395–3402.
Schlaeppi, K.; Bender, S.; Mascher, F.; Russo, G.; Patrignani, A.; Camenzind, T.; Hempel, S.; 
Rillig, M.; van der Heijden, M. G. A. High-Resolution Community Profiling of Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizal Fungi. New Phytologist. 2016, 212, 780–791. 
Seeger, E.; Baun, A.; Kastner, M.; Trapp, S. Insignificant Acute Toxicity of TiO2
 Nanoparticles 
to Willow Trees. J. Soils Sed. 2009, 9, 46–53. 
Seil, J.; Webster, T. J. Antimicrobial Applications of Nanotechnology: Methods and Literature. 
Int. J. Nanomed. 2012, 7, 2767–2781. 
Shah, V.; Belozerova, I. Influence of Metal Nanoparticles on the Soil Microbial Community 
and Germination of Lettuce Seeds. Water Air Soil Pollut. 2009, 197, 143–148. 
Shah, V.; Jones, J.; Dickman, J.; Greenman, S. Response of Soil Bacterial Community to 
Metal Nanoparticles in Biosolids. J. Hazard. Mater. 2014, 274, 399–403. 124 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Shandilya, N.; Le, B. O.; Bressot, C.; Morgeneyer, M. Emission of Titanium Dioxide 
Nanoparticles From Building Materials to the Environment by Wear and Weather. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 2015, 49, 2163–2170.
Shen, Z.Y.; Chen, Z.; Hou, Z.; Li, T.T.; Lu, X.X. Ecotoxicological effect of zinc oxide 
nanoparticles on soil microorganisms.Front. Environ.Sci. Eng.2015, 9, 912–918.
Sheng, Z.; Van Nostrand, J. D.; Zhou, J.; Liu, Y. Contradictory Effects of Silver Nanoparticles 
on Activated Sludge Wastewater Treatment. J. Hazard. Mater. 2018, 341, 448–456. 
Shi, Y.; Xiao, Y.; Li, Z.; Zhang, X.; Liu, T.; Li, Y.; Pan, Y.; Yan, W. Microorganism Structure 
Variation in Urban Soil Microenvironment Upon ZnO Nanoparticles Contamination. 
Chemosphere 2021, 273, 128565. 
Shrestha, B.; Acosta-Martinez, V.; Cox, S. B.; Green, M. J.; Li, S.; Canas-Carrell, J. E. An 
Evaluation of the Impact of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes on Soil Microbial Community 
Structure and Functioning. J. Hazard. Mater. 2013, 261, 188–197. 
Siani, N. G.; Fallah, S.; Pokhrel, L. R.; Rostamnejadi, A. Natural Amelioration of Zinc 
Oxide Nanoparticle Toxicity in Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-gracum) by Arbuscular 
Mycorrhizal (Glomus intraradices) Secretion of Glomalin. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2017, 
112, 227–238. 
Siddiqui, M.H.; Al-Whaibi, M.H.; Mohammad, F. Role of nanoparticles in plants.
Nanotechnology and Plant Sciences, Springer, Cham, 2015,19-35.
Silva, S.; Oliveira, H.; Craveiro, S. C.; Calado, A. J.; Santos, C. Pure Anatase and Rutile 
+ Anatase Nanoparticles Differently Affect Wheat Seedlings. Chemosphere 2016, 151,
68–75. 
Simonin, M.; Guyonnet, J. P.; Martins, J. M. F.; Ginot, M.; Richaume, A. Influence of Soil 
Properties on the Toxicity of TiO2
 Nanoparticles on Carbon Mineralization and Bacterial 
Abundance. J. Hazard. Mater. 2015, 283, 529–535. 
Singh, A.; Singh, N. B.; Hussain, I.; Singh, H.; Singh, S. C. Plant-Nanoparticle Interaction: 
An Approach to Improve Agricultural Practices and Plant Productivity. Int. J. Pharma. Sci. 
Invent. 2015, 4, 25–40.
Singh, A., Rajput, V., Rawat, S., Kumar Singh, A., Bind, A., Kumar Singh, A., Chernikova, N.; 
Voloshina, M.; Lobzenko, I. Monitoring Soil Salinity and Recent Advances in Mechanism 
of Salinity Tolerance in Plants. Biogeosyst. Tech. 2021, 2, 66–87. https://doi.org/10.13187/
bgt.2020.2.66
Singh, A.; Rajput, V.; Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V.; Chokheli, V. A.; Singh, R. K. Modern 
Sustainable Techniques for Enhancing Crop Production. In Sustainable Soil Fertility 
Management, 2020; pp 73–100 
Siracusa, G. Recalcitrant Compounds in Soils and Dredged Sediments. New Biotechnological 
Approaches for the Recover to the Public Use, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Pisa, Italy 2018.
Sirelkhatim, A.; Shahrom, M.; Azman, S.; Noor, H. M. K.; Chuo, A. L.; Siti, K. M. B.; 
Habsah, H.; Dasmawati, M. Review on Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles: Antibacterial Activity 
and Toxicity Mechanism. Nanomicro. Lett. 2015, 7, 219–242. 
Slavin, Y. N.; Asnis, J.; Häfeli, U. O.; Bach, H. Metal Nanoparticles: Understanding the 
Mechanisms Behind Antibacterial Activity. J. Nanobiotechnol. 2017, 15, 65.
Smith, S. E.; Read, D. J. Mycorrhizal Symbiosis. Academic Press: New York, 2008.
Sohm, B.; Immel, F.; Bauda, P.; Pagnout, C. Insight into the Primary Mode of Action of TiO2 
Nanoparticles on Escherichia coli in the Dark. Proteomics 2015, 15, 98–113. 
Srivastava, A.; Srivastava, O. N.; Talapatra, S.; Vajtai, R.; Ajayan, P. M. Carbon Nanotube 
Filters. Nat. Mater. 2004, 3, 610–614. Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 125
Suman, T. Y.; RadhikaRajasree, S. R.; Kirubagaran, R. Evaluation of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles 
Toxicity on Marine Algae Chlorella vulgaris Through Flow Cytometric, Cytotoxicity and 
Oxidative Stress Analysis. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2015, 113, 23–30. 
Sun, T.Y.; Gottschalk, F.; Hungerbühler, K.; Nowack, B. Comprehensive probabilistic 
modelling of environmental emissions of engineered nanomaterials. Environ. 
Pollut.2014,185, 69-76. 
Tan, W.; Peralta-Videa, J. R.; Gardea-Torresdey, J. L. Interaction of Titanium Dioxide 
Nanoparticles With Soil Components and Plants: Current Knowledge and Future Research 
Needs - A Critical Review. Environ. Sci. Nano. 2018, 5, 257–278. 
Taran, N. Y.; Gonchar, O. M.; Lopatko, K. G.; Batsmanova, L. M.; Patyka, M. V.; Volkogon, 
M. V. The Effect of Colloidal Solution of Molybdenum Nanoparticles on the Microbial 
Composition in Rhizosphere of Cicer arietinum L. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 2014, 9, 289.
Tarazona, A.; Gómez, J. V.; Mateo, E. M.; Jiménez, M.; Mateo, F. Antifungal Effect of 
Engineered Silver Nanoparticles on Phytopathogenic and Toxigenic Fusarium spp. and 
Their Impact on Mycotoxin Accumulation. Int. J. Food Microbiol. 2019, 306, 108259.
Taylor, R.; Walton, D. R. M. The Chemistry of Fullerenes. Nature 1993, 363, 685–693. 
Thakur, M. P.; Milcu, A.; Manning, P.; Niklaus, P. A.; Roscher, C.; Power, S.; Reich, P. B.; 
Scheu, S.; Tilman, D.; Ai, F.; Guo, H.; Ji, R.; Pierce, S.; Ramirez, N. G.; Richter, A. N.; 
Steinauer, K.; Strecker, T.; Vogel, A.; Eisenhauer, N. Plant Diversity Drives Soil Microbial 
Biomass Carbon in Grasslands Irrespective of Global Environmental Change Factors. 
Global Change Biol. 2015, 21, 4076–4085.
Thostenson, E. T.; Ren, Z. F.; Chou, T. W. Advances in the Science and Technology of Carbon 
Nanotubes and Their Composites: A Review. Comp. Sci. Technol. 2001, 61, 1899–1912. 
Thul, S. T.; Sarangi, B. K. Implications of Nanotechnology on Plant Productivity and its 
Rhizospheric Environment. In: Nanotechnology and plant sciences; Springer: Cham, 2015; 
pp 37–53.
Tiede, K.; Hanssen, S. F.; Westerhoff, P.; Fern, G. J.; Hankin, S. M.; Aitken, R. J.; Chaudhry, 
Q.; Boxall, A. B. How Important is Drinking Water Exposure for the Risks of Engineered 
Nanoparticles to Consumers? Nanotoxicology 2016, 10, 102–110. 
Tong, Z.; Bischoff Gray, M.; Nies, L. F.; Applegate, B.; Turco, R. F. Impact of Fullerene (C60) 
on Soil Microbial Community. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2007, 41, 2985–2991.
Tong, Z.; Bischoff, M.; Nies, L. F.; Myer, P.; Applegate, B.; Turco, R. F. Response of Soil 
Microorganisms to as-Produced and Functionalized Single-Wall Carbon Nanotubes 
(SWNTs). Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 13471–13479. 
Tripathi, S.; Champagne, D.; Tufenkji, N. Transport Behavior of Selected Nanoparticles 
With Different Surface Coatings in Granular Porous Media Coated With Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa Biofilm. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2012, 46, 6942–6949.
Tsao, N.; Luh, T. Y.; Chou, C. K.; Wu, J. J.; Liu, C. C.; Lei, H. Y. In Vitro Action of 
Carboxyfullerene. Antimicrob. Agents Chemo. 2002, 49, 641–649. 
Upadhyaya, H.; Panda, S. K.; Bhattacharjee, M. K.; Dutta, S. Role of Arbuscular Mycorrhiza 
in Heavy Metal Tolerance in Plants: Prospects for Phytoremediation. J. Phytol. 2010, 2,
16–27.
van der Heijden, M.; Hartmann, M. Networking in the Plant Microbiome. PLoS Biol. 2016, 
14, e1002378.
Wang, P.; Lombi, E.; Zhao, F. J.; Kopittke, P. M. Nanotechnology: A New Opportunity in 
Plant Sciences. Trends Plant Sci. 2016, 21, 699–712. 126 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Wang, Y.; Jiang, F.; Ma, C.; Rui, Y.; Tsang, D. C. W.; Xing, B. Effect of Metal Oxide 
Nanoparticles on Amino Acids in Wheat Grains (Triticum aestivum) in a Life Cycle Study. 
J. Environ. Manag. 2019, 241, 319–327. 
Wijnhoven, S. W. P.; Peijnenburg, W. J. G. M.; Herberts, C. A.; Hagens, W. I.; Oomen, A. G.; 
Heugens, E. H. W.; Roszek, B.; Bisschops, J.; Gosens, I.; Van de Meent, D.; Dekkers, S.; De 
Jong, W. H.; van Zijverden, M.; Sips, A. J. A. M.; Geertsma, R. E. Nano-silver - A Review 
of Available Data and Knowledge Gaps in Human and Environmental Risk Assessment. 
Nanotoxicology 2009, 3, 109–138.
Wu, F.; You, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, H.; Chen, W.; Yang, Y.; Werner, D.; Tao, S.; Wang, X. 
Effects of Various Carbon Nanotubes on Soil Bacterial Community Composition and 
Structure. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2019, 53, 5707−5716.
Wu, Y. H.; Xu, X. W. Advances in the Taxonomy of Erythrobacteraceae. Microbiol. China 
2016, 43, 1082–1094. 
Xu, C.; Peng, C.; Sun, L.; Zhang, S.; Huang, H.; Chen, Y.; Shi, J. Distinctive Effects of 
TiO2
 and CuO Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes and Their Community Structures in Flooded 
Paddy Soil. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2015, 86, 24–33. 
Xu, J.; Liu, S. J.; Song, S. R.; Guo, H. L.; Tang, J. J.; Yong, J. W. H.; Ma, Y. D.; Chen, X. 
Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Influence Decomposition and the Associated Soil Microbial 
Community Under Different Soil Phosphorus Availability. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2018, 120,
181–190. 
Yadav, T.; Mungray, A. A.; Mungray, A. K. Fabricated Nanoparticles. Rev. Environ. Contam. 
Toxicol. 2014, 230, 83–110. 
Yadav, T.; Mungray, A. A.; Mungray, A. K. Effect of Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes on 
UASB Microbial Consortium. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 2016, 23, 4063–4072.
Yamada, T.; Sekiguchi, Y. Cultivation of Uncultured Chloroflexi Subphyla: Significance 
and Ecophysiology of Formerly Uncultured Chloroflexi ‘Subphylum I’ With Natural and 
Biotechnological Relevance. Microbes Environ. 2009, 24, 205–216. 
Yang, Y.; Wang, J.; Xiu, Z. M.; Alvarez, P. J. J. Impacts of Silver Nanoparticles on Cellular 
and Transcriptional Activity of Nitrogen-Cycling Bacteria. Environ. Toxicol. Chem. 2013, 
32, 1488–1494. 
You, T.; Liu, D.; Chen, J.; Yang, Z.; Dou, R.; Gao, X.; Wang, L. Effects of Metal Oxide 
Nanoparticles on Soil Enzyme Activities and Bacterial Communities in Two Different Soil 
Types. J. Soils Sed. 2017, 18, 211–221.
Yugay, Y. A.; Usoltseva, R. V.; Silant’ev, V. E.; Egorova, A. E.; Karabtsov, A. A.; Kumeiko, 
V. V.; Ermakova, S. P.; Bulgakov, V. P.; Shkryl, Y. N. Synthesis of Bioactive Silver 
Nanoparticles Using Alginate, Fucoidan and Laminaran From Brown Algae as a Reducing 
and Stabilizing Agent. Carbohydr. Polym. 2020, 245, 116547.
Zeng, P.; Guo, Z.; Xiao, X.; Peng, C. Effects of Tree-Herb Co-planting on the Bacterial 
Community Composition and the Relationship Between Specific Microorganisms and 
Enzymatic Activities in Metal-(loid)-Contaminated Soil. Chemosphere 2019, 220, 237−248.
Zeng, X.; Zhang, F.; He, N.; Zhang, B.; Liu, X.; Li, X. ZnO Nanoparticles of Different Shapes 
and Their Antimycotic Property Against Penicillium and Mucor. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 
Lett. 2016, 8, 688–694. 
Zhang, C.; Li, M.; Xu, X.; Liu, N. Effects of Carbon Nanotubes on Atrazine Biodegradation 
by Arthrobacter sp. J. Hazard. Mater. 2015, 287, 1–6. Impact of Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes for Enhancing Soil Fertility 127
Zhang, L.; Shi, N.; Fan, J. Q.; Wang, F.; George, T. S.; Feng, G. Arbuscular Mycorrhizal 
Fungi Stimulate Organic Phosphate Mobilization Associated With Changing Bacterial 
Community Structure Under Field Conditions. Environ. Microbiol. 2018, 20, 2639–2651. 
Zhang, M.; Gao, B.; Chen, J.; Li, Y. Effects of Graphene on Seed Germination and Seedling 
Growth. J. Nanopart. Res. 2015, 17, 78.
Zhang, Q.; Huang, J. Q.; Qian, W. Z.; Zhang, Y. Y.; Wei, F. The Road for Nanomaterials 
Industry: A Review of Carbon Nanotube Production, Post-Treatment, and Bulk Applications 
for Composites and Energy Storage. Small 2013, 9, 1237–1265. 
Zhang, X.; Xu, Z.; Qian, X.; Lin, D.; Zeng, T.; Filser, J.; Li, L.; Kah, M. Assessing the Impacts 
of Cu(OH)2 Nanopesticide and Ionic Copper on the Soil Enzyme Activity and Bacterial 
Community. J. Agri. Food Chem. 2020, 68, 3372−3381.
Zhao, L.; Huang, Y.; Keller, A. A. Comparative Metabolic Response Between Cucumber 
(Cucumis sativus) and Corn (Zea mays) to a Cu(OH)2 Nanopesticide. J. Agri. Food Chem. 
2018, 66, 6628− 6636.
Zhou, W.; Shan, J.; Jiang, B.; Wang, L.; Feng, J.; Guo, H.; Ji, R. Inhibitory Effects of Carbon 
Nanotubes on the Degradation of 14C-2,4-Dichlorophenol in Soil. Chemosphere 2013, 90,
527–534. 
Zhu, Y.; Murali, S.; Cai, W.; Li, X.; Suk, J. W.; Potts, J. R.; Ruoff, R. S. Graphene and 
Graphene Oxide Synthesis, Properties, and Applications. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 3906–3924.Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents 
Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests
IMMANUEL SURESH J. and ISWAREYA LAKSHIMI V.
PG Department of Microbiology, The American College, Madurai, 
Tamil Nadu, India
CHAPTER 6
ABSTRACT
Population explosion in the world leading to the high requirement for food 
has obligated the need for optimizing the agriculture methods with minimal 
loss on fields. Crops are generally lost due to factors like pests, insects, 
pathogens causing plant diseases, environmental conditions, etc. Crops can 
be protected from these damages by the application of antimicrobials and 
pesticides. Due to long-time usage of chemical pesticides and antimicrobials, 
pests and phytopathogens have developed resistance. So, there is a need to 
develop innovative, cost-effective agents made possible by nanotechnology. 
Numerous organic and inorganic nanoparticles have been successfully 
developed and used against a wide range of agricultural pests and pathogens.
Many nanoparticles like gold, silica, titanium, silver, carbon, titanium 
dioxide, iron, and zinc oxide are used as pesticides. Metal oxide nanopar￾ticles of CuO and CaO were developed and tested against cotton leafworm 
(Spodoptera littoralis), which showed potential entomo-toxic activity. Many 
nanoparticles based on the green synthesis method like Iron oxide nanopar￾ticles were developed using Trigonella foenum-graecum leaf, against South 
American leaf miner Tuta absoluta larvae. Similarly, many nanoparticles 
like copper, chitosan-coated fungal metabolites, Copper oxide, sulfur, and 
nanocomposites showed antibacterial and antifungal activity against 130 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
notable phytopathogens. One of the important bacterial pathogens of rice, 
Xanthomonas oryzae pv. Oryzae, which is developing resistance to general 
antimicrobials, had been efectively targeted by Copper nanoparticles of size 
28 nm. Silver nanoparticles exhibited signifcant antifungal activity against 
phytopathogenic fungi like Rhizoctonia solani, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, and 
Sclerotinia minor and were also confrmed using microscopic observation 
of hyphae. This review will evidence the applications of nanoparticles as an 
efective plant protective–nano control agent by protecting the crops from 
pests and pathogens and preventing heavy agricultural losses.
6.1 INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, population explosion is a major problem globally due to which 
there is a huge requirement of food (Singh et al., 2021). So agricultural 
products are in huge demand, and it is necessary to safeguard the plants from 
various damages so that the unwanted loss of plants can be avoided (Singh et 
al., 2020a). Plants generally encounter two different stresses, which leads to 
their loss. They are biotic and abiotic stresses. Abiotic stress includes envi￾ronmental conditions like drought, salinity, metal toxicity, nutrient depletion, 
etc. (Singh et al., 2020b). In contrast, biotic stress is caused by living organ￾isms that mainly include pests that damage the plants and pathogens that 
cause diseases to the plants (Rajput et al., 2021). Many chemical pesticides 
and antimicrobials have been in use today, but due to inappropriate and 
excessive usage, pathogens and pests have developed resistance to them, 
and some of them are toxic to humans and animals. So, there is an immediate 
need to develop innovative ways to eliminate the pest and pathogen in a 
specific and eco-friendly mechanism. 
Every year 20–40% of crops are damaged by plant pests and pathogens, 
which cause complete loss of those plants. Chemical antimicrobials are toxic 
to plants and animals and have other problems like poor solubility, less shelf 
life, and action against nontarget organisms (Stephenson, 2003; Worrall et 
al., 2018). Many plant pathogens and pests have developed resistance to 
conventional chemicals, which must be overcome (Hernández-Díaz et al., 
2021). Annual use of chemical pesticides has reached 4.6 million world￾wide, but even though after the application of huge quantities of pesticides, 
about 90% of it runs of into the environment, leaves residue in agricultural 
products, and interferes with the ecological cycle. Thus, the appropriate use 
of pesticides and antimicrobials has led to many problems like non-point Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 131
pollution, eutrophication, resistance development, soil fertility loss, biodi￾versity loss, and bioaccumulation in the food chain (Malaj et al., 2014; Zhao 
et al., 2017). These disadvantages are crucial for leading nanopesticides 
and nanoparticles-based antimicrobials for their efective development and 
research. 
Nanotechnology is developing and manipulating materials with at least 
one dimension in the nanoscale range of 1–100 nm, which is 10-9 m (Ahmed 
and Lee, 2015; Islam, 2020; Misra et al., 2013). Nanoparticles can be 
produced by various physical, chemical, and biological methods. Nanopar￾ticles have high surface-to-volume ratio that enhances their reactivity and 
biochemical activity (Khan et al., 2019). Nanoparticles difer widely in their 
properties from their bulk material. Copper in its nanoscale is transparent to 
visible light, whereas its bulk form is entirely impermeable (Gao et al., 2003; 
Zong et al., 2005). Similarly, gold and silver nanoparticles show inhibitory 
activity against pathogens, whereas macro form does not. Nanotechnology 
has applications in various felds like medicine, pharmacology, energy, envi￾ronment, food, and agriculture (Malaj et al., 2014). It is also reported that 
nanoparticles synthesized from various sources like marine endophytic fungi 
exhibit antibacterial, anticancer activity and have various uses in pharmaceu￾tical industries (Lydia et al., 2021). 
FIGURE 6.1 Overview of plant protective activity of nanoparticles (NPs) against plant 
pests and pathogens.132 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
There are various methods by which nanoparticles can be synthesized. 
The two major mechanisms are the top-down and bottom-up approaches. 
In the top-down approach, nanoparticles are produced from bulk material 
by physical methods like sonication, radiation, thermal decomposition, and 
laser ablation. But in the bottom-up approach, nanomaterials are produced 
by the building up of atom and molecular components (Dantas et al., 2020; 
Malaj et al., 2014). In the biological synthesis method, nanoparticles are 
produced by using biological reducing agents like bacterial, fungi, algae, or 
their metabolites and by using plant extracts. In chemical synthesis, chemical 
reducing agents like sodium citrate are used (Wuithschick et al., 2015). The 
biological synthesis method is cost-efective, eco-friendly, safe, and readily 
available (Huang and Yang, 2004). 
In agriculture, nanoparticles are used for various applications like 
promoting plant growth, yield, and combating biotic and abiotic stresses. 
Properties of nanoparticles that must be considered for use in pesticides 
and antimicrobial activity are size, shape, surface-to-volume ratio, and 
chemical composition, which determines its efcacy, activity, and toxicity 
(Athanassiou et al., 2018). This review gives a detailed report about various 
nanomaterials studied for their pesticide activity and activity against plant 
pathogens. An overview of plant protective efects of nanoparticles against 
plant pests and pathogens with few examples is given in Figure 6.1. 
6.2 PROPERTIES TO BE CONSIDERED FOR DEVELOPING NPs￾BASED PESTICIDES AND ANTIPHYTOPATHOGENS
There are various properties to be considered for the nanoparticles to be used as 
pesticides and against phytopathogens. The chemical structures like geometry, 
chains, branches, rings, bonded and unbonded atoms, and chemical composi￾tion are major factors determining nanoparticles’ role. Pesticides should be 
water-soluble in nature so that they can be less volatile and more reactive. Nano 
pesticides designed with hydrophilic carriers will release the pesticide with 
direct contact with water, preventing excessive accumulation of pesticides on 
unspecific sites. As mentioned above, nanopesticides and anti-phytopathogens 
should be less volatile with low vapor pressure so that they will evaporate 
before reaching the site of action. Field temperature, mode of application also 
affects the rate of the volatility of the nano formulations. Formulations like 
emulsion, granules, and pellets are better than dust, sprayable liquid, liquid 
mixtures, and wettable powders as the former can withstand drifts and volatile 
loss than the latter. So, in brief, nanoparticles used for agricultural applications Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 133
must have good solubility, less volatility, suitable formulation, and should not 
be toxic to the plants (Gahukar and Das, 2020).
6.3 NANOPESTICIDES
Pesticides that are developed in the nano-based formulation are nanopes￾ticides. It may be active pesticide ingredients in nano-scale particles or 
nanoparticles itself exhibiting pesticidal activity. Nanopesticides have 
various advantages like reducing toxicity, increasing solubility, targeted 
action, high pesticide activity due to the high surface area-to-volume ratio, 
and requiring less quantity for application (Nuruzzaman et al., 2016). Many 
nanomaterials like silica, sulfur, silver, copper, copper oxide, zinc, titanium 
oxide, graphene, and chitosan-based nanoparticles and nanocomposites have 
been studied for their pesticidal activity (Pho et al., 2020). 
6.3.1 NANOPESTICIDES PRODUCED BY BIOLOGICAL SYNTHESIS 
METHOD NANOPESTICIDES SYNTHESIZED USING PLANT EXTRACTS
Many nanoparticles that are synthesized based on plant extracts have shown 
pesticidal activity. Helicoverpa armigera is the major pest in Asia, affecting 
many crops like tomato, pigeon pea, okra, and blackgram. Significant larvicidal 
activity of silver nanoparticles synthesized from Aristolochia indica against 
third instar larvae of Helicoverpa armigera was observed (Siva and Kumar, 
2015). The pesticidal activity was exhibited by silver and lead nanoparticles 
produced using Avicennia marina against the grain storage pest Sitophilus 
oryzae, and a significant effect was observed in silver nanoparticles after 4 
days (Sankar and Abideen, 2015). Silver nanoparticles synthesized using 
aqueous leaf extracts of Euphorbia prostrata showed pesticidal activity with 
100% mortality against Sitophilus oryzae L. after 7 days (Zahir et al., 2012). 
Silver and gold nanoparticles synthesized based on pungamoil compared with 
commercial neem-based insecticide showed significant pesticide activity 
against Pericallia ricini by reducing the food conversion by pests, thereby 
affecting its growth (Sahayaraj et al., 2016). Silver nanoparticles generally 
cause pesticide activity by releasing Ag+
 ions, which are highly toxic and 
can disrupt the membrane, kill pests by binding to the cysteine-containing 
proteins in the plasma membrane (Servin et al., 2015). 
Iron oxide nanoparticles produced by photosynthesis using capping and 
reducing agents from aqueous extract of Anthocephalous cadamba exhib￾ited signifcant pesticide activity against Sitophilus granaries compared to 134 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
chemical nanoparticles. It was also observed that these iron oxide nanopar￾ticles did not show any antimicrobial activity against E. coli and Bacillus 
sp. Hence, it can be concluded that iron oxide nanoparticles will not afect 
plant-promoting microbes (Sivapriya et al., 2018). Iron oxide nanoparticles 
synthesized from Trigonella foenum-graecum were tested for their insecti￾cidal activity against tomato pinworm, Tuta absoluta, and 72% mortality was 
observed after 96 h in 100 µg mL-1 concentration (Ramkumar et al., 2020). 
The synergistic efect of thiamethoxam nanocomposite and zinc nanopar￾ticles was evaluated against the fourth instar larvae of Spodoptera litura. 
The larvae fed on the composite of zinc nanoparticles with thiamethoxam 
showed larvae mortality by altering levels of superoxide dismutase, gluta￾thione S transferase, and thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances in the pest 
(Jameel et al., 2020). Zinc oxide nanoparticles synthesized using Pongamia 
pinnata extract were evaluated against the major pulse beetle Callosobru￾chus maculatus. Pupal, larval, and complete development of C. maculatus
was delayed, and it caused the pest’s mortality exhibiting potential pesticide 
activity (Malaikozhundan and Vinodhini, 2018). The better pesticide activity 
was exhibited against pistachio psylla, Agonoscena pistacie compared with 
amitraz (a commercial insecticide) by ZnO nanoparticles (Samih et al., 
2011). 
Cubic Nickel nanoparticles of size 47 nm synthesized using methanolic 
extract of Cocos nucifera showed pesticidal activity against agricultural 
pest C. maculates with 97.31% mortality (Elango et al., 2016). Nanoen￾zyme conjugate was prepared by doping Silica nanoparticles with chitinase 
enzyme, and its synergistic pesticidal activity in the combination of extracts 
of Azadirachta indica, Adhatoda vasica, Leucas aspera, and Curcuma longa
were studied against Spodoptera litura. The enhanced pesticidal activity was 
observed in the combination of silica nanoparticles, chitinase enzyme conju￾gate, and Azadirachta indica (Narendrakumar and Namasivayam, 2021). 
Pimpinella anisum L., Lemongrass, and peppermint-based nanoemulsion 
showed repellent activity and mortality against Rhopalosiphum padi L., 
an oat aphid at low (0.02 μL/cm2
) and high (0.15 μL/cm2
) concentrations, 
respectively (Pascual-Villalobos et al., 2017). Similarly, nanoparticles based 
on essential oil of garlic in a polyethylene glycol carrier were developed with 
sustained-release mechanism; it showed 80% mortality against Tribolium 
castaneum after 5 months (Yang et al., 2009). Nanoparticles prepared using 
diatomaceous earth also showed mortality against Tribolium confusum and T. 
castaneum than the macro form and caused insecticidal activity by disrupting 
oviposition, adult infestation, and emergence (Sabbour et al., 2015).Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 135
6.3.1.1 NANOPESTICIDES SYNTHESIZED USING MICROBES AND ITS 
METABOLITES 
Nanoconjugate prepared by the combination of the pesticidal fungal metabo￾lite from Nomuraea rileyi and silver nanoparticles was studied against the 
pest Spodoptera litura, and significant pesticidal activity was observed 
against all the larval instars (Namasivayam and Bharani, 2021). Pesticidal 
fungal metabolite from Nomuraea rileyi with chitosan nanoparticles was 
evaluated for pesticidal activity against Spodoptera litura compared with 
fungal metabolite and fungal spores. Fungal metabolite coated with chitosan 
nanoparticles showed better activity than the other two, and pesticidal 
activity was inversely proportional to the instar stage (Chandra et al., 2013). 
It is evidenced that nanoparticle conjugation and coating on natural pesti￾cidal metabolites can enhance its activity, and nanoparticles play a major 
role in improving the pesticidal activity of the fungal metabolite (Ayoub et 
al., 2018). Titanium oxidenanoparticles synthesized by Trichoderma viride
showed significant pesticidal activity against the first three instar stages of 
larvae of Helicoverpa armigera. This activity was due to reducing detoxi￾fying enzymes like carboxylesterase and β-glucosidase and increased the 
level of glutathione S transferase in the pest (Chinnaperumal et al., 2018). 
Copper nanoparticles treated with cell-free extract of copper-resistant 
bacteria Pseudomonas fluorescens MAL2 showed pesticidal activity against 
Tribolium castaneum, grain pest, and significant activity compared with 
chemically synthesized copper nanoparticles (El-Saadony et al., 2020).
6.3.2 NANOPESTICIDES PRODUCED BY CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS 
METHOD
Many nanoparticles synthesized by chemical means also have been studied 
for their pesticidal activity. In Europe, SiO2
 nanoparticles of size greater than 
1 μm synthesized by chemical methods are an approved insecticide (Adisa 
et al., 2019). World Health Organization (WHO) also approved amorphous 
silica as nano biopesticide since it is safe for humans, and several NPs are 
considered safe as they do not alter photosynthesis or gene expression in 
plants and insects, respectively (Athanassiou et al., 2018). Tinea pellionella, a 
cloth moth, causes high weight loss in cotton fiber crops. 20 ppm of colloidal 
nano silver caused the pest’s complete mortality and inhibited weight loss of 
the cotton fiber (Ki et al., 2007). 136 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Nanoparticles pesticidal activity was also enhanced by coating or tagging 
it. Au, Ag, and CdS nanoparticles were tagged with pesticidal DNA, and 
CdS showed maximum activity against S. litura larvae. Similarly, nanopar￾ticles coated with Ecdysteroid showed signifcant pesticidal activity against 
Corcyra cephalonica (Chandrashekharaiah et al., 2015). Nanoparticles of 
metal oxides like fower structured Copper oxide and hexagonal sheet-like 
Calcium oxide were analyzed for entomotoxic activity against cotton leaf￾worm Spodoptera littoralis. Copper oxide nanoparticles and calcium oxide 
nanoparticles showed signifcant pesticidal activity after 3 and 11 days, 
respectively, by disrupting the mid gut and cuticle layer of the body wall 
of insects. They also damaged vital enzymes beyond the cell membrane 
and generated superoxide damaging cell membrane leading to leakage of 
cellular compounds respectively and caused the death of the pest. Changes 
in the midgut, cuticle layer, and related biochemical aspects were also 
observed on the application of pesticidal nanoparticles (Ayoub et al., 2018). 
Nanoparticles help in overcoming the resistance to commercial insecticides. 
Chemically synthesized silver nanoparticles showed an efective pesticidal 
efect in combination with commercial insecticide malathion, whereas most 
pests like Tribolium castaneum are developing resistance to malathion (Alif 
Alisha and Thangapandiyan, 2019). 
Nanomaterials of Chitosan-g-poly (acrylic acid) also reported insecticidal 
activity against soybean insect pests, namely Callosobruchus maculatus, 
Aphis gossypii, and Callosobruchus maculatus (Sahab et al., 2015). Similarly, 
Calcium nanoparticles against Bactrocera dorsalis and Aonidiella aurantia, 
silver and silica NPs against S. litura and Achaea Janata, nanostructured 
alumina against Sitophilus oryzae and Rhyzopertha dominica, silica, Al2
O3
, 
TiO2
 NPs against S. oryzae are also studied (Kitherian, 2017).
6.3.3 NANOPARTICLES AS CARRIER FOR PESTICIDES
Besides directly acting as pesticides, nanoparticles help slow and sustain 
various available pesticides and enhance performance by acting as nanocar￾riers. This technique is called nanoencapsulation, which mainly helps in the 
steady release of pesticides, aids in safer handling by less direct exposure, 
and ensures appropriate concentration to attain bio-efficacy (Athanassiou 
et al., 2018). Since nanocarriers can penetrate the cells and deliver the 
biomolecules in various cells and tissues of plants, they form a nanocarrier 
transport system (Du et al., 2012). Major advantages of nanocarriers include 
reducing cost and amount of pesticide requirement, enhanced shelf life, Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 137
delay loss in bioefficacy due to degradation, promoting site-specific action, 
safety by avoiding direct contact, protection against environmental stress, 
allow high loading due to large surface area, and capability to load more 
than one pesticide (Athanassiou et al., 2018; Worrall et al., 2018). Nanocar￾riers include controlled-release formulations like beads, gels, capsules, and 
granules (Mishra et al., 2020). They can also be used for directly altering 
plants to become pest-resistant by delivering genetic materials and other 
active metabolites (Prasad et al., 2014). 
Several nanoparticles have been studied for their nanocarrier property. 
Silica nanoparticles have the structural fexibility of producing NPs of various 
sizes and shapes and can also form pores for loading the pesticides (Athanas￾siou et al., 2018). Chlorfenapyr in silica nanoparticles ensured the slow and 
sustained release of around 10–20 weeks and showed insecticidal activity twice 
better than the direct application of chlorfenapyr (Song et al., 2012). Similar 
results have been observed in various studies in plants like Cajanus cajan, 
Vigna mungo, Cicer arietinum against Callosobruchus maculatus, Tribolium 
confusum, and R. dominica (Adisa et al., 2019). 100% mortality was observed 
against Rhynchophorus ferrugineus, the red palm weevil, after 10 days when 
NPs based on Moringa olifera leaf extract were administered with TiO2
 carrier 
(Hamza, 2015). Similarly, TiCl4
-based carrier for neem bar gum extract showed 
pesticidal activity against H. armigra and Spodoptera litura. Many activities 
like reduction of feeding efect, abnormal changes of pest morphology leading 
to mortality of various instar stages with higher activity against second stage 
and pupae were also observed (Kamaraj et al., 2018).
The insecticidal protein beauvericin incorporated in chitosan nanopar￾ticles by ionic gelation was tested against groundnut defoliator Spodoptera 
litura, and pesticidal activity against all stages of the pest was observed with 
91% release of beauvericin after 24 h (Bharani et al., 2014). Emamectin 
benzoate, a biopesticide produced by the fermentation of Streptomyces 
avermitilis, is used broadly in controlling pests and is specifc in action, but 
the major drawback is its sensitivity to UV and light. It was overcome by 
incorporating this biopesticide in cellulose nanocrystals and silicon dioxide 
nanoparticles, and it was found that it was not afected by UV or light. 
Emamectin benzoate delivered in nanocarriers showed better pesticidal 
activity against Phenacoccus solenopsis than the biopesticide alone (Elabasy 
et al., 2019).
Nanocapsules have also shown 68% reduction in root-knot disease, and 
poly (ε-caprolactone) and poly (lactic-co-glycolic-acid) nanocapsule with 
ametryn and atrazine also showed better activity due to slow and sustained 138 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
release (Adisa et al., 2019; Clemente et al., 2014). In the latter nanocapsule, 
only 15% of atrazine was found to be released even after 72 h of administra￾tion (Schnoor et al., 2018).
6.3.4 ADVANTAGES OF NANOPESTICIDES
Nanopesticides have been suggested as better than conventional pesticides 
as they have shown better pesticidal activity by increasing mortality rate 
and morphological disruptions of the pest. Besides, nanopesticides also have 
several advantages. They have better stability, specific activity, physical 
stability (Kah and Hofmann, 2014), increased solubility, improved mobility, 
larger surface area ensures higher longevity, less toxicity, and sustained 
delivery (Sasson et al., 2007). Since the loss of pesticides is low, there are 
less chances of pollution and toxicity to humans and animals (Islam, 2020).
6.4 PHYTOPATHOGENS
Several pathogens like bacteria, fungi, and viruses affect plants causing 
disease, accounting for a huge loss of agricultural crops. Bacterial patho￾gens like Xanthomonas sp., fungal pathogens like Fusarium sp., and viral 
pathogens like Tomato mosaic virus have been suppressed by using various 
nanoparticles in plants. Chitosan nanoparticles derived by ionic gelation 
of chitosan showed antifungal activity against Fusarium oxysporum and 
antibacterial activity against phytopathogens Erwinia carotovora subsp. 
carotovora and Xanthomonas campestris pv. Vesicatoria (Oh et al., 2019).
Chitosan guar nanoparticles prepared using sodium tripolyphosphate by 
the ionic gelation method showed antifungal activity against the rice blast 
disease pathogen Pyricularia grisea and antibacterial rice blight disease 
pathogen Xanthomonas oryzae (Sathiyabama and Muthukumar, 2020). 
Silver nanoparticles synthesized by algae Chlorella vulgaris showed effec￾tive activity against phytopathogens like Erwinia carotovora and Alternaria 
alternata (El-Moslamy et al., 2016).
6.4.1 NANOPARTICLES AGAINST BACTERIAL PHYTOPATHOGENS 
SYNTHESIZED BY BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL METHOD
Bacterial pathogens are of major concern in plants causing a variety of 
diseases like bacterial wilt. Many nanoparticles have been studied for their 
antibacterial activity against bacterial phytopathogens. Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 139
6.4.1.1 COPPER NANOPARTICLES 
Chemically synthesized copper nanoparticles of various sizes, including 
18, 24, 28, and 33 nm, exhibited antibacterial activity against Xanthomonas 
oryzae pv. Oryzae in size and concentration-dependent manner. Antibacterial 
activity was attributed to the increase in reactive oxygen species, and copper 
nanoparticles showed better activity than streptomycin sulfate (Majumdar et 
al., 2019). 
6.4.1.2 SLIVER NANOPARTICLES 
Antibacterial activity of silver nanoparticles produced by papaya extract 
against Ralstonia solanacearum, which causes bacterial wilt, is reported. 
Nanoparticles exhibit antibacterial activity by preventing biofilm formation, 
disturbing ATP production, reducing swarming motility, causing mechanical 
damage to the cell membrane at the nano level, and downregulating the 
bacterial genes that play a major role in virulence (Chen et al., 2019). Silver 
nanoparticles synthesized by the green method using Mentha longifolia
showed antibacterial activity against plant pathogens like Pectobacterium 
carotovorum, Xanthomonas oryzae, Xanthomonas vesicatoria, and Ralstonia 
solanacearum. It was also biocompatible against RBC and suggested that 
Mentha longifolia-based silver nanoparticles can be used as anti-phyto￾pathogenic and consumed by humans due to its biocompatibility (Javed et 
al., 2021). Silver nanoparticles synthesized using Taraxacum officinale as 
reducing agent showed significant antibacterial activity against plant patho￾gens Xanthomonas axonopodis and Pseudomonas syringae. Green synthe￾sized silver nanoparticles showed better activity than chemically synthesized 
nanoparticles (Saratale et al., 2018). Silver nanoparticles synthesized using 
the stem extract of Gossypium hirsutum showed antibacterial activity against 
Xanthomonas axonopodis pv. malvacearum and Xanthomonas campestris pv. 
Campestris and no phytotoxicity was detected, suggesting that the produced 
silver nanoparticles are nontoxic to the plants and specific to plant pathogens 
(Vanti et al., 2019).
Synergistic antibacterial efects of silver nanoparticles with commercial 
antibiotics are also studied against Pseudomonas solanocearum, Pseudo￾monas syringae, Xanthomonas malvacearum, and Xanthomonas campestris
(Mala et al., 2012). Similarly, silver nanoparticles on treatment with tween 
80 showed potential antibacterial activity against Ralstonia solanacearum by 140 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
disrupting cellular proteins and cell membrane in vitro analysis and in vivo 
analysis like pot experiment of plant with the pathogen (Chen et al., 2016). 
In some studies, silver nanoparticles are stabilized by biological methods 
like using matrix of bovine submaxillary mucin and bile salt capping showed 
better antibacterial activity against Acidovorax, Xanthomonas, Clavibacter,
and anthracnose, causing phytopathogen (Makarovsky et al., 2018; Shan￾mugam et al., 2015). Ag nanoparticles prepared on graphene oxide and 
double-stranded DNA inhibited the Xanthomonas perforans both in vitro 
completely and in plants (Ocsoy et al., 2013).
6.4.1.3 TITANIUM OXIDE AND ZINC NPs 
Lemon fruit extract was used as a reducing agent for producing zinc oxide 
and titanium dioxide (TiO2
) nanoparticles. Such nanoparticles showed 
promising antibacterial activity against Dickeya dadantii, which causes stem 
and root rot disease in sweet potato. Macro zinc oxide and titanium dioxide 
did not exhibit any antibacterial activity, whereas nanoparticles synthesized 
from them showed antibacterial activity in a concentration-dependent 
manner (Hossain et al., 2019). TiO2
/Zn nanocomposite was evaluated for 
their antibacterial activity against Xanthomonas sp, which caused leaf 
spot disease and reduced the disease by 62–71% in rose plants in the pot 
experiment (Graham et al., 2016). Similarly, plate-like and particulates-like 
zinc formulations, namely Zinkicide SG4 and Zinkicide SG6, significantly 
suppressed Xanthomonas citri, which causes citrus canker lesions in grape 
fruit (Adisa et al., 2019). 
6.4.1.4 OTHER NPs 
Chemically synthesized Magnesium oxide nanoparticles exhibited a 
similar mechanism of action like foresaid nanoparticles against Ralstonia 
solanacearum, which causes bacterial wilt, and in addition to the above 
mechanisms, magnesium oxide nanoparticles also interfere with the reactive 
oxygen species level in the pathogen causing DNA damage and death (Cai 
et al., 2018). Surface modification of nanoparticles using suitable chemicals 
has enhanced antimicrobial activity. Halloysite nanotube is a clay material 
nanoparticle, and on the enhancement with surfactants like cetyl trimethyl￾ammonium bromide (CTAB), sodium dodecyl sulfate, and Tween 80, the 
physicochemical properties of the nanotube were improved. CTAB modified Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 141
nanotube showed better antibacterial activity against Xanthomonas oryzae, 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, and Ralstonia solanacearum by disrupting the 
cell membrane integrity biofilm formation by the pathogens and induced 
high level of reactive oxygen species (Abhinayaa et al., 2019). Starch 
capped sulfur nanoparticles produced by spectral and microscopic methods 
showed significant antibacterial activity against the potato ring rot pathogen 
Clavibacter michiganensis subsp. sepedonicus (Lesnichaya et al., 2021). 
Copper-resistant phytopathogens like Xanthomonas oryzae, F. oxysporum, 
P. syringae, and A. niger were inhibited by graphene oxide nanoparticles 
(Rajwade et al., 2020). 
6.4.2 NANOPARTICLES AGAINST FUNGAL PHYTOPATHOGENS
Various studies have been carried out to evaluate the antifungal activity of 
the nanoparticles produced by both biological and chemical methods that act 
against different phytopathogenic fungi.
6.4.2.1 ANTIFUNGAL PATHOGENIC NANOPARTICLES PRODUCED BY 
BIOLOGICAL SYNTHESIS METHOD
Many nanoparticles synthesized using plant-based extracts are studied 
for their antifungal activity against plant pathogenic fungi like Fusarium, 
Curvularia sp., etc.
6.4.2.1.1 Sliver NPs 
In comparison with 10 different species of Cassia, Cassia roxburghii
produced stable silver nanoparticles of size 35 nm, and it showed significant 
antifungal activity against plant pathogens like Rhizoctonia solani, Fusarium 
oxysporum, and Curvularia sp. which was significantly better than ampho￾tericin B (Balashanmugam et al., 2016). Silver nanoparticles of 13 nm size 
synthesized using leaf extract of Ligustrum lucidum showed reduction in 
conidia germination, colony growth, and also significant antifungal activity 
was observed by disk diffusion and in vitro inoculation analysis against Seto￾sphaeria turcica, which causes northern corn leaf blight in maize (Huang 
et al., 2020). Silver nanoparticles synthesized using Justicia peploides and
Withania coagulans showed effective antifungal activity against Fusarium 142 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
oxysporum, Fusarium solani, and Fusarium lateritium, respectively. Silver 
nanoparticles when entering the cell, they may dissociate into silver ion, and 
they can bind with phosphate backbone of DNA as they have high affinity 
for phosphorus, which may cause cell death or they may increase the reactive 
oxygen species level in fungi-causing death (Hashmi et al., 2019). 
Silver (Ag) nanoparticles synthesized using the leaf extract of Acalypha 
indica as reducing agents showed a signifcant antifungal mechanism by 
disrupting membrane integrity and DNA damage against Alternaria alter￾nata, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, Macrophomina phaseolina, Rhizoctonia 
solani, Botrytis cinerea, and Curvularia lunata with the highest efect against 
Alternaria alternata (Krishnaraj et al., 2012). Ag nanomaterials synthesized 
using aqueous extract of Artemisia absinthium inhibited both Phythopthora 
parasitica and P. capsica in tobacco with 100 mgL-1 concentration had 
similar inhibitory activity as of mefenoxam, a commercial fungicide (Adisa 
et al., 2019). Ag nanoparticles synthesized from potato steroidal alkaloids 
α-chaconine and α-solanine showed antifungal activity against Alternaria 
alternate, Rhizoctonia solani, Botrytis cinerea, and Fusarium oxysporum 
f. sp. lycopersici with highest and lowest activity against R. solani and F. 
oxysporum, respectively (Almadiy and Nenaah, 2018). 
Antifungal activity of biosynthesized Ag nanomaterials against Alter￾naria solani was evidenced by the reduction in 100% spore count after 
3 days and 73% reduction in biomass after 7 days (Kumari et al., 2017). 
Increasing concentration of Ag nanoparticles against Bipolaris sorokiniana
was evidenced by inhibition of fungal conidial growth (Mishra et al., 2014), 
and against Sclerotium rolfsii in chick pea was evidenced by sclerotial rind 
disruption and accumulation inside the cells (Mishra et al., 2017). These 
antifungal mechanisms may be attributed to Ag+
 ions released from the Ag 
nanoparticles capable of reacting with functional groups like carboxyl, thiol, 
imidazole, phosphate, and amino on the cell wall inactivation of the various 
cellular process leading to the death of the pathogen (Adisa et al., 2019).
6.4.2.1.2 Zinc NPs 
Zinc oxide nanoparticles synthesized using the aqueous extract of Melia 
azedarach by the solution combustion method showed significant antifungal 
activity in a dose-dependent manner against Cladosporium cladosporioides 
and Fusarium oxysporum, which are the soybean seed-borne pathogens. 
It kills the fungi by reducing ergosterol and cell membrane integrity by Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 143
increasing reactive oxygen species and cellular damage in the pathogen 
(Lakshmeesha et al., 2020). Zinc oxide nanoparticles synthesized chemically 
and by green synthesis showed antifungal activity against A. alternata, A. 
niger, B. cinerea, F. oxysporum, and P. expansum with green synthesized 
Zinc oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles showing higher efficacy (Jamdagni et al., 
2018). The shape of the nanoparticles also plays a major role in antifungal 
activity against the phytopathogens. Zinc oxide nanoparticles of three 
different shapes like nanoparticles, lamellar platelets, and hexagonal rods 
were studied for their antifungal activity against fungal pathogens of plants. 
Platelet-shaped ZnO nanoparticles showed antifungal activity against them 
Fusarium solani, reducing growth up to 65% (Pariona et al., 2020). ZnO 
nanoparticles also inhibited the growth of Fusarium graminearum after 7 
days of exposure with 75% and 63% inhibition in agar and sand, respectively 
(Dimkpa et al., 2013). The major mechanism associated was reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) which damages the cell wall of the pathogens and causes 
death. Zinc-based nanoparticles are generally eco-friendly as it is less toxic 
to the plants (Adisa et al., 2019). 
6.4.2.1.3 Other NPs 
Copper nanoparticles synthesized using the leaf extract of Azadirachta indica
showed potential activity against Alternaria mali, Diplodia seriata, and
Botryosphaeria dothidea, which are observed in the common pathogens of 
apple in both the nanoparticles and in synergy with A. indica extract (Ahmad 
et al., 2020). Spherical gold nanoparticles of size 60 nm synthesized using 
Mentha piperita essential oil showed significant antifungal activity against 
Aspergillus niger (Islam, 2020). Selenium nanoparticles of size 15–40 
nm synthesized using water extract of Emblica officinalis fruits exhibited 
significant antifungal activity against Aspergillus brasiliensis, Rhizopus 
stolonifera, A. flavus, A. ochraceus, Fusarium anthophilum, and A. oryzae
(Gunti et al., 2019). 
Many fungi and yeast have also been used as the reducing agent in 
synthesizing various nanoparticles with antifungal activity against phyto￾pathogens. Mycosilver nanoparticles produced using endophytic fungi 
Setosphaeria rostrata isolated from Solanum nigrum showed mild and high 
antifungal activity against Aspergillus niger and Fusarium udum, respec￾tively (Akther and Hemalatha, 2019). Silver nanoparticles produced using 
the supernatant of yeasts Cryptococcus laurentii and Rhodotorula glutinis 144 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
were evaluated against phytopathogens like Botrytis cinerea, Penicillium 
expansum, Aspergillus niger, Alternaria sp., and Rhizopus sp that limits the 
shelf life of fruits and vegetables in which both showed better activity than 
chemically synthesized nanoparticles and similar activity as commercial 
fungicide iprodione (Fernández et al., 2016). Silver nanoparticles produced 
using Alternaria sp. fungi isolated from banana cultivated soil showed 
signifcant antifungal activity against plant pathogen Fusarium oxysporum 
and Alternaria sp by destructing membrane integrity of pathogens (Win et al., 
2020). Similarly, silver nanoparticles synthesized using Aspergillus versi￾color were efective against Sclerotinia sclerotiorum and Botrytis cinerea
in strawberry plants, and concentration-dependent activity was observed 
with higher activity against B. cinerea and silver nanoparticles synthesized 
using Guignardia mangiferae were efective against Colletotrichum sp., 
Rhizoctonia solani, and Curvularia lunata (Guilger-Casagrande and Lima, 
2019). Many benefcial microbes like Serratia sp., Bacillus, Trichoderma 
sp., and Spirulina platensis have been utilized to produce silver nanopar￾ticles with antimicrobial activity against a variety of phytopathogens like 
B. sorokiniana (Mishra and Singh, 2015). Silver nanoparticles synthesized 
using Trichoderma longibrachiatum cell fltrate showed 90% activity 
against Fusarium verticillioides, Fusarium moniliforme, Penicillium 
brevicompactum, Helminthosporium oryzae, and Pyricularia grisea. The 
authors have suggested that the antifungal activity may be due to disrup￾tion of membrane-bound enzymes and lipids, inactivation of the sulfhydryl 
group in the cell wall, pore formation in the cell wall, DNA damage, and 
disturbing replication, elevation of hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, 
and superoxide anions (Elamawi et al., 2018). 
Copper nanoparticles produced using actinomycetes Streptomyces 
capillispiralisCa-1 isolated from a medicinal plant Convolvulus arvensis
evaluated against Alternaria spp., Aspergillus niger, and Pythium spp. 
showed antifungal activity by causing structural and functional changes 
of the fungal cell causing cell death (Hassan et al., 2018). Ag and Copper 
oxide nanoparticles produced using cell fltrate of Trichoderma harzianum 
showed efective activity against Alternaria alternata, Pyricularia oryzae, 
and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum in a dose-dependent manner (Consolo et 
al., 2020). Chitosan nanoparticles prepared using anionic proteins from 
Penicillium oxalicum were tested against Pyricularia grisea, Alternaria 
solani, Fusarium oxysporum. Improved morphology of chickpea seeds 
was observed on the application of nanoparticles (Sathiyabama and 
Parthasarathy, 2016).Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 145
6.4.2.2 ANTIFUNGAL PATHOGENIC NANOPARTICLES PRODUCED BY 
CHEMICAL SYNTHESIS METHOD
6.4.2.2.1 Chitosan NPs 
Chitosan, chitosan saponin, and copper chitosan nanoparticles were reported 
for antifungal activity against phytopathogens like Alternaria alternata, 
Macrophomina phaseolina, and Rhizoctonia solani. Copper chitosan 
nanoparticles were more effective followed by chitosan nanoparticles 
(Saharan et al., 2013). Chitosan nanomaterials showed significant antifungal 
activity against Ceratocystis fimbriata and caused nearly 70% mortality 
in 3 h of exposure. Antifungal activity was evidenced by studying the 
mechanisms like reduction of mycelial expansion, irreversible damage of 
membrane, hyphal morphology alteration, induction of membrane perme￾ability, causing cellular components like potassium ions to leak out of 
cells leading to necrotic death (Xing et al., 2018). Chitosan nanomaterials 
reduced the blast disease in finger millet by around 64% by possible ROS 
production mechanisms and delayed the disease onset (Adisa et al., 2019). 
Similarly, chitosan nanomaterials decreased nearly 82% of downy mildew 
disease caused by Sclerospora graminicola in millet seeds, and genomic 
analysis revealed the upregulation of genes related to ROS enzymes like 
catalase, peroxidase, superoxide dismutase, ammonia-lyase, which may 
be the possible mechanism for the suppression of the disease (Siddaiah et 
al., 2018). Membrane structure damage was also observed as a possible 
antifungal mechanism in chitosan nanocomposite with silver in its activity 
against F. oxysporum (Dananjaya et al., 2017). 
6.4.2.2.2 Copper NPs 
Copper oxide nanoparticles showed effective activity against Phytophthora 
infestans which causes damage in tomato, and several copper-based nanopar￾ticles have been reported with sustained release of Cu2+
ions than copper 
sulfate (Adisa et al., 2019). Nanoparticles made of copper, copper oxide, 
silver, zinc oxide (ZnO) on evaluation against seven common fungal patho￾gens causing foliar and seed-borne diseases showed that copper nanopar￾ticles showed significant reduction in mycelial growth. ZnO nanoparticles 
and copper nanoparticles showed better antifungal activity against zinc 
sulfate, and copper sulfate and nanoparticles showed 100-fold higher activity 
against spores than hyphae (Malandrakis et al., 2019). Copper nanoparticles, 146 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Zinc nanoparticles, Chitosan, zinc oxide, and copper nanocomposites were 
evaluated against A. alternata, R. solani, and B. cinerea for their antifungal 
activity where the nanocomposite was effective (Al-Dhabaan et al., 2017). 
6.4.2.2.3 Magnesium Oxide NPs 
Magnesium oxide nanoparticles and macroscale magnesium oxide were 
compared for their antifungal activity against Phytophthora nicotianae 
and Thielaviopsis basicola, which causes black shank and black root rot in 
many plants like tobacco. Magnesium oxide nanoparticles showed better 
antifungal activity against these phytopathogens by causing morphological 
changes and elevation of ROS level in pathogen leading to death, suggesting 
that magnesium oxide in its nano form develops potential antifungal activity 
(Chen et al., 2020). Comparing magnesium oxide nanoparticles and sepiolite 
magnesium oxide nanocomposites against Fusarium verticilliodes, Bipolaris 
oryzae, and Fusarium fujikuroi showed that magnesium oxide in sepiolite￾based nanocomposite was effective in protecting the seeds from the fungal 
pathogen. The antifungal activity was due to the distortion of hyphae and the 
collapse of spores after nanocomposite treatment (Sidhu et al., 2020).
6.4.2.2.4 Silver NPs 
Silver nanoparticles synthesized chemically showed antifungal activity 
against Colletotrichum gloesporioides which caused anthracnose and its 
associated lesions in a wide variety of fruits. Antifungal activity increased 
in a dose-dependent manner, evidenced by reduction of mycelial growth 
(Aguilar-Méndez et al., 2011). Silver nanoparticles caused hyphae damage, 
causing separation of hyphal layers and collapse in Rhizoctonia solani, 
Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, and S. minor, which forms sclerotiorum in plant 
diseases. Higher activity was reported against R. solani followed by S. 
sclerotiorum and S. minor (Min et al., 2009). Silver nanoparticles inhibited 
radial fungal growth and reduced mycelial growth of phytopathogens like 
Pythium aphanidermatum, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, and Macrophomina 
phaseolina. Greenhouse experiment also showed positive antifungal activity 
of silver nanoparticles (Mahdizadeh et al., 2015). 
Silica silver nanoparticles combined with water-soluble polymer 
produced by the radiation method efectively eliminated powdery mildew 
of pumpkin caused by pathogenic fungi. Even the low concentration of 
0.3 ppm was efective in its antifungal activity (Park et al., 2006). Silver Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 147
chitosan nanocomposites showed antifungal activity against phytopathogens 
in the following order: Aspergillus>Alternaria>Rhizoctonia. Silver chitosan 
nanocomposite antifungal activity was higher in comparison with silver and 
chitosan nanoparticles (Kaur et al., 2012). Nano colloidal silver exhibited 
95% activity in curing powdery mildew disease caused by Sphaerotheca 
pannosa Var rosae and recurrence was inhibited in rose plants (Patel et al., 
2014). Silver-doped hollow titanium oxide nanoparticles showed efective 
antifungal activity against causative agents of fusarium wilt in potato and 
apple scab disease, namely Fusarium solani and Venturia inaequalis, respec￾tively. Since Ag-doped TiO2
 nanoparticles have two diferent mechanisms 
of antifungal activity, that is, TiO2, which is positively charged, are attracted 
to negatively charged fungal cell wall, causing oxidation, cell wall perfo￾ration, and fungal death, whereas silver nanoparticles produce silver ions 
that damage DNA. Due to this dual antifungal mechanism, Ag-doped TiO2
nanoparticles showed enhanced activity than individual nanoparticles (Boxi 
et al., 2016). Several other studies have also demonstrated nanoparticles’ 
disruption of the transport system as a possible mechanism of antifungal 
activity (Mishra and Singh, 2015). 
6.4.2.2.5 Other NPs 
Sulfur nanoparticles have been studied for effective antifungal activity 
against Erysiphe cichoracearum at 1000 mg/L and against Fusarium solani, 
Venturia inaequalis by damaging cell wall result of deposition (Khan et al., 
2019; Rajwade et al., 2020). β-D-glycan nanoparticles at 0.1%, w/v concen￾tration on foliar treatment on turmeric plants, rhizome rot disease were 
suppressed up to 77% by increasing peroxidase activity polyphenol oxidase 
and protease inhibitors (Anusuya and Sathiyabama, 2015). Cell membrane 
disruption and hyphal malformation were observed as the possible mecha￾nism of antifungal activity of mesoporous alumina sphere nanoparticles 
against Fusarium oxysporum, and the antifungal activity was better than 
tolclofosmethyl, a commercial fungicide (Kaur et al., 2012). Silica nanopar￾ticles are also studied for their effective action against Aspergillus niger and 
F. oxysporum in maize (Suriyaprabha et al., 2014).
6.4.3 NANOPARTICLES AGAINST VIRAL PHYTOPATHOGENS
Research on the application of nanoparticles for combating plant viruses is 
still in its initial step (Vargas-Hernandez et al., 2020). Silver nanoparticles 148 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
synthesized using Bacillus pumilus, Bacillus licheniformis, and B. persicus 
showed significant suppression of Bean Yellow Mosaic Virus infection in 
fava beans in pre, post, and simultaneous inoculation conditions of nanopar￾ticles with the virus. Silver nanoparticles of size nm synthesized using B. 
licheniformis showed complete antiviral activity by completely suppressing 
the viral infection (Elbeshehy et al., 2015). 
Fe3
O4
, Zinc oxide, and SiO2
 NPs showed antiviral activity against the 
Tobacco Mosaic virus by causing damage to TMV shell protein due to 
the interaction of nanoparticles with glycoprotein, which eventually led to 
aggregation (Cai et al., 2020, p. 4). Post-inoculation and pre-inoculation of 
SiO2
 nanoparticles were able to suppress the viral concentration of tomato 
curly virus and TMV and complete inhibition of disease, respectively (Hao 
et al., 2018). Pre-inoculation of nanoparticles has been shown to suppress 
various viruses in the plant. Pre-inoculation of Zinc oxide and TiO2
 nanopar￾ticles have suppressed the turnip mosaic virus (21 days pre-inoculation) and 
Tobacco mosaic virus (12 days pre-inoculation) by limiting the replication of 
the virus. Gold nanoparticles against Barley yellow Dwarf virus in Hordeum 
vulgare (Aref et al., 2012), silver nanoparticles against tomato mosaic virus
and potato virus by binding to coat proteins and sunhemp rosette virus in 
Cymopsis tetragonaloba plant by inactivation of the virus were also observed 
(Jain and Kothari, 2014). Application of graphene oxide-based silver 
nanoparticles against in Solanum tuberosum conferred disease resistance of 
plants against potato virus Y (El-Shazly et al., 2017). 
6.4.4 MECHANISM OF ANTI-PHYTOPATHOGENIC ACTIVITY OF 
NANOPARTICLES
Generally, nanomaterials have the large surface, which is a major reason for 
enhanced activity and function in the biological system like plants, and due 
to their nano-size, it is easier for the plants to take them up than their bulk 
or ionic form (Adisa et al., 2019). In fungal cells nanomaterials internal￾ization may be nonspecific direct internalization due to small size, specific 
receptor-mediated adsorption or by membrane-spanning ion transport 
proteins (Rajwade et al., 2020). The major mechanism of action includes 
ROS production and the production of ions that react with various cellular 
components causing damages. 
Many nanoparticles are associated with elevated ROS production, which 
disturbs microbial cellular homeostasis, creates oxidative burst, or may Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 149
cause mutations, single-stranded breaks, deletion, and protein cross-linking, 
eventually leading to death (Adisa et al., 2019; Ali et al., 2020). TiO2
-based 
nanoparticles have been studied to reduce the white and brown rot of fungi, 
and this antifungal activity is associated with ROS generation like superoxide 
anions, hydrogen peroxide, and hydroxyl radicals (Pho et al., 2020). Other 
mechanisms including protein dysfunction like oxidation of cysteine in the 
iron-binding site, membrane function disruption, interfering nutrient uptake 
by the pathogens are causing genotoxicity (Lemire et al., 2013). Generally, 
metallic nanoparticles release ions like Ag+
, Cu2+Zn2+, and Ti4+, which bind 
to functional groups and disrupt the cell membrane structure by altering the 
function of the membrane. They can also cause genotoxicity and disturb the 
electron transport chain, which causes the death of the pathogen (El-Argawy 
et al., 2017).
The major factor involved in the antimicrobial activity of chitosan 
nanoparticles is the presence of positive charge due to the amino functional 
group on its surface. Since microbial membrane has an anionic surface, the 
chitosan nanoparticles can bind to it by electrostatic interaction, cause cell 
membrane permeability, intracellular component leakage, and cause the 
death of the pathogen by cell lysis. They can also chelate with various metals 
in the cell, electrostatically interact with DNA, inhibit mRNA and protein 
synthesis, and interrupt many essential enzymes’ activity (Adisa et al., 2019). 
Zinc oxide nanoparticles are also studied for their antibacterial activity by 
ROS production due to increased surface area. It causes lipid peroxidation, 
enzyme deactivation, and membrane destruction by accumulation, difusion, 
interaction with the cell membrane, and intracellular components electro￾static interactions (Yi et al., 2019). TiO2
 nanoparticles doped with nitrogen 
modifed with palladium oxide showed efective antifungal activity against 
Fusarium graminearum, and these nanoparticles can be activated by visible 
light, which produces ROS and disrupts the cell membrane and cellular 
components (Pho et al., 2020). 
Many nanoparticles like Ag, Al2
O3
, CdO, Cu, TiO2
, and Zn are toxic 
toward pathogens, increase ROS production, disrupt cell membrane, and 
cause intracellular leakage (Hernández-Díaz et al., 2021). These mecha￾nisms are common in most nanoparticles. But few other mechanisms are 
associated with the antimicrobial activity of nanoparticles. Al2
O3
 nanopar￾ticles cause depolarization of cell membranes (Sadiq et al., 2009); Gold 
nanoparticles interfere with uncoiling and transcription of DNA and cause 
porosity in the cell membrane, causing cellular leakage (Rai et al., 2010). 
Cerium oxide nanoparticles inhibit electron and ion transport pumps and 150 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
interfere with cellular respiration. It interacts with the bacterial membrane 
by electrostatic and redox interaction (Hernández-Díaz et al., 2021). Sele￾nium nanoparticles cause depletion of ATP in cells and inhibit fungal spore 
germination (Huang et al., 2019). Silica nanoparticles have been shown to 
cause mechanical damage to the bacterial membrane in a dose-dependent 
manner (Hernández-Díaz et al., 2021). Iron and iron oxide-based nanopar￾ticles cause cellular damage by causing confrmational DNA changes, 
protein, and cellular membrane. Another mechanism of action is the Fenton 
reaction, in which more potent ROS like OH• and HO2
 • are produced, 
which damages the cell and eventually causes the death of the pathogen 
(Arakha et al., 2015).
6.5 MECHANISM OF ANTIVIRAL ACTIVITY 
Many studies have suggested that the major mechanism of nanoparticles to 
exhibit antiviral activity is by the production of ROS. Plant cells produce 
various antioxidant enzymes such as catalase, guaiacol peroxidase, and 
ascorbate peroxidase (Vargas-Hernandez et al., 2020). Several studies 
suggest that various antioxidant enzymes are elevated in the presence of 
nanoparticles which are reported in Table 6.1.
Several plant hormones are also suggested as possible mechanisms for 
antiviral activity. Many studies have reported the increase in various phyto￾hormones after exposure to nanoparticles. Salicylic acid and jasmonic acid 
levels in Arabidopsis thaliana on exposure to CuO nanoparticles, jasmonic 
acid level in tomato plants on exposure to chitosan polyvinyl alcohol 
hydrogels, abscisic acid and salicylic acid level in Nicotiana benthamiana
on exposure to Fe3
O4
NPs, cytokinin in Capsicum annuum L on exposure 
to CeO2
 nanoparticles were elevated (Vargas-Hernandez et al., 2020). 
Antiviral activity of nanoparticles against various viral plant pathogens 
is also associated with the nanoparticles to bind to envelope glycoprotein 
(Elbeshehy et al., 2015), interfere with the fusion of viral membrane and 
penetration of the virus into host cells (Mehrbod et al., 2009). Silver 
nanoparticles have been reported to inhibit viral RNA and virion produc￾tion (Lara et al., 2010). Antiviral activity against the yellow mosaic virus 
was observed due to the binding of nanoparticles to the disulphide bond 
regions of CD4-binding domain and inhibiting the virus (Mohamed and 
Abd–Elsalam, 2018). Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 151
TABLE 6. 1 Antioxidant Enzymes Elevation in the Presence of Nanoparticles.
Nanoparticles Enzyme/gene Impacts Reference
ZnO Catalase, peroxide Foliar application of ZnO 
nanoparticles inhibited Tobacco 
Mosaic Virus replication
(Cai et al., 2019)
Fe3
O4 Catalase, peroxide Promoted plant growth and 
elicited defence response against 
Tobacco Mosaic virus
(Cai et al., 2020, 
p 4)
SiO2 Pox gene expression 
(Peroxidase)
Increased defence mechanism 
against papaya ring spot virus in 
cucumber plant
(Elsharkawy and 
Mousa, 2015)
Ag Polyphenol oxidase, 
peroxide
Reduced the disease severity 
and relative concentration of 
Tomato Mosaic virus and Potato 
virus Y in tomato plants by 
inducing a systemic acquired 
resistance
(Noha et al., 
2018)
Nickel oxide Pod gene expression 
(peroxidase)
Reduced disease severity, 
accumulation of Cucumber 
Mosaic Virus accumulation and 
induced systemic resistance to 
the virus in cucumber plants
(Derbalah and 
Elsharkawy, 
2019)
Thus, by various mechanisms like intracellular accumulation, ROS 
production, membrane disruption, deactivation of enzymes, interfering 
important cellular processes, and cell lysis, nanoparticles play a major role 
in acting against plant pathogens.
6.6 ISSUES AND CHALLENGES
Various challenges must be solved and overcome to achieve sustainable use of 
nanoparticles in agriculture for pesticidal and anti-phytopathogenic activity 
(Gahukar and Das, 2020). Even though many studies have been carried out 
to understand the efficacy of nanoparticles as pesticides and against plant 
pathogens, most of the studies are carried out in laboratory environment. 
Soil and field-based studies are required to confirm the reproducibility 
of nanoparticles in agricultural field application. Many experiments are 
required to estimate the concentration, type, and mode of application to get 
better results. Concentration must be fixed such that metallic nanoparticles 
do not cause any metal contamination or pollution in the soil (Adisa et al., 
2019).152 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Bioefcacy should be confrmed to facilitate the required concentration of 
nanoparticles to be available at its site of activity. Stability and site-specifc 
release by application of hydrophilic carriers can enhance the bioavailability 
of nanoparticles. Some nanoparticles may afect the plant in attacking pests 
and pathogens, causing cytotoxic and genotoxic efects in plants. During the 
experimental studies, it should be ensured that nanoparticles have no or low 
toxicity against the plants. Since target organisms are not the only living 
organism in the feld, the nanoparticles used should be specifc only to the 
target pest or pathogen and should not afect the benefcial microbes and 
other organisms like earthworms. Studies have shown that nanocapsules of 
400 nm prepared using Azadirachta indica were specifc in their activity and 
did not cause any adverse efect on soil microbiota even after 300 days. Apart 
from toxicity to soil organisms, even humans and animals are also vulnerable 
to adverse health efects due to the ingestion, inhalation, and dermal contact 
of nanoparticles, especially NPs based on metals. So, to reduce the risk 
posed mainly by feld workers and consumers, metal nanoparticles should be 
modifed to reduce their toxicity (Gahukar and Das, 2020). 
In brief, the major challenges and issues associated with applying 
nanoparticles in agriculture include bioefcacy, toxicity to plants, animals, 
humans, and specifcity. Nanoparticle-based pesticides and anti-phytopatho￾gens should be further studied for enhancing their easy and safe application, 
cost-efectiveness, and easy availability with specifcity, eco-friendly, and 
without toxicity. 
6.7 CONCLUSIONS
These studies show that nanoparticle-based pesticides and anti-phyto￾pathogenic agents hold great potential for nano-enabled agriculture. Till 
now, few nanoparticles like silica oxide-based nanopesticides have been 
approved for field use in Europe (Adisa et al., 2019). Nanoparticles offer 
various benefits like reducing the quantity to be used, specific activity, 
and cost-effective and eco-friendly agents. But further studies are required 
to modify and develop nanopesticides and anti-phytopathogenic agents 
that possess bioefficacy, stability, and toxicity to humans, animals, and 
the environment. Thus, nanoparticles can be developed as promising plant 
protective agents for eliminating the pest and pathogen in agriculture, 
thereby preventing economic loss and supporting the economic backbone 
of our country. Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 153
KEYWORDS
• antibacterial
• antifungal
• crop protection
• nanoparticles
• pesticides
REFERENCES
Abhinayaa, R.; Jeevitha, G.; Mangalaraj, D.; Ponpandian, N.; Meena, P. Toxic Influence of 
Pristine and Surfactant Modified Halloysite Nanotubes on Phytopathogenic Bacteria. Appl. 
Clay Sci. 2019, 174, 57–68.
Adisa, I. O.; Pullagurala, V. L. R.; Peralta-Videa, J. R.; Dimkpa, C. O.; Elmer, W. H.; Gardea￾Torresdey, J. L.; White, J. C. Recent Advances in Nano-Enabled Fertilizers and Pesticides: 
A Critical Review of Mechanisms of Action. Environ. Sci. Nano 2019, 6(7), 2002–2030.
Aguilar-Méndez, M. A.; San Martín-Martínez, E.; Ortega-Arroyo, L.; Cobián-Portillo, G.; 
Sánchez-Espíndola, E. Synthesis and Characterization of Silver Nanoparticles: Effect 
on Phytopathogen Colletotrichum Gloesporioides. J. Nanoparticle Res. 2011, 13(6), 
2525–2532.
Ahmad, H.; Venugopal, K.; Bhat, A. H.; Kavitha, K.; Ramanan, A.; Rajagopal, K.; Srinivasan, 
R.; Manikandan, E. Enhanced Biosynthesis Synthesis of Copper Oxide Nanoparticles 
(CuO-NPs) for Their Antifungal Activity Toxicity Against Major Phyto-Pathogens of Apple 
Orchards. Pharm. Res. 2020, 37(12), 1–12.
Ahmed, A. I.; Lee, Y. S. Nanoparticles as Alternative Pesticides: Concept, Manufacturing and 
Activities. Korean J. Mycol. 2015, 43(4), 207–215.
Akther, T.; Hemalatha, S. Mycosilver Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Characterization and Its 
Efficacy Against Plant Pathogenic Fungi. BioNanoScience 2019, 9(2), 296–301.
Al-Dhabaan, F. A.; Shoala, T.; Ali, A. A.; Alaa, M.; Abd-Elsalam, K.; Abd-Elsalam, K. 
Chemically-Produced Copper, Zinc Nanoparticles and Chitosan-Bimetallic Nanocomposites 
and Their Antifungal Activity Against Three Phytopathogenic Fungi. Int. J. Agric. Technol. 
2017, 13(5), 753–769.
Ali, M.; Ahmed, T.; Wu, W.; Hossain, A.; Hafeez, R.; Islam Masum, M.; Wang, Y.; An, 
Q.; Sun, G.; Li, B. Advancements in Plant and Microbe-Based Synthesis of Metallic 
Nanoparticles and Their Antimicrobial Activity against Plant Pathogens. Nanomaterials 
2020, 10(6), 1146.
Almadiy, A. A.; Nenaah, G. E. Ecofriendly Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Using Potato 
Steroidal Alkaloids and Their Activity against Phytopathogenic Fungi. Braz. Arch. Biol. 
Technol. 2018, 61.
Anusuya, S.; Sathiyabama, M. Foliar Application of β-D-Glucan Nanoparticles to Control 
Rhizome Rot Disease of Turmeric. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2015, 72, 1205–1212.154 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Arakha, M.; Pal, S.; Samantarrai, D.; Panigrahi, T. K.; Mallick, B. C.; Pramanik, K.; Mallick, 
B.; Jha, S. Antimicrobial Activity of Iron Oxide Nanoparticle Upon Modulation of 
Nanoparticle-Bacteria Interface. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5(1), 1–12.
Aref, N.; Alkubaisi, N.; Marraiki, N.; Hindi, A. In Multi-Functional Effects of Gold Nano￾Particles Inducing Plant Virus Resistance Crops, Proceedings of the 5th Annual World 
Congress of Industrial Biotechnology-2012; Xi’an: China, 2012; vol 25.
Alif Alisha, A. S.; Thangapandiyan, S. Comparative Bioassay of Silver Nanoparticles and 
Malathion on Infestation of Red Flour Beetle, Tribolium Castaneum. J. Basic Appl. Zool. 
2019, 80(1), 1–10.
Athanassiou, C. G.; Kavallieratos, N. G.; Benelli, G.; Losic, D.; Rani, P. U.; Desneux, N. 
Nanoparticles for Pest Control: Current Status and Future Perspectives. J. Pest Sci. 2018,
91(1), 1–15.
Ayoub, H. A.; Khairy, M.; Elsaid, S.; Rashwan, F. A.; Abdel-Hafez, H. F. Pesticidal Activity 
of Nanostructured Metal Oxides for Generation of Alternative Pesticide Formulations. J. 
Agric. Food Chem. 2018, 66(22), 5491–5498.
Balashanmugam, P.; Balakumaran, M. D.; Murugan, R.; Dhanapal, K.; Kalaichelvan, P. T. 
Phytogenic Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles, Optimization and Evaluation of in Vitro 
Antifungal Activity against Human and Plant Pathogens. Microbiol. Res. 2016, 192, 52–64.
Bharani, R. A.; Namasivayam, S. K. R.; Shankar, S. S. Biocompatible Chitosan Nanoparticles 
Incorporated Pesticidal Protein Beauvericin (Csnp-Bv) Preparation for the Improved 
Pesticidal Activity Against Major Groundnut Defoliator Spodopteralitura (Fab.)
(Lepidoptera; Noctuidae). Int. Chem. Tech. Res. 2014, 6(12), 5007–5012.
Boxi, S. S.; Mukherjee, K.; Paria, S. Ag Doped Hollow TiO2 Nanoparticles as an Effective 
Green Fungicide Against Fusarium Solani and Venturia Inaequalis Phytopathogens. 
Nanotechnology 2016, 27(8), 085103.
Cai, L.; Cai, L.; Jia, H.; Liu, C.; Wang, D.; Sun, X. Foliar Exposure of Fe3O4 Nanoparticles 
on Nicotiana Benthamiana: Evidence for Nanoparticles Uptake, Plant Growth Promoter 
and Defense Response Elicitor Against Plant Virus. J. Hazard. Mater. 2020, 393, 122415.
Cai, L.; Chen, J.; Liu, Z.; Wang, H.; Yang, H.; Ding, W. Magnesium Oxide Nanoparticles: 
Effective Agricultural Antibacterial Agent against Ralstonia Solanacearum. Front. 
Microbiol. 2018, 9, 790.
Cai, L.; Liu, C.; Fan, G.; Liu, C.; Sun, X. Preventing Viral Disease by ZnONPs through 
Directly Deactivating TMV and Activating Plant Immunity in Nicotiana Benthamiana. 
Environ. Sci. Nano 2019, 6(12), 3653–3669.
Chandra, J. H.; Raj, L. A.; Namasivayam, S. K. R.; Bharani, R. A. In Improved Pesticidal 
Activity of Fungal Metabolite From Nomureae Rileyi With Chitosan Nanoparticles,
International Conference on Advanced Nanomaterials & Emerging Engineering 
Technologies; IEEE, 2013; pp 387–390.
Chandrashekharaiah, M.; Kandakoor, S. B.; Gowda, G. B.; Kammar, V.; Chakravarthy, 
A. K. Nanomaterials: A Review of Their Action and Application in Pest Management 
and Evaluation of DNA-Tagged Particles. In New Horizons in Insect Science: Towards 
Sustainable Pest Management; 2015; pp 113–126.
Chen, J.; Li, S.; Luo, J.; Wang, R.; Ding, W. Enhancement of the Antibacterial Activity of 
Silver Nanoparticles Against Phytopathogenic Bacterium Ralstonia Solanacearum by 
Stabilization. J. Nanomater. 2016, 2016, 1–15.Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 155
Chen, J.; Mao, S.; Xu, Z.; Ding, W. Various Antibacterial Mechanisms of Biosynthesized 
Copper Oxide Nanoparticles against Soilborne Ralstonia Solanacearum. RSC Adv. 2019,
9(7), 3788–3799.
Chen, J.; Wu, L.; Lu, M.; Lu, S.; Li, Z.; Ding, W. Comparative Study on the Fungicidal 
Activity of Metallic MgO Nanoparticles and Macroscale MgO against Soilborne Fungal 
Phytopathogens. Front. Microbiol. 2020, 11, 365.
Chinnaperumal, K.; Govindasamy, B.; Paramasivam, D.; Dilipkumar, A.; Dhayalan, A.; 
Vadivel, A.; Sengodan, K.; Pachiappan, P. Bio-Pesticidal Effects of Trichoderma Viride
Formulated Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticle and Their Physiological and Biochemical 
Changes on Helicoverpa Armigera (Hub.). Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 2018, 149, 26–36.
Clemente, Z.; Grillo, R.; Jonsson, M.; Santos, N. Z. P.; Feitosa, L. O.; Lima, R.; Fraceto, L. 
F. Ecotoxicological Evaluation of Poly (ε-Caprolactone) Nanocapsules Containing Triazine 
Herbicides. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2014, 14(7), 4911–4917.
Consolo, V. F.; Torres-Nicolini, A.; Alvarez, V. A. Mycosinthetized Ag, CuO and ZnO 
Nanoparticles From a Promising Trichoderma Harzianum Strain and Their Antifungal 
Potential Against Important Phytopathogens. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10(1), 1–9.
Dananjaya, S. H. S.; Erandani, W.; Kim, C.-H.; Nikapitiya, C.; Lee, J.; De Zoysa, M. 
Comparative Study on Antifungal Activities of Chitosan Nanoparticles and Chitosan Silver 
Nano Composites Against Fusarium Oxysporum Species Complex. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 
2017, 105, 478–488.
Dantas, J.; Motta, I.; Vidal, L.; Bílio, J.; Pupe, J. M.; Veiga, A.; Carvalho, C. H.; Lopes, R. B.; 
Rocha, T. L.; Silva, L. P. A Comprehensive Review of the Coffee Leaf Miner Leucoptera 
Coffeella (Lepidoptera: Lyonetiidae), With Special Regard to Neotropical Impacts, Pest 
Management and Control. 2020.
Derbalah, A. S. H.; Elsharkawy, M. M. A New Strategy to Control Cucumber Mosaic Virus
Using Fabricated NiO-Nanostructures. J. Biotechnol. 2019, 306, 134–141.
Dimkpa, C. O.; McLean, J. E.; Britt, D. W.; Anderson, A. J. Antifungal Activity of ZnO 
Nanoparticles and Their Interactive Effect With a Biocontrol Bacterium on Growth 
Antagonism of the Plant Pathogen Fusarium Graminearum. Biometals 2013, 26(6), 
913–924.
Du, L.; Miao, X.; Jiang, Y.; Jia, H.; Tian, Q.; Shen, J.; Liu, Y. An Effective Strategy for the 
Synthesis of Biocompatible Gold Nanoparticles Using Danshensu Antioxidant: Prevention 
of Cytotoxicity via Attenuation of Free Radical Formation. Nanotoxicology 2012, 7(3), 
294–300.
Elabasy, A.; Shoaib, A.; Waqas, M.; Jiang, M.; Shi, Z. Synthesis, Characterization, and 
Pesticidal Activity of Emamectin Benzoate Nanoformulations Against Phenacoccus 
Solenopsis Tinsley (Hemiptera: Pseudococcidae). Molecules 2019, 24(15), 2801.
Elamawi, R. M.; Al-Harbi, R. E.; Hendi, A. A. Biosynthesis and Characterization of Silver 
Nanoparticles Using Trichoderma Longibrachiatum and Their Effect on Phytopathogenic 
Fungi. Egypt. J. Biol. Pest Control 2018, 28(1), 1–11.
Elango, G.; Roopan, S. M.; Dhamodaran, K. I.; Elumalai, K.; Al-Dhabi, N. A.; Arasu, M. 
V. Spectroscopic Investigation of Biosynthesized Nickel Nanoparticles and Its Larvicidal, 
Pesticidal Activities. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 2016, 162, 162–167.
El-Argawy, E.; Rahhal, M. M. H.; El-Korany, A.; Elshabrawy, E. M.; Eltahan, R. M. Efficacy 
of Some Nanoparticles to Control Damping-off and Root Rot of Sugar Beet in El-Behiera 
Governorate. Asian J. Plant Pathol. 2017, 11, 35–47.156 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Elbeshehy, E. K.; Elazzazy, A. M.; Aggelis, G. Silver Nanoparticles Synthesis Mediated by 
New Isolates of Bacillus Spp., Nanoparticle Characterization and Their Activity Against 
Bean Yellow Mosaic Virus and Human Pathogens. Front. Microbiol. 2015, 6, 453.
El-Moslamy, S.; Kabeil, S.; Hafez, E. J. O. Bioprocess Development for Chlorella Vulgaris
Cultivation and Biosynthesis of Anti-Phytopathogens Silver Nanoparticles. J. Nanomater. 
Mol. Nanotechnol. 2016, 5(1) ..
El-Saadony, M. T.; El-Hack, A.; Mohamed, E.; Taha, A. E.; Fouda, M. M.; Ajarem, J. S.; N 
Maodaa, S.; Allam, A. A.; Elshaer, N. Ecofriendly Synthesis and Insecticidal Application 
of Copper Nanoparticles against the Storage Pest Tribolium Castaneum. Nanomaterials 
2020, 10(3), 587.
Elsharkawy, M. M.; Mousa, K. M. Induction of Systemic Resistance against Papaya Ring 
Spot Virus (PRSV) and Its Vector Myzus Persicae by Penicillium Simplicissimum GP17-2 
and Silica (SiO2) Nanopowder. Int. J. Pest Manag. 2015, 61(4), 353–358.
El-Shazly, M. A.; Attia, Y. A.; Kabil, F. F.; Anis, E.; Hazman, M. Inhibitory Effects of Salicylic 
Acid and Silver Nanoparticles on Potato Virus Y-Infected Potato Plants in Egypt. Middle 
East J. Agric. Res. 2017, 6(3), 835–848.
Fernández, J. G.; Fernández-Baldo, M. A.; Berni, E.; Camí, G.; Durán, N.; Raba, J.; Sanz, 
M. I. Production of Silver Nanoparticles Using Yeasts and Evaluation of Their Antifungal 
Activity against Phytopathogenic Fungi. Process Biochem. 2016, 51(9), 1306–1313.
Gahukar, R. T.; Das, R. K. Plant-Derived Nanopesticides for Agricultural Pest Control: 
Challenges and Prospects. Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng. 2020, 5(1), 1–9.
Gao, S.; Zhao, Y.; Gou, P.; Chen, N.; Xie, Y. Preparation of CuAlO2 Nanocrystalline 
Transparent Thin Films With High Conductivity. Nanotechnology 2003, 14(5), 538.
Graham, J. H.; Johnson, E. G.; Myers, M. E.; Young, M.; Rajasekaran, P.; Das, S.; Santra, S. 
Potential of Nano-Formulated Zinc Oxide for Control of Citrus Canker on Grapefruit Trees. 
Plant Dis. 2016, 100(12), 2442–2447.
Guilger-Casagrande, M.; Lima, R. de. Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles Mediated by Fungi: 
A Review. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2019, 7, 287.
Gunti, L.; Dass, R. S.; Kalagatur, N. K. Phytofabrication of Selenium Nanoparticles From 
Emblica Officinalis Fruit Extract and Exploring Its Biopotential Applications: Antioxidant, 
Antimicrobial, and Biocompatibility. Front. Microbiol. 2019, 10, 931.
Hamza, R. Z. M. M. Larvicidal, Antioxidant Activities and Perturbation of Transaminases 
Activities of Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles Synthesized Using Moringa Oleifera Leaves 
Extract Against the Red Palm WEEVIL (Rhynchophorus Ferrugineus; Innovare Academic 
Sciences, 2015; pp. 49–54.
Hao, Y.; Yuan, W.; Ma, C.; White, J. C.; Zhang, Z.; Adeel, M.; Zhou, T.; Rui, Y.; Xing, B. 
Engineered Nanomaterials Suppress Turnip Mosaic Virus Infection in Tobacco (Nicotiana 
Benthamiana). Environ. Sci. Nano 2018, 5(7), 1685–1693.
Hashmi, S. S.; Abbasi, B. H.; Rahman, L.; Zaka, M.; Zahir, A. Phytosynthesis of Organo￾Metallic Silver Nanoparticles and Their Anti-Phytopathogenic Potency Against Soil Borne 
Fusarium Spp. Mater. Res. Express 2019, 6(11), 1150a9.
Hassan, S. E.-D.; Salem, S. S.; Fouda, A.; Awad, M. A.; El-Gamal, M. S.; Abdo, A. M. 
New Approach for Antimicrobial Activity and Bio-Control of Various Pathogens by 
Biosynthesized Copper Nanoparticles Using Endophytic Actinomycetes. J. Radiat. Res. 
Appl. Sci. 2018, 11(3), 262–270.
Hernández-Díaz, J. A.; Garza-García, J. J.; Zamudio-Ojeda, A.; León-Morales, J. M.; 
López-Velázquez, J. C.; García-Morales, S. Plant-Mediated Synthesis of Nanoparticles and Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 157
Their Antimicrobial Activity Against Phytopathogens. J. Sci. Food Agric. 2021, 101(4), 
1270–1287.
Hossain, A.; Abdallah, Y.; Ali, M.; Masum, M.; Islam, M.; Li, B.; Sun, G.; Meng, Y.; 
Wang, Y.; An, Q. Lemon-Fruit-Based Green Synthesis of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles and 
Titanium Dioxide Nanoparticles Against Soft Rot Bacterial Pathogen Dickeya Dadantii. 
Biomolecules 2019, 9(12), 863.
Huang, H.; Yang, X. Synthesis of Chitosan-Stabilized Gold Nanoparticles in the Absence/
Presence of Tripolyphosphate. Biomacromolecules 2004, 5(6), 2340–2346.
Huang, T.; Holden, J. A.; Heath, D. E.; O’Brien-Simpson, N. M.; O’Connor, A. J. Engineering 
Highly Effective Antimicrobial Selenium Nanoparticles Through Control of Particle Size. 
Nanoscale 2019, 11(31), 14937–14951.
Huang, W.; Yan, M.; Duan, H.; Bi, Y.; Cheng, X.; Yu, H. Synergistic Antifungal Activity of 
Green Synthesized Silver Nanoparticles and Epoxiconazole against Setosphaeria Turcica. 
J. Nanomater. 2020, 2020.
Islam, M. T. Application of Nanomaterials in Plant Protection. Ph.D. Thesis, Bangabandhu 
Sheikh Mujibur Rahman Agricultural University, 2020.
Jain, D.; Kothari, S. L. Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles and Their Application in Plant 
Virus Inhibition. J. Mycol. Plant Pathol. 2014, 44(1), 21–24.
Jamdagni, P.; Rana, J. S.; Khatri, P.; Nehra, K. Comparative Account of Antifungal Activity 
of Green and Chemically Synthesized Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles in Combination With 
Agricultural Fungicides. Int. J. Nano Dimens. 2018, 9(2), 198–208.
Jameel, M.; Shoeb, M.; Khan, M. T.; Ullah, R.; Mobin, M.; Farooqi, M. K.; Adnan, S. M. 
Enhanced Insecticidal Activity of Thiamethoxam by Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles: A Novel 
Nanotechnology Approach for Pest Control. ACS Omega 2020, 5(3), 1607–1615.
Javed, B.; Ikram, M.; Farooq, F.; Sultana, T.; Mashwani, Z.-R.; Raja, N. I. Biogenesis of 
Silver Nanoparticles to Treat Cancer, Diabetes, and Microbial Infections: A Mechanistic 
Overview. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2021, 105(6), 2261–2275.
Kah, M.; Hofmann, T. Nanopesticide Research: Current Trends and Future Priorities. Environ. 
Int. 2014, 63, 224–235.
Kamaraj, C.; Gandhi, P. R.; Elango, G.; Karthi, S.; Chung, I.-M.; Rajakumar, G. Novel and 
Environmental Friendly Approach; Impact of Neem (Azadirachta Indica) Gum Nano 
Formulation (NGNF) on Helicoverpa Armigera (Hub.) and Spodoptera Litura (Fab.). Int. 
J. Biol. Macromol. 2018, 107, 59–69.
Kaur, P.; Thakur, R.; Choudhary, A. An in Vitro Study of the Antifungal Activity of Silver/
Chitosan Nanoformulations Against Important Seed Borne Pathogens. Int. J. Sci. Technol. 
Res. 2012, 1(6), 83–86.
Khan, M. R.; Ahamad, F.; Rizvi, T. F. Effect of Nanoparticles on Plant Pathogens. In Advances 
in Phytonanotechnology; Elsevier, 2019; pp 215–240.
Ki, H. Y.; Kim, J. H.; Kwon, S. C.; Jeong, S. H. A Study on Multifunctional Wool Textiles 
Treated With Nano-Sized Silver. J. Mater. Sci. 2007, 42(19), 8020–8024.
Kitherian, S. Nano and Bio-Nanoparticles for Insect Control. Res. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 
2017, 7(1), 1–9.
Krishnaraj, C.; Ramachandran, R.; Mohan, K.; Kalaichelvan, P. T. Optimization for Rapid 
Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles and Its Effect on Phytopathogenic Fungi. Spectrochim. 
Acta A Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 2012, 93, 95–99.158 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Kumari, M.; Pandey, S.; Bhattacharya, A.; Mishra, A.; Nautiyal, C. S. Protective Role 
of Biosynthesized Silver Nanoparticles Against Early Blight Disease in Solanum 
Lycopersicum. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2017, 121, 216–225.
Lakshmeesha, T. R.; Murali, M.; Ansari, M. A.; Udayashankar, A. C.; Alzohairy, M. 
A.; Almatroudi, A.; Alomary, M. N.; Asiri, S. M. M.; Ashwini, B. S.; Kalagatur, N. K. 
Biofabrication of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles From Melia Azedarach and Its Potential in 
Controlling Soybean Seed-Borne Phytopathogenic Fungi. Saudi J. Biol. Sci. 2020, 27(8), 
1923–1930.
Lara, H. H.; Ayala-Núnez, N. V.; Turrent, L. del C. I.; Padilla, C. R. Bactericidal Effect of 
Silver Nanoparticles Against Multidrug-Resistant Bacteria. World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
2010, 26(4), 615–621.
Lemire, J. A.; Harrison, J. J.; Turner, R. J. Antimicrobial Activity of Metals: Mechanisms, 
Molecular Targets and Applications. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 2013, 11(6), 371–384.
Lesnichaya, M.; Gazizova, A.; Perfileva, A.; Nozhkina, O.; Graskova, I.; Sukhov, B. Starch￾Capped Sulphur Nanoparticles Synthesised From Bulk Powder Sulphur and Their Anti￾Phytopathogenic Activity Against Clavibacter Sepedonicus. IET Nanobiotechnol. 2021, 
15(7), 585–593.
Lydia, N. J.; Atchayadana, U.; Mubina, J. Marine Endophytic Fungi Isolated From Gulf of 
Mannar—A Source for New Generation of Pharmaceutical Drugs and Biosynthesis of 
Silver Nanoparticles and Its Antibacterial Efficacy. In Fungi Bio-Prospects in Sustainable 
Agriculture, Environment and Nano-technology; Elsevier, 2021; pp 175–185.
Mahdizadeh, V.; Safaie, N.; Khelghatibana, F. Evaluation of Antifungal Activity of Silver 
Nanoparticles against Some Phytopathogenic Fungi and Trichoderma Harzianum. J. Crop 
Protect. 2015, 4(3), 291–300.
Majumdar, T. D.; Singh, M.; Thapa, M.; Dutta, M.; Mukherjee, A.; Ghosh, C. K. Size￾Dependent Antibacterial Activity of Copper Nanoparticles Against Xanthomonas Oryzae
Pv. Oryzae–A Synthetic and Mechanistic Approach. Colloid Interface Sci. Commun. 2019,
32, 100190.
Makarovsky, D.; Fadeev, L.; Salam, B. B.; Zelinger, E.; Matan, O.; Inbar, J.; Jurkevitch, 
E.; Gozin, M.; Burdman, S. Silver Nanoparticles Complexed With Bovine Submaxillary 
Mucin Possess Strong Antibacterial Activity and Protect Against Seedling Infection. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. 2018, 84(4), e02212–e02217.
Mala, R.; Arunachalam, P.; Sivasankari, M. Synergistic Bactericidal Activity of Silver 
Nanoparticles and Ciprofloxacin Against Phytopathogens. J. Cell Tissue Res. 2012, 12(2), 
3249.
Malaikozhundan, B.; Vinodhini, J. Nanopesticidal Effects of Pongamia Pinnata Leaf Extract 
Coated Zinc Oxide Nanoparticle Against the Pulse Beetle, Callosobruchus Maculatus. 
Mater. Today Commun. 2018, 14, 106–115.
Malaj, E.; Peter, C.; Grote, M.; Kühne, R.; Mondy, C. P.; Usseglio-Polatera, P.; Brack, W.; 
Schäfer, R. B. Organic Chemicals Jeopardize the Health of Freshwater Ecosystems on the 
Continental Scale. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2014, 111(26), 9549–9554.
Malandrakis, A. A.; Kavroulakis, N.; Chrysikopoulos, C. V. Use of Copper, Silver and Zinc 
Nanoparticles Against Foliar and Soil-Borne Plant Pathogens. Sci. Total Environ. 2019,
670, 292–299.
Mehrbod, P.; Motamed, N.; Tabatabaeian, M.; Soleymani, E. R.; Amini, E.; Shahidi, M.; 
Kheyri, M. T. In Vitro Antiviral Effect of “Nanosilver” on Influenza Virus. DARU J. Pharm. 
Sci. 2009, 17(2),88–93.Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 159
Min, J.-S.; Kim, K.-S.; Kim, S.-W.; Jung, J.-H.; Lamsal, K.; Kim, S.-B.; Jung, M.-Y.; Lee, 
Y.-S. Effects of Colloidal Silver Nanoparticles on Sclerotium-Forming Phytopathogenic 
Fungi. Plant Pathol. J. 2009, 25(4), 376–380.
Misra, A. N.; Misra, M.; Singh, R. Nanotechnology in Agriculture and Food Industry. Int. J. 
Pure Appl. Sci. Technol. 2013, 16(2), 1.
Mishra, A.; Saini, R. K.; Bajpai, A. K. Polymer Formulations for Pesticide Release. In 
Controlled Release of Pesticides for Sustainable Agriculture; Springer, 2020; pp 185–206.
Mishra, S.; Singh, H. B. Biosynthesized Silver Nanoparticles as a Nano-weapon against 
Phytopathogens: Exploring Their Scope and Potential in Agriculture. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol. 2015, 99(3), 1097–1107.
Mishra, S.; Singh, B. R.; Naqvi, A. H.; Singh, H. B. Potential of Biosynthesized Silver 
Nanoparticles Using Stenotrophomonas Sp. BHU-S7 (MTCC 5978) for Management of 
Soil-Borne and Foliar Phytopathogens. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7(1), 1–15.
Mishra, S.; Singh, B. R.; Singh, A.; Keswani, C.; Naqvi, A. H.; Singh, H. B. Biofabricated 
Silver Nanoparticles Act as a Strong Fungicide against Bipolaris Sorokiniana Causing Spot 
Blotch Disease in Wheat. Plos One 2014, 9(5), e97881.
Mohamed, M. A.; Abd–Elsalam, K. A. Nanoantimicrobials for Plant Pathogens Control: 
Potential Applications and Mechanistic Aspects. In Nanobiotechnology Applications in 
Plant Protection; Springer, 2018; pp 87–109.
Namasivayam, S. K. R.; Bharani, R. A. Biocompatible Silver Nanoparticles-Loaded Fungal 
Metabolites Nanoconjugate (AgNp–FM) Preparation for the Noteworthy Pesticidal 
Activity. National Academy Science Letters 2021; pp 1–7.
Narendrakumar, G.; Karthick Raja Namasivayam, S. Surface-Modified Nanosilica–Chitinase 
(SiNp-Chs)-Doped Nano Enzyme Conjugate and Its Synergistic Pesticidal Activity with 
Plant Extracts against Armyworm Spodoptera Litura (Fab.)(Lepidoptera: Noctuidae). IET 
Nanobiotechnol. 2021, 15(1), 117–134.
Noha, K.; Bondok, A. M.; El-Dougdoug, K. A. Evaluation of Silver Nanoparticles as Antiviral 
Agent against ToMV and PVY in Tomato Plants. Sciences 2018, 8(01), 100–111.
Nuruzzaman, M. D.; Rahman, M. M.; Liu, Y.; Naidu, R. Nanoencapsulation, Nano-Guard 
for Pesticides: A New Window for Safe Application. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2016, 64(7), 
1447–1483.
Ocsoy, I.; Paret, M. L.; Ocsoy, M. A.; Kunwar, S.; Chen, T.; You, M.; Tan, W. Nanotechnology 
in Plant Disease Management: DNA-Directed Silver Nanoparticles on Graphene Oxide as 
an Antibacterial against Xanthomonas Perforans. Acs Nano 2013, 7(10), 8972–8980.
Oh, J.-W.; Chun, S. C.; Chandrasekaran, M. Preparation and in Vitro Characterization of 
Chitosan Nanoparticles and Their Broad-Spectrum Antifungal Action Compared to 
Antibacterial Activities Against Phytopathogens of Tomato. Agronomy 2019, 9(1), 21.
Pariona, N.; Paraguay-Delgado, F.; Basurto-Cereceda, S.; Morales-Mendoza, J. E.; Hermida￾Montero, L. A.; Mtz-Enriquez, A. I. Shape-Dependent Antifungal Activity of ZnO Particles 
against Phytopathogenic Fungi. Appl. Nanosci. 2020, 10(2), 435–443.
Park, H.-J.; Kim, S.-H.; Kim, H.-J.; Choi, S.-H. A New Composition of Nanosized Silica￾Silver for Control of Various Plant Diseases. Plant Pathol. J. 2006, 22(3), 295–302.
Pascual-Villalobos, M. J.; Cantó-Tejero, M.; Vallejo, R.; Guirao, P.; Rodríguez-Rojo, S.; 
Cocero, M. J. Use of Nanoemulsions of Plant Essential Oils as Aphid Repellents. Ind. 
Crops Products 2017, 110, 45–57.
Patel, N.; Desai, P.; Patel, N.; Jha, A.; Gautam, H. K. Agronanotechnology for Plant Fungal 
Disease Management: A Review. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. App. Sci. 2014, 3(10), 71–84.160 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Pho, Q. H.; Losic, D.; Ostrikov, K. K.; Tran, N. N.; Hessel, V. Perspectives on Plasma-Assisted 
Synthesis of N-Doped Nanoparticles as Nanopesticides for Pest Control in Crops. React. 
Chem. Eng. 2020, 5(8), 1374–1396.
Prasad, R.; Kumar, V.; Prasad, K. S. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: Present 
Concerns and Future Aspects. Afr. J Biotechnol. 2014, 13(6), 705–713.
Rai, A.; Prabhune, A.; Perry, C. C. Antibiotic Mediated Synthesis of Gold Nanoparticles with 
Potent Antimicrobial Activity and Their Application in Antimicrobial Coatings. J. Mater. 
Chem. 2010, 20(32), 6789–6798.
Rajput, V., Singh, A., Minkina, T., Shende, S., Kumar, P., Verma, K., Bauer, T., Gorobtsova, 
O., Deneva, S. and Sindireva, A. Potential Applications of Nanobiotechnology in Plant 
Nutrition and Protection for Sustainable Agriculture. Nanotechnology in Plant Growth 
Promotion and Protection, 2021; pp 79–92
Rajwade, J. M.; Chikte, R. G.; Paknikar, K. M. Nanomaterials: New Weapons in a Crusade 
against Phytopathogens. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 2020, 104(4), 1437–1461.
Ramkumar, G.; Asokan, R.; Ramya, S.; Gayathri, G. Characterization of Trigonella Foenum￾Graecum Derived Iron Nanoparticles and Its Potential Pesticidal Activity Against Tuta 
Absoluta (Lepidoptera). J. Cluster Sci. 2020, 1–6.
Sabbour, M. M.; Abd El-Aziz, S. E.; Shadia, E. Efficacy of Nano-Diatomaceous Earth against 
Red Flour Beetle, Tribolium Castaneum and Confused Flour Beetle, Tribolium Confusum 
(Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae) Under Laboratory and Storage Conditions. Bull. Environ. 
Pharmacol. Life Sci. 2015, 4(7), 54–59.
Sadiq, I. M.; Chowdhury, B.; Chandrasekaran, N.; Mukherjee, A. Antimicrobial Sensitivity 
of Escherichia Coli to Alumina Nanoparticles. Nanomed. Nanotechnol. Biol. Med. 2009,
5(3), 282–286.
Sahab, A. F.; Waly, A. I.; Sabbour, M. M.; Nawar, L. S. Synthesis, Antifungal and Insecticidal 
Potential of Chitosan (CS)-g-Poly (Acrylic Acid)(PAA) Nanoparticles Against Some Seed 
Borne Fungi and Insects of Soybean. Int. J. Chem. Tech. Res. 2015, 8(2), 589–598.
Saharan, V.; Mehrotra, A.; Khatik, R.; Rawal, P.; Sharma, S. S.; Pal, A. Synthesis of Chitosan 
Based Nanoparticles and Their in Vitro Evaluation against Phytopathogenic Fungi. Int. J. 
Biol. Macromol. 2013, 62, 677–683.
Sahayaraj, K.; Madasamy, M.; Radhika, S. A. Insecticidal Activity of Bio-Silver and Gold 
Nanoparticles Against Pericallia Ricini Fab.(Lepidaptera: Archidae). J. Biopestic. 2016,
9(1), 63.
Samih, M. A.; Rouhani, M.; Aslani, A.; Beiki, K. In Insecticidal Properties of Amitraz, 
Nano-Amitraz, Nano-ZnO and Nano-ZnO-Al2O3 Nanoparticles on Agonoscena Pistaciae 
(Hem.: Aphelaridae), Proceedings Symposium: Third International Symposium on Insect 
Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology; 2011; pp 2–5.
Sankar, M. V.; Abideen, S. Pesticidal Effect of Green Synthesized Silver and Lead 
Nanoparticles Using Avicennia Marina Against Grain Storage Pest Sitophilus Oryzae. Int. 
J. Nanomater. Biostruct. 2015, 5(3), 32–39.
Saratale, R. G.; Benelli, G.; Kumar, G.; Kim, D. S.; Saratale, G. D. Bio-Fabrication of 
Silver Nanoparticles Using the Leaf Extract of an Ancient Herbal Medicine, Dandelion 
(Taraxacum Officinale), Evaluation of Their Antioxidant, Anticancer Potential, and 
Antimicrobial Activity against Phytopathogens. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2018, 25(11), 
10392–10406.Nanoparticles: Plant Protective Agents Against Pathogenic Microbes and Pests 161
Sasson, Y.; Levy-Ruso, G.; Toledano, O.; Ishaaya, I. Nanosuspensions: Emerging Novel 
Agrochemical Formulations. In Insecticides design using advanced technologies; Springer, 
2007; pp 1–39.
Sathiyabama, M.; Muthukumar, S. Chitosan Guar Nanoparticle Preparation and Its in Vitro 
Antimicrobial Activity Towards Phytopathogens of Rice. Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2020, 153, 
297–304.
Sathiyabama, M.; Parthasarathy, R. Biological Preparation of Chitosan Nanoparticles and 
Its in Vitro Antifungal Efficacy Against Some Phytopathogenic Fungi. Carbohydr. Polym. 
2016, 151, 321–325.
Schnoor, B.; Elhendawy, A.; Joseph, S.; Putman, M.; Chacón-Cerdas, R.; Flores-Mora, D.; 
Bravo-Moraga, F.; Gonzalez-Nilo, F.; Salvador-Morales, C. Engineering Atrazine Loaded 
Poly (Lactic-Co-Glycolic Acid) Nanoparticles to Ameliorate Environmental Challenges. J. 
Agric. Food Chem. 2018, 66(30), 7889–7898.
Servin, A.; Elmer, W.; Mukherjee, A.; De la Torre-Roche, R.; Hamdi, H.; White, J. C.; 
Bindraban, P.; Dimkpa, C. A Review of the Use of Engineered Nanomaterials to Suppress 
Plant Disease and Enhance Crop Yield. J. Nanoparticle Res.2015, 17(2), 1–21.
Shanmugam, C.; Gunasekaran, D.; Duraisamy, N.; Nagappan, R.; Krishnan, K. Bioactive 
Bile Salt-Capped Silver Nanoparticles Activity Against Destructive Plant Pathogenic Fungi 
Through in Vitro System. RSC Adv. 2015, 5(87), 71174–71182.
Siddaiah, C. N.; Prasanth, K. V. H.; Satyanarayana, N. R.; Mudili, V.; Gupta, V. K.; Kalagatur, 
N. K.; Satyavati, T.; Dai, X.-F.; Chen, J.-Y.; Mocan, A. Chitosan Nanoparticles Having 
Higher Degree of Acetylation Induce Resistance against Pearl Millet Downy Mildew 
through Nitric Oxide Generation. Sci. Rep. 2018, 8(1), 1–14.
Sidhu, A.; Bala, A.; Singh, H.; Ahuja, R.; Kumar, A. Development of MgO-Sepoilite 
Nanocomposites Against Phytopathogenic Fungi of Rice (Oryzae Sativa): A Green 
Approach. ACS Omega 2020, 5(23), 13557–13565.
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova Science Publishers Inc., 
2020a; vol 1, pp 73–100.
Singh, A., Rajput, V., Rawat, S., Kumar Singh, A., Bind, A., Kumar Singh, A., Chernikova, N.; 
Voloshina, M., Lobzenko, I. Monitoring Soil Salinity and Recent Advances in Mechanism 
of Salinity Tolerance in Plants. Biogeosyst. Tech. 2020b,7(2). https://doi.org/10.13187/
bgt.2020.2.66
 Singh, A., Rajput, V., Singh, A., Sengar, R., Singh, R., Minkina, T. Transformation Techniques 
and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. Policy Issues 
Genet. Modified Crops 2021, 1, 515–542.
Siva, C.; Kumar, M. S. Pesticidal Activity of Eco-Friendly Synthesized Silver Nanoparticles 
Using Aristolochia Indica Extract against Helicoverpa Armigera Hubner (Lepidoptera: 
Noctuidae). Int. J. Adv. Sci. Tech. Res. 2015, 2, 197–226.
Sivapriya, V.; Azeez, A. N.; Deepa, S. V. Phyto Synthesis of Iron Oxide Nano Particles Using 
the Agro Waste of Anthocephalus Cadamba for Pesticidal Activity against Sitophilus 
Granaries. J. Entomol. Zool. Stud. 2018, 6, 1050–1057.
Song, M.-R.; Cui, S.-M.; Gao, F.; Liu, Y.-R.; Fan, C.-L.; Lei, T.-Q.; Liu, D.-C. Dispersible 
Silica Nanoparticles as Carrier for Enhanced Bioactivity of Chlorfenapyr. J. Pest. Sci. 2012,
37(3), 258–260.
Stephenson, G. R. Pesticide Use and World Food Production: Risks and Benefits, 
Environmental Fate and Effects of Pesticides. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 853, 261–270.162 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Suriyaprabha, R.; Karunakaran, G.; Kavitha, K.; Yuvakkumar, R.; Rajendran, V.; Kannan, 
N. Application of Silica Nanoparticles in Maize to Enhance Fungal Resistance. IET 
Nanobiotechnol. 2014, 8(3), 133–137.
Vanti, G. L.; Nargund, V. B.; Vanarchi, R.; Kurjogi, M.; Mulla, S. I.; Tubaki, S.; Patil, R. R. 
Synthesis of Gossypium Hirsutum-Derived Silver Nanoparticles and Their Antibacterial 
Efficacy against Plant Pathogens. Appl. Organomet. Chem. 2019, 33(1), e4630.
Vargas-Hernandez, M.; Macias-Bobadilla, I.; Guevara-Gonzalez, R. G.; Rico-Garcia, E.; 
Ocampo-Velazquez, R. V.; Avila-Juarez, L.; Torres-Pacheco, I. Nanoparticles as Potential 
Antivirals in Agriculture. Agriculture 2020, 10(10), 444.
Win, T. T.; Khan, S.; Fu, P. Fungus-(Alternaria Sp.) Mediated Silver Nanoparticles Synthesis, 
Characterization, and Screening of Antifungal Activity Against Some Phytopathogens. J. 
Nanotechnol. 2020, 2020.
Worrall, E. A.; Hamid, A.; Mody, K. T.; Mitter, N.; Pappu, H. R. Nanotechnology for Plant 
Disease Management. Agronomy 2018, 8(12), 285.
Wuithschick, M.; Birnbaum, A.; Witte, S.; Sztucki, M.; Vainio, U.; Pinna, N.; Rademann, K.; 
Emmerling, F.; Kraehnert, R.; Polte, J. Turkevich in New Robes: Key Questions Answered 
for the Most Common Gold Nanoparticle Synthesis. ACS Nano 2015, 9(7), 7052–7071.
Xing, K.; Xing, Y.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Shen, X.; Li, X.; Miao, X.; Feng, Z.; Peng, X.; Qin, 
S. Fungicidal Effect of Chitosan via Inducing Membrane Disturbance against Ceratocystis 
Fimbriata. Carbohydr. Polym. 2018, 192, 95–103.
Yang, F.-L.; Li, X.-G.; Zhu, F.; Lei, C.-L. Structural Characterization of Nanoparticles Loaded 
With Garlic Essential Oil and Their Insecticidal Activity Against Tribolium Castaneum 
(Herbst)(Coleoptera: Tenebrionidae). J. Agric. Food Chem. 2009, 57(21), 10156–10162.
Yi, G.; Li, X.; Yuan, Y.; Zhang, Y. Redox Active Zn/ZnO Duo Generating Superoxide (˙ O 2-) 
and H 2 O 2 Under All Conditions for Environmental Sanitation. Environ. Sci. Nano 2019,
6(1), 68–74.
Zahir, A. A.; Bagavan, A.; Kamaraj, C.; Elango, G.; Rahuman, A. A. Efficacy of Plant￾Mediated Synthesized Silver Nanoparticles Against Sitophilus Oryzae. J. Biopestic. 2012,
5, 95.
Zhao, X.; Cui, H.; Wang, Y.; Sun, C.; Cui, B.; Zeng, Z. Development Strategies and Prospects of 
Nano-Based Smart Pesticide Formulation. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2017, 66(26), 6504–6512.
Zong, R.-L.; Zhou, J.; Li, B.; Fu, M.; Shi, S.-K.; Li, L.-T. Optical Properties of Transparent 
Copper Nanorod and Nanowire Arrays Embedded in Anodic Alumina Oxide. J. Chem. 
Phys. 2005, 123(9), 094710.Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under 
Abiotic Stress
FATHY ELBEHIRY1
, HASSAN EL-RAMADY2
, and HEBA ELBASIOUNY3
1
Basic and Applied Sciences Department, Higher Institute for Agricultural 
Co-Operation, Shubra El-Kheima, Egypt
2
Soil and Water Department, Faculty of Agriculture, 
Kafrelsheikh University, Kafr El-Sheikh, Egypt
3
Department of Environmental and Biological Sciences, 
Home Economics Faculty, Al-Azhar University, Tanta, Egypt
CHAPTER 7
ABSTRACT 
Plant production faces many challenges including biotic and abiotic stresses. 
Consequently, the accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is acti￾vated and resulted in oxidative stress and may cause death in plants; however, 
in some cases, the plant has a strong defense system that may face these 
circumstances. Using nanomaterials is an attractive way for such circum￾stances; it can boost the defense system of plants, improve plant growth and 
development, and enhance the quality and the quantity of yields. Also, nano￾materials are applied as fertilizers to effectively supply nutrients (macro- and 
micronutrients) because of many of their advantages such as high surface 
area, ability to penetrate plants, higher reactivity with other chemicals, 
and others. Furthermore, nanomaterials are widely used to remediate toxic 
compounds in the environment. However, the use of nanomaterials in the 
agriculture sector needs to be precise because the high concentration of these 
materials may make them stressors for plants. 164 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Global agricultural production faces several challenges including the incred￾ibly increasing world population, changes in climate, and other biotic/
abiotic stresses (Sreelakshmi et al. 2021). These stresses cause losses in 
crop productivity especially drought, salinity, waterlogging, and heat stress 
as well as phytopathogens (Rhaman et al., 2021). Hence, cultivated plants 
under stress have a great defense system, which supports plants against these 
stresses through endogenous materials like nonenzymatic antioxidants (e.g., 
ascorbic acid, glutathione, proline) or enzymatic antioxidants (e.g., catalase, 
peroxidases, and superoxide dismutase). Several exogenous materials have 
been applied to mitigate these abiotic stresses like melatonin (Tiwari et al., 
2020; Menhas et al., 2021), nitric oxide (Zhou et al., 2021), 5-aminolevulinic 
acid as plant growth regulators (Rhaman et al., 2021), and nanofertilizers 
(NFs) (Sharma et al., 2021). Nanofertilizers or nano-encapsulated nutrients 
are considered effective slow-release nutrients for plant demand that further 
regulate plant growth (Madzokere et al., 2021). It could be encapsulated 
the conventional fertilizers using nanoparticles for the slow and sustainable 
release of nutrients over an extended time (Madzokere et al., 2021; Sharma 
et al., 2021).
Recently, many engineered NFs have been applied for supporting crops 
under abiotic stresses such as nano copper (González-García et al., 2021; 
Nguyen et al., 2021; Noman et al., 2020, 2021; Rai et al., 2021; Xu et al., 
2021), nano iron (Mohammadi et al., 2020; Ahmed et al., 2021; Bidi et al., 
2021; Manzoor et al., 2021; Sreelakshmi et al., 2021), nano selenium (Zahedi 
et al., 2020; Shalaby et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2020, 2021), and nano zinc 
(Hassanpour-aghdam et al., 2020; Faizan et al., 2021a, 2021b; Priyanka et 
al., 2021; Semida et al., 2021; Shah et al., 2021; Yasmin et al., 2021). The 
NFs can supply cultivated plants with nutrients, improving nutrient efciency 
and enhancing plant growth under stress (Fatima et al., 2021). On the other 
hand, several nanomaterials (NMs) have many applications under stressful 
conditions like nano-phytoremediation (Romeh and Saber, 2020), although 
sometimes the over-application of NMs may cause a serious problem as 
nano-pollutants, which could be found in water (Gui et al., 2021) and soil 
(Naghdi et al., 2017). Recently, these nano-pollutants have an increasing 
global concern because of their possible harmful impacts on human health 
and the entire environment.
Therefore, this chapter will focus on diferent NMs on cultivated plants 
under diferent abiotic stresses. The role of nanofertilizers for stressful plants, Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 165
nano-phytoremediation, and nano-pollutants as stressors on cultivated plants 
will be also discussed.
7.2 NANOMATERIALS FOR CULTIVATED PLANTS UNDER ABIOTIC 
STRESS
The relationship between plants and NMs is long-standing, and plants are 
regularly exposed to natural NMs. Plants have powerful defensive systems 
to combat diverse stressors since they have survived and developed geneti￾cally and phenotypically under severe environments throughout their lives. 
Synthetic NMs have recently put these mechanisms to the challenge (Dev 
et al., 2018), although advanced NT offers appealing advantages such as 
improved efficiency of chemicals through enhanced nanostructure that 
decreases their environmental loads in the chemical priming applications. 
Despite related lack of knowledge about the interactions between NPs 
and plants, their applications could be a promising approach in agriculture 
(Gohari et al., 2021). Abiotic stresses can be counted as the most severe 
negative circumstances that plants face. The severity of any of them can be 
increased in plants as they are sessile organisms and hence cannot move out 
avoiding the disturbance of whole plant metabolism and performance. As 
a result of confronting abiotic stresses, too much accumulation of ROS is 
activated which leads to a circumstance of oxidative stress and ultimately 
causes cell death. Normally, chloroplasts, mitochondrial, and peroxisomes 
processes create ROS; however, environmental conditions that boost ROS 
accumulation cause oxidative stress conditions. The uncontrolled oxidation 
encouraged or motivated by any environmental stress can be overcome by 
cellular defense mechanisms, which include variable antioxidant enzymes 
and plant secondary metabolites such as flavonoids, phenolics, and proline 
(Souza et al., 2017; Hussain et al., 2021). 
The applications of NPs include mitigation of abiotic stresses among other 
applications. In diferent crop species, the application of NMs reduces reac￾tive oxygen species (ROS), malondialdehyde content, and chlorophyll degra￾dation accelerating the activities of antioxidative enzymes, photosynthetic 
parameters, Rubisco expression, and genes of chlorophyll-binding protein. 
Moreover, NPs can protect the photosynthesis process, a cellular process 
susceptible to abiotic stresses, by reducing osmotic and oxidative stresses. 
Generally, NMs have shown enhanced crop growth in adverse conditions. In 
contrast, the transformation and fate of NMs in agro-ecosystems also raise 166 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
signifcant issues since these NMs in certain conditions may generate ROS 
and N and demonstrate toxic efects (Singh and Husen, 2020; Gohari et al., 
2021). For example, in comparison to control and other treatments, foliar 
application of nano-Se on cucumber under combined stressors (salinity and 
heat) enhanced growth metrics, growth yield, and yield quality (H2
O2
 and 
Si) (Shalaby et al., 2021). The nano-Fe oxide is also stated to assist plants 
to cope with salt. Photosystem II (PSII) performance and photosynthetic 
rate were enhanced in seeds primed with sorghum iron oxide NP (Kukde 
et al., 2019). It has also been found that plant sensitivity to NPs correlated 
with an increase in lettuce P abundance and absorption, as well as enhanced 
plant development. Stress is thought to have played a role in enhanced root 
exudation in lettuce following exposure to TiO2
 NPs in the soil. As the TiO2
NP concentration in the soil elevated, shoot and root length, and dry weight 
enhanced in comparison to regulation (Montes et al., 2017). The usage of 
Ti NPs is becoming increasingly popular. It is described that seeds treated 
with Ti NPs suspensions were found to have higher germination rates, longer 
root lengths, and better seedling development in a variety of plant species. 
Furthermore, Ti NPs improved plant resistance to abiotic and biotic stresses 
such as cold, drought, Cd toxicity, and bacterial spot disease by Xanthomonas 
perforans (Gómez-Merino and Trejo-Téllez, 2018). 
7.3 NANOFERTILIZERS FOR STRESSFUL PLANTS
After drought and salt, plant nutrient deficiency is a major limiting factor for 
plant growth and yield. Plants require nutrients for growth and development, 
and their roots absorb the majority of mineral nutrients from the soil. Fertil￾izers, on the other hand, are given to the soil to compensate for nutritional 
deficiencies, allowing plants to develop normally. For their growth and 
development, plants require 17 elements, 14 of which are essential nutrients. 
Six of these key nutrients, Ca, K, Mg, N, P, and S, are macronutrients that 
must be absorbed in substantial amounts. Cl, Cu, Mn, Fe, Zn, Co, Mo, and 
Ni are micronutrients that are needed in tiny amounts. The nutrient shortage 
shown in commercially accessible economic crops has an impact on human 
health, particularly among rural residents, but NT’s long-term strategy is 
alleviating these issues (Amjad and Serajuddin, 2021). In addition, high 
demands for agricultural products put enormous pressure on the new agricul￾tural strategies including the use of high-yielding chemically manufactured 
fertilizer, farmyard manure, bio-manure, etc., because it has been shown that Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 167
fertilizer use boosts the production and its products in the proper proportions. 
Thus, chemical fertilizers have become an important element in meeting the 
growing demands. Because of the ever-increasing population with plen￾tiful food supply, agricultural resources need additional development. The 
expensive cost of traditional fertilizers is a challenge for all producers at the 
net root level since they are utilized in large amounts (Fatima et al., 2021). 
Recently, NT-based products are developed for the utilization in agriculture. 
Agri-NT products include many materials such as NFs, and nano-pesticides 
which are modernized agriculture and associated fields. They are created 
in parallel with the progress of the emerging agri-NT. The novel NFs can 
be made by many NPs for increasing crop production. For example, ZnO 
NPs can stimulate the lateral roots that can modify the root architecture and 
enhance the whole uptake of nutrients in plants (Thirugnanasambandan, 
2021). 
At the nanoscale, the matter has changed characteristics that are unique 
and distinct from those found at the macroscopic level. These nano-formula￾tions might be used in the agricultural and food sectors because of the unique 
features of nano-agrochemicals, such as high surface-to-volume ratio, high 
reactivity, efectiveness, and efciency (Pirzadah et al., 2020). Thus, recently, 
NT has been widely utilized for producing NFs and for agricultural purposes. 
Thus, NFs are modifed or synthesized materials that are applied to improve 
the soil quality for enhanced crop quality and quantity of diferent crops. 
Nanofertilizers are a customized version of traditional fertilizers that are 
created from bulk materials or vegetative or reproductive portions of plants 
utilizing nanotechnology by a variety of physical, chemical, and biological 
techniques. Nanoparticles have entirely diferent molecular characteristics 
than bulk materials due to their tiny size and high surface-to-volume ratio. 
Nanofertilizing can be a signifcant tool for achieving sustainable agriculture 
by replacing traditional fertilizers (El-Gamry et al., 2018; Shukla et al., 
2019). Nanofertilizers are small enough to penetrate the root, epidermis, 
and stomata of leaves, and also move rapidly through the xylem and 
phloem vessels of plants. The NFs research and uses to beneft crops have 
been described (Wang and Nguyen, 2018). The NPs afect plants at very 
low concentrations, and their efects vary depending on the type and dose; 
they have been demonstrated to be an appealing alternative for the produc￾tion of NFs that are more efcient and efective than standard fertilizers 
(Khan and Upadhyaya). Surprisingly, most of the NMs examined on crops 
as “nanofertilizers” were either created or marketed by chemical companies 
for commercial purposes. Furthermore, the likelihood of applying NFs in 168 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
large-scale agriculture systems remains a challenge. Many countries, on the 
other hand, are going forward with their plans to use NFs in their agriculture 
systems to improve crop productivity (Pirzadah et al., 2020).
Some of NF researches have focused on micronutrients such as Zn, Cu, 
Mn, and Fe; however, plants require large amounts of macronutrients (N, 
P, K, Ca, S, and Mg) to increase crop productivity, so macronutrients have 
received more attention than micronutrients (Vázquez-Núñez et al., 2018). 
Sharma et al. (2021) reported that C nanotubes, Cu, Mn, Mo, Zn, Fe, Si, 
their oxides, and NMs of commonly used agricultural inputs like urea, P, and 
S are among the NMs accessible. The ingredients described above can be 
administered in a variety of ways, including soil application, plant injection, 
in vitro, and foliar treatment. Nutrients applied foliarly have been shown to 
quickly correct nutrient defcits and improve crop production (Sharma et al., 
2021). 
Many authors applied NFs to improve crop quality and quantity in 
diferent ways. For example, Wang and Nguyen (2018) stated that ZnO and 
TiO NFs boost nutrient absorption and the content of chlorophyll, as well 
as enzymatic activity, resulting in better crop growth, yields, and quality. 
Furthermore, Zn, Ti, Mn, and Fe oxide NPs are not only micronutrients for 
plants, but they also limit the growth of plant disease fungi. Micronutrient 
NFs have been used to some crops such as barley, soybeans (Glycin max L.), 
spinach (Spinacia oleracea), cluster beans (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba L.), 
peanuts (Arachis hypogae), pearl millet (Pennisetum americanum), and 
chickpeas (Cicer arietinum L.) (Wang and Nguyen, 2018). Kandil et al. 
(2020) conducted a feld experiment to study the efects of combined foliar 
application treatments (fulvic acid and NPK NPs) and boron (B) fertilizer on 
sugar beet plants for 120 and 150 days after planting. Fulvic acid + NPK NPs 
signifcantly increased the root length, diameter, and weight, and the root to 
shoot ratio of plants. The interaction between fulvic acid or NPK NPs and B 
signifcantly afected the parameters of plants’ yield and quality. However, the 
conjunction of foliar applications of fulvic acid + NPK NPs with B resulted 
in the greatest mean values of these parameters in the environmental and 
soil conditions at Alexandria, Egypt. Singh et al. (2021) applied and evalu￾ated synthesized ZnO NP as an alternative NF to conventional Zn sulfate in 
Zn-defcient soils varied with their pH from 7.2 to 8.7. They applied several 
doses ranging from 0 to 500 mg L−1 with diferent sizes (30–100 nm). It has 
shown that the maximum soil microbial biomass C and bacterial population 
were recorded at 100 mg L−1 of ZnONPs, while a sharp decline was recorded 
at higher concentrations. Furthermore, soil application of 5 mg kg−1 ZnO Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 169
NPs produced higher root elongation, shoot elongation, total chlorophyll, 
grain yield, and grain Zn-content compared to the conventional Zn sulfate. 
They concluded the application of spherically synthesized ZnO NPs with an 
average of 36.7 nm at 5 mg kg−1 in the soil and 100 mg L−1 as a foliar applica￾tion to maintain soil microbial biomass C and bacterial population improves 
total chlorophyll, and grain Zn-contents, thus sustaining wheat production in 
Zn-defcient soils (neutral and alkaline).
Salem et al. (2021) reported some advantages of NFs that make them 
more efective and benefcial than traditional fertilizers:
1) Increased surface area which increases nutrient absorption and effi￾ciency and improved NF reactivity with other chemicals.
2) Higher solubility: In a range of solvents, particularly water, the 
NF is highly soluble. This NF characteristic helps to solubilize and 
disperse soil insoluble nutrients increasing nutrient bioavailability.
3) Small particle size: NFs have a particle size of less than 100 nm, 
which enhances their capacity to enter plants from applied surfaces 
like soil or leaves, increasing plant nutrient uptake.
4) Fertilizer encapsulating at NPs: This causes increased nutrient 
availability and absorption in agricultural plants. Zeolite-based NFs 
enhance fertilizer availability in crops in the growth cycle, limit 
nutrient losses by denitrification, volatilization, and leaching, and 
fix nutrients in the soil.
5) Rapid penetration and regulated fertilizer release: Because of this, 
NFs contribute to enhancing plant nutrient availability, healthy seed￾ling development, and reduced fertilizer toxicity. When compared 
to bulk zinc sulfate, nano-ZnO delivers a greater percentage of 
germination and root development in peanut seeds.
6) Nutrient absorption efficiency of NFs: This increases the propor￾tion of soil nutrients absorbed by crops. Furthermore, NFs help to 
prevent fertilizer loss through leaching.
7) NFs release period: Bulk fertilizers with activated nutrient release 
periods are beneficial in the short term; however, NFs can lengthen 
the nutrient release period as in Figure 7.1.170 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
FIGURE 7.1 Some advantages of nanofertilizers.
Although more attention is being paid to the role of nanofertilizers in 
increasing nutrient usage efciency and water purifcation, their positive 
efects on decreasing the negative impact of various abiotic stresses on 
plants, resulting in increased agricultural yields, have been reported also. As 
a result, determining the precise benefcial concentration of NPs is critical 
to minimize plant toxicity, which varies depending on the kind of NPs, plant 
stage during the application, and NPs concentration (Salem et al., 2021). 
Table 7.1 includes the efect of using some nanofertilizers under abiotic 
stresses on plants.
7.4 NANOMATERIALS AND REMEDIATION OF TOXIC 
CONTAMINATES 
Environmental crises, fossil fuel combustion, urbanization, and industrial￾ization have all contributed to soil contamination over time, creating toxic 
metals, which is a recurring concern. Since a result, toxic contaminants 
in soil remediation are constantly a hot subject, as polluted soil may have Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 171 TABLE 7.1 A Survey on Some Engineered Nanofertilizers on Some Crops Under Abiotic Stresses Crop (scientific name) Stress type and its details Nanofertilizer and its concentration Roles of nanofertilizer Reference Nano-copper Bell pepper (Capsicum annuum L.) Salt stress (25 and 50 mM NaCl) Chemical Cu-NPs at 100 and 500 mg l−1 (50 nm) Increased the bioactive compounds in fruits like flavonoids, carotene, and carotenoids González-García et al. (2021) Maize (Zea mays L.) Drought stress (drying soil for 7 days) Chemical zero-valent copper (Cuo-NPs; 30–40 nm; 69.4 µM) Maintained water status in leaves; photosynthetic pigments, and improved detoxification of ROS Nguyen et al. (2021) Maize (Zea mays L.) Soil salinity (0.5 mM NaCl = 4 dS m−1) Biological Cu-NPs (28.55 nm; 25, 50, 100 mg kg−1) Dose 100 mg kg−1 prevented oxidative damage and lipid peroxidation by acti- vating the antioxidants and demoting ROS cellular levels Noman et al. (2021) Rice (Oryza sativa L.) CuO-NPs stress (100 μM) Chemical CuO-NPs (50 nm) Applied Si and H2S supported rice oxida- tive stress by CuO-NPs, via stimulated enzymes of ascorbate-glutathione cycle Rai et al. (2021) NO plants Soil stress by different levels of pH (4.89–8.05), texture, DOC (8.39–107 mg l−1) CuO-NPs (100 mg l−1) at three forms: CuO-NPs, CuO-NTs, and CuO-MPs (50, 10–12 × 75–100 nm, 10 μm resp.) Dissolution of CuO-NPs in soil totally controlled by soil DOC and pH; greater Cu2+ release by nano-CuO than CuO-NTs and CuO-MPs Xu et al. (2021) Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) Cadmium stress (soil mixed with 4.75 mg kg−1) Biological Cu-NPs (17–38 nm; 25, 50, 100 mg kg−1) Cu-NPs (100 mg kg-1) decreased in wheat Cd translocation by 49.62 % Noman et al. (2020) Nano- iron Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Cd stress (16.31 mg kg−1 soil) and drought stress Biological iron oxide-NPs (25, 50, 100 mg kg−1) Increased biomass, enzymatic antioxidants, decrease in ROS Ahmed et al. (2021)172 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture Crop (scientific name) Stress type and its details Nanofertilizer and its concentration Roles of nanofertilizer Reference Rice (Oryza sativa L.) As stress (50 μM) in Hoagland solution for 21 days Chemical iron oxide-NPs (20–30 nm; 50 mg L−1) Reduced As accumulation in rice roots and leaves and phytotoxicity Bidi et al. (2021) Wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) Cd (3.78 mg kg−1) and salinity stress (EC 8.07 dS m−1) Biological FeO-NPs (19–40 nm; 25 to 100 mg kg−1) FeO-NPs (100 mg kg−1) increased antioxidants, biomass, photosynthetic pigments under stress Manzoor et al. (2021) Foxtail millet (Setaria italica L.) Drought stress by employing 10% PEG Biological Fe3O4-NPs (10–18 nm; 5, 10, 15, 20, 50, 90, and 120 mg l−1) Increased the uptake of iron, H2O2, and proline contents in plants, which amelio- rated drought stress Sreelakshmi et al. (2021) Sunflower (Helianthus annuus) Chromium stress (Cr IV 75 and 150 mg kg−1) Chemical Fe0-NPs (35–45 nm; 1.0 and 2.0%) Reduced Cr uptake and enhanced activity of de-toxification plant enzymes (SOD, CAT, and POX) Mohammadi et al. (2020) Nano- selenium Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.) Soil salinity (EC 4.49 dS m−1) and heat stress (41°C) Biological nano-Se (50–200 nm; 25 mg L−1) Improved productivity and growth under combined heat and salinity stress Shalaby et al. (2021) Paddy rice (Oryza sativa L.) Cd and Pb stress (3.0 and 300 mg kg−1, respectively.) Chemical nano-Se (160 nm; 25–100 μmol L−1) Dose of 50 μmol L−1 Se-NPs is the best; decreased Cd accumulation, and improved photosynthesis Wang et al. (2021) Paddy rice (Oryza sativa L.) Cd and Pb stress (3.0 and 300 mg kg−1, respectively) Chemical nano-Se (50 nm; 4, 6, 12 mg L−1) Combined nano-silica and nano-Se reduced Cd and Pb accumulation; mitigated oxidative stress damage Wang et al. (2020) Strawberry (Fragaria × ananassa Duch.) Drought stress (30, 60, and 100% field capacity) Chemical Se-NPs (25 mg L−1, 60 nm) Applied Se/SiO2-NPs at 100 mg L−1 managed drought stress by higher level of osmolytes like carbohydrate and proline Zahedi et al. (2020) TABLE 7.1 (Continued)Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 173 Crop (scientific name) Stress type and its details Nanofertilizer and its concentration Roles of nanofertilizer Reference Nano- zinc Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) Cu stress (100 mg kg−1 soil) Chemical ZnO-NPs (20–100 nm; 50 mg L−1) Improved photosynthetic activity, growth, proline, stomatal aperture, and enzymatic antioxidants Faizan et al. (2021a) Tomato (Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.) Salt stress (150 mM NaCl) Chemical ZnO-NPs (20–100 nm; 10, 50, 100 mg L−1) Alleviated salt toxicity by boosting the growth and mitigated the adverse effects on plants Faizan et al. (2021b) Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) In hydroponic system (Cd 12.5 and 150 mg L−1 Pb) for 21 days Phycomolecules coated zinc oxide-NPs (75 mg L−1) Protected cotton seedlings by alleviating Cd and Pb phytotoxicity; promoted antioxidant systems Priyanka et al. (2021) Eggplant (Solanum melongena L.) Drought stress (60% of ETc) and saline soil (7.33 dS m−1) Chemical ZnO-NPs (200 nm; 50 and 100 mg kg l−1) Alleviated damage of cell membrane and increased leaf and stem anatomical parameters Semida et al. (2021) Muskmelon (Cucumis melo L.) Cd stress (75 mg kg−1) Chemical ZnO-NPs (20 mg kg−1) Alleviated phytotoxicity of Cd by reducing uptake of Cd and protein/non protein bound thiols under Cd-stress Shah et al. (2021) Safflower (Carthamus tinctorius L.) Salt stress (250 mM NaCl) Biological ZnO-NPs (17 mg L−1) Protected plants to stress by regulating ion homeostasis and antioxidant systems Yasmin et al. (2021) Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis L.) Salt stress (75, 150, and 225 mM NaCl) Chemical nano-zinc (10–30 nm; at 3 mg L−1) Alleviated impacts of salinity by decreasing both H2O2 and MDA Hassanpour-aghdam et al. (2020) CAT, catalase; CuO-MPs, spherical microsized CuO; CuO-NTs, tubular nano-CuO; DOC, dissolved organic carbon; ETc, crop evapotranspira- tion; Fe0, nano-zerovalent iron; H2O2, hydrogen peroxide; MDA, malondialdehyde; PEG, poly ethylene glycol; POX, peroxidase; ROS, reactive oxygen species; SOD, super oxide dismutase. TABLE 7.1 (Continued)174 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
negative impacts on the environment, agricultural safety, and human health. 
Numerous remediation techniques have been created; nevertheless, it is 
critical to ensure their safety and to consider each methodology’s limita￾tions that include high-energy inputs and residues generation (Souza et al., 
2020). One of the most environmental applications of NT is the remediation 
of contaminated environments and hazardous substances. Some of NPs are 
used to remove contaminants, while others sequester them. For example, C 
nanotubes have been noted for their significantly stronger capacity to adsorb 
dioxin than conventional activated carbon. Furthermore, the use of micro￾organisms for intracellular/extracellular creation of different NPs (either in 
chemical composition, in size/shape, or regulated mono-dispersity) can be a 
modern, commercially proper, and eco-friendly approach that can decrease 
toxic chemicals in the traditional protocol ( Juwarkar et al., 2010). 
Much research in recent years have demonstrated that NT combined 
with phytoremediation can be a promising remediation approach for 
contaminated soil. This advanced technology has gained prominence in 
the remediation of potentially toxic contaminants from soil, and a variety 
of nanomaterials, nano-TiO2
, nano-Ni, nano-Ag, nano-SnO2
, nano-Zn, 
nZVI (nanozero valent Fe), biochar-supported nanohydroxyapatite, and 
nano-C black can be used to remove potentially toxic metals such as Pb, 
Cd, and other metals. When heavy metal-contaminated soils are treated 
with a sophisticated nanophytoremediation technology, diferent NMs have 
varying remediation efects. Furthermore, the efect of potentially harmful 
heavy metal immobilization changes in contaminated soils is infuenced 
by varied particle sizes of NMs, which afects the heavy metal restoration 
process (Shikha and Singh, 2021). Souza et al. (2020) stated also that Fe 
oxide NPs have higher 10 times sorption capacity of microscale particles. 
The low cost, low energy consumption, and suitability to in situ treatment 
are all advantages of this technique. However, it is critical to examine the 
environmental impacts of NPs (Souza et al., 2020). Souza et al. (2020) 
added also in this context that many NPs have been investigated for As 
adsorption (and hence remediation). The most promising materials for this 
include Fe oxide NPs like hematite and magnetite, as well as zerovalent 
iron NPs. Depending on the degree of oxidation of As, the mechanism of 
interaction between As and Fe NPs complexes such as FeS difers. For 
example, at pH > 6, the As(V) interacts with FeS particles by creating an 
outer sphere complexation and chemical complexation, whereas the As(III) 
interacts with FeS particles via surface sorption. At pH 5, the interaction 
happens by the next equationRole of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 175
3FeS+H3
AsO3
+3H+
⇌1/2 Fe3
S4
+AsS+3/2 Fe2
+ 3H2
O
Zand et al. (2020) reported that the use of NMs to promote phytoremedia￾tion of contaminated soils is gaining traction around the world. Because of 
its large specifc surface area, great reducibility, cheap cost, and low toxicity, 
nanoscale zero-valent iron (nZVI) have been utilized in the remediation of 
soils contaminated with organic and inorganic pollutants. Immobilization of 
heavy metals in soil by the use of nZVI has been discovered to be a key 
mechanism for achieving remediation goals in metal-contaminated loca￾tions. The efcacy of nZVI to immobilize metals in soils is infuenced by 
many factors, including soil characteristics, nZVI dosage, and the presence 
of nontarget contaminants. Anionic heavy metals (As and Cr) were shown 
to be more immobilized in acidic soils, while cationic heavy metals (Pb, 
Cd, and Zn) were found to be more retained in calcareous soils. The P Pb, 
As, and Cr immobilization increased by more than 82% when % nZVI was 
applied; however, nZVI had little efect on Cd availability/immobilization 
(only 13–42%), independent of soil pH. NPs’ efect in promoting plant 
development and tolerance to metal stress has been widely researched 
(El-Moneim et al., 2021). Si NPs may improve the nutrient status, photosyn￾thesis, morphology, and physiology of metal-stressed plants, allowing them 
to develop faster. In wheat grains, ZnO NPs increased Zn2+ concentration, 
photosynthetic pigments, antioxidant enzymes, and decreased Cd2+ concen￾tration. It is stated that ZnO NPs coupled with biochar reduced Cd2+ levels 
in rice (Oryza sativa) and maize (Zea mays) in a short time of growth. It 
is reported also that applying zero-valent Fe to calcareous or acidic soils 
reduced the availability of heavy metals (El-Moneim et al., 2021).
7.5 NANOMATERIALS AS STRESSORS ON CULTIVATED PLANTS 
Metal and metalloid NPs have the potential to help crops cope with the detri￾mental effects of abiotic stressors. On the other side, it has been discovered 
that at a certain concentration, certain NPs have detrimental impacts on crop 
yield (El-Moneim et al., 2021). Also, the explosive growth of NPs resulting 
from human activities contributes to environmental pollution and may have 
an adverse effect on the growth and yield of economically important crops, 
while accumulation of toxic components such as heavy metals in eatable 
parts of plants poses a health risk (Jampílek and Kráľová, 2019).
Toxic reactions and aberrant cell division are possible side efects. In 
onion root tips, silver nanoparticles (Ag NPs) and silver ions (Ag+) were 176 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
shown to lower the mitotic index and produce many chromosomal abnor￾malities (Allium cepa) (El-Moneim et al., 2021). Also, Au NPs, for example, 
promoted vegetative development and fruit/seed production at lower 
concentrations but inhibited them at greater concentrations (Liu et al., 2020). 
The plant promotes antioxidant defense function to minimize oxida￾tive damage and improve plant susceptibility to NPs toxicity (Rajput et 
al., 2019). Thus, diferent plants interact with the NMs through physical 
or chemical interaction. These interactions induce chemical and physical 
signaling, resulting in the production of unknown new chemicals that may be 
detrimental to plants, such as ROS and lipid peroxidation, as well as changes 
in ion transport across cell membranes. The major players that determine the 
interaction between NMs with plants include nanoparticle characteristics, 
plant species, and environmental variables (Dev et al., 2018).
7.6 CONCLUSIONS
Plants face a variety of challenges, including a growing global population and 
biotic and abiotic stresses. Agricultural yield losses are caused by drought, 
salt, waterlogging, and heat stress, as well as phytopathogens. As a result, 
stressed grown plants have a robust defense mechanism that uses endog￾enous resources like nonenzymatic antioxidants to defend them from these 
stresses. The use of nanotechnology in many fields including the agriculture 
field is promising in many aspects including plant growth and development 
under stress, the efficacy of fertilizing, remediation, and many other aspects. 
However, the explosive use of NPs contributes to environmental pollution 
and some negative impacts on plant growth and development, as well as 
on the accumulation of toxic components in edible parts of plants posing a 
health risk.
KEYWORDS
• nanomaterials
• abiotic stress
• reactive oxygen species
• nanofertilizers
• nano-pesticidesRole of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 177
REFERENCES 
Ahmed, T.; Noman, M.; Manzoor, N.; Shahid, M.; Abdullah, M.; Ali, L.; Wang, G.; Hashem, 
A.; Al-Arjani, A. F.; Alqarawi, A. A.; Abd-Allah, E. F.; Li, B. Nanoparticle-Based 
Amelioration of Drought Stress and Cadmium Toxicity in Rice Via Triggering the Stress 
Responsive Genetic Mechanisms and Nutrient Acquisition. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2021,
209, 111829. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2020.111829 
Amjad, S.; Serajuddin, M. Applications of Nanobiotechnology to Mitigate Mineral Nutrients 
Deficiency Stress in Crop Plants. In Nanobiotechnology; Al-Khayri, J. M., Ansari, M. I., 
Singh, A. K., Eds.; Springer: Cham, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-73606-4_19
Bidi, H.; Fallah, H.; Niknejad, Y.; Tari, D. B. Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Alleviate Arsenic 
Phytotoxicity in Rice by Improving Iron Uptake, Oxidative Stress Tolerance and 
Diminishing Arsenic Accumulation. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2021, 163, 348–357. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2021.04.020 
Dev, A.; Srivastava, A. K.; Karmakar, S. Nanomaterial Toxicity for Plants. Environ. Chem. 
Lett. 2018, 16, 85–100. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10311-017-0667-6
El-Ghamry, A.; Mosa, A. A.; Alshaal, T.; El-Ramady, H. Nanofertilizers Vs. Biofertilizers: 
New Insights. Environ. Biodivers. Soil Secur. 2018, 2(2018), 51–72. DOI: 10.21608/
jenvbs.2018.3880.1029
El-Moneim, D. A.; Dawood, M. F. A.; Moursi, Y. S.; et al. Positive and Negative Effects of 
Nanoparticles on Agricultural Crops. Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng. 2021, 6(21). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s41204-021-00117-0
Faizan, M.; Bhat, J. A.; Chen, C.; Alyemeni, M. N.; Wijaya, L.; Ahmad, P.; Yu, F.. Zinc Oxide 
Nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs) Induce Salt Tolerance by Improving the Antioxidant System 
and Photosynthetic Machinery in Tomato. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2021b, 161, 122–130. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2021.02.002 
Faizan, M.; Bhat, J. A.; Noureldeen, A.; Ahmad, P.; Yu, F. Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles and 
24-epibrassinolide Alleviates Cu Toxicity in Tomato by Regulating ROS Scavenging, 
Stomatal Movement and Photosynthesis. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2021a, 218, 112293. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2021.112293 
Fatima, F.; Hashim, A.; Anees, S. Efficacy of Nanoparticles as Nanofertilizer Production: 
A Review. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2021, 28, 1292–1303. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11356-020-11218-9 
Gohari, G.; Panahirad, S.; Sepehri, N.; Akbari, A.; Zahedi, S. M., Jafari, H.; Dadpour, M. 
R.; Fotopoulos, V. Enhanced Tolerance to Salinity Stress in Grapevine Plants Through 
Application of Carbon Quantum Dots Functionalized by Proline. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res.
2021, 28(31), 42877–42890. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-021-13794-w
Gómez-Merino, F. C.; Trejo-Téllez, L. I. The Role of Beneficial Elements in Triggering 
Adaptive Responses to Environmental Stressors and Improving Plant Performance. In 
Biotic and Abiotic Stress Tolerance in Plants; Vats, S., Eds.; Springer: Singapore, 2018. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-9029-5_6
González-García, Y.; Cárdenas-Álvarez, C.; Cadenas-Pliego, G.; Benavides-Mendoza, A.; 
Cabrera-de-la-Fuente, M.; Sandoval-Rangel, A.; Valdés-Reyna, J.; Juárez-Maldonado, A. 
Effect of Three Nanoparticles (Se, Si and Cu) on the Bioactive Compounds of Bell Pepper 
Fruits under Saline Stress. Plants (Basel) 2021, 10(2), 217. DOI: 10.3390/plants10020217
Gui, W.; Liu, J.; Song, X.; Zhang, H.; Lin, J.; Luan, B. A New Microfiltration Membrane 
With Three-Dimensional Reticular Architecture for Nano-pollutants Removal From 178 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Wastewater. Progress Natl. Sci. Mater. Int. 2021, 31(3), 414–419. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pnsc.2021.04.002 
Hassanpouraghdam, M. B.; Mehrabani, L. V.; Tzortzakis, N. Foliar Application of Nano-zinc 
and Iron Affects Physiological Attributes of Rosmarinus officinalis and Quietens NaCl 
Salinity Depression. J. Soil Sci. Plant Nutr. 2020, 20, 335–345. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s42729-019-00111-1 
Hussain, F.; Hadi, F.; Rongliang, Q. Effects of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles on Antioxidants, 
Chlorophyll Contents, and Proline in Persicaria Hydropiper L. and its Potential for 
Pb Phytoremediation. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2021, 28, 34697–34713. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11356-021-13132-0
Jampílek, J.; Kráľová, K. Impact of Nanoparticles on Photosynthesizing Organisms and Their 
Use in Hybrid Structures With Some Components of Photosynthetic Apparatus. In Plant 
Nanobionics, Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences; Prasad, R., Eds.; Springer: Cham, 
2019; pp 255–332. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-12496-0_11
Juwarkar, A. A.; Singh, S. K.; Mudhoo, A. A Comprehensive Overview of Elements in 
Bioremediation. Rev. Environ. Sci. Biotechnol. 2010, 9, 215–288. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11157-010-9215-6
Kandil, E. E.; Abdelsalam, N. R.; Abd EL Aziz, A. A.; Siddiqui, M. H. Efficacy of 
Nanofertilizer, Fulvic Acid and Boron Fertilizer on Sugar Beet (Beta vulgaris L.) Yield 
and Quality. Sugar Tech. 2020, 22, 782–791. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12355-020-00837-8
Kukde, S.; Sarangi, B. K.; Purohit, H. Antioxidant Role of Nanoparticles for Enhancing 
Ecological Performance of Plant System. Compr. Anal. Chem. 2019, 87, 159–187.
Liu, Y.; Pan, B.; Li, H.; Lang, D.; Zhao, Q.; Zhang, D.; Wu, M.; Steinberg, C. E.; Xing, B. Can 
the Properties of Engineered Nanoparticles be Indicative of Their Functions and Effects in 
Plants? Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2020, 205, 111128.
Madzokere, T. C.; Murombo, L. T.; Chiririwa, H. Nano-Based Slow Releasing Fertilizers for 
Enhanced Agricultural Productivity. In Materials Today: Proceedings, 2021; vol 45(3), pp 
3709–3715. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.12.674 
Manzoor, N.; Ahmed, T.; Noman, M.; Shahid, M.; Nazir, M. M.; Ali, L.; Alnusaire, T. S.; 
Li, B.; Schulin, R.; Wang, G. Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Ameliorated the Cadmium and 
Salinity Stresses in Wheat Plants, Facilitating Photosynthetic Pigments and Restricting 
Cadmium Uptake. Sci. Total Environ. 2021, 769, 145221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scitotenv.2021.145221 
Menhas, S.; Yang, X.; Hayat, K.; Aftab, T.; Bundschuh, J.; Arnao, M. B.; Zhou, Y.; Zhou, 
P. Exogenous Melatonin Enhances Cd Tolerance and Phytoremediation Efficiency by 
Ameliorating Cd‑Induced Stress in Oilseed Crops: A Review. J. Plant Growth Regulat.
2021, 41, 922–935. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00344-021-10349-8 
Mohammadi, H.; Amani-Ghadim, A. R.; Matin, A. A.; Ghorbanpour, M. Fe0 Nanoparticles 
Improve Physiological and Antioxidative Attributes of Sunflower (Helianthus annuus) 
Plants Grown in Soil Spiked With Hexavalent Chromium. 3 Biotech 2020, 10, 19. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s13205-019-2002-3 
Montes, A.; Bisson, M. A.; Gardella, J. A.; Aga, D. S. Uptake and Transformations of 
Engineered Nanomaterials: Critical Responses Observed in Terrestrial Plants and the 
Model Plant Arabidopsis Thaliana. Sci. Total Environ. 2017, 607–608, 1497–1516.
Naghdi, M.; Metahni, S.; Ouarda, Y.; Brar, S. K.; Das, R. K.; Cledon, M. Instrumental 
Approach Toward Understanding Nano-Pollutants. Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng. 2017, 2, 3. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s41204-017-0015-x Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 179
Nguyen, D. V.; Nguyen, H. M.; Le, N. T.; Nguyen, K. H.; Nguyen, H. T.; Le, H. M.; Nguyen, 
A. T.; Dinh, N. T. T.; Hoang, S. A.; Ha, C. V. Copper Nanoparticle Application Enhances 
Plant Growth and Grain Yield in Maize Under Drought Stress Conditions. J. Plant Growth 
Regul. 2021, 41, 364–375. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00344-021-10301-w 
Noman, M.; Ahmed, T.; Hussain, S.; Niazi, M. B. K.; Shahid, M.; Song, F. Biogenic Copper 
Nanoparticles Synthesized by Using a Copper-Resistant Strain Shigella flexneri SNT22 
Reduced the Translocation of Cadmium From Soil to Wheat Plants. J. Hazard. Mater.
2020, 398, 123175. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhazmat.2020.123175 
Noman, M.; Ahmed, T.; Shahid, M.; Niazi, M. B. K.; Qasim, M.; Kouadri, F.; Abdulmajeed, 
A. M.; Alghanem, S. M.; Ahmad, N.; Zafar, M.; Ali, S. Biogenic Copper Nanoparticles 
Produced by Using the Klebsiella Pneumoniae Strain NST2 Curtailed Salt Stress Effects in 
Maize by Modulating the Cellular Oxidative Repair Mechanisms. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf.
2021, 217, 112264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2021.112264 
Pirzadah, B.; Pirzadah, T. B.; Jan, A.; Hakeem, K. R. Nanofertilizers: A Way Forward for 
Green Economy. In Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences; Hakeem, K., Pirzadah, T., Eds.; 
Springer: Cham, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-39978-8_5
Priyanka, N.; Geetha, N.; Manish, T.; Sahi, S. V.; Venkatachalam, P. Zinc Oxide Nanocatalyst 
Mediates Cadmium and Lead Toxicity Tolerance Mechanism by Differential Regulation of 
Photosynthetic Machinery and Antioxidant Enzymes Level in Cotton Seedlings. Toxicol. 
Rep. 2021, 8, 295–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.toxrep.2021.01.016 
Rajput, V. D.; Minkina, T.; Sushkova, S.; Chokheli, V.; Soldatov, M. Toxicity Assessment of 
Metal Oxide Nanoparticles on Terrestrial Plants. Compr. Anal. Chem. 2019, 87, 189–207.
Rhaman, M. S.; Imran, S.; Karim, M. M.; Chakrobortty, J.; Mahamud, M. A.; Sarker, P.; 
Tahjib‑Ul‑Arif, M.; Robin, A. H. K.; Ye, W.; Murata, Y.; Hasanuzzaman, M. 5‑aminolevulinic 
Acid-Mediated Plant Adaptive Responses to Abiotic Stress. Plant Cell Rep. 2021, 40,
1451–1469. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-021-02690-9 
Rizwan, M.; Ali, S.; Ali, B.; Adrees, M.; Arshad, M.; Hussain, A.; Zia ur Rehman, M.; Waris, 
A. A. Zinc and Iron Oxide Nanoparticles Improved the Plant Growth and Reduced the 
Oxidative Stress and Cadmium Concentration in Wheat. Chemosphere 2019, 214, 269–277.
Romeh, A. A.; Saber, R. A. I. Green Nano-Phytoremediation and Solubility Improving Agents 
for the Remediation of Chlorfenapyr Contaminated Soil and Water. J. Environ. Manag.
2020, 260, 110104. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2020.110104 
Salem, K. F. M.; Alloosh, M. T.; Saleh, M. M.; Alnaddaf, L. M.; Almuhammady, A. K.; 
Al-Khayri, J. M. Utilization of Nanofertilizers in Crop Tolerance to Abiotic Stress. In 
Nanobiotechnology; Al-Khayri, J. M., Ansari, M. I., Singh, A. K., Eds.; Springer: Cham, 
2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-73606-4_11
Shalaby, T. A.; Abd-Alkarim, E.; El-Aidy, F.; Hamed, E.; Sharaf-Eldin, M.; Taha, N.; 
El-Ramady, H.; Bayoumi, Y.; Reis, A. R. D. Nano-Selenium, Silicon and H2O2 Boost 
Growth and Productivity of Cucumber Under Combined Salinity and Heat Stress. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2021, 212, 111962.
Semida, W. M.; Abdelkhalik, A.; Mohamed, G. F.; Abd El-Mageed, T. A.; Abd El-Mageed, 
S. A.; Rady, M. M.; Ali, E. F. Foliar Application of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles Promotes 
Drought Stress Tolerance in Eggplant (Solanum melongena L.). Plants (Basel) 2021, 10(2), 
421. DOI: 10.3390/plants10020421
Shah, A. A.; Aslam, S.; Akbar, M.; Ahmad, A.; Khan, W. U.; Yasin, N. A.; Ali, B.; Rizwan, 
M.; Ali, S. Combined Effect of Bacillus fortis IAGS 223 and Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles to 180 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Alleviate Cadmium Phytotoxicity in Cucumis melo. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2021, 158,
1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.plaphy.2020.11.011 
Shalaby, T. A.; Abd-Alkarim, E.; El-Aidy, F.; Hamed, E.; Sharaf-Eldin, M.; Taha, N.; 
El-Ramady, H.; Bayoumi, Y.; dos Reis, A. R. Nano-selenium, Silicon and H2
O2
 Boost 
Growth and Productivity of Cucumber Under Combined Salinity and Heat Stress. 
Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2021, 212, 111962. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoenv.2021.111962 
Sharma, S.; Rana, V. S.; Pawar, R.; Lakra, J.; Racchapannavar, V. K. Nanofertilizers for 
Sustainable Fruit Production: A Review. Environ. Chem. Lett. 2021, 19, 1693–1714. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s10311-020-01125-3 
Shikha, D.; Singh, P. K. In Situ Phytoremediation of Heavy Metal–Contaminated Soil and 
Groundwater: A Green Inventive Approach. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2021, 28, 4104–4124. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-11600-7
Shukla, Y. M. Nanofertilizers: A Recent Approach in Crop Production. In Nanotechnology for 
Agriculture: Crop Production & Protection; Springer: Singapore, 2019; pp 25–58.
Singh, S.; Husen, A. Behavior of Agricultural Crops in Relation to Nanomaterials 
Under Adverse Environmental Conditions. In Nanomaterials for Agriculture and 
Forestry Applications; Husen, A., Jawaid, M.;  pp. 219–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-817852-2.00009-3. 
Singh, K.; Madhusudanan, M.; Verma, A. K.; et al. Engineered Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles: An 
Alternative to Conventional Zinc Sulphate in Neutral and Alkaline Soils for Sustainable 
Wheat Production. 3 Biotech 2021, 11, 322. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13205-021-02861-1
Sreelakshmi, B.; Induja, S.; Adarsh, P. P.; Rahul, H. L.; Arya, S. M.; Aswana, S.; Haripriya, 
R.; Aswathy, B. R.; Manoj, P. K.; Vishnudasan, D. Drought Stress Amelioration in Plants 
Using Green Synthesised Iron Oxide Nanoparticles. Mater. Today Proc. 2021, 41, 723–727. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.05.801 
Souza, L. A.; Monteiro, C. C.; Carvalho, R. F.; Gratão, P. L.; Azevedo, R. A. Dealing With 
Abiotic Stresses: An Integrative View of How Phytohormones Control Abiotic Stress￾Induced Oxidative Stress. Theor. Exp. Plant Physiol. 2017, 29, 109–127. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s40626-017-0088-8
Souza, L. R. R.; Pomarolli, L. C.; da Veiga, M. A. M. S. From Classic Methodologies to 
Application of Nanomaterials for Soil Remediation: An Integrated View of Methods for 
Decontamination of Toxic Metal(oid)s. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020, 27, 10205–10227. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-08032-8
Thirugnanasambandan, T. Advances of Engineered Nanofertilizers for Modern Agriculture. 
In Plant-Microbes-Engineered Nano-particles (PM-ENPs) Nexus in Agro-Ecosystems, 
Advances in Science, Technology & Innovation; Singh, P., et al., Eds.; Springer Nature: 
Switzerland, AG, 2021; pp 131–152. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-66956-0_9 
Tiwari, R. K.; Lal, M. K.; Naga, K. C.; Kumar, R.; Chourasia, K. N.; Subhash, S.; Kumar, 
D.; Sharma, S. Emerging Roles of Melatonin in Mitigating Abiotic and Biotic Stresses 
of Horticultural Crops. Sci. Hortic. 2020, 272, 109592. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
scienta.2020.109592
Vázquez-Núñez, E.; López-Moreno, M. L.; de la Rosa Álvarez, G.; Fernández-Luqueño, F. 
Incorporation of Nanoparticles Into Plant Nutrients: The Real Benefits. In Agricultural 
Nanobiotechnology; Springer: Cham, 2018; pp 49–76. 
Wang, C.; Cheng, T.; Liu, H.; Zhou, F.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, M.; Liu, X.; Shi, W.; Cao, T. Nano￾Selenium Controlled Cadmium Accumulation and Improved Photosynthesis in Indica Role of Nanomaterials in Plants Under Abiotic Stress 181
Rice Cultivated in Lead and Cadmium Combined Paddy Soils. J. Environ. Sci. 2021, 103,
336–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jes.2020.11.005 
Wang, S. L.; Nguyen, A. D. Effects of Zn/B Nanofertilizer on Biophysical Characteristics and 
Growth of Coffee Seedlings in a Greenhouse. Res. Chem. Intermed. 2018, 44, 4889–4901. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11164-018-3342-z
Wang, C.R.; Rong, H.; Zhang, X. B.; Shi, W. J.; Hong, X.; Liu, W. C.; Cao, T.; Yu, X.; 
Yu, Q. Effects and Mechanisms of Foliar Application of Silicon and Selenium Composite 
Sols on Diminishing Cadmium and Lead Translocation and Affiliated Physiological and 
Biochemical Responses in Hybrid Rice (Oryza sativa L.) Exposed to Cadmium and Lead. 
Chemosphere 2020, 251, 126347. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chemosphere.2020.126347 
Xu, M.; Wang, Y.; Mu, Z.; Li, S.; Li, H. Dissolution of Copper Oxide Nanoparticles is Controlled 
by Soil Solution pH, Dissolved Organic Matter, and Particle Specific Surface Area. Sci. 
Total Environ. 2021, 772, 145477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scitotenv.2021.145477 
Yasmin, H.; Mazher, J.; Azmat, A.; Nosheen, A.; Naz, R.; Hassan, M. N.; Noureldeen, A.; 
Ahmad, P. Combined Application of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles and Biofertilizer to Induce 
Salt Resistance in Safflower by Regulating Ion Homeostasis and Antioxidant Defence 
Responses. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 2021, 218, 112262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
ecoenv.2021.112262 
Zahedi, S. M.; Moharrami, F.; Sarikhani, S.; Padervand, M. Selenium and Silica Nanostructure￾Based Recovery of Strawberry Plants Subjected to Drought Stress. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10,
17672. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-020-74273-9
Zand, A. D.; Tabrizi, A. M.; Heir, A. V. The Influence of Association of Plant Growth￾Promoting Rhizobacteria and Zero-Valent Iron Nanoparticles on Removal of Antimony 
From Soil by Trifolium Repens. Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. 2020, 27, 42815–42829. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11356-020-10252-x
Zhou, X.; Joshi, S.; Khare, T.; Patil, S.; Shang, J.; Kumar, V. Nitric Oxide, Crosstalk 
With Stress Regulators and Plant Abiotic Stress Tolerance. Plant Cell Rep. 2021, 40(8),
1395–1414. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00299-021-02705-5Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil 
and Interaction with Soil Biota
MONIKA MAHAJAN, ANUCHAYA DEVI, BHAVISHA SHARMA, and 
RAJEEV PRATAP SINGH
Institute of Environment and Sustainable Development, 
Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh, India
CHAPTER 8
ABSTRACT
Human civilization cannot exist without the food and agriculture domains, 
which are inextricably linked to human life. As a result, now that the regula￾tory authorities have legalized nanotechnology, it has a lot of potential in this 
industry. Traditional agricultural technologies’ limitations have limited the 
effective use of available farmland to meet demand and ensure food security. 
Nanotechnology has emerged as one of the most promising alternatives for 
addressing the shortcomings of traditional agriculture approaches. Nano￾technology has opened a new chapter in agriculture’s long-term viability. 
It reduces the amount of synthetic chemicals in the field by a significant 
amount. Engineered nanoparticles have a promising future in agriculture; 
it can promote soil amelioration from toxic pollutants and improve plant 
growth and productivity. Adequate amount and duration of exposure of 
nanoparticles such as nSiO2
, nTiO2
, AgNP, single- and multi-walled carbon 
nanotubes have several advantages such as stimulating the synthesis of 
the bioactive compound, increasing the efficacy of germination rate, and 
enhancing the vegetative biomass. But the inappropriate concentration of 
nanoparticles diminishes the metabolism, enzymatic activities of soil and 
plants. This chapter is an approach to point out the possible prospects and 184 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
implications of nanoparticles with the current guidelines to their use in agri￾culture, food safety, and security of the nation. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
It is projected that the exponential increase in the demography will lead the 
world to reach 9 billion by the year 2050 (Silva, 2017). The major challenge 
here is to accomplish food security and feed the huge mass within the restric￾tions of inadequate resources (Singh et al., 2021a; Rajput et al., 2021). Current 
agriculture practices exhaust around 4 million tons of pesticide, 187 million 
tons of fertilizer, 2700 billion cubic meters of freshwater, and tremendous 
energy (Kah et al., 2019). Moreover, post induction of green revolution, 
ampule use of chemical fertilizer and pesticide are declining the health of 
the environment (Mukhopadhyay, 2014). Therefore, bio-friendly growth 
boosters came into existence as an alternative to ensure the environmental 
worry. But this pro-environment method also has significant weaknesses, 
such as large dose requirements, field stability, and inadequate performance 
under various environmental conditions (Pandey, 2018). Here, to overcome 
the inadequate yield nano-based formulation is introduced in agriculture 
(Iavicoli et al., 2017; Prasad et al., 2017; Lowry et al., 2019). Nanotech￾nology (NT) is a very advanced and revolutionary option in the agriculture 
sector. In this modern era, nanotechnology emerges with intensive benefits 
such as reduced input cost and advancement in current agriculture practices 
to improve yield with proper support of the “sustainable intensification” 
(Perez-de-Luque and Hermosin, 2013; Sekhon, 2014). Nanotechnology 
is very innovative; it converts the macro-sized element into nanoparticles 
(1–100 nm) and small-sized nanoparticles that behave differently from 
parent material (Bhattacharya et al., 2011). This technology can be used for 
multiple purposes (1) to truncate the plant pathology via restricted transport 
of functional molecules, (2) to diagnose the disease through nanosensors 
(Boom, 2011). 
The use of nanotechnology has a wide spectrum in the agricultural feld 
because of the nano-enhanced solution that enables seed germination, plant 
protection, and growth. It can curtail the excessive use of agrochemical and 
nutrient loss in fertilization. Along with these, it revamps ecological factors 
such as water and soil health (Sonkaria et al., 2012; Sekhon, 2014). Nano￾technology having various nano-devices, nano ingredients, nanoformulation 
to enhance agricultural practices, such as nano-pesticide, nano herbicides The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 185
for pest and weed management, nano fertilizer for profcient nutrient supply, 
nano biosensors diagnose appropriate moisture content and help in main￾taining nutrient budget (Iavicoli et al., 2017). An engineered nanoparticle has 
enough potency to positively or negatively afect soil physicochemical, soil 
microfora, and biological properties; for instance, cerium oxide nanopar￾ticle is one of them (Keller et al., 2013; Li et al., 2017). According to Li et 
al.’s (2017) experiment performed at Clemson, United States, cerium oxide 
nanoparticles exhibited an immense efect on the improvement of phospha￾tase enzymatic activity with a signifcant increase from 97.46 to 131.37 to 
181.45% at a concentration of 100, 500, and 1000 mg/kg, respectively. 
Nanomaterials have concomitant characteristics such as tiny size and 
comparatively high specifc surface area, reactivity that invokes recalcitrant 
contaminants from complex environments. A repercussion of nanotechnolo￾gies (NTs) on plant physiology, morphology, biological properties are mixed 
type; it varied from the plant to plant. In some plants, it promotes growth 
and seed germination, but in some plants such as wheat, it inhibits 60% 
root growth via stimulating the lateral roots increasing the oxidative stress 
(Sang et al., 2019; Shukla et al., 2019). So, instead of numerous benefts it 
has several implications that resist the widespread of nanotechnological use 
in agriculture. This chapter aims to elucidate the clear scope of guidelines 
for evaluating nano-based agri-input and food products in India. Article 
compiled the importance of nanotechnology and it is exhibited as a better 
substitute than conventional chemicals. But every technology has a darker 
side, so we discuss its loopholes and their future outlook in agriculture.
8.2 NEED FOR NANOTECHNOLOGY IN AGRICULTURE 
Conventional techniques involve direct diffuse of concentrated fertilizer to 
the crop, but in reality, very less amount will reach to its targeted site due to 
leaching, drift, runoff, oxidation, evaporation, hydrolysis through microbial 
degradation, photolysis, and soil moisture. According to the previous studies 
of Ombodi and Saigusa (2000), it has been evaluated that out of the total 
percentage of sprayed fertilizer, 40–70% nitrogen, 80–90% phosphorus, 
and 50–90% of potassium were lost in the environment and could not reach 
to the plants that cause huge economic loss. According to the International 
Fertilizer Industry Association report illustration, fertilizer use rate sharply 
increased 5–6% in the year 2009–2011. 186 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
In the aftermath of the green revolution, fertilizer and pesticide practices 
amplify many times from 0.5 tons to 23 million tons in just 48 years (1960–
2008) (Nelson et al., 2019). This paradigm shift has promoted the grain yield 
up to four times (Huke et al., 2007). But after lots of success, productivity 
becomes constant in certain crops, and the percentage of organic content in 
soil continuously decreases because of nonjudicious use of chemical fertil￾izer. Irrational use of an array of chemicals on fertile land disturbs the NPK 
proportion 10:2.7:1, which is much diferent from the standard ratio of 4:2:1 
(Meghana et al., 2021). Excessive use of synthetic chemicals will be toxic for 
water reservoirs and nektons, ultimately incur health risks in humans. Exces￾sive use of agrochemicals promotes pathogen, arthropods of pest resistance, 
soil microfora, enhances bioaccumulation of heavy metals, pesticides, and 
afects the tree biome (Manjunatha et al., 2016). Inappropriate agricultural 
practices can deteriorate soil health and exceed the fertilizer expenses and 
energy to regulate the productivity in demolishing soil (Tillman et al., 2002; 
Mukhopadhyay, 2014). The challenges agriculture faces has wide ambit such 
as continuous water availability, nutrient defciency, productivity, climate 
change, land-use change of cultivable feld, desertifcation, resistance to 
pesticide, and genetically modifed organisms (Oliver, 2014; Raman, 2017). 
They create a hurdle in attaining 300 million tons food demand for feeding 
1.5 billion projected population by 2025 in India (Kumar et al., 2012). It is 
imperative to maintain the equilibrium between organic and inorganic fertil￾izers for the conservation of soil health attributes, but it is very problematic 
to achieve. Conventional techniques in agriculture, such as organic farming, 
have shown a negative impression in the case of productivity and quality 
(Shennan et al., 2017). Altogether, it can be favorable that alternate cultiva￾tion practices be also tested and supply proportionate, adequate nutrients to 
promote plant growth, and combat environmental pollution. The limitation of 
conventional technology triggers the research in the feld of nanotechnology.
An efcient, innovative nanotechnology study should be consisting of 
cost-efective nanoscale or nanostructured materials as fertilizers and a prop￾erly controlled efcient way to reduce environmental pollution; these aspects 
are required for smart fertilizer (Cinnamuthu and Bhopati, 2009). Their 
nanometer size makes them more efcient and useful in the easy delivery of 
nutrients to plants such as fertilizer. They are encapsulated with nanomate￾rial from inside and externally narrow coating of the protective polymer flm 
in the form of a tiny particle (De Rosa et al., 2010; Manjunath et al., 2016). 
This specifc packaging of nano-fertilizer particles increases the adherence 
with material more intensely because greater surface tension is created than The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 187
the macro-fertilizer. The size of nano-based fertilizer and its higher surface 
tension makes it suitable to mobilize inside the plant easily and diminish the 
unnecessary input cost of farmers and upgrade their quality of living, which 
ultimately curtail environmental pollution (Kalia et al., 2020). In this way, 
nanotechnology in agriculture is becoming the foreseeable part of agriculture 
and is the need of the hour. 
8.3 APPLICATION OF INNOVATIVE NANOTECHNOLOGY IN 
MODERN AGRICULTURE 
8.3.1 IMPACT OF NANOMATERIAL ON SOIL 
Engineered nanomaterial plays a crucial role in soil remediation by enhancing 
overall soil health, but in conventional ex-situ soil remediation techniques, it 
involves replacing contaminated soil with fresh one. Therefore, engineered 
nanomaterial becomes the silver lining for this field. There are various in-situ 
mechanisms available such as (1) Immobilization via carbon nanotubes and 
metal oxides nanomaterial, (2) photocatalytic degradation, and (3) oxidation/
reduction (Wang et al., 2019).
Nowadays, immobilization/adsorption techniques are the biggest in 
remedial application because of cost-efectiveness and sustainable cleanup 
process for polluted soil (Barzegar et al., 2017). Nanoscale supplements such 
as carbon nanotube and carbon allotropes (fullerene, graphene) along with 
metal oxides such as (Fe3
O4
 and TiO2
), composites of nanosized material 
are used for the adsorption of organic and inorganic contaminants from 
soil ecosystem (Qian et al., 2020). The basic principle involves removing 
higher surface hydrophobicity, large adsorption capacity, and van der Waals 
forces (Qian et al., 2020). Towell et al.’s (2011) study illustrated that carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs) could combat from polyaromatic hydrocarbons in various 
soil conditions by inhibiting the process of mineralization and mobilization 
of aromatic compounds. After hampering the mechanism, it will reduce the 
bioavailability of PAHs to plants and microorganisms.
Despite CNTs, iron oxide and titanium dioxide have enough capacity 
to resist the mobilization of hazardous trace metals such as cadmium and 
arsenic (Sebastian et al., 2020). Liang et al. (2014) reported reduced metal 
stress in the terrestrial plant after the application of Fe3
O4. Although, after the 
amendment of iron oxide for surface modifcation, stabilizing compounds 
such as the use of starch was necessary; otherwise, metal oxide tended to 
agglomerate and settled out as the soil particles in the aqueous phase (Liang 188 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
and Zhao, 2014). TiO2 has another important sorption beneft in the presence 
of humic acid and fuvic acid at a particular pH 4.0 (Qian et al., 2020). Tan et 
al. (2007) demonstrated with their result that titanium dioxide could remove 
Thorium (Th (IV) up to 94% efcacy. The combined potential for chemical 
oxidation via ENP and microbial biodegradation to alleviate Aroclor 1248 
(polychlorineated biphenyl (PCB’s)) was assessed in one experiment. At 
the start, 99%, 92% tetra, 84% penta, and 28% hexa-chlorinated biphenyls 
have been dechlorinated using bimetallic nanoparticles composed of palla￾dium and iron. During the fnal step of PCB’s amelioration, Burkholderia 
xenovorans were involved because there was no signifcant toxic efect of 
nanoparticles on Burkholderia xenovorans (Le et al., 2015).
8.3.2 IMPLICATION OF NANOMATERIAL OVER SOIL 
MICROORGANISM AND AOIL ENZYME
Nanomaterial has played a pivotal role in soil remediation with the help of 
carbon nanotubes and metal oxide, but this is a brighter part of the theme; 
however, every concept consists of a shady side also filled with implications. 
The use of nanomaterial in soil has some shortcomings over soil organisms 
and soil enzymes (Li et al., 2017; Achari and Kowshik, 2018; Asadishad 
et al., 2018). According to Asadishad et al.’s (2018) experiment, 1, 10, and 
100 mg engineered nanoparticles (silver (nAg), zinc oxide (nZnO), copper 
oxide (nCuO), titanium dioxide (nTiO2
)) per kg amended in soil for 30-day 
period. At the observation time, zinc oxide and copper oxide had not shown 
any significant response on the enzymatic activity of soil. But the reaction 
was contrary to silver, it inhibited some enzymatic activity at a higher dose 
(100 mg/kg), and the result is expressed differently with nTiO2. It affects 
nonsignificantly slightly diminishing enzymatic activity in the soil. 
Nanoparticle shows the detrimental efect on soil microbiota along 
with its enzymatic equilibrium. Xu et al. (2015) illustrated with their study, 
nanoparticles of titanium dioxide and copper oxide deprive soil microbial 
biomass and their community focs in paddy soil (Singh et al., 2020). Most 
of the metal oxide nano-particles ZnO, TiO2
, CeO2
, Fe3
O4
 reduce various soil 
enzyme invertase, urease, catalase, phosphatase, and deduce the bacterial 
community (Cao et al., 2016; You et al., 2017). Chai et al. (2015) reported 
ZnO and CeO2 ENPs (engineered nanoparticles) restrict the bacterial count 
such as P-solubilizing, K solubilizing, and Azotobactor in a plate. The life of 
the subtle organism is very sensitive; the minute concentration of biogenic 
nanoparticles made up of gold creates a growth inhibition zone (Lakshmi The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 189
et al., 2012; Maliszewska, 2016; Rajput et al., 2018). All nanoparticles are 
not toxic for the soil ecosystem, but few act as havoc for specifc bacteria. 
Fajardo et al. (2014) demonstrated from their result that silver nanoparticles 
adversely afect soil bacteria such as Bacillus cereus and Pseudomonas 
stutzeri, but at the same time, Al2
O3 was not shown any adverse efect. Some 
studies also support that Ag NPs afect organic matter (Grillo et al., 2015; 
Schlich and Hund- Rinke, 2015). In general, the previous report suggests 
low pH organic matter and cation exchange capacity obstruct the sorption of 
silver nanoparticles to colloidal structure in the soil. Low pH organic matter 
is an ideal condition for the mobilization of particles, toxicity, bioavailability, 
and higher pH organic content promotes the AgNPs sorption and restricts 
the toxicity. The nanoparticle of zinc oxide was found toxic for Folsomia 
candida in acidic soil (Waalewijin-Kool et al., 2013). Nanoparticles metal 
oxide afects soil properties and infuences the soil biota, but it inserts inside 
the plant system and delivers both types of response, either positive or nega￾tive, as per the plant physiology and morphology accompanied with quality 
and quantity of nano-materials.
8.3.3 CONSEQUENCES OF NANOPARTICLES ON PLANT HEALTH 
The application of adequate nanomaterial plays a pivotal role in improving 
the germination, growth, and productivity in some particular plants. NPs 
provoke stress-tolerant genes and stress protein that helps to overcome biotic 
and abiotic stresses in various plant species (Usman et al., 2020; Singh et al., 
2021b). 
TABLE 8.1 The Ramification of Nanomaterial on Soil Health and its Function.
Nanomaterial Effects 
positive/negative
Function References
nAg, nTiO2 Negative Soil enzyme Asadishad et al., 2018
nTiO2
, nCuO Negative Soil enzyme Xu et al., 2015
TiO2 Positive Remediation Tan et al., 2007
CNT’s, iron oxide, titanium 
dioxide
 Positive Remediation Sebastian et al., 2019
CNT’s Positive Remediation Towell et al., 2011
Carbon allotropes, Fe3
O4
, and 
TiO4
Positive Remediation Qian et al., 2020
TiO2
, Fe3
O4
, CeO2
, ZnO Negative Soil enzyme Jiling et al., 2016; You 
et al., 2017190 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
According to the study by Joshi et al. (2018), multi-walled carbon nano￾tubes (MWCNTs) posed augmentation in the process of seed germination 
in crops such as tomato, peanut, soybean, and garlic (Khodakovskaya et al., 
2010; Lahiani et al., 2013; Srivastava and Rao, 2014).
There is some nanomaterial in nanoscience, such as silicon dioxide (SiO2
), 
titanium dioxide (TiO2
), and Zeolite, which have a benefcial response in 
yield enhancement, stimulating enzymatic activity in crops. Carbon fuller￾enes application in Arabidopsis had improved hypocotyl growth through cell 
division (Gao et al., 2011). Fullerol use for seed dressings can increase the 
quality and quantity of product up to 128% and promote the synthesis of 
bioactive compounds, such as lycopene, charantin in Momordica charantia. 
The use of nanoemulsions in seed priming can accelerate seed germination. 
Acharya et al.’s (2020) experiment result also follows the same conclusion. 
Turmeric oil nanoemulsions (TNE) and silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) have 
improved the germination of watermelon seeds, and the study demonstrates 
the signifcant increase of soluble sugar (glucose and fructose) contents in 
AgNP-treated seeds at 96 h. Nanoemulsion-treated seeds were expressed 
better growth and yield of watermelon. 
Uptake and translocation of engineered nanomaterial difer from the 
type of plant, chemical composition, and size of nanoparticles (Aslani et 
al., 2014). The gene expression of plants is diferent after the confrontation 
with the nanoparticle. The expression of plant is associated with a change 
in the biological pathway (Ghormade et al., 2011; Bagheri et al., 2012); it 
might invoke the physiological, morphological, and phytotoxic responses 
(Siddiqui et al., 2015) for instant soaking of wheat seeds before germina￾tion in 40–60 µg/L MWCNTs solution for 4 h. It will have resulted in rapid 
root growth and vegetative biomass (Wang et al., 2012). Nanomaterial 
such as nZnO poses a more noticeable efect on tobacco growth (Nicotiana 
tabacum L.) calli because it accumulated more zinc when received than 
nanomaterials, and progression of calli growth also received higher protein 
contents (Mazaheri-Tirani and Dayani, 2020). In addition NPs are used as 
a foliar application; in an experiment performed by Elsheery et al. (2020), 
SiO2 nanoparticles (5–15 nm; 300 µg/L) foliar spray was used on sugar cane 
(Saccharum ofcinarum L.) under stress condition and the result showed 
an improved efective quantum yield of cyclic electron fow. Despite all the 
benefts, many studies resist nanoparticle application in agriculture due to 
their ecotoxic response on various plants. The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 191
8.4 THE NEGATIVE REPERCUSSION OF NANOTECHNOLOGY ON 
PLANTS 
Nanomaterial poses detrimental effects on germination, biomass, leaf number, 
root elongation (Doshi et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2010). However, the adverse 
effect depends on exposure time, size, nature of nanomaterial (Nouri et al., 
2020). Fullerene is beneficial, but sometimes it disturbs the energy pathways 
and electron movement by suppressing the transcription gene (Hussain et 
al., 2016). Similarly, MWCNTs play an important role in the upregulation of 
gene that helps in channelizing water transport, formation of the cell wall as 
well as it further stimulates cell division in the plant (Khodakovskaya et al., 
2012), but inappropriate concentration and exposure time of MWCNTs will 
be toxic (Usman et al., 2020). The plethora of studies reported on the adverse 
effect of nanoparticles because of the formation of antimicrobial metal ions 
from the surface of NPs. Induction of antibacterial effects on zinc oxide 
(ZnO) and Ag stimulates Zn ion and silver ions (Feng et al., 2000; Wang et 
al., 2016; Aziz et al., 2015, 2016). According to research on the phytotoxic 
effects of AgNPs on rice plants, NPs are taken up through the roots and 
cause intracellular damage. The effects of AgNPs with sizes ranging from 1 
FIGURE 8.1 Beneficial impact of nanoparticle on plant growth and plant properties.192 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
to 20 nm and concentrations ranging from 1 to 100 ppm on the germination 
of ryegrass, barley, and flax (Linum usitatissimum) were investigated, with 
different-sized NPs having distinct impacts on different plant species. The 
smallest sized particle inhibited ryegrass even at extremely low concentra￾tions (El-Temash and Joner, 2012). Size-dependent toxicity experiments of 
AgNPs were also performed on Italian ryegrass (Lolium multiflorum), and 
it was revealed that smaller AgNPs significantly hindered growth, with 
shorter roots and shoots and less biomass, as compared to plants treated with 
larger NPs of equal concentrations (Yin et al., 2011). This indicated that the 
total NP surface area has a considerable effect on the AgNP toxicity. When 
seedlings were subjected to 40 ppm of gum arabic (GA)-coated AgNPs, they 
failed to develop root hairs with vacuolated and collapsed cortical cells and 
a damaged root cap, probably due to a loss of gravitropism in roots due to 
decreased auxin transport. AgNPs phytotoxicity experiments on mung bean 
and sorghum seedling growth found detrimental effects (Nair, 2016). The 
mechanisms of nanomaterial toxicity in plants vary, such as generation of 
reactive oxygen species, inhibition of cellular respiration, and cell damage 
(Fu et al., 2014). Metal ions (Chromium, Arsenic, Mercury, Cadmium, Iron, 
Copper) release intracellular ROS; the entire mechanism comes under the 
Fenton reaction (Birben et al., 2012). In this reaction, H2
O2 oxidizes the 
reduced metal and generates hydroxide ion and hydroxyl radical (OH·
).
H2
O2
 + Metal2 + → Metal3 + + OH−
 + OH •
Release of ROS causes oxidative stress that leads to free radical which 
induced protein and DNA structure damage. Copper is an essential element 
for regulating protein and enzymatic activity in plants. But the oxidative 
property of copper oxide nanomaterial having a considerable toxic efect 
such as CuO NPs has a detrimental efect on the photosynthesis of Elodea 
densa (waterweed) at (1 mg/L) higher concentration (Nekrasova et al., 2011). 
Larue et al. (2012) reported a similar sort of result with high amount of TiO2 
NPs. According to the study, 36 nm Titanium dioxide has been stored in the 
wheat root parenchyma. Several hydroponic phytotoxic experiments have 
been reported in previous studies, and their experimental results demonstrate 
the failed and detrimental efect of metal oxide nanoparticles on plants. For 
example, amendment of CeO2 NPs over the cotton plants had hampered the 
function of the vascular bundle and reduced indole-3-acetic acid as well as 
abscisic acid (Nhan et al., 2015).The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 193
FIGURE 8.2 Implication of nanomaterials on plant health and metabolism.
NPs enter into the plant through root junction and its uptake through 
various physiological, chemical barriers. After translocation inside the plant, 
it frst confronts with the cell wall. The cell wall permits the smaller particle 
and hinders the larger mobility (Dietz and Herth, 2011; Rastogi et al., 2017). 
But, sometimes, larger nanoparticles also succeed in entering cell walls 194 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
through large pores and facilitate endocytosis (Etxeberria et al., 2016). If 
some remnants are left over from the endocytosis, it goes through symplastic 
transport (Ma et al., 2010). According to Wong et al. (2016), the proposed 
mathematical model specifes that size, magnitude, and zeta potential are the 
most determining parameter in nanoparticle transport.
8.5 GUIDELINES FOR NANO-BASED INPUTS AND FOCUS ON ITS 
FURURE PERSPECTIVE 
Guidelines would always encourage and harmonize the implementation of 
innovative products. In India, there are a number of guidelines and provi￾sions for farmers’ welfare and enhancement of agricultural productivity, but 
few regulations are available to maintain the nano-based inputs. Recently, 
the conglomeration of various ministries and organizations jointly release a 
regulatory guideline for evaluating nano-based agricultural additives. Guide￾lines based on agricultural additive in the form of nano finished formula￾tion as an active ingredient(s) made up of any material: inorganic, organic, 
composite. These materials have immense use in different dimensions of 
agriculture such as protection, management, harvesting, post-harvesting, and 
packaging. According to the Indian government guidelines on nano-based 
input (2020), there are multiple benefits in a wide spectrum of management, 
prevention, genetic modulation, and biostimulants for plant growth. Under 
the provision, Fertilizer (FCO,1985), the nano agri-input products (NAIPs) 
category covers the safety, efficacy, and functionality of nano fertilizers. 
Under the umbrella of regulatory provisions section 9, the Insecticide 
Act, 1968 (Act 46 of 1968) involves packaging, processing, chemistry, bioef￾fcacy, and toxicity of nano pesticide products. According to the government 
regulation, nano generated agri products such as nano food should follow 
all food safety and Standard Act, 2006, and products may be adopted by 
FSSAI (Food safety and standard authority of India). In case of nano feed, 
their safety and evaluation of quality should be assessed through Cattle feed 
(Regulation of Manufacture and Sale) Order, 2009, and with supplementary 
criteria for inclusion, FSSAI may employ it. But implementation of standards 
would always do under the regulation of BIS (Bureau of Indian Standard). 
In the future prospective ENPs application in food safety and agricul￾ture has increased due to their distinctive size and surface-related features 
when compared to their bulk or ionic analogues (Nuruzzaman et al., 2016; 
Dimkpa et al., 2019). ENPs could be used in agriculture as nanofertilizers, The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 195
growth regulators, or nanopesticides to combat plant and zoonotic diseases. 
Furthermore, due to their increased surface reactivity, ENPs could be used 
as a sensor in the early detection of infections and/or the breakdown of 
pesticidal residues (Xiong et al., 2017). ZnONPs with signifcantly better 
physiochemical properties could be used as a new fertilizer to increase food 
quality and agricultural productivity (Tanha et al., 2020).
8.6 CONCLUSIONS 
The application of nanoscience/nanotechnology in agriculture is very pecu￾liar and novel. Flaws in conventional techniques stimulate the contemporary 
research in the field of nanoparticles. Amendment of engineered nanopar￾ticles in the agricultural field led to improved germination, growth, and plant 
productivity. The list of advantages is so long, such as carbon nanotubes, 
oxides of metal used for amelioration soil from heavy metals, and poly￾chlorineated biphenyls. The potential of nanotechnology will revolutionize 
the agricultural sector and allied fields such as food security, safety, and 
management. With lots of benefits, some inevitable implications are also 
associated with nanotechnology. It expresses consolidated toxicological 
response on soil and plant regime such as inappropriate amount, size, and 
exposure time suppresses the transcription gene, generating reactive oxygen 
species—Indian government launch recent guideline for evaluation and 
safety of nano-based food and fodders. But for better application worldwide, 
nanotechnology requires wide-ranging databank and international alliance for 
dissemination of policy, regulation, and innovations in this field. A strategic 
roadmap of implementation will reduce the downside of nanotechnology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors are grateful to Director and Dean, Institute of Environment and 
Sustainable Development (IESD), Banaras Hindu University (BHU), Vara￾nasi, India. The authors express their sincere thanks to Head, Department of 
Environment and Sustainable Development, IESD, BHU for providing the 
necessary help. RPS is thankful to authorities of Banaras Hindu University 
(BHU), Varanasi, India for providing support under IOE (Institute of Excel￾lence) scheme. AD thanks DBT for DBT-RA fellowship. 196 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
KEYWORDS
• amelioration
• guidelines
• nanoparticle
• nanotechnology
• plant growth
• sustainable agriculture 
REFERENCES
Abdel-Aziz, M. S.; Abou-El-Sherbini, K. S.; Hamzawy, E. M.; Amr, M. H.; El-Dafrawy, S. 
Green Synthesis of Silver Nano-Particles by Macrococcus Bovicus and its Immobilization 
Onto Montmorillonite Clay for Antimicrobial Functionality. Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol.
2015, 176(8), 2225–2241.
Achari, G. A.; Kowshik, M. Recent Developments on Nanotechnology in Agriculture: Plant 
Mineral Nutrition, Health, and Interactions With Soil Microflora. J. Agric. Food Chem.
2018, 66(33), 8647–8661.
Acharya, P.; Jayaprakasha, G. K.; Crosby, K. M.; Jifon, J. L.; Patil, B. S. Nanoparticle￾Mediated Seed Priming Improves Germination, Growth, Yield, and Quality of Watermelons 
(Citrullus lanatus) at Multi-Locations in Texas. Sci. Rep. 2020, 10(1), 1–16.
Asadishad, B.; Chahal, S.; Akbari, A.; Cianciarelli, V.; Azodi, M.; Ghoshal, S.; Tufenkji, N. 
Amendment of Agricultural Soil With Metal Nanoparticles: Effects on Soil Enzyme Activity 
and Microbial Community Composition. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2018, 52(4), 1908–1918.
Aslani, F.; Bagheri, S.; Muhd Julkapli, N.; Juraimi, A. S.; Hashemi, F. S. G.; Baghdadi, A. 
Effects of Engineered Nanomaterials on Plants Growth: An Overview. Sci. World J. 2014,
2014, 641759.
Aziz, H. M. A.; Hasaneen, M. N.; Omer, A. M. Nano Chitosan-NPK Fertilizer Enhances the 
Growth and Productivity of Wheat Plants Grown in Sandy Soil. Spanish J. Agric. Res.
2016, 14(1), 17.
Bagheri, H.; Afkhami, A.; Saber-Tehrani, M.; Khoshsafar, H. Preparation and Characterization 
of Magnetic Nanocomposite of Schiff Base/Silica/Magnetite as a Preconcentration Phase 
for the Trace Determination of Heavy Metal Ions in Water, Food and Biological Samples 
Using Atomic Absorption Spectrometry. Talanta 2012, 97, 87–95
Barzegar, G.; Jorfi, S.; Soltani, R. D. C.; Ahmadi, M.; Saeedi, R.; Abtahi, M.; Ramavandi, 
B.; Baboli, Z.. Enhanced Sono-Fenton-Like Oxidation of PAH-Contaminated Soil Using 
Nano-Sized Magnetite as Catalyst: Optimization With Response Surface Methodology. Soil 
Sediment Contam. Int. J. 2017, 26(5), 538–557.
Bhattacharya, S.; Shilpa, M. Mapping Nanotechnology Research and Innovation in 
India. DESIDOC J. Libr. Inf. Technol. 2011, 31(5).The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 197
Birben, E.; Sahiner, U. M.; Sackesen, C.; Erzurum, S.; Kalayci, O. Oxidative Stress and 
Antioxidant Defense. World Allergy Organ. J. 2012, 5(1), 9–19.
Boom, R. M. Nanotechnology in Food Production. Nanotechnology in the Agri-Food Sector, 
2011; pp 37–57.
Cao, J.; Feng, Y.; Lin, X.; Wang, J. Arbuscular Mycorrhizal Fungi Alleviate the Negative 
Effects of Iron Oxide Nanoparticles on Bacterial Community in Rhizospheric Soils. Front. 
Environ. Sci. 2016, 4, 10.
Chai, H.; Yao, J.; Sun, J.; Zhang, C.; Liu, W.; Zhu, M.; Ceccanti, B. The Effect of Metal Oxide 
Nanoparticles on Functional Bacteria and Metabolic Profiles in Agricultural Soil. Bull. 
Environ. Contam. Toxicol. 2015, 94(4), 490–495.
Chinnamuthu, C. R.; Boopathi, P. M. Nanotechnology and Agroecosystem. Madras Agric. J.
2009, 96(1/6), 17–31.
DeRosa, M. C.; Monreal, C.; Schnitzer, M.; Walsh, R.; Sultan, Y. Nanotechnology in 
Fertilizers. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2010, 5(2), 91–91.
Dietz, K. J.; Herth, S. Plant Nanotoxicology. Trends Plant Sci. 2011, 16(11), 582–589.
Doshi, R.; Braida, W.; Christodoulatos, C.; Wazne, M.; O’Connor, G. Nano-aluminum: 
Transport Through Sand Columns and Environmental Effects on Plants and Soil 
Communities. Environ. Res. 2008, 106(3), 296–303.
Elsheery, N. I.; Sunoj, V. S. J.; Wen, Y.; Zhu, J. J.; Muralidharan, G.; Cao, K. F. Foliar 
Application of Nanoparticles Mitigates the Chilling Effect on Photosynthesis and 
Photoprotection in Sugarcane. Plant Physiol. Biochem. 2020, 149, 50–60.
El‐Temsah, Y. S.; Joner, E. J. Impact of Fe and Ag Nanoparticles on Seed Germination and 
Differences in Bioavailability During Exposure in Aqueous Suspension and Soil. Environ. 
Toxicol. 2012, 27(1), 42–49.
Etxeberria, E.; Gonzalez, P.; Bhattacharya, P.; Sharma, P.; Ke, P. C. Determining the Size 
Exclusion for Nanoparticles in Citrus Leaves. HortScience 2016, 51(6), 732–737.
Fajardo, C.; Saccà, M. L.; Costa, G.; Nande, M.; Martin, M. Impact of Ag and Al2O3 
Nanoparticles on Soil Organisms: In vitro and Soil Experiments. Sci. Total Environ.
2014, 473, 254–261.
Feng, Q. L.; Wu, J.; Chen, G. Q.; Cui, F. Z.; Kim, T. N.; Kim, J. O. A Mechanistic Study of 
the Antibacterial Effect of Silver Ions on Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus Aureus. J. 
Biomed. Mater. Res. 2000, 52(4), 662–668.
Fu, P. P.; Xia, Q.; Hwang, H. M.; Ray, P. C.; Yu, H. Mechanisms of Nanotoxicity: Generation 
of Reactive Oxygen Species. J. Food and Drug Analy. 2014, 22(1), 64–75.
Ganesh-Kumar, A., Mehta, R.; Pullabhotla, H.; Prasad, S. K.; Kavery, G.; Ashok, G. Demand 
and Supply of Cereals in India 2010–2025. IFPRI-Discussion Papers, 2012, (1158).
Gao, J., Wang, Y.; Folta, K. M.; Krishna, V.; Bai, W.; Indeglia, P.; Georgieva, A.; Nakamura, 
H.; Koopman, B.; Moudgil, B. Polyhydroxy Fullerenes (fullerols or fullerenols): Beneficial 
Effects on Growth and Lifespan in Diverse Biological Models. PLoS One 2011, 6(5),
e19976.
Ghormade, V.; Deshpande, M. V.; Paknikar, K. M. Perspectives for Nano-biotechnology 
Enabled Protection and Nutrition of Plants. Biotechnol. Adv. 2011, 29(6), 792–803.
Grillo, R.; Rosa, A. H.; Fraceto, L. F. Engineered Nanoparticles and Organic Matter: A Review 
of the State-of-the-art. Chemosphere 2015, 119, 608–619.
Huke, R. E. The Green Revolution. J. Geog. 2007, 84(6), 248–254.
Hussain, I.; Singh, N. B.; Singh, A.; Singh, H.; Singh, S. C. Green synthesis of Nanoparticles 
and its Potential Application. Biotechnol. Lett. 2016, 38(4), 545–560.198 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Iavicoli, I.; Leso, V.; Beezhold, D. H.; Shvedova, A. A. Nanotechnology in Agriculture: 
Opportunities, Toxicological Implications, and Occupational Risks. Toxicol. Appl. 
Pharmacol. 2017, 329, 96–111.
Joshi, M.; Adak, B.; Butola, B. S. Polyurethane Nanocomposite-Based Gas Barrier Films, 
Membranes and Coatings: A Review on Synthesis, Characterization and Potential 
Applications. Progress Mater. Sci. 2018, 97, 230–282.
Kah, M.; Tufenkji, N.; White, J. C. Nano-enabled Strategies to Enhance Crop Nutrition and 
Protection. Nature Nanotechnol. 2019, 14(6), 532–540.
Kalia, A.; Sharma, S. P.; Kaur, H.; Kaur, H. Novel Nanocomposite-Based Controlled-Release 
Fertilizer and Pesticide Formulations: Prospects and Challenges. In Multifunctional Hybrid 
Nanomaterials for Sustainable Agri-Food and Ecosystems, 2020; pp 99–134.
Keller, A. A.; McFerran, S.; Lazareva, A.; Suh, S. Global Life Cycle Releases of Engineered 
Nanomaterials. J. Nanoparticle Res. 2013, 15(6), 1–17.
Khodakovskaya, M. V.; de Silva, K.; Nedosekin, D. A.; Dervishi, E.; Biris, A. S.; Shashkov, 
E. V.; Galanzha, E. I.; Zharov, V. P. Complex genetic, photothermal, and photoacoustic 
analysis of nanoparticle-plant interactions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2011, 108(3), 1028–1033.
Khodakovskaya, M.; Dervishi, E.; Mahmood, M.; Xu, Y.; Li, Z.; Watanabe, F.; Biris, A. 
S. Retraction Notice for Carbon Nanotubes are Able to Penetrate Plant Seed Coat and 
Dramatically Affect Seed Germination and Pant Growth. ACS Nano 2012, 6(8), 7541–7541.
Lahiani, M. H.; Dervishi, E.; Chen, J.; Nima, Z.; Gaume, A.; Biris, A. S.; Khodakovskaya, 
M. V. Impact of Carbon Nanotube Exposure to Seeds of Valuable Crops. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2013, 5(16), 7965–7973.
Lakshmi, R. V.; Bharathidasan, T.; Bera, P.; Basu, B. J. Fabrication of Superhydrophobic 
and Oleophobic Sol–gel Nanocomposite Coating. Surf. Coat. Technol. 2012, 206(19–20),
3888–3894.
Larue, C.; Laurette, J.; Herlin-Boime, N.; Khodja, H.; Fayard, B.; Flank, A. M.; Brisset, F.; 
Carriere, M. Accumulation, Translocation and Impact of TiO2 Nanoparticles in Wheat 
(Triticum aestivum spp.): Influence of Diameter and Crystal Phase. Sci. Total Environ.
2012, 431, 197–208.
Le, T. T.; Nguyen, K. H.; Jeon, J. R.; Francis, A. J.; Chang, Y. S. Nano/bio Treatment of 
Polychlorinated Biphenyls With Evaluation of Comparative Toxicity. J. Hazard. Mater.
2015, 287, 335–341.
Lee, W. M.; Kim, S. W.; Kwak, J. I.; Nam, S. H.; Shin, Y. J.; An, Y. J. Research Trends of 
Ecotoxicity of Nanoparticles in Soil Environment. Toxicol. Res. 2010, 26(4), 253–259.
Li, B.; Chen, Y.; Liang, W. Z.; Mu, L.; Bridges, W. C.; Jacobson, A. R.; Darnault, C. J. 
Influence of Cerium Oxide Nanoparticles on the Soil Enzyme Activities in a Soil-Grass 
Microcosm System. Geoderma 2017, 299, 54–62.
Liang, B.; Xie, Y.; Fang, Z.; Tsang, E. P. Assessment of the Transport of Polyvinylpyrrolidone￾Stabilised Zero-valent Iron Nanoparticles in a Silica Sand Medium. J. Nanoparticle Res.
2014, 16(7), 1–11.
Liang, Q.; Zhao, D. Immobilization of Arsenate in a Sandy Loam Soil Using Starch-Stabilized 
magnetite Nanoparticles. J. Hazard. Mater. 2014, 271, 16–23.
Lowry, G. V.; Avellan, A.; Gilbertson, L. M. Opportunities and Challenges for Nanotechnology 
in the Agri-tech Revolution. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14(6), 517–522.
Ma, X.; Geiser-Lee, J.; Deng, Y.; Kolmakov, A. Interactions Between Engineered 
Nanoparticles (ENPs) and Plants: Phytotoxicity, Uptake and Accumulation. Sci. Total 
Environ. 2010, 408(16), 3053–3061.The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 199
Maliszewska, I. Effects of the Biogenic Gold Nanoparticles on Microbial Community 
Structure and Activities. Ann. Microbiol. 2016, 66(2), 785–794.
Manjunatha, S. B.; Biradar, D. P.; Aladakatti, Y. R. Nanotechnology and its Applications in 
Agriculture: A Review. J. Farm Sci. 2016, 29(1), 1–13.
Mazaheri-Tirani, M.; Dayani, S. In Vitro Effect of Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles on Nicotiana 
Tabacum Callus Compared to ZnO Micro Particles and Zinc Sulfate (ZnSO 4). Plant Cell 
Tissue Organ Culture (PCTOC) 2020, 140(2), 279–289.
Meghana, K. T.; Wahiduzzaman, M. D.; Vamsi, Golla. Nano Fertilizers in Agriculture. Acta 
Sci. Agric. 2021, 5(3) 35–46.
Mukhopadhyay, S. S. Nanotechnology in Agriculture: Prospects and Constraints.Nanotechnol. 
Sci. Appl. 2014, 7, 63.
Nair, R. Effects of Nanoparticles on Plant Growth and Development. In Plant Nanotechnology; 
Springer: Cham, 2016; pp 95–118. 
National Center for Biotechnology Information, d. PubChem database. Zinc sulfate, CID= 
24424 [Online]. https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/Zinc-sulfate.
Nekrasova, G. F.; Ushakova, O. S.; Ermakov, A. E.; Uimin, M. A.; Byzov, I. V. Effects of 
Copper (II) Ions and Copper Oxide Nanoparticles on Elodea Densa Planch. Russ. J. Ecol.
2011, 42(6), 458–463.
Nelson, A. R. L. E.; Ravichandran, K.; Antony, U. The Impact of the Green Revolution on 
Indigenous Crops of India. J. Ethnic Foods 2019, 6(1), 1–10.
Nhan, L. V.; Ma, C.; Rui, Y.; Liu, S.; Li, X.; Xing, B.; Liu, L. Phytotoxic Mechanism of 
Nanoparticles: Destruction of Chloroplasts and Vascular Bundles and Alteration of Nutrient 
Absorption. Sci. Rep. 2015, 5, 11618.
Ninawe, S.; Krishna, A V. Guidelines for Evaluation of Nano-Based Agri- Input and Food 
Products in India, 2020 [Online]. https://www.jatinverma.org. 
Nouri, Z.; Hajialyani, M.; Izadi, Z.; Bahramsoltani, R.; Farzaei, M. H.; Abdollahi, M. 
Nanophytomedicines for the Prevention of Metabolic Syndrome: A Pharmacological and 
Biopharmaceutical Review. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 8, 425.
Oliver, M. J. Why We Need GMO Crops in a Agriculture. Missouri Med. 2014, 111(6), 492.
Ombódi, A.; Saigusa, M. Broadcast Application Versus Band Application of Polyolefin‐Coated 
Fertilizer on Green Peppers Grown on Andisol. J. Plant Nutr. 2000, 23(10), 1485–1493.
Pandey, G. Challenges and Future Prospects of Agri-nanotechnology for Sustainable 
Agriculture in India. Environ. Technol. Innov. 2018, 11, 299–307.
Pérez‐de‐Luque, A.; Hermosín, M. C. Nanotechnology and its use in Agriculture. In 
Bio‐Nanotechnology: A Revolution in Food, Biomedical and Health Sciences, 2013; pp 
383–398.
Prasad, R.; Bhattacharyya, A.; Nguyen, Q. D. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: 
Recent Developments, Challenges, and Perspectives. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1014.
Qian, Y.; Qin, C.; Chen, M.; Lin, S. Nanotechnology in Soil Remediation− Applications Vs. 
Implications. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Aaf. 2020, 201, 110815.
Rajput, V. D.; Minkina, T.; Sushkova, S.; Tsitsuashvili, V.; Mandzhieva, S.; Gorovtsov, A.; 
Nevidomskyaya, D.; Gromakova, N. Effect of Nanoparticles on Crops and Soil Microbial 
Communities. J. Soils Sediment 2018, 18(6), 2179–2187.
Rajput, V.; Singh, A.; Minkina, T.; Shende, S.; Kumar, P.; Verma, K.; Bauer, T.; Gorobtsova, 
O.; Deneva, S.; Sindireva, A. Potential Applications of Nanobiotechnology in Plant 
Nutrition and Protection for Sustainable Agriculture. In Nanotechnology in Plant Growth 
Promotion and Protection, 2021; pp 79–92.200 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Raman, R. The Impact of Genetically Modified (GM) Crops in Modern Agriculture: A 
Review. GM Crops Food 2017, 8(4), 195–208.
Rastogi, A.; Zivcak, M.; Sytar, O.; Kalaji, H. M.; He, X.; Mbarki, S.; Brestic, M. Impact of 
Metal and Metal Oxide Nanoparticles on Plant: A Critical Review. Front. Chem. 2017, 5, 
78.
Schlich, K.; Hund-Rinke, K. Influence of Soil Properties on the Effect of Silver Nanomaterials 
on Microbial Activity in Five Soils. Environ. Pollut. 2015, 196, 321–330.
Sebastian, A.; Nangia, A.; Prasad, M. N. V. Advances in Agrochemical Remediation Using 
Nanoparticles. In Agrochemicals Detection, Treatment and Remediation; Butterworth￾Heinemann: Oxford, 2020; pp. 465–485. 
Sekhon, B. S. Nanotechnology in Agri-food Production: An Overview. Nanotechnol. Sci. 
Appl. 2014, 7, 31.
Shang, Y.; Hasan, M.; Ahammed, G. J.; Li, M.; Yin, H.; Zhou, J. Applications of Nanotechnology 
in Plant Growth and Crop Protection: A Review. Molecules 2019, 24(14), 2558.
Shennan, C.; Krupnik, T. J.; Baird, G.; Cohen, H.; Forbush, K.; Lovell, R. J.; Olimpi, E. 
M. Organic and Conventional Agriculture: A Useful Framing? Ann. Rev. Environ. Resour. 
2017, 42, 317–346.
Shukla, P.; Chaurasia, P.; Younis, K.; Qadri, O. S.; Faridi, S. A.; Srivastava, G. 
Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: Studies From Seed Priming to Post-Harvest 
Management. Nanotechnol. Environ. Eng. 2019, 4(1), 11.
Siddiqui, M. H.; Al-Whaibi, M. H.; Firoz, M.; Al-Khaishany, M. Y. Role of Nanoparticles in 
Plants. In Nanotechnology and Plant Sciences, 2015; pp 19–35.
Silva, J. G. D. The Future of Food and Agriculture, Trends and challenges. Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, 2017 [Online]. http://www.fao.org 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova. Sci. Publishers, Inc., 2020; 
vol 1, pp 73–100. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Rawat, S.; Sharma, R.; Singh, A. K.; Singh, A. K.; Tomar, R. S. In 
Emerging Tools for SustainableAgriculture and Food Security; Rajput, D.; Book Agency: 
New Delhi, Delhi, 2021a; vol 1, pp 1–15. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V.; Singh, A.; Sengar, R.; Singh, R.; Minkina, T. Transformation Techniques 
and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. Policy Issues 
Genetically Modified Crops 2021b, 1, 515–542.
Sonkaria, S.; Ahn, S. H.; Khare, V. Nanotechnology and its Impact on Food and Nutrition: A 
Review. Recent Pat. Food Nutr. Agric. 2012, 4(1), 8–18.
Srivastava, A.; Rao, D. P. Enhancement of Seed Germination and Plant Growth of Wheat, 
Maize, Peanut and Garlic Using Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes. Eur. Chem. Bull. 
2014, 3(5), 502–504.
Tan, X.; Wang, X.; Fang, M.; Chen, C. Sorption and Desorption of Th (IV) on Nanoparticles 
of Anatase Studied by Batch and Spectroscopy Methods. Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. 
Eng. Asp. 2007, 296(1–3), 109–116.
Tilman, D.; Cassman, K. G.; Matson, P. A.; Naylor, R.; Polasky, S. Agricultural Sustainability 
and Intensive Production Practices. Nature 2002, 418(6898), 671–677.
Towell, M. G.; Browne, L. A.; Paton, G. I.; Semple, K. T. Impact of Carbon Nanomaterials 
on the Behaviour of 14C-Phenanthrene and 14C-Benzo-[a] Pyrene in Soil. Environ. Pollut. 
2011, 159(3), 706–715.The Behavior of Nanomaterials in Soil and Interaction with Soil Biota 201
Usman, M.; Farooq, M.; Wakeel, A.; Nawaz, A.; Cheema, S. A.; ur Rehman, H.; Ashraf, 
I.; Sanaullah, M. Nanotechnology in Agriculture: Current Status, Challenges and Future 
Opportunities. Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 721, 137778.
Waalewijn-Kool, P. L.; Ortiz, M. D.; van Straalen, N. M.; van Gestel, C. A. Ecotoxicological 
Assessment of ZnO Nanoparticles to ‘Folsomia Candida’. Vrije Universiteit, 2013.
Wang, C.; Lu, J.; Zhou, L.; Li, J.; Xu, J.; Li, W.; Zhang, L.; Zhong, X.; Wang, T. Effects 
of long-term exposure to zinc oxide nanoparticles on development, zinc metabolism and 
biodistribution of minerals (Zn, Fe, Cu, Mn) in mice. PloS One 2016, 11(10), e0164434.
Wang, J.; Meng, G.; Tao, K.; Feng, M.; Zhao, X.; Li, Z.; Xu, H.; Xia, D.; Lu, J. R. 
Immobilization of Lipases on Alkyl Silane Modified Magnetic Nanoparticles: Effect of 
Alkyl Chain Length on Enzyme Activity. PloS One 2012, 7(8), 43478.
Wang, Y.; Pan, C.; Chu, W.; Vipin, A. K.; Sun, L. Environmental Remediation Applications 
of Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene Oxide: Adsorption and Catalysis. Nanomaterials 
2019, 9(3), 439.
Wong, J. K.; Mohseni, R.; Hamidieh, A. A.; MacLaren, R. E.; Habib, N.; Seifalian, A. M. 
Will Nanotechnology Bring New Hope for Gene Delivery? Trends Biotechnol. 2017, 35(5),
434–451.
Xiong, T.; Dumat, C.; Dappe, V.; Vezin, H.; Schreck, E.; Shahid, M.; Pierart, A.; Sobanska, S. 
Copper Oxide Nanoparticle Foliar Uptake, Phytotoxicity, and Consequences for Sustainable 
Urban Agriculture. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2017, 51(9), 5242–5251.
Xu, C.; Peng, C.; Sun, L.; Zhang, S.; Huang, H.; Chen, Y.; Shi, J. Distinctive Effects of 
TiO2
 and CuO Nanoparticles on Soil Microbes and Their Community Structures in Flooded 
Paddy Soil. Soil Biol. Biochem. 2015, 86, 24–33.
Yin, L.; Cheng, Y.; Espinasse, B.; Colman, B. P.; Auffan, M.; Wiesner, M.; Rose, J.; Liu, 
J.; Bernhardt, E. S. More Than the Ions: The Effects of Silver Nanoparticles on Lolium 
Multiflorum. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2011, 45(6), 2360–2367.
You, T.; Liu, D.; Chen, J.; Yang, Z.; Dou, R.; Gao, X.; Wang, L. Effects of Metal Oxide 
Nanoparticles on Soil Enzyme Activities and Bacterial Communities in Two Different Soil 
Types. J. Soils Sediment. 2018, 18(1), 211–221.
Yusefi-Tanha, E.; Fallah, S.; Rostamnejadi, A.; Pokhrel, L. R. Zinc Oxide Nanoparticles 
(ZnONPs) as a Novel Nanofertilizer: Influence on Seed Yield and Antioxidant Defense 
System in Soil Grown Soybean (Glycine max cv. Kowsar). Sci. Total Environ. 2020, 738, 
140240.PART IV
Emerging Nanotechnological Tools and 
Techniques for Crop ImprovementNanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 9
Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop 
Improvement in the Nano-Era
ANAMIKA KASHYAP1
, KUNAL TANWAR1
, POOJA GARG1
, 
SUJATA KUMARI1
, PHAM THI THU HA2
, SANJAY SINGH1
, and 
MAHESH RAO1
1
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Delhi, India
2
Genomic Research Institute and Seed, Ton Duc Thang University, Vietnam
ABSTRACT
Crop improvement programs are enhanced regularly by introducing new 
technologies to produce enough for human consumption in the changing 
climatic conditions. One such recent approach as inspired by NASA’s extra￾terrestrial experiments is “speed breeding.” The scientists have developed 
the speed breeding platform where crops can be grown at a faster rate in 
controlled conditions as compared with natural seasonal cycles. As speed 
breeding shortens the crop generation time, this strategy can be used for 
various research studies as well as breeding programs. The benefits harnessed 
from speed breeding are enormous over conventional breeding approaches. 
In this chapter, we describe in detail about speed breeding, how it was devel￾oped, methods used for speed breeding, how it functions, and where can it be 
applied for crop improvement.
9.1 INTRODUCTION
In order to satisfy the demand of the growing population, there is a need 
for increasing crop yield in the future. According to a prediction, by the 206 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
next 30 years, the human population is expected to grow by 25% and reach 
approximately 10 billion (Hickey et al., 2019). There are several methods 
for increasing the yield, but the present increasing scenario of genetic gain 
could not sufficiently meet the higher demand (Singh et al., 2020). It has 
been observed that breeding programs for crop improvement have somehow 
become stagnant and localized, and also, they have certain environmental 
influence (Singh et al., 2020). There is tremendous pressure on plant 
breeders to improve breeding programs in a particular duration of time and 
focus mainly on enhancing crop yields with better resistance to abiotic and 
biotic stress and resilience to climate change (Singh et al., 2021a). One of 
the major threats to world food security is climate change which is leading to 
an increase in temperature, CO2
 levels, pest and diseases, droughts, floods, 
decline of quality of the agricultural produce, and reduction in global crop 
yields (Peng et al., 2004; Nelson et al., 2009; Wassmann et al., 2009a; 
Newton et al., 2011; Lobell and Gourdji, 2012; IPCC, 2014; Sreenivasulu et 
al., 2015; Zhao et al., 2017; Van Oort and Zwart, 2018). Various improved 
cultivars or varieties via conventional breeding programs have been released 
worldwide in the last 5–6 decades. Traditional breeding programs are slow 
and time-consuming. It follows a fixed process of crossing between parents 
and then selfing in the next 4–6 generations to obtain homozygosity to eval￾uate agro-morphological traits further. To enhance the present level of crop 
productivity to meet the higher demand, an accelerated breeding process is 
required to shorten the generation time.
Climate change is unpredictable, and insufcient light during diferent 
crop development stages can hamper productivity, especially reduced yield 
and crop failure in the winter season in diferent parts of the world (Singh et 
al., 2021b). To overcome this yield loss and failure, the artifcial light source 
was given to crops under controlled environment and in protected cultiva￾tion such as glasshouses. Plant tissue cultures were maintained under the 
artifcial light sources in plant tissue culture laboratories (Mpelkas, 1980). 
Initial references of using artifcial electric lamps, incandescent lamps, elec￾tric arc lamps, and light-emitting diode (LEDs) as artifcial supplement to 
sunlight are also reported. Inspired by NASA’s extraterrestrial experiments 
to grow wheat under constant light, a new concept of “speed breeding” 
was developed by the University of Queensland by utilizing controlled 
growth chambers that can shorten the life cycle of crops for commercial 
and research purposes as can be seen in Figure 9.1. Alongside, accelerated 
breeding additional growth parameters, which included immature seeds 
harvest was also investigated. The acceleration process is accomplished Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 207
in fully enclosed, controlled environment growth chambers where mutant 
studies, phenotyping of adult plant traits, and transformation can be studied. 
At present, many generations of plants can be grown in a single year using 
speed breeding. For example, four generations per year of canola (Brassica 
napus), six generations in a year for barley (Hordeum vulgare), durum wheat 
(Triticum durum), spring wheat (Triticum aestivum), pea (Pisum sativum), 
and chickpea (Cicer arietinum) can be grown using speed breeding (Ghosh 
et al., 2018; Watson et al., 2018).
FIGURE 9.1 This figure represents the time duration of a variety development via 
conventional breeding with 1–2 generations per year and speed breeding with 3–6 generations 
per year. The time difference for line development is notable.
9.2 METHODS OF SPEED BREEDING
Speed breeding is a very old technique, but it has emerged significantly in 
the past few years. Thus, many different methods have been described that 
the breeders can employ depending on the crop, conditions, and cost. These 
methods are listed below. Tables 9.1 and 9.2 provide a brief overview of 
some of these methods.
• Speed breeding I (SB I)
• Speed breeding II (SB II)
• Speed breeding III (SB III)
• Greenhouse (Ochatt et al., 2002),
• Greenhouse RGT (O’Connor et al., 2013)
• In vitro only (Mobini et al., 2015)208 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
• In vitro along with in vivo (Rizal et al., 2014; Ochatt et al., 2002)
• Biotron
• Modified controlled biotron
• Rapid generation advance (RGA) (Collard et al., 2017)
TABLE 9.1 Major Specifications and Differences in Speed Breeding I, II, and III Methods.
Parameters SB I SB II SB III
Growth 
chamber
Conviron BDW chamber Glasshouse Homemade growth 
room design
Lights/lamps The mixture of white LED 
bars, far-red LED lamps, and 
ceramic metal hydrargyrum 
quartz iodide lamps
High-pressure 
sodium vapor 
lamps
Sandwich paneling 
fitted with seven LB-8 
LED light boxes
Light intensity 490–500 µmol m−2 s−1(at 
adult plant height)
440–650 µmol m−2
s−1 (at adult plant 
height)
340–590 µmol m−2(s−1
at adult plant height)
Photoperiod 
duration
22 h 22 h 12 h for 4 weeks, then 
increased to 18 h
Photoperiod 
temperature
22°C 22°C 21°C
Dark period 
duration
2 h 2 h 12 h for 4 weeks, then 
reduced to 6 h
Dark period 
temperature
17°C 17°C 18°C
Ramping Yes. Natural dawn and dusk 
conditions were simulated 
by ramping up and down of 
light and temperature for 1 h 
and 30 min
No No
Crops Wheat, barley, 
Brachypodium, pea, and 
Medicago truncatula seeds
Wheat, barley, 
canola, and 
chickpea seeds
Wheat, barley, oat, 
and triticale
Reference Watson et al., 2018 Watson et al., 2018 Watson et al., 2018
9.3 SPEED BREEDING IN CROPS
9.3.1 CEREALS 
In temperate cereals, such as barley and wheat, speed breeding protocols 
are used to quicken growth and development by extending the photoperiods 
and controlling temperatures to produce six generations/year (Watson et Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 209
al., 2018). Protocols for speed breeding tropical short-day plants, such as 
cereal crops and orphan grass have yet to be developed. In Amaranthus, a 
short-day plant, flowering occurs between 30 and 50 days after sowing, so 
to synchronize the flowering, speed breeding protocols can be helpful in 
breeding strategies. It has been possible to promote early flowering in late￾flowering lines with late flowering and promote production and quick devel￾opment of new varieties by this technique. Speed breeding has been done 
in amaranth by providing the high temperature and long-day conditions to 
promote robust vegetative growth. Transfers to short-day conditions induce 
flowering almost immediately in short-day species. This technique is also 
helpful in synchronizing the flowering times and in promoting hybridiza￾tion in amaranth. At the University of Queensland, Australia, this amaranth 
protocol has been trialed in sorghum (Sorghum bicolor), a short-day crop 
(Joshi et al., 2018; Stetter et al., 2016).
TABLE 9.2 This Table Highlights the Growth Conditions of the Two Breeding Systems. 
Biotron Breeding System was Developed as an Alternative Method to Grow Rice Under 
Artificial Climate Conditions, Further Modified by Rana et al. to Reduce Costs.
Parameters Biotron Modified controlled biotron
Photoperiod 
duration
11 h 14 h for 30 days
10 h afterwards
Photoperiod 
temperature
30°C 30°C
Dark period 
duration
13 h 10 h for 30 days
14 h afterwards
Dark period 
temperature
25°C 25°C
Relative 
humidity
70% 70%
CO2 level 20% (CO2
 gas cylinder) No CO2 supply to reduce cost
Crops Rice cultivars Rice cultivars (Kaijin, 
Yukinko-mai)
Other techniques 
used
Tiller removal, embryo rescue Tiller removal, embryo rescue
Observations Vigorous growth and sufficient seed 
production with accelerated flowering 
time. Nipponbare life cycle was 
shortened to about 2 months
“YNU31-2-4” salt-tolerant 
introgression line was devel￾oped in six generations within a 
short span of 17 months
Reference Ohnishi et al., 2011 Rana et al., 2019210 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
The phenotyping of a population for resistance in the feld is reduced to 
once a year because it is afected by weather conditions. In wheat, identifca￾tion of plant resistance for leaf rust at the adult stage under controlled growth 
conditions at both juvenile and adult growth stages was done. Genotypes of 
spring wheat having known APR genes, such as Lr34 and Lr46 were used 
under feld and controlled conditions (Riaz et al., 2016). 
9.3.2 LEGUMES AND OILSEEDS 
In orphan legumes, such as in lupin (Lupinus sp.), chickpea (Cicer arietinum), 
lentil (Lens culinaris), and faba bean (Vicia faba) generation time has been 
reduced by speed breeding protocols. Different light spectra, red to far-red 
were used to optimize early flowering, which speeds up generation turnover. 
It was also examined that the environment with R: FR ratio below 3.5 with 
the highest light intensity in the FR region was highly effective (Croser et 
al., 2016). In chickpea (Cicer arietinum), early flowering was induced by 
providing 24-h day-length incandescent light. Plants grown under 24 h day 
length showed slight increase in seed size, the number of pods, and plant 
height. This technique allows us to obtain more than one generation/year 
(Sethi et al., 1981). In the case of subterranean clover (Trifolium subter￾raneum), in vitro-assisted single seed descent (IVASSD) technique was used 
to obtain 2.7–6.1 generations per year. The IVASSD protocol was useful 
in accelerating the generation cycle by minimizing the time of floral initia￾tion by growing under extended photoperiod and appropriate temperature, 
followed by reducing the seed filling period and germination of immature 
seed in vitro on B5. Normal and fertile F7
 pants were obtained (Pazos et al., 
2017). Procedures have also been developed in broad beans (Vicia faba) and 
lentil (Lens culinaris) (Lulsdorf and Banniza, 2018; Mobini et al., 2015). 
These crops are of greater interest because they have become a part of the 
agro-based food supply chain, and cost-efficient breeding programs are 
required to combat disease or climate challenges (Pazos et al., 2017; Kole, 
2007).
Speed breeding was performed in peanuts and was found to be successful 
in reducing generation time (O’Connor et al., 2013). In Brassica napus, speed 
breeding procedure was performed using two methods. The frst method is 
the “all soil” method to achieve fve generations/year, where plants were 
provided water stress, long lighting hours, and high temperature. Using the 
second method, “embryo culture plus soil,” seven generations were achieved Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 211
in a year. It is also used for RILs and NILs production in a research project, 
and the extensive use of this method could promote canola breeding along 
with biological studies (Yao et al., 2016).
In oilseed crops like soybean (Glycine max), in which the reproductive 
cycle contributes 50% of the total life cycle, immature seeds were used in 
speed breeding protocol to shorten the reproductive cycle by pretreatment of 
seeds and exposing pods to slight dehydration for 4 days at a temperature of 
26 + 2°C, 14 h/10 h day/night, 70/100% relative humidity. Later on, excised 
embryos were provided germination conditions. This method is useful for 
the development of recombinant lines (Roumet and Morin, 1997). The same 
immature seed culturing was also performed in sunfowers for shortening the 
breeding cycle to produce four generations/annum. The immature embryos 
of 10–12 DAP were cut and cultured into MS medium. The developed young 
plantlets were then transferred in a viol containing peat, perlite, and soil 
mixture (v/v) in 1:1:2 ratio in the growth chamber, developed to maturity, 
self-pollinated, and set seed but plants developed reduced agronomic char￾acters as compared with feld experiment (Dagustu et al., 2012).
9.3.3 ROOTS, TUBERS, AND BANANAS 
Being multiplied by clonal propagation, these crops lack diversity, and thus, 
only few clones are available for millions of people (Heslop and Schwar￾zacher, 2007). Therefore, these crops are highly at risk for disease and pest, 
and the livelihood of people depending on these crops is at risk because it 
has been reported that their incidence and impact increase due to a variety 
of socioeconomic and biophysical factors (Godfray et al., 2010; Ehrlich and 
Harte, 2015; Sundstrom et al., 2014). Speed breeding will be beneficial in 
introducing required traits in such crops to surmount the diseases like cassava 
brown streak disease and banana bacterial wilt. The seeds of these crops 
have no economic importance to farmers. These crops are mostly grown via 
vegetative propagation. These crops have either late flowering or sometimes 
they flower only under special conditions. 
In root crop cassava, plants were provided no light at night along with 
extended photoperiod by using red light-emitting diodes with a range of 
625–635 nm wavelength for three seasons. EP induced early fowering in 
erect-plant genotypes (Pineda et al., 2020). In cassava, speed breeding has 
also been performed by grafting to increase fowering. There was an increase 
in shoot production on grafted cassava plants. Grafting of genotypes with 212 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
high fowering rates onto genotypes with low fowering rates can result in 
fowering in genotypes with low fowering rates (Souza et al., 2018). In 
cassava, if genomics-assisted breeding approaches estimate the breeding 
value of individuals plants, then progenies can be grown rapidly for the 
next generation using speed breeding (Wolfe et al., 2017). For clonally 
propagated crops and RTBs, the development of elite clones is the main aim 
of breeding programs, for example, in root crop Cocoyam, Wilson (1979) 
developed elite clones by foliar treatment of plants with an aqueous solution 
of the potassium salt of GA3
 at diferent concentration at 3–4 leaf stage. The 
large number of inforescences was recorded after 120 days when dry season 
terminated the experiment. Hand pollination was performed, and after fruit 
development, seeds were collected and grown in MS medium, and then 
seedlings were transplanted into greenhouse, followed by feld transfer. 
In the potato breeding program, the sli gene was introduced into potato 
germplasm using speed breeding by crossing two donors D1 and D2, to 
generate F1 progenies. The progenies were grown in the winter in a glass￾house, and the temperature was set at 20/10°
C for day/night. Self-compatible 
F2
 plants obtained were selfed to get F3
 progenies (Lindhout et al., 2011). 
The International Potato Centre developed new elite clones of potato 
showing heat tolerance, resistance against late blight, and potato virus Y by 
selecting clones where the night and day temperatures were 21°C and 27°C, 
respectively for heat tolerance. Further selection for late blight resistance 
by exposing them with the pathogen and selection for viral resistance were 
done by inoculation and grafting procedure (Gastelo et al., 2015). Suppose 
advanced technology, such as gene mapping, genetic analysis, genomic 
selection, and QTL are used in potato breeding programs. In that case, it will 
be possible to tag breeding traits to specifc DNA markers for their use for 
selection to speed up hybrid seed development (Ortiz, 2020).
9.3.4 FRUIT TREES 
In most fruit-bearing trees, flowering occurs only after a juvenile phase that 
can last from few to more than 20 years (Korbo et al., 2013). Therefore, to 
speed up fruit tree breeding, efforts are laid to reduce the juvenile period. 
Such techniques have been observed to increase vegetative development 
and flowering in a fragment of the period; for example, for apple (Malus 
× Domestica), in 10 months rather than 5 years (van Nocker and Gardiner, 
2014) and chestnut (Castanea sativa) in 2 years rather than 7 years (Baier Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 213
et al., 2012). Due to tree crops, extra resources and protocol modifications 
are needed so that the plants, at a certain height, can be managed in the 
controlled-environment facilities. In some species, the seed-to-seed interval 
can be removed by breaking seed dormancy (van Nocker and Gardiner, 
2014). It has been reported that transgenic early flowering plants can be used 
for inducing early flowering in apple and combined with MAS process to 
speed up the breeding process. To achieve this, transgenic apple lines with 
early flowering were evaluated in glasshouse conditions showing overex￾pression of the BpMADS4 gene encoding tree morphology. The selected 
line was analyzed and used in fast-breeding (Flachowsky et al., 2011). Speed 
breeding has been applied in several crops for different traits. A summary of 
such crops has been given in Table 9.3.
9.4 APPLICATIONS
The most significant advantage of speed breeding technology is the “rapid 
advancement of generations.” Due to shorter generation time, research and 
breeding programs are accelerated at great rates. This technology can be 
combined with other breeding and molecular approaches, such as genomic 
selection, marker-assisted selection, gene editing for faster outcomes (Shiva￾kumar et al., 2018).
9.4.1 SPEED BREEDING FOR VARIETY DEVELOPMENT
The scientists at ICAR-Indian Institute of Soybean Research (ICAR-IISR), 
Indore are working on varietal development and are taking up off-season 
(January–April) generation at Bengaluru. The advancement of F1
 to F2
generations is done at greenhouse and poly house facilities at ICAR-IISR, 
Indore, India. Further, the selected segregating material is advanced via 
speed breeding to pace the variety development (Shivakumar et al., 2018).
There was another such research conducted by O’Connor et al. in peanut. 
Variety release is usually a lengthy process of about 10–15 years, but speed 
breeding can be shortened. With this approach, the life cycle of maturity 
cultivars is reduced from 15 to 89 days, and the inbreeding of F2
, F3
, and 
F4
 generations can rapidly progress within a year. This can lead to the rapid 
commercial release of a new variety within 6 to 7 years (O’Connor et al., 
2013).214 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture TABLE 9.3 The Table Summarizes the Crops Grown Using Different Methods of Speed Breeding and Their Targeted Traits and Selection Methods. Crop Technique Trait targeted Gen./year Selection method References Amaranth Temperature and photoperiod Early flowering 6 SSD Stetter et al. (2016) Apple The apical portion of 10 months old plant was grafted and grown under optimal growth conditions. Early flowering 1 generation in less than a year – Van nocker and Gardiner (2014) Culturing in medium and acclimatization of plantlets In glasshouse under long-day conditions (16 h light: 8 h darkness) at 22°C. Genetic fixing of BpMADS4 gene encoding early flowering 1 Marker- assisted selection Flachowsky et al. (2011) Barley Temperature, photoperiod, immature germina- tion of seed, embryo rescue Early flowering 9 SSD Zheng et al. (2013) Temperature, photoperiod Early flowering 6 SSD Watson et al. (2018) Canola Temperature, light intensity, photoperiod Early flowering 4 SSD Watson et al. (2018) Cassava High temperature, long photoperiod, embryo culture, and water stress Reduced generation time 5–7 All soil and SPD Yao et al. (2016) Extended photoperiod, different light intensi- ties, and temperature Accelerated flowering – – Marcela et al. (2020) Grafting followed by the development of plants in the nursery Increase flowering – – Souza et al. (2018), Ceballos et al. (2017) Chestnut Tissue cultured plantlets were grown under high-intensity light, with the temperature of 23°C and 60% relative humidity Early flowering 1 generation in 2 years – Baier et al. (2012)Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 215 Crop Technique Trait targeted Gen./year Selection method References Chickpea Photoperiod and immature seed germination Early flowering 7 SPD Semineni et al. (2019) Temperature, photoperiod Early flowering 2 – Sethi et al. (1981) Photoperiod, plant hormones, light intensity, and immature seed Early flowering 8 SPD Mobini et al. (2015) Cocoyam Development of elite clones via GA3 applica- tion and hand pollination done and collected seeds cultured and plants transferred to the greenhouse Flower induction and seed formation – – Wilson (1979) Faba bean Photoperiod, light intensity, plant hormones, and immature seed Early flowering 7 SPD Mobini et al. (2015) Lentil Photoperiod, light intensity Early flowering and Aphanomyces root rot selection 5 SSD Lulsdorf et al. (2018) Lupin Temperature, photoperiod, immature seeds germination Early flowering 5 – Croser et al. (2016). Also used in chickpea, faba bean, lentil Pea Temperature, photoperiod, immature embryo culture Rapid generation of progenies 5 – Mobini and Warkent in (2016) Peanut Temperature, photoperiod Reducing generation time 3 SSD O’Connor et al. (2013) Pigeon pea Photoperiod, temperature, immature seed germination Rapid flowering 4 SPD Saxena et al. (2019) TABLE 9.3 (Continued)216 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture Crop Technique Trait targeted Gen./year Selection method References Potato Crossing of parents, seeds germinated in the greenhouse under controlled temperature followed by selfing and marker selection Sli gene fixing, which inhibits gametophytic self-incompatibility 2–3 Marker- assisted selection Lindhout et al. (2011) Rice Photoperiod, high-density planting, and temperature High yielding trait 4 SSD Collard et al. (2017) Backcrossing, germination in controlled temperature and daylight and embryo rescue followed by selection Hst1 gene introgression for salt tolerance 6 Marker- assisted selection Rana et al. (2019) Sorghum Photoperiod, temperature, and immature seed germination Early flowering 6 SSD Forster et al. (2014) Soybean Temperature, photoperiod germination, pretreatment of pods at high temperature, immature seeds germinated Early flowering 5 SSD Roumet and Morin (1997) Temperature, long photoperiod, light intensity (low red to far-red) Accelerated flowering 5 SSD Jahne et al. (2020), also done in rice and amaranth Temperature, photoperiod, CO2 Accelerated flowering 5 – Nagatoshi and Fujita (2018) Subterranean clover Photoperiod, temperature, germination of immature seeds Early flowering 2.7–6.1 SSD Pazos-Navarro et al. (2017) Sunflower Temperature, photoperiod, immature embryos were excised and cultured, and plantlets were transferred to pot at 24 ± 2oC in 16 h/8 h Accelerated flowering 4 – Nazan et al. (2012) TABLE 9.3 (Continued)Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 217 Crop Technique Trait targeted Gen./year Selection method References Wheat Temperature, photoperiod, immature germina- tion of seed followed by embryo rescue Early flowering 7.6 SSD Zheng et al. (2013) Temperature, photoperiod Leaf rust resistance – – Riaz et al. (2016) Temperature, photoperiod, speed breeding system Phenotyping for seminal root number, seminal root angle, plant height, resistance to leaf rust, and tolerance to crown rot 6 – Alahmad et al. 2018 F1 progeny produced by crossing two germplasms and growing under controlled temperature and humidity and water deficit conditions upto F7 Improvement of stay green and root traits 5–7 – Christopher et al. (2015) SPD, single pod descent; SSD, single seed descent. TABLE 9.3 (Continued)218 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
9.4.2 SPEED BREEDING FOR YIELD 
In 2015, a study was conducted by Jack Christopher et al. to investigate 
the combined effects of phenotyping, nested association mapping (NAM), 
and speed breeding on root adaptation amidst climate change and water 
limitation. This study was conducted to increase wheat yield. Using speed 
breeding technique, a NAM population of 1000 recombinant inbred lines 
were progressed to F5
 generations within 18 months. Multiple trials were 
done to identify the superior germplasm (Christopher et al., 2015).
9.4.3 SPEED BREEDING FOR MULTIPLE QUANTITATIVE TRAITS 
SELECTION
Speed breeding has been developed successfully in bread wheat (T. aestivum
L.) to advance it to six generations per year. Such technique has also been 
deployed in durum wheat (T. durum Desf.). When combined with speed 
breeding, the novel multitrait phenotyping method leads to the selection of 
early filial generations and fixed lines out-of-season characterization. More￾over, it offers the efficient use of resources by assaying multiple traits on the 
same set of plants (Alahmad et al., 2018). 
9.4.4 SPEED BREEDING FOR BIOTIC AND ABIOTIC STRESS
9.4.4.1 BIOTIC STRESS (MULTIPLE DISEASE RESISTANCE)
One of the most important parameters to enhance crop production is incor￾porating disease resistance to plants. Breeders are trying to achieve this via 
speed breeding to achieve faster and better outputs. One such research was 
performed by Hickey et al. in 2017 in which multiple disease resistance was 
transferred into two-rowed barley with scarlett genetic background via novel 
trait introgression methodology. The backcross-derived Scarlett introgression 
lines (ILs) with enhanced resistance to foliar diseases developed within just 
2 years under controlled environment conditions. Likewise, other breeding 
technologies can also be combined with speed breeding technology for crop 
improvement programs (Hickey et al., 2017).
9.4.4.2 ABIOTIC STRESS (SALT TOLERANCE)
One of the major reasons that speed breeding technology is now being 
explored rapidly is climate change. Climate change is responsible for a Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 219
number of plant abiotic stresses, such as drought, salinity, heat, heavy metals, 
submergence (Wassmannet al., 2009b). Rice is severely affected by salinity 
due to low salt tolerance. The research was performed by Rana et al., 2019 
to improve salinity resistance in locally grown cultivars. In this study, the 
tolerant gene for salinity, hst1, was introgressed from “Kaijin” to “Yukinko￾mai” (WT) variety of rice through SNP (single-nucleotide polymorphism)-
based MAS (marker-assisted selection using biotron speed breeding system 
as given in Table 9.2. The population BC3
F3
 (YNU31-2-4) was developed in 
six generations within 17 months only. In the seedlings, survival rates were 
higher and increased shoot and root length. Avoiding accumulation of Na+ in 
shoots under salinity stress, high tolerance was found in YNU31-2-4 against 
salt stress at both seedling and reproductive stages (Rana et al., 2019). This 
research is a great example of the potential that we can harness from the 
fusion of developed and upcoming technologies.
9.5 DRAWBACKS AND CHALLENGES OF SPEED BREEDING
For accelerating conventional breeding programs, the process of speed 
breeding is a valuable approach that requires appropriate infrastructure, 
plant phenomics facilities along with the expertise to handle with continuous 
financial support (Shimelis et al., 2019). Such resources can be developed 
easily only if approaches for speed breeding are given enough recognition 
for conventional plant breeding, MAS, and genetic engineering. Also, this 
process requires expertise and skills in biotechnology and plant breeding 
and support from government at policy and long-term financial require￾ments. However, challenges that most commonly hamper the use of speed 
breeding are: (1) direct access to proper lab facilities, (2) trained workers, 
(3) embracing major changes to breeding program design and operations, 
(4) species/crop-specific protocols, and (5) the requirement for long-term 
funding. Also, there are certain limitations of speed breeding. Firstly, the 
use of extended photoperiods may cause harmful results on plant growth. 
Extended photoperiod exposure can result in photooxidation and high starch 
production and can also lead to the production of various stress hormones. 
Secondly, this technique cannot be successfully applied in short-day crops. 
Thirdly, controlled environmental conditions can lead to the outbreak 
of diseases, such as leaf injury, chlorosis, and limited plant growth and 
productivity. Fourthly, losses of plants in single seed descent under green￾house conditions, and lastly, the cost of speed breeding is much higher than 
conventional breeding (Wanga et al., 2021).220 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
9.6 CONCLUSIONS
Speed breeding is a powerful technique that can be used to produce indi￾rectly more food by directing the fast development of improved varieties 
for the growing population as it reduces the generation time of crops. When 
combined with other modern or conventional techniques like embryo rescue, 
marker-assisted selection, gene editing, quantitative analysis can accelerate 
the academic, and commercial research. 
KEYWORDS
• breeding program
• crop improvement
• speed breeding
REFERENCES
Alahmad, S.; Dinglasan, E.; Leung, K. M.; Riaz, A.; Derbal, N.; Voss-Fels, K. P.; Able, J. A.; 
Bassi, F. M.; Christopher, J.; Hickey, L. T. Speed Breeding for Multiple Quantitative Traits 
in Durum Wheat. Plant Methods 2018,14(1), 1–15. 
Baier, K.; Maynard, C.; Powell, W. Chestnuts and Light. J. Am. Chestnut Foundation 2012, 
8–10.
Christopher, J.; Richard, C.; Chenu, K.; Christopher, M.; Borrell, A.; Hickey, L. Integrating 
Rapid Phenotyping and Speed Breeding to Improve Stay-Green and Root Adaptation of 
Wheat in Changing, Water-Limited, Australian Environments. Procedia Environ. Sci. 2015, 
29(Agri), 175–176. 
Collard, B. C. Y.; Beredo, J. C.; Lenaerts, B.; Mendoza, R.; Santelices, R.; Lopena, V.; 
Verdeprado, H.; Raghavan, C.; Gregorio, G. B.; Vial, L.; Demont, M.; Biswas, P. S.; 
Iftekharuddaula, K. M.; Rahman, M. A.; Cobb, J. N.; Islam, M. R. Revisiting Rice Breeding 
Methods–Evaluating the use of Rapid Generation Advance (RGA) for Routine Rice 
Breeding. Plant Prod. Sci. 2017, 20(4), 337–352. 
Croser, J. S.; Pazos-Navarro, M.; Bennett, R. G.;Tschirren, S.; Edwards, K.; Erskine, W.; 
Creasy, R.; Ribalta, F. M. Time to Flowering of Temperate Pulses In Vivo and Generation 
Turnover In Vivo–In Vitro of Narrow-Leaf Lupin Accelerated by Low Red to Far-Red Ratio 
and High Intensity in the Far-Red Region. Plant Cell Tissue Organ Culture (PCTOC) 2016, 
127(3), 591–599.
Dagustu, N.; Bayram, G.; Sincik, M.; Bayraktaroglu, M. The Short Breeding Cycle Protocol 
Effective on Diverse Genotypes of Sunflower (Helianthus annuusL.). Turk. J. Field Crops
2012,17(2), 124–128. Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 221
Ehrlich, P. R.; Harte, J. Opinion: To feed the World in 2050 Will Require a Global 
Revolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2015, 112(48), 14743–14744.
Flachowsky, H.; Le Roux, P. M.; Peil, A.; Patocchi, A.; Richter, K.; Hanke, M. V. Application 
of a High‐Speed Breeding Technology to Apple (Malus× domestica) Based on Transgenic 
Early Flowering Plants and Marker‐Assisted Selection. New Phytol. 2011, 192(2), 364–377.
Forster, B. P.; Till, B. J.; Ghanim, A. M. A.; Huynh, H. O. A.; Burstmayr, H.; Caligari, P. D. S. 
Accelerated Plant Breeding. Cab Rev. 2014, 9(043), 1–16.
Gastelo, M.; Diaz, L.; Landeo, J. A.; Bonierbale, M. New Elite Potato Clones With Heat 
Tolerance, Late Blight and Virus Resistance to Address Climate Change. In Potato and 
Sweet potato in Africa: Transforming the Value Chains for Food and Nutrition Security; 
Low, J., Nyongesa, M., Quinn, S., Parker, M,. Eds.; CABI International: Oxfordshire, 
UK,2015; pp 143–152.
Ghosh, S.; Watson, A.; Hickey, L.T. Speed Breeding in Growth Chambers and Glasshouses 
for Crop Breeding and Model Plant Research. Nat. Protoc. 2018, 13, 944–2963.
Godfray, H. C. J.; Beddington, J. R.; Crute, I. R.; Haddad, L.; Lawrence, D.; Muir, J. F. Pretty, 
J.; Robinson, S.; Thomas, S.M.; Toulmin, C. Food Security: The Challenge of Feeding 9 
Billion People. Science 2010, 327(5967), 812–818.
Heslop-Harrison, S.; Schwarzacher, T. Domestication, Genomics and the Future for 
Banana. Ann. Botany 2007, 100(5), 1073–1084.
Hickey, L. T.; Germán, S. E.; Pereyra, S. A.; Diaz, J. E.; Ziems, L. A.; Fowler, R. A.; Platz, 
G. J.; Franckowiak, J. D.;Dieters, M. J. Speed Breeding for Multiple Disease Resistance in 
Barley. Euphytica 2017, 213(3). 
Hickey, L. T.; Hafeez, A. N.; Robinson, H.; Jackson, S. A.; Leal-Bertioli, S. C.; Tester, M.; 
Wulff, B. B. Breeding Crops to Feed 10 Billion. Nat. Biotechnol. 2019, 37(7), 744–754.
Jähne, F.; Hahn, V.; Würschum, T.; Leiser, W. L. Speed Breeding Short-Day Crops by 
LED-Controlled Light Schemes. Theor. Appl. Genet. 2020, 133(8), 2335–2342.
Joshi, D. C.; Sood, S.; Hosahatti, R.; Kant, L.; Pattanayak, A.; Kumar, A.; Yadav, D.; Stetter, 
M. G. From Zero to Hero: The Past, Present and Future of Grain Amaranth Breeding. Theor. 
Appl. Genet. 2018, 131(9), 1807–1823.
Kole, C. (Ed.); Pulses, Sugar and Tuber Crops. Springer Science & Business Media, 2007; 
vol 3.
Korbo, A.; Kjær, E. D.; Sanou, H.; Ræbild, A.; Jensen, J. S.; Hansen, J. K. Breeding for High 
Production of Leaves of Baobab (Adansonia digitata L) in an Irrigated Hedge System. Tree 
Genet. Genomes 2013, 9, 779–793. 
Lindhout, P.; Meijer, D.; Schotte, T.; Hutten, R. C.; Visser, R. G.; van Eck, H. J. Towards F1 
Hybrid Seed Potato Breeding. Potato Res. 2011, 54(4), 301–312.
Lobell, D. B.; Gourdji, S. M. The Influence of Climate Change on Global Crop Productivity. 
Plant Physiol. 2012, 160, 1686–1697.
Lulsdorf, M. M.; Banniza, S. Rapid Generation Cycling of an F2 Population Derived 
From a Cross Between Lens culinaris Medik. And Lens ervoides (Brign.) Grande After 
Aphanomyces Root Rot Selection. Plant Breed. 2018, 137(4), 486–491.
Mobini, S. H.; Lulsdorf, M.; Warkentin, T. D.; Vandenberg, A. Plant Growth Regulators 
Improve In Vitro Flowering and Rapid Generation Advancement in Lentil and Faba 
Bean. In Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Plant 2015, 51(1), 71–79.
Mpelkas, C. C. Light Sources for Horticultural Lighting. IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl. 1980, 
IA-16(4), 557–565. 222 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Nagatoshi, Y.; Fujita, Y. Accelerating Soybean Breeding in a CO2
-Supplemented Growth 
Chamber. Plant Cell Physiol. 2019, 60(1), 77–84.
Nelson, G. C.; Rosegrant, M. W.; Koo, J.; Robertson, R.; Sulser, T.; Zhu, T.; Ringler, C.; 
Msangi, S.; Palazzo, A.; Batka, M. Climate Change: Impact on Agriculture and Costs of 
Adaptation. International Food Policy Research Institute, 2009; 21. 
Newton, A. C.; Johnson, S. N.; Gregory, P. J. Implications of Climate change for Diseases, 
Crop Yields and Food Security. Euphytica 2011,179, 3–18.
Ochatt, S. J.; Sangwan, R. S.; Marget P.; Ndong, Y. A.; Rancillac, M.; Perney, P. 
Robbelen, G. New Approaches Towards the Shortening of Generation Cycles for 
Faster Breeding of Protein Legumes. Plant Breed. 2002, 121(5), 436–440. https://doi.
org/10.1046/j.1439-0523.2002.746803.x
O’Connor, D. J.; Wright, G. C.; Dieters, M. J.; George, D. L.; Hunter, M. N.; Tatnell, J. R.; 
Fleischfresser, D. B. Development and Application of Speed Breeding Technologies in a 
Commercial Peanut Breeding Program. Peanut Sci. 2013, 40(2), 107–114. 
Ohnishi, T.; Yoshino, M.; Yamakawa, H.; Kinoshita, T. The Biotron Breeding System: A 
Rapid and Reliable Procedure for Genetic Studies and Breeding in Rice. Plant Cell Physiol. 
2011, 52(7), 1249–1257. 
Ortiz, R. Genomic-Led Potato Breeding for Increasing Genetic Gains: Achievements and 
Outlook. Genet. Genom. Breed. Crop Plants. 2020, 2(e200010), 1–25.
Pazos-Navarro, M.; Castello, M.; Bennett, R. G.; Nichols, P.; Croser, J. In Vitro-Assisted 
Single-Seed Descent for Breeding-Cycle Compression in Subterranean Clover (Trifolium 
subterraneum L.). Crop Pasture Sci. 2017, 68(11), 958–966.
Peng, S.; Huang, J.; Sheehy, J. E.; Laza, R. C.; Visperas, R. M.; Zhong, X.; Centeno, G. S.; 
Khush, G. S.; Cassman, K. G. Rice Yields Decline With Higher Night Temperature From 
Global Warming. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2004, 101, 9971–9975.
Pineda, M.; Morante, N.; Salazar, S.; Cuásquer, J.; Hyde, P. T.; Setter, T. L. Ceballos, H. 
Induction of Earlier Flowering in Cassava Through Extended Photoperiod. Agronomy 
2020, 10(9), 1273.
Rana, M. M.; Takamatsu, T.; Baslam, M.; Kaneko, K.; Itoh, K.; Harada, N.; Sugiyama, T.; 
Ohnishi, T.; Kinoshita, T.; Takagi, H.; Mitsui, T. Salt Tolerance Improvement in Rice 
Through Efficient SNP Marker-Assisted Selection Coupled With Speed-Breeding. Int. J. 
Mol. Sci. 2019, 20(10), 2585. 
Riaz, A.; Periyannan, S.; Aitken, E.; Hickey, L. A Rapid Phenotyping Method for Adult Plant 
rResistance to Leaf Rust in Wheat. Plant Methods 2016, 12(1), 1–10.
Rizal, G.; Karki, S.; Alcasid, M.; Montecillo, F.; Acebron, K.; Larazo, N.; Garcia, R.; Slamet￾Loedin, I. H.; Quick, W. P. Shortening the Breeding Cycle of Sorghum, A Model Crop for 
Research. Crop Sci. 2014, 54, 520–529.
Roumet, P.; Morin, F. Germination of Immature Soybean Seeds to Shorten Reproductive 
Cycle Duration. Crop Sci. 1997, 37(2), 521–525.
Samineni, S.; Sen, M.; Sajja, S. B.; Gaur, P. M. Rapid Generation Advance (RGA) in Chickpea 
to Produce up to Seven Generations per Year and Enable Speed Breeding. Crop J. 2020, 
8(1), 164–169.
Saxena, K. B.; Saxena, R. K.; Hickey, L. T.; Varshney, R. K. Can a Speed Breeding Approach 
Accelerate Genetic Gain in Pigeonpea? Euphytica 2019, 215(12), 1–7.
Sethi, S. C.; Byth, D. E.; Gowda, C. L. L.; Green, J. M. Photoperiodic Response and 
Accelerated Generation Turnover in Chickpea. Field Crops Res. 1981, 4, 215–225Speed Breeding: Space-Inspired Crop Improvement in the Nano-Era 223
Shimelis, H.; Gwata, E. T.; Laing, M. D. Crop Improvement for Agricultural Transformation 
in Southern Africa. In Transforming Agriculture in Southern Africa, 2019; 97.
Shivakumar, M.; Nataraj, V.; Kumawat, G.; Rajesh, V.; Chandra, S.; Gupta, S.;Bhatia, V. S. 
Speed Breeding for Indian Agriculture: A Rapid Method for Development of New Crop 
Varieties. Curr. Sci. 2018, 115(7), 1241.
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova. Sci. Publishers, Inc., 2020; 
vol 1, pp. 73–100. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Rawat, S.; Sharma, R.; Singh, A. K.; Singh, A. K.; Tomar, R. S. In 
Emerging Tools for Sustainable Agriculture and Food Security; Rajput, D.; Book Agency: 
New Delhi, Delhi, 2021a; vol 1, pp. 1–15. 
Singh, A., Rajput, V., Singh, A., Sengar, R., Singh, R., Minkina, T. Transformation Techniques 
and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. Policy Issues 
Genetically Modified Crops 2021b, 1, 515–542.
Souza, L. S.; Diniz, R. P.; de Jesus Neves, R.; Alves, A. A. C.; de Oliveira, E. J. Grafting as a 
Strategy to Increase Flowering of Cassava. Sci. Hortic. 2018, 240, 544–551.
Sreenivasulu, N.; Butardo, V. M.; Misra, G.; Cuevas, R. P.; Anacleto, R.; Kishor, P. B. K. 
Designing Climate-Resilient Rice With Ideal Grain Quality Suited for High-Temperature 
Stress. J. Exp. Bot. 2015, 66, 1737–1748.
Stetter, M. G.; Zeitler, L.; Steinhaus, A.; Kroener, K.; Biljecki, M.; Schmid, K. J. Crossing 
Methods and Cultivation Conditions for Rapid Production of Segregating Populations in 
Three Grain Amaranth Species. Front. Plant Sci. 2016, 7, 816.
Sundström, J. F.; Albihn, A.; Boqvist, S.; Ljungvall, K.; Marstorp, H.; Martiin, C.; Nyberg, 
K.; Vågsholm, I.; Yuen, J.; Magnusson, U. Future Threats to Agricultural Food Production 
Posed by Environmental Degradation, Climate Change, and Animal and Plant Diseases–A 
Risk Analysis in Three Economic and Climate Settings. Food Secur. 2014, 6(2), 201–215.
Van Oort, P. A.; Zwart, S. J. Impacts of Climate Change on Rice Production in Africa and 
Causes of Simulated Yield Changes. Glob. Change Biol. Bioenergy. 2018, 24, 1029–1045.
vanNocker, S.; Gardiner, S. E. Breeding Better Cultivars, Faster: Applications of New 
Technologies for the Rapid Deployment of Superior Horticultural Tree Crops. Hortic. 
Res. 2014, 1(1), 1–8.
Wanga, M. A.; Shimelis, H.; Mashilo, J.; Laing, M. D. Opportunities and Challenges of Speed 
Breeding: A Review. Plant Breed. 2021, 140(2), 185–194.
Wassmann, R.; Jagadish, S. V. K.; Sumfleth, K.; Pathak, H.; Howell, G.; Ismail, A.; Serraj, R.; 
Redona, E.; Singh, R. K.; Heuer, S. Regional Vulnerability of Climate Change Impacts on 
Asian Rice Production and Scope for Adaptation. Adv. Agron. 2009a, 102, 91–133.
Wassmann, R.; Jagadish, S. V. K.; Heuer, S.; Ismail, A.; Redona, E.; Serraj, R.; Singh, R. 
K.; Howell, G.; Pathak, H.; Sumfleth, K. Climate Change Affecting Rice Production: The 
Physiological and Agronomic Basis for Possible Adaptation Strategies. Adv. Agron. 2009b,
101, 59–122.
Watson, A., Ghosh, S., Matthew, J., et al. Speed Breeding is a Powerful Tool to Accelerate 
Crop Research and Breeding. Nature Plants 2018, 4, 23–291. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41477-017-0083-8.
Wilson, J. E. Promotion of Flowering and Production of Seed in Cocoyam (Xanthosoma and 
Colocasia). In International Symposium on Tropical Root and Tuber Crops, IITA, Ibadan, 
Nigeria, Sept, 1979. 224 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Wolfe, M. D.; Del Carpio, D. P.; Alabi, O.; Ezenwaka, L. C.; Ikeogu, U. N.; Kayondo, I. S.; 
Lozano, R.; Okeke, G. U.; Ozimati, A. A.; Williams, E.; Egesi, C.; Kawuki, S. R.; Kulakow, 
P.; Rabbi, Y. I.; Jannink, J. L. Prospects for Genomic Selection in Cassava Breeding. Plant 
Genome. 2017, 10(3). 
Yao, Y.; Zhang, P.; Wang, H. B.; Lu, Z. Y.; Liu, C. J.; Liu, H.; Yan, G. J. How to Advance up 
to Seven Generations of Canola (Brassica napus L.) per Annum for the Production of Pure 
Line Populations? Euphytica 2016, 209(1), 113–119.
Zhao, C.; Liu, B.; Piao, S.; Wang, X.; Lobell, D. B.; Huang, Y.; Huang, M. Temperature 
Increase Reduces Global Yields of Major Crops in Four Independent Estimates. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. 2017, 114(35), 9326–93312.
Zheng, Z.; Wang, H. B.; Chen, G. D.; Yan, G. J.; Liu, C. J. A Procedure Allowing up to Eight 
Generations of Wheat and Nine Generations of Barley Per Annum. Euphytica 2013, 191(2),
311–316.Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Nanotechnological Approaches in the 
Second Green Revolution
SUKH VEER SINGH1
, RAKHI SINGH1
, AND SADHAN JYOTI DUTTA2
1
Department of Food Science and Technology, National Institute of 
Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli, Sonipat, 
Haryana, India
2
National Institute of Food Technology Entrepreneurship and 
Management, Kundli, Sonipat, Haryana, India
CHAPTER 10
ABSTRACT
Nanotechnology is considered as “one out of the six key permitting technolo￾gies that can add to sustainable competitiveness and growth in numerous 
fields of industrial application.” The agricultural sector is one of those fields, 
where nanotechnology has proven to have a profound future. The advent of 
nanofertilizers, nanopesticides, nanosensors, and other nanoagrochemicals 
has brought the nanotechnology applications in agriculture to a more abut￾ting affair. In this study, various applications of nanotechnology have been 
explained, specifically in the agriculture sector. The pros and cons of the 
first Green Revolution have been examined as the crucial issues, that must 
be taken care of during the second Green Revolution. The study concludes 
that despite enormous potentials, the agricultural and the food sector are 
hesitant about the applications of nanotechnology due to its possible adverse 
effects. Hence, establishment of regulatory bodies will be an important 
aspect to formulate stringent rules and regulations for an effective impact of 
nanotechnology in the second Green Revolution.226 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
10.1 INTRODUCTION
Agriculture shows a major and decisive role in the economic prosperity of 
developed and developing countries (Singh et al., 2020a; Singh et al., 2021a). 
In the past few decades, the agricultural sector has noticed an astounding 
growth due to the revolutions, such as use of hybrid varieties, use of pest￾resistant cultivars, synthetic fertilizers, and genetically modified crops 
(Sunding and Zilberman, 2001; Singh et al., 2020b). Apart from these, Green 
Revolution was another persuasive factor for the momentous development 
in the agricultural sector. Green Revolution in the early 1960s brought in the 
amalgamation of mechanization, agricultural expansion, use of genetically 
modified crops, high-yielding varieties (HYV) of crops, synthetic fertilizers, 
pesticides, and high crop research investment rates (Pingali, 2012). The 
success of this revolution resulted in the usage of plentiful food supplies and 
lower prices of agricultural products. However, the climate changes due to 
the greenhouse effect and global warming, environmental issues, urbaniza￾tion, and non-judicious use of nonrenewable resources have brought about 
many challenges in the world of agriculture. The alarming rate of increase in 
the world population further intensified these problems (Ditta and Arshad, 
2016). The United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UNDESA) published a report in 2017, which showed that the current world 
population (7.7 billion) is expected to reach about 9.8 billion in 2050 and 
11.2 billion in 2100 (United Nations, 2017). The report further mentioned 
that the increase in the population will be concentrated in just nine such as 
countries. India, Nigeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Pakistan, 
Ethiopia, the United Republic of Tanzania, the United States of America, 
Uganda, and Indonesia. This will bring a huge burden of feeding to the 
rapidly growing population of the world. This keeps us wondering with a 
question. How to feed these rapidly and exponentially growing populations 
while keeping intact the environment, climate, and the world? The answer 
lies in the way modern technologies and methods, which must be utilized in 
a more interactive and sustainable manner. Nanotechnology and agriculture 
can be combined in one such profound interactive mode that will unfold this 
question to feed the world, sustainably.
The European Commission (EC) has recognized “nanotechnology” as one 
out of its six basic enabling technology that pay of to sustainable competi￾tiveness and progress in several felds of industrial application (Parisi et al., 
2015). Back in 1974, the term “Nanotechnology” was frst defned by Norio 
Taniguchi of the Tokyo Science University as “the study of manipulating Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 227
matter on an atomic and molecular scale.” It deals with the study of 1–100 
nm sized structures and involves developing materials or devices within that 
size. The applications of nanotechnology have helped to develop various 
new materials and devices in a wide range of application. From medicine 
and electronics to food production and energy creation, nanotechnology has 
found applications in almost every feld (Agrawal and Rathore, 2014). The 
unique properties of particles at a nanoscale facilitate their applications in 
many areas such as electronics, medicine, material science, biotechnology, 
and energy sectors. Agriculture is one such sector wherein nanotechnology 
has been recently introduced. This has brought promising results, especially 
in providing solutions to challenges faced to solve global food security, 
climate change, and environmental degradation. Out of these three chal￾lenges, the frst Green Revolution was able to resolve the issue of global food 
security. But, the issues of climate change and environmental degradation 
were not addressed. Therefore, nanoscale science and nanotechnology which 
addressed to have potential to revolutionize agriculture and food systems, 
emerges as a promising tool to address all three challenges altogether in the 
form of second Green Revolution (Hakeem and Pirzadah, 2020; Agrawal and 
Rathore, 2014). In the present study, previous studies have been reviewed to 
understand the several applications of nanotechnology in agriculture. The 
main objective of this study is to review the possible role of nanotechnology 
in the second Green Revolution. Accordingly, we have evaluated the various 
efects of the frst Green Revolution, the need for a second Green Revolution, 
and numerous applications of nanotechnology in agriculture and food sector. 
10.2 FIRST GREEN REVOLUTION AND POST-FIRST GREEN 
REVOLUTION 
The Green Revolution began with the foundation of an institute by the 
Rockefeller Foundation in 1944. The primary objective of the institute 
was to improve the agricultural output of Mexican farms. The results were 
astonishing as Mexico was importing half of its wheat prior to 1956, when it 
went on to become self-sufficient in 1956, and to exporting wheat by 1964 
(Kendall and Pimentel, 1994). During the same period in the 1950s and 
1960s, countries in Asia and Africa were facing food shortages. This led the 
Rockefeller Foundation to develop the International Rice Research Institute 
(IRRI) in the Philippines in 1960. The main objective of the IRRI was to 
develop high-yielding rice seeds for Asian countries. This led to booming 228 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
growth in countries, such as India and Pakistan and this marked the begin￾ning of the Green Revolution in Asia. This period of Green Revolution from 
1960 to 2000 pronounced an astounding era of global food security (Zeigler 
and Mohanty, 2010).
Notwithstanding this enormous achievement, the Green Revolution 
also brought many side efects. One of the most perceptible efects in the 
post-Green Revolution era was the negative efect on the environment due 
to extreme use of fertilizers, pesticides, and irrigation water. It led to the 
pollution of ground water and other water ways, and land degradation. This 
also resulted in the killing of benefcial insects and other wild life, thereby, 
weakening the ecosystem. These chemicals were also toxic and hazardous, 
which adversely afected the health of the farmers. Genetic erosion was 
another ill-efect of green revolution (International Food Policy Research 
Institute, 2002). This occurred because only a few high-yielding varieties 
of crops were subjected to wide-spread cultivation. Another front where the 
green revolution is criticized the socioeconomic aspect. It is argued that the 
Green Revolution served only those regions, that had abundant resources, 
whereas, the resource-scarce regions were left behind. This is easily perceiv￾able from the regions of Saharan Africa and eastern India. These are the 
regions where poverty density is the highest in the world and hugely needed 
the favor of the Green Revolution, but were less impacted by it (Zeigler and 
Mohanty, 2010). 
10.3 NEED OF THE SECOND GREEN REVOLUTION 
It has been estimated that the agricultural production must be increased 
globally up to 60–110 % by 2050 (FAO, 2009; OECD et al., 2012; Tilman 
et al., 2011). The increase in agricultural production must meet the demands 
of future populations. Additionally, it must also fulfill the requirements by 
providing food security to the 870 million people, who are undernourished 
(FAO WFP and IFAD, 2012). Nevertheless, many studies have shown that 
the crop yields are not increasing at the expected rate (Cassman, 1999; 
Finger, 2010; Peltonen-Sainio et al., 2009; Ray et al., 2012). A study was 
conducted using approximately 2.5 million agricultural statistics, collected 
from nearly 13,500 regions across the world to investigate yields per year 
of four global crops. maize, rice, wheat, and soybean (Ray et al., 2013). It 
was found that these crops were increasing at 1.6%, 1.0%, 0.9%, and 1.3% 
per year, respectively with non-compounding rates. It is less than the 2.4% Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 229
per year rate which is required to double the global production by 2050. 
These four crops would increase only by ~67%, ~42%, ~38%, and ~55%, 
respectively with the current increasing trend of the crop (Ray et al., 2013). 
This expected increase is unfit for what is forecasted to meet the demands by 
2050 and beyond. Hence, there is a need of innovative strategies and tools 
to meet the future needs sustainably for ensuring unbroken supply of the 
food. This gives the fundamental requirement for a second Green Revolution 
which must be implemented based on modern technologies. In addition, it 
has to be kept in mind about the nonrecurrence of the various ill-effects that 
the first Green Revolution bestowed.
10.4 AGRICULTURE, FOOD, AND NANOTECHNOLOGY 
The combined works of agriculture and nanotechnology are elucidated 
by many terms, such as “Nano Agriculture” and “Agricultural Nanotech￾nologies” which illustrate the applications of nanomaterials in agriculture. 
Shivendu et al., 2016 and Shivendu et al., 2017 also used the term “Agri￾nanotechniques” to exemplify the terms agriculture, nanotechnology, 
and techniques. The applications of these agri-nanotechniques have huge 
potential in precision agriculture (Duhan et al., 2017), but the utilization of 
agri-nano techniques has not yet been fully developed in the global markets. 
Bradley et al., 2011; Chaudhry and Castle, 2011; Kuan et al., 2012; Meetoo, 
2011; Momin et al., 2013; Rashidi and Khosravi-Darani, 2011; Ravichan￾dran, 2010; Sekhon, 2010; Sekhon, 2014; Sonkaria et al., 2012 have reported 
the massive opportunities of nanotechnology in agriculture and in all facets 
of the food industry, including preservation, processing, packaging, and 
monitoring (Fig. 10.1). This can be blamed on the absence of directives on 
the uses of nanomaterials in agriculture and food (Parisi et al., 2015). One 
primary reason for this lack of regulations is due to the deficit of knowledge 
we possess about the various effects on health and environment. There 
have been enough shreds of evidences to support the claim that the agri￾nanotechniques result in a significant increase in crop yields and a decrease 
in other losses from external conditions which include biotic stresses, such 
as insects and diseases, and abiotic stresses, such as drought and heat. The 
applications of functional nanomaterials in plants resulted in a conclusive 
remark that the interactions between nanoparticles and agriculture will 
increase food production (Swift et al., 2019). Nanofertilizers, nanopesti￾cides, and nanosensors also improve the efficiency of food production in 230 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
a more sustainable way (McClements, 2020). Some of the applications of 
nanotechnology like nanosensors and nano-based smart delivery systems 
which are now exploited in the agricultural industry to help with combating 
viruses and other pathogens (crop infection) (Singh et al., 2021b). These 
techniques increase agrochemicals efficiency at lower dosage rates. Besides 
this, engineered nanomaterials are being developed for a variety of agri-food 
applications for example food additives, feed additives, flavorings, food 
packaging, novel foods, and pesticides (Handford et al., 2014). Moreover, 
applications may be classified as nano-inside and nano-outside. Nano-inside 
and nano-outside refer to application in the food product as in primary 
production or food processing and food packaging, respectively (Henchion 
et al., 2013).
FIGURE 10.1 This schematic shows summarized illustration of nanotechnological 
application in agri-food sector. (Modified from Handford et al. (2014)).
10.5 APPLICATION OF NANOTECHNOLOGY IN AGRICULTURE 
The present study broadly classified the applications of nanotechnology 
in agriculture into five categories: sensors, pest control, water and nutrient 
control, genetic engineering, and nanomaterials (Fig. 10.2). The five catego￾ries have been created based on the paramount scope of nanotechnology in 
agricultural field. These applications give an idea about the role of nano￾technology in the near future to ensure the food security for rapidly growing 
population (Hakeem and Pirzadah, 2020).Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 231
FIGURE 10.2 This schematic shows illustrated applications of nanotechnology in 
agriculture. (Modified from Hakeem and Pirzadah 2020 and Agrawal and Rathore 2014).
10.5.1 SENSORS 
Nanosensors are advantageous due to their characteristics of being “small, 
transferable, sensitive with real-time monitoring, precise, quantitative, 
reliable, accurate, reproducible and robust, and stable which can over￾come the deficits of present sensors” (Agrawal and Rathore, 2014). The 
nanotechnology-enabled sensors or nanosensors facilitate to track the data 232 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
and monitor the growth of crops and conditions of agriculture fields which 
include (1) soil conditions, such as pH, moisture level, and fertility, (2) 
temperature, (3) crop nutrients, and (4). detection of phytopathogens and 
weeds (Mousavi and Rezaei, 2011; Prasad et al., 2017). Collection of these 
data will provide important information that will be helpful in decreasing 
the losses and increasing the yield. One possible application of nanosen￾sors is using it as an identification tool to spot pathogens, such as bacteria, 
fungi, and viruses in agriculture (Boonham et al., 2008). Etefagh et al. 
(2013) developed nanosensors of CuO nanoparticles and nanostructural 
layer biosensors, which were used to detect Aspergillus niger by detecting 
the toxic gases it produced. Another application of nanosensors is the real￾time detection of the pathogens in agriculture. Neethirajan et al. (2010) 
developed a CO2 sensor using polyaniline boronic acid conducting polymer, 
which simplified the real-time detection of spoilage in stored grain. The use 
of nanoparticles along with enzyme-based biosensors resulted in the devel￾opment of nanoparticles-based enzymatic biosensors. Organophosphorus 
(OP) and non-organophosphorus (non-OP) pesticides were detected using 
a bi-enzyme biosensing system consisting of multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs) ( Zhang et al., 2015). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used 
to develop a nanobiosensor equipped with the acetolactate synthase (ALS) 
enzyme, which aided in the detection of herbicide metsulfuron-methyl (da 
Silva et al., 2013).
Moreover, another class of biosensors are known as aptasensors. These 
are biosensors that consists aptamers and nanomaterials. The aptamers are the 
target-recognition element and the nanomaterials are the signal transducers 
and/or signal enhancers. Omanović-Mikličanina & Maksimović (2016) 
reported that “aptamers are single-stranded nucleic acid or peptide molecules 
of size less than 25 kDa with natural or synthetic origin.” A wide variety of 
nanomaterials can be used in aptasensors which includes metal nanoparticles 
and nanoclusters, semiconductor nanoparticles, carbon nanoparticles, and 
magnetic nanoparticles (Sharma et al., 2015). Table 10.1 depicts a broad 
range of transducing systems that have been employed in aptasensors for 
food quality assessment and safety. The principle involved in the working 
of these aptasensors are based on the property of the nanoparticles that have 
been used. These aptameters are classifed into optical and electrochemical 
systems on the basis of the detection mechanism (Omanović-Mikličanina 
and Maksimović, 2016). Another study was performed where copper oxide 
nanoparticles were utilized to develop an antibacterial agent by loading them 
on the surfaces of graphene oxide sheets (GO–Cu NPs). The result showed Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 233
that GO–Cu NPs were very efective in reducing the bacterial speck disease 
caused by Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato (Pst) in tomatoes without 
phytotoxicity ( Li et al., 2017).
TABLE 10.1 Particular of Sensors, Designing Nanomaterial, and its Application.
Sensors 
particulars
Nanomaterial 
compositions
Applications References
Nanosensors Copper-doped
montmorillonite
Propineb fungicide
detection in aquatic
environment 
Abbaci et al., 2014
Nanosensors Graphene Pathogen detection in
wastewater 
Wibowo et al., 2018
Smart sensor 
technology –
Monitoring the quality of 
grain, dairy products, fruits, 
and vegetables in a storage 
environment in order to detect the 
source and the type of spoilage
Omanović￾Mikličanina and 
Maksimović, 2016
Aptasensor Aptamer and 
nanomaterial
Determination of pesticides and 
insecticides (phorate, acetamiprid, 
isocarbophos)
Omanović￾Mikličanina and 
Maksimović, 2016
Aptasensor Aptamer and 
nanomaterial
Determination of antibiotics, 
drugs, and their residues (cocaine, 
oxytetracycline, tetracycline, 
kanamycin)
Omanović￾Mikličanina, and 
Maksimović, 2016
Aptasensor Aptamer and 
nanomaterial
Determination of heavy metals 
(Hg2+, As3+, Cu2+), and microbial 
toxins (OTA, Fumonisin B1
)
Omanović￾Mikličanina, and 
Maksimović, 2016
Nanoparticles
and 
nanochips
–
Selectively bind and remove 
chemicals or pathogens from food.
For identity preservation and 
tracking
Omanović￾Mikličanina, and 
Maksimović, 2016
10.5.2 PEST CONTROL 
Protection of crops against insect pests is one of the most challenging 
problems in every environmental condition. Nanotechnology can be used 
as a functional tool to solve this problem through its pest detection and 
management abilities. The nanopesticides and nano-encapsulated pesticide 
formulations are eco-friendly and also reduce harmful exposure to humans. 
These have been taken as very constructive techniques to avoid the spread 234 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
of dangerous chemicals to the environment (Alfadul, 2017; Nuruzzaman 
et al., 2016). Amphiphilic zein-based nanomaterials have been reported 
to be efficacious when applied as aqueous nanocarriers for hydrophobic 
pesticides (Hao et al., 2020). An eco-friendly polyurethane delivery system 
with enhanced pesticide retention on plant surfaces was developed by encap￾sulating biopesticide (azadirachtin) in their hydrophobic cores. This study 
showed the development of an efficient pesticide delivery system (Zhang 
et al., 2020). The nanocarriers can have other beneficial effects such as an 
increase in the efficiency of the activity and stability of the nanopesticides 
under environmental pressures, such as UV and rain. This decreases the 
toxicity and also reduces their costs due to significant reduction in the 
number of applications (Worrall et al., 2018) as shown in Figure 10.3
FIGURE 10.3 This schematic shows nanomaterials (protectants or carriers). These are 
for actives, such as insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, or RNA-interference molecules. 
Nanomaterials target a wide spectrum (pests to pathogens) that deals with crop protection. 
(Modified from Worrall et al. (2018)).Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 235
10.5.3 WATER AND NUTRIENT CONTROL 
In precision farming, it is necessary to ensure the efficient use of water and 
nutrients. It can be achieved by using nanosensors and nano-based smart 
delivery systems. The employment of smart delivery systems improves the 
yield and quality in an eco-friendly manner (Mousavi and Rezaei, 2011). 
Kottegoda et al. (2011) developed a N-carrying nanomaterials, that is, hydroxy￾apatite NPs (Ca10(PO4
)
6
(OH)2
), HA) using a hybrid nanostructure based on 
urea molecules, which had a slower release of N. Similar studies were also 
carried out to study the intake of macronutrient fertilizers, such as phosphorus, 
calcium, magnesium, etc., and micronutrient fertilizers, such as copper, iron, 
manganese, etc. Hydroxyapatite (Ca10(PO4
)
6
(OH)2
) nanoparticles (nHA) were 
found to have clear features for an effective nanofertilizer (Marchiol et al., 
2019). Nanoparticle-based nanofertilizer regulates the different aspect related 
to nutrients in agriculture as shown in Figure 10.4. On the other hand, the 
increase in concentrations of nHA did not hold the percentage germination 
of S. lycopersicum, while it strongly influenced root elongation. Copper (Cu) 
nanoparticles facilitated the quality of Moringa oleifera Lam. Significant 
improvements were observed in the leaves of M. oleifera due to an increase in 
the bioactive compounds and increase in antioxidant capacity on the applica￾tion of Cu nanoparticles (Juárez-Maldonado et al., 2018).
FIGURE 10.4 This schematic shows the better nutrient regulation and utilization through 
nanofertilizers in agricultural farming system. 
Sources: Modified from Pudake et al. (2019). 236 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
10.5.4 GENETIC ENGINEERING 
Genetic engineering can be coupled with nanotechnology to boost the 
process of crop improvement and plant transformation (Singh et al., 2020b). 
The application of genetic engineering in agriculture has resulted in momen￾tous outcomes, which include the development of crops with high yields and 
good nutritional value, and crops with resistance against herbicides. This 
also led crops to resist against biotic stresses, such as insects and diseases, 
and against abiotic stresses, such as drought and heat (Shivendu et al., 2017). 
Despite surprising results, there were limitations in genetic engineering 
such as the lack of versatile and high-throughput tools for the delivery of 
biomolecules into plant cells. This hurdle can be overcome by using nano￾biotechnology. It is described to offer “a new set of tools to manipulate the 
genes using nanoparticles, nanofibers, and nanocapsules.” One example of 
nanobiotechnology is nanofiber arrays. For the quick and efficient delivery 
of genetic materials to cells, nanofiber arrays find their applications in drug 
delivery, crop engineering, and environmental monitoring. These nanofibers 
are used for the controlled biochemical manipulations in cells (Agrawal and 
Rathore, 2014). Another example of nanobiotechnology in agriculture is the 
transfer of plasmid DNA by gene gun method using gold-capped nanopar￾ticles. This method is used for the direct delivery of DNA into intact plant 
cells. This proves to be beneficial as there is simultaneous delivery of both 
DNA and effector molecules to the specific sites (Nair et al., 2010). 
On the other hand, DNA and chemicals were transported into isolated plant 
cells and intact leaves using a honeycomb mesoporous silica nanoparticle 
(MSN) system with 3-nm pores (Torney et al., 2007). This was one of the initial 
studies that showed nanoparticle-mediated delivery in plants. A recent study 
on DNA nanostructures describes the efective role of DNA nanostructures in 
the delivery of exogenous biomolecules such as siRNA to plants (Zhang et al., 
2019). Similar studies were carried out for force-independent internalization 
through cell walls using MSNs for plasmid DNA delivery (Chang et al., 2013), 
layered double hydroxide clay nanosheets for the RNAi molecules delivery 
(Mitter et al., 2017), CNTs for the unassisted delivery of plasmid DNA and 
siRNA (Demirer et al., 2019a; Demirer et al., 2019b; Kwak et al., 2019).
10.5.5 NANOMATERIALS
Nanomaterials are defined as “an ingredient containing particles with at least 
one dimension that measures about 1–100 nm” (United States Environmental Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 237
Protection Agency) (Ditta and Arshad, 2016). There is an efficient way for 
synthesizing nanomaterials using agricultural-based plant material. It has 
been a challenge to control the nanomaterials in response to immediate 
environmental changes at such high-resolution along with precision. In 
addition to this, there is limitation in the study of bioinspired nanomaterials 
in food and agriculture sectors. Still, there has been success in studying 
about some artificial bioinspired devices for pesticide delivery, chemical 
and pathogen detection, and environmental sensing (He et al., 2019), as 
listed in Table10.2. The utilization of plants for synthesizing nanomaterials 
is found to be eco-friendly, cost-effective, and less hazardous (Shivendu 
et al., 2017). Since, this method involves plant phytochemicals, such as 
terpenoids, quinines, carboxylic acids, flavonoids, ketones, aldehydes, and 
amides for synthesizing nanomaterials, it is generally known as a green 
synthesis method. Numerous studies have been performed, which have 
revealed magnificent results. Silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) were produced 
from silver nitrate aqueous using aqueous extract of Alternanthera sessilis
Linn. (Amaranthaceae) (Niraimathi et al., 2013). These synthesized AgNPs 
possessed good antimicrobial and antioxidant activity with a coating of 
proteins that indicated a dual role of biomolecules for capping and efficient 
stabilization. A similar study was performed where AgNPs were synthesized 
using aqueous garlic, green tea, and turmeric extracts. but AgNPs from 
turmeric extract demonstrate excellent antioxidant and cytotoxicity activity 
than AgNPs synthesized from other extracts (Arumai Selvan et al., 2018). 
The leaves extract of Mirabilis jalapa was used to synthesize monometallic 
ZnO/Ag nanoparticles (NPs) and bimetallic ZnO/Ag NPs. The biological 
characterization of these nanoparticles displayed higher total antioxidant, 
free radical scavenging, and reducing power potentials (Sumbal et al., 2019).
TABLE 10.2 Specific Bioinspired Nanomaterials in Agriculture and Allied Sectors.
Bioinspired 
template
Nanomaterials Features Applications
Silk Graphene Battery-free sensors for 
remote monitoring of 
pathogenic bacteria at 
single-cell level
Shed light on wireless 
nanosensors for food 
pathogen detection
Biological 
cilia
Polyvinylidene 
fluoride
piezoelectric 
nanofiber
Flow velocity and flow 
direction
May assist in taste sensors
or real-time sensing in 
food safety, such as food 
pathogen, allergens, and 
food quality monitoring238 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Bioinspired 
template
Nanomaterials Features Applications
Insect 
tentacles
Nanoporous 
Prussian blue (PB) 
nanocube heads/
TiO2
 nanowire 
(NW) arms
Sensitive detection of H2
O2
at a low detection limit 
(~20 nM), broad detection 
range (10-8 to 10-5 M), 
short response time (~5 s), 
and long-term biocatalytic 
activity (up to 6 months)
Show potential for 
biomolecule detection in 
food safety
Zwitterion Fluorescent 
biomimetic carbon 
quantum dots
Detection limit for vitamin 
B12 at 81 nM; highly 
biocompatible
Show potential in 
bioanalaysis in nutritional 
and dietary supplement
Mussel Polydopamine 
(PDA)-coated 
molecularly 
imprinted SiO2
 NPs
Specific recognition of the 
trace quantities of papain 
with low detection limit of 
0.63 nM
Show potential in 
bioanalysis in nutritional 
and dietary supplement
Candida 
lusitaniae
Silver/silver 
chloride NPs
Antimicrobial activity Yeast isolated from 
termite gut
Aloe vera 
plant
Nanoscale zero￾valent iron
Removal of arsenic (As) 
and Selenium (Se) from 
water
Plant extract as reducing 
agent
Data modified from He et al. (2019).
10.6 DRAWBACK OF NANOTECHNOLOGY IN AGRICULTURE AND 
FOOD SECTOR 
Although nanotechnology has enormous opportunities and potential applica￾tions in the agri-food sector, there are increasing concerns related to safety 
and health (Handford et al., 2014). Consumer safety and adverse environ￾mental effects are the two major concerns of nanotechnology in agriculture 
and are shown in Figure 10.5. Nanotechnology is still in the primitive stage 
because only a few nanofertilizers are commercially available to be used in 
agriculture sector. Hence, there is a lack of risk assessment of these nanoma￾terials being used in agriculture and the food sectors. The lack of risk assess￾ment is also primarily due to the complexity of environmental conditions. It 
further restricts the determinateness of the nanomaterials, thereby increasing 
the complexity to monitor the dissemination of nanomaterials (He et al., 
2014a; He et al., 2015a; He et al., 2018). Assessment of nanotoxicology 
on human health has recently attracted public concerns. The nanomate￾rials which are used as food additives and other functional and nutritional 
ingredients pose a threat to human health due to intentional or unintentional 
addition, and moreover due to migration of nanomaterials from food or 
TABLE 10.2 (Continued)Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 239
agricultural products (He et al., 2015a; He et al., 2015b; He et al., 2014b). 
Many studies have also shown the low toxic effects of nanomaterials in food 
and agricultural products from short-term exposure. Titanium dioxide (TiO2
) 
particles were evaluated for their adverse effects on health (Warheit et al., 
2015). It was found that there was no TiO2
-related hazards. TiO2 is used as 
food-grade additive E171 which is included in candies, sweets, and chewing 
for whitening or brightening. Another study was performed to investigate the 
genotoxicological effects of Fe2
O3
-30 nm and Fe2
O3
-bulk in female Wistar 
rats. The results showed that Fe2
O3
-30 nm and Fe2
O3
-bulk was not genotoxic 
with the single doses of 500, 1000, and 2000 mg/kg (Singh et al., 2013). 
On the contrary, increasing scientific evidence suggest that exposure to 
nanoparticles can lead to oxidative damage and inflammatory reactions of 
the gastrointestinal tract (i.e., carbon black, silicates, titanium dioxide, and 
iron oxide) (Handford et al., 2014) as shown in Figure 10.5. In contrast, 
a study concludes that there were accumulations of Fe nanomaterials in 
body organs, such as liver, spleen, kidney, heart, and bone marrow. But, this 
accumulation did not cause any significant genotoxicity. Even though these 
results proved the less toxic effects of nanomaterials, however, more studies 
must be conducted to evaluate the safety limits of certain nanomaterials for 
their commercial applications. This is a necessity because public concerns 
must be on priority for the successful applications of nanomaterials in the 
food and agricultural sector (Handford et al., 2014). 
FIGURE 10.5 This schematic shows risk in agri-food nanotechnology. 
Source: Modified from Handford et al. (2014).240 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
On the other hand, nanotechnology faces drawback in the dimensions of 
environmental efects, health and safety issues, economic and societal issues. 
It is a sure implication that the acquisition of nanotechnology in agriculture 
will result in environmental regulations due to the compulsion of sustain￾able agriculture in the future. The subject of the environmental safety is one 
area, where research and development must be focused. Another drawback 
is related to the health and safety of the public. There are safety concerns 
over the use of nanofertilizers, nanopesticides, and nanoherbicides in agri￾cultural products. Issues have also been raised on the use of nanomaterials 
in food packaging over the fear of migrations of nanomaterials from food 
package to the foods. In terms of socioeconomic aspects, the adoption of 
new agricultural technology is a challenge as it will depend on two factors 
like employment opportunities and an increase in wage rate (Zeigler and 
Mohanty, 2010). These factors will exert higher impact in developing coun￾tries, such as India, where agriculture is the prime occupation of majority of 
the population. Hence, these challenges must be addressed for full-fedged 
utilization of nanotechnology in the agriculture sector. 
10.7 URGENT NEED FOR LEGISLATION 
Nanomaterials behave differently from conventional materials because they 
follow a different set of laws that defines their properties, functions, and 
interactions. Hence, they require new rules and legislation to address food 
safety, risks, and applications. The present legislations to maintain the appli￾cations of nanotechnology/nanomaterials are limited to only for the general 
aspect of application. The current trends in the application of nanotechnology 
in the food industry promote to make us understand that the food industry 
should invest hugely for the utilization of nanotechnology in food products 
and processes. In food industry, nanotechnology already has food applica￾tions as nanomaterials-based food additives, food packages, detectors, and 
sensors. They promote the application of nanotechnology in food products 
which raise questions about the safety of the foods for the human health and 
wellness. Thus, there is the need for new legislations for specific nanomate￾rials apart from the general legislation for the use of nanotechnology in the 
food industry so that novel food products can have a safe standpoint in the 
market (He et al., 2019). One suggestion which can be implemented by the 
governments across the world is that they can form common and strict norms 
and monitor the use of these technologies before commercialization and bulk 
use of these nanomaterials (Agrawal and Rathore, 2014).Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 241
FIGURE 10.6 Simplified overview of nanomaterials applications in agricultural production 
for sustainability. Improvement in crop production is through nanoparticles-based pesticides 
and fertilizers. Regulation of metal uptake and plant growth is by using organic and inorganic 
nanoparticles. Protection of crops using nano-agrochemicals. Providing crop nutrition through 
formulations of nanoparticles. Modified from Shang et al. (2019).
10.8 CONCLUSIONS 
The application of nanotechnology in agriculture has shown significant 
results by boosting the production of crops and enriching their quality. This 
is done by bringing improvements in the farming systems as schematically 
presented in Figure 10.6. Nanotechnology holds promising possibilities for 
the second Green Revolution. We can be optimistic about the role that nano￾technology will play to solve crucial global issues, such as food security, 
climate changes, and environmental degradation. The fusion of nanotech￾nology in agriculture generated various applications, such as sensors, pest 
control, water and nutrient control, genetic engineering, and nanomaterials. 
Despite such huge potentials, the maximum utilization about the applications 
of nanotechnology in the agricultural and food sector has not been tapped to 242 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
its fullest. The primary reason which holds this fact is due to the uncer￾tainties that may hold in terms of environmental effects, health and safety 
issues, and economic and societal issues. To solve these issues, a significant 
role can be played upon by regulatory bodies. The proper establishments 
of these regulatory bodies will view under its guidance the adherence of all 
the rules and regulations. Hence, they can play an important role during the 
second Green Revolution for its effective implementation. Nanotechnology 
thus has provoked its enormity in agriculture as a promising interdisciplinary 
research field.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This book chapter was supported by the National Institute of Food Tech￾nology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM), set up by Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries (MOFPI), Government of India, Kundli, Sonipat 
district, Haryana, under Delhi NCR.
AUTHOR DISCLOSURES
The authors declare no conflict of interest, financial or otherwise.
KEYWORDS
• agriculture
• green revolution and application
• nanotechnology
REFERENCES
Abbaci, A.; Azzouz, N.; Bouznit, Y. A New Copper Doped Montmorillonite Modified Carbon 
Paste Electrode for Propineb Detection. Appl. Clay Sci. 2014, 90, 130–134.
Abbaci, A.; Azzouz, N.; Bouznit, Y. A New Copper Doped Montmorillonite Modified Carbon 
Paste Electrode for Propineb Detection. Appl. Clay Sci. 90, 130–134. https://doi.org/https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.clay.2013.12.036Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 243
Abrol, D. P.; Shankar, U. Integrated Pest Management. In Breeding Oilseed Crops for 
Sustainable Production: Opportunities and Constraints, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-801309-0.00020-3
Agrawal, D. S.; Rathore, D. P. Review Article Nanotechnology Pros and Cons to Agriculture: 
A Review. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci. (ISSN: 2319-7706 ) 2014, 3, 43–55. https://doi.
org/10.13140/2.1.3352.1283
Aguila, S. A.; Shimomoto, D.; Ipinza, F.; Bedolla-Valdez, Z. I.; Romo-Herrera, J.; Contreras, 
O. E.; Farías, M. H.; Alonso-Núñez, G. A Biosensor Based on Coriolopsis Gallica 
Laccase Immobilized on Nitrogen-Doped Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene 
Oxide for Polyphenol Detection; 2015. Http://Www.Tandfonline.Com/Action/JournalInf
ormation?Show=aimsScope&journalCode=tsta20#.VmBmuzZFCUk, 16(5). https://doi.
org/10.1088/1468-6996/16/5/055004
Alahmad, S.; Dinglasan, E.; Leung, K. M.; Riaz, A.; Derbal, N.; Voss-Fels, K. P.; Able, J. 
A.; Bassi, F. M.; Christopher, J.; Hickey, L. T. Speed Breeding for Multiple Quantitative 
Traits in Durum Wheat. Plant Methods 2018, 14(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1186/
s13007-018-0302-y
Alessio, P.; Martin, C. S.; De Saja, J. A.; Rodriguez-Mendez, M. L. Mimetic Biosensors 
Composed by Layer-by-Layer Films of Phospholipid, Phthalocyanine and Silver 
Nanoparticles to Polyphenol Detection. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2016, 233, 654–666. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SNB.2016.04.139
Alfadul, S. Application of Nanotechnology in the Field of Food Production. Acad. J. Sci. Res.
2017, 5, 143–154. https://doi.org/10.15413/ajsr.2017.0220
Allison, S. D.; Martiny, J. B. H. In Resistance, Resilience, and Redundancy in Microbial 
Communities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 2008. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801925105
Arumai Selvan, D.; Mahendiran, D.; Senthil Kumar, R.; Kalilur Rahiman, A. Garlic, Green Tea 
and Turmeric Extracts-Mediated Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles: Phytochemical, 
Antioxidant and In Vitro Cytotoxicity Studies. J. Photochem. Photobiol. B Biol. 2018, 180, 
243–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2018.02.014
Augustin, M. A.; Sanguansri, P. Chapter 5 Nanostructured materials in the food industry. Adv. 
Food Nutr. Res. 2009, 58, 183–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1043-4526(09)58005-9
Bass, C.; Denholm, I.; Williamson, M. S.; Nauen, R. The Global Status of Insect Resistance 
to Neonicotinoid Insecticides. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 2015, 121,78–87. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pestbp.2015.04.004
Bergman, J. M.; Tingey, W. M. Aspects of Interaction Between Plant Genotypes and Biological 
Control. Bulletin of the Entomological Society of America,1979. https://doi.org/10.1093/
besa/25.4.275
Bilir, K.; Weil, M.-T.; Lochead, J.; Kök, F. N.; Werner, T. Construction of an Oxygen 
Detection-Based Optic Laccase Biosensor for Polyphenolic Compound Detection. Turk. J. 
Biol. 2016, 40(6), 1303–1310.
Boonham, N.; Glover, R.; Tomlinson, J.; Mumford, R. Exploiting Generic Platform 
Technologies for the Detection and Identification of Plant Pathogens. Euro. J. Plant Pathol.
2008, 121(3), 355. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-008-9284-3
Burrell, A. M.; Taylor, K. G.; Williams, R. J.; Cantrell, R. T.; Menz, M. A.; Pepper, A. 
E. A Comparative Genomic Map for Caulanthus Amplexicaulis and Related Species 
(Brassicaceae). Mol. Ecol. 2011. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04981.x244 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Butnariu, M.; Butu, A. Plant Nanobionics: Application of Nanobiosensors in Plant 
Biology. In Nanotechnology in the Life Sciences, 2019; pp 337–376. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-16379-2_12
Cai, H.; Xu, C.; He, P., chemistry, Y. F.-J. of electroanalytical, & 2001, undefined. (n.d.). 
Colloid Au-enhanced DNA immobilization for the electrochemical detection of sequence￾specific DNA. Elsevier.
Cassman, K. G. Ecological Intensification of Cereal Production Systems: Yield Potential, Soil 
Quality, and Precision Agriculture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 1999, 96(11), 5952–5959. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.11.5952
Chamarthi, S. K.; Sharma, H. C.; Sahrawat, K. L.; Narasu, L. M.; Dhillon, M. K. Physico￾chemical Mechanisms of Resistance to Shoot Fly, Atherigona soccata in sorghum, Sorghum 
bicolor. J. Appl. Entomol. 2011. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0418.2010.01564.x
Cho, U. H.; Park, J. O. Mercury-Induced Oxidative Stress in Tomato Seedlings. Plant Sci.
2000. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9452(00)00227-2
Christopher, J.; Richard, C.; Chenu, K.; Christopher, M.; Borrell, A.; Hickey, L. Integrating 
Rapid Phenotyping and Speed Breeding to Improve Stay-Green and Root Adaptation of 
Wheat in Changing, Water-Limited, Australian Environments. Procedia Environ. Sci. 2015, 
29(Agri), 175–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proenv.2015.07.246
Cloonan, K. R. The Navel Orangeworm, Amyelois transitella: An Examination of its Biology, 
Pest Ecology in Almonds, and Development of Screening Bioassays to Identify Compounds 
for Reducing Oviposition. ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, 2013.
Cockbain, A. J. Low Temperature Thresholds for Flight in Aphis Fabae Scop. Entomologia 
Experimentalis et Applicata, 1961. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1570-7458.1961.tb02136.x
Collard, B. C. Y.; Beredo, J. C.; Lenaerts, B.; Mendoza, R.; Santelices, R.; Lopena, V.; 
Verdeprado, H.; Raghavan, C.; Gregorio, G. B.; Vial, L.; Demont, M.; Biswas, P. 
S.; Iftekharuddaula, K. M.; Rahman, M. A.; Cobb, J. N.; Islam, M. R. Revisiting Rice 
Breeding Methods–Evaluating the Use of Rapid Generation Advance (RGA) for Routine 
Rice Breeding. Plant Prod. Sci. 2017, 20(4), 337–352. https://doi.org/10.1080/1343
943X.2017.1391705
Cook, S. M.; Khan, Z. R.; Pickett, J. A. The use of push-pull strategies in integrated 
pest management. Ann. Rev. Entomol. (2007). https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
ento.52.110405.091407
Cranston, P. J. G.; P. S. In The Insects: An Outline of Entomology, 4th ed.. Journal of Insect 
Conservation, 2010.
Crowder, D. W.; Northfield, T. D.; Strand, M. R.; Snyder, W. E. Organic Agriculture Promotes 
Evenness and Natural Pest Control. Nature 2010. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09183
da Silva, A. C. N.; Deda, D. K.; da Róz, A. L.; Prado, R. A.; Carvalho, C. C.; Viviani, V.; 
Leite, F. L. Nanobiosensors Based on Chemically Modified AFM Probes: A Useful Tool 
for Metsulfuron-Methyl Detection. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 2013, 13(2), 1477–1489. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s130201477
Davies, T. G. E.; Field, L. M.; Williamson, M. S. The Re-emergence of the Bed Bug as a 
Nuisance Pest: Implications of Resistance to the Pyrethroid Insecticides. Med. Vet. 
Entomol. 2012. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2915.2011.01006.x
Davis, J. J.; Coleman, K. S.; Azamian, B. R.; Bagshaw, C. B.; Green, M. L. H. Chemical 
and Biochemical Sensing With Modified Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes. Chem. Euro. J.
2003, 9(16), 3732–3739. https://doi.org/10.1002/CHEM.200304872Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 245
Delphia, C. M.; Mescher, M. C.; De Moraes, C. M. Induction of Plant Volatiles by Herbivores 
With Different Feeding Habits and the Effects of Induced Defenses on Host-Plant Selection 
by Thrips. J. Chem. Ecol. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10886-007-9273-6
Dermody, O.; O’Neill, B. F.; Zangerl, A. R.; Berenbaum, M. R.; DeLucia, E. H. Effects of 
Elevated CO2
 and O3
 on Leaf Damage and Insect Abundance in a Soybean Agroecosystem. 
Arthropod-Plant Interact. 2008. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11829-008-9045-4
Després, L.; David, J. P.; Gallet, C. The Evolutionary Ecology of Insect Resistance to Plant 
Chemicals. Trends Ecol. Evol. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2007.02.010
Ditta, A.; Arshad, M. Applications and Perspectives of Using Nanomaterials for Sustainable 
Plant Nutrition. Nanotechnol. Rev. 2016, 5(2), 209–229. https://doi.org/doi:10.1515/
ntrev-2015-0060
Dong, Y.; Phillips, K. S; Cheng, Q. Immunosensing of Staphylococcus Enterotoxin B (SEB) in 
Milk With PDMS Microfluidic Systems Using Reinforced Supported Bilayer Membranes 
(r-SBMs). Lab Chip 2006, 6(5), 675–681.
Duggan, A.; Ma, C.; Chalfie, M. Regulation of Touch Receptor Differentiation by the 
Caenorhabditis Elegans mec-3 and unc-86 Genes. Development 1998.
Duhan, J. S.; Kumar, R.; Kumar, N.; Kaur, P.; Nehra, K.; Duhan, S. Nanotechnology: The 
New Perspective in Precision Agriculture. Biotechnol. Rep. 2017, 15, 11–23. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2017.03.002
Dunse, K. M.; Kaas, Q.; Guarino, R. F.; Barton, P. A.; Craik, D. J.; Anderson, M. A. Molecular 
Basis for the Resistance of an Insect Chymotrypsin to a Potato Type II Proteinase Inhibitor. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1009327107
Durán, N.; Marcato, P. D. Nanobiotechnology Perspectives. Role of Nanotechnology in the 
Food Industry: A Review. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 48(6), 1127–1134. https://doi.
org/10.1111/IJFS.12027
Eigenbrode, S. D. The Effects of Plant Epicuticular Waxy Blooms on Attachment and 
Effectiveness of Predatory Insects. Arthrop. Struct. Dev. 2004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
asd.2003.11.004
Etefagh, R.; Azhir, E.; Shahtahmasebi, N. Synthesis of CuO Nanoparticles and Fabrication of 
Nanostructural Layer Biosensors for Detecting Aspergillus Niger Fungi. Scientia Iranica
2013, 20(3), 1055–1058. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scient.2013.05.015
FAO. Global Agriculture Towards 2050. Rome; 2009.
FAO WFP, & IFAD. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2012. Economic Growth Is 
Necessary but Not Sufficient to Accelerate Reduction of Hunger and Malnutrition. Rome, 
FAO; 2012
Fathipour, Y.; Maleknia, B.; Bagheri, A.; Soufbaf, M.; Reddy, G. V. P. Functional and 
Numerical Responses, Mutual Interference, and Resource Switching of Amblyseius 
Swirskii on Two-Spotted Spider Mite. Biol. Control. 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biocontrol.2020.104266
Fatouros, N. E.; Dicke, M.; Mumm, R.; Meiners, T.; Hilker, M. Foraging Behavior of Egg 
Parasitoids Exploiting Chemical Information. Behav. Ecol. 2008. https://doi.org/10.1093/
beheco/arn011
Ferreira, N. S..; Cruz, M. G. N..; Gomes, M. T. S. R.; Rudnitskaya, A. Potentiometric Chemical 
Sensors for the Detection of Paralytic Shellfish Toxins. Talanta 2018,181, 380–384. 
Finger, R. Evidence of Slowing Yield Growth – The Example of Swiss Cereal yields. Food 
Pol. 2010, 35(2), 175–182. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2009.11.004246 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Fuertes, G.; Soto, I.; Carrasco, R.; Vargas, M.; Sabattin, J.; Lagos, C. Intelligent Packaging 
Systems: Sensors and Nanosensors to Monitor Food Quality and Safety. J. Sens. 2016. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/4046061
Gadanakis, Y.; Bennett, R.; Park, J.; Areal, F. J. Evaluating the Sustainable Intensification 
of Arable Farms. J. Environ. Manag. 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.10.005
Gale, M. D.; Devos, K. M. Comparative Genetics in the Grasses. In Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 1998. https://doi.
org/10.1073/pnas.95.5.1971
Ghorbanpour, M.; Fahimirad, S. Plant Nanobionics a Novel Approach to Overcome the 
Environmental Challenges. Med. Plants Environ. Chall. 2017, 247–257. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-68717-9_14
Gould, F.; Kennedy, G. G.; Johnson, M. T. Effects of Natural Enemies on the Rate of 
Herbivore Adaptation to Resistant Host Plants. Entomol. Exp. Appl. 1991. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1570-7458.1991.tb01445.x
Hahlbrock, K.; Grisebach, H. Enzymic Controls in the Biosynthesis of Lignin and Flavonoids. 
Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. 1979. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.pp.30.060179.000541.
Hakeem, K. R.; Pirzadah, T. B. Nanobiotechnology in Agriculture.Springer International 
Publishing. 2020.
Hall, J.; Matos, S. Incorporating Impoverished Communities in Sustainable Supply Chains. 
Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 2010. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031011020368.
Handford, C. E.; Dean, M.; Henchion, M.; Spence, M.; Elliott, C. T.; Campbell, K. Implications 
of nanotechnology for the agri-food industry: opportunities, benefits and risks. Trends in 
Food Science & Technology. 2014, 40(2), 226–241.
Hao, L.; Lin, G.; Wang, H.; Wei, C.; Chen, L.; Zhou, H; Chen, H.; Xu, H.; Zhou, X. 
Preparation and Characterization of Zein-Based Nanoparticles via Ring-Opening Reaction 
and Self-Assembly as Aqueous Nanocarriers for Pesticides. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2020,
68(36), 9624–9635. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.0c01592
Hare, J. D.; Andreadis, T. G. Variation in the Susceptibility of Leptinotarsa decemlineata 
(Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) When Reared on Different Host Plants to the Fungal 
Pathogen, Beauveria Bassiana in the Field and Laboratory. Environ. Entomol. 1983. https://
doi.org/10.1093/ee/12.6.1892
He, X.; Aker, W. G.; Fu, P. P.; Hwang, H.-M. Toxicity of Engineered Metal Oxide Nanomaterials 
Mediated by Nano–Bio–Eco–Interactions: A Review and Perspective. Environ. Sci. Nano 
2015, 2(6), 564–582. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5EN00094G
He, X.; Aker, W. G.; Huang, M. -J; Watts, J. D.; Hwang, H. M. Metal Oxide Nanomaterials in 
Nanomedicine: Applications in Photodynamic Therapy and Potential Toxicity. Curr. Top. 
Med. Chem. 2015, 15(18), 1887–1900). https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.2174/15680266
15666150506145251
He, X.; Aker, W. G.; Hwang, H.-M. An In Vivo Study on the Photo-enhanced Toxicities of 
S-doped TiO2 Nanoparticles to Zebrafish Embryos (Danio rerio) in Terms of Malformation, 
Mortality, Rheotaxis Dysfunction, and DNA Damage. Nanotoxicology 2014, 8(sup1), 
185–195. https://doi.org/10.3109/17435390.2013.874050
He, X.; Aker, W. G.; Leszczynski, J.; Hwang, H.-M. Using a Holistic Approach to Assess the 
Impact of Engineered Nanomaterials Inducing Toxicity in Aquatic Systems. J. Food Drug 
Anal. 2014, 22(1), 128–146. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfda.2014.01.011Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 247
He, X.; Deng, H.; Hwang, H. The Current Application of Nanotechnology in Food and 
Agriculture. J. Food Drug Anal. 2019, 27(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jfda.2018.12.002
He, X.; Fu, P.; Aker, W. G.; Hwang, H.-M. Toxicity of Engineered Nanomaterials Mediated 
by Nano–Bio–Eco Interactions. J. Environ. Sci. Health Part C 2018, 36(1), 21–42. https://
doi.org/10.1080/10590501.2017.1418793
Hickey, L. T.; Germán, S. E.; Pereyra, S. A.; Diaz, J. E.; Ziems, L. A.; Fowler, R. A.; Platz, 
G. J.; Franckowiak, J. D.; Dieters, M. J. Speed Breeding for Multiple Disease Resistance in 
Barley. Euphytica 2018, 213(3). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681-016-1803-2
Iglesias, A.; Rosenzweig, C.; Pereira, D. Agricultural Impacts of Climate Change in Spain: 
Developing Tools for a Spatial Analysis. Global Environ. Change. 2000. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0959-3780(00)00010-8
International Food Policy Research Institute. Green Revolution: Curse or Blessing? Int. Food 
Policy Res. Inst. 2002.
Johnson, M. T.; Gould, F.; Kennedy, G. G. Effects of Natural Enemies on Relative Fitness of 
Heliothis Virescens Genotypes Adapted and not Adapted to Resistant Host Plants. Entomol. 
Exp. Appl. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1570-7458.1997.00133.x
Jönsson, A. M.; Appelberg, G.; Harding, S.; Bärring, L. Spatio-temporal Impact of Climate 
Change on the Activity and Voltinism of the Spruce Bark Beetle, Ips Typographus. Global 
Change Biol. 2009. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01742.x
Joyner, J.; Nanosensors and their applications in food analysis: a review. Search.Proquest.
Com.
Juárez-Maldonado, A.; Ortega-Ortíz, H.; Cadenas-Pliego, G.; Valdés-Reyna, J; Pinedo￾Espinoza, J.; López-Palestina, C.; Hernández-Fuentes, A. Foliar Application of Cu 
Nanoparticles Modified the Content of Bioactive Compounds in Moringa oleifera Lam. 
Agronomy 2018, 8(9), 167. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy8090167
Kalita, D.; Baruah, S. The Impact of Nanotechnology on Food. In Nanomaterials Applications 
for Environmental Matrices: Water, Soil and Air. Elsevier Inc.; 2019 https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-814829-7.00011-2
Karp, A.; Kresovich, S.; Bhat, K. V.; Ayad, W. G.; Hodgkin, T. Molecular Tools in Plant 
Genetic Resources Conservation: A Guide to the Technologies. In IPGRI Technical Bulletin, 
1997.
Kasili, P. M.; Cullum, B. M.; Griffin, G. D.; Vo-Dinh, T. Nanosensor for In Vivo Measurement 
of the Carcinogen Benzo[a]pyrene in a Single Cell. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2002, 2(6), 
653–658. https://doi.org/10.1166/JNN.2002.155
Kasili, P. M.; Song, J. M.; Vo-Dinh, T. Optical Sensor for the Detection of Caspase-9 Activity 
in a Single Cell. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126(9), 2799–2806. https://doi.org/10.1021/
JA037388T
Kendall, H. W.; Pimentel, D. Constraints on the Expansion of the Global Food Supply. Ambio
1994, 23(3), 198–205.
Kennedy, G. G.; Gould, F.; Deponti, O. M. B.; Stinner, R. E. Ecological, Agricultural, Genetic, 
and Commercial Considerations in the Deployment of Insect-resistant Germplasm. Environ. 
Entomol. 1987. https://doi.org/10.1093/ee/16.2.327
Kissinger, P. T. Biosensors—A Perspective. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2005, 20(12), 2512–2516. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIOS.2004.10.004
Knipling, E. F. No TitleThe basic Principles of Insect Population Suppression and Management. 
US Department of Agriculture, No. 512. 1979.248 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Kottegoda, N.; Munaweera, I.; Adassooriya, N.; Karunaratne, V. A Green Slow-Release 
Fertilizer Composition Based on Urea-Modified Hydroxyapatite Nanoparticles 
Encapsulated Wood. Curr. Sci. 2011, 101, 73–78.
Kumar, A.; Sinha, R. P.; Häder, D. P. Effect of UV-B on Enzymes of Nitrogen Metabolism 
in the Cyanobacterium Nostoc Calcicola. J. Plant Physiol. 1996. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0176-1617(96)80298-7
Kwak, S. Y.; Lew, T. T. S.; Sweeney, C. J.; Koman, V. B.; Wong, M. H.; Bohmert-Tatarev, 
K.; Snell, K. D.; Seo, J. S.; Chua, N. H.; Strano, M. S. Chloroplast-Selective Gene 
Delivery and Expression in Planta Using Chitosan-Complexed Single-Walled Carbon 
Nanotube Carriers. Nature Nanotechnol. 2019, 14(5), 447–455. https://doi.org/10.1038/
S41565-019-0375-4
Lee, C.; Itoh, T.; Sasaki, G.; Suga, T. Sol-gel Derived PZT Force Sensor for 
Scanning Force Microscopy. Mater. Chem. Phys. 1996, 44(1), 25–29. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0254-0584(95)01647-D
Lew, T. T. S.; Koman, V. B.; Gordiichuk, P.; Park, M.; Strano, M. S. The Emergence of Plant 
Nanobionics and Living Plants as Technology. Adv. Mater. Technol. 2020, 5(3), 1900657. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ADMT.201900657
Li, X.; Huang, Q.; Yuan, J.; Tang, Z. Fipronil Resistance Mechanisms in the Rice Stem Borer, 
Chilo Suppressalis Walker. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pestbp.2007.06.002
Li, Y.; Yang, D.; Cui, J. Graphene Oxide Loaded With Copper Oxide Nanoparticles as an 
Antibacterial Agent Against Pseudomonas Syringae pv. Tomato. RSC Adv. 2017, 7(62), 
38853–38860. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7RA05520J
Liebhold, A. M.; Tobin, P. C. Population Ecology of Insect Invasions and Their Management. 
Ann. Rev. Entomol.2008. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ento.52.110405.091401
Lim, T. C.; Ramakrishna, S. A Conceptual Review of Nanosensors. Zeitschrift Fur 
Naturforschung A 2006, 61(7–8), 402–412. https://doi.org/10.1515/zna-2006-7-815
Liu, T.; Tang, J.; Jiang, L. The Enhancement Effect of Gold Nanoparticles as a Surface 
Modifier on DNA Sensor Sensitivity. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 313(1), 3–7.
Lu, J.; Buwles, M. How Will Nanotechnology Affect Agricultural Supply Chains? Int. Food 
Agribus. Manag. Ass. 2013, 16(2):21–42
Luechinger, N. A.; Loher, S.; Athanassiou, E. K.; N. Grass, R.N; Stark, W. J. Highly Sensitive 
Optical Detection of Humidity on Polymer/Metal Nanoparticle Hybrid Films. Langmuir 
2007, 23(6), 3473–3477. https://doi.org/10.1021/LA062424Y
Malik, P.; Katyal, V.; Malik, V.; Asatkar, A.; Inwati, G.; Mukherjee, T. K. Nanobiosensors: 
Concepts and Variations. ISRN Nanomater. 2013, 2013, 1–9. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2013/327435
Marchiol, L.; Filippi, A.; Adamiano, A.; Degli Esposti, L.; Iafisco, M.; Mattiello, A.; 
Petrussa, E.; Braidot, E. Influence of Hydroxyapatite Nanoparticles on Germination and 
Plant Metabolism of Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.): Preliminary Evidence. Agronomy
2019, 9(4), 161. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy9040161
McClements, D. J. Nanotechnology Approaches for Improving the Healthiness and 
Sustainability of the Modern Food Supply. ACS Omega 2020, 5(46), 29623–29630. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c04050
Mello, L. D.; Kubota, L. T. Review of the Use of Biosensors as Analytical Tools in the Food 
and Drink Industries. Food Chem. 2002, 77(2), 237–256.Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 249
Mobini, S. H.; Lulsdorf, M.; Warkentin, T. D.; Vandenberg, A. Plant Growth Regulators 
Improve In Vitro Flowering and Rapid Generation Advancement in Lentil and Faba 
Bean. In Vitro Cell. Develop. Biol. Plant 2015, 51(1), 71–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11627-014-9647-8
Mousavi, S. R.; Rezaei, M. Nanotechnology in Agriculture and Food Production. J. Appl. 
Environ. Biol. Sci. 2011, 1, 414–419.
Narang, J.; Chauhan, N.; Rani, P.; Pundir, C. S. Construction of an Amperometric TG 
Biosensor Based on AuPPy Nanocomposite and Poly (indole-5-carboxylic acid) Modified 
Au Electrode. Bioproc. Biosyst. Eng. 2012, 36(4), 425–432. https://doi.org/10.1007/
S00449-012-0799-9
Nauen, R.; Denholm, I. Resistance of Insect Pests to Neonicotinoid Insecticides: Current 
Status and Future Prospects. Arch. Insect Biochem. Physiol. 2005. https://doi.org/10.1002/
arch.20043
Neethirajan, S.; Freund, M. S.; Jayas, D. S.; Shafai, C.; Thomson, D. J.; White, N. D. G. 
Development of Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Sensor for Grain Quality Monitoring. Biosyst. Eng.
2010,106(4), 395–404. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2010.05.002
Niraimathi, K. L.; Sudha, V.; Lavanya, R.; Brindha, P. Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles 
Using Alternanthera Sessilis (Linn.) Extract and Their Antimicrobial, Antioxidant Activities. 
Coll. Surf. B Biointerf. 2013, 102, 288–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.08.041
Nuruzzaman, M.; Rahman, M. M.; Liu, Y.; Naidu, R. Nanoencapsulation, Nano-guard 
for Pesticides: A New Window for Safe Application. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2016, 64(7), 
1447–1483. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.5b05214
O’Connor, D. J.; Wright, G. C.; Dieters, M. J.; George, D. L.; Hunter, M. N.; Tatnell, J. 
R.; Fleischfresser, D. B. Development and Application of Speed Breeding Technologies 
in a Commercial Peanut Breeding Program. Peanut Sci. 2013, 40(2), 107–114. https://doi.
org/10.3146/ps12-12.1
Ochatt, S. J.; Sangwan, R. S.; Marget, P.; Assoumou Ndong, Y.; Rancillac, M.; 
Perney, P. New Approaches Towards the Shortening of Generation Cycles for Faster 
Breeding of Protein Legumes. Plant Breed. 2002, 121(5), 436–440. https://doi.
org/10.1046/j.1439-0523.2002.746803.x
OECD, Food, & of the United Nations, A. O.. OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2012, 2002.. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1787/agr_outlook-2012-en
Olaitan, A. F.; Abiodun, T. A.; Foluke, A. O.; Oluwaseyi, O. E. Comparative Assessment of 
Insect Pests Population Densities of Three Selected Cucurbit Crops. Acta Fytotechnica et 
Zootechnica 2017. https://doi.org/10.15414/afz.2017.20.04.78-83
Omanović-Mikličanina, E.; Maksimović, M. Nanosensors Applications in Agriculture and 
Food Industry.
Omanović, E.; Maksimović, M. Nanosensors Applications in Agriculture and Food Industry. 
Bull. Chem. Technol. Bosnia Herzegovina 2016,47, 59–70.
Ong, B.; Lin-Heng, L.; Chun, J. Biological Diversity Conservation Laws in South East Asia and 
Singapore: A Regional Approach in Pursuit of the United Nations’ Sstainable Development 
Goals? Asia Pacific J. Environ. Law, 2000. https://doi.org/10.4337/apjel.2016.01.05
Palevitz, B. A. Genetic Parasites and a Whole Lot More. Scientist 2000.
Parisi, C.; Vigani, M.; Rodríguez-Cerezo, E. Agricultural Nanotechnologies: What are the 
Current Possibilities? Nano Today 2016, 10(2), 124–127. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nantod.2014.09.009250 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Peltonen-Sainio, P.; Jauhiainen, L.; Laurila, I. P. Cereal Yield Trends in Northern European 
Conditions: Changes in Yield Potential and its Realisation. Field Crops Res. 2009, 110(1), 
85–90. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2008.07.007
Peshin, R.; Dhawan, A. K. Integrated pest management. In Integrated Pest Management,
2009. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-8992-3
Pingali, P. L. Green Revolution: Impacts, limits, and the Path Ahead. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
2012, 109(31) 12302 LP – 12308. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912953109
Piškur, J.; Langkjær, R. B. Yeast Genome Sequencing: The Power of Comparative Genomics. 
Molecul. Microbiol. 2004. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04182.x
Prasad, S. Nanobiosensors: The Future for Diagnosis of Disease? Nanobiosens. Dis. Diagn.
2014, 3, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.2147/NDD.S39421
Prasad, R.; Bhattacharyya, A.; Nguyen, Q. D. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: 
Recent Developments, Challenges, and Perspectives. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1014. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.01014
Prasanna de Silva, A.; Nimal Gunaratne, H. Q.; Gunnlaugsson, Thorfinnur; Huxley, Allen 
J. M.; McCoy, Colin P.; Rademacher, Jude T.; Rice, T. E. Signaling Recognition Events 
With Fluorescent Sensors and Switches. Chem. Rev. 1997, 97(5), 1515–1566. https://doi.
org/10.1021/CR960386P.
Pudake, R. N.; Chauhan, N.; Kole, C. (Eds.). Nanoscience for Sustainable Agriculture. 
Springer International Publishing. 2019.
Rana, M. M.; Takamatsu, T.; Baslam, M.; Kaneko, K.; Itoh, K.; Harada, N.; Sugiyama, T.; 
Ohnishi, T.; Kinoshita, T.; Takagi, H.; Mitsui, T. Salt Tolerance Improvement in Rice 
Through Efficient SNP Marker-Assisted Selection Coupled With Speed-Breeding. Int. J. 
Mol. Sci. 2019, 20(10). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20102585
Rashidi, L.; Khosravi-Darani, K. The Applications of Nanotechnology in Food Industry. 
2011, 51(8), 723–730. https://doi.org/10.1080/10408391003785417
rathbun 2013 nanosensors - Google fo}ku. (n.d.).
Ray, D. K.; Mueller, N. D.; West, P. C.; Foley, J. A. Yield Trends Are Insufficient to Double 
Global Crop Production by 2050. PLoS One 2013, 8(6), e66428.
Ray, D. K.; Ramankutty, N.; Mueller, N. D.; West, P. C.; Foley, J. A. Recent Patterns of Crop 
Yield Growth and Stagnation. Nature Commun. 2012, 3(1), 1293. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms2296
Richardson, J.; Hawkins, P.; Luxton, R. The Use of Coated Paramagnetic Particles as a 
Physical Label in a Magneto-Immunoassay. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2001, 16(9–12) 989–993.
Rivelli, A. R.; Trotta, V.; Toma, I.; Fanti, P.; Battaglia, D. Relation Between Plant Water Status 
and Macrosiphum Euphorbiae (Hemiptera: Aphididae) Population Dynamics on Three 
Cultivars of Tomato. Euro. J. Entomol.2013. https://doi.org/10.14411/eje.2013.084
Rizal, G., Karki, S., Alcasid, M., Montecillo, F., Acebron, K., Larazo, N., Garcia, R., Slamet￾Loedin, I. H.; Quick, W. P. Shortening the Breeding Cycle of Sorghum, A Model Crop for 
Research. Crop Sci. 2014, 54(2), 520–529. https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci2013.07.0471
Rodriguez-Saona, C., R., B.; Isaacs, R. Manipulation of Natural Enemies in Agroecosystems: 
Habitat and Semiochemicals for Sustainable Insect Pest Control. In Integrated 
Pest Management and Pest Control - Current and Future Tactics; 2012. https://doi.
org/10.5772/30375
Russell, E. P. Enemies Hypothesis: A Review of the Effect of Vegetational Diversity on 
Predatory Insects and Parasitoids. Environ. Entomol. 1989. https://doi.org/10.1093/
ee/18.4.590Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 251
Samways, M. J. Insect Conservation: A Synthetic Management Approach. Annu. Rev. 
Entomol. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ento.52.110405.091317
Shang, Y.; Hasan, M. K.; Ahammed, G. J.; Li, M.; Yin, H.; Zhou, J. Applications of 
Nanotechnology in Plant Growth and Crop Protection: A Review. Molecules (Basel) 2019,
24(14). https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules24142558
Sharma, K.; Lavanya, M. Recent Developments in Transgenics for Abiotic Stress in Legumes 
of the Semi-arid Tropics. JIRCAS Working Report No. 23; 2003.
Sharma, H. C.; Ortiz, R. Host Plant Resistance to Insects: An Eco-friendly Approach for Pest 
Management and Environment Conservation. J. Environ. Biol. 2002.
Sharma, S.; Ruud, A. On the Path to Sustainability: Integrating Social Dimensions Into 
the Research and Practice of Environmental Management. Business Strategy and the 
Environment, 2003. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.366
Sharma, H. C.; Sujana, G.; Manohar Rao, D. Morphological and Chemical Components of 
Resistance to Pod Borer, Helicoverpa Armigera in Wild Relatives of Pigeonpea. Arthropod 
Plant Interact. 2009, 3, 151–161. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11829-009-9068-5
Sharma, H. C.; Venkateswarulu, G.; Sharma, A. Environmental Factors Influence the 
Expression of Resistance to Sorghummidge, Stenodiplosis sorghicola. Euphytica 2003. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023041713713
Shivakumar, M.; Nataraj, V.; Kumawat, G.; Rajesh, V.; Chandra, S.; Gupta, S.; & Bhatia, V. S. 
(2018). Speed breeding for Indian agriculture: A rapid method for development of new crop 
varieties. Current Science, 115(7), 1241. https://doi.org/10.18520/cs/v115/i7/1241-1241
Shivendu, R.; Dasgupta, N.; Lichtfouse, E. Nanoscience in Food and Agriculture 2; Springer 
International Publishing, 2016.
Shivendu, R.; Dasgupta, N.; Lichtfouse, E. Nanoscience in Food and Agriculture 5; Springer 
International Publishing, 2017.
Singh, S. P.; Rahman, M. F.; Murty, U. S. N.; Mahboob, M.; Grover, P. Comparative Study 
of Genotoxicity and Tissue Distribution of Nano and Micron Sized Iron Oxide in Rats 
After Acute Oral Treatment. Toxicol. Appl.Pharmacol. 2013, 266(1), 56–66. https://doi.org/
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.taap.2012.10.016
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D.; Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova. Sci. Publishers, Inc.; 2020a, 
vol 1, pp 73–100. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V.; Rawat, S.; Kumar Singh, A.; Bind, A.; Kumar Singh, A.; Chernikova, N.; 
Voloshina, M.; Lobzenko, I. Monitoring Soil Salinity and Recent Advances in Mechanism 
of Salinity Tolerance in Plants. Biogeosyst. Techniq. 2020b, 7(2). https://doi.org/10.13187/
bgt.2020.2.66
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D.; Rawat, S.; Sharma, R.; Singh, A. K.; Singh, A. K.; Tomar, R. S. In 
Emerging Tools for Sustainable Agriculture and Food Security; Rajput, D.; Book Agency: 
New Delhi, Delhi, 2021a, vol 1, pp 1–15. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V.; Singh, A.; Sengar, R.; Singh, R.; Minkina, T. Transformation Techniques 
and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. Policy Issues 
Genetically Modified Crops 2021b, 1, 515–542.
Slosser, J. E.; Price, J. R.; Puterka, G. J. Evaluation of Furrow Diking and Early-Season 
Insecticide Applications on Boll Weevils (Coleoptera: Curculionidae), Bollworms 
(Lepidoptera: Noctuidae), and Cotton Yield in the Texas Rolling Plains. J. Eco. Entomol. 
1989. https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/82.2.599252 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Smith, S. L.; Slywka, G. W.; Krueger, R. J. Anthocyanins of Strobilanthes Dyeriana and Their 
Production in Callus Culture. J. Natl. Prod. 1981. https://doi.org/10.1021/np50017a020
Song, J. M.; Kasili, P. M.; Griffin, G. D.; Vo-Dinh, T. Detection of Cytochrome c in a Single 
Cell Using an Optical Nanobiosensor. Anal. Chem. 2004, 76(9), 2591–2594. https://doi.
org/10.1021/AC0352878
Sotiropoulou, S., Gavalas, Vamvakaki, V.; Chaniotakis, N. A. Novel Carbon Materials in 
Biosensor Systems. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2003, 18(2–3), 211–215.
Southwood, T. R. E. Habitat, the Templet for Ecological Strategies? J. Anim. Ecol. 1977. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/3817
Sparks, T. C.; Nauen, R. IRAC: Mode of Action Classification and Insecticide Resistance 
Management. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pestbp.2014.11.014
Stoner, K. A. Plant Resistance to Insects: A Resource Available for Sustainable Agriculture. 
Biol. Agric. Hortic. 1996. https://doi.org/10.1080/01448765.1996.9754764
Su, X.; Chew, F. T.; Sam, F.Y. Li.Design and Application of Piezoelectric Quartz Crystal￾Based Immunoassay. Anal. Sci. 2000. 
Sumbal; Nadeem, A.; Naz, S.; Ali, J. S.; Mannan, A.; Zia, M. . Biotechnol. Rep. (Amst) 2019,
22, e00338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2019.e00338
Sunding, D.; Zilberman, D. Chapter 4 The agricultural innovation process: Research and 
technology adoption in a changing agricultural sector. In Agricultural Production; Elsevier, 
2001; vol 1, pp 207–261https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S1574-0072(01)10007-1
Swift, T. A.; Oliver, T. A. A.; Galan, M. C.; Whitney, H. M. Functional Nanomaterials to 
Augment Photosynthesis: Evidence and Considerations for Their Responsible Use in 
Agricultural Applications. Interface Focus 2019, 9(1), 20180048. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsfs.2018.0048
Tabashnik, B. E.; Carrière, Y. Successes and Failures of Transgenic bt crops: Global 
Patterns of Field-Evolved Resistance. In Bt Resistance: Characterization and 
Strategies for GM Crops Producing Bacillus thuringiensis Toxins; 2015. https://doi.
org/10.1079/9781780644370.0001
Tamhane, V. A.; Giri, A. P.; Sainani, M. N.; Gupta, V. S. Diverse Forms of Pin-II 
Family Proteinase Inhibitors From Capsicum Annuum Adversely Affect the Growth 
and Development of Helicoverpa Armigera. Gene. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
gene.2007.07.024
Tefera, T.; Mugo, S.; Beyene, Y. Developing and Deploying Insect Resistant Maize Varieties 
to Reduce Pre-and Post-harvest Food Losses in Africa. Food Secur. 2016. https://doi.
org/10.1007/s12571-015-0537-7
Tilman, D.; Balzer, C.; Hill, J.; Befort, B. L. Global Food Demand and the Sustainable 
Intensification of Agriculture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2011, 108(50), 20260 LP–20264. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1116437108
United Nations, D. of E. and S. A. (UN-D. Population Division, 2017. World Population 
Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables. Working Paper No. 
ESA/P/WP/248.; 2017.
van Emden, H. F. Host Plant-Aphidophaga Interactions. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 1995. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0167-8809(94)09001-N
van Lenteren, J. C.; Hua, L. Z.; Kamerman, J. W.; Rumei, X. The Parasite‐Host Relationship 
Between Encarsia Formosa (Hym., Aphelinidae) and Trialeurodes Vaporariorum (Hom., 
Aleyrodidae) XXVI. Leaf Hairs Reduce the Capacity of Encarsia to Control Greenhouse Nanotechnological Approaches in the Second Green Revolution 253
Whitefly on Cucumber. J. Appl. Entomol. 1995. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0418.1995.
tb01335.x
Vo-Dinh, T.; Cullum, B. Biosensors and Biochips: Advances in Biological and Medical 
Diagnostics. Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem. 2000, 366(6), 540–551. https://doi.org/10.1007/
S002160051549
Warheit, D. B.; Brown, S. C.; Donner, E. M. Acute and Subchronic Oral Toxicity Studies in 
Rats With Nanoscale and Pigment Grade Titanium Dioxide Particles. Food Chem. Toxicol.
2015, 84, 208–224. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2015.08.026
Wassmann, R.; Jagadish, S. V. K.; Heuer, S.; Ismail, A.; Redona, E.; Serraj, R.; Singh, 
R. K.; Howell, G.; Pathak, H.; Sumfleth, K. Chapter 2 Climate Change Affecting Rice 
Production. The Physiological and Agronomic Basis for Possible Adaptation Strategies. In 
Advances in Agronomy,1st ed.; Elsevier Inc., 2009; vol 101, Issue January 2009). https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0065-2113(08)00802-X
Worrall, E. A.; Hamid, A.; Mody, K. T.; Mitter, N.; Pappu, H. R. Nanotechnology for plant 
disease management. Agronomy. 2018, 8(12), 285.
Zeigler, R. S.; Mohanty, S. Support for International Agricultural Research: Current Status 
and Future Challenges. New Biotechnol. 2010, 27(5), 565–572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nbt.2010.08.003
Zhang, Y.; Arugula, M. A.; Wales, M.; Wild, J.; Simonian, A. L. A Novel Layer-by-Layer 
Assembled Multi-Enzyme/CNT Biosensor for Discriminative Detection Between 
Organophosphorus and Non-Organophosphorus Pesticides. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 67, 
287–295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2014.08.036
Zhang, Yi; Liu, B.,;Huang, K.; Wang, S.; Quirino, R. L.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, C. Eco-Friendly 
Castor Oil-Based Delivery System With Sustained Pesticide Release and Enhanced 
Retention. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(33), 37607–37618. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acsami.0c10620Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era 
for Crop Improvement
MAINAK BARMAN1
, SURACHITA DAS2
, SUBHRA MUKHERJEE3
, and 
SATISH KUMAR SINGH4
1
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, Bidhan Chandra Krishi 
Viswavidyalaya, West Bengal, India
2
Department of Human Physiology, Vidyasagar University, West Bengal, 
India
3
Department of Genetics and Plant Breeding, Bidhan Chandra Krishi 
Viswavidyalaya, West Bengal, India
4
Department of Plant Breeding and Genetics, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central 
Agricultural University, Bihar, India
CHAPTER 11
ABSTRACT 
DNA sequencing technologies have shed the light of success to all the 
current-era discoveries of biological science to achieve a tremendous height. 
Nanopore sequencing is the most recent in the queue of DNA sequencing 
techniques. This approach reliably senses the nucleotides with no active 
DNA production. The nanopore DNA sequencing principles rely on 
nucleotide-detecting mechanisms. The standard protocol of DNA extrac￾tion for nanopore sequencing is always one of the critical steps to achieve 
success from the procedure. Biological nanopore and solid-state nanopore 
are the two primary groups of nanopore technologies along with the most 
recently developed hybrid nanopores. Oxford Nanopore Technologies has 256 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
been constructing nanopore-based systems to sequence DNA for commercial 
utilization. Several plant species have been used for the Oxford Nanopore 
Sequencing. Several sensing methods have been suggested and discovered 
with a great success rate in the last few years, which are strong determining 
factors for a successful DNA nanopore sequencing method. When a DNA 
strand translocates through the nanopore, speed control is a major challenge 
for this DNA sequencing approach. It is being handled with great innovative 
researches nowadays. The major constraint of the nanopore sequencer is the 
relatively low reading precision. Many bioinformatics tools have already 
been released, and several further are in progress, focused, or optimized for 
nanopore sequencing. 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
Since the last decade, innovative technologies envisaging the unseen or 
unravelling the imperceptible have always extended helping hands to the 
advances in scientific inventions. The quick arrival of high‐throughput and 
reasonable machinery of sequencing DNA has unquestionably served as the 
significant driving strength in advancing life science studies (Goodwin et al., 
2016). Genomic information has always played the role of one of the hearts 
of molecular biology, supplying as well as aiding means for genome probing, 
its configuration, expression of genes, epigenetics, and a large number 
of other relevant fields (Singh et al., 2020; Singh et al., 2021). Nanopore 
sequencers are the most recent in the queue of DNA sequencers (Jain et al., 
2016). Although a range of sequencing methods are accessible like single￾molecule real-time sequencing (SMRT), sequencing by ligation, sequencing 
by synthesis, and pyrosequencing, approaches of DNA sequencing since 
Sanger sequencing largely depended upon the procedure of DNA synthesis 
(Schadt et al., 2010). DNA nanopore sequencing differentiates itself from 
these preceding techniques. This approach unswervingly senses the nucleo￾tides with no active DNA production. The stretch of DNA moves through 
a protein nanopore as an elongated single-stranded DNA stretch and is 
then stabilized in an electrically resistant membrane of polymer (Feng et 
al., 2015). A voltage is fixed across this membrane, and detection of ionic 
current alterations is done by these sensors caused by shifting by nucleotides 
dwelling in the pore in real time as the DNA molecule passes through. The 
exceptional sequencing mode of nanopore offers manifold benefits over other 
conventional approaches. Firstly, the sequencing does not entail imaging Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 257
tools for detecting the nucleotides, permitting the system to rationalize in size 
to a convenient degree. Secondly, as the sequencing method unswervingly 
senses the input molecule exclusive of DNA synthesis or amplification, there 
is no prominent extent edge of the DNA we can sequence. In addition, ionic 
current alterations recognition reallocated by the nucleotides passing across 
the nanopore is not restricted to the four canonical nucleo-bases of A,T,G, 
C. Captivating pros of the character of unamplified unswerving sequencing, 
nanopore sequencing is potent of straight observing the changes of bases 
like methylations (Simpson et al., 2017), and even can directly sequence the 
molecules of RNA that contain uracil bases (Garalde et al., 2018). In this 
chapter, we will discuss how the method of nanopore sequencing actually 
functions and the present scenario of this mesmerizing scientific innovation.
11.2 PRINCIPLE OF NANOPORE SEQUENCING 
The protocols of nanopore DNA sequencing are dependent upon the nucle￾otide-detecting mechanisms. Optical readout (i.e., fluorescent detection) 
(Huang et al., 2015) and electrical signature (Branton et al., 2008) are the 
two categories of principles of detection presently relied on. To be exact, the 
earliest discovered nanopore sequencing principle used is the ionic current 
blockade (Howorka et al., 2001), which is basically acquired from the usually 
known “Coulter counter” technique. Figure 11.1 represents this principle, 
and currently, this technology is explored in the most extensive manner as 
its ease permits lessening the cost as well as the size of instruments (Iqbal 
et al., 2011; Edel and Albrecht, 2013). In this method, current patterns are 
caused by the diverse nucleotide bases along a strand of DNA across the 
nanopore for the duration of its translocation in a linear manner under a field 
of electricity. These prototypes are specific for different nucleotides and are 
ultimately translated into the original string of DNA (Pennisi, 2012). When 
two tiny detached compartments get in touch with a fragile membrane with 
a nanopore, the field of electricity across the membrane generates a flow of 
ionic current. The ion flow is disturbed by the single-stranded DNA when 
it traverses through the nanopore. Thus, the pattern of blockade current is 
traced as a function of time which contains the information regarding the 
nucleotides. The patterns in the ionic currents show a sturdy relationship 
with the sequence of a number of nucleotide bases positioned at the nano￾pore all through the translocation- this is the hypothesis on which the central 
idea of this principle stands. This hypothesis has already been established 258 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
to be applicable with protein nanopores (Manrao et al., 2012; Laszlo et al., 
2014). Although, it has not so far been authenticated utilizing solid-state 
nanopores. Subsequently, tough confronts must be addressed concurrently 
for demonstrating concrete sequencing of DNA. In exacting, the following 
major necessities must be resolved essentially: an ultra-small nanopore as 
sequencing needs nanopore diameter less than 2 nm (Lindsay, 2016), an 
ultrathin membrane as detection of a distinctive signal at a level of single￾nucleotide would turn out to be complicated if the membrane is much wider 
than several nucleotides, control of DNA speed as well as recognition of four 
nucleotides as the quick speed of traversing across the nanopore of ssDNA 
(usually faster than 1 μs/nt (Meller, 2003; Akahori et al., 2014) is excessively 
hasty to detain the signal at the level of single-nucleotides by the amplifiers 
that are existing at present.
FIGURE 11.1 Schematic representation of DNA nanopore sequencing (adapted and 
modified from Goto et al., 2019).
11.3 TYPE OF NANOPORES 
We can broadly classify nanopore technologies into two groups: (1) biolog￾ical nanopores and (2) solid-state nanopores. The first category of nano￾pores, that is, biological ones, has been used extensively in detecting single 
molecules, diagnosing a range of diseases, and sequencing of DNA. Recent 
progress in the field of nanotechnology has smoothened the advancement 
of solid-state nanopore sensors. These synthetic nanopores can be incorpo￾rated additionally on a circuit chip together with other tools, for instance, a 
field-effect transistor offering the prospective for portable, miniature devices Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 259 TABLE 11.1 Key Events of Nanopore Sequencing (Deamer, 1998; Howorka et al., 2001; Quick et al., 2015; Quick et al., 2016; Quick et al., 2017). Year Key events Scientists Institutes 1992 First-time experiment that shows the capacity of alpha-hemolysin pore in nanopore sequencing Deamer and Kasianowicz National Institute of Standards and Technology 1998 For nanopore sequencing, the first patent was granted Branton, Balderelli, Kasianowicz, Church, and Deamer National Institute of Standards and Technology, University of California, Harvard University 2001 By using an engineered nanopore, up to 30 nucleotides length individual DNA strands were recognized Howorka, Cheley, and Bayley Texas A&M University 2006 Engineered alpha-hemoplysin pore with a molecular adaptor was used for easy recognition of the four bases of DNA for the very first time Bayley, Braha, and Astler Oxford University 2011 Hand-held DNA sequencer (MinION) effec- tively sequenced the first piece of DNA Clive Brown Oxford Nanopore Technology 2014 Successful use of MinION for sequencing the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa genome Nick Loman University of Birmingham 2015 Successful use of MinION to sequence 142 Ebola virus samples in Guinea to combat outbreak of the disease Quick and Nick Loman University of Birmingham 2016 For sequencing and preventing the spread of Zika virus in Brazil, the mobile laboratory equipped MinION was used Faria, Loman, Quick, de Jesus, Goodfellow, and Ramabut FIOCRUZ Bahia, InstitutoEvandro Chagas, ARTIC Network, Oxford Nanopore Technology 2018 MinION appeared to be potential means to sequence human genome Koren, Miga, Rand, Olsen, O'Grady, Nieto, Marriot, Malla, Fiddes, Dilthey, Simpson and Loose Beggs, Philippy, Paten, Tee, Snutch, Quinlan, Richardson, Rhie, Pedersen, Tyson, Sasani, Jain, Quick, and Loman University of Nottingham, University of Birmingham, University of Utah, University of British Columbia, Ontario Institute for Cancer Research, Santa Cruz, University of East Anglia, University of California, National Human Genome Research Institute 260 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture Year Key events Scientists Institutes 2019 For the first time, sequencing tools are opted for program of population genome genomics (Abu Dhabi Genome Program) Oxford Nanopore Technology 2020 Nanopore sequencers started using ARCTIC protocol for decoding the SARS-Cov2 Loman Oxford Nanopore Technology, ARTIC Network 2020 Oxford instigated a highly precise COVID-19 test termed as LamPORE which was its first IVD controlled diagnostic Oxford Nanopore Technology TABLE 11.1 (Continued)Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 261
for sequencing DNA. To capture the benefits of the attributes of both the 
solid-state as well as biological nanopores, hybrid nanopores have been 
put forward (Derrington et al., 2010). The technology of nanopore DNA 
sequencing is being rapidly developed.
11.3.1 BIOLOGICAL NANOPORES 
These kinds of nanopores are termed transmembrane protein channels. These 
are typically introduced into a substrate, for example, liposomes, planar lipid 
bilayers, or other polymer films. Well-defined as well as highly reproduc￾ible nanopore structure and size are the major leads of biological nanopores. 
More significantly, we can modify these types of nanopores easily with up to 
date methods of molecular biology like mutating the sequence of nucleotides 
for altering the amino acid residue at an exact position. In this segment, we 
will discuss three biological nanopores that are well-studied.
11.3.1.1 Α-HEMOLYSIN 
α-Hemolysin also termed as α-toxin. Among the biological nanopores, it 
is the first and most frequently utilized type that holds remarkable impor￾tance in the DNA sequencing field. It is an exotoxin produced by a human 
pathogenic bacterium Staphylococcus aureus. This mushroom-structured 
heptamer is a transmembrane channel of 232.4-kDa which consists of a 
cap of 3.6-nm diameter and a transmembrane β-barrel of diameter 2.6-nm 
(Song et al.,1996). The outside measurements of the apertures are 10 nm 
× 10 nm. The thickness of the α-Hemolysin channel from inside and the 
extent of a molecule of ssDNA are extremely close in size. Hence, within the 
nanopore, this α-Hemolysin is capable of discriminating single nucleotides 
employing ionic current (Cherf et al., 2012). This provides this biological 
nanopore a skillful means to analyze biomolecular communications as well 
as configurations at the level of single molecule. Moreover, the structure of 
the nanopore can dwell steady at high temperature close to 100ºC within an 
ample range of pH (2–12) (Kang et al., 2005). Even though these pores are 
broadly exploited in biological researches, the restricted size of pore (1.4 
nm) confines its utility in analyzing RNA, ssDNA, or small molecules. In 
addition, the b-barrel is excessively lengthy for directly differentiating each 
nucleotide from single long-chain molecules of DNA.262 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
11.3.1.2 MSPA
Branton et al. (2008) reported Mycobacterium smegmatis porin A or MspA 
to be a hopeful and potent biological nanopore to read information from four 
nucleotides concurrently. The diameter of the MspA octamer channel is 1 
nm at the minimum end, which is comparatively petite as well as slender 
than α-Hemolysin. As a result, it has the potential of improving the spatial 
resolution of sequencing single-stranded DNA. Additionally, this biological 
nanopore is vigorous and maintains the channel dynamic under tremendous 
experimental circumstances, for instance, varying pH range from 0 to 14 and 
maintaining the temperature at 100ºC for 30 min (Abiola et al., 2003).
11.3.1.3 BACTERIOPHAGE PHI29
Phi29 is one other well-studied biological nanopore that has created immense 
attention. For the first time, Wendell et al. (2009) revealed that through the 
phi29 pore, dsDNA could pass. The bacteriophage phi29 DNA packaging 
motor has a 12-subunit gp10 connector (Guasch et al., 2002), six replicas 
of ATP-binding DNA packaging RNA (Guo et al., 1998), and an ATPase 
protein, gp16 (Lee et al., 2006), which offers the chemical force entailed for 
translocation of DNA. The connector protein is capable of effortlessly self￾assembling to shape an unwavering and recurring dodecameric organization 
in solution. In contrast to the previously discussed two nanopores, this phi29 
pore holds a greater diameter, which permits measuring molecules, such as 
proteins, DNA complexes, and double-stranded DNA that are larger. In addi￾tion, a larger phi29 pore offers more litheness for biochemical alterations.
11.3.2 SOILD-STATE NANOPORE 
Even though biological nanopores are reported to show exclusively stirring 
test results for sequencing single-stranded DNA, these protein pores include 
an invariable size of the pore, profile, in addition to be deficient in steadiness. 
Additionally, they survive from conventionally supported lipid membrane 
frailty. To fiddle with these paucities, a range of synthetic nanopores have been 
constructed employing diverse techniques and are put in an application to the 
analysis of DNA as well as RNA. Li et al. (2001) are credited for confirming 
that we can use these solid-state nanopores for studying the procedure on 
how different molecules translocate (Cheley et al., 2002). The advancement Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 263
of microfabrication technologies has drawn the rising interest of solid-state 
nanopores. This category of nanopores holds several advanced benefits over 
biological equivalents, such as mechanical, chemical and thermal stability, 
adjustability of size, and incorporation. Solid-state nanopores can accurately 
function under a broad range of experimental states in addition to being able 
to be produced in mass through conventional semiconductor practices. In 
recent times, solid-state nanopores have been applied as an innovative tech￾nique in diverse areas, counting disease diagnosis, molecule translocation 
process, protein detection, and DNA sequencing. A number of primary skills 
are frequently exercised for constructing nanopores in polymer membranes 
(Menestrina et al., 2014), graphene (Garaj et al., 2010), boron nitride (BN) 
(Liu, 2013), aluminum oxide (Al2
O3
) (Venkatesan and Bashir, 2011), silicon 
dioxide (SiO2
) (Storm et al., 2003), silicon nitride (Si3
N4
) (Heng et al., 2004), 
and hybrid materials (Bai et al., 2014). The elite geometric along with elec￾trical characteristics of these nanopores offer them a distinctive lead over the 
biological ones. Still, it is necessary to improve their thermal and chemical 
steadiness to craft trustworthy mechanisms (Kwok et al., 2014).
11.3.2.1 SI3
N4 AND SIO2 NANOPORES
High chemical stability and low mechanical stress have put Si3
N4
 and SiO2
films into light to be extensively used as substrates. We can manufacture 
them using balancing metal oxide semiconductor-attuned industrial inte￾grated circuit procedures (Gao and Xie, 2012; Dai et al., 2012; Gao et al., 
2013). Ion or electron beam, carving in a free-positioning membrane window, 
frequently drill nanopores, and we can regulate them employing wet-etching 
methods with micrometer accuracy as well as standard photolithography 
(Dai et al., 2012; Gao et al., 2013). Both these substrates demonstrate to be 
excellent also in high concentrations solution of an electrolyte.
11.3.2.2 AL2
O3
 MEMBRANES 
In contrast to the previous two, the electrical performance of Al2
O3
 films is 
superior in having an advanced ratio of signal-to-noise and lesser noise for 
the period of DNA translocation (Venkatesan et al., 2009). We can use atomic 
layer deposition for fabricating these at a single atomic-level thickness. We 
can take transmission electron microscopy and focused ion beam into a 
grant for constructing nanopores in metal oxide membranes (Venkatesan et 264 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
al., 2009; Haque et al., 2013). The speed of DNA translocation is sluggish 
through Al2
O3
 nanopores compared with the speed through Si3N4 nano￾pores, which is endorsed to the well-built electrostatic dealings among the 
positively charged ones Al2
O3
 surface and the negatively charged molecules 
of double-stranded DNA. 
11.3.3 SINGLE-LAYER MEMBRANES
Even though the solid-state nanopores engineered in insulating films have 
been functional extensively in protein and DNA translocation procedures, 
they are not seen as having an adequate spatial and temporal resolution for 
obtaining structural data of molecules at the single-base level. Graphene 
membrane has been used as a substitute in recent times to conventional 
solid-state membranes. It is a single atomic layer of carbons with aston￾ishing electrical as well as mechanical characteristics (Traversi et al., 2013). 
Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2
) has also created huge attention. We can fabri￾cate nanopores in suspended single-layer membranes by organized electron 
beam exposure via transmission electron microscopy (Liu et al., 2012). 
One meticulous benefit of utilizing nanopores in ultrathin membranes is the 
negligible membrane breadth (0.335 nm) comparable to the two DNA chain￾bases distance (Traversi et al., 2013). Single-layer membranes possibly will 
grip the prospect of achieving astonishingly towering spatial resolution for 
the sequencing of DNA.
11.3.4 HYBRID BIOLOGICAL/SOILD-STATE NANOPORES 
The lacuna of chemical discrimination from the target molecules of roughly 
identical size is presently the critical disadvantage of solid-state nanopores. 
By functionalizing surfaces, we can improve this chemical specificity (Bai 
et al., 2014); affixing precise sequences of recognition and receptors to the 
nanopores can also assist (Iqbal et al., 2007; Venkatesan and Bashir, 2011). 
Nanopores programmed with hairpin DNAs or other receptors are capable 
in distinctively recognizing nucleotides in sequencing applications (Iqbal et 
al., 2007; Branton et al., 2008). A fluid lipid bilayer can be used to cover the 
synthetic nanopores for controlling the translocations of protein (Yusko et 
al., 2011). A range of lipids can be employed to precisely manage the breadth 
and surface chemistry of the coating surface. These nanopore sensors demon￾strate tremendous electrical attributes and improved mechanical strength, 
and thus, may uncover wider uses in nanobiotechnology.Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 265 TABLE 11.2 Comparative Structural Features of the Major Nanopore Categories (Yanxiao et al., 2015). Types of nanopore Shape of the channel Fabrication membrane Nanopore connecter Channel diameter (nm) Channel length (nm) Special feature Biological nanopore α-hemolysin Mushroom-shaped, heptamer (β-barrel) Lipid bilayer Self-assemble 1.4–2.6 5.2 Discriminate single nucleotide using ionic current within nanopore MspA Octamer Self-assemble 1.2 3.7 Potent to advance spatial resolution of ssDNA sequencing and maintains the channel dynamic under extreme conditions Phi29 Dodecamer Self-assemble 3.6–6 7 Allows to measure large molecules, that is, ssDNA, DNA complexes, and provide more flexibility for chemical modification Solid-state nanopore Silicon-based nanopore Si3N4/ SiO2membrane Electron beam-based decomposition sputtering, laser ablation, ion milling track-etch method, helium ion microscopy, FIB techniques, dielectric breakdown, electron-beam lithography Measured by sub-nm scale Membrane thickness Perform in high concentration of electrolyte solution to detect DNA molecule Al2O3 nanopore Al2O3 FIB, TEM Measured by sub-nm scale 45–60 Slow translocation speed is characteristic to well-built electrostatic interaction between (+ve) charged Al2O3 surface and (-ve) charged ds DNA 266 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture Types of nanopore Shape of the channel Fabrication membrane Nanopore connecter Channel diameter (nm) Channel length (nm) Special feature Single-layer membranes BN, Graphene,MoS2 TEM Measured by sub-nm scale 0.335 Minimal thickness of the membrane is comparable to the space between the bases in a DNA chain and may grasp prospective to accomplish high spatial resolution to sequence DNA Hybrid nanopore Si3N4 Al2O3 TEM Measured by sub-nm scale Membrane thickness Can function with hairpin DNA or other receptor have the capacity to distinctively recognize nucleotides in sequencing application TABLE 11.3 Plant Species Used for the Oxford Nanopore Sequencing (Kathryn et al., 2020). Year Name of the plant species Technology used for sequencing Size of genome/N50 Assembler 2017 Solanum pennellii (wild tomato) Illumina, ONT 1.0 Gbp/N50 2.45 Mbp (contig) Pilon, SMARTdenovo, Canu 2018 Sorghum bicolor(sorghum) Illumina, ONT, bionano 732 Mbp/N50 33.28 Mbp (scaffold), 3.05 Mbp (contigs) Bionano, nanopolish, Pilon, SMARTdenovo, Canu 2018 Oryza coarctata (wild rice) Illumina, ONT, illumina mate-pair 665 Mbp/N50 1.86 Mbp (scaffold), 15.13 kbp (contig) PLATANUS, SSPACE, GapCloser 2018 Brassica oleracea Illumina, ONT, bionano 630 Mbp N50 29.5 Mbp (scaffold), 7.3 Mbp (contig) Bionano Solve and Access, Pilon, Racon, Ra (SMART denovo, wtdbg) 2018 Arabidopsis thaliana Illumina, ONT 119.5 Mbp/N50 12.3 Mbp (contig) Canu, Miniasm, Pilon TABLE 11.2 (Continued)Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 267 TABLE 11.3 (Continued) Year Name of the plant species Technology used for sequencing Size of genome/N50 Assembler 2019 Juglans regia (walnut) ONT, illumina short read, Hi-C 547 Mbp/N50 31.49 Mbp (scaffold), 1.36 Mbp (contig) MaSuRCA, HiRise 2019 Lupinus albus (white lupin) ONT, PacBio, illumina, bionano optical mapping 451 Mbp/N50 9.88 Mbp (scaffold), 7.11 Mbp (contig) Canu, Falcon (for PacBio data only), Pilon, Bionano Solve 2019 Corylus avellana L. (European hazel) Illumina, ONT, Hi-C 370 Mbp/N50 36.65 Mbp (scaffold) MaSuRCA, HiRise 2020 Lonicera japonica (Japanese honeysuckle) ONT, illumina, Hi-C 843.2 Mbp N50 84.4 Mbp (scaffold) LACHESIS, SMARTdenovo, Pilon; SLR, SALSA (for Hi-C data), Canu 2020 Euryale ferox (prickly water lily) ONT, illumina, Hi-C 725.2 Mbp/N50 4.75 Mbp (contig) LACHESIS (for Hi-C data); Pilon, Canu 2020 Asparagus setaceus (asparagus fern) ONT, illumina, 10× genomics, Hi-C 710.15 Mbp/N50 2.19 Mbp (scaffold) Canu, Pilon; LACHESIS (for Hi-C data) 2020 Juglans sigillata (iron walnut) ONT, illumina, bionano, Hi-C 536.5 Mbp/N50 16.43 Mbp (scaffold), N50 4.34 Mbp (contig) Canu, wtdbg, Pilon 2020 Oryza sativa (rice) ONT, illumina 386.5 Mbp N50 6.32 Mbp (contig) (Basmati 334); 383.6 Mbp/N50 10.53 Mbp (contig) (Dom Sufid) Canu, fly, Medaka, Pilon 2020 Oryza sativa (rice) Carolina Gold Select ONT, illumina 377 Mbp/N50 1.72 Mbp (scaffold), N50 1.63 Mbp (contig) Flye, MaSuRCA 2020 Spirodela polyrhiza (common duckweed) ONT, Hi-C 138.49 Mbp/N50 3.34 Mbp (contig), 7.68 (scaffold) Miniasm; Proximo (for Hi-C data)268 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
11.3.5 COMMERCIAL BIOLOGICAL NANOPORE SEQUENCERS 
Gordon Sangheraand Hagan Bayley founded Oxford Nanopore Technolo￾gies (ONT). This has been constructing nanopore-based systems of DNA 
sequencing for utilization in commercial purpose. In 2012, ONT revealed 
the preliminary investigational outcomes from its larger GridION system 
(Eisenstein, 2012). This GridION system can be expanded with supplemen￾tary cartridges, each of which includes assortments of nanopores. Numerous 
gigabytes of raw data can be produced per day by each GridION node and 
cartridge. The method is planned for stretchy run times having a wide range 
from a few minutes up to some days based upon the data prerequisites of 
the tests. The MinION is a one-time usable DNA sequencing USB memory 
stick-sized apparatus intended for wide-ranging DNA sequencing functions. 
Many research teams have taken the MinION for sequencing amplicons from 
a snake venom gland transcriptome, ʎ-phage genome, and Escherichia coli
K-12 substrate (Quick et al., 2014). Nevertheless, the inaccuracy rates of these 
investigations were beyond 90% (Mikheyev and Tin, 2014). Even though it is 
still a lengthy approach from exploitation in a broad array of functions, these 
outcomes are incredibly cheering for nanopore-based DNA sequencing skills.
FIGURE 11.2 Standard protocol of DNA extraction for nanopore sequencing (Karin and 
Hege, 2020).Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 269
11.4 MECHANISMS OF DNA TRANSLOCATION SENSING
The means of sensing, that is, on which way we can generate the signal and 
by which means we can exclusively connect it with the DNA molecules’ 
structure that is under translocation, is a strong determining factor for the 
accomplishment of DNA nanopore sequencing methods. A number of 
sensing methods have been suggested as well as discovered in last few years, 
though with diverse scales of triumph. In this section, we will talk about 
and evaluate fundamental techniques to read off the DNA sequences in the 
translocation via nanopores.
11.4.1 IONIC CURRENT BLOCKADES 
Quantification of ionic currents for the period of translocation is the 
most extensively practiced method in detecting sequence (Dekker, 2007; 
Venkatesan and Bashir, 2011). The assumption is that the threading of 
biopolymer through the channel chunks the small ions’ fluxes by geometrical 
omission, and recording is kept as a function time of this alteration in the 
current. Modulations in the ionic currents that sturdily associate with the 
chemical characteristics of the nucleotide at the constricted part of the nano￾pore are the major thought of this sequencing technique is the hypothesis. 
Massive studies have been executed on DNA nanopore sequencing exer￾cising ion–current blockages (Yang et al., 2013; Liang and Zhang, 2015). 
However, there are a lot of challenges in the field that are to be resolved yet.
11.4.2 TRANSVERSE CURRENT MEASUREMENTS OF DNA 
TRANSLOCATION 
In the current-blockade technique, the ionic fluxes corresponding to the 
translocating DNA chains are assessed and interpreted. In recent times, a 
method has been suggested as a substitute for DNA nanopore sequencing, 
which is rooted in calculating the electrical current at a 90-degree angle to 
the direction of DNA transportation all through the translocation. Transverse 
electrical conductivity is anticipated to be exceptionally dependent upon the 
character of each of the nucleotides in the nanopore. Scanning tunneling 
microscopy has helped to hypothetically inspect and investigationally 
envisage the physical characteristics of these currents (Nelson et al., 2010). 
Suggestions have been made regarding these currents that tunneling effects 270 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
cause these, or they can be linked with the characteristics of semiconductor 
materials attached to the nanopores.
11.4.2.1 TRANSVERSE TUNNELING CURRENT 
Electrodes are positioned (two in number) in the nanopore, and the transverse 
voltage is provided across them in transverse tunneling current measure￾ments. Inside the nanopore, the electrons jump between electrodes along 
the nanometer distance. Passing DNA base sequences amend the impending 
obstruction among the two electrodes and result in a tunneling current that 
quickly crumbles with distance. This quantum effect of current alteration 
directs to the increased spatial resolution, and in addition, it offers an 
advanced molecular explicit. Measurement of electron tunneling current flow 
among vertical electrodes for the period of translocation of DNA is believed 
a capable move for the nanopore sequencing procedures. Still, a number of 
challenges exist. Firstly, nanoelectrode fabrication within a nanopore is a 
tremendously complicated technical stage, which is the foremost obstacle 
to apply these DNA sequencing devices. Additionally, the technique has to 
make sure that the DNA molecule constantly traverses the pore in an explicit 
direction because of the high sensitivity of tunneling current to atomic-scale 
alterations of directions along with distances (Agah et al., 2016). In alter￾native expression, the relative orientation of the nucleotide concerning the 
electrodes will be the depending factor for the tunneling current. The resolu￾tion of this DNA nanopore sequencing technique is considerably lessened by 
all these effects.
11.4.2.2 TRANSVERSE SEMICONDUCTOR CURRENT 
An associated method exploits the alterations in the semiconductor mate￾rial’s conductance that is linked with the nanopore when translocation of 
DNA molecules takes through the path. Due to high intrinsic speeds and 
elevated sensitivity, carbon nanotube field-effect transistors (FETs) and 
nanowires are often exploited as biological and chemical sensors. Lieber’s 
team proposed to link FET in a straight line with the nanopores to analyze 
how DNA translocates. Synchronized notes of the nanowire FET conduc￾tance and the corresponding ionic flux when cis and trans chambers are 
packed with solutions of diverse ionic potency validate that this technique 
accurately assesses the translocation incidents. Nevertheless, there is a Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 271
considerable noise intensity in FET transistors which shrinks the worth of 
this move. It has been proposed to incorporate graphene nanogaps and/or 
graphene nanoribbons (GNR) with SiNx membranes into the nanopore to 
investigate the phenomenon of translocation to get better performance from 
this approach (Agah et al., 2016).
11.4.3 OPTICAL RECOGNITION 
It is an exceedingly well-designed, recently developed technique that depends 
not on the measurements all through the translocation. As an alternative, 
optical sensing machinery is used here, as Figure 11 depicts. The immense 
benefit of this technique is the capability of recognizing DNA sequences by 
means of extremely analogous delivery. This is possibly the most capable 
arrangement to sequence DNA since it coalesces a high-speed parallel 
readout of the signals, elevated sensitivity, and the aptitudes to advance by 
exploiting multicolor schemes. Still, this technique has numerous confronts 
prior to being professionally applied in the DNA nanopore sequencing. The 
inaccuracies in nucleotide detection are of 10% order, and the target DNA 
switch is somewhat intricate (Venkatesan and Bashir, 2011). The capability 
of converting and reading hefty genomic pieces with high reliability applying 
this method has not been exhibited so far (Venkatesan and Bashir, 2011).
11.5 SPEED CONTROL OF DNA TRANSLOCATION 
A major confront for this method is to control the speed while a DNA strand 
translocates through the nanopore. The classic reside period of DNA channel 
is less than 1 μs/nt across the nanopore. This time length is excessively 
minute for recording the ionic current signature, including nucleotide data 
utilizing existing amplifiers (Wanunu et al., 2008; Venkatesan and Bashir, 
2011). Preferably, the settling time of DNA in a nanopore ought to be length￾ened to greater than 100–1000 μs/nt in any case for satisfactory documenta￾tion of the electric signal at single-nucleotide level. Many research groups 
have stepped forward on developing competent approaches to trim down 
the speed of DNA (Wanunu, 2012; Carson and Wanunu, 2015; Wang et al., 
2014; Pungetmongkol, 2018). Establishing a molecular motor close to the 
nanopore doorway is the most triumphant technique for protein nanopores 
(Fig. 11.3B). The functions as a molecular ratchet of DNA strands can be 
achieved by molecular motors like DNA helicase or DNA polymerase. This 272 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
ratchet is capable of considerably lessening the DNA speed, in addition, to 
accurately controlling DNA relocation at the single-nucleotide level (Laszlo 
et al., 2014). Regrettably, a thriving effort on a molecular motor having a 
solid-state nanopore has not been noted until now as per our acquaintance. 
The compatibility of biological proteins with a nanoporous substance might 
be the reason of this insufficiency. Concerning solid-state nanopores, altering 
the gradient concentration (Wanunu et al., 2009), temperature (Verschueren 
et al., 2015), electrolyte species (Kowalczyk et al., 2012), and viscosity 
(Fologea et al., 2005) has been demonstrated to be trouble-free means. 
Many researchers have tried an approach in which different obstructions like 
nanocylinder (Yoshida et al., 2016), polymer gel (Tang et al., 2015), nano￾bead array (Goto et al., 2015), or nanofiber mesh (Squires et al., 2013) are 
positioned near a nanopore opening for averting DNA movement. Relying 
on these incessant attempts, the single-stranded DNA translocation dwelling 
period might be expanded to ~10–100 μs/nt with no outside implements. 
DNA-immobilized probe or bead is one other approach to controlling speed. 
Manoeuvring of DNA movement is accomplished by regulating the bead or 
probe with an optical potential or piezoactuator (Akahori et al., 2017). In this 
direct regulating technique, we can slow down the dwelling time of DNA 
to 100 μs/nt. Even though the speed of DNA has effectively been slowed 
down, each documented regulatory process for solid-state nanopores still is 
not capable of stifling the vast disparity in dwell times. 
FIGURE 11.3 Schematic representation of DNA speed control mechanisms. (A) Molecular 
motor for DNA speed control, (B) alterations in a solution, and (C) DNA motion control 
directly via a piezo actuator or AFM (Adapted and modified from Goto et al., 2019).Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 273 TABLE 11.4 Instrument and Data Comparison Between Three Generations of Nanopore Sequencing (Kchouk et al., 2017). Year Generation Instrument Reading per run Reading type Avg length of reading (pb) Rate of error Category of error Generated data per run (Gb) First generation 2002 ABI Sanger 3730xl 96 SE 400–900a 0.3 NA 0.00069–0.0021 Second generation 2005 454 GS20 200 SE, PE 100 1 Indel 0.02 2007 GS FLX 400 250 1 Indel 0.01 2009 GS FLX Titanium 1 M 450 1 Indel 0.45 2010 GS junior 100 400 1 Indel 0.04 2011 GS FLX 1 M 700 1 Indel _ Titanium+ 0.7 2014 GS Junior+ 100 700 1 Indel 0.07 2011 Illumina Miseq 25 M (max) SE,PE 300 0.1 Mismatch 15 (max) 2012 Hiseq 5 B (max) 150 0.1 Mismatch 1.5 Tb (max) 2013 Miniseq 25 M (max) 150 1 Mismatch 7.5 (max) 2014 Nextseq 400 M (max) 150 1 Mismatch 120 (max) 2014 Hiseq 6 B (max) 150 0.1 Mismatch 1.8 Tb (max) 2011 SOLiD 5500 W 3 B SE 75 0.1 Mismatch 160 2013 5500xl W 6 B 75 0.1 Mismatch 320 2011 Ion Torrent PGM 316 chip v2 2–3 M 200 1 Indel 0.6–1 2011 PGM 314 chip v2 400–500 400 1 Indel 0.06–0.01 2012 Ion proton 60–80 M 200 1 Indel 10 2013 PGM 318 chip v2 4–5.5 M 400 1 Indel 1.2–2 2015 Ion S5/S5XL 540 60–80 M 400 1 Indel _ 2015 Ion S5/S5XL 520 3–5 M 400 1 Indel 1.2–5
2015 Ion S5/S5XL 530 15–20 M 400 1 Indel 3–5274 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture Year Generation Instrument Reading per run Reading type Avg length of reading (pb) Rate of error Category of error Generated data per run (Gb) Third generation 2011 PacBio RS C1 932 SE 1300 15 Indel 0.54 2012 RS C2 932 2500 15 Indel 0.5–1 2012 RS C2 XL 932 4300 15 Indel 0.5–1 2013 RSII C2 XL 564 4600 15 Indel 0.5–1 2014 RS II P5 C3 528 8500 13 Indel 0.5-–1 2014 RS II P6 C4 660 13,500 12 Indel 0.5–1 2016 Sequel 350 10,000 _ _ 7 2015 Oxford nanopore MinION Mk 100 1 D, 2 D 9545 12 indel/mismatch 1.5 2016 PromethION _ 9846 _ _ 2–4 Tb
aAs per the run module. B, billion; Gb, gigabytes; M, million; PE, paired end; SE, single end; Tb, terabytes.
TABLE 11.4 (Continued)Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 275
11.6 LIMITATIONS 
The major constraint of the nanopore sequencer is the relatively inferior 
reading precision when evaluated against small read sequencers. The broad 
range of existing errors is from 5 to 20%, depending upon the molecule type 
as well as library preparation techniques (Rang et al., 2018). As insertions 
and deletions are embraced in errors, per se, nanopore reads are not the finest 
to detect single-nucleotide variation (SNV). Even though SNV genotyping 
with nanopore‐sequenced reads are exhibited, high-exposure reads were 
entailed (Ebler et al., 2018), and HLA genotyping has hitches as well; it is not 
able to differentiate precise alleles because of a deficiency of read precision 
(Jain et al., 2018). Both the base‐calling algorithm and the pore chemistry 
are the depending factors to improve the precision of nanopore sequencers 
(Patel et al., 2018). The most recent R9.X nanopore is based on the E. coli 
Curlin sigma S‐dependent growth gene (Goyal et al., 2014) and is attaining 
a considerably decreased rate of error (Rang et al., 2018). A novel protein 
R10 nanopore was released in 2019, as said by the Nanopore Community 
Meeting 2018 to further advance the precision for homopolymers. Many 
tools of bioinformatics are already released that are focused or optimized for 
nanopore sequencing, and several further are in vigorous progress. Figure 
11.4 lists representative software helpful to analyze nanopore data.
FIGURE 11.4 Softwares used for nanopore data analysis.276 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
11.7 CONCLUSIONS 
To conclude, we can state that this unique technology of DNA sequencing 
has opened up a new vista in the era of modern science and technology. The 
method wraps up vast potential supremacy and scope starting from its speed, 
the minimal operating cost, to the capacity of directly recognizing bases. 
Comparative low-grade reading precision is a backdrop of this glamorous 
scientific innovation that is in the way of recovery. Interventions of poten￾tial bioinformatics tools, including the use of numerous software to work 
together with this novel technology, is definitely going to show a new path 
of success to the researchers. The actual long-term success of this unique 
discovery relies on the combined efforts of geneticists, biotechnologists, 
physicists, and chemists. 
KEYWORDS
• bioinformatics tools
• DNA extraction
• DNA nanopore sequencing principle
• sensing methods
• speed control
REFERENCES
Abiola, O.; Angel, J. M.; Avner, P.; Bachmanov, A. A.; Belknap, J. K.; Bennett, B. The Nature 
and Identification of Quantitative Trait Loci: A Community’s View. Nat. Rev. Gene. 2003,
4, 911–916.
Agah, S.; Zheng, M.; Pasquali, M.; Kolomeisky, A. B. DNA Sequencing by Nanopores: 
Advances and Challenges. J. Physics D App. Phy. 2016, 49, 413001.
Akahori, R.; Haga, T.; Hatano, T.; Yanagi, I.; Ohura, T.; Hamamura, H. Slowing Single￾Stranded DNA Translocation Through a Solid state nanopore by Decreasing the Nanopore 
Diameter. Nanotechnol. 2014, 25, 275501.
Akahori, R.; Yanagi, I.; Goto, Y.; Harada, K.; Yokoi, T.; Takeda, K. Discrimination of Three 
Types of Homopolymers in Single-stranded DNA With Solid-State Nanopores Through 
External Control of the DNA Motion. Sci. Rep. 2017, 7, 9073.
Bai, J. W.; Wang, D. Q.; Nam, S. W.; Peng, H. B.; Bruce, R.; Gignac, L. Fabrication of Sub-20 
nm Nanopore Arrays in Membranes With Embedded Metal Electrodes at Wafer Scales. 
Nanoscale 2014, 6, 8900–8906.Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 277
Branton, D.; Deamer, D. W.; Marziali, A.; Bayley, H.; Benner, S. A.; Butler, T. The Potential 
and Challenges of Nanopore Sequencing. Nat. Biotechnol. 2008, 26, 1146–1153.
Carson, S.; Wanunu, M. Challenges in DNA Motion Control and Sequence Readout Using 
Nanopore Devices. Nanotechnology 2015, 26, 074004.
Cheley, S.; Gu, L. Q.; Bayley, H. Stochastic Sensing of Nanomolar Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 
With an Engineered Pore. Chem. Biol. 2002, 9, 829–838.
Cherf, G.; Lieberman, K.; Rashid, H.; Lam, C.; Karplus, K.; Akeson, M. Automated Forward 
and Reverse Ratcheting of DNA in a Nanopore at 5-a Precision. Nat. Biotechnol. 2012, 30, 
344–348.
Dai, L.; Gao, X.; Guo, Y.; Xiao, J.; Zhang, Z. Bioinformatics Clouds for Big Data Manipulation. 
Biol. Direct. 2012, 7, 43.
Deamer, D. Daniel Branton and Freeze-Fracture Analysis of Membranes. Trend. Cell. Biol. 
1998, 8, 460–462.
Dekker, C. Solid-state Nanopores. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2002, 2, 209–915.
Derrington, I. M.; Butler, T. Z.; Collins, M. D.; Manrao, E.; Pavlenok, M.; Niederweis, 
M. Nanopore DNA Sequencing With MspA. Proceed. Nat. Acad. Sci. U S A 2002, 107,
16060–16065.
Ebler, J.; Haukness, M.; Pesout, T.; Marschall, T.; Paten, B. Haplotype-aware Genotyping 
From Noisy Long Reads. Bio. Rxiv. 2018, 293944.
Edel, J. B.; Albrecht T. Engineered Nanopores For Bioanalytical Applications. Elsevier 
Science: Amsterdam, NL, 2013.
Eisenstein, M. Oxford Nanopore Announcement Sets Sequencing Sector Abuzz. Nat. 
Biotechnol. 2012, 30, 295–296.
Feng, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Ying, C.; Wang, D.; Du, C. Nanopore‐Based Fourth‐Generation DNA 
Sequencing Technology. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2015, 13, 4–16. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.gpb.2015.01.009.
Fologea, D.; Uplinger, J.; Thomas, B.; McNabb, D. S.; Li, J. Slowing DNA Translocation in 
a Solid-State Nanopore. Nanotechnol. Lett. 2005, 5, 1734–1737.
Gao, N.; Xie, C. Experimental Demonstration of Free-Space Optical Vortex Transmutation 
With Polygonal Lenses. Optics. Lett. 2012, 37(15), 3255–3257.
Gao, N.; Li, H.; Zhu, X.; Hua, Y.; Xie, C. Quasi-Periodic Gratings: Diffraction Orders 
Accelerate Along Curves. Optics Lett. 2013, 38(15), 2829–2831.
Garaj, S.; Hubbard, W.; Reina, A.; Kong, J.; Branton, D.; Golovchenko, J. A. Graphene as a 
Subnanometre Trans-Electrode Membrane. Nature 2010, 467, 190–3.
Garalde, D. R.; Snell, E.A.; Jachimowicz, D.; Sipos, B.; Lloyd, J. H.; Bruce, M.; Serra, S. 
Highly Parallel Direct RNA Sequencing on an Array of Nanopores. Nat. Meth. 2018, 15, 
201–206. https://doi. org/10.1038/nmeth.4577
Goodwin, S.; Mcpherson, J. D.; Mccombie, W. R. Coming of Age: Ten Years of Next‐
Generation Sequencing Technologies. Nat. Rev. Gene. 2016, 17, 333–351. https://doi.
org/10.1038/nrg.2016.49
Goto, Y.; Akahori, R.; Yanagi, I.; Takeda, K. Solid-State Nanopores Towards Single-Molecule 
DNA Sequencing. J. Human Gene. 2019. https://doi.org/10.1038/s10038-019-0655-8
Goto, Y.; Haga, T.; Yanagi, I.; Yokoi, T.; Takeda, K. Deceleration of Single-Stranded DNA 
Passing Through A Nanopore Using a Nanometre-Sized Bead Structure. Sci. Rep. 2015,
5, 16640. 278 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Goyal, P.; Krasteva, P. V.; Van Gerven, N.; Gubellini, F.; Van den Broeck, I.; Troupiotis‐
Tsaïlaki, A.; Chapman, M.R. Structural and Mechanistic Insights into the Bacterial Amyloid 
Secretion Channel CsgG. Nature 2014, 516, 250–253. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13768
Guasch, A.; Pous, J.; Ibarra, B.; Gomis-Ruth, F. X.; Valpuesta, J.M.; Sousa, N. Detailed 
Architecture of a DNA Translocating Machine: The High-Resolution Structure Of The 
Bacteriophage Phi 29 Connector Particle. J. Molecul. Biol. 2002, 315, 663–76. 
Haque, F.; Li, J.H.; Wu, H. C.; Liang, X. J.; Guo, P. X. Solid-State and Biological Nanopore 
for Real-Time Sensing of Single Chemical and Sequencing of DNA. Nano Today 2013, 8, 
56–74
Heng, J. B.; Ho, C.; Kim, T.; Timp, R.; Aksimentiev, A.; Grinkova, Y.V. Sizing DNA Using a 
Nanometer-Diameter Pore. Biophys. J. 2004, 87, 2905–11.
Howorka, S.; Cheley, S.; Bayley, H. Sequence-Specific Detection of Individual DNA Strands 
Using Engineered Nanopores. Nat. Biotechnol. 2001, 19, 636–639.
Huang, S.; Romero-Ruiz, M.; Castell, O. K.; Bayley, H.; Wallace, M.I. High-Throughput 
Optical Sensing of Nucleic Acids in a Nanopore Array. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2015, 10, 986.
Iqbal, S. M.; Akin, D.; Bashir, R. Solid-State Nanopore Channels With DNA Selectivity. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2007, 2, 243–248.
Iqbal, S. M.; Bashir, R. Nanopores: Sensing And Fundamental Biological Interactions. 
Springer: Heidelberg, 2011.
Jain, M.; Koren, S.; Miga, K. H.; Quick, J.; Rand, A. C.; Sasani, T. A.; Dilthey, A. T. Nanopore 
Sequencing and Assembly of a Human Genome With Ultra‐Long Reads. Nat. Biotechnol. 
2018, 36, 338–345. https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.4060
Jain, M.; Olsen, H. E.; Paten, B.; Akeson, M. The Oxford NanoporeMinION: Delivery of 
Nanopore Sequencing to the Genom‐ ics Community. Genome. Biol. 2016, 17, 239. https://
doi.org/10.1186/ s13059-016-1103-0
Kang, X. F.; Gu, L. Q.; Cheley, S.; Bayley, H. Single Protein Pores Containing Molecular 
Adapters at High Temperatures. Ang. Chem. Int. Ed. 2005, 44(10), 1495–1499.
Karin, H.; Hege, V. A. DNA Extraction of Microbial DNA Directly From Infected Tissue: An 
Optimized Protocol for use In Nanopore Sequencing. Sci. Rep. 2010, 10, 2985.
Kathryn, D.; Maximilian, W. S.; Harmeet, S. C.; Rod, S.; Björn, U. Oxford Nanopore 
Sequencing: New Opportunities for Plant Genomics. J. Exp. Bot. 2020, 71(18), 5313–5322.
Kchouk, M.; Gibrat, J. F.; Elloumi, M. Generations of Sequencing Technologies: From First 
to Next Generation. Biol. Med. 2017, 9, 395. DOI: 10.4172/0974-8369.1000395.
Kowalczyk, S. W.; Wells, D. B.; Aksimentiev, A.; Dekker, C. Slowing Down DNA 
Translocation Through a Nanopore in Lithium Chloride. Nanotechnol. Lett. 2012, 12, 
1038–1044. 
Kwok, H.; Briggs, K.; Tabard-Cossa, V. Nanopore Fabrication by Controlled Dielectric 
Breakdown. PLoS One 2014, 9, e92880.
Laszlo, A. H.; Derrington, I. M.; Ross, B. C.; Brinkerhoff, H.; Adey, A.; Nova, I. C. Decoding 
Long Nanopore Sequencing Reads of Natural DNA. Nat. Biotechnol. 2014, 32, 829–833.
Lee, T. J.; Guo, P.X. Interaction of gp16 with pRNA and DNA for Genome Packaging by the 
Motor of Bacterial Virus Phi29. J. Molecul. Biol. 2006, 356, 589–599.
Li, J.; Stein, D.; McMullan, C.; Branton, D.; Aziz, M. J.; Golovchenko, J. A. Ion-Beam 
Sculpting at Nanometre Length Scales. Nature 2001, 412, 166–169.
Liang, F.; Zhang, P. Nanopore DNA Sequencing: Are we there yet? Sci. Bullet. 2015, 60(3), 
296–303.Nanopore DNA Sequencing: A New Era for Crop Improvement 279
Lindsay, S. The Promises and Challenges of Solid-State Sequencing. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2016,
11, 109–111.
Liu, S.; Zhao, Q.; Xu, J.; Yan, K.; Peng, H. L.; Yang, F.H. Fast and Controllable Fabrication 
of Suspended Graphene Nanopore Devices. Nanotechnology 2012, 23, 6.
Manrao, E. A.; Derrington, I. M.; Laszlo, A. H.; Langford, K. W.; Hopper, M. K.; Gillgren, 
N. Reading DNA at Single-Nucleotide Resolution With a Mutant MspAnanoporeand phi29 
DNA Polymerase. Nat. Biotechnol. 2012, 30, 349–353.
Meller, A. Dynamics of Polynucleotide Transport Through Nanometre-Scale Pores. J. Phy. 
Condensed Matter 2003, 15(17), R581.
Menestrina, J.; Yang, C.; Schiel, M.; Vlassiouk, I.; Siwy, Z. S. Charged Particles Modulate 
Local Ionic Concentrations and Cause Formation of Positive Peaks in resistive-Pulse-Based 
Detection. J. Phys. Chem. 2014, 118(5), 2391–2398.
Mikheyev, A. S.; Tin, M. Y. A First Look at the Oxford NanoporeMinION Sequencer. Mol. 
Ecol. Res. 2014, 14, 1097–1102.
Nelson, T.; Zhang, B.; Prezhdo, O. V. Detection of Nucleic Acids With Graphene Nanopores: 
ab Initio Characterization Of A Novel Sequencing Device. Nano Lett. 2010, 10(9), 
3237–3242.
Patel, A.; Belykh, E.; Miller, E. J.; George, L. L.; Martirosyan, N. L.; Byvaltsev, V. A.; Preul, 
M. C. MinION Rapid Sequencing: Review of Potential Applications in Neurosurgery. Surg. 
Neurol. Int. 2018, 9, 157.
Pennisi, E. Search for Pore-Fection. Science 2012, 336, 534.
Pungetmongkol, P. Speculation of Nano-gap Sensor for DNA Sequencing Technology: A 
Review on Synthetic Nanopores. Eng. J. 2018, 22(6), 229–250.
Quick, J.; Ashton, P.; Calus, S.; Chatt, C.; Gossain, S.; Hawker, J.; Loman, N. J. Rapid 
Draft Sequencing and Real-Time Nanopore Sequencing in a Hospital Outbreak of 
Salmonella. Genome Biol. 2015, 16(1), 1–14.
Quick, J.; Grubaugh, N. D.; Pullan, S. T.; Claro, I. M.; Smith, A. D.; Gangavarapu, K.; Loman, 
N. J. Multiplex PCR Method for MinION and Illumina Sequencing of Zika and Other Virus 
Genomes Directly From Clinical Samples. Nat. Protocols. 2017, 12(6), 1261.
Quick, J.; Loman, N. J.; Duraffour, S.; Simpson, J. T.; Severi, E.; Cowley, L.; Carroll, M. W. 
Real-time, Portable Genome Sequencing For Ebola Surveillance. Nature 2016, 530(7589), 
228–232.
Quick, J.; Quinlan, A.; Loman, N. A reference bacterial genome dataset generated on the 
MinIONTM portable single-molecule nanopore sequencer. Giga. Sci. 2014, 3, 22.
Rang, F. J.; Kloosterman, W. P.; De Ridder, J. From Squiggle to Basepair: Computational 
Approaches for Improving Nanopore Sequencing Read Accuracy. Genome Biol. 2018, 19, 
90. https://doi. org/10.1186/s13059-018-1462-9
Schadt, E. E.; Turner, S.; Kasarskis, A. A Window Into Third‐ Generation Sequencing. Human 
Molecul. Gene. 2010, 19, R227–R240.https://doi.org/10.1093/hmg/ddq416
Simpson, J. T.; Workman, R. E.; Zuzarte, P. C.; David, M.; Dursi, L. J.; Timp, W. Detecting 
DNA Cytosine Methylation Using Nanopore Sequencing. Nat. Methods 2017, 14, 407–410. 
https://doi. org/10.1038/nmeth.4184
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova. Sci. Publishers, Inc., 2020; 
vol 1, pp 73–100. 280 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Singh, A., Rajput, V., Singh, A., Sengar, R., Singh, R. and Minkina, T. Transformation 
Techniques and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. Policy 
Issues Genetically Modified Crops 2021, 1, 515–542.
Song, L. Z.; Hobaugh, M. R.; Shustak, C.; Cheley, S.; Bayley, H.; Gouaux, J.E. Structure of 
Staphylococcal Alpha-Hemolysin, a Heptameric Transmembrane Pore. Science 1996, 274, 
1859–1866.
Squires, A. H.; Hersey, J. S.; Grinstaff, M. W.; Meller, A. A Nanoporenanofiber Mesh 
Biosensor to Control DNA Translocation. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135,16304–16307. 
Storm, A. J.; Chen, J. H.; Ling, X. S.; Zandbergen, H. W.; Dekker, C. Fabrication of Solid￾State Nanopores With Single–Nanometre Precision. Nat. Mater. 2003, 2, 537–540.
Tang, Z.; Liang, Z.; Lu, B.; Li, J.; Hu, R.; Zhao, Q. Gel Mesh as “Brake” to Slow Down DNA 
Translocation Through Solid-State Nanopores. Nanoscale 2015, 7, 13207–13214.
Traversi, F.; Raillon, C.; Benameur, S. M.; Liu, K.; Khlybov, S.; Tosun, M. Detecting 
the Translocation of DNA Through a Nanopore Using Graphene Nanoribbons. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2013, 8, 939–945.
Venkatesan, B. M.; Bashir, R. Nanopore sensors for nucleic acid analysis. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011, 6, 615–624.
Venkatesan, B. M.; Dorvel, B.; Yemenicioglu, S.; Watkins, N.; Petrov, I.; Bashir, R. Highly 
Sensitive, Mechanically Stable Nanopore Sensors for DNA Analysis. Adv. Mat. 2009, 21, 
2771.
Verschueren, D. V.; Jonsson, M. P.; Dekker, C. Temperature Dependence of DNA 
Translocations Through Solid-State Nanopores. Nanotechnology 2015, 26, 234004.
Wang, Y.; Yang, Q.; Wang, Z. The Evolution of Nanopore Sequencing. Front. Gene. 2014,
5, 449.
Wanunu, M. Nanopores: A Journey Towards DNA Sequencing. Phy. Life. Rev. 2012, 9(2), 
125–158.
Wanunu, M.; Sutin, J.; McNally, B.; Chow, A.; Meller, A. DNA Translocation Governed by 
Interactions With Solid-State Nanopores. Biophys. J. 2008, 95, 4716–4725.
Wendell, D.; Jing, P.; Geng, J.; Subramaniam, V.; Lee, T.J.; Montemagno, C. Translocation of 
Double-Stranded DNA Through Membrane-Adapted Phi29 Motor Protein Nanopores. Nat. 
Nanotechnol. 2009, 4, 765–772.
Yang, Y.; Liu, R.; Xie, H.; Hui, Y.; Jiao, R.; Gong, Y.; Zhang, Y. Advances in Nanopore 
Sequencing Technology. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2013, 13(7), 4521–4538.
Yanxiao, F.; Yuechuan, Z.; Cuifeng, Y.; Deqiang, W.; Chunlei, D. Nanopore-Based Fourth 
Generation DNA Sequencing Technology. Genomics Proteomics Bioinformatics 2015, 13, 
4–16.
Yoshida, H.; Goto, Y.; Akahori, R.; Tada, Y.; Terada, S.; Komura, M. Slowing the 
Translocation of Single-stranded DNA by Using Nano-Cylindrical Passage Self-Assembled 
by Amphiphilic Block Copolymers. Nanoscale 2016, 8, 18270–18276.
Yusko, E. C.; Johnson, J. M.; Majd, S.; Prangkio, P.; Rollings, R. C.; Li, J. L. Controlling 
Protein Translocation Through Nanopores With Bio-Inspired Fluid Walls. Nat. Nanotechnol. 
2011, 6, 253–260.Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop 
Production and Pest Management
ZAHRA GHORBANZADEH1
, RASMIEH HAMID2
, 
MOHAMMAD REZA GHAFFARI1
, BAHADOR MALEKNIA3
, 
RUKAM S. TOMAR4
, and FEBA JACOB THOPPURATHU5
1
Department of Systems Biology, Agricultural Biotechnology Research 
Institute of Iran (ABRII), Agricultural Research Education and Extension 
Organization (AREEO), Karaj, Iran.
2
Cotton Research Institute of Iran (CRII), Agricultural Research, 
Education and Extension Organization (AREEO), Gorgan, Iran
3
Department of Entomology, Faculty of Agriculture, Tarbiat Modares 
University, Tehran, Iran
4
Department of Biotechnology, Junagadh Agricultural University, 
Junagadh, Gujarat, India
5
Centre for Plant Biotechnology and Molecular Biology, Kerala 
Agricultural University, Thrissur, India
CHAPTER 12
ABSTRACT
In this century, most agriculture products are grown by using various pesti￾cides and fertilizers but only a small portion of pesticides applied to crops 
reach the target pest and most of these chemicals enter the environment and 
kill non-target living things more than pests. Sustainable agriculture is an eco￾friendly option and reduces the negative effects of conventional agriculture, 282 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
as it protects both human and the environment from these unknown risks by 
using sustainable methods, such as crop protection, integrated pest manage￾ment (IPM), and biotechnological methods. In cases where the produc￾tion of organic crops is impossible, biotechnological programs would be 
appropriate strategies for food safety in integrated crop management (ICM) 
programs. However, integrated pest management methods have been devel￾oped worldwide, recently improvement of IPM is more than before required. 
The use of biotechnological methods to create resistant plants can enhance 
integrated pest management efficiency. A major improvement will come 
from a new cultivar with different levels of resistance to pests. Classical 
breeding for increased host plant resistance needs more time and special 
labor-intensive technique. Recent molecular methods have opened up new 
opportunities for pest control by providing access to novel pathways, the 
accessibility for changing the quality and quantity of expression of genes, 
and the development of transgenic crops with pesticide genes. Then, there 
are several biotechnological strategies for increasing plant resistance such 
as enhanced direct resistance against pests, a transgenic plant that promotes 
natural enemies’ demography parameters, incorporating transgenic plants in 
IPM, effects of transgenic varieties on beneficial organisms, side effects of 
genes expression in plant resistance, and the others. In this chapter, we will 
discuss about the use of biotechnological methods to develop insect-resistant 
transgenic plants as a novel method to integrating pest management.
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
Pest management is one of the most important strategies of increasing crop 
production, currently an estimated 15% of total agricultural production 
were losses by pests (Singh et al., 2020a). Using pesticides to decrease 
damage of insect pest, disease, and weeds has resulted in side effects to the 
beneficial organisms, accumulation of pesticide residues in the tritrophic 
levels. In pest management, it is necessary to use target-specific compounds 
with the low persistence. An increase in using integrated pest management 
(IPM) strategies, and development of alternative technologies that will 
allow a logical use of pesticides for sustainable agriculture production are 
needed (Singh et al., 2021a). Natural enemies, biopesticides, natural plant 
products, pest-resistant varieties, and genetic engineering methods offer a 
potentially safe method of managing insect pests’ damages. The application 
of biotechnology can develop plants that are resistant to drought, insect pest, Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 283
weeds, and diseases (Rajput et al., 2021a). Crop cultivars derived through 
biotechnological methods can play a pivotal role in IPM in different crops 
and cropping systems. This transgenic plant with different insecticidal genes 
can be exploited for sustainable crop production in the future (Singh et al., 
2021b). Manipulation of plants with resistance to insects pests and disease 
mixed with biocontrol agents decreased using pesticides and also reduces 
farmer’s costs while benefiting community health programs (Rajput et al., 
2021b). 
Several projects have been done on genome sequencing of model organ￾isms, such as human, yeast (Piškur and Langkjær, 2004), Caenorhabditis 
elegans White (Duggan et al., 1998), Arabidopsis thaliana (L.) Heynh. 
(Burrell et al., 2011), and rice, Oryza sativa L. (Palevitz, 2000) in the last 
decade. This provided valuable information on gene, genome organization 
and function pathway, and has updated our understanding of crop produc￾tion, and ability to manipulate traits for increase crop productivity (Iglesias 
et al., 2000). Such an information can improve our understanding of plant 
biology, and thus our ability to extract genomic information in agriculture 
productions. Recombinant genetic technologies, besides generating data on 
gene sequences and function pathways, is helpful to identifcation of specifc 
chromosomal regions carrying genes to choosing the traits of economic 
interest (Karp et al., 1997). The improvement of genetic maps in diferent 
numbers of species has led to the realization of positional similarity of maps 
across species. This information will allow advances made in one species 
genetic traits, easily applicable to other species genetic traits (Gale and 
Devos, 1998). When a high level of same sequences is detected between an 
expressed sequence tags and a gene of known pathway in another species, 
it is possible to understand the gene function in the species of interest traits. 
However, the emphatic explanation of gene function still needs experimental 
verifcation.
Using of biotechnology methods is an important prerequisite for sustain￾able and economic use of biotechnology for making new crop with traits of 
economic interest. Genetic resistance to insects has been inserted into main 
crop plants, such as maize, cotton, potato, tobacco, rice, broccoli, lettuce, 
walnuts, apple, alfalfa, and soybean. A number of transgenic crops have now 
been released for on-farm production or feld testing (Cranston, 2010). The 
increase of conventional breeding with the use of marker-assisted selection 
and manipulate plants promises to comfort substantial increases in agricul￾ture crops production. However, knowledge of the physiology and biochem￾istry of plants will be very important for explicating the information from 284 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
molecular markers and concluded new and more efective models in plant 
breeding methods. The application of DNA marker methods in activating the 
vast and huge under-utilized pool of suitable alleles existing in the wild rela￾tives of agriculture crops will increase a huge new resource of genetic difer￾ence to fuel the next phase of crop economic trait improvement. Specifcally, 
enormous benefts will be taken through the transfer of economic trait genes 
important for crop protection and crop quality. However, rapid and cost￾efective improvement, and adoption of biotechnology-derived products will 
depend on improving a full realizing of the interaction of trait within their 
genomic environment, and with the environment in which their admitted 
phenotype trait must interact.
12.2 MAKING RESISTANCE PLANT FOR PESTS CONTROL 
(MECHANISMS)
It is difficult to control several insect species through currently available 
insecticides because of pest resistance to insecticides, which has renewed 
our interests in the development of insect-resistant cultivars for pest manage￾ment (Abrol and Shankar, 2015). Production of varieties that are resistant to 
insects has not been as rapid as for disease resistance. Most timely progress 
in developing resistant plant cultivars has been mainly due to the difficulties 
involved in ensuring adequate insect infestation for resistance screening in 
addition to low levels of resistance to certain insect species in the cultivated 
plants (Cook et al., 2007). However, even if 90% of the insects are killed 
when farmers use high dose of insecticides, the remaining population 
multiplies at a much faster rate in the absence of natural enemies, which are 
killed by the insecticides (Samways, 2007), which finally results in failure 
of control operations and environmental pollution. The most effective and 
safe strategy for pest management is to use selective insecticides at a low 
dosage in combination with plant resistance to reduce the rate of evolution 
of insecticide-resistant insect populations (Fathipour et al., 2020). Making a 
resistant plant for pest control through conventional breeding, wide hybrid￾ization, marker-assisted selection, and genetic transformation will signifi￾cantly contribute to sustainable agriculture and environmental conservation. 
Varieties with adequate rates of resistance to insect pests will provide safer 
farm environments and produce sustainable pest management tool.
The plants that were resistant to insect pests survived until crop harvest 
where the herbivore pressure resulted in plant mortality, or their proportion Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 285
decreased over time where the herbivore pressure did not result in plant 
mortality. This process led to natural selection of plants with resistance to 
several kinds of stresses prevalent in an ecosystem. Because of this uninten￾tional but continuous selection of resistance plants to insect pests, diferent 
varieties with resistance to insects were selected by the farmers (Sharma 
and Ruud, 2003). Resistance of plants to insects enables a plant to avoid or 
inhibit host selection, oviposition, and feeding, reduce insect survival, retard 
development, and tolerate or recover from injury from insect populations 
that would otherwise cause greater damage to other genotypes of the same 
species under similar environmental conditions (Cockbain, 1961). The ability 
of plants to resist insect damage is based on morphological and biochemical 
characteristics of the plants, which afect the behavior and biology of insects, 
and thus infuence the extent of damage caused by the insect pests. Wild 
species of crops are important sources of genes for plant resistance to biotic 
and abiotic constraints. Host plant resistance sources will play an important 
role in the application of tools of biotechnology for integrated crop manage￾ment and sustainable crop production.
There are several kinds of resistances: (1) Pseudoresistance or false 
resistance through avoidance of insect infestation; (2) Constitutive resistance 
is due to physicochemical characteristics of the host plant that afect the 
host selection and feeding behavior, survival, development, and fecundity 
of insect pests; (3) Inducible resistance is due to the infuence of tempera￾ture, photoperiod, plant–water potential, chemicals, and pathogen or insect 
damage on nutritional quality of the target plant; (4) Associate resistance can 
be created in the presence of resistant or non-resistance plants in the vicinity 
that damage resistant cultivars.
Induced resistance is a mechanism against insect pests in response to 
extrinsic physical or chemical stimuli. Chemically induced expression 
systems or “gene switches” created by temporal, spatial, and quantitative 
control of genes inserted into target plants or those that are already present 
in the host plants to impart resistance to insects. In transgenic crops, this 
approach has provided opportunities for the management of development of 
resistance in insect pest populations. In addition to insect or pathogen attack, 
resistance can also be developed by suboptimal concentration that caused 
resistance to various insect pests and pathogens. Induced resistance against 
E. varivestis lasted 3 days after damage in soybean (Dermody et al., 2008). 
Proteinase inhibitors and oxidative enzymes, such as polyphenol oxidase, 
peroxidase, and lipoxygenase persist for at least 21 days after induction in 
damaged tomato leafets (Cho and Park, 2000)286 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
12.3 ABIOTIC FACTOR AFFECTED RESISTANCE
Several climatic and edaphic factors influence the level and nature of plant 
resistant to insect pests, such as physiological characteristics that are influ￾enced by the environmental factors. Moisture stress alters the plant’s reaction 
to insect damage, leading either to an increase or decrease in susceptibility 
to insect pests. Reproduction rates of Aphis fabae (Scop.) populations are 
decreased on water-stressed plants (Rivelli et al., 2013). High levels of water 
stress also reduce damage by sorghum shoot fly, A. soccata (Chamarthi et 
al., 2011). High humidity increases the detection of odors, and thus, may 
influence host finding by the insects. In cotton, frequent irrigation increases 
vegetative growth and subsequent damage by H. armigera (Bass et al., 2015).
Nutrients play a major role in plant resistance to insect pests. In some 
instances, high levels of nutrients increase the level of plant resistance to 
insects, and in others, they may increase the susceptibility. Application of 
nitrogenous fertilizers decreases the damage by shoot fy, A. soccata, and 
spotted stem borer, C. partellus, in sorghum (Kumar et al., 1996). Application 
of potash decreases the incidence of the top borer Scirpophaga excerptalis
(Walker) in sugarcane. High levels of nitrogen lead to greater damage by the 
cotton jassid, A. biguttula biguttula (Crowder et al., 2010).
Temperature-induced stress changes the levels of biochemicals, enzymes, 
morphological defenses, or nutritional quality of the host plant. Temperature 
afects not only the plant growth, but also the biology, behavior, and popula￾tion dynamics of the insect pest, therefore, this abiotic factor is one of the 
most important factors that impressed the behavioral and physiological inter￾actions of insects and their host plants (Davies et al., 2012). In general, low 
temperatures have a negative efect on plant resistance to insects (Jönsson et 
al., 2009). In sorghum, expression of plant resistance to sorghum midge, S. 
sorghicola is infuenced by temperature and the relative humidity (Sharma 
et al., 2003). There is signifcant variation in the impact of temperature on 
expression of resistance to insect pests, and such interactions need to be kept 
in mind while identifying sources of resistance to target insects for use in 
crop improvement programs.
Photoperiod infuences plant growth and physicochemical characteristics 
of crop plants which in turn efects the interaction between insects and crop 
plants. Failure or inability to grow certain crop plants during the of season 
at times is largely associated with increased susceptibility to insects and 
diseases. Intensity and quality of light impacts the biosynthesis of phenyl￾propanoids (Hahlbrock and Grisebach, 1979) and anthocyanins (Smith et Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 287
al., 1981). Prolonged exposure to high-intensity light induces susceptibility 
in PI 227687 soybean plants to the cabbage looper, Trichoplusia ni (Hubner) 
(otherwise resistant) (Cloonan, 2013). Susceptibility in sorghum to midge, 
S. sorghicola, increases under long day length in Kenya near the Equator 
(Sharma and Lavanya, 2002). 
12.4 EFFECTS OF HOST PLANTS RESISTANCE IN INSECT 
POPULATION
The insect damage is determined by economic injury levels (EILs) that is 
used for the determination of the levels of host plant resistance. Studies on 
the effect of insect-resistant cultivars on EILs will also be useful in assessing 
the contribution of insect-resistant germ plasm in regulating pest populations, 
avoiding excessive insecticide use, and in determining the levels of insect 
resistance needed in the newly developed cultivars, as well as the effective￾ness of insect-resistant cultivars in IPM for sustainable crop production. In 
the case of insects, in which the damage is limited to a particular stage and 
a short span of time (e.g., deadheart formation due to sorghum shoot fly), a 
cultivar can be planted up to a period when insect density is expected to be 
below EIL. If EIL is based on adults, which is a nondamaging stage of the 
insect (e.g., sorghum midge adults or number of Helicoverpa or Spodoptera 
moths caught in pheromone or light traps), the levels of EIL are depended 
to increase or decrease in the levels of insect resistance. One of the first 
and most important adjustments to crop management recommendations, is 
associated with the economic thresholds or action thresholds in relation to 
host plant resistance (Allison and Martiny, 2008). In some cases, there are 
several cultivars of a crop with different levels of resistance. Experimental 
and empirical data should be generated to determine the level of resistance of 
a cultivar, which is critical in deciding the nature and timing of the interven￾tion (insecticide application or release of natural enemies) needed to suppress 
an increasing pest population.
12.5 HOST PLANT RESISTANCE TO HELP IPM
Host plant resistance (HPR) as a method of insect control in the context of 
IPM has a greater potential than any other method of pest suppression. In 
general, the use of insect-resistant varieties is not subjected to the vagaries 
of nature, unlike chemical and biological control methods. HPR along with 288 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
natural enemies and cultural practices is an important component of any 
pest management strategy (Olaitan et al., 2017; Sharma et al., 2009). Plant 
resistance as a method of pest control offers many advantages, and in other 
cases, it is the only practical and effective method of pest management. 
However, there may be some problems if we rely exclusively on plant 
resistance for insect control, for example, high levels of resistance may be 
associated with low yield potential or undesirable quality traits, and resis￾tance may not be expressed in every environment where a variety is grown. 
Therefore, insect-resistant varieties need to be carefully fitted into the pest 
management programs in different agroecosystems. The nature of deploy￾ment, alone or together with other methods of insect control, depends on 
the level and mechanisms of resistance, and the cropping system (Kennedy 
et al., 1987). 
High levels of plant resistance are available against the management of 
several insect species and only a few insect species can be controlled by 
using resistant varieties alone. Varieties with low-to-moderate levels of pest 
resistance or those that can avoid insect damage can be deployed for pest 
management in combination with other components of pest management. 
Deployment of insect-resistant cultivars should be aimed at conservation of 
the natural enemies and minimizing the number of insecticide applications. 
Use of insect-resistant cultivars also improves the efciency of other pest 
management practices, including the synthetic insecticides.
The benefts of host plant resistance depend on the pattern of insect 
invasion, for example, many insects, such as aphids, whitefies, and mites, 
invade the crop in low numbers, and their abundance increases over several 
generations before reaching the economic threshold levels. For such insects, 
even low levels of antixenotic and antibiotic resistance would be useful 
in delaying the time required to reach the damaging levels. However, for 
insects that invade a crop in large numbers due to immigration, such as 
Heliothis/Helicoverpa and the armyworms M. separata, Spodoptera exempta
(Walker), and S. frugiperda, grass hoppers, and locusts, the efects of HPR 
in suppressing insect populations and damage may not be apparent in the 
frst few generations. When the two types of resistances are combined, the 
insect would take 32 generations to overcome the antibiotic resistance, and 
over 100 generations to overcome the antixenotic resistance. The infuence 
of insect-resistant varieties on insect populations can be demonstrated by 
making use of the simple insect models of Knipling (1979) as adopted by 
Adkisson and Dyck (1980).Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 289
12.6 USING BIOLOGICAL CONTROL AGENTS IN COMBINATION 
WITH HOST PLANT RESISTANCE 
Plant resistance and biological control are the key components of integrated 
pest management. generally, is compatible with the natural enemies for pest 
management. Varieties with moderate levels of resistance that allow the 
insect densities to remain below economic threshold levels are best suited 
for use in pest management in combination with natural enemies. The natural 
enemies not only help in controlling the target pests, but also help in reducing 
the population densities of other insects within their host range (Sharma and 
Ortiz, 2002). Insect-resistant varieties also increase the effectiveness of the 
natural enemies because of a favorable ratio between the densities of the 
target pest and its natural enemies. Such a combination is more effective in 
crops with a tolerance mechanism of resistance (Després et al., 2007). The 
use of HPR and biological control brings together unrelated mortality factors 
and thus reduces the insect population’s genetic response to selection pressure 
from either plant resistance or from the natural enemies. Acting in concert, 
they provide a density-independent mortality at times of low insect density, 
and density-dependent mortality at times of pest abundance (Bergman and 
Tingey, 1979). In addition to the direct and indirect effects of plant resistance 
on insect pests, the selection pressure imposed by natural enemies can also 
result in the magnification of the effects of plant resistance on insect density 
(van Emden, 1995). In general, the rate of insect adaptation to a resistant 
cultivar is lower when the suppression is achieved by the combined action of 
plant resistance and natural enemies than by high levels of plant resistance 
alone (Gould et al., 1991). Restless behavior of the insects on the resistant 
varieties also increases their vulnerability to the natural enemies (Johnson 
et al., 1997). A prolonged developmental period of the immature stages also 
increases the susceptibility period of the target insect species to the natural 
enemies or result in synchronization of the insect developmental stages with 
the peak activity and abundance of the natural enemies. 
Biological control processes involve the tritrophic interactions between 
the plants, the target pests, and the natural enemies. A synergism between 
plant resistance and biological control is a valuable phenomenon in the 
development of practical insect pest management. These interactions are not 
limited to the impact of plant chemicals on the target insect and the efect of 
insect ftness on natural enemies, but also include the direct efects of plants 
on the natural enemies. The physical or chemical characteristics of the host 
plant that infuences the activity and abundance of natural enemies can be 290 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
used for producing resistance plants. It is very likely that plants have evolved 
mechanisms to attract the natural enemies to reduce the extent of insect 
damage, for example, the female parasitoid wasp, Campoletis sonorensis
(Cam.) responds to the volatiles of cotton plant over a short distance, while 
searching for its prey, H. virescens. It is easier for the wasp to fnd the host 
habitat frst and then the prey within the vicinity of the host plant. Tobacco, 
cotton, and maize plants produce distinct volatile blends in response to 
damage by H. virescens and H. zea (Delphia et al., 2007). Therefore, the 
nature of insect–host plant interactions is critical in determining the extent 
of parasitization by the natural enemies. This type of strategy is compatible 
with biological control (Rodriguez-Saona et al., 2012). In contrast, secondary 
compounds of plants such as tomatine in the insect host’s diet may afect the 
parasitization. In other cases, changes in host suitability due to the insect 
host’s diet can infuence the developmental rate, size, survival, parasitization 
success, sex ratio, fecundity, and life span of the parasitoids (Fatouros et al., 
2008).
Plant characteristics can also be manipulated to increase the efectiveness 
of the natural enemies. For example, the hairiness of cucumbers interferes 
with the biological control of the greenhouse whitefy, Trialeurodes vapo￾rariorum (West.) by Encarsia formosa (Gahan). Movement of E. formosa
is 30% higher on cucumber hybrids with half the number of hairs (van 
Lenteren et al., 1995). Similarly, development of pigeonpea lines without 
glandular trichomes may lead to greater parasitization of H. armigera eggs 
by Trichogramma spp. (Sharma, H.C., unpublished). Brussels sprouts with 
glossy leaves are more attractive to aphid predators than the cultivars with 
waxy foliage (Eigenbrode, 2004), while predation by Hippodamia conver￾gens (G.M.) on adults of Plutella xylostella (L.) larvae is signifcantly greater 
on lines with glossy leaves compared with lines with normal wax in Brassica 
oleracea L. Therefore, new works should be made to identify insect-resistant 
genotypes that are compatible or hospitable to the natural enemies.
12.7 USING CULTURAL CONTROL IN COMBINATION WITH HOST 
PLANT RESISTANCE
Cultural practices cause specific physiological changes that reduce the 
suitability of host plants for phytophagous insects (Hare and Andreadis, 
1983). Most of these practices are compatible with other pest control 
tactics, including host plant resistance, and have long been associated with Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 291
subsistence farming. Insect-resistant cultivars, including those that can 
escape pest damage are highly useful in pest management in combination 
with cultural practices. This will have the same effect on the population 
dynamics of the pest species in question as the combined action of insecti￾cides and insect-resistant cultivars. Cultural control by itself may not reduce 
the pest populations below economic threshold levels, but aids in reducing 
the losses through interaction with plant resistance (Tamhane et al., 2007). 
Plant resistance in concert with cultural control can drastically reduce the 
need for insecticide application. For example, late planting of sorghum culti￾vars M 35-1 and Phule Yashoda resistant to shoot fly, A. soccata, can reduce 
the dead heart formation substantially during the post-rainy season. Cultural 
control is a powerful tool to suppress insect pests in different agroecosystems. 
This technique involves two basic approaches: making the environment less 
favorable to the pest or making the environment more favorable to the pest’s 
natural enemies.
Insect-resistant varieties in combination with early-planting, early￾maturity, defoliation, destruction of stalks, and deep ploughing can be 
used efectively to control boll weevil, Anthonomus grandis (Boh.) and 
bollworms, H. virescens, and P. gossypiella, in cotton (Tefera et al., 2016). 
This not only reduces the pest damage but also decreases the over-wintering 
populations of these pests, and thus results in reduced crop loss in the 
following seasons. The nectarless cotton varieties reduce pink bollworm 
infestation by 50%, and this in combination with cultural practices can 
reduce the pink bollworm infestation by 16-fold. Through careful planning, 
the cropping pattern can be adjusted such that the most susceptible stage of 
the crop avoids the peak periods of insect activity. A combination of plant 
resistance and short-duration cotton varieties has been quite efective for 
controlling the bollworms (Slosser et al., 1989). Short-season and rapid￾fruiting cotton varieties mature 2–3 weeks earlier than the long-duration 
varieties. Early harvest coupled with area-wide stalk destruction reduces 
the over-wintering population of diapausing insects by 90% (Stoner, 1996). 
Such a system not only suppresses the pest population but also restores 
the biological control and signifcantly reduces the need for insecticide 
application.
Genetic diversity, through its infuence on herbivores and on the natural 
enemies, can play a key role in pest management. Polyculture (growing more 
than one crop in the same area) is one way of increasing crop diversity. 
Polycultures are ecologically complex because of interspecifc and intraspe￾cifc competition with the insects and the natural enemies. Elimination of 292 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
alternate habitats leads to decreased biological control agents populations and 
an increase in insect pest abundance (Southwood, 1977). Polyculture farms 
frequently have lower population densities of insect pests (Gadanakis et al., 
2015) because of associational resistance levels or resource available, and 
the distinct action of natural enemies (Russell, 1989). Specialist biological 
agents are generally less abundant in diverse natural habitats because of low 
concentration of their food in the habitat and increased activity of biological 
control agents. Plant diversity may also provide important resources for 
the natural enemies, such as alternative prey, nectar, pollen, and breeding 
sites. In diverse plant communities, a specialist predator or parasitoid is less 
successful to fnd its host because of the mixing and confusing or confusing 
efects of chemical stimuli from the nonhost plants, several physical barriers 
to movement for searching behavior, and changes in the environmental 
conditions of the target insect pests. Frequently, insect survival items are 
lower in polyculture farms than in the monoculture farms (Hall and Matos, 
2010)
Insect pests or other organisms attracted to trap crops caused decrease in 
pest attraction on the target crop. Preventing from pest damage is achieved 
either by reduction in insect pests from infesting the target crop or steering 
them in a certain part of the feld where they can be easily feeding. The 
truth is similar to associational plant resistance, in which the insect pests 
show a frequent feeding preference for certain plant species, cultivars, or a 
certain part of the crop. Crop stands can be manipulated in time and space 
so that attractive host plants are ofered to the insect pests at a critical stage 
of insect development. The insects attract at the special part on the trap crop, 
and as a result, for control, the main crop does not need to be treated with 
insecticides in several time and species and thus the natural control agents of 
insect pests remain safe and operational in most of the feld. Trap cropping 
system is one of the most important methods in subsistence farming in the 
developing countries, and using this method in cotton and soybean has been 
very successful (Sparks and Nauen, 2015). 
Crop susceptibility to diferent insect pests changes with the amount 
and type of fertilizers applied. Therefore, care should be taken to apply 
appropriate combinations of nutrients to minimize pest damage and realize 
maximum crop yield in combination with insect-resistant cultivars. Expres￾sion of plant resistance to pests changes with the availability of nutrients. 
Sorghum shoot fy incidence decreases with an increase in the application of 
nitrogenous fertilizers (Peshin and Dhawan, 2009).Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 293
12.8 LIMITATION IN MAKING PLANT RESISTANCE 
Plant resistance is not an absolute solution for pest problems. Certain 
limitations and problems will always be associated with any insect control 
program, and resistance in plant is no exception. Development of plant vari￾eties resistant to insect pests is a long-time program (Singh et al., 2020b). 
Developing insect-resistant crop varieties requires a great deal of expertise 
and resources. It is usually necessary to organize a well-planned multidisci￾plinary team of entomologists and plant breeders. Commitment of relatively 
long-term funding is a critical factor in the ultimate success of crop resistance 
programs. Several mechanisms of plant resistance to pests may involve the 
diversion of some resources by the plant to extra structures or production of 
defense chemicals at the expense of other physiological processes, including 
those contributing to yield (Li et al., 2007). One might expect a negative 
correlation between the potential yield of a cultivar and its level of resistance 
to the target pest. This is illustrated by the failure to evolve insect-resistant 
varieties in soybean, pigeonpea, chickpea, etc. Although host plant resistance 
promises to contribute a great deal to pest management in several crops, 
progress has been slow mainly because of low yield potential of the resistant 
varieties (Liebhold and Tobin, 2008). However, the fundamental objective 
of breeding for insect resistance in crop plants is to reduce the amount of 
insecticides needed to achieve acceptable control of the target pests, and an 
acceptable level of sustainable resistance, compatible with agriculture crop, 
and quality of the produce. Despite many dramatic successes in host plant 
resistance, there are still cases where plant resistance to one insect leads to 
increased susceptibility to another insect (Nauen and Denholm, 2005).
Secondary plant substances have a negative efect on the behavior of 
herbivores that cause decrease in the ftness of insects. However, many 
herbivores possess remarkable potential for utilizing or metabolizing the 
toxic plant chemicals, and therefore, their role as plant defense chemicals 
is not sacrosanct. Insects also develop into biotypes to overcome antibiosis 
resistance. However, partially resistant varieties would probably last longer 
in the feld than those with high levels of pest resistance (Dunse et al., 2010). 
The current theories on plant defense strategies do not take into account 
the complexity of tritrophic interactions. Plant resistance based on antibiosis 
may not always be compatible with biological control (Ong et al., 2016). 
Elucidation of these interactions can further the understanding and provide 
greater potential for manipulation of these systems to specifc crop species 
and varieties. The possibility of using compounds from plants to reduce 294 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
herbivore damage and increase the efectiveness of biological control agents 
is quite attractive. Ideally, plant resistance should strive to reduce substances 
attractive to herbivores, while increasing the substances attractive to the 
natural enemies.
Plant resistance at times may be associated with low yield or factors 
resulting in poor or unacceptable produce, for example, sorghum genotypes 
with high tannin content are resistant to sorghum midge (S. sorghicola) and 
birds, but such a grain has poor nutritional quality. Similarly, gossypol and 
other terpenoids in cotton confer resistance to bollworms (Tabashnik and 
Carrière, 2015), but high gossypol content spoils the quality of cottonseed 
oil. In such situations, one has to break the linkage between the factors 
conferring resistance to the target insects and the low yield potential or arrive 
at a threshold level for the resistant traits (secondary metabolites) that result 
in reduced pest susceptibility, do not have any adverse efect on the quality 
of the produce at the same time.
12.9 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE
Biotechnology methods will be improved for identification of plant resis￾tance to insects. Multilocational investigation of the identified resistance 
sources and breeding material need to be strengthened to detect stable and 
diverse sources of crop resistance or establish the presence of new resistance 
strategy. Resistance to insects should be mentioned as much emphasis as 
agriculture products in order to make new varieties and hybrids. Different 
effects of insect-resistant varieties with constant and cumulative effect on 
decreasing insect pest populations over time and space have no side effects 
on the environment, reduce the usage of insecticides, decrease farmer’s costs, 
and do not require inputs and application skills by the farmers. Therefore, 
plant resistance to insects should increase the stability of pest management 
programs for integrated pest management. Biotechnology methods can be 
used to improve introgression pace of insect-resistant genes pathway into 
high-yielding cultivars. Conventional plant resistance to insects can also 
be deployed in combination with novel genes to make plant resistance is 
an effective weapon for pest management and sustainable agriculture 
production.Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 295
KEYWORDS
• host plant resistance
• integrated pest management
• sustainable agriculture
• transgenic plant
REFERENCES
Abbaci, A.; Azzouz, N.; Bouznit, Y. A New Copper Doped Montmorillonite Modified Carbon 
Paste Electrode for Propineb Detection. Appl. Clay Sci. 2014, 90, 130–134. https://doi.org/
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clay.2013.12.036
Abrol, D. P.; Shankar, U. Integrated Pest Management. In Breeding Oilseed Crops for 
Sustainable Production: Opportunities and Constraints, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-801309-0.00020-3
Agrawal, D. S.; Rathore, D. P. Review Article Nanotechnology Pros and Cons to Agriculture: 
A Review. Int. J. Curr. Microbiol. Appl. Sci. (ISSN: 2319-7706 ) 2014, 3, 43–55. https://
doi.org/10.13140/2.1.3352.1283
Aguila, S. A.; Shimomoto, D.; Ipinza, F.; Bedolla-Valdez, Z. I.; Romo-Herrera, J.; Contreras, 
O. E.; Farías, M. H.; Alonso-Núñez, G. A Biosensor Based on Coriolopsis Gallica 
Laccase Immobilized on Nitrogen-Doped Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene 
Oxide for Polyphenol Detection, 2015. Http://Www.Tandfonline.Com/Action/JournalInf
ormation?Show=aimsScope&journalCode=tsta20#.VmBmuzZFCUk, 16(5). https://doi.
org/10.1088/1468-6996/16/5/055004
Alahmad, S.; Dinglasan, E.; Leung, K. M.; Riaz, A.; Derbal, N.; Voss-Fels, K. P.; Able, J. A.; 
Bassi, F. M.; Christopher, J.; Hickey, L. T. Speed Breeding for Multiple Quantitative Traits in 
Durum Wheat. Plant Meth. 2018, 14(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13007-018-0302-y
Alessio, P.; Martin, C. S.; De Saja, J. A.; Rodriguez-Mendez, M. L. Mimetic Biosensors 
Composed by Layer-by-Layer Films of Phospholipid, Phthalocyanine and Silver 
Nanoparticles to polyphenol Detection. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2016, 233, 654–666. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.SNB.2016.04.139
Alfadul, S. Application of Nanotechnology in the Field of Food Production. Academia J. Sci. 
Res. 2017, 5, 143–154. https://doi.org/10.15413/ajsr.2017.0220
Allison, S. D.; Martiny, J. B. H. Resistance, Resilience, and Redundancy in Microbial 
Communities. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2008. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0801925105
Arumai Selvan, D.; Mahendiran, D.; Senthil Kumar, R.; Kalilur Rahiman, A. Garlic, Green Tea 
and Turmeric Extracts-Mediated Green Synthesis of Silver Nanoparticles: Phytochemical, 
Antioxidant and In Vitro Cytotoxicity Studies. J. Photochem. Photobiolo. B Biol. 2018,
180, 243–252. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphotobiol.2018.02.014
Augustin, M. A.; Sanguansri, P. Chapter 5 Nanostructured Materials in the Food Industry. 
Adv. Food Nutr. Res. 2009, 58, 183–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1043-4526(09)58005-9296 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Bass, C.; Denholm, I.; Williamson, M. S.; Nauen, R. The Global Status of Insect Resistance 
to Neonicotinoid Insecticides. In Pesticide Biochemistry and Physiology; 2015. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pestbp.2015.04.004
Bergman, J. M.; Tingey, W. M. Aspects of Interaction Between Plant Genotypes and Biological 
Control. Bull. Entomol. Soc. Am. 1979. https://doi.org/10.1093/besa/25.4.275
Bilir, K.; Weil, M.-T.; Lochead, J.; Kök, F. N.; Werner, T. Construction of an Oxygen 
Detection-Based Optic Laccase Biosensor for Polyphenolic Compound Detection. Turk. J. 
Biol. 2016, 40(6), 1303–1310.
Boonham, N.; Glover, R.; Tomlinson, J.; Mumford, R. Exploiting Generic Platform 
Technologies for the Detection and Identification of Plant Pathogens. Euro. J. Plant Pathol.
2008, 121(3), 355. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10658-008-9284-3
Burrell, A. M.; Taylor, K. G.; Williams, R. J.; Cantrell, R. T.; Menz, M. A.; Pepper, A. 
E. A Comparative Genomic Map for Caulanthus Amplexicaulis and Related Species 
(Brassicaceae). Mol. Ecol. 2011.https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04981.x
Butnariu, M.; Butu, A. Plant Nanobionics: Application of Nanobiosensors in Plant Biology. 
Nanotechnol. Life Sci. 2019, 337–376. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16379-2_12
Cai, H.; Xu, C.; He, P., Fang, Y. Colloid Au-enhanced DNA Immobilization for the 
Electrochemical Detection of Sequence-Specific DNA. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2001,
510(1–2), 78–85.
Cassman, K. G. Ecological Intensification of Cereal Production Systems: Yield Potential, Soil 
Quality, and Precision Agriculture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 1999, 96(11), 5952–5959. https://
doi.org/10.1073/pnas.96.11.5952
Chamarthi, S. K.; Sharma, H. C.; Sahrawat, K. L.; Narasu, L. M.; Dhillon, M. K. Physico￾Chemical Mechanisms of Resistance to Shoot Fly, Atherigona Soccata in Sorghum, Sorghum 
Bicolor. J. Appl. Entomol. 2011. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0418.2010.01564.x
Cho, U. H.; Park, J. O. Mercury-Induced Oxidative Stress in Tomato Seedlings. Plant Sci. 
2000. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0168-9452(00)00227-2
Christopher, J.; Richard, C.; Chenu, K.; Christopher, M.; Borrell, A.; Hickey, L. Integrating 
Rapid Phenotyping and Speed Breeding to Improve Stay-Green and Root Adaptation of 
Wheat in Changing, Water-Limited, Australian Environments. Procedia Environ. Sci. 2015,
29(Agri), 175–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.proenv.2015.07.246
Cloonan, K. R. The Navel Orangeworm, Amyelois transitella: An Examination of its Biology, 
Pest Ecology in Almonds, and Development of Screening Bioassays to Identify Compounds 
for Reducing Oviposition. In ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, 2013.
Cockbain, A. J. Low temperature Thresholds for Flight in Aphis Fabae Scop. Entomol. Exp. 
Appl. 1961. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1570-7458.1961.tb02136.x
Collard, B. C. Y.; Beredo, J. C.; Lenaerts, B.; Mendoza, R.; Santelices, R.; Lopena, V.; 
Verdeprado, H.; Raghavan, C.; Gregorio, G. B.; Vial, L.; Demont, M.; Biswas, P. 
S.; Iftekharuddaula, K. M.; Rahman, M. A.; Cobb, J. N.; Islam, M. R. Revisiting Rice 
Breeding Methods–Evaluating the Use of Rapid Generation Advance (RGA) for Routine 
Rice Breeding. Plant Prod. Sci. 2017, 20(4), 337–352. https://doi.org/10.1080/1343
943X.2017.1391705
Cook, S. M.; Khan, Z. R.; Pickett, J. A. The Use of Push-Pull Strategies in Integrated 
Pest Management. Ann. Rev. Entomol. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.
ento.52.110405.091407
Cranston, P. J. G.; P. S. The Insects: An Outline of Entomology (4th Edition). J. Insect 
Conservat. 2010.Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 297
Crowder, D. W.; Northfield, T. D.; Strand, M. R.; Snyder, W. E. Organic Agriculture Promotes 
Evenness and natural Pest Control. Nature 2010. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09183
da Silva, A. C. N.; Deda, D. K.; da Róz, A. L.; Prado, R. A.; Carvalho, C. C.; Viviani, V.; 
Leite, F. L. Nanobiosensors Based on Chemically Modified AFM Probes: A Useful Tool 
for Metsulfuron-Methyl Detection. Sensors (Basel) 2013, 13(2), 1477–1489. https://doi.
org/10.3390/s130201477
Davies, T. G. E.; Field, L. M.; Williamson, M. S. The Re-emergence of the Bed Bug as a 
Nuisance Pest: Implications of Resistance to the Pyrethroid Insecticides. Med. Veter. 
Entomol. 2012. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2915.2011.01006.x
Davis, J. J.; Coleman, K. S.; Azamian, B. R.; Bagshaw, C. B.; Green, M. L. H. Chemical 
and Biochemical Sensing With Modified Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes. Chem. Euro. J.
2003, 9(16), 3732–3739. https://doi.org/10.1002/CHEM.200304872
de Silva, P. A.; Nimal Gunaratne, H. Q.; Gunnlaugsson,T.; Huxley, A. J. M; McCoy, C. P.; 
Rademacher, J. T.; Rice, T. E. Signaling Recognition Events with Fluorescent Sensors and 
Switches. Chem. Rev. 1997, 97(5), 1515–1566. https://doi.org/10.1021/CR960386P
Delphia, C. M.; Mescher, M. C.; De Moraes, C. M. Induction of Plant Volatiles by Herbivores 
With Different Feeding Habits and the Effects of Induced Defenses on Host-Plant Selection 
by Thrips. J. Chem. Ecol. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10886-007-9273-6
Dermody, O.; O’Neill, B. F.; Zangerl, A. R.; Berenbaum, M. R.; DeLucia, E. H. Effects of 
Elevated CO2 and O3 on Leaf Damage and Insect Abundance in a Soybean Agroecosystem. 
Arthropod-Plant Interact. 2008. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11829-008-9045-4
Després, L.; David, J. P.; Gallet, C. The Evolutionary Ecology of Insect Resistance to Plant 
Chemicals. Trends Ecol. Evolut. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tree.2007.02.010
Ditta, A.; Arshad, M. Applications and Perspectives of Using Nanomaterials for Sustainable 
Plant Nutrition. Nanotechnol. Rev. 2016, 5(2), 209–229. https://doi.org/doi:10.1515/
ntrev-2015-0060
Dong, Y.; Phillips, K.; Chip, Q. Immunosensing of Staphylococcus enterotoxin B (SEB) 
in milk with PDMS microfluidic systems using reinforced supported bilayer membranes 
(r-SBMs).Lab Chip 2006, 6(5), 675–681. DOI: 10.1039/b514902a. Epub 2006 Mar 15.
Duggan, A.; Ma, C.; Chalfie, M. Regulation of Touch Receptor Differentiation by the 
Caenorhabditis Elegans mec-3 and unc-86 genes. Development 1998.
Duhan, J. S.; Kumar, R.; Kumar, N.; Kaur, P.; Nehra, K.; Duhan, S. Nanotechnology: The 
New Perspective in Precision Agriculture. Biotechnol. Rep. 2017, 15, 11–23. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.btre.2017.03.002
Dunse, K. M.; Kaas, Q.; Guarino, R. F.; Barton, P. A.; Craik, D. J.; Anderson, M. A. Molecular 
Basis for the Resistance of an Insect Chymotrypsin to a Potato Type II Proteinase Inhibitor. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2010. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1009327107
Durán, N.; Marcato, P. D. Nanobiotechnology Perspectives. Role of Nanotechnology in the 
Food Industry: A Review. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 48(6), 1127–1134. https://doi.
org/10.1111/IJFS.12027
Eigenbrode, S. D. The Effects of Plant Epicuticular Waxy Blooms on Attachment and 
Effectiveness of Predatory Insects. Arthropod Struct. Dev. 2004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
asd.2003.11.004
Etefagh, R.; Azhir, E.; Shahtahmasebi, N. Synthesis of CuO Nanoparticles and Fabrication 
of Nanostructural Layer Biosensors for Detecting Aspergillus Niger Fungi. Sci. Iran. 2013,
20(3), 1055–1058. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scient.2013.05.015
FAO. Global agriculture towards 2050, Rome, 2009.298 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
FAO WFP, & IFAD. The State of Food Insecurity in the World 2012. Economic Growth Is 
Necessary but Not Sufficient to Accelerate Reduction of Hunger and Malnutrition. Rome, 
FAO, 2012.
Fathipour, Y.; Maleknia, B.; Bagheri, A.; Soufbaf, M.; Reddy, G. V. P. Functional and 
Numerical Responses, Mutual Interference, and Resource Switching of Amblyseius 
Swirskii on Two-Spotted Spider Mite. Biol. Control 2020. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
biocontrol.2020.104266
Fatouros, N. E.; Dicke, M.; Mumm, R.; Meiners, T.; Hilker, M. Foraging Behavior of Egg 
Parasitoids Exploiting Chemical Information. Behav. Ecol. 2008. https://doi.org/10.1093/
beheco/arn011
Ferreira, N.; Cruz, M.; Gomes, M.; Rudnitskaya, A. undefined. (n.d.). Potentiometric 
chemical sensors for the detection of paralytic shellfish toxins. Talanta 2018, 181, 380–384.
Finger, R. Evidence of Slowing Yield Growth – The Example of Swiss Cereal Yields. Food 
Policy 2010, 35(2), 175–182. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foodpol.2009.11.004
Fuertes, G.; Soto, I.; Carrasco, R.; Vargas, M.; Sabattin, J.; Lagos, C. Intelligent Packaging 
Systems: Sensors and Nanosensors to Monitor Food Quality and Safety. J. Sens. 2016. 
https://doi.org/10.1155/2016/4046061
Gadanakis, Y.; Bennett, R.; Park, J.; Areal, F. J. Evaluating the Sustainable Intensification 
of arable farms. J. Environ. Manag. 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2014.10.005
Gale, M. D.; Devos, K. M. Comparative Genetics in the Grasses. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A
1998. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.95.5.1971
Ghorbanpour, M.; Fahimirad, S. Plant Nanobionics a Novel Approach to Overcome the 
Environmental Challenges. Med. Plants Environ. Chall. 2017, 247–257. https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-319-68717-9_14
Gould, F.; Kennedy, G. G.; Johnson, M. T. Effects of Natural Enemies on the Rate of 
Herbivore Adaptation to Resistant Host Plants. Entomol. Exp. Applicata 1991. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1570-7458.1991.tb01445.x
Hahlbrock, K.; Grisebach, H. Enzymic Controls in the Biosynthesis of Lignin and Flavonoids. 
Ann. Rev. Plant Physiol. 1979. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.pp.30.060179.000541
Hall, J.; Matos, S. Incorporating Impoverished Communities in Sustainable Supply Chains. 
Int. J. Phys. Distrib. Logist. Manag. 2010. https://doi.org/10.1108/09600031011020368
Hao, L.; Lin, G.; Wang, H.; Wei, C.; Chen, L.; Zhou, H.; Chen, H.; Xu, H.; Zhou, X. 
Preparation and Characterization of Zein-Based Nanoparticles via Ring-Opening Reaction 
and Self-Assembly as Aqueous Nanocarriers for Pesticides. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2020,
68(36), 9624–9635. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.0c01592
Hare, J. D.; Andreadis, T. G. Variation in the Susceptibility of Leptinotarsa Decemlineata 
(Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) When Reared on Different Host Plants to the Fungal 
Pathogen, Beauveria Bassiana in the Field and Laboratory. Environ. Entomol. 1983. https://
doi.org/10.1093/ee/12.6.1892
He, X.; Aker, W. G.; Fu, P. P.; Hwang, H.-M. Toxicity of Engineered Metal Oxide Nanomaterials 
Mediated by nano–Bio–Eco–Interactions: A Review and Perspective. Environ. Sci.: Nano
2015, 2(6), 564–582. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5EN00094G
He, X.; Aker, W. G.; Huang, M.-J.; Watts, J. D.;Hwang, H.-M. Metal Oxide Nanomaterials in 
Nanomedicine: Applications in Photodynamic Therapy and Potential Toxicity. Curr. Topics 
Med. Chem. 2015, 15(18), 1887–1900). https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.2174/15680266
15666150506145251Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 299
He, X.; Aker, W. G.; Hwang, H.-M. An In Vivo Study on the Photo-Enhanced Toxicities of 
S-doped TiO2 Nanoparticles to Zebrafish Embryos (Danio rerio) in Terms of Malformation, 
Mortality, Rheotaxis Dysfunction, and DNA Damage. Nanotoxicology 2014, 8(sup1), 
185–195. https://doi.org/10.3109/17435390.2013.874050
He, X.; Aker, W. G.; Leszczynski, J.; Hwang, H.-M. Using a Holistic Approach to Assess the 
Impact of Engineered Nanomaterials Inducing Toxicity in Aquatic Systems. J. Food Drug 
Anal. 2014, 22(1), 128–146. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfda.2014.01.011
He, X.;, Deng, H.; Hwang, H. The Current Application of Nanotechnology in Food and 
Agriculture. J. Food Drug Anal. 2019, 27(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
jfda.2018.12.002
He, X.; Fu, P.; Aker, W. G., Hwang, H.-M. Toxicity of Engineered Nanomaterials Mediated 
by Nano–Bio–Eco Interactions. J. Environ. Sci. Health C 2018, 36(1), 21–42. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10590501.2017.1418793
Hickey, L. T.; Germán, S. E.; Pereyra, S. A.; Diaz, J. E.; Ziems, L. A.; Fowler, R. A.; Platz, 
G. J.; Franckowiak, J. D.; Dieters, M. J. Speed Breeding for Multiple Disease Resistance in 
Barley. Euphytica 2017, 213(3). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10681-016-1803-2
Iglesias, A.; Rosenzweig, C.; Pereira, D. Agricultural Impacts of Climate Change in Spain: 
Developing Tools for a Spatial Analysis. Global Environ. Change 2000. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0959-3780(00)00010-8
International Food Policy Research Institute. Green Revolution: Curse or Blessing? Int. Food 
Policy Res. Inst. 2002.
Johnson, M. T.; Gould, F.; Kennedy, G. G. Effects of Natural Enemies on Relative Fitness of 
Heliothis Virescens Genotypes Adapted and not Adapted to Resistant Host Plants. Entomol. 
Exp. Applicata 1997. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1570-7458.1997.00133.x
Jönsson, A. M.; Appelberg, G.; Harding, S.; Bärring, L. Spatio-Temporal Impact of Climate 
Change on the Activity and Voltinism of the Spruce Bark Beetle, Ips Typographus. Global 
Change Biol. 2009. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2486.2008.01742.x
Song, J. M.; Kasili, P. M.; Griffin, G. D.; Vo-Dinh, T. Detection of Cytochrome c in a Single 
Cell Using an Optical Nanobiosensor. Anal. Chem. 2004, 76(9), 2591–2594. https://doi.
org/10.1021/AC0352878
Juárez-Maldonado, A.; Ortega-Ortíz, H.; Cadenas-Pliego, G.; Valdés-Reyna, J.; Pinedo￾Espinoza, J.; López-Palestina, C.; Hernández-Fuentes, A. Foliar Application of Cu 
Nanoparticles Modified the Content of Bioactive Compounds in Moringa oleifera Lam. 
Agronomy 2018, 8(9), 167. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy8090167
Kalita, D.; Baruah, S. The Impact of Nanotechnology on Food. In Nanomaterials Applications 
for Environmental Matrices: Water, Soil and Air; Elsevier Inc., 2019. https://doi.
org/10.1016/B978-0-12-814829-7.00011-2
Karp, A.; Kresovich, S.; Bhat, K. V; Ayad, W. G.; Hodgkin, T. Molecular Tools in Plant Genetic 
Resources Conservation: A Guide to the Technologies. In IPGRI Technical Bulletin, 1997.
Kasili, P. M.; Cullum, B. M.; Griffin, G. D.; Vo-Dinh, T. Nanosensor for In Vivo Measurement 
of the Carcinogen Benzo[a]pyrene in a Single Cell. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. (2002). 2(6), 
653–658. https://doi.org/10.1166/JNN.2002.155
Kasili, P. M.; Song, J. M.; Vo-Dinh, T. Optical Sensor for the Detection of Caspase-9 Activity 
in a Single Cell. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126(9), 2799–2806. https://doi.org/10.1021/
JA037388T
Kendall, H. W.; Pimentel, D. Constraints on the Expansion of the Global Food Supply. Ambio
1994, 23(3), 198–205.300 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Kennedy, G. G.; Gould, F.; Deponti, O. M. B.; Stinner, R. E. Ecological, Agricultural, Genetic, 
and Commercial Considerations in the Deployment of Insect-resistant Germplasm. Environ. 
Entomol. 1987. https://doi.org/10.1093/ee/16.2.327
Kissinger, P. T. Biosensors—A Perspective. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2005, 20(12), 2512–2516. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BIOS.2004.10.004
Knipling, E. F. No TitleThe Basic Principles of Insect Population Auppression and 
Management. US Department of Agriculture., No. 512, 1979.
Kottegoda, N.; Munaweera, I.; Adassooriya, N.; Karunaratne, V. A Green Slow-Release 
Fertilizer Composition Based on Urea-Modified Hydroxyapatite Nanoparticles 
Encapsulated Wood. Curr. Sci. 2011, 101, 73–78.
Kumar, A.; Sinha, R. P.; Häder, D. P. Effect of UV-B on Enzymes Of Nitrogen Metabolism 
in the Cyanobacterium Nostoc Calcicola. J. Plant Physiol. 1996. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0176-1617(96)80298-7
Kwak, S. Y.; Lew, T. T. S.; Sweeney, C. J.; Koman, V. B.;Wong, M. H.; Bohmert-Tatarev, K.; 
Snell, K. D.; Seo, J. S.;, Chua, N. H.; Strano, M. S. Chloroplast-selective gene delivery 
and expression in planta using chitosan-complexed single-walled carbon nanotube carriers. 
Nature Nanotechnol. 2019, 14(5), 447–455. https://doi.org/10.1038/S41565-019-0375-4
Lee, C.;Itoh, T.; Sasaki, G.;Suga, T. Sol-gel Derived PZT Force Sensor for Scanning 
Force Microscopy. Mat. Chem. Phys. 1996, 44(1), 25–29. https://doi.org/10.1016/0254-
0584(95)01647-D
Lew, T. T. S.; Koman, V. B.; Gordiichuk, P.; Park, M.; Strano, M. S. The Emergence of Plant 
Nanobionics and Living Plants as Technology. Adv. Mater. Technol. 2020, 5(3), 1900657. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ADMT.201900657
Li, X.; Huang, Q.; Yuan, J.; Tang, Z. Fipronil Resistance Mechanisms in the Rice Stem Borer, 
Chilo Suppressalis Walker. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol. 2007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
pestbp.2007.06.002
Li, Y.; Yang, D.; Cui, J. Graphene Oxide Loaded With Copper Oxide Nanoparticles As an 
Antibacterial Agent Against Pseudomonas Syringae pv. tomato. RSC Adv. 2017, 7(62), 
38853–38860. https://doi.org/10.1039/C7RA05520J
Liebhold, A. M.; Tobin, P. C. Population Ecology of Insect Invasions and Their Management. 
Ann. Rev. Entomol. 2008. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ento.52.110405.091401
Lim, T. C.; Ramakrishna, S. A Conceptual Review of Nanosensors. Zeitschrift Fur 
Naturforschung A J. Phys. Sci. 2006, 61(7–8), 402–412. https://doi.org/10.1515/
zna-2006-7-815
Liu, T.; Tang, J.; Jiang, L. The Enhancement Effect of Gold Nanoparticles as a Surface 
Modifier on DNA Sensor Sensitivity.Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 313(1), 
3–7. DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2003.11.098. Lu, J.; Bowls, M. How will nanotechnology affect 
agricultural supply chains? Int. Food Agribus.Manag. Assoc. 2013, 16(2), 21–42.
Malik, P.; Katyal, V.; Malik, V.; Asatkar, A.; Inwati, G.; Mukherjee, T. K. Nanobiosensors: 
Concepts and Variations. ISRN Nanomater. 2013, 2013, 1–9. https://doi.
org/10.1155/2013/327435
Marchiol, L.; Filippi, A.; Adamiano, A.; Degli Esposti, L.; Iafisco, M.; Mattiello, A.; 
Petrussa, E.; Braidot, E. Influence of Hydroxyapatite Nanoparticles on Germination and 
Plant Metabolism of Tomato (Solanum lycopersicum L.): Preliminary Evidence. Agronomy
2019, 9(4), 161. https://doi.org/10.3390/agronomy9040161Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 301
McClements, D. J. Nanotechnology Approaches for Improving the Healthiness and 
Sustainability of the Modern Food Supply. ACS Omega 2020, 5(46), 29623–29630. https://
doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.0c04050
Mello, L.; Kubota, L. T. Review of the Use of Biosensors as Analytical Tools in the Food and 
Drink Industries. Food Chem. 2002, 77(2), 237–256.
Mobini, S. H.; Lulsdorf, M.; Warkentin, T. D.;Vandenberg, A. Plant Growth Regulators 
Improve In Vitro Flowering and Rapid Generation Advancement in Lentil and Faba Bean. In 
Vitro Cell. Dev. Biol. Plant 2015, 51(1), 71–79. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11627-014-9647-8
Mousavi, S. R.; Rezaei, M. Nanotechnology in Agriculture and Food Production. J. Appl. 
Environ. Biol. Sci. 2011, 1, 414–419.
Narang, J.; Chauhan, N.; Rani, P.; Pundir, C. S. Construction of an Amperometric TG 
Biosensor Based on AuPPy Nanocomposite and Poly (indole-5-carboxylic acid) modified 
Au Electrode. Bioproc. Biosyst. Eng. 2012, 36(4), 425–432. https://doi.org/10.1007/
S00449-012-0799-9
Nauen, R.; Denholm, I. Resistance of Insect Pests to Neonicotinoid Insecticides: Current 
Status and Future Prospects. Arch. Insect Biochem. Physiol. 2005. https://doi.org/10.1002/
arch.20043
Neethirajan, S.; Freund, M. S.; Jayas, D. S.; Shafai, C.; Thomson, D. J.; White, N. D. G. 
Development of Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Sensor for Grain Quality Monitoring. Biosyst. Eng.
2005, 106(4), 395–404. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2010.05.002
Niraimathi, K. L.; Sudha, V.; Lavanya, R.; Brindha, P. Biosynthesis of Silver Nanoparticles 
Using Alternanthera Sessilis (Linn.) Extract and Their Antimicrobial, Antioxidant Activities. 
Coll. Surf B Biointerf. 2013, 102, 288–291. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.colsurfb.2012.08.041
Luechinger, N. A.; Loher, S.; Athanassiou, E. K.; Grass, R. N.; Stark, W. J. Highly Sensitive 
Optical Detection of Humidity on Polymer/Metal Nanoparticle Hybrid Films. Langmuir
2007, 23(6), 3473–3477. https://doi.org/10.1021/LA062424Y
Nuruzzaman, M.; Rahman, M. M.; Liu, Y.; Naidu, R. Nanoencapsulation, Nano-guard 
for Pesticides: A New Window for Safe Application. J. Agric. Food Chem. 2016, 64(7), 
1447–1483. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jafc.5b05214
O’Connor, D. J.; Wright, G. C.; Dieters, M. J.; George, D. L.; Hunter, M. N.; Tatnell, J. 
R.; Fleischfresser, D. B. Development and Application of Speed Breeding Technologies 
in a Commercial Peanut Breeding Program. Peanut Sci. 2013, 40(2), 107–114. https://doi.
org/10.3146/ps12-12.1
Ochatt, S. J.; Sangwan, R. S.; Marget, P.; Assoumou Ndong, Y.; Rancillac, M.; 
Perney, P. New Approaches Towards the Shortening of Generation Cycles for Faster 
Breeding of Protein Legumes. Plant Breed. 2002, 121(5), 436–440. https://doi.
org/10.1046/j.1439-0523.2002.746803.x
OECD, Food, & of the United Nations, A. O. (2012). OECD-FAO Agricultural Outlook 2012. 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1787/agr_outlook-2012-en
Olaitan, A. F.; Abiodun, T. A.; Foluke, A. O.; Oluwaseyi, O. E. Comparative Assessment 
of Insect Pests Population Densities of Three Selected Cucurbit Crops. Acta Fytotech. 
Zootech. 2017. https://doi.org/10.15414/afz.2017.20.04.78-83
Omanović-Mikličanin, E.; Maksimović, M. Nanosensors applications in agriculture and food 
industry, (n.d.).
Omanović, E.; Maksimović, M. Nanosensors Applications in Agriculture and Food Industry. 
Bull. Chem. Technol. Bosnia Herzegovina 2016, 47, 59–70.302 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Ong, B.; Lin-Heng, L.; Chun, J. Biological Diversity Conservation Laws in South East 
Asia and Singapore: A Regional Approach in Pursuit of the United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals? In Asia Pacific Journal of Environmental Law, 2016. https://doi.
org/10.4337/apjel.2016.01.05
Palevitz, B. A. Genetic Parasites and a Whole Lot More. Scientist 2000.
Parisi, C.; Vigani, M.; Rodríguez-Cerezo, E. Agricultural Nanotechnologies: What are the 
Current Possibilities? Nano Today 2015, 10(2), 124–127. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.nantod.2014.09.009
Peltonen-Sainio, P.; Jauhiainen, L.; Laurila, I. P. Cereal Yield Trends in Northern European 
Conditions: Changes in Yield Potential and its Realisation. Field Crops Res. 2009, 110(1), 
85–90. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fcr.2008.07.007
Peshin, R.; Dhawan, A. K. Integrated Pest Management. In Integrated Pest Management, 
2009. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4020-8992-3
Pingali, P. L. Green Revolution: Impacts, limits, and the Path Ahead. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
2012, 109(31), 12302 LP – 12308. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0912953109
Piškur, J.; Langkjær, R. B. Yeast Genome Sequencing: The Power of Comparative Genomics. 
Mol. Microbiol. 2004. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04182.x
Prasad, R.; Bhattacharyya, A; Nguyen, Q. D. Nanotechnology in Sustainable Agriculture: 
Recent Developments, Challenges, and Perspectives. Front. Microbiol. 2017, 8, 1014. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fmicb.2017.01014
Prasad, S. Nanobiosensors: The Future for Diagnosis of Disease? Nanobiosens. Dis. Diag.
2014, 3, 1–10. https://doi.org/10.2147/NDD.S39421
Rajput, V.; Singh, A.; Minkina, T.; Shende, S.; Kumar, P.; Verma, K.; Bauer, T.; Gorobtsova, 
O.; Deneva, S.; Sindireva, A. Potential Applications of Nanobiotechnology in Plant 
Nutrition and Protection for Sustainable Agriculture. In Nanotechnology in Plant Growth 
Promotion and Protection, 2021a, pp 79–92.
Rajput, V.; Minkina, T.; Feizi, M.; Kumari, A.; Khan, M.; Mandzhieva, S.; Sushkova, S.; 
El-Ramady, H.; Verma, K.; Singh, A.; Hullebusch, E.; Singh, R.; Jatav, H.; Choudhary, 
R. Effects of Silicon and Silicon-Based Nanoparticles on Rhizosphere Microbiome, Plant 
Stress and Growth. Biology 2021b, 10(8), 7–9.
Rana, M. M.; Takamatsu, T.; Baslam, M.; Kaneko, K.; Itoh, K.; Harada, N.; Sugiyama, 
T.; Ohnishi, T.; Kinoshita, T.; Takagi, H.;Mitsui, T. Salt Tolerance Improvement in Rice 
Through Efficient SNP Marker-Assisted Selection Coupled With Speed-Breeding. Int. J. 
Mol. Sci. 2019, 20(10). https://doi.org/10.3390/ijms20102585
Rashidi, L.; Khosravi-Darani, K. The Applications of Nanotechnology in Food Industry, 
2011. Http://Dx.Doi.Org/10.1080/10408391003785417, 51(8), 723–730. https://doi.
org/10.1080/10408391003785417
rathbun 2013 nanosensors - Google fo}ku. (n.d.).
Ray, D. K.; Mueller, N. D.; West, P. C.; Foley, J. A. Yield Trends Are Insufficient to Double 
Global Crop Production by 2050. PLoS One 2013, 8(6), e66428.
Ray, D. K.; Ramankutty, N.; Mueller, N. D.; West, P. C.; Foley, J. A. Recent Patterns of Crop 
Yield Growth and Stagnation. Nat. Commun. 2012, 3(1), 1293. https://doi.org/10.1038/
ncomms2296
Richardson, J.; Hawkins, P.; Bioelectronics, R. L.-B. and, & 2001, undefined. (n.d.). The use 
of coated paramagnetic particles as a physical label in a magneto-immunoassay. Elsevier.Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 303
Rivelli, A. R.; Trotta, V.; Toma, I.; Fanti, P.; Battaglia, D. Relation Between Plant Water 
Status and Macrosiphum Euphorbiae (hemiptera: Aphididae) population dynamics on three 
cultivars of tomato. Eur. J. Entomol. https://doi.org/10.14411/eje.2013.084
Rizal, G.; Karki, S.; Alcasid, M.; Montecillo, F.; Acebron, K.; Larazo, N.; Garcia, R.; Slamet￾Loedin, I. H.; Quick, W. P. Shortening the breeding cycle of sorghum, a model crop for 
research. Crop Sci. 2014, 54(2), 520–529. https://doi.org/10.2135/cropsci2013.07.0471
Rodriguez-Saona, C., R., B., Isaacs, R. Manipulation of Natural Enemies in Agroecosystems: 
Habitat and Semiochemicals for Sustainable Insect Pest Control. In Integrated 
Pest Management and Pest Control - Current and Future Tactics. 2012. https://doi.
org/10.5772/30375
Russell, E. P. Enemies Hypothesis: A Review of the Effect of Vegetational Diversity on 
Predatory Insects and Parasitoids. Environ. Entomol. 1989. https://doi.org/10.1093/
ee/18.4.590
Samways, M. J. Insect conservation: A synthetic management approach. In Annual Review of 
Entomology, 2007. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ento.52.110405.091317
Shang, Y.; Hasan, M. K.; Ahammed, G. J.; Li, M.; Yin, H.; Zhou, J. Applications of 
Nanotechnology in Plant Growth and Crop Protection: A Review. Molecules (Basel) 2019,
24(14). https://doi.org/10.3390/molecules24142558
Sharma, K.; Lavanya, M. Recent developments in transgenics for abiotic stress in legumes of 
the semi-arid tropics. JIRCAS Working Report No. 23, 2002.
Sharma, H. C.; Ortiz, R. Host plant resistance to insects: An eco-friendly approach for pest 
management and environment conservation. J. Environ. Biol. 2002.
Sharma, S.; Ruud, A. On the path to sustainability: integrating social dimensions into 
the research and practice of environmental management. Business Strategy and the 
Environment, 2003. https://doi.org/10.1002/bse.366
Sharma, H. C.; Sujana, G.; Manohar Rao, D. Morphological and chemical components of 
resistance to pod borer, Helicoverpa armigera in wild relatives of pigeonpea. Arthropod￾Plant Interact. 2009. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11829-009-9068-5
Sharma, H. C.; Venkateswarulu, G.; Sharma, A. Environmental factors influence the 
expression of resistance to sorghummidge, Stenodiplosis sorghicola. Euphytica 2003. 
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023041713713
Shivakumar, M.; Nataraj, V.; Kumawat, G.; Rajesh, V.; Chandra, S.; Gupta, S.; Bhatia, V. 
S. Speed breeding for Indian agriculture: A rapid method for development of new crop 
varieties. Curr. Sci. 2018, 115(7), 1241. https://doi.org/10.18520/cs/v115/i7/1241-1241
Shivendu, R.; Dasgupta, N.; Lichtfouse, E. Nanoscience in Food and Agriculture 2. Springer 
International Publishing, 2016.
Shivendu, R.; Dasgupta, N.; Lichtfouse, E. Nanoscience in Food and Agriculture 5. Springer 
International Publishing, 2017.
Singh, S. P.; Rahman, M. F.; Murty, U. S. N.; Mahboob, M.; Grover, P. Comparative study of 
genotoxicity and tissue distribution of nano and micron sized iron oxide in rats after acute 
oral treatment. Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol. 2013, 266(1), 56–66. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.taap.2012.10.016
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova. Sci. Publishers, Inc., 2020a, 
vol 1, pp 73–100. 
Singh, A., Rajput, V., Rawat, S., Kumar Singh, A., Bind, A., Kumar Singh, A., Chernikova, N.; 
Voloshina, M.; Lobzenko, I. Monitoring Soil Salinity and Recent Advances in Mechanism 304 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
of Salinity Tolerance in Plants. Biogeosyst. Tech. 2020b, 7(2). https://doi.org/10.13187/
bgt.2020.2.66
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Rawat, S.; Sharma, R.; Singh, A. K.; Singh, A. K.; Tomar, R. S. 
In Emerging Tools for Sustainable Agriculture and Food Security; Deepika Book Agency: 
New Delhi, Delhi, 2021a, vol 1, pp 1–15. 
Singh, A., Rajput, V., Singh, A., Sengar, R., Singh, R. and Minkina, T. Transformation 
Techniques and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. Policy 
Issues Genetically Modified Crops, 2021b, 1, 515–542.
Slosser, J. E.; Price, J. R.; Puterka, G. J. Evaluation of Furrow Diking and Early-Season 
Insecticide Applications on Boll Weevils (Coleoptera: Curculionidae), Bollworms 
(Lepidoptera: Noctuidae), and Cotton Yield in the Texas Rolling Plains. J. Eco. Entomol. 
1989. https://doi.org/10.1093/jee/82.2.599
Smith, S. L.; Slywka, G. W.; Krueger, R. J. Anthocyanins of strobilanthes dyeriana and their 
production in callus culture. J. Natl. Prod. 1981. https://doi.org/10.1021/np50017a020
Sotiropoulou, S.; Gavalas, V., … V. V.-B. and, & 2003, undefined. (n.d.). Novel carbon 
materials in biosensor systems. Elsevier.
Southwood, T. R. E.. Habitat, the Templet for Ecological Strategies? J. Animal Ecol. 1977. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/3817
Sparks, T. C.; Nauen, R. IRAC: Mode of action classification and insecticide resistance 
management. Pestic. Biochem. Physiol, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pestbp.2014.11.014
Stoner, K. A. Plant Resistance to Insects: A Resource Available for Sustainable Agriculture. 
Biol. Agric. Hortic. 1996. https://doi.org/10.1080/01448765.1996.9754764
Su, X., Chew, F., sciences, S. L.-A., & 2000, undefined. (n.d.). Design and application of 
piezoelectric quartz crystal-based immunoassay. Jstage.Jst.Go.Jp.
Sumbal, Nadeem, A.; Naz, S.; Ali, J. S.; Mannan, A.; Zia, M. Synthesis, characterization and 
biological activities of monometallic and bimetallic nanoparticles using Mirabilis jalapa 
leaf extract. Biotechnol. Rep. (Amsterdam) 2019, 22, e00338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
btre.2019.e00338
Sunding, D., & Zilberman, D. B. T.-H. of A. E. (2001). Chapter 4 The agricultural innovation 
process: Research and technology adoption in a changing agricultural sector. In Agricultural 
Production (Vol. 1, pp. 207–261). Elsevier. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1574-0072(01)10007-1
Swift, T. A.; Oliver, T. A. A.; Galan, M. C.; Whitney, H. M. Functional nanomaterials to 
augment photosynthesis: evidence and considerations for their responsible use in 
agricultural applications. Interface Focus 2019, 9(1), 20180048. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rsfs.2018.0048
Tabashnik, B. E.; Carrière, Y. Successes and failures of transgenic bt crops: Global patterns of 
field-evolved resistance. In Bt Resistance: Characterization and Strategies for GM Crops 
Producing Bacillus thuringiensis Toxins, 2015. https://doi.org/10.1079/9781780644370.0001
Tamhane, V. A.; Giri, A. P.; Sainani, M. N.; Gupta, V. S. Diverse forms of Pin-II family 
proteinase inhibitors from Capsicum annuum adversely affect the growth and development 
of Helicoverpa armigera. Gene 2007. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gene.2007.07.024
Tefera, T.; Mugo, S.; Beyene, Y. Developing and deploying insect resistant maize varieties to 
reduce pre-and post-harvest food losses in Africa. Food Sec. 2016. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s12571-015-0537-7Bionanotechnological Methods in Crop Production and Pest Management 305
Tilman, D.; Balzer, C.; Hill, J.; Befort, B. L. Global food demand and the sustainable 
intensification of agriculture. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 2011, 108(50), 20260 LP–20264. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1116437108
United Nations, D. of E. and S. A. (UN-D. (2017). Population Division, 2017. World 
Population Prospects: The 2017 Revision, Key Findings and Advance Tables. Working 
Paper No. ESA/P/WP/248.
van Emden, H. F. Host plant-Aphidophaga interactions. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 1995. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0167-8809(94)09001-N
van Lenteren, J. C.; Hua, L. Z.; Kamerman, J. W.; Rumei, X. The parasite‐host relationship 
between Encarsia formosa (Hym., Aphelinidae) and Trialeurodes vaporariorum (Hom., 
Aleyrodidae) XXVI. Leaf hairs reduce the capacity of Encarsia to control greenhouse 
whitefly on cucumber. J. Appl. Entomol. 1995. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0418.1995.
tb01335.x
Vo-Dinh, T.; Cullum, B. Biosensors and biochips: advances in biological and medical 
diagnostics. Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem. 2000, 366(6), 540–551. https://doi.org/10.1007/
S002160051549
Warheit, D. B.; Brown, S. C.; Donner, E. M. Acute and subchronic oral toxicity studies in rats 
with nanoscale and pigment grade titanium dioxide particles. Food Chem. Toxicol. 2015,
84, 208–224. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fct.2015.08.026
Wassmann, R.; Jagadish, S. V. K.; Heuer, S.; Ismail, A.; Redona, E.; Serraj, R.; Singh, R. K.; 
Howell, G.; Pathak, H.; Sumfleth, K. Chapter 2 Climate Change Affecting Rice Production. 
The Physiological and Agronomic Basis for Possible Adaptation Strategies. In Advances 
in Agronomy; 1st ed.; Elsevier Inc., 2009; vol. 101, Issue January 2009). https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0065-2113(08)00802-X
Zeigler, R. S.; Mohanty, S. Support for international agricultural research: current status 
and future challenges. New Biotechnol. 2010, 27(5), 565–572. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
nbt.2010.08.003
Zhang, Y.; Arugula, M. A.; Wales, M.; Wild, J.; Simonian, A. L. A novel layer-by￾layer assembled multi-enzyme/CNT biosensor for discriminative detection between 
organophosphorus and non-organophosphorus pesticides. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 67, 
287–295. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bios.2014.08.036
Zhang, Y.; Liu, B.; Huang, K.; Wang, S.; Quirino, R. L.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, C. Eco-Friendly 
Castor Oil-Based Delivery System with Sustained Pesticide Release and Enhanced 
Retention. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2020, 12(33), 37607–37618. https://doi.org/10.1021/
acsami.0c10620Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Nanobiotechnological Approaches for 
Improved Plant Breeding
SAPNA RAWAT1
, ABHISHEK SINGH2
, VISHNU D RAJPUT3
, 
RAGINI SHARMA,4
 SAGLARA MANDZHIEVA3
, and 
AWANI KUMAR SINGH5
1
Department of Botany, University of Delhi, Delhi, India
2
Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, College of Agriculture, 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel University of Agriculture and Technology, 
Meerut, UP, India
3
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia
4
Department of Zoology, Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana, India
5
Centre for Protected Cultivation, ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research 
Institute, New Delhi, India
CHAPTER 13
ABSTRACT
Nanobiotechnological approaches can make a huge advancement in crop 
improvement through molecular-marker-assisted breeding. It is a cost-effec￾tive, rapid, and accurate platform for identification of genetic polymorphism 
with high throughput and automated detection. Thus, nanogenomics is 
facilitating plant breeders to attain their target of precision breeding as well 
as providing a new prospect for selection and gene transfer. In this chapter, 308 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
emphasized nanobiotechnological advances and their application in plant 
breeding and focused on single nucleotide polymorphism detection.
13.1 INTRODUCTION
Nanobiotechnology is a combination of molecular biology and engineering of 
atomic and molecular size with the aim of developing structures and devices 
(Jain, 2003). These nanodevices have application in various biological fields 
such as diagnostics, drug delivery, and therapeutics. Nanobiotechnology is 
growing enormously in the field of pharmaceuticals (Seetharam, 2006) and 
is targeted to drug delivery and noninvasive medical procedures as used in 
cancer (Shelley, 2006). It utilizes materials with particle size of 1–100 nm. 
They have unique properties in various terms such as chemistry, morphology, 
reactivity, and magnetic characters. Nanotechnology uses these nanoparticles 
as advanced biotechnological tool as well as for better understanding and 
development of living beings and biomolecules.
Plant breeding can produce genome-wide molecular markers quickly and 
simply, which can lead to a substantial improvement, QTL analysis, MAS, 
and varieties identifcation (Kanazin et al., 2002). Molecular marker method 
has not been implemented properly (Gupta et al., 2001) due to various 
factors such as cost of technology, time consuming, cost of measuring 
traits, and large segregating populations are not easy to manage (Lamkey 
and Lee, 1993) thus restricting broader execution of plant breeding based 
on molecular markers (Gupta et al., 2001). Eventually, identifying an allele, 
trait, or individual using molecular marker technology remains a major 
challenge. The nanogenomics method is helping plant breeders to achieve 
their target of precision breeding as well as providing a new opportunity 
for selection and gene transfer. This can also allow the gene transfer from 
distant plant. DNA sequencing in a nanofabricated gel-free system that can 
allow more rapid DNA sequencing. This sequencing data can be used to 
know a lot of information about the relationship between molecular markers 
and economically important features of crop germplasm that help in produc￾tion. Thus, nanobiotechnology can improve the progress of breeding for 
crop improvement assisted by molecular markers. Thus, nanobiotechnology 
can improve the progress of Molecular-marker Assisted Breeding for the 
purpose of development of crops. In near future, advances in the feld of 
nanotechnology can facilitate genotyping by generating materials by micro￾fabrication, decreasing reaction volume, increasing volume rates, automated Nanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding 309
sample handling, and evolving single-platform genotyping, data analysis as 
well as instrumentation for storage. In this chapter, we highlighted nanobio￾technological advances and its application in plant breeding and focused on 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) detection.
FIGURE 13.1 Diagrammatic representation of nanotechnology products in plant breeding 
for crop improvement. 
13.2 QUANTUM DOTS AND FLODOTS
Quantum dots are semiconductor nanocrystals made up of CdSe core, various 
times capped with ZnS to enhance the quantum yield of light which is the 
ratio of absorbed light and emitted light (Chan et al., 2002). Semiconductors 
are made through the process of doping, adding conductive metal atoms 
onto the insulator surface that changes the available electrons. Electrons 
move freely into vacant orbitals upon excitation, thus semiconductor QD 
can absorb and emit photons. The emission properties depend on size and 
composition. A single wavelength of light can be used to stimulate emitted 
wavelengths ranging from blue to near-infrared (Chan et al., 2002) that is 
detected through instrumentation. Thus, QDs can be great alternative to 
traditional fluorescent dyes. QDs can be linked to biomolecules themself. 310 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Using various combinations of QDs generating light of six distinct hues at 
varied intensities, they can generate 40,000 unique optical codes (Han et 
al., 2001; Ng and Liu, 2006). This unique optical address with specific QD 
composition can be used to create large screening libraries by conjugation 
of allele with particular oligonucleotide probes to microspheres (Han et 
al., 2001). This optical signal can be used to detect the target, however, the 
complex of labeled target/probe specifies the existence or nonexistence as 
well as richness of the target (Han et al., 2001). Standard microscopes can 
image and examine this. Flow cytometers, on the other hand, may be used 
for high-throughput detection and screening (Gao and Nie, 2004). 
FloDots is a silica matrix with thousands of luminous dye molecules 
incorporated in it. When stimulated, it produces a powerful emission signal. 
These silica surfaces, which may be changed by adding functional groups, 
are utilized as a substrate for the immobilization of biomolecules. It ofers 
a number of benefts over QD, including water dispersion, the ability to 
overcome limited solubility, and agglutination (Yao et al., 2006).
13.3 MICROSPHERES AND BEAD-BASED ASSAYS
Microspheres (diameter of 2–500) permit the attachment of numerous 
compounds on each and every bead thus can provide solid platforms for 
attaching biological recognition compounds for bead-based assays (Trau 
and Battersby, 2001). These spherical microsphere beads are made up of 
polystyrene, latex, and silica thus allow spatial homogeneity of probe attach￾ment and consequent target hybridization (Spiro et al., 2000). Assays based 
on microspheres can create large number of combinational libraries with 
varying number and intensities of attached dyes (Battersby et al., 2001).
13.4 LUMINEX 
Luminex is a fluorescent microspore technology, which is made up of 
polystyrene beads with red and orange fluorophores that are impregnated in 
various ratios to produce a library that can be differentiated by their relative 
intensities of red and orange fluorescence. Probes that are complimentary 
to the target of interest can be attached directly to the microsphere with 
its unique code (Fulton et al., 1997). Detection and analysis of fluorescent 
wavelength and intensity were done using flow cytometers. Thus, the identi￾fication with quantification of prokaryotic DNA sequences in heterogeneous Nanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding 311
DNA samples and can allow the quantification of target (Spiro et al., 
2000). The microspheres form aggregate when targeted DNA was found 
to be complementary to oligos trapped on the surface of the microsphere, 
producing a FRET-induced fluorescence (Ihara et al., 2004). That can be 
measured by fluorescent microscopy. This technique requires improvement 
in color differentiation for high-throughput applications (Ihara et al., 2004).
13.5 QBEADS
Latex microspheres embedded with QDs are Qbeads. Qbeads of various 
colors and intensities are used to color label Qbeads. This assay is based on 
dyes used and allele-specific target hybridization. They are conjugated with 
allele-specific oligos get hybridized to biotinylated targets. TaqMan PCR is 
used to confirm the results of Qbead test and can identify homozygous and 
heterozygous SNP alleles with more precision than sequencing (Xu et al., 
2003). Multiplexed amplification step was made to save genomic template, 
time, and expense associated with PCR (Xu et al., 2003).
13.6 SILICA MICROPHORES
Silica microspores are porous and can facilitate attachment of various 
biomolecules with covalently attached dyes that are optically encoded 
(Johnston et al., 2005). These dyes can be used in various combinations 
thus generating optical signals with a wide range (Johnston et al., 2005). 
Microsphere surface produce fluorescence when oligonucleotides attached 
with microspheres get hybridized to the target site, while mismatch show 
less fluorescence significantly (Johnston et al., 2005; Corrie et al., 2006). 
The microsphere interior has free either thiol or amines groups uniformly 
that form covalent bonds with dyes (Miller et al., 2005). This fluorescence 
is quantified by flow cytometer (Wedemeyer and Potter, 2001). Thus, high￾throughput detection and quantification of various molecular interactions 
can be done via flow cytometer (Nolan and Sklar, 1998).
13.7 NANOPORE
It is a nanometer pore sized, made of pore-forming protein or a hole of 
synthetic compounds such as silicon or grapheme. It is used as single-molecule 312 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
detector. Nanopore-based DNA sequencing can electrically detect DNA 
sequence with low cost, high speed, and less sample preparation. It is a rapid 
and lost cost alternative of next-generation DNA sequencing (Khiyami et al., 
2014).
13.8 GOLD NPs
Gold NPs can act as attractive labels for biosensors that can be perceived 
through various analytical techniques such as electrical conductivity, fluores￾cence, and optical absorption (Jain, 2003). Storhoff et al. (2004) conducted 
an experiment that used gold nanoparticle labeled with oligonucleotide 
probe (GNP-DNA) for detection of bacterial DNA that was unamplified. 
When probe became hybridized to the target and was identified on a glass 
slide, scattered yellowish orange light when illuminated with white light. 
Simultaneously, nonhybridized DNA scattered green light. Though, it is 
rapid and inexpensive technique that uses visual readings. Microarray bound 
allele-specific probes modified with gold nanoparticle can be used to detect 
the target genomic DNA site. Scattered light captured on photo sensor.
13.9 NANOBARCODES
Nanobarcodes are microscopic metal wires that are sequentially barcoded 
by electroplating of metal ions of diverse reflectivity into fine channels 
by means of lithography (Nicewarner-Pena et al., 2001; Sha et al., 2006). 
Varying sequence and kind of deposited metal are used to increase barcode 
complexity. Each Nanowire with unique coding is fixed with different 
fluorescently oligonucleotide probe added into PCR reaction. When they 
perfectly hybridized with target, nanowire imaged and analyzed for SNP 
detection (Sha et al., 2006). 
13.10 NANOCHIPS AND NANO ARRAYS
It is an ultra-miniature form of microarray for ultramicro and nanoscale fluid 
delivery. Large number of samples such as nucleic acids, antibodies, and 
nanomaterials can be analyzed using thousands of nanospots (1–20 mm). 
They are patterned directly by the nanoarrays through microcantilever print 
head (Jain, 2003).Nanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding 313
13.11 NANOPRODUCT USE IN PLANT BREEDING 
Nanoparticles are easier for a plant to absorb due to their small size and that 
means plant spend less energy in doing so. This energy conservation means 
enhanced growth and development for crop. Plant have to work less in taking 
up nutrient more it can mobilize their energy in promoting healthy, vigorous 
growth, faster germination, increase initial growth, and powerful root devel￾opment. For plant breeding 24 nanoproducts are available in the commercial 
market in six countries developed by six companies (Table 13.1).
13.11.1 NANOTECH T5 REFLECTORS
As the light travel through target area, plenty of available light is lost as 
that was absorbed by ballast. Recovery of that lost light is our foremost 
objective. Once it is achieved can enhance the performance of previously 
outstanding grow lamp. Each and every T5 lighting fixtures had similar 
designs. They collect 100% of lost light and reflect 99% of it back to the 
target area as diffused light of improved quality. This diffused light pene￾trates deeper into the canopy, resulting in better beginnings and quicker 
development cycles. As a result, Nanotech’s superior crystal reflecting 
layer surface improved overall performance while also providing a number 
of additional benefits. Improvement in light quality enhanced light effec￾tiveness, availability of lumen, improved coverage, and light penetration 
of the canopy.
13.11.2 SUNBLASTER NANODOME
SunBlaster 7″ NanoDome can speedup germination, improve seedling 
growth, and maintaining high humidity with controlled temperature with 
adjustable vents that controls air circulation in all 1020 seedling trays 
or flats. It has a H-shaped groove that gives the dome superior strength. 
It permits both our T5 NanoTech lights and LED Strip Lights to fitted 
in the dome, ensuring centered lights, and plants can receive even light 
coverage. The dome is fit with Quad Thick and Double thick trays. The 
light channels integrated into these domes (a patented feature) retain 
lights in place during the propagation stage and easily detached for crop 
inspection or misting.314 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture TABLE 13.1 Number of Nanoproducts, Companies and the Countries That Involved in Plant Breeding Related Nano Products Development (Source: Statnano, 2021). Plant-breeding nanoproducts Company Country Properties Applications NanoTech-T5 reflectors SunBlaster Holdings ULC Canada Seed germination promotion, hydroponic, increased lighting, increased lumen availability Use in plant breeding SunBlasterNanoDome SunBlaster Holdings ULC Canada High humidity management, temperature control, seed germination promotion, air circulation control Use in plant breeding Primo MAXX growth regulator Syngenta Switzerland Regulation of plant growth, acceleration of plant development, plant resistance, stress withstand, and drought tolerance. Use in plant breeding Plant growth promoter HTNY-03 Nanjing Hgh Technology Nano Material China Anti-bacterial activity, nontoxic, inorganic Use in plant breeding Anabolic plant roids Plant vitality Ltd United Kingdom Plant growth regulation, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding PK boost Plant vitality Ltd United Kingdom Plant growth regulation, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Cal mag nitrate Plant vitality Ltd United Kingdom Plant growth regulation, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Nano silicate+ Plant vitality Ltd United Kingdom Plant growth regulation, plant growth acceleration, seed germination promotion Use in plant breeding Hydro: grow Plant vitality Ltd United Kingdom Plant growth regulation, root activity improvement, seed germination promotion Use in plant breeding Root zone mass Plant vitality Ltd United Kingdom Plant growth regulation, root activity improvement, seed germination promotion Use in plant breeding Seed speed Plant vitality Ltd United Kingdom Plant growth regulation, root activity improvement, seed germination promotion Use in plant breeding Nano-boron Kanak Biotech India Plant growth regulation Use in plant breeding Nano-molybdenum Kanak Biotech India Plant growth regulator Use in plant breedingNanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding 315 Plant-breeding nanoproducts Company Country Properties Applications Nanosilver Kanak Biotech India Plant growth regulation, nutritional, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Nano-magnesium Kanak Biotech India High specific surface area, plant growth regulation, nutritional, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Nano-iron Kanak Biotech India High specific surface area, plant growth regulation, nutritional, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Nano-nitrogen Kanak Biotech India High specific surface area, plant growth regulation, nutritional, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Nano-sulfur Kanak Biotech India High specific surface area, plant growth regulation, nutritional, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Nano-potassium Kanak Biotech India High specific surface area, plant growth regulation, nutritional, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Nano-phosphorous Kanak Biotech India High specific surface area, plant growth regulation, nutritional, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding Nano-Zinc Kanak Biotech India High specific surface area, plant growth regulation, nutritional, plant growth acceleration Use in plant breeding NeuSelen-X® Neufarm GmbH Germany Crop yield enhancement Use in plant breeding NeuCytokin® Neufarm GmbH Germany Plant growth regulator with nano technology (PGR), crop yield enhancement Use in plant breeding Nano silicate+ Plant vitality Ltd United Kingdom Plant growth regulation, root activity Improvement, seed germination promotion Use in plant breeding TABLE 13.1 (Continued)316 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
13.11.3 PRIMO MAXX GROWTH REGULATOR
Primo Maxx® plant growth regulator can promote denser and healthier 
turfgrass that can endure a various stresses comprising heat, drought, and 
diseases. It stimulates gibberellic acid production, which promotes elonga￾tion of cell. Shoot growth is slowed vertically, whereas lateral and below￾ground growth of rhizomes, stolons, tillers, and roots is boosted. It has the 
potential to reduce water use and improve drought resistance. To inhibit 
basal rot anthracnose, this innovative formulation combines water and may 
be sprayed at rates of 0.1–0.2 fl. oz. per 1000 sq. ft. every 7–14 days.
13.11.4 PLANT GROWTH PROMOTER HTNY-03
These products are made from a variety of nano oxides, with various charac￾teristics such as nontoxic and harmless to human, purified water, support the 
plant growth, advance pest, and disease resistance. Product benefits contain 
improvement in agricultural production, easy to use, low quantity to be used 
with high yield, nontoxicity, harmless, and safety.
13.11.5 ANABOLIC PLANT ROIDS
It contains natural steroids found in plants. It can be absorbed through roots 
enhancing metabolic and anabolic rate, enhances bud development, increase 
yield, and flowers aided through larger rooting systems.
13.11.6 PK BOOST
Pk boost 9/18+ is a flowering cycle upregulation enhancer that aims to 
improve the size and weight of vegetables, flowers, and fruits.
13.11.7 CAL MAG NITRATE
It is formed to promote fast growth of plants by avoiding nutrient deficien￾cies, enhanced nutrient uptake, and enhance plant growth and development. 
Help in uptake of vital elements and providing a critical surge of trace 
elements to the plants.Nanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding 317
13.11.8 NANO SILICATE+
Nanoparticle product can faster the plant growth, larger flower development, 
reduction in harvesting time, resistance to drought and diseases, and are easy 
to use.
13.11.9 HYDRO: GROW
A hydroponic system can produce plants and vegetables at faster rate than 
growing them in outdoors in soil. Plants grown hydroponically often more 
yield, need less space, and water than with conventional gardening.
13.11.10 ROOT ZONE MASS (RZM)
RZM is a root growth stimulator that contains a combination of NPK, Humic 
Acid, Fulvic Acid, chosen plant vitamins, Lecithin, and Protein molecules to 
stimulate multiroot development and allow plants to carry nutrients to their 
maximum potential. It may be found in all types of substrates, as well as 
hydroponics and airoponics.
13.11.11 SEED SPEED
It is a new development of unlocking dormant seeds and encourages quicker 
emerging of seeds. Soak for 12–24 h after blending speed seed with warm 
water as it is safest for seed soaking. Some seeds can tolerate boiling water 
that can differ significantly from species to species.
13.11.12 NANO-BORON
Boron is a crucial nutrient for the growth and development of healthy plants. 
It is also used as a herbicide, algaecides, and as a pest controller. Vital for 
upholding a balance between sugar and starch and aids in the translocation 
of sugar & carbohydrates crops are sensitive to boron deficiency. Boron defi￾ciency can lead to impaired cell expansion in fast-growing organs (leaves, 
roots, pollen tube), malformation of roots and shoots, male and female flower 
sterility, and reduced seed set due to inhibition of pollen growth.318 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
13.11.13 NANO-MOLYBDENUM
Molybdenum is crucial to plant growth as a constituent of the enzymes nitrate 
reductase and nitrogenase. Legumes need more molybdenum than any other 
crops, in the root nodules of legumes want molybdenum for nitrogen fixa￾tion. Almost all crops are sensitive to molybdenum deficiency. An overall 
light green tint, stunted development with tiny leaves, and reddening of veins 
on immature leaves are all indicators of N deficiency.
13.11.14 NANOSILVER
Eco-friendly and organic-certified SILVER (Ag) nanoparticles consider as 
an effective antimicrobial mechanism because silver ions are toxic to 650 
microorganisms (bacteria, yeast, fungi, molds, viruses, etc.). Nanosilver can 
absorb the oxygen atom on its surface area, will combine with the cell walls 
of microorganism thus have ability to interact and oxidize with the microbe’s 
surface protein (-SH functional group), eventually destroying the bacteria.
Nano Silver is a highly efective, eco-friendly sanitizing solution. It 
indicates advanced approach of clean, harmless, environmentally friendly 
biocides for the efective control of micro-pathogens on hard surfaces and 
in water systems.
13.11.15 NANO-MAGNESIUM
The only mineral constituent of the chlorophyll molecule, and a component 
of chlorophyll on which photosynthesis depends. It has an essential role in 
the translocation of phosphorus. Deficiency can lead to yellowing between 
the leaf veins or reddish-brown tints Leaves become brittle and necrotic and 
may drop prematurely.
13.11.16 NANO-IRON
The most important mineral for respiration and photosynthesis is iron. 
All crops are sensitive to Iron deficiency. Deficiency can lead to inhibited 
growth and reduced fruit development, decreased leaf size, and discolored 
premature leaf fall. It can also cause tissue between the veins to become Nanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding 319
yellow, even when the veins say green leading to necrosis due to chlorosis 
(leaf mottling). 
13.11.17 NANO-NITROGEN
Nitrogen is the most crucial nutrient for plants. It is an important component 
of chlorophyll and while leaves encompass adequate nitrogen, photosynthesis 
occurs at high rates. Its deficiency can lead to light green or yellow and some 
may develop red or orange. Stunted growth and decrease the protein levels 
in pasture and grain.
13.11.18 NANO-SULFUR
Sulfur is an essential plant nutrient for nutrient and protein synthesis, as 
well as for enzyme and vitamin function. It acts as supplement that provides 
dynamic plant growth. Deficiency can lead to uniform pale green to yellow 
leaf, poor low-yielding, low protein, and pale green and yellow leaves in 
wheat.
13.11.19 NANO-POTASSIUM
Potassium is required by the plant for protein synthesis as well as the opening 
and shutting of stomata. It is linked with water movement, nutrients, and 
carbohydrates in plant tissues. All crops are especially all fruits and vege￾tables. Deficiency includes brown scorching and curling of leaf tips as well 
chlorosis reduces in plant growth, root development, and fruits formation.
13.11.20 NANO-PHOSPHORUS
It is another nutrient that plants require for their development and reproduc￾tion. It is reflected as one of the three major nutrients due to the relatively 
large amounts utilized by plants. All crops are sensitive to phosphorous 
deficiency. Reduced growths lead to stunted and shortened inter. 320 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
13.11.21 NANO-ZINC
Zinc is an important nutrient that promotes crop growth and reproduction. 
It functions as a structural component or regulatory co-factor in a variety of 
enzymes. Its deficiency can result in stunted growth and reduce development.
13.11.22 NEUSELEN-X®
It is an innovative formulation of a chemical enzymatic synthesis through 
which the division of a tripeptide (Glutapione) as valuable to retain the 
selenium inside potato. For potatoes a tripeptide that permits an improved 
absorption of elementary nutrients, the amino acids content advances the 
growth, speckling, endogenous defense, and the production. Infect, from 
field trials resulted in the production is improved of about 7–8%.
13.11.23 NEUCYTOKIN®
NeuCytokin® is a liquid plant hormone produce comprising cytokinins from 
natural seaweed source and water soluble humic/fulvicacid. NeuCytokin® is 
used in foliar and in the soil as a supplement to the natural hormone levein 
plants to encourage and withstand flowering, flower set, fruit retention, and 
fruit development to proliferate production and yields. For those conventional 
and organic cultivators needing the profits of foliar fertilizers, NeuCytokin® 
is a foliar fertilizer made from natural potassium and seaweed that promotes 
growth over that experienced with fertilizers alone.
13.12 CONCLUSIONS 
Miniaturization has reduced cost of plant genotyping as well as increasing 
throughput. Development of cost-effective, rapid, and accurate platform 
needed to identify genetic polymorphism with multiplex and high-throughput 
automated detection (Shi, 2001). The main barrier is the cost of developing 
and validating innovative high-throughput tests. PCR amplification should 
be eliminated to remove additional steps for the generation of target ampli￾cons, eliminate chances of cross-contamination and variation in the efficacy 
of target amplification (Griffin and Smith, 2000; Galvin, 2002). Unamplified 
targets can be detected through gold nanoparticles, due to their sensitivity Nanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding 321
(Storhoff et al., 2004; Bao et al., 2005). Bead-based assays have capability 
for SNP genotyping at low price, fast fluid-phase reaction rates, small 
reaction volume, and automated sample processing. This one platform of 
genotyping with fast data analysis and storage in flow cytometer can provide 
cost effective genotyping in plant sciences.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and 
Higher Education of the Russian Federation (no. FENW-2023-0008) and the 
Strategic Academic Leadership Program of the Southern Federal University 
(“Priority 2030”).
KEYWORDS
• automation
• high throughput
• nanogenomics
• SNP
REFERENCES
Battersby, B. J.; Lawrie, G. A.; Trau, M. Optical Encoding of Microbeads for Gene Screening: 
Alternatives to Microarrays. Drug Discov. Today 2001, 6, S19–S26.
Chan, W. C. W.; Maxwell, D.; Gao, X.; Bailey, R.E.; Han, M.; Nie, S. Luminescent Quantum 
Dots for Multiplexed Biological Detection and Imaging. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 2002, 13,
40–46.
Corrie, S. R.; Lawrie, G. A.; Trau, M. Quantitative Analysis and Characterization of 
Biofunctionalized Fluorescent Silica Particles. Langmuir 2006, 22, 2731–2737.
Fulton, R. J.; McDade, R. L.; Smith, P. L; Kienker, L. J.; Kettman Jr.; J. R. Advanced 
Multiplexed Analysis With the Flow Metrix (TM) System. Clin. Chem. 1997, 43,
1749–1756.
Galvin, P. A nanobiotechnology roadmap for high-throughput single nucleotide polymorphism 
analysis. Psychiatric Genetics, 2002, 12, 75–82.
Gao, X.; and Nie, S. Quantum Dot-Encoded Mesoporous Beads With High Brightness and 
Uniformity: Rapid Readout Using Flow Cytometry. Anal. Chem. 2004, 76, 2406–2410.322 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Griffin, T. J.; Smith, L. M. Single-Nucleotide Polymorphism Analysis by MALDI-TOF Mass 
Spectrometry. Trends Biotechnol. 2000, 18, 77–84.
Gupta, P. K.; Roy, J. K; Prasad, M. Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms: A New Paradigm for 
Molecular Marker Technology and DNA Polymorphism Detection With Emphasis on Their 
use in Plants. Curr. Sci. 2001, 80, 524–535.
Han, M.; Gao, X.; Su, J. Z; Nie, S. Quantum-Dot-Tagged Microbeads for Multiplexed Optical 
Coding of Biomolecules. Nat. Biotechnol. 2001, 19, 631–635.
Ihara, T.; Tanaka, S.; Chikaura, Y; Jyo, A. Preparation of DNA-Modified Nanoparticles and 
Preliminary Study for Colorimetric SNP Analysis Using Their Selective Aggregations. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 2004, 32, e105.
Jain, K. K. Nanodiagnostics: Application of Nanotechnology in Molecular Diagnostics. 
Expert Rev. Mol. Diagn. 2003, 3, 153–161.
Johnston, A. P. R.; Battersby, B. J.; Lawrie, G. A.; Trau, M. Porous Functionalized Silica 
Particles: A Potential Platform for Bimolecular Screening. Chem. Commun. 2005, 7,
848–850.
Kanazin, V.; Talbert, H.; See, D.; DeCamp, P.; Nevo, E; Blake, T. Discovery and Assay of 
Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms in Barley (Hordeum vulgare). Plant Mol. Biol. 2002,
48, 529–537.
Khiyami, M. A.;Almoamma, H.; Awad, Y. M.; Alghuthaymi, M. A.; Abd-Elsalam, K. A. Plant 
Pathogen Nanodiagnostic Techniques: Forthcoming Changes? Biotechnol. Biotechnol. 
Equip. 2014, 28, 5, 775–785. DOI: 10.1080/13102818.2014.960739
Lamkey, K. R; Lee, M. In Quantitative Genetics, Molecular Markers, and Plant Improvement, 
10th Australian Plant Breeding Conference, Focused Plant Improvement: Towards 
Responsible and Sustainable Agriculture; Imrie, B. C., Hacker, J. B., Eds.; Gold Coast, 
Australia, 1993; pp 104–115.
Miller, C. R.; Vogel, R.; Surawski, P. P. T.; Corrie, S. R.; Ruhmann, A; Trau, M. Biomolecular 
Screening With Novel Organosilica Microspheres. Chem. Commun. 2005, 4783–4785.
Nicewarner-Pena, S. R.; Freeman, R. G.; Reiss, G. D.; He, L.; Pena, D. J.; Walton, I. D.; 
Cromer, R.; Keating, C. D; Natan, M. J. Submicrometer Metallic Barcodes. Science 2001,
294, 137–141.
Nolan, J. P; Sklar, L. A. The Emergence of Flow Cytometry for Sensitive, Real-Time 
Measurements of Molecular Interactions. Nat. Biotechnol. 1998, 16, 633–638.
Seetharam, R. N. Nanomedicine – Emerging Area of Nanobiotechnology Research. Curr. Sci.
2006, 91, 260.
Sha, M. Y.; Walton, I. D.; Norton, S. M.; Taylor, M.; Yamanaka, M.; Natan, M. J.; Xu, C.; 
Drmanac, S.; Huang, S.; Bordherding, A.; Drmanac, R; and Penn, S. G. Multiplexed SNP 
Genotyping Using Nanobarcode Particle Technology. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2006, 384,
658–666.
Shelley, S. A. Nanobiotechnology: Cancer’s Newest Deadly Foe. Chem. Eng. Prog. 2006,
102, 43–47.
Shi, M. M. Enabling Large-Scale Pharmacogenetic Studies by High-Throughput Mutation 
Detection and Genotyping Technologies. Clin. Chem. 2001, 47, 164–172.
Spiro, A.; Lowe, M; Brown, D. A Bead-Based Method for Multiplexed Identification and 
Quantitation of DNA Sequences Using Flow Cytometry. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 2000,
66, 4258–4265.
Statnano, [Online] 2021. https://product.statnano.com/industry/agricultureNanobiotechnological Approaches for Improved Plant Breeding 323
Storhoff, J. J.; Lucas, A. D.; Garimella, V.; Bao, Y. P; Muller, U. R. Homogeneous Detection 
of Unamplified Genomic DNA Sequences Based on Colorimetric Scatter of Gold 
Nanoparticle Probes. Nat. Biotechnol. 2004, 22, 883–887.
Trau, M.; Battersby, B. J. Novel Colloidal Materials for High-Throughput Screening 
Applications in Drug Discovery and Genomics. Adv. Mater. 2001, 13, 975–979.
Wedemeyer, N.; Potter, T. Flow Cytometry: An ‘Old’ Tool for Novel Applications in Medical 
Genetics. Clin. Genet. 2001, 60, 1–8.
Xu, H.; Sha, M. Y.; Wong, E. Y.; Uphoff, J.; Xu, Y.; Treadway, J. A.; Truong, A.; O’Brien, 
E.; Asquith, S.; Stubbins, M.; Spurr, N. K.; Lai, E. H.; Mahoney, W. Multiplexed SNP 
Genotyping Using the Qbead (TM) System: A Quantum Dot-Encoded Microsphere-Based 
Assay. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003, 31, e43.
Yao, G.; Wang, L.; Wu, Y.; Smith, J.; Xu, J.; Zhao, W.; Lee, E.; Tan, W. FloDots: Luminescent 
Nanoparticles. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 2006, 385, 518–524Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Nanobionics Aid in Agriculture
ABHISHEK SINGH1
, PRIYADARSHANI RAJPUT2
, SAPNA RAWAT3
, 
SVETLANA SUSHKOVA2
, and VISHNU D. RAJPUT2
1
Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, College of Agriculture, 
Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel University of Agriculture and Technology, 
Meerut, UP, India
2
Academy of Biology and Biotechnology, Southern Federal University, 
Rostov-on-Don, Russia
3
Department of Botany, University of Delhi, Delhi, India
CHAPTER 14
ABSTRACT 
Plant nanobionics provides an interface between nanotechnology and plant 
biology. It is an area of plant science that uses nanoparticles and their interac￾tion with plant system that comes up with a novel function. The application of 
nanoparticles in plants system provides them with novel functions is termed 
as plant nanobionics. Plant nanobionics has various applications in the field 
of agriculture, biosensors, defense, etc. Thus, can help in crop management.
14.1 INTRODUCTION 
Nanobionics is the combination of two words, nano + bionics, so nanobi￾onics can be defined as the study of electronic interactions at nanoscale in 
the biological systems. The broader vision is to generate an extensive array 
of wild-type plants that are trained in imaging objects in their environment, 
infrared communication devices, working as self-powered light sources, 326 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
and also running as self-powered groundwater sensors (Lew et al., 2020). 
Plants are exclusively fit to execute these roles due to their ability to generate 
energy from sunlight through photosynthesis. In the field of nanobiotech￾nology, researchers target to develop bionic plants that display the highest 
possible photosynthesis efficiency and biochemical sensing (Butnariu and 
Butu, 2019).
14.2 PLANT NANOBIONICS 
Nanotechnology has been enhanced to a greater degree, where nanoscale 
materials are designed for drugs delivery onto particular cells or tissues. 
Nanoparticles can expand the stability of the drug, the pharmacokinetics, 
and the creation of therapeutics into nanoparticles that can lessen toxicity 
(Ghorbanpour and Fahimirad, 2017). The nanoparticle development for 
drug delivery systems and production of these drugs on larger scale takes 
a lengthy time, signifying major obstacles to its success. Plant viruses are 
an evolving class of biologics used in drug delivery systems (Czapar and 
Steinmetz, 2017). The main improvement of using these plant sources to 
produce biologics is that the plant cell wall defends expressed PDs from 
acids and enzymes in the stomach via bioencapsulation. Though, gut 
microbes have progressed to break down every cell wall component; thus, 
when whole plant cells comprising PDs reach the gut, commensal microbes 
digest the cell walls and discharge the proteins. When they are fused to PDs, 
tags (receptor-binding proteins) proficiently cross the intestinal epithelium 
(the largest mucosal area in the body, measuring 1.8–2.7 m2
) and are carried 
to the circulatory system or the immune system (Kwon and Daniell, 2015). 
Plant cell walls are consisted of various polysaccharides. Thus, the cell wall 
acts as an obstacle for avoiding entry of foreign particles and nanoparticles 
into the cell, where they could cause damage to the internal cellular part. 
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are a novel class of nanoparticles and 
have been described to efficiently deliver biomolecules into plant cells. The 
main benefits of using LDH nanoparticles are that RNA activity is secure 
and their penetration through cell walls into intact cells suffers only minimal 
damage. In general, LDHs are usually represented as [M2+ 1−xM3+x(OH)2]
[An−]x/n∙zH2O, where M2+ and M3+ are divalent and trivalent metal ions, 
respectively, and a interlayer anion. The positively charged ion sheets are 
intercalated with charge-balancing anions to establish the LDH complex, 
which is tunable, and the ion sheets can be delaminated into ultrathin nano￾structures. LDHs hold very promising properties such as good compatibility, Nanobionics Aid in Agriculture 327
simply biodegradable, low cytotoxicity, and precise release of drugs (Bao 
et al., 2017). ENMs have wonderful physiochemical skins appropriate for 
various applications in medicine, biotechnology, energy, pharmaceuticals, 
cosmetics, and electronics due to their ultrafine size and high surface reac￾tivity. Engineered nanoparticles have made a solid impact over the previous 
few decades, thus they tend to possess properties such as a huge capability to 
absorb target molecules, the capacity to release molecules more efficiently 
within target cells or to precise organelles, and the capacity to penetrate into 
cell walls without any damage. ENMs play a part by arriving plant cells 
and interacting with metabolic pathways and intracellular structures, which 
may cause toxicity or promote plant growth and development by varied 
mechanisms.
14.2.1 APPLICATION OF PLANT NANOBIONICS 
(A) Crop production
(1) Improve photosynthesis efficiency 
In most varieties of plants, thylakoid membranes in chloroplasts are chief 
site of the photosynthetic machinery. Chloroplast has ability to absorb 
visible range of the light spectrum, which encompass of 50% of the incident 
solar energy radiation (SY et al., 2019). Besides, Plants normally use only 
around 10% of the sunlight accessible to them (Zhu et al., 2010). Hence, 
researchers have tried to improve photosynthetic efficiency by extending 
the range of solar light absorption (Blankenship et al., 2011). Nanomaterials 
using seamless chemical and physical traits in photocatalytic complexes 
based on chloroplast improved novel functional properties (Giraldo et al., 
2014). Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) have ability to capture 
visible and near-infrared spectra of light wavelengths, while absorption 
rate of chloroplast antenna pigments is limited in this case. Giraldo et al. 
(2014) effectively designed highly charged SWNTs coated with DNA and 
chitosan (a biomolecule derivative from shrimp and other crustacean shells) 
which have ability to spontaneously enter into chloroplasts. This new lipid 
exchange envelope penetration procedure for integrating the nanostructures 
comprises wrapping carbon nanotubes (CNTs) or nanoparticles with highly 
charged DNA or polymer molecules, permitting them to penetrate into the 
fatty, hydrophobic membranes that surround chloroplasts. SWNTs embedded 
within chloroplasts has the potential to improve the photosynthetic light 
reactions of with their typical optical properties. SWNTs are capable to 328 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
capture visible and near-infrared spectra of light wavelengths though chloro￾plast antenna pigments absorption rates are inadequate in this case. SWNTs 
alter this absorbed solar energy into excitations, which transfer electrons to 
the photosynthetic machinery (Han et al., 2010). Integration of CNTs into 
chloroplasts extracted from plants improved chloroplast’s photosynthetic 
activity by 49% as compared with the control. When these nanocomposites 
were incorporated into living leaf chloroplasts, the electron flow related with 
photosynthesis was enhanced by 30%. SWNT real-time sensing of NO in 
extracted chloroplasts and leaves could also be stretched to identify anexten￾sive range of plant signaling molecules and exogenous compounds such as 
pesticides, herbicides, and environmental pollutants.
(2) Plant nanobionic with higher plant ROS-savaging ability 
Remarkably, SWNT-based nanosensors have ability to display single￾molecule free radical dynamics within the chloroplasts for optimizing photo￾synthetic environmental conditions (light and CO2
) (Zhang et al., 2010). The 
main limitation in the usage of extracted chloroplasts for solar energy appli￾cations is that they easily breakdown because of light and oxygen-induced 
damage to the photosynthetic proteins. Giraldo et al. (2014) demonstrated 
that cerium oxide nanoparticles (nanoceria) were united with a highly 
charged polymer (polyacrylic acid) pass through the outer membranes of the 
chloroplast and localize in the stroma, and remarkably inhibit damage to the 
photosystems (PS) by quenching reactive oxygen species that are extensively 
distributed throughout the chloroplast and permit real-time monitoring of 
free-radical species and environmental pollutants using in vivo and ex vivo 
embedded nanosensors (Siddiqui et al., 2015). Additionally, solar energy 
is caught by chlorophylls in the two types of pigment-protein complexes 
(PSs I and II, designated PSI and PSII, respectively) and is converted into 
electrochemical energy to yield ATP and NADPH that are used for CO2
fixation. PSII accomplishes the light-induced oxygen evolution reaction and 
transfers electrons from water to plastoquinone in the membrane and PSI 
yields strong reducing power using electrons provided by PSII and decreases 
ferredoxin and NADPH. Noji et al. (2011) showed that nanomesoporous 
silica compound (SBA) conjugated with PSII retained the high and stable 
oxygen-evolving capacity of Thermosynechococcus vulcanus PSII even 
inside silica nanopores. The movement lasted for more than 3 h under the 
adequate illumination/dark cycles. Combination of PSII-SBA conjugates 
with the mediator recycling systems can eliminate the detrimental effects of Nanobionics Aid in Agriculture 329
electron acceptors and light-induced radicals and have properties to develop 
for photosensors and artificial photosynthetic system.
(B) The aspect of plant nanobionic in environment
(1) Nanobionic plants as nitroaromatics 
It may appear exquisite but imitate from simple plant transpiration process. 
Plants pull up water and other analytics from the ground and can gather 
even trace levels of analytics within tissues. Knowing this rule, Wong et al. 
(2016) made a nanobionic plant that can notice explosives in groundwater 
and aware a user to their occurrence in the area. IR-fluorescent CNTs-based 
sensors that selectively answer to nitro aromatics that were inoculated into a 
spinach plant’s leaves. These nanotubes quench in fluorescence intensity in 
the occurrence of nitro-aromatics. Then a reference sensor that is invariant 
in signal intensity was designed. The plant pulls the nitro-aromatics or the 
common explosives component picric acid (2,4,6-trinitrophenol) up via the 
roots into its leaves, where the repressed IR signal is imaged with a night￾vision camera and directed to a smartphone through a Wi-Fi signal. With the 
reference sensor implanted in the leaf as well, the technique creates high￾contrast images.
(2) Nanobionic plant as temperature detector 
Cyberwood was deliberated by using a new synthetic CNT with mechanical 
and structural properties like wood embedded and intricately sensitive to 
temperature changes into a matrix of plant cells from the tobacco. Conserving 
plant cells’ natural capacity to sense temperature differences even after 
their death cause electrical conductivity of this kind of CNTs change with 
temperature. The incidence of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) 
deliberates structural stability and a great electrical conductivity, which can 
be exploited to attach the samples to an external circuit (Di Giacomo et al. 
2015). In fact, pectin and charged atoms (ions) perform a crucial role in the 
temperature sensitivity of both living plant cells and the dry cyber wood. 
Pectinisa sugar molecules found in plant cell walls that can be cross-linked, 
dependent on temperature, to form a gel. Calcium and magnesium ions both 
exist in this gel. With rise in the temperature, the contacts of the pectin break 
apart, the gel becomes softer, and the ions can travel more freely. In the result, 
the material conducts electricity better with increase in temperature. For the 
synthesis of cyberwood, several conventional nano-synthesis methodologies 330 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
were pooled. At first phase, undifferentiated tobacco BY-2 cells derived from 
the callus seedlings of Nicotianatabacum were cultured in a growth medium 
that contained MWCNTs. Spontaneous accumulation of cells was detected 
with tobacco cells combined with MWCNTs. A gel-like material formed after 
24 h, was collected and dried at 47 °C for 15 days. The material designed 
had a complex, hierarchical structure, similar to wood. This construct may 
discover applications in thermal sensors, for example, for thermal cameras, 
or in distance sensors for consumer products and security systems. Because 
of its exquisite temperature sensitivity, the cyberwood sensor can recognize 
warm bodies even at distance; for example, a hand impending the sensor from 
a distance of a few dozen centimeters. The sensor’s conductivity depends 
straight on the hand’s distance from the sensor. The very high responsively to 
temperature changes of cyberwood proposes that it can be used as a tempera￾ture distance sensor. The distance of a warm body from the sensor can be 
inferred from temperature measurements achieved at constant environmental 
conditions (Di Giacomo et al., 2015).
14.3 CONCLUSIONS 
Plants are the lifeguards on earth with huge influence in our life due to their 
valuable products. Now with the help of biotechnology, novel features have 
been introduced into plants as well as in animals. Nanobionics is a mixture 
of nanotechnology and biological processes. Nanoparticles are introduced 
into plant cells and organelles like chloroplasts, imparting alteration in plant 
trait. The major idea behind it is to empower plants with novel features in 
their vicinity. Agricultural production can be enhanced with nanoformula￾tions such as agrochemicals in plants, nanosensor for plant protection, and 
nanodevices for genetic manipulations of plant. Thus it can help in better 
crop management.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research was financially supported by the Ministry of Science and 
Higher Education of the Russian Federation (no. FENW-2023-0008) and the 
Strategic Academic Leadership Program of the Southern Federal University 
(“Priority 2030”)Nanobionics Aid in Agriculture 331
KEYWORDS
• agriculture
• biosensor
• defense
• nanobionic
• nanoparticles
REFERENCES 
Bao, W.; Wan, Y.; Baluška, F. Nanosheets for Delivery of Biomolecules Into Plant Cells. 
Trends Plant Sci. 2017, 22(6), 445–447. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tplants.2017.03.014
Blankenship, R. E.; et al. Comparing Photosynthetic and Photovoltaic Efficiencies and 
Recognizing the Potential for Improvement. Science 2011, 332, 805–809.
Butnariu, M.; Butu, A. Plant Nanobionics: Application of Nanobiosensors in Plant Biology. 
Nanotechnol. Life Sci. 2019, 337–376. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-16379-2_12
Czapar, A. E.; Steinmetz, N. F. Plant Viruses and Bacteriophages for Delivery in Medicine 
and Biotechnology. Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol. 2017, 38, 108–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
cbpa.2017.03.013
Di Giacomo, R.; Daraio, C.; Maresca.; B. Plant Nanobionic Materials With a Giant 
Temperature Response Mediated by Pectin-Ca2+. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U S A 2015,
112(15), 4541–4545. DOI: 10.1073/pnas
Giraldo, J. P.; Landry, M. P.; Faltermeier, S. M.; McNicholas, T. P.; Iverson, N. M.; Boghossian, 
A. A.; Reuel, N. F.; Hilmer, A. J.; Sen, F.; Brew, J. A.; Strano, M. S. Plant Nanobionics 
Approach to Augment Photosynthesis and Biochemical Sensing. Nat. Mater. 2014. DOI: 
10.1038/nmat3890
Han, J. H.; et al. Excitation Antennas and Concentrators From Core-Shell and Corrugated 
Carbon Nanotube Filaments of Homogeneous Composition. Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 833–839.
Kwak, S. Y.; Lew, T. T. S.; Sweeney, C. J.; Koman, V. B.; Wong, M. H.; Bohmert-Tatarev, K.; 
Snell, K. D.; Seo, J. S.; Chua, N. H; Strano, M. S. Chloroplast-Selective Gene Delivery and 
Expression in Planta Using Chitosan-Complexed Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Carriers. 
Nat. Nanotechnol. 2019, 14, 447–455. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-019-0375-4
Kwon, K. C.; Daniell, H. Low-Cost Oral Delivery of Protein Drugs Bioencapsulated in Plant 
Cells. Plant Biotechnol. J. 2015, 13(8), 1017–1022. https://doi.org/10.1111/pbi.12462
Noji, T.; Kamidaki, C.; Kawakami, K.; Shen, J. R.; Kajino, T.; Fukushima, Y.; Sekitoh, T, 
Itoh, S. Photosynthetic Oxygen Evolution in Mesoporous Silica Material: Adsorption of 
Photosystem IIreaction Center Complex into 23 nm Nanopores in SBA. Langmuir 2011,
27(2), 705–713.
Siddiqui, M. H.; Al-Whaibi, M. H.; Mohammad, F. Nanotechnology and Plant Sciences: 
Nanoparticles and Their Impact on Plants. Nanotechnol. Plant Sci. Nanopart. Impact 
Plants 2015, 1–303.332 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
Wong, M. H.; Giraldo, J. P.; Kwak, S. Y.; Koman, V. B.; Sinclair, R.; Lew, T. T.; Bisker, G.; 
Liu, P.; Strano, M. S. Nitroaromatic Detection and Infrared Communication From Wild￾Type Plants Using PlantNanobionics. Nat. Mater. 2016, 16(2), 264–272. doi:10.1038/
nmat4771
Zhang, J.; Boghossian, A. A.; Barone, P. W.; Rwei, A.; Kim, J. H.; Lin, D.; Heller, D. A., et 
al. Single Molecule Detection of Nitric Oxide Enabled by d(AT)(15) DNA Adsorbed to 
Near Infrared Fluorescent Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 20, 
567–581.
Zhu, X. G.; Long, S. P.; Ort, D. R. Improving Photosynthetic Efficiency for Greater Yield. 
Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 2010, 61, 235–261Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture: An Innovative and Eco-Friendly Approach. Vishnu D. 
Rajput, Abhishek Singh, Tatiana M. Minkina, Krishan K. Verma, and Awani Kumar Singh (Eds.)
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: 
Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials
SHIVANGI MISHRA, RAKHI SINGH, and SUKH VEER SINGH
Department of Food Science and Technology, National Institute of 
Food Technology Entrepreneurship and Management, Kundli, Sonepat, 
Haryana, India.
CHAPTER 15
ABSTRACT
Food safety and quality is the foremost duty of food-business operator to 
make hazard-free human life. Therefore, it is a primary concern of human 
well-being. To make proper food safety and quality system, it is necessary 
to monitor every step of food processing from farm to fork, including food 
product storage. However, monitoring all steps is not an easy task. It neces￾sitates developing rapid, sensitive, safe, and efficient methods to monitor 
quality changes in biological, chemical, and physical hazards to meet the 
demand for eco-friendly processing. Nanotechnology plays a tremendous 
role in developing such kinds of detectors, nanosensors and biosensors. 
nanosensors and biosensors can be defined as a type of analytical device 
biologically derived material that help in the detection of any undesirable 
hazard or chemical changes in the food system. It is a compassionate 
monitoring strategy to detect the shelf-life of food products and even slight 
changes in packaging material responsible for food safety and quality. Use of 
nanosensors are varied from product to product, but the overall role of these 
sensors is to ensure food quality. This chapter mainly focuses on different 
nanosensors, their roles, and their impact on food quality monitoring, such 
as pesticides, contaminants, and foodborne pathogens.334 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
15.1 INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, nanosensors are a very emerging and promising tool for various 
agriculture and food production sectors (Rajput et al., 2021a). Nanosensors 
are advanced and give better results than traditional physicochemical, micro￾bial, and biological analysis methods (Singh et al., 2020a; Singh et al., 2021a). 
We can utilize nanosensors in various agriculture and food processing fields 
to detect microbial infection and microbial toxins, pollutants, and toxicants. 
Nanosensors assume a vital part in checking the period of usability of the 
item (Joyner and kumar, 2015). In food manufacturing, nanosensors play 
a significant role in food packaging and food transport. Nanosensors can 
further improve food packaging through their chemical and electro-optical 
properties (Omanović-Mikličanin and Maksimović, 2016). Nanosensors are 
like any other sensors, yet their creation is at the nanoscale. In this way, 
nanosensors can be characterized as tiny/little gadgets that can undoubtedly 
tie to what is needed to be distinguished and convey back a message in the 
form of signals. However, all these nanosensors have an excellent capability 
to detect and give a response in the form of signals that can be used by 
humans (Lu and Bowle, 2013). 
Impact of nanosensors on food production and agriculture-related feld 
is increasing day by day because nanosensors provide a better and easy way 
to detect something like inactive packaging various sensing agents are used 
and they easily detect the problem and give the response in various ways 
like by changing the color of packaging material (Rajput et al., 2021b). It 
is also used in shelf-healing composite. Many techniques are used for the 
development of nanosensors:
1. Top-down lithography 
2. Self-assembly of molecule 
3. Assembly of bottom-up. 
According to Omanović and Maksimović (2016), nanosensors gadget 
can be classifed into the following fve categories: 
1. Nanostructured materials, for example, porous silicon 
2. Sensors made with nanoparticles
3. Nano probes 
4. Nanowire nanosensors 
5. Nano system: cantilevers, nanoelectromechanical system 
For food analysis, nanosensors can be divided intoNanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials 335
1. Nanoparticle-based nanosensors
2. Electrochemical nanosensors
3. Optical nanosensors
There are various nanosensors used to monitor the food quality like mois￾ture sensors for monitoring the moisture level, oxygen sensors for monitoring 
oxygen level, compact nano sensing devices to identify synthetic substances 
that are not good for consumption, microorganism, and poisonous matter in 
food. Nanosensors are helpful to improve the quality of packaging material 
because they have specifc unique physical and chemical properties. The use 
of nanosensors in food packaging ensures that the food that comes in contact 
with consumers is safe and free from any foodborne diseases, in this way, it 
ensures food safety. Signifcant advantages of nanosensors are in analyzing 
and sensing real-time information regarding the product from production to 
the end consumers (Omanović and Maksimović, 2016).
15.2 CONCEPTUAL IDEA ABOUT NANOSENSORS 
Nanosensor can be defined as a sensing device that has a sensing dimension 
not more than 100 nm. Nanosensors perform various roles and are used as 
instruments for: (1) identifying the biochemical level in cellular organelles; 
(2) measuring the nanoscopic material which has small particles in the food 
processing and other industry and ecosystem; (3) use as the sensors for 
packaging materials (Kissinger, 2005).
The nanosensors are grouped into the following four major categories: 
1. Optical nonosensors 
2. Mechanical and vibrational nanosensors 
3. Electromagnetic nanosensors
4. Nanobiosensors
15.2.1 OPTICAL NANOSENSORS 
Optical nanosensors that were invented for the first time were based on fluo￾rescein, and this fluorescein caught inside a polyacrylamide nanoparticle, 
and these nanosensors were utilized for the pH estimations (Lee et al., 1996). 
The most basic concept about fluorescent chemosensors is that molecules of 
these chemosensors have at least one substrate binding unit and one photoac￾tive component (de Silva et al., 1997). Molecule base color or dye probe 336 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
inside a cell is the most basic optical nanosensors, which is essential for a 
direct cell loading of fluorescent dyes. Many other types of optical nanosen￾sors are given in the following subsections.
15.2.1.1 FIBER OPTIC NANOSENSORS
These nanosensors have the remarkable capacity to measure crucial cellular 
processes in vivo. Basic conceptual understanding and monitoring of 
biological and cellular processes at the molecular cell level is essential to 
understand dynamic cell capacities further. When the target molecule A and 
receptor R interface, they produce a physicochemical perturbation that can 
change into electrical signals or other quantifiable signals. Then, they are 
picked by the optical probe and afterward sent into the information base 
(Song et al., 2004; Vo-Dinh and Cullum, 2000).
The fber optical nanosensors have been successful in various applica￾tions namely: 
1. In the measurement of benzopyrene tetrol and benzopyrene inside a 
single cell (Vo-Dinh and Cullum, 2000; Kasili et al., 2004)
2. For the monitoring of apoptosis (Kasili et al., 2004)
3. In the measurement of cytochrome (Song et al., 2004)
4. Optical nanosensors are helpful for the detection of cellular pH value 
as well as some ions such as K+
 and Ca2+, NO, NO2
−
, Cl−
, Na+
 (Lim 
and Ramakrishna, 2006)
15.2.1.2 PHOTONIC EXPLORER FOR BIOANALYSIS WITH BIOLOGICALLY 
LOCALIZED EMBEDDING SENSORS (PEBBLES)
There are some problems associated with the free moving fluorescent dye 
procedure and optical fiber methods. The invention of photonic explorer was 
done to deal with these issues, which has the capabilities of bioanalysis with 
a biologically embedding system. A nanoscale sensor encapsulates analyze 
specific dye and a reference dye inside a bio-based inert matrix. The short 
probe is less disruptive to the cellular environment and the inert matrix to 
protect the sensing phase from the cell environment, and this system prevents 
chemical interference (Lim and Ramakrishna, 2006). PEBBLEs are classi￾fied into the following four categories:
1. Polyacrylamide 
2. Polydecylmethacrylate Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials 337
3. Sol–gel 
4. Organically modified silicates 
15.2.2 ELECTROMAGNETIC NANOSENSORS 
Base on their physical mechanism, electromagnetic nanosensors are divided 
into two broad categories.
1. Measurement system based on electrical current measurement. 
2. Analysis by magnetic measuring system.
The electrical current measuring system is basically for two cases: 
analysis by current reduction and analysis by current enhancement. In the 
category of current reduction, Geng et al. (2005) studied the hydrogen sulfde 
and gold nanoparticles and interaction of these two components, and he 
found that when the adsorption of hydrogen sulfde molecule occurs on the 
nanoparticles. It changes the hopping behavior of electrons by its particles 
and this is called suppressed hopping phenomenon and these electrons are 
measured by recording the current across chromium and gold electrodes. 
When no exposure of hydrogen sulfde increases in current with applied 
voltage, but when exposure with hydrogen sulfde loss is observed. In the 
category of current advancement as nanosensors, carbon nanotubes are used, 
and these tubes are helpful in the monitoring of oxides such as glucose; apart 
from glucose, lactate oxidase is also detected by these tubes, and it also plays 
a crucial role in the detection of enzymes like dehydrogenase, peroxidase 
hydrogen peroxides, etc. 
15.2.3 MECHANICAL NANOSENSORS
The first mechanical nanosensors (Binh et al., 1994) were proposed to 
measure the vibrational and elastic characteristics of a nanosphere attached 
to a tapered cantilever. This work is vital for application in nanodevice 
components and nanoscale subassemblies in microelectronic devices (Lim 
and Ramakrishna, 2006).
15.2.4 BIOSENSORS
This is also a type of sensing device or a measurement system designed 
specifically for the estimation of material by using the biological interac￾tion then convert these accessing into the readable form with the help of 338 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
electromechanical transduction interpretation. The prominent functional role 
of biosensors is to sense a biologically specific material. It can be antibodies, 
amino acids, enzymes, immunological molecules, and so on. In the making of 
nanobiosensors, various nanomaterials are used, which improve the quality 
of biosensors (Kissinger, 2005). The transduction mechanism is a crucial 
component of biosensors; this mechanism is responsible for converting 
responses of bioanalytical interaction in an identifiable and reproducible 
manner (Malik et al., 2013). Some nanomaterials are listed in Table 15.1, 
which are used for preparing biosensors. 
TABLE 15.1 Nanomaterials Used for the Designing of Biosensors and Their Key Benefits.
Nanomaterials used 
in biosensors 
Benefits of nanomaterials References 
Carbon nanotubes Improved enzyme loading, provide better 
electrical communication 
(Malik et al., 2013)
Nanoparticles It helps in possessing good catalytic proper￾ties, provides better loading of analyte 
(Malik et al., 2013)
Quantum dots Brilliant fluoresce, quantum restriction of 
charge carriers,
(Malik et al. 2013)
Nanowires Have outstanding electrical and detecting 
properties for bio and chemical substance
(Malik et al., 2013)
A broad range of nanosensors are available, and their application and 
working have been discussed by various scientists. Some of the nanosensors 
are helpful in the detection of chemicals which is present inside a single cell, 
and some of them are useful in analysis of physicochemical properties of the 
product. In a short duration of their development, achievements of nanosen￾sors are remarkable and in upcoming days it is going to be more advance and 
compatible (Lim and Ramakrishna, 2006). Malik et al. (2013) reported that 
nanobiosensors can be classifed into three major categories based on their 
function and materials to prepare sensors. 
15.2.4.1 NANOPARTICLE-BASED SENSORS 
It is also further classified in a different category. Acoustic-wave biosensors 
are created to intensify the sensing reactions to exact the restriction limit of 
bio-detection. In these sensors, various stimulus-based effects are present 
(Su et al., 2000; Liu et al., 2004).Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials 339
15.2.4.1.1 Magnetic Biosensors 
These kinds of sensors utilize specially designed nanoparticles. The ferrite￾based material may be used as single or in combination—the prominent 
use of these sensors in the biomedical fields. The material with magnetic 
properties empowers much variety for the few logical applications that the 
constituent includes in screening have an iron with other charge material, 
and all have the various properties. Furthermore, with the consolidation of 
attractive nanoparticles, bio-detection have further become more sensitive 
and powerful (Richardson et al., 2001).
15.2.4.1.2 Electrochemical Biosensors
Electrochemical biosensors are used to investigate chemical and biological 
reactions with enhanced electrical means. Moreover, these types of instru￾ments are made up of metallic nanoparticles. Metallic nanoparticles help in 
a chemical reaction between biomolecules which help in accomplished to 
immobilize one of the reactants (Cai et al., 2001).
15.2.4.2 NANOTUBE-BASED SENSORS
In the realm of material science and optoelectronic application nowadays, 
carbon nanotubes are perhaps the most mainstream nanomaterials. These 
nanotubes have electronic conductivity, adoptable actual calculation high￾lights, and ever dynamic physical–mechanical properties. Moreover, due 
to these properties, both single-walled and multiwall nanotubes are utilized 
to design biosensors that provide better performance (Davis et al., 2003; 
Sotiropoulou et al., 2003).
15.2.4.3 NANOWIRE-BASED NANOSENSORS
Nanowires are the arrangement of one-dimensional nanostructure which 
have good electron transport properties. Usually, nanowire-based sensors 
are few. However, some research and literature report some great utilization 
of nanowires altogether which enhance the performance of these sensors for 
the detection of biological materials. Cullum et al. (2000) reported that gold￾electrode-coated ZnO nanotubes are utilizing for the detection of hydrazine 340 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
by using amperometric response. Nanowires are versatile and much better 
than nanotubes. Nanowires provide various modifications in their working 
and arrangement profile by optimized procedural parameters during 
synthesis. Some scholars reported the striking highlights of nanowires and 
clarified their utilization in excellent conduction and detection of biological 
stimulus (Malik et al., 2013). By exploring various literatures, we can say 
that nanomaterials are profoundly prosperous for lighting up the sensing 
and detecting innovation and have worked on the diagnostic, analytical, and 
detection procedures in a considerable amount at a time. Some nano-based 
materials like quantum dots have been added as tags with the dyes, and these 
kinds of sensors yielded thermochromic, photochromic, and electrochromic 
material shows extreme sensitive detection that can be easily monitored. In 
this way, various nanosensors positively impact food quality because due 
to these easy and fast monitoring patterns, food quality analysis becomes 
precise, and convenient day by day.
15.3 APPLICATIONS OF NANOSENSORS IN THE FOOD INDUSTRY 
AND FOOD QUALITY MONITORING 
Nowadays, various nanosensors are developed for use in different applica￾tions in the agriculture and food industry. For example, for the detection of 
growth of microorganism, nanosensors used in food packaging other than 
this nanosensors use in supply-line process control and for keeping an eye 
on the storage environment which is very helpful for fend off food poisoning 
(Augustin and Sanguansri, 2009). For example, a team of scientists devel￾oped a nanoparticle made of gold and coated these nanoparticles with that 
molecule, which can bind to substances like pesticides. By using these 
nanoparticles, farmers can detect the chemical like pesticides (Debnath and 
Das, 2013). 
One more literature reported that nanosensors are ideally suited for food 
forensic like investigation of food origin, adulteration, and contamination. 
Nanosensors are very convenient in detecting and monitoring instantaneous 
information related to the product. Nanosensors can get information quickly 
and analyze the data and generate the result in a concise duration. Because 
of this, nanosensors are very helpful in monitoring the critical control point 
in the food supply chain from the point where food is processed or manu￾factured until is consumed. Nanosensors can provide quality assurance as 
they help track microbes, toxins, pathogens, pesticides, metals throughout Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials 341
the food processing chain by using data for automated control function 
and documentation (Prasad, 2014). List of commercially available intel￾ligent packaging is given in Table 15.2. A redox dye has been developed 
for in-package oxygen detection, based on nanosized TiO2
 or SuO2
 particles 
(Mills, 2005). Nanoparticle-based nanosensors have also been developed to 
detect the moisture content within the food (Luechinger et al., 2007).
TABLE 15.2 Commercially Available Intelligent Packaging and Their Application.
Application Trade name Company name
Time and temperature indicators Cook-check 
Time strip 
Thermax
Checkpoint 
Pymah corp.
Time strip plc
Thermographic measurement limited 
Vista 
Integrity indicators Novas 
Time strip 
Ageless eye 
Insignia Technologies Ltd.
Time strip Ltd.
Mistubishi Gas Chemical Inc.
Radiofrequency identification Tempt rip Tempt rip LLC.
Source: Fuertes et al. (2016)
In recent years, nanotechnology market proliferates; according to a survey 
study, the leading manufacturer of nanofood (in which nanotechnology is 
used) is in the United States, followed by Japan and China. Around 400 plus 
companies are currently producing the nanofood. Nonchocolate are very 
much famous nowadays in delivering the nutrient to cell without afecting 
the color and taste of food products (Kalita and Baruah, 2019). 
Various nanosensors based on nanoparticles are developed to analyze the 
moisture content inside a food packaging (Luechinger et al., 2007). There 
is a vast application of nanosensors in food and food-related industries. 
Nanosensors are used as a favor enhancer, which is nano encapsulated with 
some favoring compound and delivers the favor in a particular food. Some 
nanotubes and nanoparticles act as a scofng agent. Figure 15.1 shows the 
various applications of nanosensors in various felds of food processing. The 
development of DNA biochips helps to detect pathogens and toxicants caused 
by bacteria, yeast, and molds. Some nanosensors act as electronic tongues 
as they detect diferent favors when incorporated into food material. It also 342 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
helps in the detection of some gases like ethylene. In simple words, we can 
say that nanosensors play a signifcant role in every feld of food processing 
and agriculture processing (Omanović-Mikličanin and Maksimović, 2016).
FIGURE 15.1 Application of nanosensors in various fields of food technology.
15.4 ROLE OF NANOSENSORS IN FOOD QUALITY
The role of nanosensors in food quality is a multifactorial and multilevel 
concern because nanosensors play a crucial role in food quality monitoring, 
and due to the development of nanosensors, many of the critical and arduous 
tasks and monitoring procedures related to food quality become easy. There￾fore, crucial role of the nanosensors in the food quality are given below. 
15.4.1 NANOSENSORS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF INTELLIGENT 
FOOD PACKAGING
The significant impact of nanosensors in food quality monitoring is basically 
on the development of intelligent packaging material. We all know that safe 
and wholesome food products are one of the main objectives of food law. 
Packaging materials play a critical role in food safety because packages 
provide protection, better conversation mediums with consumers to convey 
food-related information, ergonomics, and marketing. The primary function 
of packages is containment means ensure the right amount of product to Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials 343
delay or keep away from any spill or leakage. Moreover, it is observed that 
the physical properties of packages and improvement in the safety aspect of 
food packaging are the expectation that affects consumer acceptability and 
sale of products. In this context, intelligent packaging is a better option. 
Intelligent packaging is any food container or packaging box that provides 
a particular property beyond the essential functions of packaging material. 
Intelligent packaging is a packaging technology that monitors the interac￾tion of food, packaging material, and the environment through internal and 
external indicators, these packaging materials analyze the system, collect 
information, and present it without affecting food quality. 
Nowadays, when consumers are very conscious about what they eat, 
and due to this, they are very curious about the ingredient of product and 
how the product store, use and discarded after use, intelligent packaging 
technology provides packaging material with intelligent tags and stickers, 
which can have a conversation with the consumer at frst hand with the help 
of packing flm instruments that provide visual information (Singh et al., 
2020b, 2021b). The primary application of these packaging materials is time 
and temperature, integrity, freshness, and radio-frequency identifcation of 
food products. This efective use of nanosensors for time and temperature 
indicators is due to their intelligibility, economical, afordable, and efcient 
work system. This indicator is majorly utilizing to observe and interpret to 
the consumer about standard characteristics of food products. In the form of 
tiny chips or stickers, time, and temperature indicator (TTI) is attached with 
the containers of food product. TTI gives a particular indication by chemical 
changes when the food is exposed to some diferent environment which is 
not suitable for their quality. Time and temperature indicators are specifcally 
essential for monitoring chilled or frozen food’s quality characteristics and 
safety. 
After TTI, most used sensors are freshness indicator and integrity indi￾cator, freshness and novelty indicator directly indicate the characteristics of 
a food product either it is edible or not. It is also present in the form of labels 
on the packaging material. A signifcant role of the freshness indicator is 
to monitor the very frst kind of change and detect these changes. Usually, 
a color reaction is generated that can be easily analyzed and matched up 
with the freshness of food. So, biosensors are used in this type of indicator. 
Radiofrequency identifcation detector (RFID) tags are more advanced kind 
of indicators that support specifc statistical information that can fnd any 
food product with specifc marked tag/labels that emit radio waves. These 
kinds of tags categorizes into four classes:344 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
1. Active 
2. Passive 
3. Semiactive 
4. Semipassive
Depending on their function these tags are attached in the same way 
as the other tags are attached with packaging material, but these tags can 
be easily accessible from several meters away beyond the limit of sight. 
Nevertheless, RFID is very much expensive than other indicators that are 
signifcantly less expensive. These current advancements of nanosensors 
have high potential benefts for the food industry, and intelligent and active 
packaging systems focus on food security and safety, and the demand for 
this technology increasing day by day the eventual fate of food security is 
majorly dependent on the innovation head way of nanosensors. These new 
bundling frameworks can aid in the location tracking, and convey throughout 
the store duration (Fuertes et al., 2016). 
15.4.2 NANOSENSORS IN FOOD PROCESSING AND SAFETY 
During food processing, nanoparticle nanomaterials are added to food to 
improve its nutritional quality. Sometimes, these particles give some specific 
taste, color, and texture to food and increase the product’s shelf-life. Recent 
advancements in the field of nanotechnology help to develop nanosensors for 
the detection of foodborne pathogens or toxins (Rashidi and Khosravi-Darani, 
2011). For example, immunosensing of Staphylococcus sp. Enterotoxin B 
using polydimethylsiloxane chips with reinforced fluid bilayer membrane 
and specific antibodies to the toxins (Dong et al., 2006). Development of 
G-liposomal nanovesicles-based immune magnetic bead sandwich assay for 
detecting Escherichia coli O157:H7, salmonella sp., and listeria monocytes 
in food. (Rashidi and Khosravi-Darani, 2011). In the agriculture fields, 
nanoparticles-based innovative nanosensors are used for rapid warning of 
changing conditions that can respond to different conditions. Several other 
bio-based nanosensors are developed to detect the most common food patho￾gens and mycotoxin in food (Durán and Marcato, 2013). Nanobiosensors are 
utilized as taking care of supplement media and substrate combination into 
the bioreactors. Thus, much large-scale commercial preparation and separa￾tion can be ameliorated with these sensors. In addition, nanobiosensors are 
used for filtration purposes at the industrial level. According to the working 
condition and composition, various nanobiosensors are available as thermal Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials 345
biosensors that are used to analyze samples based on the heat over time 
(Mello and kubota, 2002; Fuertes et al., 2016). 
Nanobiosensors play a signifcant role in detecting foodborne diseases 
whereas traditional methods like ELISA and HPLC are expensive and time￾consuming. However, nanobiosensors may not just assist in pathogenic food 
identifcation in a limited time, and it is efectively versatile and gives a 
speedy, explicit, and designated approach. Biosensors play a signifcant role 
in detecting foodborne toxins and help detect many pesticides that come in 
food from agriculture form, and these pesticides afect the quality of food 
and afect the quality of water and the environment. Acetylcholinesterase￾based electrochemical and optical biosensors alongside nanomaterials like 
carbon nanotube, quantum dab, graphene, and nanocomposite are utilized to 
identify various pesticides like carbonyl and monocrotophos, DDVP (insec￾ticide), and phoxim in the test sample within 10 min (Chauhan et al., 2019). 
A wide range of toxins present in food and the environment and their 
detection on time is a big challenge, but these problems are somewhat 
overcome by using the third generation of nanobiosensors. For example, 
graphene-based fuorescence resonance energy transfer biosensors were 
developed similarly to other graphene-based immunosensors to detect 
fumonisin B1
, afatoxin, diarrheic shellfsh poisoning toxin, and sax toxin in 
food samples (Ferreira et al., 2018). Various other studies also concentrated 
on polyphenol measurement in food samples. Phospholipid, phthalocyanine, 
and AgNP-based biosensor and optic laccase biosensor were mapped out to 
quantify the level catechol in cofee samples (Aguila et al., 2015). Alessio 
et al. (2016) and Bilir et al. (2016) designed nitrogen-doped MWCNT (Lac/
CNx-MWCNT) and on graphene oxide (Lac/GO)-based biosensor on sensing 
both important compounds one is catechol and the second one is catechin in 
wine sample which have a detection limit of 10−8 mol/L. An amperometric 
biosensor was also developed to analyze polyphenol in various food products 
such as tea leaves, alcoholic beverages, and water (Narang et al., 2013). In 
this way, food quality and safety are majorly afected by the nanosensors. In 
future, the use of these nanosensors increases with some advancement in the 
technology of nanosensors. Quality monitoring and analysis of food quality 
become straightforward with the nanosensors.
15.4.3 NANOSENSORS IN FOOD STORAGE
Various nanosensors are developed, which help to detect bacteria and several 
other contaminants, such as Salmonella sp., in food packaging plants. These 346 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
sensors are beneficial in regulating the environment of foodstuff. In addi￾tion, this system allows monitoring to the self-system and reduce the cost 
of sending the sample to the laboratory for testing. More than 80% of the 
market with bakery and meat products utilizes nanosensors-based packaging 
material correctly monitor the storage and quality of products. In this field, 
massive demand of nanosensor is found as oxygen scavenger, moisture 
observer, and barrier packing material. Some examples are gold nanopar￾ticle incorporated enzymes used for microbial detection and gas sensing 
related to the environmental condition in which food is placed. ZnO and 
TiO2
 nanocomposite are used for the volatile organic compound and nano 
barcodes are widely used for the tagging and security. In this way, the use of 
nanosensors or intelligent sensors for the storage, packaging, and different 
parts of the food processing system is beneficial for the consumer by which 
they know very well about the quality of food. Moreover, this technology 
is beneficial for the producer itself because they can rapidly distribute the 
authentic product (Kalita and Baruah, 2019). 
15.5 CONCLUSIONS
The nanosensors and nanotechnology give many benefits and positively 
affect the quality of food. The application of nanosensors and nanotech￾nology increase in a swift manner. Due to its fast and accurate result, it is 
beneficial for the food producer. It reduces wastage and the extra cost for 
keeping and storage facility. It helps in enhancing the production, increase 
the shelf-life, and monitor food quality throughout storage without extra 
effort. In the future, the use of nanosensors would be increased for monitoring 
and analysis of food quality which would be straightforward. Consequently, 
the use of nanosensors or intelligent sensors in the storage, packaging, and 
different part of the food processing system is beneficial for the consumers 
by which they know very well about the quality of food.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book chapter was supported by the National Institute of Food Tech￾nology Entrepreneurship and Management (NIFTEM), set up by Ministry of 
Food Processing Industries (MOFPI), Government of India, Kundli, Sonepat 
district, Haryana, under Delhi NCR.Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials 347
AUTHOR DISCLOSURES:
The authors declare no conflict of interest, financial, or otherwise.
KEYWORDS
• biosensors
• monitoring
• nanosensors
• quality
• safety 
REFERENCES
Aguila, S. A.; Shimomoto, D.; Ipinza, F.; Bedolla-Valdez, Z. I.; Romo-Herrera, J.; Contreras, 
O. E.; Alonso-Núñez, G. A Biosensor Based on Coriolopsis Gallica Laccase Immobilized 
on Nitrogen-Doped Multiwalled Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene Oxide for Polyphenol 
Detection. Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater. 2015.
Alessio, P.; Martin, C. S.; De Saja, J. A.; Rodriguez-Mendez, M. L. Mimetic Biosensors 
Composed by Layer-by-Layer Films of Phospholipid, Phthalocyanine and Silver 
Nanoparticles to Polyphenol Detection. Sens. Actuators B Chem. 2016, 233, 654–666.
Augustin, M. A.; Sanguansri, P. Nanostructured Materials in the Food Industry. Adv. Food 
Nutr. Res. 2009, 58, 183–213.
Bilir, K.; Weil, M. T.; Lochead, J.; KÖK, F. N.; Werner, T. Construction of an Oxygen 
Detection-Based Optic Laccase Biosensor for Polyphenolic Compound Detection. Turk. J. 
Biol. 2016, 40(6), 1303–1310.
Binh, V. T; Garcia, N.; Levanuyk, A. L. A Mechanical nanosensor in the Gigahertz Range: 
Where Mechanics Meets Electronics. Surf. Sci. 1994, 301(1--3), L224–L228.
Cai, H.; Xu, C.; He, P.; Fang, Y. Colloid Au-enhanced DNA Immobilization for the 
Electrochemical Detection of Sequence-Specific DNA. J. Electroanal. Chem. 2001, 510(1–
2), 78--85.
Chauhan, N.; Jain, U.; Soni, S. Sensors for Food Quality Monitoring. In Nanoscience for 
Sustainable Agriculture; Springer: Cham, 2019; pp. 601–626.
Cullum, B. M.; Griffin, G. D.; Miller, G. H.; Vo-Dinh, T. Intracellular Measurements in 
Mammary Carcinoma Cells Using Fiber-Optic nanosensors. Anal. Biochem. 2000, 277(1), 
25–32.
Davis, J. J.; Coleman, K. S.; Azamian, B. R.; Bagshaw, C. B.; Green, M. L. Chemical and 
Biochemical Sensing With Modified Single Walled Carbon Nanotubes. Chem. A Euro. J. 
2003, 9(16), 3732–3739.348 Nanotechnology for Sustainable Agriculture
De Silva, A. P.; Gunaratne, H. N.; Gunnlaugsson, T.; Huxley, A. J.; McCoy, C. P.; 
Rademacher, J. T.; Rice, T. E. Signaling Recognition Events With Fluorescent Sensors and 
Switches. Chem. Rev. 1997, 97(5), 1515–1566.
Debnath, N.; Das, S. Nanobiosensor: Current Trends and Applications. In NanoBioMedicine; 
Springer: Singapore, 2020; pp 389--409. 
Dong, Y.; Phillips, K. S.; Cheng, Q. Immunosensing of Staphylococcus Enterotoxin B (SEB) 
in Milk With PDMS Microfluidic Systems Using Reinforced Supported Bilayer Membranes 
(r-SBMs). Lab Chip 2006, 6(5), 675–681.
Durán, N.; Marcato, P. D. Nanobiotechnology Perspectives. Role of Nanotechnology in the 
Food Industry: A Review. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; Int. J. Food Sci. Technol. 2013, 48(6), 
1127–34. DOI: 10.1111/IJFS.12027.
Ferreira, N. S.; Cruz, M. G.; Gomes, M. T. S.; Rudnitskaya, A. Potentiometric Chemical 
Sensors for the Detection of Paralytic Shellfish Toxins. Talanta 2018, 181, 380–384.
Fuertes, G.; Soto, I.; Carrasco, R.; Vargas, M.; Sabattin, J.; Lagos, C. Intelligent Packaging 
Systems: Sensors and nanosensors to Monitor Food Quality and Safety. J. Sens. 2016.
Geng, J.; Thomas, M. D.; Shephard, D. S.; Johnson, B. F. Suppressed Electron Hopping 
in a Au Nanoparticle/H 2 S System: Development Towards a H 2 S nanosensor. Chem. 
Commun. 2005, (14), 1895–1897.
Joyner, J. J.; Kumar, D. V. nanosensors and Their Applications in Food Analysis: A Review.
Int. J. Sci. Technol. 2015, 3(4), 80.
Kalita, D.; Baruah, S. The Impact of Nanotechnology on Food. In Nanomaterials Applications 
for Environmental Matrices; Elsevier, 2019; pp 369–379. 
Kasili, P. M.; Song, J. M.; Vo-Dinh, T. Optical Sensor for the Detection of Caspase-9 Activity 
in a Single Cell. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126(9), 2799–2806.
Kissinger, P. T. Biosensors—a perspective. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2005, 20(12), 2512–2516.
Lee, C.; Itoh, T.; Sasaki, G.; Suga, T. Sol-gel Derived PZT Force Sensor for Scanning Force 
Microscopy. Mater. Chem. Phys. 1996, 44(1), 25–29.
Lim, T. C.; Ramakrishna, S. A Conceptual Review of nanosensors. Zeitschrift für 
Naturforschung A. 2006, 61(7–8), 402–412.
Liu, T.; Tang, J. A.; Jiang, L. The Enhancement Effect of Gold Nanoparticles as a Surface 
Modifier on DNA Sensor Sensitivity. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 2004, 313(1), 3–7.
Lu, J.; Bowles, M. How Will Nanotechnology Affect Agricultural Supply Chains? Int. Food 
Agribus. Manag. Rev. 2013, 16(1030-2016-82815), 21–42.
Luechinger, N. A.; Loher, S.; Athanassiou, E. K.; Grass, R. N.; Stark, W. J. Highly Sensitive 
Optical Detection of Humidity on Polymer/Metal Nanoparticle Hybrid Films. Langmuir
2007, 23(6), 3473–3477.
Malik, P.; Katyal, V.; Malik, V.; Asatkar, A.; Inwati, G.; Mukherjee, T. K. Nanobiosensors: 
Concepts and Variations. Int. Sch. Res. Notices 2013.
Mello, L. D.; Kubota, L. T. Review of the Use of Biosensors as Analytical Tools in the Food 
and Drink Industries. Food Chem. 2002, 77(2), 237–256.
Mills, A. Oxygen Indicators and Intelligent Inks for Packaging Food. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2005,
34(12), 1003–1011.
Narang, J.; Chauhan, N.; Rani, P.; Pundir, C. S. Construction of an Amperometric TG 
Biosensor Based on AuPPy Nanocomposite and Poly (indole-5-carboxylic acid) Modified 
Au Electrode. Bioproc. Biosyst. Eng. 2013, 36(4), 425–432.
Omanović-Mikličanina, E.; Maksimović, M. nanosensors Applications in Agriculture and 
Food Industry. Bull. Chem. Technol. Bosnia. Herzegovina. 2016, 47, 59–70.Nanosensors and Nanobiosensors: Nanoparticles as Sensing Materials 349
Prasad, S. Nanobiosensors: Ihe Future for Diagnosis of Disease? Nanobiosens. Dis. Diagn. 
2014, 3, 1–10.
Rajput, V.; Singh, A.; Minkina, T.; Shende, S.; Kumar, P.; Verma, K.; Bauer, T.; Gorobtsova, 
O.; Deneva, S.; Sindireva, A. Potential Applications of Nanobiotechnology in Plant 
Nutrition and Protection for Sustainable Agriculture. Nanotechnol. Plant Growth Promot. 
Protect 2021a, 79–92
Rajput, V.; Minkina, T.; Feizi, M.; Kumari, A.; Khan, M.; Mandzhieva, S.; Sushkova, S.; 
El-Ramady, H.; Verma, K.; Singh, A.; Hullebusch, E.; Singh, R.; Jatav, H.; Choudhary, 
R. Effects of Silicon and Silicon-Based Nanoparticles on Rhizosphere Microbiome, Plant 
Stress and Growth. Biology 2021b, 10(8), 7–9.
Rashidi, L.; Khosravi-Darani, K. The Applications of Nanotechnology in Food Industry. Crit. 
Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 2011, 51(8), 723–730.
Richardson, J.; Hawkins, P.; Luxton, R. The Use of Coated Paramagnetic Particles as a 
Physical Label in a Magneto-Immunoassay. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2001, 16(9–12), 989–993.
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D.; Mehrotra, R.; Pal, N.; Singh, V. K.; Minkina, T.; Chokheli, V. A.; 
Singh, R. K. In Sustainable Soil Fertility Management; Nova. Sci. Publishers, Inc., 2020a; 
vol 1, pp 73–100. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V.; Rawat, S.; Kumar Singh, A.; Bind, A.; Kumar Singh, A.; Chernikova, N.; 
Voloshina, M., Lobzenko, I. Monitoring Soil Salinity and Recent Advances in Mechanism 
of Salinity Tolerance in Plants. Biogeosyst. Techniq. 2020b, 7(2). https://doi.org/10.13187/
bgt.2020.2.66
Singh, A.; Rajput, V. D., Rawat, S.; Sharma, R.; Singh, A. K.; Singh, A. K.; Tomar, R. S. In: 
Emerging Tools for SustainableAgriculture and Food Security; Rajput, D.; Book Agency: 
New Delhi, Delhi, 2021a; vol 1, pp 1–15. 
Singh, A.; Rajput, V.; Singh, A.; Sengar, R.; Singh, R.; Minkina, T. Transformation Techniques 
and Their Role in Crop Improvements: A Global Scenario of GM Crops. Policy Issues 
Genetically Modified Crops 2021b, 1, 515–542.
Song, J. M.; Kasili, P. M.; Griffin, G. D.; Vo-Dinh, T. Detection of Cytochrome C in a Single 
Cell Using an Optical Nanobiosensor. Anal. Chem. 2004, 76(9), 2591--2594.
Sotiropoulou, S.; Gavalas, V.; Vamvakaki, V.; Chaniotakis, N. A. Novel Carbon Materials in 
Biosensor Systems. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2003, 18(2--3), 211--215.
Su, X.; Chew, F. T.; Li, S. F. Design and Application of Piezoelectric Quartz Crystal-Based 
Immunoassay. Anal. Sci. 2000, 16(2), 107–114.
Vo-Dinh, T.; Cullum, B. Biosensors and Biochips: Advances in Biological and Medical 
Diagnostics. Fresenius’ J Anal. 2000.Index
A
Abiotic stress
nanomaterial role in plants
advantages, 170
cultivated plants, 165–166
nanofertilizers, 166–170
as stressors, 175–176
surveys on, 171–173
toxic contaminates, remediation, 
170–175
AGNPS by microorganisms
synthesizing, 42
bacteria, 43
fungi, use, 43
plant viruses, 43
Agricultural importance
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), 106
biocontrol activity, 107
biological nitrogen fixation, 104–106
secondary metabolites, 106–107
Al2
O3
 membranes, 263–264
Antifungal pathogenic, 143–144
mechanism of, 150–151
sliver, 141–142
zinc, 142–143
Antiviral activity
mechanism of, 150–151
Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), 106
ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABC), 
108
B
Bead-based assays, 310
Beneficial traits of agriculturally, 105
Biological and chemical method
bacterial synthesized, 140–141
copper, 139
sliver, 139–140
titanium oxide, 140
zinc NPS, 140
Biological nanopores
bacteriophage phi29, 262
α-Hemolysin, 261
MSPA, 262
Biosensors
nanoparticle-based sensors, 338
nanotube-based sensors, 339
nanowire-based nanosensors, 339–340
Biotechnology methods
abiotic factor, 286–287
biological control agents, 289–290
cultural control, 290–292
economic injury levels (EILs), 287
host plant resistance (HPR), 287
help IPM, 287–288
in insect population, 287
limitation, 293–294
C
Carbon nanomaterials (CNMS), 81–82
comparison and effect, 89
comparison and effects, 89
graphene, 88–89
microbial populations, effect, 83–85
MWCNTs, 85–86
SWCNTs, 86–87
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 80, 187
Cerium oxide (CeO2
), 100
Chemical synthesis method, 147
chitosan NPs, 145
copper, 145–146
magnesium oxide, 146
silver, 146–147
Chromium trioxide (Cr2
O3
), 100
Colony-forming units (CFUs), 84
Copper oxide, 93–94
Crop improvement, 255
biological nanopores
bacteriophage phi29, 262
α-Hemolysin, 261
MSPA, 262352 Index
limitations, 275
principle, 257–258
soild-state
Al2
O3
 membranes, 263–264
Si3
N4
 and SiO2
, 263
speed control, 271–274
translocation sensing, mechanisms, 269
ionic current blockades, 269
optical recognition, 271
transverse current measurements, 
269–270
transverse current measurements
field-effect transistors (FETs), 270
semiconductor current, 270–271
tunneling current, 270
type, 258–261
biological nanopores, 261
commercial biological, 268
hybrid, 264–267
oxford nanopore technologies (ONT), 
268
single-layer, 264
soild-state, 262–263
Crop production
abiotic factor, 286–287
biological control agents, 289–290
cultural control, 290–292
economic injury levels (EILs), 287
host plant resistance (HPR), 287
help IPM, 287–288
in insect population, 287
limitation, 293–294
Crop protection
nanofertilizer, 10
nanofungicides, 9
nanoherbicides, 9
nano-insecticides, 8
Cyanophycin grana proteins (CGPs), 104
D
Drawback of nanotechnology, 238–240
Drosophila melanogaster, 8
E
Economic injury levels (EILs), 287
Electrochemical biosensors, 339
Extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), 103
F
Field-effect transistors (FETs), 270
First green revolution, 227–228
Flodots, 309–310
Food processing and safety, 344–345
Food storage, 345–346
G
Genetic engineering, 236
H
α-Hemolysin, 261
Higher plant ROS-savaging ability, 328–329
Host plant resistance (HPR), 287
help IPM, 287–288
in insect population, 287
I
ICAR-Indian Institute of Soybean Research 
(ICAR-IISR), 213
Improved plant breeding
bead-based assays, 310
flodots, 309–310
gold NPs, 312
luminex, 310–311
microspheres, 310
nano arrays, 312
nanobarcodes, 312
nanochips, 312
nanopore, 311–312
nanoproduct use
anabolic plant roids, 316
CAL MAG nitrate, 316
hydroponic system, 317
nano silicate, 317
nano-boron, 317
nano-iron, 318–319
nano-magnesium, 318
nano-molybdenum, 318
nano-nitrogen, 319
nano-phosphorus, 319
nano-potassium, 319
nanosilver, 318
nano-sulfur, 319
nanotech T5 reflector, 313
nano-zinc, 320
NeuCytokin®, 320Index 353
Neuselen-X®, 320
PK boost, 316
plant growth promoter HTNY-03, 316
Primo Maxx® growth regulator, 316
root zone mass (RZM), 317
seed speed, 317
sunblaster nanodome, 313–315
QBEADS, 311
quantum dots, 309–310
silica microspores, 311
Innovative nanotechnology
in modern agriculture
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 187
microorganism and soil enzyme, 188–189
nanomaterial on soil, impact, 187–188
on plant health, consequences, 189–190
polychlorineated biphenyl (PCB’s), 188
Intelligent food packaging, 342–344
L
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs), 326
Lignin peroxidase (LiP), 87
Lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 108
Luminex, 310–311
M
Magnetic biosensors, 339
Manganese peroxidase (MnP), 87
Methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), 99
Microbial growth
agricultural importance, 103
plant pathogens, 102
profitable soil microorganisms, 102–103
Multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), 
80, 329
N
Nanobionics aid in agriculture
application
crop production, 327–329
in environment, aspect, 329–330
crop production
higher plant ROS-savaging ability, 
328–329
improve photosynthesis efficiency, 
327–328
layered double hydroxides (LDHs), 326
multiwalled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs), 329
plant nanobionic in environment
nitroaromatics, 329
temperature detector, 329–330
plant nanotechnology, 326–327
application, 327
single-walled carbon nanotubes 
(SWNTs), 327
Nano-fertilizers (NFS), 23
agro-ecosystems, development, 29–30
born (B), 29
copper (Cu), 26
foliar and soil exposure, 22–23
iron (Fe), 25–26
macronutrient, 23
manganese (Mn), 26
nitrogen (N), 23–24
phosphorus (P), 24
in plants, 21–22
potassium (K), 24
silicon (Si), 26–29
zinc (Zn), 25
Nanoparticles as sensing materials
biosensors
nanoparticle-based sensors, 338
nanotube-based sensors, 339
nanowire-based nanosensors, 339–340
conceptual idea, 335
biosensors, 337–338
electromagnetic, 337
mechanical, 337
optical nanosensors, 335–336
nanoparticle-based sensors
electrochemical biosensors, 339
magnetic biosensors, 339
nanosensors in food industry
applications of, 340–342
optical nanosensors
fiber, 337
photonic explorer for bioanalysis, 
336–337
radiofrequency identification detector 
(RFID), 344
role, 342
food processing and safety, 344–345
food storage, 345–346
intelligent food packaging, 342–344
temperature indicator (TTI), 343354 Index
Nano-pesticides (NPS)
AGNPS by microorganisms, 
synthesizing, 42
bacteria, 43
fungi, use, 43
plant viruses, 43
living organisms, 41–42
plant disease management, 39
as protectors, 39–42
powdery mildew (PM), 47
source of
bacteria, 43
fungi, 43
viruses, 43–44
treatment of plant disease, NT’s use, 44
AgNPS use as antimicrobial agent, 
44–45
antifungal properties, 46–47
antimicrobial pathways for nanometal 
toxicity, 45–46
delivery networks for NMS, 48–49
nanosized compounds, 47–48
plant resistance, 49
of sliver, 49–50
water-soluble (WS), 39
Nanopore DNA sequencing, 255
biological nanopores
bacteriophage phi29, 262
α-Hemolysin, 261
MSPA, 262
limitations, 275
principle, 257–258
soild-state
Al2
O3
 membranes, 263–264
Si3
N4
 and SiO2
, 263
speed control, 271–274
translocation sensing, mechanisms, 269
ionic current blockades, 269
optical recognition, 271
transverse current measurements, 
269–270
transverse current measurements
field-effect transistors (FETs), 270
semiconductor current, 270–271
tunneling current, 270
type, 258–261
biological nanopores, 261
commercial biological, 268
hybrid, 264–267
oxford nanopore technologies (ONT), 
268
single-layer, 264
soild-state, 262–263
Nanoproduct
anabolic plant roids, 316
CAL MAG nitrate, 316
hydroponic system, 317
nano silicate, 317
nano-boron, 317
nano-iron, 318–319
nano-magnesium, 318
nano-molybdenum, 318
nano-nitrogen, 319
nano-phosphorus, 319
nano-potassium, 319
nanosilver, 318
nano-sulfur, 319
nanotech T5 reflector, 313
nano-zinc, 320
NeuCytokin®, 320
Neuselen-X®, 320
PK boost, 316
plant growth promoter HTNY-03, 316
Primo Maxx® growth regulator, 316
root zone mass (RZM), 317
seed speed, 317
sunblaster nanodome, 313–315
Nanotech T5 reflector, 313
NeuCytokin®, 320
Neuselen-X®, 320
Nutrient usage efficiency (NUE), 20
O
Optical nanosensors
fiber, 337
photonic explorer for bioanalysis, 
336–337
Oxford nanopore technologies (ONT), 268
P
Pest management
abiotic factor, 286–287
biological control agents, 289–290
cultural control, 290–292
economic injury levels (EILs), 287Index 355
host plant resistance (HPR), 287
help IPM, 287–288
in insect population, 287
limitation, 293–294
Phytopathogens, 138
anti-phytopathogeni, mechanism of, 
148–150
bacterial synthesized, 138
nanoparticles against fungal, 141
viral phytopathogens, 147–148
Plant growth promoter HTNY-03, 316
Plant growth promoting rhizobacteria 
(PGPRs), 107
Plant nanobionic in environment
nitroaromatics, 329
temperature detector, 329–330
Plant nanotechnology, 326–327
application, 327
Plant protective agents
antifungal pathogenic, 143–144
sliver, 141–142
zinc, 142–143
antiviral activity
mechanism of, 150–151
biological and chemical method, 140–141
copper, 139
sliver, 139–140
titanium oxide, 140
zinc NPS, 140
challenges, 151–152
chemical synthesis method, 147
chitosan NPs, 145
copper, 145–146
magnesium oxide, 146
silver, 146–147
nanoparticles against fungal
biological synthesis method, 141
chemical synthesis method, 144
nanopesticides
advantages, 138
chemical synthesis method, 135–136
nanoparticles, 136–138
plant extracts, 133–134
phytopathogens, 138
anti-phytopathogeni, mechanism of, 
148–150
bacterial synthesized, 138
nanoparticles against fungal, 141
viral phytopathogens, 147–148
plant extracts
microbes and metabolites, 135
properties, 132–133
Polychlorineated biphenyl (PCB’s), 188
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), 99
Polyphenol oxidase (PPO), 99
Post-first green revolution, 227–228
Powdery mildew (PM), 47
R
Radiofrequency identification detector 
(RFID), 344
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), 80
Root zone mass (RZM), 317
S
Second green revolution, 225
agriculture, 229–230
drawback of nanotechnology, 238–240
first green revolution, 227–228
food, 229–230
nanotechnology, 229–230
genetic engineering, 236
nanomaterials, 236–238
nutrient control, 235
pest control, 233–234
sensors, 230–233
water, 235
need of, 228–229
post-first green revolution, 227–228
urgent need for
legislation, 240–241
Si3
N4
 and SiO2
, 263
Single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs), 
80, 327
Soil biota, 183
innovative nanotechnology in modern 
agriculture
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 187
microorganism and soil enzyme, 
188–189
nanomaterial on soil, impact, 187–188
on plant health, consequences, 189–190
polychlorineated biphenyl (PCB’s), 188
nano-based inputs, guidelines, 194–195
nanotechnology in agriculture, 185–187
negative repercussion, 191–194356 Index
Soil fertility and productivity
agricultural importance
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), 
106
biocontrol activity, 107
biological nitrogen fixation, 104–106
secondary metabolites, 106–107
ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABC), 
108
beneficial traits of agriculturally, 105
carbon nanomaterials (CNMS)
comparison and effect, 89
graphene, 88–89
microbial populations, effect, 83–85
MWCNTs, 85–86
SWCNTs, 86–87
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 80
colony-forming units (CFUs), 84
cyanophycin grana proteins (CGPs), 104
effect, 79–80
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), 
103
influence, 80–81
carbon nanomaterials (CNMS), 81–82
cerium oxide (CeO2
), 100
chromium trioxide (Cr2
O3
), 100
copper oxide, 93–94
gold, 101
silver, 95–97
titanium oxide (TiO2
), 90–93
zinc oxide NPS (ZnO-NPS), 97–99
lignin peroxidase (LiP), 87
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 108
manganese peroxidase (MnP), 87
methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), 99
microbial growth
agricultural importance, 103
plant pathogens, 102
profitable soil microorganisms, 
102–103
microorganisms and cellular level, 
interactions, 107–109
multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs), 80
nanoparticles, 77–78
natural origin, 78–79
plant growth promoting rhizobacteria 
(PGPRs), 107
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), 
99
polyphenol oxidase (PPO), 99
reactive oxygen species (ROS), 80
singlewalled carbon nanotubes 
(SWCNTs), 80
soil organic matter (SOM), 84
Soil health and plant growth
agro ecosystem, various elements of, 64
controlled release of nutrient to soil, 67
decrease in toxicity level in soil, 69
effect on plant growth, 68
importance, 62–63
maintaining soil fertility, 66–67
modes of NPS entry into environment, 
64–65
NPS, application, 65–66
soil microbial community, 61–62
translocation, 68
Soil microbes
agricultural importance
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF), 106
biocontrol activity, 107
biological nitrogen fixation, 104–106
secondary metabolites, 106–107
ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABC), 
108
beneficial traits of agriculturally, 105
carbon nanomaterials (CNMS)
comparison and effects, 89
graphene, 88–89
microbial populations, effect, 83–85
MWCNTs, 85–86
SWCNTs, 86–87
carbon nanotubes (CNTs), 80
colony-forming units (CFUs), 84
cyanophycin grana proteins (CGPs), 104
effect, 79–80
extracellular polymeric substances (EPS), 
103
influence, 80–81
carbon nanomaterials (CNMS), 81–82
cerium oxide (CeO2
), 100
chromium trioxide (Cr2
O3
), 100
copper oxide, 93–94
gold, 101
silver, 95–97
titanium oxide (TiO2
), 90–93
zinc oxide NPS (ZnO-NPS), 97–99Index 357
lignin peroxidase (LiP), 87
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), 108
manganese peroxidase (MnP), 87
methyl tert-butyl ether (MTBE), 99
microbial growth
agricultural importance, 103
plant pathogens, 102
profitable soil microorganisms, 102–103
microorganisms and cellular level, 
interactions, 107–109
multi-walled carbon nanotubes 
(MWCNTs), 80
nanoparticles, 77–78
influence, 79–80
natural origin of NPS, 78–79
natural origin, 78–79
plant growth promoting rhizobacteria 
(PGPRs), 107
polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), 
99
polyphenol oxidase (PPO), 99
reactive oxygen species (ROS), 80
singlewalled carbon nanotubes 
(SWCNTs), 80
soil organic matter (SOM), 84
Soil organic matter (SOM), 84
Speed breeding, 205
applications
ICAR-Indian Institute of Soybean 
Research (ICAR-IISR), 213
multiple quantitative traits selection, 218
variety development, 213–217
for yield, 218
biotic and abiotic stress
multiple disease resistance, 218
salt tolerance, 218–219
in crops
bananas, 211–212
cereals, 208–210
fruit trees, 212–213
legumes and oilseeds, 210–211
roots, 211–212
tubers, 211–212
crops grown, 214–217
drawbacks, 219
methods, 207–208
Sustainable agriculture
atomic level, manipulation, 5–6
concerns, 12–13
crop protection
nanofertilizer, 10
nanofungicides, 9
nanoherbicides, 9
nano-insecticides, 8
field application of NPS, 6–7
crop protection, 7–8
plant uptake, 10–11
translocation of nanoparticles, 10–11
water dispersible powder (WDP), 8
Sustainable alternative
adaptation, 21–22
foliar, 22–23
nano-fertilizers (NFS), 23
agro-ecosytems, development, 29–30
born (B), 29
copper (Cu), 26
foliar and soil exposure, 22–23
iron (Fe), 25–26
macronutrient, 23
manganese (Mn), 26
nitrogen (N), 23–24
phosphorus (P), 24
in plants, 21–22
potassium (K), 24
silicon (Si), 26–29
zinc (Zn), 25
nutrient usage efficiency (NUE), 20
soil exposure, 22–23
uptake mechanisms, 21–22
T
Temperature detector, 329–330
Temperature indicator (TTI), 343
Titanium oxide (TiO2
), 90–93
Translocation sensing
mechanisms, 269
field-effect transistors (FETs), 270
ionic current blockades, 269
optical recognition, 271
transverse current measurements, 
269–270
Transverse current measurements
field-effect transistors (FETs), 270
semiconductor current, 270–271
tunneling current, 270
Treatment of plant disease358 Index
nanotechnology (NT), 44
AgNPS use as antimicrobial agent, 44–45
antifungal properties, 46–47
antimicrobial pathways for nanometal 
toxicity, 45–46
delivery networks for NMS, 48–49
nanosized compounds, 47–48
plant resistance, 49
of sliver, 49–50
W
Water dispersible powder (WDP), 8
Water-soluble (WS), 39
Z
Zinc oxide NPS (ZnO-NPS), 97–99
